THE 

ALCHEMIST 

PAULO COELHO 

TRANSLATED BY ALAN R. CLARKE 

INTRODUCTION 

American publisher Harper Collins… 

PROLOGUE 

in the… 

ONE 

falling as the… 

merchant for… 

EPILOGUE 

church just as night… 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

INTERNATIONAL ACCLAIM 

BOOKS BY PAULO COELHO 

CREDITS 

COVER 

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER 

Collins that said that: “reading The Alchemist was like getting up at 
dawn and seeing the sun rise while the rest of the world still slept.” I 

went outside, looked up at the sky, and thought to myself: “So, the 
book is going to be published in English!” At the time, I was 

struggling to establish myself as a writer and to follow my path 

despite all the voices telling me it was impossible. 

And little by little, my dream was becoming reality. Ten, a 

hundred, a thousand, a million copies sold in America. One day, a 

Brazilian journalist phoned to say that President Clinton had been 

photographed reading the book. Some time later, when I was in 

Turkey, I opened the magazine Vanity Fair and there was Julia 

Roberts declaring that she adored the book. Walking alone down a 

street in Miami, I heard a girl telling her mother: “You must read 

The Alchemist!” 

The book has been translated into fifty-six languages, has sold 

more than twenty million copies, and people are beginning to ask: 

What’s the secret behind such a huge success? 

The only honest response is: I don’t know. All I know is that, like 

Santiago the shepherd boy, we all need to be aware of our personal 

calling. What is a personal calling? It is God’s blessing, it is the path 

that God chose for you here on Earth. Whenever we do something 

that fills us with enthusiasm, we are following our legend. However, 

we don’t all have the courage to confront our own dream. 

Why? 

There are four obstacles. First: we are told from childhood 

onward that everything we want to do is impossible. We grow up 

with this idea, and as the years accumulate, so too do the layers of 

calling is so deeply buried in our soul as to be invisible. But it’s still 

there. 

afraid of hurting those around us by abandoning everything in 

be happy and are prepared to accompany us on that journey. 

Once we have accepted that love is a stimulus, we come up 

work out, because we cannot fall back on the old excuse: “Oh, well, I 

staked everything on it and that the path of the personal calling is 
no easier than any other path, except that our whole heart is in this 

journey. Then, we warriors of light must be prepared to have 
patience in difficult times and to know that the Universe is 

conspiring in our favor, even though we may not understand how. 

I ask myself: are defeats necessary? 

Well, necessary or not, they happen. When we first begin 

fighting for our dream, we have no experience and make many 

mistakes. The secret of life, though, is to fall seven times and to get 

up eight times. 

only going to suffer more than other people? 

Because, once we have overcome the defeats—and we always 

worthy of the miracle of life. Each day, each hour, is part of the good 

unexpected suffering passes more quickly than suffering that is 

to free ourselves from the bitterness and it stays with us for the rest 

of our lives. 

Having disinterred our dream, having used the power of love to 

the very next day. Then comes the fourth obstacle: the fear of 

realizing the dream for which we fought all our lives. 

Oscar Wilde said: “Each man kills the thing he loves.” And it’s 

the ordinary person with guilt. We look around at all those who 
have failed to get what they want and feel that we do not deserve to 

get what we want either. We forget about all the obstacles we 
overcame, all the suffering we endured, all the things we had to give 

series of stupid mistakes and never reached their goal—when it was 
only a step away. 

This is the most dangerous of the obstacles because it has a kind 

and you understand why you are here. 

Paulo Coelho 

Rio de Janeiro 

November 2002 

Translated by Margaret Jull Costa 

Translated by Clifford E. Landers 

brought. Leafing through the pages, he found a story about 

Narcissus. 

The alchemist knew the legend of Narcissus, a youth who knelt 

daily beside a lake to contemplate his own beauty. He was so 

fascinated by himself that, one morning, he fell into the lake and 

drowned. At the spot where he fell, a flower was born, which was 

called the narcissus. 

But this was not how the author of the book ended the story. 

He said that when Narcissus died, the goddesses of the forest 

appeared and found the lake, which had been fresh water, 

transformed into a lake of salty tears. 

“Why do you weep?” the goddesses asked. 

“I weep for Narcissus,” the lake replied. 

“Ah, it is no surprise that you weep for Narcissus,” they said, “for 

though we always pursued him in the forest, you alone could 

contemplate his beauty close at hand.” 

“But…was Narcissus beautiful?” the lake asked. 

“Who better than you to know that?” the goddesses said in 

wonder. “After all, it was by your banks that he knelt each day to 

contemplate himself!” 

The lake was silent for some time. Finally, it said: 

“I weep for Narcissus, but I never noticed that Narcissus was 

could see, in the depths of his eyes, my own beauty reflected.” 

“What a lovely story,” the alchemist thought. 

THE BOY’S NAME WAS SANTIAGO. DUSK WAS FALLING AS the boy arrived 

sacristy had once stood. 

He decided to spend the night there. He saw to it that all the 

across it to prevent the flock from wandering away during the night. 

searching for it. 

He swept the floor with his jacket and lay down, using the book 

made more comfortable pillows. 

It was still dark when he awoke, and, looking up, he could see 

the stars through the half-destroyed roof. 

I wanted to sleep a little longer, he thought. He had had the same 

dream that night as a week ago, and once again he had awakened 
before it ended. 

that still slept. He had noticed that, as soon as he awoke, most of his 

accustomed to their schedule. 

name. He had always believed that the sheep were able to 

the fields. Sometimes he would comment to them on the things he 

had seen in the villages they passed. 

But for the past few days he had spoken to them about only one 

they would reach in about four days. He had been to the village only 

his presence, so that he would not be cheated. A friend had told the 

boy about the shop, and he had taken his sheep there. 

 
“I NEED TO SELL SOME WOOL,” THE BOY TOLD THE merchant. 

The shop was busy, and the man asked the shepherd to wait 

until the afternoon. So the boy sat on the steps of the shop and took 

a book from his bag. 

“I didn’t know shepherds knew how to read,” said a girl’s voice 

behind him. 

black hair, and eyes that vaguely recalled the Moorish conquerors. 

was the merchant’s daughter, and spoke of life in the village, where 

sheep. 

“How did you learn to read?” the girl asked at one point. 

“Like everybody learns,” he said. “In school.” 

“Well, if you know how to read, why are you just a shepherd?” 

The boy mumbled an answer that allowed him to avoid 

responding to her question. He was sure the girl would never 

passed, the boy found himself wishing that the day would never 

days. He recognized that he was feeling something he had never 

experienced before: the desire to live in one place forever. With the 

girl with the raven hair, his days would never be the same again. 

four sheep. He paid for the wool and asked the shepherd to come 

back the following year. 

village. He was excited, and at the same time uneasy: maybe the girl 

had already forgotten him. Lots of shepherds passed through, 
selling their wool. 

“It doesn’t matter,” he said to his sheep. “I know other girls in 

other places.” 

town where there was someone who could make them forget the 

joys of carefree wandering. 

The day was dawning, and the shepherd urged his sheep in the 

thought. Maybe that’s why they always stay close to me. 

The only things that concerned the sheep were food and water. 

their wool, their company, and—once in a while—their meat. 

how to rely on their own instincts, because I lead them to 

nourishment. 

The boy was surprised at his thoughts. Maybe the church, with 

the sycamore growing from within, had been haunted. It had caused 
him to have the same dream for a second time, and it was causing 

and he gathered his jacket closer to his body. He knew that a few 
hours from now, with the sun at its zenith, the heat would be so 

great that he would not be able to lead his flock across the fields. It 

jacket. But when he thought to complain about the burden of its 

weight, he remembered that, because he had the jacket, he had 

withstood the cold of the dawn. 

We have to be prepared for change, he thought, and he was 

grateful for the jacket’s weight and warmth. 

The jacket had a purpose, and so did the boy. His purpose in life 

was to travel, and, after two years of walking the Andalusian terrain, 

he knew all the cities of the region. He was planning, on this visit, to 

didn’t want to become a priest. That he wanted to travel. 

son,” said his father. “They come in search of new things, but when 

thinking that the past was better than what we have now. They have 
blond hair, or dark skin, but basically they’re the same as the people 

who live right here.” 

“But I’d like to see the castles in the towns where they live,” the 

boy explained. 

to live here forever,” his father continued. 

“Well, I’d like to see their land, and see how they live,” said his 

son. 

“The people who come here have a lot of money to spend, so 

they can afford to travel,” his father said. “Amongst us, the only ones 

who travel are the shepherds.” 

“Well, then I’ll be a shepherd!” 

His father said no more. The next day, he gave his son a pouch 

that held three ancient Spanish gold coins. 

“I found these one day in the fields. I wanted them to be a part of 

your inheritance. But use them to buy your flock. Take to the fields, 

women are the most beautiful.” 

And he gave the boy his blessing. The boy could see in his 

desire that was still alive, despite his father’s having had to bury it, 

drink, food to eat, and the same place to sleep every night of his life. 

 
THE HORIZON WAS TINGED WITH RED, AND SUDDENLY THE sun appeared. 

The boy thought back to that conversation with his father, and felt 
happy; he had already seen many castles and met many women (but 

thought, as he looked at the sunrise. 

through those parts many times. The world was huge and 

inexhaustible; he had only to allow his sheep to set the route for a 

All they think about is food and water. 

Maybe we’re all that way, the boy mused. Even me—I haven’t 

thought of other women since I met the merchant’s daughter. 

wine bottle, shave, and have a haircut; he had to prepare himself for 

had arrived there before him and asked for her hand. 

interesting, he thought, as he looked again at the position of the sun, 

and hurried his pace. He had suddenly remembered that, in Tarifa, 
there was an old woman who interpreted dreams. 

 
THE OLD WOMAN LED THE BOY TO A ROOM AT THE BACK of her house; it was 

of Jesus, and two chairs. 

The woman sat down, and told him to be seated as well. Then 

she took both of his hands in hers, and began quietly to pray. 

It sounded like a Gypsy prayer. The boy had already had 

tricking others. It was also said that they had a pact with the devil, 

always been frightened to death that he would be captured by 

his hands in hers. 

But she has the Sacred Heart of Jesus there, he thought, trying to 

showing the old woman that he was fearful. He recited an Our 

Father silently. 

“Very interesting,” said the woman, never taking her eyes from 

the boy’s hands, and then she fell silent. 

the woman sensed it. He quickly pulled his hands away. 

“I didn’t come here to have you read my palm,” he said, already 

regretting having come. He thought for a moment that it would be 

better to pay her fee and leave without learning a thing, that he was 
giving too much importance to his recurrent dream. 

“You came so that you could learn about your dreams,” said the 

old woman. “And dreams are the language of God. When he speaks 

whichever it is, I’m going to charge you for the consultation.” 

and that’s what makes a shepherd’s life exciting. 

sheep are afraid of strangers. But children always seem to be able to 

know how animals know the age of human beings.” 

give you a lot of time.” 

“The child went on playing with my sheep for quite a while,” 

both hands and transported me to the Egyptian pyramids.” 

He paused for a moment to see if the woman knew what the 

Egyptian pyramids were. But she said nothing. 

“Then, at the Egyptian pyramids,”—he said the last three words 

me, ‘If you come here, you will find a hidden treasure.’ And, just as 
she was about to show me the exact location, I woke up. Both 

times.” 

The woman was silent for some time. Then she again took his 

hands and studied them carefully. 

“I’m not going to charge you anything now,” she said. “But I want 

one-tenth of the treasure, if you find it.” 

The boy laughed—out of happiness. He was going to be able to 

save the little money he had because of a dream about hidden 

treasure! 

“Well, interpret the dream,” he said. 

your treasure in exchange for what I am going to tell you.” 

The shepherd swore that he would. The old woman asked him to 

swear again while looking at the image of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

“It’s a dream in the language of the world,” she said. “I can 

interpret it, but the interpretation is very difficult. That’s why I feel 

that I deserve a part of what you find. 

Egypt. I have never heard of them, but, if it was a child who showed 

you a rich man.” 

going to have to pay anything. 

“I didn’t need to waste my time just for this,” he said. 

learn other arts, such as the reading of palms.” 

“Well, how am I going to get to Egypt?” 
“I only interpret dreams. I don’t know how to turn them into 

reality. That’s why I have to live off what my daughters provide me 
with.” 

“And what if I never get to Egypt?” 
“Then I don’t get paid. It wouldn’t be the first time.” 

And the woman told the boy to leave, saying she had already 

wasted too much time with him. 

The boy knew a lot of people in the city. That was what made 

her own. 

now, he would be with the merchant’s daughter. 

He started to read the book he had bought. On the very first page 

it described a burial ceremony. And the names of the people 

he thought, he would present one person at a time, so that the 
reader wouldn’t have to worry about memorizing a lot of names. 

When he was finally able to concentrate on what he was reading, 

he liked the book better; the burial was on a snowy day, and he 

welcomed the feeling of being cold. As he read on, an old man sat 
down at his side and tried to strike up a conversation. 

“What are they doing?” the old man asked, pointing at the people 

in the plaza. 

“Working,” the boy answered dryly, making it look as if he 

wanted to concentrate on his reading. 

Actually, he was thinking about shearing his sheep in front of the 

know the difference, because she didn’t know how to read. 

conversation. He said that he was tired and thirsty, and asked if he 

hoping that the old man would leave him alone. 

But the old man wanted to talk, and he asked the boy what book 

he was reading. The boy was tempted to be rude, and move to 

another bench, but his father had taught him to be respectful of the 

that he, himself, wasn’t sure how to pronounce the title; and second, 

ashamed and decide of his own accord to change benches. 

“Hmm…” said the old man, looking at all sides of the book, as if it 

were some strange object. “This is an important book, but it’s really 
irritating.” 

The boy was shocked. The old man knew how to read, and had 

already read the book. And if the book was irritating, as the old man 

had said, the boy still had time to change it for another. 

“It’s a book that says the same thing almost all the other books in 

the world say,” continued the old man. “It describes people’s 

saying that everyone believes the world’s greatest lie.” 

“What’s the world’s greatest lie?” the boy asked, completely 

surprised. 

“It’s this: that at a certain point in our lives, we lose control of 

what’s happening to us, and our lives become controlled by fate. 

That’s the world’s greatest lie.” 

“That’s never happened to me,” the boy said. “They wanted me 

to be a priest, but I decided to become a shepherd.” 

“Much better,” said the old man. “Because you really like to 

travel.” 

want to return it at all. The boy noticed that the man’s clothing was 

parts. Africa was only a few hours from Tarifa; one had only to cross 

shopping and chanting their strange prayers several times a day. 

“Where are you from?” the boy asked. 

“From many places.” 

“No one can be from many places,” the boy said. “I’m a shepherd, 

and I have been to many places, but I come from only one place—
from a city near an ancient castle. That’s where I was born.” 

“Well then, we could say that I was born in Salem.” 
The boy didn’t know where Salem was, but he didn’t want to ask, 

fearing that he would appear ignorant. He looked at the people in 
the plaza for a while; they were coming and going, and all of them 

seemed to be very busy. 

“So, what is Salem like?” he asked, trying to get some sort of clue. 

“It’s like it always has been.” 

were, he would already have heard of it. 

“And what do you do in Salem?” he insisted. 

“What do I do in Salem?” The old man laughed. “Well, I’m the 

king of Salem!” 

alone with one’s books. They tell their incredible stories at the time 

continue the conversation. 

“My name is Melchizedek,” said the old man. “How many sheep 

do you have?” 

know more about his life. 

“Well, then, we’ve got a problem. I can’t help you if you feel 

you’ve got enough sheep.” 

the conversation. 

sheep and get going.” 

“Give me one-tenth of your sheep,” said the old man, “and I’ll tell 

you how to find the hidden treasure.” 

The boy remembered his dream, and suddenly everything was 

clear to him. The old woman hadn’t charged him anything, but the 
old man—maybe he was her husband—was going to find a way to 

get much more money in exchange for information about something 
that didn’t even exist. The old man was probably a Gypsy, too. 

read what the old man had written in the sand. 

There, in the sand of the plaza of that small city, the boy read the 

had attended. He read the name of the merchant’s daughter, which 

he hadn’t even known, and he read things he had never told anyone. 

“Why would a king be talking with a shepherd?” the boy asked, 

awed and embarrassed. 

“For several reasons. But let’s say that the most important is that 

you have succeeded in discovering your Personal Legend.” 

The boy didn’t know what a person’s “Personal Legend” was. 

“It’s what you have always wanted to accomplish. Everyone, 

when they are young, knows what their Personal Legend is. 

“At that point in their lives, everything is clear and everything is 

possible. They are not afraid to dream, and to yearn for everything 

impossible for them to realize their Personal Legend.” 

None of what the old man was saying made much sense to the 

boy. But he wanted to know what the “mysterious force” was; the 
merchant’s daughter would be impressed when he told her about 

that! 

“It’s a force that appears to be negative, but actually shows you 

how to realize your Personal Legend. It prepares your spirit and 

universe. It’s your mission on earth.” 

of a textile merchant?” 

“Yes, or even search for treasure. The Soul of the World is 

nourished by people’s happiness. And also by unhappiness, envy, 

real obligation. All things are one. 

“And, when you want something, all the universe conspires in 

helping you to achieve it.” 

They were both silent for a time, observing the plaza and the 

townspeople. It was the old man who spoke first. 

“Why do you tend a flock of sheep?” 

“Because I like to travel.” 

The old man pointed to a baker standing in his shop window at 

money aside. When he’s an old man, he’s going to spend a month in 
Africa. He never realized that people are capable, at any time in 

their lives, of doing what they dream of.” 

“He should have decided to become a shepherd,” the boy said. 

“Well, he thought about that,” the old man said. “But bakers are 

more important people than shepherds. Bakers have homes, while 

shepherds sleep out in the open. Parents would rather see their 
children marry bakers than shepherds.” 

daughter. There was surely a baker in her town. 

about shepherds and bakers becomes more important for them 

than their own Personal Legends.” 

this?” 

“Because you are trying to realize your Personal Legend. And 

you are at the point where you’re about to give it all up.” 

“And that’s when you always appear on the scene?” 

“Not always in this way, but I always appear in one form or 

idea. At other times, at a crucial moment, I make it easier for things 

people don’t realize I’ve done them.” 

thousands of stones looking for an emerald. The miner was about to 
give it all up, right at the point when, if he were to examine just one 

frustration of his five fruitless years, picked up the stone and threw 
it aside. But he had thrown it with such force that it broke the stone 

beautiful emerald in the world. 

“People learn, early in their lives, what is their reason for being,” 

give up on it so early, too. But that’s the way it is.” 

hidden treasure. 

buried by the same currents,” said the old man. “If you want to learn 

flock.” 

“What about one-tenth of my treasure?” 

The old man looked disappointed. “If you start out by promising 

what you don’t even have yet, you’ll lose your desire to work 

toward getting it.” 

The boy told him that he had already promised to give one-tenth 

of his treasure to the Gypsy. 

“Gypsies are experts at getting people to do that,” sighed the old 

life has its price. This is what the Warriors of the Light try to teach.” 

The old man returned the book to the boy. 

“Tomorrow, at this same time, bring me a tenth of your flock. 

And I will tell you how to find the hidden treasure. Good afternoon.” 

And he vanished around the corner of the plaza. 
 

THE BOY BEGAN AGAIN TO READ HIS BOOK, BUT HE WAS NO longer able to 

concentrate. He was tense and upset, because he knew that the old 

man was right. He went over to the bakery and bought a loaf of 

the old man had said about him. Sometimes it’s better to leave 

the way things were. The boy could certainly resist causing that 

he knew that Egypt was in Africa. 

“Can I help you?” asked the man behind the window. 

strait. The idea frightened him. 

“Another dreamer,” said the ticket seller to his assistant, 

watching the boy walk away. “He doesn’t have enough money to 

travel.” 

While standing at the ticket window, the boy had remembered 

years he had learned everything about shepherding: he knew how 

animals. 

He decided to return to his friend’s stable by the longest route 

all of Spain. 

He could see almost the entire city from where he sat, including 

They were solitary individuals who no longer believed in things, 

and didn’t understand that shepherds become attached to their 

sheep. He knew everything about each member of his flock: he 

knew which ones were lame, which one was to give birth two 

months from now, and which were the laziest. He knew how to 

them, they would suffer. 

The wind began to pick up. He knew that wind: people called it 

the eastern end of the Mediterranean. 

and my treasure, the boy thought. He had to choose between 

to her on which day he appeared: for her, every day was the same, 
and when each day is the same as the next, it’s because people fail to 

recognize the good things that happen in their lives every day that 
the sun rises. 

I left my father, my mother, and the town castle behind. They 

have gotten used to my being away, and so have I. The sheep will get 

used to my not being there, too, the boy thought. 

bench where he had talked with the old man, and they kissed. 

“That baker…” he said to himself, without completing the 

thought. The levanter was still getting stronger, and he felt its force 

for the unknown, and for gold and adventure—and for the 

him back except himself. The sheep, the merchant’s daughter, and 

Legend. 

The next day, the boy met the old man at noon. He brought six 

sheep with him. 

“I’m surprised,” the boy said. “My friend bought all the other 

shepherd, and that it was a good omen.” 

“That’s the way it always is,” said the old man. “It’s called the 

principle of favorability. When you play cards the first time, you are 

almost sure to win. Beginner’s luck.” 

“Why is that?” 
“Because there is a force that wants you to realize your Personal 

Legend; it whets your appetite with a taste of success.” 

one was lame. The boy explained that it wasn’t important, since that 
sheep was the most intelligent of the flock, and produced the most 

wool. 

“Where is the treasure?” he asked. 

“It’s in Egypt, near the Pyramids.” 

The boy was startled. The old woman had said the same thing. 

But she hadn’t charged him anything. 

“In order to find the treasure, you will have to follow the omens. 

read the omens that he left for you.” 

Before the boy could reply, a butterfly appeared and fluttered 

between him and the old man. He remembered something his 

Like crickets, and like grasshoppers; like lizards and four-leaf 

clovers. 

“That’s right,” said the old man, able to read the boy’s thoughts. 

“Just as your grandfather taught you. These are good omens.” 

The old man opened his cape, and the boy was struck by what he 

the previous day. 

He really was a king! He must be disguised to avoid encounters 

with thieves. 

“Take these,” said the old man, holding out a white stone and a 

black stone that had been embedded at the center of the 

breastplate. “They are called Urim and Thummim. The black 

signifies ‘yes,’ and the white ‘no.’ When you are unable to read the 
omens, they will help you to do so. Always ask an objective 

question. 

“But, if you can, try to make your own decisions. The treasure is 

at the Pyramids; that you already knew. But I had to insist on the 
payment of six sheep because I helped you to make your decision.” 

The boy put the stones in his pouch. From then on, he would 

make his own decisions. 

“Don’t forget that everything you deal with is only one thing and 

don’t forget to follow your Personal Legend through to its 

conclusion. 

“But before I go, I want to tell you a little story. 

happiness from the wisest man in the world. The lad wandered 

castle, high atop a mountain. It was there that the wise man lived. 

“Rather than finding a saintly man, though, our hero, on entering 

and went, people were conversing in the corners, a small orchestra 

conversed with everyone, and the boy had to wait for two hours 

before it was his turn to be given the man’s attention. 

“The wise man listened attentively to the boy’s explanation of 

around the palace and return in two hours. 

“‘Meanwhile, I want to ask you to do something,’ said the wise 

man, handing the boy a teaspoon that held two drops of oil. ‘As you 
wander around, carry this spoon with you without allowing the oil 

to spill.’ 

the palace, keeping his eyes fixed on the spoon. After two hours, he 
returned to the room where the wise man was. 

“‘Well,’ asked the wise man, ‘did you see the Persian tapestries 

that are hanging in my dining hall? Did you see the garden that it 

beautiful parchments in my library?’ 

“The boy was embarrassed, and confessed that he had observed 

man had entrusted to him. 

wise man. ‘You cannot trust a man if you don’t know his house.’ 

“Relieved, the boy picked up the spoon and returned to his 

exploration of the palace, this time observing all of the works of art 

around him, the beauty of the flowers, and the taste with which 

related in detail everything he had seen. 

wise man. 

gone. 

“‘Well, there is only one piece of advice I can give you,’ said the 

wisest of wise men. ‘The secret of happiness is to see all the marvels 

of the world, and never to forget the drops of oil on the spoon.’” 

The shepherd said nothing. He had understood the story the old 

king had told him. A shepherd may like to travel, but he should 
never forget about his sheep. 

The old man looked at the boy and, with his hands held together, 

made several strange gestures over the boy’s head. Then, taking his 

sheep, he walked away. 

Melchizedek, the king of Salem, sat on the wall of the fort that 

afternoon, and felt the levanter blowing in his face. The sheep 

much change. All they wanted was food and water. 

That was his work. 

The gods should not have desires, because they don’t have 

boy would be successful. 

It’s too bad that he’s quickly going to forget my name, he 

about me he would say that I am Melchizedek, the king of Salem. 

sometimes has to take some pride in himself.” 

hours he had seen men walking hand in hand, women with their 
faces covered, and priests that climbed to the tops of towers and 

chanted—as everyone about him went to their knees and placed 
their foreheads on the ground. 

“A practice of infidels,” he said to himself. As a child in church, he 

white horse, his sword unsheathed, and figures such as these 

kneeling at his feet. The boy felt ill and terribly alone. The infidels 

had an evil look about them. 

Besides this, in the rush of his travels he had forgotten a detail, 

time: only Arabic was spoken in this country. 

bitter tea. The boy preferred wine. 

But he didn’t need to worry about that right now. What he had 

to be concerned about was his treasure, and how he was going to go 

money in his pouch, and the boy knew that in money there was 

breastplate of gold, wouldn’t have lied just to acquire six sheep. 

snake was nearby, and that a certain shrub was a sign that there 
was water in the area. The sheep had taught him that. 

If God leads the sheep so well, he will also lead a man, he 

thought, and that made him feel better. The tea seemed less bitter. 

“Who are you?” he heard a voice ask him in Spanish. 
The boy was relieved. He was thinking about omens, and 

someone had appeared. 

was from this city. He was about the same age and height as the boy. 

“Almost everyone here speaks Spanish. We’re only two hours 

from Spain.” 

“Sit down, and let me treat you to something,” said the boy. “And 

ask for a glass of wine for me. I hate this tea.” 

“There is no wine in this country,” the young man said. “The 

religion here forbids it.” 

almost began to tell about his treasure, but decided not to do so. If 

payment for taking him there. He remembered what the old man 

had said about offering something you didn’t even have yet. 

“I’d like you to take me there if you can. I can pay you to serve as 

my guide.” 

“Do you have any idea how to get there?” the newcomer asked. 

The boy noticed that the owner of the bar stood nearby, 

man’s presence. But he had found a guide, and didn’t want to miss 
out on an opportunity. 

“And to do that, you need money. I need to know whether you have 

enough.” 

The boy thought it a strange question. But he trusted in the old 

man, who had said that, when you really want something, the 
universe always conspires in your favor. 

irritated. 

“Let’s get out of here,” said the new arrival. “He wants us to 

leave.” 

grabbed him and began to speak to him in an angry stream of 

the boy outside with him. “He wanted your money,” he said. 

“Tangier is not like the rest of Africa. This is a port, and every port 

has its thieves.” 

The boy trusted his new friend. He had helped him out in a 

dangerous situation. He took out his money and counted it. 

“We could get to the Pyramids by tomorrow,” said the other, 

taking the money. “But I have to buy two camels.” 

They walked together through the narrow streets of Tangier. 

center of a large plaza where the market was held. There were 

for sale amongst daggers, and carpets displayed alongside tobacco. 
But the boy never took his eye off his new friend. After all, he had all 

his money. He thought about asking him to give it back, but decided 
that would be unfriendly. He knew nothing about the customs of the 

strange land he was in. 

“I’ll just watch him,” he said to himself. He knew he was stronger 

than his friend. 

Suddenly, there in the midst of all that confusion, he saw the 

Egypt, he would buy that sword. 

sword for a bit longer, until he summoned the courage to turn 

around. 

could he find his new companion. 

The boy wanted to believe that his friend had simply become 

stalls and left. 

its trajectory for some time, until it was hidden behind the white 

where he couldn’t even speak the language. He was no longer a 

start everything over. 

He was feeling sorry for himself, and lamenting the fact that his life 

could have changed so suddenly and so drastically. 

He was so ashamed that he wanted to cry. He had never even 

their dreams. 

When I had my sheep, I was happy, and I made those around me 

happy. People saw me coming and welcomed me, he thought. But 

now I’m sad and alone. I’m going to become bitter and distrustful of 

going to hold on to what little I have, because I’m too insignificant to 

conquer the world. 

He opened his pouch to see what was left of his possessions; 

the old man had given him. 

had exchanged six sheep for two precious stones that had been 

taken from a gold breastplate. He could sell the stones and buy a 
return ticket. But this time I’ll be smarter, the boy thought, 

him was that port towns are full of thieves. 

not what actually does.” 

He ran his fingers slowly over the stones, sensing their 

man. 

you to achieve it,” he had said. 

The boy was trying to understand the truth of what the old man 

the boy’s past. 

“They’re called Urim and Thummim, and they can help you to 

he asked if the old man’s blessing was still with him. 

He took out one of the stones. It was “yes.” 

“Am I going to find my treasure?” he asked. 

He stuck his hand into the pouch, and felt around for one of the 

there was a hole in his pouch. He knelt down to find Urim and 
Thummim and put them back in the pouch. But as he saw them lying 

there on the ground, another phrase came to his mind. 

said. 

An omen. The boy smiled to himself. He picked up the two 

so as not to flee from one’s own Personal Legend. “I promised that I 

would make my own decisions,” he said to himself. 

But the stones had told him that the old man was still with him, 

strange place; it was a new one. 

After all, what he had always wanted was just that: to know new 

places. Even if he never got to the Pyramids, he had already traveled 

farther than any shepherd he knew. Oh, if they only knew how 

a bit to think about it, but he had never seen one like it before. As he 

mused about these things, he realized that he had to choose 

adventurer in quest of his treasure. 

“I’m an adventurer, looking for treasure,” he said to himself. 

the middle of the marketplace, and life in the plaza was about to 

resume. 

Looking around, he sought his sheep, and then realized that he 

go in search of his treasure, instead. He had not a cent in his pocket, 

as much an adventurer as the ones he had admired in books. 

He walked slowly through the market. The merchants were 

reminded the boy of the old man—the mysterious old king he had 

easy, and yet I’ve never done it before, he thought. 

When the stall was assembled, the candy seller offered the boy 

the first sweet he had made for the day. The boy thanked him, ate it, 

spoken Arabic and the other Spanish. 

And they had understood each other perfectly well. 

There must be a language that doesn’t depend on words, the boy 

it’s happening with people. 

He was learning a lot of new things. Some of them were things 

the world. 

his sheep. 

“All things are one,” the old man had said. 

had been a time when many people knew of his shop: Arab 

have beautiful women at his side as he grew older. 

But, as time passed, Tangier had changed. The nearby city of 

Neighbors moved away, and there remained only a few small shops 

on the hill. And no one was going to climb the hill just to browse 
through a few small shops. 

of his life buying and selling crystal pieces, and now it was too late 

to do anything else. 

He spent the entire morning observing the infrequent comings 

and goings in the street. He had done this for years, and knew the 
schedule of everyone who passed. But, just before lunchtime, a boy 

stopped in front of the shop. He was dressed normally, but the 

money to spend. Nevertheless, the merchant decided to delay his 

lunch for a few minutes until the boy moved on. 

were spoken in the shop. The boy saw a man appear behind the 

counter. 

“I can clean up those glasses in the window, if you want,” said 

them.” 

The man looked at him without responding. 

“In exchange, you could give me something to eat.” 

to have to make a decision. In his pouch, he had his jacket—he 

certainly wasn’t going to need it in the desert. Taking the jacket out, 

he began to clean the glasses. In half an hour, he had cleaned all the 

entered the shop and bought some crystal. 

When he had completed the cleaning, he asked the man for 

something to eat. “Let’s go and have some lunch,” said the crystal 

merchant. 

He put a sign on the door, and they went to a small café nearby. 

As they sat down at the only table in the place, the crystal merchant 
laughed. 

“You didn’t have to do any cleaning,” he said. “The Koran 

requires me to feed a hungry person.” 

“Well then, why did you let me do it?” the boy asked. 

“Because the crystal was dirty. And both you and I needed to 

cleanse our minds of negative thoughts.” 

“I’d like you to work in my shop. Two customers came in today 

while you were working, and that’s a good omen.” 

my sheep. 

“Do you want to go to work for me?” the merchant asked. 

“I can work for the rest of today,” the boy answered. “I’ll work all 

In return, I need money to get to Egypt tomorrow.” 

The merchant laughed. “Even if you cleaned my crystal for an 

entire year…even if you earned a good commission selling every 

are thousands of kilometers of desert between here and there.” 

There was a moment of silence so profound that it seemed the 

city was asleep. No sound from the bazaars, no arguments among 

Pyramids. It was as if the world had fallen silent because the boy’s 
soul had. He sat there, staring blankly through the door of the café, 

wishing that he had died, and that everything would end forever at 
that moment. 

seen that morning had suddenly disappeared. 

“I can give you the money you need to get back to your country, 

my son,” said the crystal merchant. 

picked up his pouch. 

“I’ll work for you,” he said. 

some sheep.” 

month, and he could see that it wasn’t exactly the kind of job that 

would make him happy. The merchant spent the entire day 

pieces and not to break anything. 

commission for each piece he sold, and had already been able to put 

whole year to be able to buy some sheep. 

“I’d like to build a display case for the crystal,” the boy said to 

who pass at the bottom of the hill.” 

“I’ve never had one before,” the merchant answered. “People 

will pass by and bump into it, and pieces will be broken.” 

“Well, when I took my sheep through the fields some of them 

might have died if we had come upon a snake. But that’s the way life 
is with sheep and with shepherds.” 

The merchant turned to a customer who wanted three crystal 

glasses. He was selling better than ever…as if time had turned back 

to the old days when the street had been one of Tangier’s major 
attractions. 

return to your sheep. Why ask more out of life?” 

“Because we have to respond to omens,” the boy said, almost 

the merchant had never met the king. 

“It’s called the principle of favorability, beginner’s luck. Because 

said. 

But the merchant understood what the boy had said. The boy’s 

money was pouring into the cash drawer, he had no regrets about 

deserved, because the merchant, thinking that sales wouldn’t 

had assumed he would soon return to his sheep. 

“Why did you want to get to the Pyramids?” he asked, to get 

away from the business of the display. 

“Because I’ve always heard about them,” the boy answered, 

a painful memory, and he tried to avoid thinking about it. 

desert just to see the Pyramids,” said the merchant. “They’re just a 
pile of stones. You could build one in your backyard.” 

“You’ve never had dreams of travel,” said the boy, turning to 

wait on a customer who had entered the shop. 

Two days later, the merchant spoke to the boy about the display. 
“I don’t much like change,” he said. “You and I aren’t like Hassan, 

that rich merchant. If he makes a buying mistake, it doesn’t affect 
him much. But we two have to live with our mistakes.” 

That’s true enough, the boy thought, ruefully. 

“Why did you think we should have the display?” 

“I want to get back to my sheep faster. We have to take 

beginner’s luck.” 

The merchant was silent for a few moments. Then he said, “The 

Prophet gave us the Koran, and left us just five obligations to satisfy 

Ramadan, and be charitable to the poor.” 

wanted to live his life in accordance with Muslim law. 

“What’s the fifth obligation?” the boy asked. 

pilgrimage. We are obliged, at least once in our lives, to visit the 

holy city of Mecca. 

“Mecca is a lot farther away than the Pyramids. When I was 

this shop. I thought that someday I’d be rich, and could go to Mecca. 
I began to make some money, but I could never bring myself to 

leave someone in charge of the shop; the crystals are delicate things. 
At the same time, people were passing my shop all the time, heading 

for Mecca. Some of them were rich pilgrims, traveling in caravans 
with servants and camels, but most of the people making the 

pilgrimage were poorer than I. 

leather.” 

“Well, why don’t you go to Mecca now?” asked the boy. 

“Because it’s the thought of Mecca that keeps me alive. That’s 

what helps me face these days that are all the same, these mute 

crystals on the shelves, and lunch and dinner at that same horrible 

café. I’m afraid that if my dream is realized, I’ll have no reason to go 

on living. 

“You dream about your sheep and the Pyramids, but you’re 

different from me, because you want to realize your dreams. I just 

crossing the desert, arriving at the Plaza of the Sacred Stone, the 

seven times I walk around it before allowing myself to touch it. I’ve 

I’m afraid that it would all be a disappointment, so I prefer just to 

dream about it.” 

That day, the merchant gave the boy permission to build the 

display. Not everyone can see his dreams come true in the same 

way. 

into the crystal shop. The boy estimated that, if he worked for six 

more months, he could return to Spain and buy sixty sheep, and yet 
another sixty. In less than a year, he would have doubled his flock, 

marketplace, he had never again made use of Urim and Thummim, 

work, and thought all the time about the day when he would 

disembark at Tarifa as a winner. 

“You must always know what it is that you want,” the old king 

a thief, and doubled the size of his flock without spending a cent. 

He was proud of himself. He had learned some important things, 

like how to deal in crystal, and about the language without 

words…and about omens. One afternoon he had seen a man at the 

place to get something to drink after such a climb. The boy, 

accustomed to recognizing omens, spoke to the merchant. 

“Let’s sell tea to the people who climb the hill.” 

“Lots of places sell tea around here,” the merchant said. 

“But we could sell tea in crystal glasses. The people will enjoy 

the tea and want to buy the glasses. I have been told that beauty is 

the great seducer of men.” 

The merchant didn’t respond, but that afternoon, after saying his 

prayers and closing the shop, he invited the boy to sit with him and 

share his hookah, that strange pipe used by the Arabs. 

“What is it you’re looking for?” asked the old merchant. 

“I’ve already told you. I need to buy my sheep back, so I have to 

earn the money to do so.” 

deeply. 

“I’ve had this shop for thirty years. I know good crystal from bad, 

is going to expand. And then I’ll have to change my way of life.” 

“Well, isn’t that good?” 

know how to deal with change. I’m used to the way I am.” 

The boy didn’t know what to say. The old man continued, “You 

should be able to accomplish, and I don’t want to do so.” 

It’s good I refrained from saying anything to the baker in Tarifa, 

thought the boy to himself. 

They went on smoking the pipe for a while as the sun began to 

set. They were conversing in Arabic, and the boy was proud of 
himself for being able to do so. There had been a time when he 

There are probably other things in the world that the sheep can’t 

teach me, thought the boy as he regarded the old merchant. All they 

ever do, really, is look for food and water. And maybe it wasn’t that 

they were teaching me, but that I was learning from them. 

“Maktub,” the merchant said, finally. 

“What does that mean?” 

“You would have to have been born an Arab to understand,” he 

written.’” 

And, as he smothered the coals in the hookah, he told the boy 

there’s just no way to hold back the river. 

mint tea. They went in to drink the tea, which was served in 

beautiful crystal glasses. 

“My wife never thought of this,” said one, and he bought some 

crystal, because the aroma was retained. The third said that it was a 

tradition in the Orient to use crystal glasses for tea because it had 
magical powers. 

Before long, the news spread, and a great many people began to 

climb the hill to see the shop that was doing something new in a 

business. 

Eventually, the merchant had to hire two more employees. He 

things new. 

And, in that way, the months passed. 

days since he had first set foot on the African continent. 

He dressed in his Arabian clothing of white linen, bought 

especially for this day. He put his headcloth in place and secured it 

with a ring made of camel skin. Wearing his new sandals, he 

descended the stairs silently. 

The city was still sleeping. He prepared himself a sandwich and 

drank some hot tea from a crystal glass. Then he sat in the sun-filled 

doorway, smoking the hookah. 

He smoked in silence, thinking of nothing, and listening to the 

finished his smoke, he reached into one of his pockets, and sat there 

for a few moments, regarding what he had withdrawn. 

Africa into his own country. 

He waited patiently for the merchant to awaken and open the 

shop. Then the two went off to have some more tea. 

“I’m leaving today,” said the boy. “I have the money I need to buy 

my sheep. And you have the money you need to go to Mecca.” 

The old man said nothing. 

helped me.” The man continued to prepare his tea, saying nothing. 

Then he turned to the boy. 

you know that you’re not going to buy your sheep.” 

“Who told you that?” asked the boy, startled. 

“Maktub,” said the old crystal merchant. 

And he gave the boy his blessing. 

sacks. As he was leaving, he saw, in the corner of the room, his old 

it for a long time. As he took his jacket out of the pouch, thinking to 

give it to someone in the street, the two stones fell to the floor. Urim 

and Thummim. 

aside enough money so that he could return to Spain with pride. 

“Never stop dreaming,” the old king had said. “Follow the 

omens.” 

The boy picked up Urim and Thummim, and, once again, had the 

strange sensation that the old king was nearby. He had worked hard 

for a year, and the omens were that it was time to go. 

thought. Even though the sheep didn’t teach me to speak Arabic. 

But the sheep had taught him something even more important: 

strange city, and he felt that, just as he had conquered this place, he 

could conquer the world. 

“When you want something, all the universe conspires to help 

you achieve it,” the old king had said. 

But the old king hadn’t said anything about being robbed, or 

about endless deserts, or about people who know what their 

one you had before, you should buy it. 

tea from crystal glasses. It was more activity than usual for this time 

had also been like the old king’s smile. 

It’s almost as if he had been here and left his mark, he thought. 

trying to realize their Personal Legend. 

He left without saying good-bye to the crystal merchant. He 

the place and all the good things he had learned. He was more 

the world. 

“But I’m going back to the fields that I know, to take care of my 

make a dream come true, and that dream, minute by minute, was 

dream. 

Who knows…maybe it’s better to be like the crystal merchant: 

tea. 

I can always go back to being a shepherd, the boy thought. I 

done. But maybe I’ll never have another chance to get to the 

Pyramids in Egypt. The old man wore a breastplate of gold, and he 
knew about my past. He really was a king, a wise king. 

The hills of Andalusia were only two hours away, but there was 

an entire desert between him and the Pyramids. Yet the boy felt that 

there was another way to regard his situation: he was actually two 
hours closer to his treasure…the fact that the two hours had 

stretched into an entire year didn’t matter. 

I know why I want to get back to my flock, he thought. I 

understand sheep; they’re no longer a problem, and they can be 

friend, and it’s in the desert that I have to search for my treasure. If I 

don’t find it, I can always go home. I finally have enough money, and 

all the time I need. Why not? 

He suddenly felt tremendously happy. He could always go back 

again. Maybe the world had other hidden treasures, but he had a 

anyone! 

of the crystal merchant’s suppliers transported his crystal by means 

to his treasure. 

“I am always nearby, when someone wants to realize their 

Personal Legend,” the old king had told him. 

What could it cost to go over to the supplier’s warehouse and 

find out if the Pyramids were really that far away? 

animals, sweat, and dust; it was part warehouse, part corral. I never 

thought I’d end up in a place like this, he thought, as he leafed 
through the pages of a chemical journal. Ten years at the university, 

and here I am in a corral. 

But he had to move on. He believed in omens. All his life and all 

and now it was alchemy. He knew how to speak Esperanto, he 

understood all the major religions well, but he wasn’t yet an 

alchemist. But the alchemists were strange people, who thought 

Work—the Philosopher’s Stone—and for this reason kept their 

knowledge to themselves. 

He had already spent much of the fortune left to him by his 

had purchased all the rarest and most important volumes on 

than just a myth, had not a friend of his—returning from an 

archaeological expedition in the desert—told him about an Arab 

that was possessed of exceptional powers. 

“He lives at the Al-Fayoum oasis,” his friend had said. “And 

people say that he is two hundred years old, and is able to 

transform any metal into gold.” 

all his commitments and pulled together the most important of his 
books, and now here he was, sitting inside a dusty, smelly 

warehouse. Outside, a huge caravan was being prepared for a 
crossing of the Sahara, and was scheduled to pass through Al-

Fayoum. 

I’m going to find that damned alchemist, the Englishman 

thought. And the odor of the animals became a bit more tolerable. 

A young Arab, also loaded down with baggage, entered, and 

greeted the Englishman. 

“Where are you bound?” asked the young Arab. 

“I’m going into the desert,” the man answered, turning back to 

the alchemist would certainly put him to the test. 

The young Arab took out a book and began to read. The book 

was written in Spanish. That’s good, thought the Englishman. He 

spoke Spanish better than Arabic, and, if this boy was going to Al-

Fayoum, there would be someone to talk to when there were no 

other important things to do. 

without a king to provide an interruption, he was unable to 

concentrate. 

He still had some doubts about the decision he had made. But he 

diving into a strong current that will carry him to places he had 
never dreamed of when he first made the decision. 

When I decided to seek out my treasure, I never imagined that 

I’d wind up working in a crystal shop, he thought. And joining this 

a mystery to me. 

Nearby was the Englishman, reading a book. He seemed 

They might even have become friends, but the Englishman closed 

off the conversation. 

The boy closed his book. He felt that he didn’t want to do 

Urim and Thummim from his pocket, and began playing with them. 

The stranger shouted, “Urim and Thummim!” 

In a flash the boy put them back in his pocket. 

“They’re not for sale,” he said. 

“They’re not worth much,” the Englishman answered. “They’re 

only made of rock crystal, and there are millions of rock crystals in 

this part of the world.” 

“They were given to me as a present by a king,” the boy said. 

The stranger didn’t answer; instead, he put his hand in his 

pocket, and took out two stones that were the same as the boy’s. 

“Did you say a king?” he asked. 

“I guess you don’t believe that a king would talk to someone like 

me, a shepherd,” he said, wanting to end the conversation. 

“Not at all. It was shepherds who were the first to recognize a 

king that the rest of the world refused to acknowledge. So, it’s not 

surprising that kings would talk to shepherds.” 

he was talking about, “It’s in the Bible. The same book that taught 
me about Urim and Thummim. These stones were the only form of 

breastplate.” 

The boy was suddenly happy to be there at the warehouse. 

“Maybe this is an omen,” said the Englishman, half aloud. 

“Who told you about omens?” The boy’s interest was increasing 

by the moment. 

the journal he was reading. “There is a universal language, 

have to find a man who knows that universal language. An 

alchemist.” 

The conversation was interrupted by the warehouse boss. 

“You’re in luck, you two,” the fat Arab said. “There’s a caravan 

leaving today for Al-Fayoum.” 

“But I’m going to Egypt,” the boy said. 

“Al-Fayoum is in Egypt,” said the Arab. “What kind of Arab are 

you?” 

about the words luck and coincidence. It’s with those words that the 

universal language is written.” 

He told the boy it was no coincidence that he had met him with 

Urim and Thummim in his hand. And he asked the boy if he, too, 

were in search of the alchemist. 

“I’m looking for a treasure,” said the boy, and he immediately 

regretted having said it. But the Englishman appeared not to attach 
any importance to it. 

“In a way, so am I,” he said. 
“I don’t even know what alchemy is,” the boy was saying, when 

the warehouse boss called to them to come outside. 

The desert is a capricious lady, and sometimes she drives men 

crazy.” 

belts and rifles slung on their shoulders. The Englishman had 

understand what he was saying. 

“There are a lot of different people here, and each has his own 

God. But the only God I serve is Allah, and in his name I swear that I 

But I want each and every one of you to swear by the God you 

desert, disobedience means death.” 

to his or her own God. The boy swore to Jesus Christ. The 
Englishman said nothing. And the murmur lasted longer than a 

simple vow would have. The people were also praying to heaven for 
protection. 

The boy and the Englishman had bought camels, and climbed 

uncertainly onto their backs. The boy felt sorry for the Englishman’s 
camel, loaded down as he was with the cases of books. 

“There’s no such thing as coincidence,” said the Englishman, 

who…” 

But the caravan began to move, and it was impossible to hear 

crystal merchant, and… 

boy. 

The caravan moved toward the east. It traveled during the 

in the afternoon. The boy spoke very little with the Englishman, who 

spent most of his time with his books. 

The boy observed in silence the progress of the animals and 

and shouting, the cries of children and the whinnying of animals, all 
mixed with the nervous orders of the guides and the merchants. 

and of the hoofbeats of the animals. Even the guides spoke very 

little to one another. 

“I’ve crossed these sands many times,” said one of the camel 

drivers one night. “But the desert is so huge, and the horizons so 
distant, that they make a person feel small, and as if he should 

remain silent.” 

or a fire, he fell silent, impressed by their elemental force. 

I’ve learned things from the sheep, and I’ve learned things from 

seems old and wise. 

The wind never stopped, and the boy remembered the day he 

had sat at the fort in Tarifa with this same wind blowing in his face. 

It reminded him of the wool from his sheep…his sheep who were 

now seeking food and water in the fields of Andalusia, as they 

always had. 

“They’re not my sheep anymore,” he said to himself, without 

sheep, that are used to traveling, know about moving on.” 

He thought of the merchant’s daughter, and was sure that she 

understanding of the camel driver’s comment: maybe he was also 
learning the universal language that deals with the past and the 

everything, because it’s all written there. 

“Maktub,” the boy said, remembering the crystal merchant. 

guide were to fall ill or die, the camel drivers would draw lots and 

appoint a new one. 

But all this happened for one basic reason: no matter how many 

detours and adjustments it made, the caravan moved toward the 

its course, sighting on a star that indicated the location of the oasis. 

When the people saw that star shining in the morning sky, they 

knew they were on the right course toward water, palm trees, 

his books. 

The boy, too, had his book, and he had tried to read it during the 

to observe the caravan and listen to the wind. As soon as he had 
learned to know his camel better, and to establish a relationship 

with him, he threw the book away. Although the boy had developed 
a superstition that each time he opened the book he would learn 

something important, he decided it was an unnecessary burden. 

He became friendly with the camel driver who traveled 

alongside him. At night, as they sat around the fire, the boy related 
to the driver his adventures as a shepherd. 

During one of these conversations, the driver told of his own life. 

“I used to live near El Cairum,” he said. “I had my orchard, my 

and that made me feel good. 

children. I thought that everything I owned would be destroyed. 

“The land was ruined, and I had to find some other way to earn a 

they are capable of achieving what they need and want. 

“We are afraid of losing what we have, whether it’s our life or 

written by the same hand.” 

Sometimes, their caravan met with another. One always had 

something that the other needed—as if everything were indeed 

exchanged information about windstorms, and told stories about 
the desert. 

At other times, mysterious, hooded men would appear; they 

were Bedouins who did surveillance along the caravan route. They 

provided warnings about thieves and barbarian tribes. They came 
in silence and departed the same way, dressed in black garments 

that showed only their eyes. One night, a camel driver came to the 
fire where the Englishman and the boy were sitting. “There are 

rumors of tribal wars,” he told them. 

The three fell silent. The boy noted that there was a sense of fear 

experiencing the language without words…the universal language. 

The Englishman asked if they were in danger. 

including the danger.” 

And he concluded by saying the mysterious word: “Maktub.” 

detours, but we’re always heading for the same destination.” 

“And you ought to read more about the world,” answered the 

Englishman. “Books are like caravans in that respect.” 

faster. The days had always been silent, but now, even the nights—

when the travelers were accustomed to talking around the fires—

the decision that the fires should no longer be lighted, so as not to 

attract attention to the caravan. 

The travelers adopted the practice of arranging the animals in a 

circle at night, sleeping together in the center as protection against 
the nocturnal cold. And the leader posted armed sentinels at the 

fringes of the group. 

The Englishman was unable to sleep one night. He called to the 

boy, and they took a walk along the dunes surrounding the 
encampment. There was a full moon, and the boy told the 

Englishman the story of his life. 

achieved at the crystal shop after the boy began working there. 

“That’s the principle that governs all things,” he said. “In 

with all your heart, that’s when you are closest to the Soul of the 

World. It’s always a positive force.” 

He also said that this was not just a human gift, that everything 

on the face of the earth had a soul, whether mineral, vegetable, or 

animal—or even just a simple thought. 

rarely recognize that it is working for us. But in the crystal shop you 

success.” 

The boy thought about that for a while as he looked at the moon 

language, and it’s for that reason that the desert allows the crossing. 

It’s going to test the caravan’s every step to see if it’s in time, and, if 

it is, we will make it to the oasis.” 

“If either of us had joined this caravan based only on personal 

courage, but without understanding that language, this journey 
would have been much more difficult.” 

They stood there looking at the moon. 
“That’s the magic of omens,” said the boy. “I’ve seen how the 

guides read the signs of the desert, and how the soul of the caravan 
speaks to the soul of the desert.” 

caravan.” 

“And I’d better read your books,” said the boy. 

and kings, and he didn’t understand any of it. But there was one idea 

the manifestation of one thing only. 

inscribed on the surface of an emerald. 

“It’s the Emerald Tablet,” said the Englishman, proud that he 

might teach something to the boy. 

“Well, then, why do we need all these books?” the boy asked. 

“So that we can understand those few lines,” the Englishman 

answered, without appearing really to believe what he had said. 

The book that most interested the boy told the stories of the 

lives to the purification of metals in their laboratories; they believed 

that, if a metal were heated for many years, it would free itself of all 

its individual properties, and what was left would be the Soul of the 

on the face of the earth, because it was the language with which all 
things communicated. They called that discovery the Master 

Work—it was part liquid and part solid. 

the language?” the boy asked. 

“You have a mania for simplifying everything,” answered the 

Englishman, irritated. “Alchemy is a serious discipline. Every step 
has to be followed exactly as it was followed by the masters.” 

called the Elixir of Life, and that it cured all illnesses; it also kept the 

Philosopher’s Stone. 

“It’s not easy to find the Philosopher’s Stone,” said the 

world. They discovered that the purification of the metals had led to 

a purification of themselves.” 

The boy thought about the crystal merchant. He had said that it 

was a good thing for the boy to clean the crystal pieces, so that he 

daily life. 

“Also,” said the Englishman, “the Philosopher’s Stone has a 

quantities of metal into gold.” 

Having heard that, the boy became even more interested in 

alchemy. He thought that, with some patience, he’d be able to 

people who had succeeded in doing so: Helvétius, Elias, Fulcanelli, 
and Geber. They were fascinating stories: each of them lived out his 

Personal Legend to the end. They traveled, spoke with wise men, 
performed miracles for the incredulous, and owned the 

Philosopher’s Stone and the Elixir of Life. 

But when the boy wanted to learn how to achieve the Master 

Work, he became completely lost. There were just drawings, coded 
instructions, and obscure texts. 

and missed his books. 

“So that those who have the responsibility for understanding can 

understand,” he said. “Imagine if everyone went around 

transforming lead into gold. Gold would lose its value. 

“It’s only those who are persistent, and willing to study things 

deeply, who achieve the Master Work. That’s why I’m here in the 

to decipher the codes.” 

“When were these books written?” the boy asked. 

“Many centuries ago.” 

“They didn’t have the printing press in those days,” the boy 

Why did they use such strange language, with so many drawings?” 

The Englishman didn’t answer him directly. He said that for the 

he had noticed was that talk of war was becoming more and more 

frequent. 

you learn anything?” the Englishman asked, eager to hear what it 

might be. He needed someone to talk to so as to avoid thinking 
about the possibility of war. 

“I learned that the world has a soul, and that whoever 

Stone, and the Elixir of Life. 

“But, above all, I learned that these things are all so simple that 

they could be written on the surface of an emerald.” 

The Englishman was disappointed. The years of research, the 

magic 
symbols, 
the 
strange 
words, 
and 
the 
laboratory 

soul must be too primitive to understand those things, he thought. 

He took back his books and packed them away again in their 

bags. 

“Go back to watching the caravan,” he said. “That didn’t teach me 

anything, either.” 

The boy went back to contemplating the silence of the desert, 

and the sand raised by the animals. “Everyone has his or her own 

way of learning things,” he said to himself. “His way isn’t the same 

Legends, and I respect him for that.” 

 
THE CARAVAN BEGAN TO TRAVEL DAY AND NIGHT. THE hooded Bedouins 

reappeared more and more frequently, and the camel driver—who 
had become a good friend of the boy’s—explained that the war 

between the tribes had already begun. The caravan would be very 
lucky to reach the oasis. 

The animals were exhausted, and the men talked among 

themselves less and less. The silence was the worst aspect of the 

night, when the mere groan of a camel—which before had been 

nothing but the groan of a camel—now frightened everyone, 

because it might signal a raid. 

the threat of war. 

“I’m alive,” he said to the boy, as they ate a bunch of dates one 

night, with no fires and no moon. “When I’m eating, that’s all I think 

to fight, it will be just as good a day to die as any other. 

“Because I don’t live in either my past or my future. I’m 

present, you’ll be a happy man. You’ll see that there is life in the 

because they are part of the human race. Life will be a party for you, 

a grand festival, because life is the moment we’re living right now.” 

Two nights later, as he was getting ready to bed down, the boy 

stars on the desert itself. 

“It’s the oasis,” said the camel driver. 

“Well, why don’t we go there right now?” the boy asked. 

“Because we have to sleep.” 

 
THE BOY AWOKE AS THE SUN ROSE. THERE, IN FRONT OF him, where the 

small stars had been the night before, was an endless row of date 
palms, stretching across the entire desert. 

“We’ve done it!” said the Englishman, who had also awakened 

early. 

long way to go to reach the Pyramids, and someday this morning 

would just be a memory. But this was the present moment—the 

he did the lessons of his past and his dreams of the future. Although 

could herald a miracle. 

The world speaks many languages, the boy thought. 

as he watched the hundreds of people and animals arriving at the 

desert sun, and the children of the oasis were bursting with 

at length. 

But none of that mattered to the alchemist. He had already seen 

many people come and go, and the desert remained as it was. He 
had seen kings and beggars walking the desert sands. The dunes 

were changed constantly by the wind, yet these were the same 
sands he had known since he was a child. He always enjoyed seeing 

the happiness that the travelers experienced when, after weeks of 
yellow sand and blue sky, they first saw the green of the date palms. 

Maybe God created the desert so that man could appreciate the date 
trees, he thought. 

He decided to concentrate on more practical matters. He knew 

apprentice. 

revealed his secrets easily to all his creatures. 

He had only one explanation for this fact: things have to be 

and this kind of life cannot be captured in pictures or words. 

Because people become fascinated with pictures and words, and 

wind up forgetting the Language of the World. 

in Spain. There were three hundred wells, fifty thousand date trees, 

and innumerable colored tents spread among them. 

“It looks like A Thousand and One Nights,” said the Englishman, 

impatient to meet with the alchemist. 

They were surrounded by children, curious to look at the 

animals and people that were arriving. The men of the oasis wanted 

to know if they had seen any fighting, and the women competed 
with one another for access to the cloth and precious stones 

brought by the merchants. The silence of the desert was a distant 
dream; the travelers in the caravan were talking incessantly, 

were relieved and happy. 

camel driver explained to the boy that oases were always 

inhabitants were women and children. There were oases 

throughout the desert, but the tribesmen fought in the desert, 

leaving the oases as places of refuge. 

With some difficulty, the leader of the caravan brought all his 

with those who lived there, and would be given the best 

the men appointed by the tribal chieftains. 

“Those are the rules of war,” the leader explained. “The oases 

may not shelter armies or troops.” 

To the boy’s surprise, the Englishman took a chrome-plated 

the arms. 

“Why a revolver?” he asked. 
“It helped me to trust in people,” the Englishman answered. 

Meanwhile, the boy thought about his treasure. The closer he got 

to the realization of his dream, the more difficult things became. It 

he would fail to see the signs and omens left by God along his path. 

God placed them along my path. He had surprised himself with 

God to indicate what he should do. 

“Don’t be impatient,” he repeated to himself. “It’s like the camel 

time to move along.’” 

That first day, everyone slept from exhaustion, including the 

of the desert, and clamored to hear his stories about the great cities. 

The boy told them about his life as a shepherd, and was about to 

tell them of his experiences at the crystal shop when the 

Englishman came into the tent. 

“I’ve been looking for you all morning,” he said, as he led the boy 

outside. “I need you to help me find out where the alchemist lives.” 

First, they tried to find him on their own. An alchemist would 

probably live in a manner that was different from that of the rest of 

the people at the oasis, and it was likely that in his tent an oven was 

continuously burning. They searched everywhere, and found that 

the oasis was much larger than they could have imagined; there 
were hundreds of tents. 

“We’ve wasted almost the entire day,” said the Englishman, 

sitting down with the boy near one of the wells. 

“Maybe we’d better ask someone,” the boy suggested. 
The Englishman didn’t want to tell others about his reasons for 

being at the oasis, and couldn’t make up his mind. But, finally, he 
agreed that the boy, who spoke better Arabic than he, should do so. 

The boy approached a woman who had come to the well to fill a 

goatskin with water. 

“Good afternoon, ma’am. I’m trying to find out where the 

alchemist lives here at the oasis.” 

The woman said she had never heard of such a person, and 

because they were married women. He should respect tradition. 

The Englishman was disappointed. It seemed he had made the 

in pursuit of his Personal Legend. And, when someone was in such 

pursuit, the entire universe made an effort to help him succeed—

that’s what the old king had said. He couldn’t have been wrong. 

“I had never heard of alchemists before,” the boy said. “Maybe 

no one here has, either.” 

The Englishman’s eyes lit up. “That’s it! Maybe no one here 

knows what an alchemist is! Find out who it is who cures the 

people’s illnesses!” 

Several women dressed in black came to the well for water, but 

the boy would speak to none of them, despite the Englishman’s 

insistence. Then a man approached. 

“Do you know someone here who cures people’s illnesses?” the 

boy asked. 

“Allah cures our illnesses,” said the man, clearly frightened of the 

strangers. “You’re looking for witch doctors.” He spoke some verses 

from the Koran, and moved on. 

Another man appeared. He was older, and was carrying a small 

bucket. The boy repeated his question. 

“Why do you want to find that sort of person?” the Arab asked. 

to meet with him,” the boy said. 

when he consents. 

“Wait for the end of the war. Then leave with the caravan. Don’t 

try to enter into the life of the oasis,” he said, and walked away. 

But the Englishman was exultant. They were on the right track. 

Finally, a young woman approached who was not dressed in 

ask about the alchemist. 

world spoke—the language that everyone on earth was capable of 

the well. She smiled, and that was certainly an omen—the omen he 
had been awaiting, without even knowing he was, for all his life. The 

omen he had sought to find with his sheep and in his books, in the 
crystals and in the silence of the desert. 

It was the pure Language of the World. It required no 

explanation, just as the universe needs none as it travels through 

city. And when two such people encounter each other, and their 

Without such love, one’s dreams would have no meaning. 

Maktub, thought the boy. 

The Englishman shook the boy: “Come on, ask her!” 

The boy stepped closer to the girl, and when she smiled, he did 

the same. 

“What’s your name?” he asked. 

“Fatima,” the girl said, averting her eyes. 

“That’s what some women in my country are called.” 

“It’s the name of the Prophet’s daughter,” Fatima said. “The 

the invaders with pride. 

The Englishman prodded him, and the boy asked her about the 

man who cured people’s illnesses. 

said. “He communicates with the genies of the desert.” 

The genies were the spirits of good and evil. And the girl pointed 

to the south, indicating that it was there the strange man lived. Then 
she filled her vessel with water and left. 

discover every treasure in the world. 

The next day, the boy returned to the well, hoping to see the girl. 

To his surprise, the Englishman was there, looking out at the desert. 

“I waited all afternoon and evening,” he said. “He appeared with 

was what I had come here to learn. 

“He told me I should try to do so. That’s all he said: ‘Go and try.’” 

The boy didn’t say anything. The poor Englishman had traveled 

already done so many times. 

“So, then try,” he said to the Englishman. 

“That’s what I’m going to do. I’m going to start now.” 

As the Englishman left, Fatima arrived and filled her vessel with 

water. 

“I came to tell you just one thing,” the boy said. “I want you to be 

my wife. I love you.” 

The girl dropped the container, and the water spilled. 
“I’m going to wait here for you every day. I have crossed the 

desert in search of a treasure that is somewhere near the Pyramids, 
and for me, the war seemed a curse. But now it’s a blessing, because 

it brought me to you.” 

“The war is going to end someday,” the girl said. 

The boy looked around him at the date palms. He reminded 

himself that he had been a shepherd, and that he could be a 

shepherd again. Fatima was more important than his treasure. 

“The tribesmen are always in search of treasure,” the girl said, as 

desert are proud of their tribesmen.” 

She refilled her vessel and left. 

him. 

“We don’t know when the war will end, so we can’t continue our 

journey,” he said. “The battles may last for a long time, perhaps even 

important to both armies. It’s not a battle of good against evil. It’s a 

Allah is on both sides.” 

The people went back to where they were living, and the boy 

went to meet with Fatima that afternoon. He told her about the 
morning’s meeting. “The day after we met,” Fatima said, “you told 

me that you loved me. Then, you taught me something of the 
universal language and the Soul of the World. Because of that, I have 

become a part of you.” 

The boy listened to the sound of her voice, and thought it to be 

more beautiful than the sound of the wind in the date palms. 

“I have been waiting for you here at this oasis for a long time. I 

present. Now, my present has arrived, and it’s you.” 

handles of her jug. 

“You have told me about your dreams, about the old king and 

your treasure. And you’ve told me about omens. So now, I fear 

it. 

“That’s why I want you to continue toward your goal. If you have 

to wait until the war is over, then wait. But if you have to go before 

our love for each other. 

“Maktub,” she said. “If I am really a part of your dream, you’ll 

come back one day.” 

The boy was sad as he left her that day. He thought of all the 

married shepherds he had known. They had a difficult time 

Love required them to stay with the people they loved. 

He told Fatima that, at their next meeting. 

“The desert takes our men from us, and they don’t always 

return,” she said. “We know that, and we are used to it. Those who 

don’t return become a part of the clouds, a part of the animals that 
hide in the ravines and of the water that comes from the earth. They 

become a part of everything…they become the Soul of the World. 

“Some do come back. And then the other women are happy 

too will be one of the women who wait. 

to, I will accept the fact that he has become a part of the clouds, and 

the animals, and the water of the desert.” 

had built himself a furnace outside his tent. It was a strange furnace, 

they had when he was reading his books. 

“This is the first phase of the job,” he said. “I have to separate out 

the sulfur. To do that successfully, I must have no fear of failure. It 

was my fear of failure that first kept me from attempting the Master 

But I’m happy at least that I didn’t wait twenty years.” 

He continued to feed the fire, and the boy stayed on until the 

desert turned pink in the setting sun. He felt the urge to go out into 

the desert, to see if its silence held the answers to his questions. 

within sight. He listened to the wind, and felt the stones beneath his 
feet. Here and there, he found a shell, and realized that the desert, in 

remote times, had been a sea. He sat on a stone, and allowed himself 
to become hypnotized by the horizon. He tried to deal with the 

help him to understand, it was the desert. 

As he sat there thinking, he sensed movement above him. 

Looking up, he saw a pair of hawks flying high in the sky. 

He watched the hawks as they drifted on the wind. Although 

love without ownership. 

also wanted to sleep. “I am learning the Language of the World, and 

sense, he thought. 

Suddenly, one of the hawks made a flashing dive through the 

sky, attacking the other. As it did so, a sudden, fleeting image came 

had heard people speak of mirages, and had already seen some 

himself: they were desires that, because of their intensity, 

desire that an army invade the oasis. 

He wanted to forget about the vision, and return to his 

meditation. He tried again to concentrate on the pink shades of the 
desert, and its stones. But there was something there in his heart 

that wouldn’t allow him to do so. 

“Always heed the omens,” the old king had said. The boy recalled 

what he had seen in the vision, and sensed that it was actually going 
to occur. 

again, he perceived the many languages in the things about him: this 

dangerous. 

The camel driver was seated at the base of a palm tree, 

the dunes. 

“An army is coming,” the boy said. “I had a vision.” 

answered. 

But the boy told him about the hawks: that he had been 

to the Soul of the World. 

that any given thing on the face of the earth could reveal the history 

person’s hand; one could turn a card, or watch the flight of the 

means of penetration to the Soul of the World. 

The desert was full of men who earned their living based on the 

ease with which they could penetrate to the Soul of the World. They 
were known as seers, and they were held in fear by women and the 

elderly. Tribesmen were also wary of consulting them, because it 
would be impossible to be effective in battle if one knew that he was 

already written by Allah, and what he had written was always for 
the good of man. So the tribesmen lived only for the present, 

of many things: Where was the enemy’s sword? Where was his 

horse? What kind of blow should one deliver next in order to 

the camel driver was so interested in the future. 

“Well…so I can do things,” he had responded. “And so I can 

change those things that I don’t want to happen.” 

said. 

myself for what’s coming.” 

“If good things are coming, they will be a pleasant surprise,” said 

the seer. “If bad things are, and you know in advance, you will suffer 

greatly before they even occur.” 

“I want to know about the future because I’m a man,” the camel 

on the future.” 

The seer was a specialist in the casting of twigs; he threw them 

on the ground, and made interpretations based on how they fell. 

That day, he didn’t make a cast. He wrapped the twigs in a piece of 
cloth and put them back in his bag. 

know the science of the twigs, and I know how to use them to 

omens that are here in the present. 

“When people consult me, it’s not that I’m reading the future; I 

guess at the future? Based on the omens of the present. The secret is 

later will also be better. Forget about the future, and live each day 

Each day, in itself, brings with it an eternity.” 

The camel driver had asked what the circumstances were under 

which God would allow him to see the future. 

that was written so as to be altered.” 

God had shown the boy a part of the future, the camel driver 

thought. Why was it that he wanted the boy to serve as his 

instrument? 

“Go and speak to the tribal chieftains,” said the camel driver. 

“Tell them about the armies that are approaching.” 

“They’ll laugh at me.” 

“They are men of the desert, and the men of the desert are used 

to dealing with omens.” 

“Well, then, they probably already know.” 

they have to know about something Allah wants them to know, 

someone will tell them about it. It has happened many times before. 
But, this time, the person is you.” 

the chiefs of the tribes. 

the center of the oasis. 

desert.” 

Without responding, the guard entered the tent, where he 

remained for some time. When he emerged, it was with a young 

into the tent. 

Night fell, and an assortment of fighting men and merchants 

entered and exited the tent. One by one, the campfires were 

extinguished, and the oasis fell as quiet as the desert. Only the lights 

about Fatima, and he was still unable to understand his last 

conversation with her. 

Finally, after hours of waiting, the guard bade the boy enter. The 

imagined that, there in the middle of the desert, there existed a tent 

hung lamps of handwrought gold, each with a lighted candle. The 

tribal chieftains were seated at the back of the tent in a semicircle, 
resting upon richly embroidered silk cushions. Servants came and 

with the sweet scent of smoke. 

There were eight chieftains, but the boy could see immediately 

young Arab the boy had spoken with earlier. 

“Who is this stranger who speaks of omens?” asked one of the 

chieftains, eyeing the boy. 

“It is I,” the boy answered. And he told what he had seen. 

“Why would the desert reveal such things to a stranger, when it 

chieftains. 

see.” 

to himself. 

third chieftain. 

you don’t have to do anything about it.” 

The men fell into an animated discussion. They spoke in an 

leave, the guard told him to stay. The boy became fearful; the omens 

the camel driver about what he had seen in the desert. 

Suddenly, the elder at the center smiled almost imperceptibly, 

and the boy felt better. The man hadn’t participated in the 
discussion, and, in fact, hadn’t said a word up to that point. But the 

boy was already used to the Language of the World, and he could 
feel the vibrations of peace throughout the tent. Now his intuition 

was that he had been right in coming. 

The discussion ended. The chieftains were silent for a few 

moments as they listened to what the old man was saying. Then he 
turned to the boy: this time his expression was cold and distant. 

“Two thousand years ago, in a distant land, a man who believed 

old man said, now in the dialect the boy understood. “Our 

them.” 

The elder continued, “When the pharaoh dreamed of cows that 

a strange land, like you, and he was probably about your age.” 

He paused, and his eyes were still unfriendly. 

“We always observe the Tradition. The Tradition saved Egypt 

vulnerable.” 

No one said a word as the old man continued. 

of the desert. Everything we know was taught to us by the desert.” 

The old man gave a signal, and everyone stood. The meeting was 

over. The hookahs were extinguished, and the guards stood at 

attention. The boy made ready to leave, but the old man spoke 
again: 

“Tomorrow, we are going to break the agreement that says that 

no one at the oasis may carry arms. Throughout the entire day we 

among our enemies, you will receive a piece of gold. 

used by the end of the day tomorrow, one will be used on you.” 

began to make his way there. 

He was alarmed by what had happened. He had succeeded in 

having done so might be his life. It was a frightening bet. But he had 

die tomorrow was no worse than dying on any other day. Every day 

Everything depended on one word: “Maktub.” 

Walking along in the silence, he had no regrets. If he died 

silence of the desert and Fatima’s eyes. He had lived every one of his 

and he was proud of that. 

Suddenly he heard a thundering sound, and he was thrown to 

the ground by a wind such as he had never known. The area was 

swirling in dust so intense that it hid the moon from view. Before 
him was an enormous white horse, rearing over him with a 

frightening scream. 

what he saw. Astride the animal was a horseman dressed 
completely in black, with a falcon perched on his left shoulder. He 

with a black kerchief. He appeared to be a messenger from the 

mere messenger. 

The strange horseman drew an enormous, curved sword from a 

the light of the moon. 

fifty thousand palm trees of Al-Fayoum. 

“It is I who dared to do so,” said the boy. He was reminded of the 

except that now the roles were reversed. 

“It is I who dared to do so,” he repeated, and he lowered his head 

I was able to see through to the Soul of the World.” 

The sword didn’t fall. Instead, the stranger lowered it slowly, 

blood. 

The horseman was completely immobile, as was the boy. It 

didn’t even occur to the boy to flee. In his heart, he felt a strange 
sense of joy: he was about to die in pursuit of his Personal Legend. 

And for Fatima. The omens had been true, after all. Here he was, 
face-to-face with his enemy, but there was no need to be concerned 

that Soul. 

“Why did you read the flight of the birds?” 

men at the oasis than you have.” 

The sword remained where it was. “Who are you to change what 

Allah has willed?” 

the same hand,” the boy said, remembering the camel driver’s 

words. 

the boy felt immensely relieved. But he still couldn’t flee. 

“Be careful with your prognostications,” said the stranger. 

“When something is written, there is no way to change it.” 

of the battle.” 

The stranger seemed satisfied with the answer. But he kept the 

sword in his hand. “What is a stranger doing in a strange land?” 

“I am following my Personal Legend. It’s not something you 

would understand.” 

The stranger placed his sword in its scabbard, and the boy 

relaxed. 

“I had to test your courage,” the stranger said. “Courage is the 

quality most essential to understanding the Language of the World.” 

The boy was surprised. The stranger was speaking of things that 

very few people knew about. 

“You must not let up, even after having come so far,” he 

continued. “You must love the desert, but never trust it completely. 

Because the desert tests all men: it challenges every step, and kills 

those who become distracted.” 

What he said reminded the boy of the old king. 

shoulders at sunset, come and find me,” said the stranger. 

The same hand that had brandished the sword now held a whip. 

The horse reared again, raising a cloud of dust. 

“Where do you live?” shouted the boy, as the horseman rode 

away. 

The hand with the whip pointed to the south. 

The boy had met the alchemist. 

throughout the palm trees at Al-Fayoum. Before the sun had 

hidden in their robes. When they reached the white tent at the 

they attacked an empty tent. 

The men of the oasis surrounded the horsemen from the desert 

and within half an hour all but one of the intruders were dead. The 

children had been kept at the other side of a grove of palm trees, 
and saw nothing of what had happened. The women had remained 

in their tents, praying for the safekeeping of their husbands, and 
saw nothing of the battle, either. Were it not for the bodies there on 

the ground, it would have appeared to be a normal day at the oasis. 

days of battle, and had decided to take the oasis so as to be able to 

return to the war. 

The tribal chieftain said that he felt sorry for the tribesmen, but 

that the Tradition was sacred. He condemned the commander to 

desert wind. 

fifty pieces of gold. He repeated his story about Joseph of Egypt, and 

asked the boy to become the counselor of the oasis. 

boy started to walk to the south. He eventually sighted a single tent, 

inhabited by genies. But the boy sat down and waited. 

Not until the moon was high did the alchemist ride into view. He 

carried two dead hawks over his shoulder. 

“I am here,” the boy said. 
“You shouldn’t be here,” the alchemist answered. “Or is it your 

Personal Legend that brings you here?” 

“With the wars between the tribes, it’s impossible to cross the 

desert. So I have come here.” 

The alchemist dismounted from his horse, and signaled that the 

boy should enter the tent with him. It was a tent like many at the 
oasis. The boy looked around for the ovens and other apparatus 

used in alchemy, but saw none. There were only some books in a 

pile, a small cooking stove, and the carpets, covered with 

mysterious designs. 

said the alchemist. 

The boy suspected that they were the same hawks he had seen 

fire, and soon a delicious aroma filled the tent. It was better than the 

scent of the hookahs. 

“Why did you want to see me?” the boy asked. 

me you would be coming, and that you would need help.” 

Englishman. He’s the one that’s looking for you.” 

has begun to try to understand the desert.” 

“And what about me?” 

“When a person really desires something, all the universe 

Another person was there to help him toward his Personal Legend. 

“So you are going to instruct me?” 

“No. You already know all you need to know. I am only going to 

point you in the direction of your treasure.” 

“But there’s a tribal war,” the boy reiterated. 
“I know what’s happening in the desert.” 

money from the crystal shop, and I have fifty gold pieces. In my own 

country, I would be a rich man.” 

“But none of that is from the Pyramids,” said the alchemist. 

“I also have Fatima. She is a treasure greater than anything else I 

have won.” 

“She wasn’t found at the Pyramids, either.” 

ever tasted. 

“Isn’t wine prohibited here?” the boy asked 

“It’s not what enters men’s mouths that’s evil,” said the 

alchemist. “It’s what comes out of their mouths that is.” 

The alchemist was a bit daunting, but, as the boy drank the wine, 

under a moon so brilliant that it made the stars pale. 

“Drink and enjoy yourself,” said the alchemist, noticing that the 

boy was feeling happier. “Rest well tonight, as if you were a warrior 

you will find your treasure. You’ve got to find the treasure, so that 

everything you have learned along the way can make sense. 

“Tomorrow, sell your camel and buy a horse. Camels are 

always know how much you can ask of them, and when it is that 

they are about to die.” 

 
THE FOLLOWING NIGHT, THE BOY APPEARED AT THE alchemist’s tent with a 

where there is life out in the desert. Only those who can see such 
signs of life are able to find treasure.” 

their way. I don’t know if I’ll be able to find life in the desert, the boy 

thought. I don’t know the desert that well yet. 

hawks in the sky, but now there was only silence and the wind. 

know that there is life here, but I don’t know where to look.” 

“Life attracts life,” the alchemist answered. 

And then the boy understood. He loosened the reins on his 

Suddenly, for no apparent reason, the boy’s horse began to slow. 

“There’s life here,” the boy said to the alchemist. “I don’t know 

the language of the desert, but my horse knows the language of life.” 

They dismounted, and the alchemist said nothing. Advancing 

stones. The alchemist put his hand into the hole, and then his entire 

arm, up to his shoulder. Something was moving there, and the 

hole. Then, with a motion that startled the boy, he withdrew his arm 
and leaped to his feet. In his hand, he grasped a snake by the tail. 

The boy leapt as well, but away from the alchemist. The snake 

fought frantically, making hissing sounds that shattered the silence 

of the desert. It was a cobra, whose venom could kill a person in 
minutes. 

“Watch out for his venom,” the boy said. But even though the 

bitten, his expression was calm. “The alchemist is two hundred 

with the snakes of the desert. 

The boy watched as his companion went to his horse and 

withdrew a scimitar. With its blade, he drew a circle in the sand, and 

You found life in the desert, the omen that I needed.” 

“Why was that so important?” 

“Because the Pyramids are surrounded by the desert.” 

The boy didn’t want to talk about the Pyramids. His heart was 

Fatima. 

“I’m going to guide you across the desert,” the alchemist said. 

Fatima, and, as far as I’m concerned, she’s worth more than 

treasure.” 

“Fatima is a woman of the desert,” said the alchemist. “She 

has her treasure: it’s you. Now she expects that you will find what it 
is you’re looking for.” 

“Well, what if I decide to stay?” 
“Let me tell you what will happen. You’ll be the counselor of the 

to love the desert, and you’ll get to know every one of the fifty 
thousand palms. You’ll watch them as they grow, demonstrating 

there is. 

“Sometime during the second year, you’ll remember about the 

try to ignore them. You’ll use your knowledge for the welfare of the 

you do. And your camels will bring you wealth and power. 

“During the third year, the omens will continue to speak of your 

night, at the oasis, and Fatima will be unhappy because she’ll feel it 

she’ll return your love. You’ll remember that she never asked you to 

forever. 

“Then, sometime during the fourth year, the omens will abandon 

it’s too late. 

“You must understand that love never keeps a man from 

pursuing his Personal Legend. If he abandons that pursuit, it’s 
because it wasn’t true love…the love that speaks the Language of 

the World.” 

The alchemist erased the circle in the sand, and the snake 

slithered away among the rocks. The boy remembered the crystal 

merchant who had always wanted to go to Mecca, and the 

that had brought him to the woman he loved. 

They mounted their horses, and this time it was the boy who 

sounds of the oasis to them, and the boy tried to hear Fatima’s voice. 

But that night, as he had watched the cobra within the circle, the 

Legend. 

in his heart. 

“We’ll leave tomorrow before sunrise,” was the alchemist’s only 

response. 

one of the boys who slept in his tent, and asked him to show him 
where Fatima lived. They went to her tent, and the boy gave his 

friend enough gold to buy a sheep. 

Then he asked his friend to go into the tent where Fatima was 

buy yet another sheep. 

“Now leave us alone,” said the boy to the young Arab. The Arab 

sheep. 

Tradition, but that didn’t matter to him now. 

“I’m going away,” he said. “And I want you to know that I’m 

coming back. I love you because…” 

one is loved. No reason is needed for loving.” 

the entire universe conspired to help me find you.” 

The two embraced. It was the first time either had touched the 

other. 

“I’ll be back,” the boy said. 

“Before this, I always looked to the desert with longing,” said 

he returned to my mother, and he has always come back since 

then.” 

They said nothing else. They walked a bit farther among the 

palms, and then the boy left her at the entrance to her tent. 

“I’ll return, just as your father came back to your mother,” he 

said. 

He saw that Fatima’s eyes were filled with tears. 

“You’re crying?” 
“I’m a woman of the desert,” she said, averting her face. “But 

above all, I’m a woman.” 

place for her. 

From that day on, it was the desert that would be important. She 

the hope for his return. 

“Everything is written in the Soul of the World, and there it will stay 

forever.” 

“Men dream more about coming home than about leaving,” the 

boy said. He was already reaccustomed to the desert’s silence. 

“If what one finds is made of pure matter, it will never spoil. And 

one can always come back. If what you had found was only a 

moment of light, like the explosion of a star, you would find nothing 
on your return.” 

The man was speaking the language of alchemy. But the boy 

knew that he was referring to Fatima. 

It was difficult not to think about what he had left behind. The 

alchemist has never been in love, the boy thought. 

bird knew the language of the desert well, and whenever they 

with a rabbit, and on the second with two birds. 

times the wind carried the sweet, sickly smell of blood. Battles had 

been fought nearby, and the wind reminded the boy that there was 

failed to observe. 

On the seventh day, the alchemist decided to make camp earlier 

offered his water container to the boy. 

“I congratulate you for having pursued your Personal Legend.” 

“And you’ve told me nothing along the way,” said the boy. “I 

thought you were going to teach me some of the things you know. A 

while ago, I rode through the desert with a man who had books on 
alchemy. But I wasn’t able to learn anything from them.” 

“There is only one way to learn,” the alchemist answered. “It’s 

through action. Everything you need to know you have learned 

through your journey. You need to learn only one thing more.” 

The boy wanted to know what that was, but the alchemist was 

searching the horizon, looking for the falcon. 

“Why are you called the alchemist?” 

“Because that’s what I am.” 

“And what went wrong when other alchemists tried to make 

gold and were unable to do so?” 

“They were looking only for gold,” his companion answered. 

wanting actually to live out the Personal Legend.” 

“What is it that I still need to know?” the boy asked. 

But the alchemist continued to look to the horizon. And finally 

the falcon returned with their meal. They dug a hole and lit their fire 

in it, so that the light of the flames would not be seen. 

tracts, interpretations, and philosophical studies. They also began to 

Tablet is still alive today.” 

“What was written on the Emerald Tablet?” the boy wanted to 

know. 

The alchemist began to draw in the sand, and completed his 

drawing in less than five minutes. As he drew, the boy thought of 

the old king, and the plaza where they had met that day; it seemed 
as if it had taken place years and years ago. 

alchemist, when he had finished. 

The boy tried to read what was written in the sand. 

“It’s a code,” said the boy, a bit disappointed. “It looks like what I 

saw in the Englishman’s books.” 

is a direct passage to the Soul of the World. 

“The wise men understood that this natural world is only an 

world so that, through its visible objects, men could understand his 

mean by action.” 

“Should I understand the Emerald Tablet?” the boy asked. 

“Perhaps, if you were in a laboratory of alchemy, this would be 

desert will give you an understanding of the world; in fact, anything 

grain of sand, and you will see in it all the marvels of creation.” 

“How do I immerse myself in the desert?” 

“Listen to your heart. It knows all things, because it came from 

the Soul of the World, and it will one day return there.” 

alchemist had become much more cautious, because they were 

approaching the area where the most violent battles were being 
waged. As they moved along, the boy tried to listen to his heart. 

It was not easy to do; in earlier times, his heart had always been 

times when his heart spent hours telling of its sadness, and at other 

had to hide his tears. His heart beat fastest when it spoke to the boy 

when the boy and the alchemist had fallen into silence. 

they had made camp that day. 

“Because, wherever your heart is, that is where you’ll find your 

treasure.” 

“But my heart is agitated,” the boy said. “It has its dreams, it gets 

when I’m thinking about her.” 

“Well, that’s good. Your heart is alive. Keep listening to what it 

has to say.” 

During the next three days, the two travelers passed by a 

boy’s heart began to speak of fear. It told him stories it had heard 

treasure and never succeeded. Sometimes it frightened the boy with 
the idea that he might not find his treasure, or that he might die 

there in the desert. At other times, it told the boy that it was 
satisfied: it had found love and riches. 

“My heart is a traitor,” the boy said to the alchemist, when they 

had paused to rest the horses. “It doesn’t want me to go on.” 

“That makes sense,” the alchemist answered. “Naturally it’s 

afraid that, in pursuing your dream, you might lose everything 

you’ve won.” 

“Well, then, why should I listen to my heart?” 

and about the world.” 

“You mean I should listen, even if it’s treasonous?” 

“Treason is a blow that comes unexpectedly. If you know your 

know its dreams and wishes, and will know how to deal with them. 

“You will never be able to escape from your heart. So it’s better 

to listen to what it has to say. That way, you’ll never have to fear an 

unanticipated blow.” 

The boy continued to listen to his heart as they crossed the 

desert. He came to understand its dodges and tricks, and to accept it 

as it was. He lost his fear, and forgot about his need to go back to the 

oasis, because, one afternoon, his heart told him that it was happy. 

them. We, their hearts, become fearful just thinking of loved ones 
who go away forever, or of moments that could have been good but 

weren’t, or of treasures that might have been found but were 
forever hidden in the sands. Because, when these things happen, we 

suffer terribly.” 

“My heart is afraid that it will have to suffer,” the boy told the 

alchemist one night as they looked up at the moonless sky. 

suffering itself. And that no heart has ever suffered when it goes in 

search of its dreams, because every second of the search is a 

second’s encounter with God and with eternity.” 

was a part of the dream that I would find it. When I have been truly 

seemed impossible for a shepherd to achieve.” 

things that came from the Soul of the World. It said that all people 

them—the path to their Personal Legends, and to happiness. Most 
people see the world as a threatening place, and, because they do, 

the world turns out, indeed, to be a threatening place. 

“So, we, their hearts, speak more and more softly. We never stop 

speaking out, but we begin to hope that our words won’t be heard: 
we don’t want people to suffer because they don’t follow their 

hearts.” 

“Why don’t people’s hearts tell them to continue to follow their 

dreams?” the boy asked the alchemist. 

“Because that’s what makes a heart suffer most, and hearts don’t 

like to suffer.” 

swore that, every time he heard the alarm, he would heed its 

message. 

That night, he told all of this to the alchemist. And the alchemist 

World. 

“So what should I do now?” the boy asked. 

“Continue in the direction of the Pyramids,” said the alchemist. 

of showing you where the treasure is.” 

“Is that the one thing I still needed to know?” 

“No,” the alchemist answered. “What you still need to know is 

master the lessons we’ve learned as we’ve moved toward that 

at which, as we say in the language of the desert, one ‘dies of thirst 
just when the palm trees have appeared on the horizon.’ 

“Every search begins with beginner’s luck. And every search 

ends with the victor’s being severely tested.” 

The boy remembered an old proverb from his country. It said 

that the darkest hour of the night came just before the dawn. 

the alchemist were doing there. 

“I’m hunting with my falcon,” the alchemist answered. 

“We’re going to have to search you to see whether you’re 

armed,” one of the tribesmen said. 

The alchemist dismounted slowly, and the boy did the same. 

“Why are you carrying money?” asked the tribesman, when he 

had searched the boy’s bag. 

“I need it to get to the Pyramids,” he said. 

The tribesman who was searching the alchemist’s belongings 

found a small crystal flask filled with a liquid, and a yellow glass egg 

that was slightly larger than a chicken’s egg. 

“What are these things?” he asked. 

“That’s the Philosopher’s Stone and the Elixir of Life. It’s the 

into gold.” 

The Arabs laughed at him, and the alchemist laughed along. They 

thought his answer was amusing, and they allowed the boy and the 
alchemist to proceed with all of their belongings. 

“Are you crazy?” the boy asked the alchemist, when they had 

moved on. “What did you do that for?” 

“To show you one of life’s simple lessons,” the alchemist 

answered. “When you possess great treasures within you, and try to 

tell others of them, seldom are you believed.” 

was capable now of betraying the other. 

When his heart spoke to him, it was to provide a stimulus to the 

the desert were wearisome. His heart told the boy what his 

during the time he had worked at the crystal shop. 

And his heart told him something else that the boy had never 

the rifle the boy had taken from his father, because of the possibility 

that the boy might wound himself. And it reminded the boy of the 

thinking that he had changed his route. 

“Does a man’s heart always help him?” the boy asked the 

alchemist. 

“Mostly just the hearts of those who are trying to realize their 

Personal Legends. But they do help children, drunkards, and the 
elderly, too.” 

“Does that mean that I’ll never run into danger?” 
“It means only that the heart does what it can,” the alchemist 

said. 

One afternoon, they passed by the encampment of one of the 

attention to the two travelers. 

“There’s no danger,” the boy said, when they had moved on past 

the encampment. 

The alchemist sounded angry: “Trust in your heart, but never 

one fails to suffer the consequences of everything under the sun.” 

All things are one, the boy thought. And then, as if the desert 

appeared from behind the travelers. 

where the tribes are at war.” 

“I’m not going very far,” the alchemist answered, looking 

straight into the eyes of the horsemen. They were silent for a 

moment, and then agreed that the boy and the alchemist could 

move along. 

those horsemen with the way you looked at them,” he said. 

“Your eyes show the strength of your soul,” answered the 

alchemist. 

That’s true, the boy thought. He had noticed that, in the midst of 

the multitude of armed men back at the encampment, there had 

been looking at them. 

Finally, when they had crossed the mountain range that 

only two days from the Pyramids. 

“If we’re going to go our separate ways soon,” the boy said, “then 

teach me about alchemy.” 

Soul of the World, and discovering the treasure that has been 

reserved for you.” 

“No, that’s not what I mean. I’m talking about transforming lead 

into gold.” 

The alchemist fell as silent as the desert, and answered the boy 

only after they had stopped to eat. 

“Everything in the universe evolved,” he said. “And, for wise 

men, gold is the metal that evolved the furthest. Don’t ask me why; I 

don’t know why. I just know that the Tradition is always right. 

“Men have never understood the words of the wise. So gold, 

conflict.” 

“There are many languages spoken by things,” the boy said. 

more than whinnying. Then it became a signal of danger. And, 

finally, it became just a whinny again.” 

But then he stopped. The alchemist probably already knew all 

that. 

“I have known true alchemists,” the alchemist continued. “They 

locked themselves in their laboratories, and tried to evolve, as gold 

had. And they found the Philosopher’s Stone, because they 
understood that when something evolves, everything around that 

thing evolves as well. 

the gift, and their souls were readier for such things than the souls 

of others. But they don’t count. They’re quite rare. 

“And then there were the others, who were interested only in 

interferes with the Personal Legend of another thing never will 

discover his own.” 

and picked up a shell from the ground. 

“This desert was once a sea,” he said. 

“I noticed that,” the boy answered. 

The alchemist told the boy to place the shell over his ear. He had 

of the sea. 

“The sea has lived on in this shell, because that’s its Personal 

again covered by water.” 

They mounted their horses, and rode out in the direction of the 

Pyramids of Egypt. 

 
THE SUN WAS SETTING WHEN THE BOY’S HEART SOUNDED a danger signal. 

They were surrounded by gigantic dunes, and the boy looked at the 
alchemist to see whether he had sensed anything. But he appeared 

to be unaware of any danger. Five minutes later, the boy saw two 
horsemen waiting ahead of them. Before he could say anything to 

the alchemist, the two horsemen had become ten, and then a 
hundred. And then they were everywhere in the dunes. 

They were tribesmen dressed in blue, with black rings 

veils, with only their eyes showing. 

souls. And their eyes spoke of death. 

meeting with his staff. 

“These are the spies,” said one of the men. 

“We’re just travelers,” the alchemist answered. 

“You were seen at the enemy camp three days ago. And you 

were talking with one of the troops there.” 

“I’m just a man who wanders the desert and knows the stars,” 

movement of the tribes. I was simply acting as a guide for my friend 

here.” 

“Who is your friend?” the chief asked. 

“An alchemist,” said the alchemist. “He understands the forces of 

nature. And he wants to show you his extraordinary powers.” 

The boy listened quietly. And fearfully. 
“What is a foreigner doing here?” asked another of the men. 

before the boy could say a word. And seizing the boy’s bag, the 

alchemist gave the gold coins to the chief. 

The Arab accepted them without a word. There was enough 

there to buy a lot of weapons. 

“What is an alchemist?” he asked, finally. 

“It’s a man who understands nature and the world. If he wanted 

to, he could destroy this camp just with the force of the wind.” 

were fearful of sorcerers. 

“I want to see him do it,” said the chief. 

tribe.” 

said, arrogantly. But he granted the travelers three days. 

of the tent. 

“Don’t let them see that you’re afraid,” the alchemist said. “They 

are brave men, and they despise cowards.” 

once again, the world had demonstrated its many languages: the 

desert only moments ago had been endless and free, and now it was 
an impenetrable wall. 

“You gave them everything I had!” the boy said. “Everything I’ve 

saved in my entire life!” 

“Well, what good would it be to you if you had to die?” the 

alchemist answered. “Your money saved us for three days. It’s not 

often that money saves a person’s life.” 

He wasn’t an alchemist! 

alchemist muttered some words that the boy didn’t understand. 

gentle voice. “If you do, you won’t be able to talk to your heart.” 

“But I have no idea how to turn myself into the wind.” 

“If a person is living out his Personal Legend, he knows 

dream impossible to achieve: the fear of failure.” 

“I’m not afraid of failing. It’s just that I don’t know how to turn 

myself into the wind.” 

“Well, you’ll have to learn; your life depends on it.” 

“But what if I can’t?” 

who never even knew what their Personal Legends were. 

“But don’t worry,” the alchemist continued. “Usually the threat 

of death makes people a lot more aware of their lives.” 

number of wounded were brought back to the camp. The dead 

soldiers were replaced by others, and life went on. Death doesn’t 
change anything, the boy thought. 

“You could have died later on,” a soldier said to the body of one 

of his companions. “You could have died after peace had been 

declared. But, in any case, you were going to die.” 

who had taken his falcon out into the desert. 

repeated. 

into contact with the material plane.” 

“What are you doing?” 

“Feeding my falcon.” 

“If I’m not able to turn myself into the wind, we’re going to die,” 

the boy said. “Why feed your falcon?” 

know how to turn myself into the wind.” 

didn’t want to go near him. In any case, the desert was impassable. 

He spent the entire afternoon of the second day looking out over 

the desert, and listening to his heart. The boy knew the desert 
sensed his fear. 

They both spoke the same language. 
 

ON THE THIRD DAY, THE CHIEF MET WITH HIS OFFICERS. He called the 

alchemist to the meeting and said, “Let’s go see the boy who turns 

himself into the wind.” 

“Let’s,” the alchemist answered. 

The boy took them to the cliff where he had been on the 

previous day. He told them all to be seated. 

“It’s going to take awhile,” the boy said. 

“We’re in no hurry,” the chief answered. “We are men of the 

desert.” 

palm trees and three hundred wells. 

“What do you want here today?” the desert asked him. “Didn’t 

you spend enough time looking at me yesterday?” 

“So, when I look out over your sands, I am also looking at her. I want 

to return to her, and I need your help so that I can turn myself into 

the wind.” 

“What is love?” the desert asked. 

“Love is the falcon’s flight over your sands. Because for him, you 

are a green field, from which he always returns with game. He 

knows your rocks, your dunes, and your mountains, and you are 
generous to him.” 

“The falcon’s beak carries bits of me, myself,” the desert said. 

“For years, I care for his game, feeding it with the little water that I 

out of the sky, and takes away what I’ve created.” 

“But that’s why you created the game in the first place,” the boy 

will once again flourish. That’s how the world goes.” 

“So is that what love is?” 

“Yes, that’s what love is. It’s what makes the game become the 

what turns lead into gold, and makes the gold return to the earth.” 

“I don’t understand what you’re talking about,” the desert said. 

“But you can at least understand that somewhere in your sands 

myself into the wind.” 

The desert didn’t answer him for a few moments. 

Then it told him, “I’ll give you my sands to help the wind to blow, 

wind.” 

couldn’t understand. 

The alchemist smiled. 

the boy’s talk with the desert, because the winds know everything. 
They blow across the world without a birthplace, and with no place 

to die. 

“Help me,” the boy said. “One day you carried the voice of my 

loved one to me.” 

“Who taught you to speak the language of the desert and the 

wind?” 

“My heart,” the boy answered. 

The wind has many names. In that part of the world, it was 

levanter, because they believed that it brought with it the sands of 

and even raise sheep there, but never would they harness the wind. 

“You can’t be the wind,” the wind said. “We’re two very different 

things.” 

“That’s not true,” the boy said. “I learned the alchemist’s secrets 

the stars, and everything created in the universe. We were all made 

I love.” 

“I heard what you were talking about the other day with the 

Personal Legend. But people can’t turn themselves into the wind.” 

“Just teach me to be the wind for a few moments,” the boy said. 

“So you and I can talk about the limitless possibilities of people and 

the winds.” 

The wind’s curiosity was aroused, something that had never 

happened before. It wanted to talk about those things, but it didn’t 
know how to turn a man into the wind. And look how many things 

the wind already knew how to do! It created deserts, sank ships, 
felled entire forests, and blew through cities filled with music and 

strange noises. It felt that it had no limits, yet here was a boy saying 

that there were other things the wind should be able to do. 

can do anything in creation. When you are loved, there’s no need at 

within you, and even men can turn themselves into the wind. As 

long as the wind helps, of course.” 

The wind was a proud being, and it was becoming irritated with 

wind. And it knew nothing about love. 

“In my travels around the world, I’ve often seen people speaking 

heaven.” 

“Well then, help me do that,” the boy said. “Fill this place with a 

heaven without blinding myself.” 

So the wind blew with all its strength, and the sky was filled with 

sand. The sun was turned into a golden disk. 

At the camp, it was difficult to see anything. The men of the 

desert were already familiar with that wind. They called it the 
simum, and it was worse than a storm at sea. Their horses cried out, 

and all their weapons were filled with sand. 

said, “Maybe we had better end this!” 

They could barely see the boy. Their faces were covered with the 

blue cloths, and their eyes showed fear. 

“Let’s stop this,” another commander said. 

“I want to see the greatness of Allah,” the chief said, with respect. 

“I want to see how a man turns himself into the wind.” 

But he made a mental note of the names of the two men who had 

remove them from their commands, because true men of the desert 

are not afraid. 

“The wind told me that you know about love,” the boy said to the 

the World, because it’s made of love.” 

“From where I am,” the sun said, “I can see the Soul of the World. 

came even a little bit closer to the earth, everything there would die, 

and it gives me my reason for living.” 

“So you know about love,” the boy said. 

great length to each other during this endless trip through the 
universe. It tells me that its greatest problem is that, up until now, 

only the minerals and vegetables understand that all things are one. 
That there’s no need for iron to be the same as copper, or copper 

that wrote all this had stopped on the fifth day of creation. 

“But there was a sixth day,” the sun went on. 

thing only.” 

with greater force, so that the sun would not blind the boy. 

“This is why alchemy exists,” the boy said. “So that everyone will 

search for his treasure, find it, and then want to be better than he 

was in his former life. Lead will play its role until the world has no 

further need for lead; and then lead will have to turn itself into gold. 

“That’s what alchemists do. They show that, when we strive to 

too.” 

asked the boy. 

“Because it’s not love to be static like the desert, nor is it love to 

from a distance, like you do. Love is the force that transforms and 
improves the Soul of the World. When I first reached through to it, I 

thought the Soul of the World was perfect. But later, I could see that 
it was like other aspects of creation, and had its own passions and 

become better or worse. And that’s where the power of love comes 
in. Because when we love, we always strive to become better than 

we are.” 

“So what do you want of me?” the sun asked. 

answered. 

“Nature knows me as the wisest being in creation,” the sun said. 

“But I don’t know how to turn you into the wind.” 

“Then, whom should I ask?” 

spoke the Language of the World. 

“Speak to the hand that wrote all,” said the sun. 

The wind screamed with delight, and blew harder than ever. The 

were being freed from their tethers. On the cliff, the men clutched at 

each other as they sought to keep from being blown away. 

The boy turned to the hand that wrote all. As he did so, he 

speak. 

pray. It was a prayer that he had never said before, because it was a 

prayer without words or pleas. His prayer didn’t give thanks for his 
sheep having found new pastures; it didn’t ask that the boy be able 

to sell more crystal; and it didn’t beseech that the woman he had 
met continue to await his return. In the silence, the boy understood 

that the desert, the wind, and the sun were also trying to 
understand the signs written by the hand, and were seeking to 

follow their paths, and to understand what had been written on a 
single emerald. He saw that omens were scattered throughout the 

days of creation had evolved into a Master Work. 

it was a part of the Soul of God. And he saw that the Soul of God was 

his own soul. And that he, a boy, could perform miracles. 

camp, in defiance of the most powerful chief in the desert. 

When the simum ceased to blow, everyone looked to the place 

where the boy had been. But he was no longer there; he was 

camp. 

The men were terrified at his sorcery. But there were two 

people who were smiling: the alchemist, because he had found his 

perfect disciple, and the chief, because that disciple had understood 
the glory of God. 

The following day, the general bade the boy and the alchemist 

farewell, and provided them with an escort party to accompany 

them as far as they chose. 

THEY RODE FOR THE ENTIRE DAY. TOWARD THE END OF the afternoon, they 

the escorts they could return to the camp. 

only three hours from the Pyramids.” 

World.” 

“I only invoked what you already knew.” 

The alchemist knocked on the gate of the monastery. A monk 

the Coptic tongue, and the alchemist bade the boy enter. 

“I asked him to let me use the kitchen for a while,” the alchemist 

smiled. 

They went to the kitchen at the back of the monastery. The 

which the alchemist placed in an iron pan. When the lead had 

egg. He scraped from it a sliver as thin as a hair, wrapped it in wax, 

and added it to the pan in which the lead had melted. 

The mixture took on a reddish color, almost the color of blood. 

The alchemist removed the pan from the fire, and set it aside to cool. 

As he did so, he talked with the monk about the tribal wars. 

“I think they’re going to last for a long time,” he said to the monk. 

The monk was irritated. The caravans had been stopped at Giza 

for some time, waiting for the wars to end. “But God’s will be done,” 

the monk said. 

“Exactly,” answered the alchemist. 

longer lead. It was gold. 

“Will I learn to do that someday?” the boy asked. 

“This was my Personal Legend, not yours,” the alchemist 

answered. “But I wanted to show you that it was possible.” 

They returned to the gates of the monastery. There, the 

alchemist separated the disk into four parts. 

monk. “It’s for your generosity to the pilgrims.” 

“But this payment goes well beyond my generosity,” the monk 

responded. 

“Don’t say that again. Life might be listening, and give you less 

the next time.” 

what you gave to the general.” 

The boy was about to say that it was much more than he had 

alchemist said to the monk. 

“And this is for me,” said the alchemist, keeping one of the parts. 

“Because I have to return to the desert, where there are tribal wars.” 

He took the fourth part and handed it to the monk. 

“This is for the boy. If he ever needs it.” 
“But I’m going in search of my treasure,” the boy said. “I’m very 

close to it now.” 

“And I’m certain you’ll find it,” the alchemist said. 

“Then why this?” 
“Because you have already lost your savings twice. Once to the 

thief, and once to the general. I’m an old, superstitious Arab, and I 
believe in our proverbs. There’s one that says, ‘Everything that 

twice will surely happen a third time.’” They mounted their horses. 

“I WANT TO TELL YOU A STORY ABOUT DREAMS,” SAID THE alchemist. 

The boy brought his horse closer. 

“In ancient Rome, at the time of Emperor Tiberius, there lived a 

poet, and delighted all of Rome with his beautiful verses. 

“One night, the father had a dream. An angel appeared to him, 

proud to know. 

“Shortly thereafter, the father died as he tried to save a child 

in his dream. 

your life in a loving way, and died with dignity. I can now grant you 

any wish you desire.’ 

“‘Life was good to me,’ the man said. ‘When you appeared in my 

dream, I felt that all my efforts had been rewarded, because my 
son’s poems will be read by men for generations to come. I don’t 

want anything for myself. But any father would be proud of the 
fame achieved by one whom he had cared for as a child, and 

to see my son’s words.’ 

“The angel touched the man’s shoulder, and they were both 

surrounded by thousands of people speaking a strange language. 

“The man wept with happiness. 

“‘I knew that my son’s poems were immortal,’ he said to the 

poems these people are repeating?’ 

“The angel came closer to the man, and, with tenderness, led him 

to a bench nearby, where they sat down. 

words you’re hearing now are those of your son in the military.’ 

“The man looked at the angel in surprise. 

“‘Your son went to serve at a distant place, and became a 

he was seeking was the Son of God. He met others who had been 
cured by him, and they instructed your son in the man’s teachings. 

And so, despite the fact that he was a Roman centurion, he 
converted to their faith. Shortly thereafter, he reached the place 

where the man he was looking for was visiting.’ 

“‘He told the man that one of his servants was gravely ill, and the 

rabbi made ready to go to his house with him. But the centurion was 
a man of faith, and, looking into the eyes of the rabbi, he knew that 

he was surely in the presence of the Son of God.’ 

“‘And this is what your son said,’ the angel told the man. ‘These 

are the words he said to the rabbi at that point, and they have never 

under my roof. But only speak a word and my servant will be 

healed.””’ 

The alchemist said, “No matter what he does, every person on 

he doesn’t know it.” 

The boy smiled. He had never imagined that questions about life 

would be of such importance to a shepherd. 

“Good-bye,” the alchemist said. 

“Good-bye,” said the boy. 

him where his treasure was hidden. 

“Where your treasure is, there also will be your heart,” the 

alchemist had told him. 

But his heart was speaking of other things. With pride, it told the 

story of a shepherd who had left his flock to follow a dream he had 
on two different occasions. It told of Personal Legend, and of the 

many men who had wandered in search of distant lands or beautiful 
women, confronting the people of their times with their 

preconceived notions. It spoke of journeys, discoveries, books, and 
change. 

As he was about to climb yet another dune, his heart whispered, 

“Be aware of the place where you are brought to tears. That’s where 

I am, and that’s where your treasure is.” 

starry sky: it had been a month since he had set forth from the oasis. 

The moonlight cast shadows through the dunes, creating the 

alchemist. And the moon fell on the desert’s silence, and on a man’s 

journey in search of treasure. 

When he reached the top of the dune, his heart leapt. There, 

desert, stood the solemn and majestic Pyramids of Egypt. 

The boy fell to his knees and wept. He thanked God for making 

for his having met a woman of the desert who had told him that love 

would never keep a man from his Personal Legend. 

If he wanted to, he could now return to the oasis, go back to 

Fatima, and live his life as a simple shepherd. After all, the alchemist 

continued to live in the desert, even though he understood the 

Legend, he had learned all he needed to know, and had experienced 
everything he might have dreamed of. 

But here he was, at the point of finding his treasure, and he 

reminded himself that no project is completed until its objective has 

been achieved. The boy looked at the sands around him, and saw 
that, where his tears had fallen, a scarab beetle was scuttling 

through the sand. During his time in the desert, he had learned that, 
in Egypt, the scarab beetles are a symbol of God. 

he couldn’t do so if he placed stone upon stone for the rest of his life. 

Throughout the night, the boy dug at the place he had chosen, 

sand back into the excavation. His hands were abraded and 

exhausted, but he listened to his heart. It had told him to dig where 

his tears fell. 

As he was attempting to pull out the rocks he encountered, he 

faces. 

“What are you doing here?” one of the figures demanded. 

Because he was terrified, the boy didn’t answer. He had found 

where his treasure was, and was frightened at what might happen. 

“We’re refugees from the tribal wars, and we need money,” the 

other figure said. “What are you hiding there?” 

“I’m not hiding anything,” the boy answered. 

But one of them seized the boy and yanked him back out of the 

hole. Another, who was searching the boy’s bags, found the piece of 

gold. 

“There’s gold here,” he said. 

The moon shone on the face of the Arab who had seized him, and 

in the man’s eyes the boy saw death. 

“He’s probably got more gold hidden in the ground.” 
They made the boy continue digging, but he found nothing. As 

near. 

the boy screamed at the men, “I’m digging for treasure!” And, 

of Egypt. 

The man who appeared to be the leader of the group spoke to 

must have stolen this gold.” 

him and said, “We’re leaving.” 

not going to die. You’ll live, and you’ll learn that a man shouldn’t be 

my dream, there was a sycamore growing out of the ruins of the 

sacristy, and I was told that, if I dug at the roots of the sycamore, I 

entire desert just because of a recurrent dream.” 

And they disappeared. 

The boy stood up shakily, and looked once more at the 

Pyramids. They seemed to laugh at him, and he laughed back, his 

heart bursting with joy. 

Because now he knew where his treasure was. 

falling. The sycamore was still there in the sacristy, and the stars 
could still be seen through the half-destroyed roof. He remembered 

the time he had been there with his sheep; it had been a peaceful 
night…except for the dream. 

Now he was here not with his flock, but with a shovel. 

He sat looking at the sky for a long time. Then he took from his 

knapsack a bottle of wine, and drank some. He remembered the 

night in the desert when he had sat with the alchemist, as they 

looked at the stars and drank wine together. He thought of the many 

roads he had traveled, and of the strange way God had chosen to 

show him his treasure. If he hadn’t believed in the significance of 

recurrent dreams, he would not have met the Gypsy woman, the 

king, the thief, or…“Well, it’s a long list. But the path was written in 

the omens, and there was no way I could go wrong,” he said to 

himself. 

He fell asleep, and when he awoke the sun was already high. He 

began to dig at the base of the sycamore. 

“You old sorcerer,” the boy shouted up to the sky. “You knew the 

whole story. You even left a bit of gold at the monastery so I could 

get back to this church. The monk laughed when he saw me come 

back in tatters. Couldn’t you have saved me from that?” 

“No,” he heard a voice on the wind say. “If I had told you, you 

wouldn’t have seen the Pyramids. They’re beautiful, aren’t they?” 

adorned with red and white feathers, and stone statues embedded 

forgotten, and that some conquistador had failed to tell his children 

about. 

The boy took out Urim and Thummim from his bag. He had used 

the two stones only once, one morning when he was at a 

enough omens. 

He placed Urim and Thummim in the chest. They were also a 

king, whom he would never see again. 

he thought. Maybe it was because they moved around so much. 

came from Africa. It didn’t bring with it the smell of the desert, nor 

from far away, slowly, slowly, until it rested on his lips. 

The boy smiled. It was the first time she had done that. 

“I’m coming, Fatima,” he said. 

he now lives. His own life has in many ways been as varied and 
unusual as the protagonists of his internationally acclaimed novels. 

Like them, Paulo Coelho has followed a dream in a quest for 
fulfillment. His own dream, to be a writer, met with frustration 

throughout much of his early adult life, a time in which he worked at 

various professions, some of them materially rewarding but 

spiritually unfulfilling. “I always knew,” he says, “that my Personal 

Legend, to use a term from alchemy, was to write.” He was thirty-

eight when he published his first book. 

In 1970, after deciding that law school was not for him, he 

traveled through much of South America, North Africa, Mexico, and 

Europe. Returning to Brazil after two years, he began a successful 

career as popular songwriter. In 1974, he was imprisoned for a short 

time by the military dictatorship then ruling in Brazil. In 1980, he 

experienced one of the defining moments of his life: he walked the 

five hundred-plus mile Road of Santiago de Compostela in 

northwestern Spain. On this ancient highway, used for centuries by 

pilgrims from France to get to the cathedral said to house the 

remains of St. James, he achieved a self-awareness and a spiritual 

awakening that he later described in The Pilgrimage. 

Paulo Coelho once said that following your dream is like 

learning a foreign language; you will make mistakes but you will get 

there in the end. In 1988, he published The Alchemist, a novel that 

powerful storytelling technique and the profound spiritual insights 

sold more than twenty million copies worldwide and has been 

translated into some fifty-six languages. In addition to The 

River Piedra I Sat Down and Wept, The Valkyries, The Fifth Mountain, 

and Veronika Decides to Die. A winner of numerous literary prizes, 

Davos Economic Forum Conference. 

The Alchemist 

psychological intensity of a fairy tale, but it’s full of specific wisdom 

as well…. A sweetly exotic tale for young and old alike.” 

—Publishers Weekly 

elegance with which it’s told lies a bedrock of wisdom about 

following one’s heart.” 

—Booklist 

Prince.” 

—Austin American-Statesman 

—Indianapolis Star 

 
“A little poke in the ribs from on high.” 

—Detroit Free Press 

—Der Spiegel (Germany) 

who is passionately committed to claiming the life of their dreams—

today.” 

—Anthony Robbins, author of 

Awaken the Giant Within 

the business of our own lives.” 

—Spencer Johnson, M.D., author of  

Who Moved My Cheese 

—Rudolfo Anaya, author of Bless Me, Ultima 

treasures we seek elsewhere and then find at our doorstep.” 

—Madonna in Sonntag-Aktuell (Germany) 

wonder. This fable is a roseate amalgam of spiritual quest, 

existential puzzle, lovely sensitivity, and deep strength.” 

—Malcolm Boyd, author of 

Are You Running with Me, Jesus? 

—Kenzaburo Oé, winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature 

seeking its own destiny on the journey of life.” 

—Gerald G. Jampolsky, M.D., coauthor of 

Change Your Mind, Change Your Life and Love Is Letting Go of Fear 

simplicity of Coelho’s The Alchemist. It lifts the reader out of time 

every reader.” 

—Joseph Girzone, author of Joshua 

yourself and about life. It has philosophy, and is spiced with colors, 

flavors and subjects, like a fairy tale. A lovely book.” 

—Yedi’ot Aharonot (Israel) 

by taking us on a very excellent adventure.” 

—Paul Zindel, author of the Pulitzer Prize–winning play, 

The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds 

may bring not only him but others who read this fine book closer to 

recognizing and reaching their own inner destinies.” 

—Charlotte Zolotow, author of If You Listen 

dreams by seeing the world through your own eyes and not 

someone else’s.” 

—Lynn Andrews, author of the Medicine Woman series 

wish it with all your heart. No other book bears so much hope, small 

meaning of life.” 

—Focus (Germany) 

—Welt am Sonntag (Germany) 

transport the reader on a fantastic journey of the soul.” 

—Yomiuri-Shinbun (Japan) 

and The Prophet by Khalil Gibran, as well as biblical parables.” 

—Gazeta Wymborcza (Poland) 

exotic flavor…. You may or may not agree with PauloCoelho’s 

philosophy, but it’s nonetheless a tale that comforts our hearts as 
much as our souls.” 

—Bergensavisen (Norway) 

and simple book.” 

—Milorad Pavic (Serbia) 

Marquez is more widely read than Brazil’s Paulo Coelho.” 

—The Economist 

The Pilgrimage: A Contemporary Quest for Ancient Wisdom 

 
The Valkyries: An Encounter with Angels 

 
By the River Piedra I Sat Down and Wept 

 
The Fifth Mountain 

International 

This book is an English version of O Alquimista, the Portuguese 

original edition, published in Brazil by Editora Rocco Ltd. (Rio de 

Janeiro). Copyright © 1988 by Paulo Coelho. This edition was 

prepared by Alan R. Clarke in consultation with Paulo Coelho. 

reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 

Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been 

granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read 

the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be 

reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse 

engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage 

and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether 

electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, 

without the express written permission of PerfectBound™. 

HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. 

ordered.  

 ISBN 0–06–250217–4 (cloth)  

 ISBN 0–06–250218–2 (paperback) 

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

 
 Australia  

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 

http://www.perfectbound.com.au 
 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 

Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada 

http://www.perfectbound.ca 

 New Zealand  

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
P.O. Box 1 

Auckland, New Zealand 
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz 

United Kingdom  

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

77-85 Fulham Palace Road 

London, W6 8JB, UK 

http://www.uk.perfectbound.com 

 United States  

HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 

10 East 53rd Street 

New York, NY 10022 

http://www.perfectbound.com 

