Iris Murdoch

A SEVERED HEAD

One

‘Antonia? About us? Certain.’

Georgie was silent for a moment and then said, ‘Good.’ That curt

‘Good’ was characteristic of her, typical of a toughness which had, to my
mind, more to do with honesty than with ruthlessness. I liked the dry way in
which she accepted our relationship. Only with a person so eminently
sensible could I have deceived my wife.

We lay half embraced in front of Georgie’s gas fire. She reclined

against my shoulder while I examined a tress of her dark hair, surprised
again to find in it so many threads of a pure reddish gold. Her hair was as
straight as a horse’s tail, almost as coarse, and very long. Georgie’s room
was obscure now except for the light of the fire and a trio of red candles
burning upon the mantelpiece. The candles, together with a few scraggy bits
of holly dotted about at random, were as near as Georgie, whose ‘effects’
were always a little ramshackle, could get to Christmas decorations, yet the
room had a glitter all the same as of some half descried treasure cavern. In
front of the candles, as at an altar, stood one of my presents to her, a pair of
Chinese incense holders in the form of little bronze warriors, who held aloft
as spears the glowing sticks of incense. Their grey fumes drifted hazily to
and fro until sent by the warmth of the candle flames to circle suddenly
dervish-like upward to the darkness above. The room was heavy with a
stifling smell of Kashmir poppy and sandalwood. Bright wrapping-paper
from our exchange of presents lay all about, and pushed into a corner was
the table which still bore the remains of our meal and the empty bottle of
Château Sancy de Parabère 1955. I had been with Georgie since lunchtime.
Outside the window and curtained away was the end of the cold raw misty
London afternoon now turned to an evening which still contained in a kind
of faintly luminous haze what had never, even at midday, really been
daylight.

Georgie sighed and rolled over with her head in my lap. She was

dressed now except for her shoes and stockings. ‘When must you go?’

‘About five.’

‘Don’t let me catch you being mean with time.’

Such remarks were as near as I ever got to feeling the sharper edge of

her love. I could not have wished for a more tactful mistress.

‘Antonia’s session ends at five,’ I said. ‘I should be back at Hereford

Square soon after that. She always wants to discuss it. And we have a
dinner engagement.’ I lifted Georgie’s head a little and drew her hair
forward, spreading it over her breasts. Rodin would have liked that.

‘How is Antonia’s analysis going?’

‘Fizzingly. She enjoys it disgracefully. Of course, it’s all for fun

anyhow. She’s got a tremendous transference.’

‘Palmer Anderson,’ said George, naming Antonia’s psychoanalyst,

who was also a close friend of Antonia and myself. ‘Yes, I can imagine
becoming addicted to him. He has a clever face. I imagine he’s good at his
trade.’

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘I dislike what you call his trade. But he’s

certainly good at something. Perhaps he’s just good. He’s not simply sweet
and polite and gentle as only Americans can be sweet and polite and gentle,
though he is that. He has real power in him.’

‘You sound rather carried away by him yourself!” said Georgie. She

edged into a more comfortable position, her head in the crook of my knee.

‘Perhaps I am,’ I said. ‘Knowing him has made a lot of difference to

me.’

‘In what way?’

‘I can’t say exactly. Perhaps he has made me worry less about the

rules!’

‘The rules!’ Georgie laughed. ‘Darling, surely you became indifferent

to the rules long ago.’

Child of Nature like you. No, it’s not exactly that. But Palmer is good at
setting people free.’

‘If you think I don’t worry - but never mind. As for setting people free,

I don’t trust these professional liberators. Anyone who is good at setting
people free is also good at enslaving them, if we are to believe Plato. The
trouble with you, Martin, is that you are always looking for a master.’

I laughed. ‘Now that I have a mistress I don’t want a master! But how

did you come across Palmer? Oh, of course, through the sister.’

‘The sister,’ said Georgie. ‘Yes, the curious Honor Klein. I saw him at a

party she gave for her pupils once. But she didn’t introduce him.’

‘Is she any good?’

‘Honor? You mean as an anthropologist? She’s quite well thought of in

Cambridge. She never actually taught me, of course. Anyway, she was
usually away visiting one of her savage tribes. She was supposed to
organize and help me with my moral problems. God!’

‘She’s Palmer’s half-sister, isn’t she? How does it work? They seem to

be several nationalities between them.’

‘I think this is it,’ said Georgie. ‘They share a Scottish mother who

married Anderson first and then Klein when Anderson died.’

‘I know about Anderson. He was Danish-American, an architect or

something. But what about the other father?’

‘Emmanuel Klein. You ought to know about him. He was not a bad

classical scholar. A German Jew, of course.’

‘I knew he was a learned something-or-other,’ I said. ‘Palmer spoke of

him once or twice. Interesting. He said he still had nightmares about his
step-father. I suspect he’s a bit frightened of his sister too, though he never
actually says so.’

‘She could inspire awe,’ said Georgie. ‘There’s something primitive

about her. Perhaps it’s all those tribes. But you’ve met her, haven’t you?’

just seemed the Female Don in person. Why do those women have to look
like that?’

‘Those women!’ Georgie laughed. ‘I’m one of them now, darling!

Anyway, she certainly has power in her.’

‘You have power without looking like a haystack!’

‘Me?’ said Georgie. ‘I’m not in that class. I don’t carry half so many

guns.’

‘You said I was carried away by the brother. You seem to be carried

away by the sister.’

‘Oh, I don’t like her,’ said Georgie. ‘That’s another matter.’

She sat up abruptly and retrieved her hair and began very rapidly to

plait it. She tossed the heavy plait back over her shoulder. Then she hitched
up her skirt and some layers of stiff white petticoat and began to draw on a
pair of peacock-blue stockings which I had given her. I loved to give
Georgie outrageous things, absurd garments and gewgaws which I could
not possibly have given Antonia, barbarous necklaces and velvet pants and
purple underwear and black openwork tights, which drove me mad. I rose
now and wandered about the room, watching her possessively as with a
tense demure consciousness of my gaze she adjusted the lurid stockings.

Georgie’s room, a large untidy bed-sitting-room which looked out on to

what was virtually an alleyway in the proximity of Covent Garden, was full
of things which I had given her. I had for long, and vainly, waged a battle
with Georgie’s relentless lack of taste. The numerous Italian prints, French
paperweights, pieces of Derby, Worcester, Coleport, Spode, Copeland, and
other bric-à-brac - for I hardly ever arrived without bringing something -
lay about, for all my efforts, in a dusty hurly-burly more reminiscent of a
junk shop than a civilized room. Georgie was, somehow, not designed by
nature to possess things. Whereas when Antonia or I bought anything,
which we constantly did, it found its place at once in the rich and highly
integrated mosaic of our surroundings, Georgie seemed to have no such
carapace. There was no one of her possessions which she would not, at the
drop of a hat, have given away and not missed; and meanwhile her things

lay about in a sort of impermanent jumble on which my continually
renewed sortings and orderings seemed to have little effect. This
characteristic of my beloved exasperated me, but since it was also a part,
after all, of Georgie’s remarkable detachment and lack of worldly
pretension, I admired it and loved it as well. It was, moreover, as I
sometimes reflected, the very image and symbol of my relation to Georgie,
my mode of possessing her, or more precisely the way in which I, as it
were, failed to possess her. I possessed Antonia in a way not totally unlike
the way in which I possessed the magnificent set of original prints by
Audubon which adorned our staircase at home. I did not possess Georgie.
Georgie was simply there.

When Georgie had finished with her stockings, she leaned back against

the armchair and looked up at me. She had, with her dark heavy hair, rather
light clear greyish-blue eyes. Her face was broad, strong rather than
delicate, but her remarkably pale complexion had a finish of ivory. Her
large somewhat upturned nose, her despair and my joy, which she was
always contracting and stroking in a vain attempt to make it aquiline, now
forgotten in repose, gave to her expression a certain attentive animal quality
which softened the edge of her cleverness. Now in the incense-laden half-
light, her face was full of curves and shadows. For some time we held each
other’s gaze. This sort of quiet gazing, which was like a feeding of the
heart, was something which I had not experienced with any other woman.
Antonia and I had never looked at each other like that. Antonia would not
have sustained such a steady gaze for so long: warm, possessive, and
coquettish, she would not so have exposed herself.

‘River goddess,’ I said at last.

‘Merchant prince.’

‘Do you love me?’

‘Yes, to distraction. Do you love me?’

‘Yes, infinitely.’

‘Not infinitely,’ said Georgie. ‘Let us be exact. Your love is a great but

finite quantity.’

was profitless to discuss, and this we both knew also. There was no
question of my leaving my wife.

‘Do you want me to put my hand in the fire?’ I said.

Georgie still kept my gaze. At such moments her intelligence and her

lucidity made her beauty ring like a silver coin. Then with a quick
movement she turned about and laid her head upon my feet, prostrating
herself before me. As I briefly contemplated her homage I reflected that
there was no one in the world at whose feet I would myself have lain in
such an attitude of abandonment. Then I knelt down and gathered her into
my arms.

A little later when we had finished for the moment with kissing each

other and had lit cigarettes, Georgie said, ‘She knows your brother.’

‘Who knows my brother?’

‘Honor Klein.’

‘Are you still on about her? Yes, I believe so. They met on some

committee at the time of the Mexican Art Exhibition.’

‘When am I going to meet your brother?’ said Georgie.

‘Never, as far as I’m concerned!’

‘You said you always used to pass your girls on to him, because he

couldn’t get any of his own!’

‘Maybe,’ I said, ‘but I’m certainly not going to pass you on!’ Ever

since I had made that injudicious remark my brother Alexander had become
an object of romantic fantasy to my mistress.

‘I want to meet him,’ said Georgie, ‘just because he’s your brother. I

adore siblings, having none of my own. Does he resemble you?’

‘Yes, a bit,’ I said. ‘All Lynch-Gibbons resemble each other. Only he’s

round-shouldered and not so handsome. I’ll introduce you to my sister
Rosemary if you like.’

meet Alexander, and I shall go on and on at you about it, just as I shall go
on and on at you about that trip to New York.’

Georgie had an obsession about seeing New York, and I had in fact

very rashly promised to take her with me on a business trip which I had
made to that city last autumn. At the last moment, however, some qualm of
conscience, or more likely some failure of nerve, at the prospect of having
to lie on quite such a scale to Antonia made me change my mind. I have
never seen anyone as bitterly and so childishly disappointed; and I had
since then renewed my promise to take her with me on the next occasion.

‘There’s no need to nag me about that,’ I said. ‘One of these days we’ll

go to New York together, on condition I hear no more nonsense about
paying your own fare. Think how much you disapprove of unearned
income! You might at least let me spend mine on a sensible project!’

‘Of course it’s ludicrous your being a businessman,’ said Georgie.

‘You’re far too clever. You ought to have been a don.’

‘You imagine that being a don is the only proper way of being clever.

Perhaps you are turning into a blue stocking after all.’ I caressed one of her
legs.

‘You got the best History first of your year, didn’t you?’ said Georgie.

‘What did Alexander get, by the way?’

‘He got a second. So you see how unworthy of your attention he is.’

‘At least he had the sense not to go into business,’ said Georgie. My

brother is a talented and quite well-known sculptor.

I was in fact half of Georgie’s opinion that I should have been a don,

and the subject was a painful one. My father had been a prosperous wine
merchant, founder of the firm of Lynch-Gibbon and McCabe. On his death
the firm had split into two parts, a larger part which remained with the
McCabe family, and a smaller part which comprised the original claret
connexion in which my grandfather had been interested, which I now
managed myself. I knew too, although she never said so, that Georgie

believed that my having stayed in business had something to do with
Antonia. Her belief was not totally erroneous.

off the subject of my dear brother, I said, ‘What will you be doing on
Christmas Day? I shall want to think about you.’

Georgie frowned. ‘Oh, I shall be out with some of the chaps from the

School. There’ll be a big party.’ She added, ‘I won’t want to think about
you. It’s odd how it hurts at these times not to be part of your proper
family.’

I had no answer to that. I said, ‘I shall be having a quiet day with

Antonia. We’re staying in London this time. Rosemary will be at Rembers
with Alexander.’

‘I don’t want to know,’ said Georgie. ‘I don’t want to know what you

do when you’re not with me. It’s better not to feed the imagination. I prefer
to think that when you aren’t here you don’t exist.’

In fact, I thought along these lines myself. I was lying beside her now

and holding her feet, her beautiful Acropolis feet as I called them, which
were partly visible through the fine blue stockings. I kissed them, and
returned to gazing at her. The heavy rope of hair descended between her
breasts and she had swept a few escaping tresses severely back behind her
ears. She had a beautifully shaped head: yes, positively Alexander must
never meet her. I said, ‘I’m bloody lucky.’

‘You mean you’re bloody safe,’ said Georgie. ‘Oh yes, you’re safe,

damn you!’

‘Liaison dangereuse,’ I said. ‘And yet we lie, somehow, out of danger.’

‘You do,’ said Georgie. ‘If Antonia ever found out about this, you’d

drop me like a hot potato.’

‘Nonsense!’ I said. Yet I wondered if she wasn’t right. ‘She won’t find

out,’ I said, ‘and if she did, I’d manage. You are essential to me.’

‘No one is essential to anyone,’ said Georgie. ‘There you go looking at

your watch again. All right, go if you must. What about one for the road?

Shall I open that bottle of Nuits de Young?’

‘How many times must I tell you never to drink claret unless it has

been open at least three hours?’

‘Don’t be so holy about it,’ said Georgie. ‘As far as I’m concerned the

stuff is just booze.’

‘Little barbarian!’ I said affectionately. ‘You can give me some gin and

French. Then I really must go.’

Georgie brought me the glass and we sat enlaced like a beautiful

netsuke in front of the warm murmuring fire. Her room seemed a
subterranean place, remote, enclosed, hidden. It was for me a moment of
great peace. I did not know then that it was the last, the very last moment of
peace, the end of the old innocent world, the final moment before I was
plunged into the nightmare of which these ensuing pages tell the story.

I pushed up the sleeve of her jersey and stroked her arm. ‘Wonderful

stuff, flesh.’

‘When’ll I see you?’ said Georgie.

‘Not till after Christmas,’ I said. ‘I’ll come if I can about the twenty-

eighth or twenty-ninth. But I’ll ring up anyway before that.’

‘I wonder if we’ll ever be able to be more open about this?’ said

Georgie. ‘I do rather hate the lies. Well, I suppose not.’

‘Not,’ I said. I didn’t like the hard words she used, but I had to give it

her back as sharply. ‘We’re stuck with the lies, I’m afraid. Yet, you know,
this may sound perverse, but part of the nature, almost of the charm, of this
relation is its being so utterly private.’

‘You mean its being clandestine is of its essence,’ said Georgie, ‘and if

it were exposed to the daylight it would crumble to pieces? I don’t think I
like that idea.’

‘I didn’t quite say that,’ I said. ‘But knowledge, other people’s

knowledge, does inevitably modify what it touches. Remember the legend
of Psyche, whose child, if she told about her pregnancy, would be mortal,
whereas if she kept silent it would be a god.’

It was an unfortunate speech on which to part from Georgie, for it

brought our minds back to something which I at least preferred never now
to think about. Last spring my beloved had become pregnant. There was
nothing to be done but to get rid of the child. Georgie had gone through
with the hideous business in the manner that I would have expected of her,
calm, laconic, matter-of-fact, even cheering me along with her surly wit. We
had found it exceedingly difficult to discuss the matter even at the time, and
we had not spoken of it since. What vast wound that catastrophe had
perhaps made in Georgie’s proud and upright spirit I did not know. For
myself, I got off with an extraordinary ease. Because of Georgie’s character,
her toughness and the stoical nature of her devotion to me, I had not had to
pay. It had all been quite uncannily painless. I was left with a sense of not
having suffered enough. Only sometimes in dreams did I experience certain
horrors, glimpses of a punishment which would perhaps yet find its hour.

Two

I had, of course, misled Georgie about the success of my marriage.

What married man who keeps a mistress does not so mislead her? My
marriage with Antonia, apart from the fad. which was a continuing grief to
me, that it was childless, was perfectly happy and successful. It was just
that I wanted Georgie as well and did not see why I should not have her.
Although, as 1 had remarked, I was not indifferent to the ‘rules’, I was
certainly capable of being cool and rational about adultery. I had married
Antonia in a church, but that was largely for social reasons; and I did not
think that the marriage bond, though solemn, was uniquely sacred. It may
be relevant here to add that I hold no religious beliefs whatever. Roughly, I
cannot imagine any omnipotent sentient being sufficiently cruel to create
the world we inhabit.

I seem to have started here upon some general explanation of myself,

and it may be as well to continue this before I plunge into a narrative of
events which may, once under way, offer few opportunities for meditation.
My name, as you will have gathered, is Martin Lynch-Gibbon, and I come
on my father’s side of an Anglo-Irish family. My clever artistic mother was
Welsh. I have never lived in Ireland, though I retain a sentimental sense of
connexion with that poor bitch of a country. My brother Alexander is forty-
five, and my sister Rosemary is thirty-seven: my age is forty-one, and I feel
myself at times, after a manner which is not without its curious melancholy
charms, to be an old man.

To describe one’s character is difficult and not necessarily illuminating.

The story which follows will reveal, whether I will or no, what sort of
person I am. Let me offer here only a few elementary facts. I grew up into
the war, during which I spent on the whole a safe and inactive time. I suffer
intermittenly from a complex of disorders of which asthma and hay fever
are the best known, though not the most disagreeable, and I never
succeeded in passing as completely fit. I went on to Oxford when the war
was over, and so began my life as an ordinary citizen at a comparatively
advanced age. I am a very tall, reasonably good-looking man. I used to be a
good boxer, and passed when I was younger as a raffish quarrelsome violent
fellow. This reputation was precious to me: equally precious is the
reputation which I have more lately gained of having become morose,
something of a recluse, something indeed of a philosopher and cynic, one
who expects little and watches the world go by. Antonia accuses me of
being flippant; but Georgie once pleased me more by saying that I had the
face of someone laughing at something tragic. My face, I might add, is the
long pale rather heavy old-fashioned face that all the Lynch-Gibbons have,
which is a cross between the philosopher Hume and the actor Garrick, and
my hair is the brown floppy hair which fades with age to the colour of white
pepper. Our family, thank God, never becomes bald.

I took a decisive step when I married Antonia. I was then thirty, and

she was thirty-five. She looks now, for all her beauty, a little older than her
years, and has more than once been taken for my mother. My real mother,
who among other things was a painter, died when I was sixteen, but at the
time of my marriage my father was still alive and I had hitherto been but
casually involved in the wine trade. I was more concerned, though that also
in a dilettante fashion, with being a military historian, a type of study in
which, if I could have brought myself to abandon my amateur status, I
might have excelled. When I married Antonia, however, everything came,
for some time, to a standstill. As I say, I was fortunate to get her. Antonia
had been, and indeed still was, a somewhat eccentric society beauty. Her
father was a distinguished regular soldier, and her mother, who came out of
the Bloomsbury world, was something of a minor poet and a remote
relation of Virginia Woolf. For some reason Antonia never got a sensible
education, though she lived abroad a great deal and speaks three languages

fluently; and also, for some reason, and although much courted, she did not
marry young. She moved in a fashionable society, more fashionable than
that which I frequented, and became, through her protracted refusal to
marry, one of its scandals. Her marriage to me, when it came, was a
sensation.

I was not sure at the time, and am still not sure, whether I was precisely

what Antonia wanted, or whether she didn’t take me simply because she felt
it was time to take somebody. However that may be, we were formidably
happy; and for quite a long time, handsome clever couple that we were, we
were everyone’s darlings. So for a while everything was for me at a
standstill and I was absorbed completely into the delightful task of being
Antonia’s husband. When I as it were came round, emerged, that is, from
the warm golden haze of those honeymoon years, I found that certain roads
were closed to me. My father had died meanwhile, and I settled down to
being a wine-merchant, still and even here feeling myself something of an
amateur and none the worse for that; and although my conception of myself
had somewhat altered, I did not stop feeling happy. After all, as Antonia’s
husband I could not be other than happy.

Let me now attempt to describe Antonia. She is a woman long

accustomed to admiration, long accustomed to think of herself as beautiful.
She has long goldenish hair - I prefer women with long hair - which she
wears usually in an old-fashioned knot or bun, and indeed ‘golden’ is the
best general epithet for her appearance. She is like some rich gilded object
over which time has cast the moonlit pallor of a gentle veneer; or in a more
effective simile one might compare her to the water-haunted sunlight on an
old pavement in Venice, for there is always something a little fluid and
shivering, a little mobile and tremulous about Antonia. She has, especially
of late, aged, her face taking on that look which is sometimes described as
‘ravaged’ and which I notice is usually applied when, as in this case, there
is a slight drooping and discomposing of essentially fine features. To my
mind such a look can be, and is in the case of Antonia, exceedingly moving
and attractive, composing a dignity which was not to be found in the same
face when younger. Antonia has great tawny-coloured intelligent searching
eyes and a mobile expressive mouth which is usually twisted into some
pout of amusement or tender interest. She is a tall woman, and although

always a little inclined to plumpness has been called ‘willowy’, which I
take as a reference to her characteristic twisted and unsymmetrical poses.
Her face and body are never to be discovered quite in repose.

and passionate woman and has passed for this reason for being humourless,
though this latter charge in fact is false. Antonia, like me, has no religion;
but she achieves what might be called religiosity in relation to certain
beliefs. She holds that all human beings should aspire towards, and are
within working distance of, a perfect communion of souls. This creed,
which borrows as little from popular Oriental cults as it does from
Antonia’s vestigial Christianity, may best be described as a metaphysic of
the drawing-room. In the form in which Antonia holds it, it is original to
her, although I can discern its statelier predecessor in Antonia’s now frail
but resolutely exquisite mother with whom I have maintained a tenuous but
gallant relationship. Antonia’s undogmatic apprehension of an imminent
spiritual interlocking where nothing is withheld and nothing hidden
certainly makes up in zeal for what it lacks in clarity. The mere presence of
such a belief in a woman, particularly in a beautiful woman, tends of course
to create a rich centripetal eddy of emotion round about her, thereby
providing itself with an immediate pragmatic verification; and in the early
days particularly people were always falling in love with Antonia and
wanting to tell her all their troubles. I had no objection to this, as it eased
some of my anxieties about her welfare by making her happier than if she
had had no soul to commune with but my own.

Of late she had been much taken up with Palmer Anderson, ‘Anderson’

as she always called him, since she had a mystique about persons whose
names, like her own, began with A. This mystique had been active also in
relation to my brother Alexander, between whom and my wife there existed
a very considerable, almost sentimental, tenderness, though this had been
less evident of late since Anderson had become all the rage. I cannot think
of anyone less in need of psycho-analysis than Antonia, and I think she
went into analysis with Palmer at least partly with the idea of operating on
him. I once said sarcastically that I didn’t see why I should pay out so many
guineas per week so that Antonia should question Palmer about his
childhood, and she laughed merrily and did not deny the insinuation. Also,

of course, psycho-analysis was for her a ‘craze’ like earlier ones that she
had had for learning contract bridge, learning Russian, learning to sculpt
(with Alexander), doing social work, (with Rosemary), and studying Italian
Renaissance history (with me). I should add that whatever Antonia took up
she proved surprisingly good at, and I had no doubt that she and Palmer
were getting on famously.

A word about Palmer is necessary; and this I find difficult. The pages

that follow will show how and why my feelings on the subject of Palmer
are mixed ones. I shall only try now to describe him as I saw him at the
start, before I knew certain crucial facts about him, and when I was still
more than a little ‘carried away’. Palmer strikes one immediately as an
American, though he is in fact only half American and grew up in Europe.
He has that tall lanky, ‘rangy’ loose-jointed graceful close-cropped
formidably clean American look. He has silver-grey hair which grows soft,
furry, and inch-long all over his very round rather smallish head, and a
smooth face which looks uncannily younger than his years. It is hard to
believe he is over fifty. He dresses in the American style with belts instead
of braces and so on, and affects many foppish and casual rig-outs, involving
bright silk handkerchiefs instead of ties. I can never indeed see a gay clean
silk handkerchief without thinking of Palmer; there is something about this
object which is singularly reminiscent of him. Palmer conveys an
immediate impression of gentleness and sweetness and almost, so far have
good manners here assumed the air of a major virtue, of goodness. He is
also a beautifully cultivated person. It was I, not Antonia, who ‘discovered’
Palmer, and for a long time, before she took him over, I saw a good deal of
him. We used to read Dante together; and his relaxed gaiety, his
unshadowed enjoyment of his pleasures, eased and complemented, though
without dispelling, my affection of a resigned melancholy. Palmer appeared,
in my generously admiring vision of him, as a complete and successful
human being. He had come to analysis fairly late, after practising for some
time, both in America and in Japan, as an ordinary doctor, and he had
achieved a considerable reputation as that fashionable kind of modern
magician. He spent half the week in Cambridge, where he lodged with his
sister and lent his ear to neurotic undergraduates, and the other half in
London, where he seemed to have a formidable number of well-known

patients. He worked hard; and as I saw him, he was and deserved to be a
being of an exceptional felicity.

I had known Palmer, when this story starts, for nearly four years. I had

known Georgie Hands for three years, and she had been my mistress for
eighteen months. Georgie, who is now twenty-six, had been an
undergraduate at Cambridge, where she had taken a degree in economics.
She had then become a graduate student, and more lately a junior lecturer,
at the London School of Economics. I had met her, in her early days in
London, when I had visited the School once to give a lecture on
Machiavelli’s account of the campaigns of Cesare Borgia to a student
society, and we had met subsequently a few times, had lunch together, and
even exchanged some friendly consoling kisses, without anything
remarkable occurring in the heart of either. I had never hitherto deceived
my wife, and imagined that I had no possible intention of doing so; and it
was pure accident that I never introduced Georgie to Antonia in those early
and innocent days. Georgie was living then in a hostel for women students,
a dreary place which I never attempted to visit. Then she moved into her
little flat; and I promptly fell in love with her. It may sound ludicrous, but I
think I fell in love with her as soon as I saw her bed.

I did not fall desperately in love with Georgie; I considered myself by

then too old for the desperation and extremity which attends a youthful
love. But I loved her with a sort of gaiety and insouciance which was more
spring-like than real spring, a miraculous April without its pangs of
transformation and birth. I loved her with a wild undignified joy, and also
with a certain cheerful brutality, both of which were absent from my always
more decorous, my essentially sweeter relationship with Antonia. I adored
Georgie too for her dryness, her toughness, her independence, her lack of
intensity, her wit, and altogether for her being such a contrast, such a
complement, to the softer and more moist attractions, the more dewy
radiance of my lovely wife. I needed both of them, and having both I
possessed the world.

If the extent to which Antonia was inside society was important to me,

the extent also mattered to which Georgie was outside it. That I could love
such a person was a revelation and education to me and something of a

triumph: it involved a rediscovery of myself. Georgie’s lack of pretension
was good for me. Whereas in different ways both Rosemary and Antonia
were perpetually playing the role of being a woman, Georgie played no
role: and this was new to me. She was herself, which just happened to
involve, and nature had decreed superbly, being a woman. She was
concerned neither with role nor with status, and it was with exhilaration that
at times I positively apprehended her as an outcast.

This sense of being, with Georgie, ‘on the run’ had suffered a certain

change after Georgie’s pregnancy. Whereas our lawless existence before
that had seemed gay and even innocent, it was after that connected with a
certain pain which remained identifiable among all others, not extreme but
persistent. We had lost our innocence, and some remaking of our
relationship which was then due was continually deferred, as a result partly
of my pusillanimity and partly of Georgie’s taciturn endurance. I had at the
time of the child made a number of extravagant remarks about wishing to
join my lot more completely with hers. These remarks had had no sequel,
but they remained between us as a text which must some day be revised,
ratified, or at least explained. Meanwhile, it was important to me, even very
important, that Antonia should think me virtuous; and, with that degree of
self-deception which is essential to a prolonged and successful masquerade,
I even felt virtuous.

Three

I had just come back from Georgie’s and was still alone. I had lied to

Georgie about the time of Antonia’s return - her session with Palmer was
not due to end until six - so as to have an interval of quiet before the storm
of excited chatter which would undoubtedly follow. Antonia always arrived
back from Palmer’s house in a state of restless elation. I had supposed, and
one is often complacently led to believe by persons undergoing such
treatment, that a psycho-analysis is a grim and humiliating affair; but in the
case of my wife, analysis seemed to produce euphoria and even self-
satisfaction. At peace with the world and with myself I breathed the quiet
air, lying relaxed and warm in the bright multi-coloured shell which
Antonia and I had created, where silk and silver and rosewood, dark
mahogany and muted gilt blended sweetly together against a background of
Bellini green. I sipped the frosted fragrant Martini which I had just prepared
for both of us and thought myself, I dare say, the luckiest of men. Indeed at
that moment I was happy with an idle thoughtless happiness which was
never to come, with that particular quality of a degenerate innocence, ever
in my life again.

I was just looking at my watch, wondering whether she was late, when

Antonia appeared in the doorway. Usually when she entered she took

possession of a room, gliding immediately to the centre of it, and even, with
people she knew well, turning about as if to fill all the crannies and corners
with her presence. But tonight, already so marked as unusual, she stayed at
the door, as if afraid to enter, or as if conscious of her entrance as dramatic.
There she stood wide-eyed, her hand upon the door handle, staring at me in
a disconcerting way. I noticed too that she had not changed her clothes, but
was still wearing the striped silk blouse and cinnamon-coloured skirt which
she had had on in the morning. Normally Antonia put on different clothes
three or four times in a day.

‘You haven’t changed, my love,’ I said, sitting up. I was still in the

slow old world. ‘What is it? You look a bit bothered. Come and have your
drink and tell me all about it.’ I laid Napier aside.

Antonia came in now, moving in a slow deliberate heavy-footed way

and keeping her eyes fixed on me. I wondered if she had seen something
which I had missed in the evening papers, some account of a distant
cataclysm, or of some accident to an acquaintance, either of which might be
announced to me with a certain portentous interest. She sat down at the far
end of the sofa, still watching me with a tense unsmiling look. I tinkled the
long glass rod in the cocktail jug and poured her out a Martini. ‘What is it,
darling? Has there been an earthquake in China or have you been arrested
for speeding?’

‘Wait a minute,’ said Antonia. Her voice sounded thick, almost as if

she were drunk. She was taking slow deep breaths, like someone collecting
his powers.

I said sharply, ‘What’s the matter, Antonia? Has something bad

happened?’

‘Yes,’ said Antonia. ‘Wait a minute. Sorry.’

She sipped her drink and then poured the rest of it into my glass. I

realized that she was inarticulate with emotion.

‘For God’s sake, Antonia,’ I said, beginning to be thoroughly alarmed.

‘Whatever is it?’

‘Sorry, Martin,’ said Antonia. ‘Sorry. Wait a minute. Sorry.’

tell you now. And there’s no way of breaking it gently. It’s about me and
Anderson.’ She was looking away from me now and I could see the hand
holding the cigarette trembling.

I was still slow. I said, ‘You and Anderson what, angel?’

‘Well, just that,’ said Antonia, ‘just that.’ She threw the cigarette into

the fire.

I stared at her and began to think and to read her face. Her manner

more than her words frightened me a lot. I was so used to repose in the
peace of her simple confident spirit. I had hardly ever seen my golden
Antonia so shaken, and this in itself was dreadful. I said gently, ‘Do I
understand you? If you mean you’re a bit in love with Palmer, I’m not
surprised. I’m a bit in love with him myself.’

‘Don’t be flippant, Martin,’ said Antonia. ‘This is serious, it’s fatal.’

She turned towards me, but without taking my gaze.

I pushed back the shorter strands of golden hair from her big pale lined

brow and drew my hand down her cheek to her mouth. She closed her eyes
for a moment, remaining rigid. ‘Well, do stop looking like that, dearest. You
look as if you were going to be shot. Calm down and have your drink. Here,
I’ll pour you out another one. Now talk to me rationally, and don’t frighten
me out of my wits.’

‘You see, it’s not a matter of being a bit in love,’ said Antonia, looking

at me now with a glazed troubled stare. She spoke monotonously as if in her
sleep, with an air of comatose desperation. ‘It’s a matter of being very
desperately and deeply in love. Perhaps we ought to have told you sooner,
only it was so improbable, such an extreme love. But now we’re certain.’

‘Aren’t you both a bit old for this game?’ I said. ‘Come now!’

Antonia looked at me, her eyes hardened a little, and she became

suddenly more present and conscious. Then she smiled sadly and gave a
slight shake of the head.

This impressed me. But I said, ‘Look, darling, need we be quite so

serious about this?’

‘Yes,’ said Antonia. ‘You see, I want a divorce.’

She had found the word difficult to utter. At the shock of it I stared at

her, and bracing her body stiffly she stared back at me, trying to control her
face. She lacked expressions for a scene of this austerity. I said, ‘Don’t be
ridiculous, Antonia. Don’t say wild things that you don’t mean.’

‘Martin,’ said Antonia, ‘please help me. I do mean it, and it will save

us a lot of pain if you will understand me now, and see what things are like
now. I know this must be a ghastly shock. But please try. It makes me
utterly wretched to hurt you like this. Please help me by understanding. I
am quite certain and quite determined. I would not have spoken to you if I
were not.’

I looked at her. She would soon be in tears, her face stripped, strained

like something exposed to a great wind; but there was, in her retention of
control, a certain touching dignity. I could not yet believe her or believe that
there was anything here which the customary pressure of my will could not
sweep aside. I said quietly, ‘You’re in an over-excited state, my sweet. Has
that wretch Palmer been giving you drugs, I wonder? You say you’re in
love with him. All right. That often happens in analysis. But let’s not have
any more nonsense about divorce. And now can we just abandon this topic
for the present? I suggest you finish your drink and then go and dress for
dinner.’

I tried to rise, but Antonia grasped my arm, lifting a pitiful yet violent

face. ‘No, no no’ she said. ‘I must say it all now. I can’t tell you what this
costs me. I want a divorce, Martin. I’m deeply in love. Just believe me, and
then let me go away. I know it’s absurd and I know it’s dreadful, but I’m in
love and I’m absolutely relentless. I’m sorry to surprise you and I’m sorry
to speak like this, but I’ve got to make you understand what I mean.’

I sat down again. There was a desperate fierceness in her manner, but

there was also fear, fear of my reactions. It was the fear which began to
convince me and I felt the first light touch of a nightmarish terror. Yet this
strange half-savage, half-terrified being was still my Antonia, my dear wife.
I said, ‘Well, well, if you’re so much in love with your analyst perhaps

you’d better go to bed with him! Only don’t talk to me about divorce, for I
simply won’t hear of it!’

‘Martin!’ said Antonia in a shocked tone. Then she said, and her voice

became monotonous again, ‘I’ve already been to bed with him.’

My cheeks became hot with a sudden rush of blood as if I had been

struck. My knee was against Antonia’s. I captured Antonia’s two hands
which were still clawing at my sleeve, in a strong grip in my left hand.
‘Since when? And how many times?’

She looked back at me, frightened but still firm. Antonia had her own

soft frantic evasive way of getting what she wanted. I could feel her will
upon me like a leech. She said, ‘That doesn’t matter. If you really want the
details, I’ll tell you later. Now I just want to tell you the main truth, to tell
you that you’ve got to set me free. This thing has overwhelmed me, Martin.
I’ve simply had to give in to it. Honestly, it’s all or nothing.’

I crushed her wrists in my left hand. It may seem strange, but I was

conscious of wondering and of deciding now how I ought to react, I was
very conscious of her fear of a blow. I let go of her hands and said, ‘Well,
let me recommend nothing.’

Antonia relaxed and we drew a little apart. She gave a deep sigh and

said, ‘Oh, darling, darling —’

I said, ‘If I broke your neck now I’d probably get off with three years.’

I got up and leaned against the mantelpiece looking down at her. ‘What
have I done to deserve this?’ I said.

Antonia smiled nervously. She patted her hair, her long fingers straying

over the bun, pushing in hair-pins. She adjusted the neck of her blouse. She
had a little the air of feeling that the worst was over. She said, ‘I hate this,
Martin. And I’ve been in torment. You’ve been so perfect. But I’m beyond
thoughts about justification. I’m just desperate.’

‘Yes, I have been perfect, haven’t I?’ I said. ‘But still I don’t accept

what you say. We’ve been happy. I want to go on being happy.’

‘Happy, yes,’ said Antonia. ‘But happiness is not the point. We aren’t

getting anywhere. You know that as well as I do.’

‘One doesn’t have to get anywhere in a marriage. It’s not a public

conveyance.’

‘You must face the fact,’ said Antonia, ‘that you’re a disappointed

man.’

‘I’m damned if I’m a disappointed man,’ I said, ‘and if I were it

certainly wouldn’t be your fault. What you mean is that you’re a
disappointed woman.’

‘A marriage is an adventure in development,’ said Antonia, “and ours

is simply at a standstill. I was conscious of that even before I fell in love
with Anderson. It’s partly my being so much older and being a sort of
mother to you. I’ve kept you from growing up. All this has got to be faced
sooner or later.’ She sipped her drink. She had stopped looking frightened.

‘Spare me the clinical stuff, for Christ’s sake,’ I said, ‘it makes me feel

sick. Leave me because you want someone else, let’s have honest lust, not
pseudo-science. But in any case you aren’t going. You can’t make changes
like this at your age. You’re my wife and I love you and I want to go on
being married to you, so you’d better resign yourself to having a husband
and a lover.’

‘No,’ said Antonia. ‘I’ve got to go, Martin, I’ve got to. C’est plus fort

que moi.’ She got up and stood there opposite to me, her stomach thrust out,
tall, twisted into a pillar of determination. She added, ‘I’m extremely
grateful to you for being so rational about it.’

I stared at her beautiful haggard face, concentrated now in a look of

boldness mixed with a sort of cringing pity. Her big mobile mouth was
working as if she were masticating inwardly the tender things she might
have said. I had a sense of miserable confusion and of things having utterly
escaped my control. “I’m not being rational,’ I said. ‘I can hear what you
say, Antonia. But your words make no more sense to me than if you were a
mad woman. I think I’d better go and talk to Palmer. And if he says we
must behave like civilized men I shall kick his teeth in.’

‘He expects you, darling,’ said Antonia.

This is what is real, our marriage.’

She simply went on shaking her head.

‘Anyway, my darling, my Antonia, what would I ever do without you?’

The painful concentration of her face increased and then dissolved as

she gave a cry and began suddenly to weep. She looked infinitely pathetic
when she was in tears. I went to her and she bowed her head slowly on to
my shoulder, not raising her hands to her face. The tears fell between us.

‘I knew you’d be good about it,’ she said in a moment. ‘I’m so relieved

to have told you. I’ve hated lying about it. And you know, you need never
do without me.’ And she repeated, ‘Thank you, thank you,’ as if I had
already set her free.

I said, ‘Well, I haven’t broken your neck, have I?’

She said, ‘My child, my dear child.’

Four

I was lying down on the divan in Palmer’s study where his patients

usually reclined. Indeed I was to all intents and purposes his patient. I was
being coaxed along to accept an unpleasant truth in a civilized and rational
way.

‘No, I don’t hate you,’ I said.

‘We are civilized people,’ said Palmer. ‘We must try to be very lucid

and very honest. We are civilized and intelligent people.’

‘Yes,’ I said. I lay still and sipped the large cut-glass tumbler of whisky

and water which Palmer had just replenished for me. He himself was not
drinking. As he talked, he paced to and fro, tall and lean, with his hands
behind his back, the purple dressing-gown which he wore loosely over his
shirt and trousers making a gentle silky swish. He paced to and fro in front
of the line of Japanese prints which decorated the far wall, and bandit faces
leered from behind him. His small cropped head moved against the blurred
soft blues and charcoal blacks of the prints. The air was warm and dry,
agitated by a mysterious breeze from some invisible fan. I was sweating.

‘Antonia and I have been very happy,’ I said. ‘I hope she has not

misled you here. I still cannot take this in or accept it. Our marriage is an
extremely solid structure.’

‘Antonia could not mislead me if she tried,’ said Palmer. ‘Happiness,

my dear Martin, is neither here nor there. Some people, and Antonia is one,
conceive of their lives as a progress. Hers has been standing still for too
long. She is due to move on.’ He glanced at me occasionally as he paced,
his slightly American voice soft and slow.

‘Marriage is an adventure in development,’ I said.

‘Exactly.’

‘And it is time for Antonia to take a more advanced course.’

Palmer smiled. ‘You are charming to put it so!’ he said.

‘So the thing has a sort of inevitability.’

‘I admire your capacity for facing the facts,’ he said. ‘Yes, perhaps it

has a sort of inevitability. I do not imply this in order to avoid my own
responsibility or to help Antonia to shirk hers. There is little point in talking
of guilt, and it was not to talk of that that I saw you this evening. You know
as well as I do that any such talk would be insincere, whether in your
accusations or my confessions. But we are causing hurt and damage. For
instance to Antonia’s mother, who is fond of you. And there are others.
Never mind. We do not close our eyes to this or to anything.’

‘What about me?’ I said. ‘Damn Antonia’s mother!’

‘You will not be damaged,’ said Palmer. He paused in front of me,

looking down with a tender concentration. ‘This is a big thing, Martin,
something bigger than ourselves. If it were not so, Antonia and I might have
played things differently. It would then have been possible to deceive you,
though whether we would have done so I don’t know. But this is too
important and it is something that holds all three of us. You will see. I
would not say this unless I were pretty sure. I know Antonia very well,
Martin. Better in some ways than you do. That’s not your fault but my
profession. I know you better in some ways than you do.’

‘I doubt that,’ I said. ‘I’ve never subscribed to your religion. So

according to you we’re all going to be better off.’

‘Yes,’ said Palmer. ‘I don’t say happier, though that might be so too.

But we shall grow. You have been a child to Antonia and she a mother to
you, and that has kept you both spiritually speaking at a standstill. But you
will grow up, you will change, more than may now seem to you possible.
Haven’t you sometimes realized the extent to which you now regard
yourself both as a child and as an old man?’

This was very acute. ‘Nonsense,’ I said. ‘I reject your explanations.

Things were very well between me and Antonia before you turned up.’

her a child.’

‘Her failure to give me a child.’

‘There you are, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘Each naturally thinks of it as the

fault of the other. And the biological evidence is indecisive, as you know.’

The warmth and Palmer’s almost noiseless movements and his

repetition of my name had produced in me a sort of stupor, so that I hardly
knew what to say to him. I said, ‘You aren’t hypnotizing me, are you?’

‘Of course not,’ said Palmer. ‘What would that profit me? Relax,

Martin. Take your jacket off. You’re streaming with perspiration.’

I pulled it off and undid my waistcoat and rolled up my shirt sleeves. I

had trouble with the cuff links. I tried to sit up a little, but the divan was not
made for sitting up, so I lay back again. I stared up at Palmer, who had
paused once more in front of me, his smooth clever American face all
gentleness and concern, his fur of silver hair shining in the lamplight. There
was something abstract in his face. It was impossible to pin wickedness or
corruption on to such an image.

‘It is an important fact,’ said Palmer, ‘that you and I began it. We began

it, did we not, by becoming exceptionally attached to one another.
Attachments of that degree are rare in my life. You are certain you are not
angry with me?’

‘Cher maître!’ I said. I contemplated Palmer’s clear open face with its

uncanny youthfulness. ‘I seem not to know how to be angry with you,’ I
said slowly, ‘although in a way I want to be. I’ve drunk too much already
this evening and I’m not yet sure what has happened to me. I feel very
desolate and hurt and confused, but not angry.’ It occurred to me then as
significant that I had come to see Palmer this evening instead of
summoning him to see me. It had not even come into my mind to summon
him. It was I who had come running.

‘You see, Martin, I am wrapping nothing up,’ said Palmer.

‘Yes, you are,’ I said, ‘but very cleverly. It’s all wrapping. You’re too

clever for me. No wonder Antonia wants you. She’s probably too clever for

me too, only I never realized it.’

Palmer stood looking at me for a while, serene and detached and tender

with only a very little anxiety in his look. He pulled at the top of his
dressing-gown where a snowy white shirt emerged, and bared a little more
of his long neck. Then he resumed his pacing. He said, as if confidently
testing something out, ‘I knew you’d take it well, I knew you’d take it
splendidly.’

‘I’m not aware that I’ve yet revealed how I’m taking it!’ I said. But as I

said this I realized with a bitter clarity that I had already fallen into my role,
my role of ‘taking it well’, which had been prepared for me by Palmer and
Antonia. I had put my head straight into the halter which with care and
concern and even affection was being held out. It was important to them
that I should let them off morally, that I should spare them the necessity of
being ruthless. But if I had power, I was already surrendering it. It was
already too late for violence. I was indeed facing something big and
formidably well organized.

Palmer seemed to ignore my remark. ‘You see,’ he said, ‘it is not all

our idea that you should leave us. In a strange and rather wonderful way we
can’t do without you. We shall hold on to you, we shall look after you.
You’ll see.’

‘I thought I was supposed to grow up.’

Palmer laughed. ‘Oh, don’t imagine it will be easy! Nothing here will

be easy. It will be a dangerous adventure. But as I say, your liking me so
much is the important thing.’

‘How do you know I’ll keep on liking you, Palmer?’ I said. I felt my

faculties slipping.

‘You will,’ said Palmer.

‘Loving one’s successful rival?’

‘The psyche is a strange thing,’ he said, ‘and it has its own mysterious

methods of restoring a balance. It automatically seeks its advantage, its
consolation. It is almost entirely a matter of mechanics, and mechanical
models are the best to understand it with.’

‘You don’t see me then as an angel of compassion?’

Palmer laughed gaily. ‘Bless you, Martin,’ he said. ‘Your irony will be

the saving of all three of us.’

Five

It was lunch-time on Christmas Eve, and I was in the Oxford train. The

sky had been leaden yellow in London and as we passed Reading some
snow began to fall in rare large flakes out of a still air. It was very cold. I
had decided to spend Christmas with Alexander and Rosemary, and I had
telephoned them two days ago to tell them that I was coming, and to tell
them briefly that Antonia and I were parting. Antonia and Palmer had
pressed me with an astonishing warmth and fervour to spend Christmas
with them. It was remarkable how rapidly, after Antonia’s revelation, ‘they’
had come into existence as a sort of institution with its palpable strength,
atmosphere, and even traditions. Antonia now divided her day between
Hereford Square and Palmer’s house in Pelham Crescent, doing her best to
be in both places at once. I had never seen her so happy; and I realized with
mixed feelings that an important part of her happiness consisted in looking
after me. I let her. She had insisted on spending the two nights prior to my
departure at Hereford Square, where in any case we normally occupied

separate rooms. I went to bed each night blind drunk. I had refused their
Christmas offer, not through any fear of anger and violence, but through
fear of a too great compliance. I needed to withdraw in order to dress
myself again in some shreds of dignity and reason. ‘They’ had whirled me
naked. I hoped now to retrieve at least some tawdry semblance of self-
respect by playing, before Rosemary and Alexander, the role of the
deceived husband. More simply, I wanted time to think; more simply still,
time to feel.

I was only now beginning to believe it. The evening of Antonia’s

revelation, during which I had had a fantastic amount to drink, seemed in
retrospect a lurid dream, full of ghoulish configurations and yet somehow
mysteriously painless. It was later that the pain came, a pain unutterably
obscure and confused like that induced by some deprivation in childhood.
The familiar world of ways and objects within which I had lived for so long
received me no more; and our lovely house had put on suddenly the air of a
superior antique shop. The things in it no longer cohered together. It was
odd that the pain worked first and most immediately through things, as if
they had at once become the sad symbols of a loss which in its entirety I
could not yet face. They knew and mourned. The loss of Antonia seemed
like the impossible loss for ever of all warmth and all security; and it was
strange too that although a few days ago I had seemed to divide my being
and give to Antonia only a part, it now seemed that with her all was to be
dragged away. It was like being flayed. Or more exactly as if the bright
figured globe of my existence, which had been so warmly symmetrical to
the face of my soul, were twisted harshly off, leaving my naked face against
a cold window and darkness.

Yet I had behaved well. That, at least, had emerged, and was indeed the

main thing that had been, almost with a gentle insistence, established. I had
taken it well; and a warm radiance of gratitude for this was continually
perceptible, in which, deprived of other comforts, I was invited abjectly to
bask. It was the inevitability of just such basking which I was now in
process of running away from. I had lost the moment of action; this I felt
with, at times, a terrible fierceness of regret: although it was by no means
clear to me what that lost action might have been. It was evident in a way
that was now almost consoling and now scarcely bearable, that Antonia and

Palmer were very much in love. The revelation of their love and my
compliance with it, indeed as I bitterly reflected virtually my blessing upon
it, had released in both of them a frenetic gaiety. I had never seen them so
gay, so vital, so absolutely flaunting their colours. They seemed now in
spirit to be always waltzing. Against such a force I could hardly, I told
myself, have prevailed. Yet, I felt too, if I had only somehow tried, if I had
known how to try, in the face of her soft determination and her quick
gratitude, to keep Antonia, even if I had failed, one particular nagging
misery would now be absent. I had been cheated of some moment of
violence, of some special though perhaps fruitless movement of will and
power: and for this at least I would never forgive them.

It was ironical, I reflected as I sat in the train, that a week ago I had

seemed in secure possession of two women; now I was likely to be in
possession of neither. It was not clear to me whether the rupture with
Antonia had not in some mysterious way also killed my relation to Georgie,
as if these two growths had, so far from competing, strangely nourished
each other. I was far from sure of this, however, and my thoughts warily,
even shyly, returning inconclusively to the image of my mistress. I had not
communicated with Georgie since that day of the revelation, and since the
thing was not yet common knowledge, she was still presumably ignorant of
the change in my situation. I did not look forward to telling her. It was not a
time at which I felt well able to have things expected of me; and as I
speculated and wondered about what exactly Georgie would expect, it
occurred to me how little, after all, I knew her. That she would vulgarly
press me to marry her was of course out of the question. It was a matter
rather of how far and how she would, in turn, let me off; it was an
additional, and when I attended to it a terrible, pain that if in this new
situation either Georgie or I ‘flagged’ we would be betraying and indeed
destroying a precious and tender relation which in secrecy and ambiguity
had so much flourished. I needed Georgie, I loved her, I felt I could not
possibly, especially now, do without her. Yet I did not quite see myself
marrying her. Still, it was, I reflected, far too soon to know. I had not yet
even begun to fit the pieces together; and there might be some way of
fitting them together which would make out a picture of happiness for me
and for Georgie. At rare moments, in a quite abstract way, I imagined this

happiness, something utterly remote from my present misery and confusion,
and yet not totally unconnected with me nor totally impossible.

Rosemary was to meet me at Oxford and drive me to Rembers. I felt in

no mood for confronting Rosemary. She had never quite got on with
Antonia and would on the one hand be delighted at what had happened,
while on the other she would maintain a conventional air of distress:
distress such as persons feign at the death of an acquaintance, and which is
in fact a glow of excitement and pleasure, perceptible on waking in the
morning as a not yet diagnosed sense of all being exceptionally well with
the world. Rosemary, I should say, is for her sins a Mrs Michelis, having got
married young, and against all our wishes, to a dislikeable stockbroker
called Bill Michelis, who subsequently left her; and like most people whose
marriages have failed she had a sharp appetite for news of other failed
marriages. I had expected Rosemary to marry again, as, quite apart from
being a rich girl, she is very attractive to men, but so far she has prudently
refrained. Although with her small precise features, refined prim voice, and
Lynch-Gibbon pedantry in speech, she gives the appearance of a prude, she
is in reality far from prudish and is almost undoubtedly at her somewhat
mysterious flat in Chelsea, to which she rarely invites me, involved in
continual amorous adventures.

It was snowing hard in Oxford, and must have been doing so for some

time, as there was a good inch of soft feathery snow on the ground as I
stepped out of the train and began to look around for my sister. I soon saw
her and noted that she was dressed entirely in black: on instinct, no doubt.
She came up to me and leaned back her small pale face, under its little
velvet cap, to be kissed. Rosemary has the attractiveness which is
sometimes called petite. She has the long Lynch-Gibbon face and the
powerful nose and mouth, but all scaled down, smoothed over, and covered
with an exquisite ivory faintly freckled skin. The Lynch-Gibbon face is
made for men, I have always felt, and to my eye Rosemary’s appearance,
for all its sweetness, has always something of an air of caricature.

‘Hello, flower,’ I said, kissing her.

‘Hello, Martin,’ said Rosemary, unsmiling and clearly a little shocked

at what she felt as my levity. ‘This is grave news,’ she added, as we pushed

our way to the exit. I followed her trim black figure out, and we got into
Alexander’s Sunbeam Rapier.

‘It’s bloody news,’ I said. ‘Never mind. How are you and Alexander?’

‘We’re as well as can be expected,’ said Rosemary. She sounded

weighed down by my troubles. ‘Oh, Martin, I am sorry!’

‘Me too,’ I said. ‘I like the cute little hat, Rosemary. Is it new?’

‘Dear Martin,’ said Rosemary, ‘don’t play-act with me.’

Now we were driving along St Giles. The snow was falling steadily out

of a tawny sky. Its white blanket emphasized the black gauntness of the
bare plane trees and made the yellow fronts of the tall Georgian houses
glow to a rich terracotta.

‘I can hardly believe it,’ said Rosemary. ‘You and Antonia parting,

after such a long time! Do you know, I was very surprised indeed.’

I could hardly bear her relish. I looked down at her small high-heeled

black-shod feet on the pedals. ‘Have you been snowed up at Rembers?’

‘Not really,’ said Rosemary, ‘though I must say it seems to have

snowed more there than here. Isn’t it odd how it always seems to snow
more in the country? Water Lane was blocked last week, but the other roads
are fairly clear. The Gilliad-Smiths have been using chains on their car. We
haven’t bothered. Alexander says it’s bad for the tyres. Still, Badgett had to
help push us out of the gate once or twice. Where will you live now,
Martin?’

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Certainly not at Hereford Square. I suppose I’d

better find a flat.’

‘Darling it’s impossible to get a flat,’ said Rosemary, ‘at least a flat

that’s fit to live in, unless you pay the earth.’

‘Then I shall pay the earth,’ I said. ‘How long have you been down

here?’

‘About a week,’ said Rosemary. ‘Don’t let Antonia cheat you about the

furniture and things. I suppose as she’s the guilty party it should all really
belong to you.’

house as well as mine. We shall sort things out amicably.’

bitter. I should be mad with rage if I were you. You treated that man as your
best friend.”

‘He’s still my best friend.’

‘You’re very philosophical about it,’ said Rosemary. ‘But don’t overdo

it. You must be miserable and bitter somewhere in your soul. A bit of good
cursing may be just what you need.’

‘I’m miserable everywhere in my soul,” I said. ‘Bitterness is another

thing. There’s no point in it. Can we talk about something else?”

‘Well, Alexander and I will stand by you,’ said Rosemary. ‘We’ll look

for a flat for you and we’ll help you move in and then if you like I’ll come
and be your part-time housekeeper. I should like that. I haven’t seen half
enough of you in these last two or three years. I was just thinking that the
other day. And you’ll have to have a housekeeper, won’t you, and
professional ones cost the earth.’

‘You’re very thoughtful,’ I said. ‘What’s Alexander working on just

now?’

‘He says he’s stuck,’ said Rosemary. ‘By the way, Alexander’s

dreadfully cut up about you and Antonia.’

‘Naturally,’ I said. ‘He adores Antonia.’

‘I happened to be there when he opened her letter,’ said Rosemary.

‘I’ve never seen him so shaken.’

‘Her letter?’ I said. ‘So she wrote to him about it, did she?’ Somehow

this irritated me terribly.

‘Well, I gather so,’ said Rosemary. ‘Anyhow all I’m saying is, be kind

and tactful to Alexander, be specially nice to him.’ ‘To console him for my
wife having left me,’ I said. ‘All right, flower.’

‘Martin!’ said Rosemary. Some minutes later we turned into the gate of

Rembers.

Six

Down in Tennessee

It’s the first time I’ve been warm!’

his new fan heater. The sleeve of his white smock fluttered and rippled in
the warm wind.

It was half an hour later and we were sitting in the bay-window annexe

of Alexander’s studio drinking tea and looking out at the falling snow and
the south face of the house which could still be seen in the failing afternoon
light, its timberings loaded with soft undulating lines of whiteness against
the dulled pink. A holly wreath with a red bow hanging on the hall door
was sifted over and almost invisible. The nearer flakes fell white, but
farther off they merged into a yellowish curtain which prevented our view
and made Rembers enclosed and solitary.

In the creamy white smock, self-consciously old fashioned, my brother

seemed dressed to represent a miller in an opera. His big pale face in repose
had an eighteenth-century appearance, heavy, intelligent, the slightest bit
degenerate, speaking of a past of generals and gentlemen adventurers,
profoundly English in the way in which only Anglo-Irish faces can now be.
One might have called him ‘noble’ in the sense of the word which is usually
reserved for animals.

It was an odd thing about Alexander, and one which I noted ever anew,

especially when I saw him at Rembers, that although the form of his face
perfectly recalled my father, its spirit and animation perfectly recalled my
mother. More than in Rosemary or me, here she lived on, as indeed we both
profoundly apprehended in our relation to Alexander. We passed as being,
and I suppose we were, a very united family; and though I ruled out

financial fortunes and largely played my father’s role, Alexander in playing
my mother’s was the real head of the family. Here in the house and here in
the studio, whose whitewashed walls were still dotted with her water-
colours and pastel-shaded lithographs, I recalled her clearly, with a sad
shudder of memory, and with that particular painful guilty thrilling sense of
being both stifled and protected with which a return to my old home always
afflicted me; and now it was as if my pain for Antonia had become the same
pain, so closely was it now blended in quality, though more intense, with
the obscure malaise of my homecomings. Perhaps indeed it had always
been the same pain, a mingled shadow cast forward and backward across
my destiny.

We had not yet put the lights on, and we sat together in the window-

seat, not looking at each other but turned toward the silent movement of the
snow and the now invisible ‘view’ to enjoy which Alexander had a few
years ago had the big bay window built. Beyond the curtain which divided
it from the annexe, the studio was almost in darkness. In summer it would
be scented .with smells of wood, and flower smells from outside and the
fresh wet clean smell of clay; but now it smelt only of paraffin from the
four big oil-heaters whose equally familiar odour brought me recollections
of ill-lit childhood winters.

‘And so?’

‘Well, there it is.’

‘And Palmer didn’t tell you anything else?’

‘I didn’t ask him anything else.’

‘And you say you were charming to him?’

‘Charming.’

‘I don’t say,’ said Alexander, ‘that I would have sprung upon him like a

wild animal. But I would have interrogated him. I should have wanted to
understand.’

‘Oh, I understand,’ I said. ‘You must remember that I am very close to

Palmer; which makes it impossible to ask, but also makes it unnecessary.’

‘And Antonia seems happy?’

‘It’s the beatific vision.’

Alexander sighed. He said, ‘I’m tempted to say now that I never liked

Palmer. He’s an imitation human being: beautifully finished, exquisitely
coloured, but imitation.’

‘He’s a magician,’ I said, ‘and that can inspire dislike. But he’s warm-

blooded. He needs love as much as anyone else does. I can’t help being
touched by the way he has tried to hold me, as well as Antonia, in this
situation.’

‘I say pish, Sir, I say bah!’ said Alexander.

‘Antonia wrote to you?’ I turned to watch him, his big slow face

illuminated by the sallow light of the snow.

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘Yes. I wonder if I might have guessed. But no, any such

thing would have seemed to me impossible. When it came to it I was
stunned by her letter.’

‘Surely you didn’t get her letter before I telephoned? She would hardly

have written to you before she told me!’

‘Oh, well, of course not,’ said Alexander. ‘But I didn’t take it in

properly when you rang. She didn’t say anything in the letter, you know, not
anything informative. Tell me though, where will you live now?’

‘I don’t know. I suppose I’ll get a flat. Rosemary has appointed herself

as my housekeeper.’

Alexander laughed. He said, ‘Why not come and live here? You don’t

have to run the business, do you?’

‘What would I do here?’

‘Nothing.’

‘Come!’

‘Why not?’ said Alexander. ‘You could fleet the time idyllically. This

place is the earthly paradise, as we all saw with perfect clarity in childhood
before we were corrupted by the world. If you insisted on occupation I

would teach you how to model clay or how to carve snakes and weasels out
of tree roots. The trouble with people nowadays is they don’t know how to
do nothing. I’ve had quite a job teaching Rosemary to do it, and she’s
certainly more gifted in that direction than you are.’

‘You’re an artist,’ I said, ‘and for you doing nothing is doing

something. No. I shall get back to Wallenstein and Gustavus Adolphus and
What Is a Good General.’ I had for some time been quietly engaged on a
monograph on the Thirty Years War in which the competence of these two
commanders was compared. This was to be a chapter in a projected larger
work on what constituted efficiency in a military leader.

‘There are no good generals,’ said Alexander.

‘You are the dupe of Tolstoy who thought all generals were

incompetent because all Russian generals were incompetent. Anyway, I
shall try to work more seriously in future. Antonia, it must be admitted, was
time-consuming.’

‘Beautifully,’ said Alexander. He sighed again and we were silent for a

minute.

‘Show me some of the results of your inactivity,’ I said.

He rose and pulled back the curtain. He turned the switch in the studio

and a number of strips flickered to life overhead, producing the illumination
of an overcast afternoon in spring. The great room, which was a Cotswold
barn converted by my mother, retained its high roof and rough-hewn
wooden rafters from whose scored crevices the warm oily air, gently
circulating, seemed to sift down an ancient dust. The long work table, with
its scrubbed surface and neat groups of meticulously cleaned tools, spanned
the farther wall. Other things, though with an air of having their own places,
were dotted about: pieces of uncut stone, enormous tree roots stacked like a
tent, wooden blocks of various sizes, like overgrown nursery bricks, tall
objects covered with damp grey cloths, a box full of ornamental gourds, a
pillar of ebony shaped by nature or art, it was hard to tell which. A row of
clay bins flanked the wall by the window, and at the far end was a
population of plaster casts, torsos, swinging headless bodies, and heads
mounted on rough wooden stands. The floor of blue imitation Dutch

encaustic tiles was covered, according to a fantasy of Alexander’s, with dry
rushes and straw.

Alexander crossed the room and began carefully to undo the cloths

which draped one of the tall objects. A revolving pedestal began to appear
with something mounted upon it. As he removed the last cloth he switched
off the centre lights and turned on a single anglepoise lamp on the work
table which he swung round towards the pedestal. There was a clay head in
the first stages of composition, the early stages when the wire framework
had been roughly filled out and then the clay laid over it in various
directions in long strips until the semblance of a head appears. This
particular moment has always seemed to me uncanny, when the faceless
image acquires a quasi-human personality, and one is put in mind of the
making of monsters.

‘Who is it?’

‘I don’t know!’ said Alexander. ‘It’s not a portrait. Yet I feel odd about

it, as if I were looking for the person it was of. I’ve never worked quite like
this and it may be useless. I did some quite non-realistic heads, you
remember, ages ago.’

‘Your perspex phase.’

‘Yes, then. But I’ve never wanted to do an imaginary realistic head

before.’ He moved the lamp slowly and the oblique light made dark lines
between the strips of clay.

‘Why don’t modern sculptors do them?” I asked.

‘I don’t know,’ said Alexander. ‘We don’t believe in human nature in

the old Greek way any more. There is nothing between schematized
symbols and caricature. What I want here is some sort of impossible
liberation. Never mind. I shall go on playing with it and interrogating it and
perhaps it will tell me something.’

‘I envy you,’ I said. ‘You have a technique for discovering more about

what is real.’

‘So have you,’ said Alexander. ‘It is called morality.’

I laughed. ‘Rusted through lack of practice, brother. Show me

something else.’

‘Who is this?’ said Alexander. He turned the anglepoise directly

upward and revealed a bronze head which was mounted on a bracket above
the work table.

I felt a shock of surprise even before I recognized it. ‘I haven’t seen

that in years.’ It was Antonia.

Alexander had done the head in the early days of our marriage and then

professed dissatisfaction with it and refused to part with it. It was in a light
golden bronze and showed a youthful forward-darting Antonia that was not
quite familiar to me: a champagne-toasted dancing-on-the-table Antonia
that seemed to belong to another age. The shape of the head was excellent,
however, and the great flowing pile of hair at the back, wildly tressed and
somewhat Grecian: and the big rapacious slightly parted lips, these I knew.
But it was a younger, gayer, more keenly directed Antonia than my own.
Perhaps she had existed and I had forgotten. There was nothing there of the
warm muddle of my wife. I shivered.

‘It can’t be her without the body,’ I said. Antonia’s swaying body was

an essential part of her presence.

‘Yes, some people are more their body than others,’ said Alexander, as

he played the beam over his head, unshadowing a cheek. ‘All the same,
heads are us most of all, the apex of our incarnation. The best thing about
being God would be making the heads.’

‘I don’t think I like a sculpted head alone,’ I said. ‘It seems to represent

an unfair advantage, an illicit and incomplete relationship.’

‘An illicit and incomplete relationship,’ said Alexander. ‘Yes. Perhaps

an obsession. Freud on Medusa. The head can represent the female genitals,
feared not desired.’

‘I didn’t mean anything so fancy,’ I said. ‘Any savage likes to collect

heads.’

‘You wouldn’t let me collect yours!’ said Alexander. I had never let

Alexander sculpt me, though he had often begged.

back of my head, feeling the shape under the hair. A sculptor thinks from
the skull outwards.

We stood for a little longer looking up at the head of Antonia until I felt

the misery rising in my heart. I said, ‘I could face a stiff drink soon. By the
way, I sent off a case of Vierge de Cléry and some brandy.’

‘They came this morning,’ said Alexander. ‘But no port! All claret

would be port if it could.’

‘Not if I could catch it in time!’ I said. We had this argument every

Christmas.

‘I’m afraid we’ve got the usual mob coming tomorrow,’ said

Alexander. ‘I wasn’t able to put them off. Rosemary says they look forward
to it! But with luck we may be snowed up.’

We wandered across to the door and opened it, pausing on the threshold

to look at the scene outside. The cold air touched us sharply. It was darker
now, but the last light of day lingered with a living glow which seemed to
emerge from the snow itself. The white untrodden sheet stretched away to
where the two great acacia trees, loaded now and half sketched in in black,
marked the end of the lawn and framed the now hidden vista of hills
wherein were folded the lost ironstone villages of Sibford Gower and
Sibford Ferris. The snow fell silent and straight down out of a windless sky,
and through the open door we apprehended its positive silence. We were
shuttered as in a tomb. Then darkly blurred as in a Chinese picture, a
blackbird on its way to roost moved suddenly in the lee of a bush, turned its
head towards us, and then sped away noiselessly low over the snow. In the
last twilight of the afternoon we saw its eye and its orange beak.

With orange-tawny bill,’

‘You quote too aptly, brother.’

Too aptly?’

‘You don’t recall the rest?’

‘No.’

‘The throstle with his note so true,

The wren with little quill,

The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,

The plain-song cuckoo grey,

Whose note full many a man doth mark,

And dare not answer nay.’

faithful to Antonia?’

The question took me by surprise. However I replied at once, ‘Yes, of

course.’

Alexander sighed. The light came on in the drawing-room and cast into

the darkening air a cone of gold into which the snowflakes, grey now and
scarcely visible above, filtered to become, before they came to rest, tinsel
for a moment. The evergreen kissing bough which Rosemary laboriously
plaited every Christmas, as my mother had taught her to do, was to be seen
hanging in the window, decked with coloured balls, and oranges and long-
tailed birds and candles and hung with mistletoe; and now I could see my
sister mounting on a chair to set the candles alight. They flickered, and then
rose in a strong glow as the old ambiguous symbol swayed slightly in the
breeze that always haunted those tall ill-fitting Victorian windows.

‘Why “of course”?’ said Alexander.

At that moment we heard the tinkle of the piano. Rosemary was

beginning to play a carol. It was Once in Royal David’s City. I took a deep
breath and turned away from the door. I crossed the room to collect my

cigarettes which I had left in the bay-window. Alexander, who did not seem
to expect an answer to his question, had turned the anglepoise back to shine
upon his unfinished head. We contemplated it together to the distant sound
of the piano. I had known that it reminded me of something, something sad
and frightening, and as I looked now at the damp grey featureless face I
remembered what it was. When my mother had died Alexander had wanted
to take a death mask, but my father had not let him. I recalled with a sudden
vividness the scene in the bedroom with the still figure on the bed, its face
covered with a sheet.

I shuddered and turned to the doorway. It was quite dark outside now.

The snow fell, invisible save in the light from the window, into the depths
of its own sleep. Rosemary began to play another verse.

Seven

I have not spent Christmas quite as I expected. On
the evening when I last saw you Antonia suddenly
announced that she wished to leave me and to get
married to Palmer Anderson. I won’t tell you the
details now, but it looks as if this is what is going to
happen. Nor can I tell you exactly what my feelings
are. I don’t altogether know myself. As you may
imagine, I am suffering from shock. Indeed, I feel
scarcely sane and nothing seems solid any longer or
real for the present. You will understand that there
is nothing more I can say just now. I needed to tell
you the facts anyway and it is a great relief simply
to be writing to you. Hope and fear nothing if you
can. Oh, sweetheart, I have never felt more
wretchedly incapable of any bright or adventurous
destiny. I feel half faded away like some figure in
the background of an old picture. Try at least if you
can, to restore to me some sense and some vigour.
Darling child, your love and your devotion have
been so precious to me: support me now with
patience. Excuse this cowardly and distracted letter.
Your discredited prince kisses your feet. I am
simply too miserable to think straight. Please bear
with me and go on loving me. If I can I’ll call on
you tomorrow at the usual time. If I can’t come I’ll
telephone about then.

M.

Rosemary were descending the stairs, still trying to talk both at once.

‘And the whole building has oil-fired central heating,’ Antonia was

saying.

I got up from where I had been sitting at the Carlton House writing-

table and went over to the fireplace. It was early afternoon, but very dark
outside, and the lamps had already been turned on. Two electric fires were
burning in the room, but Antonia had insisted on lighting a coal fire as well,
to cheer me up, as she put it.

They came in and stood side by side looking at me with the look of

tender delighted concern with which women look at babies. The concern
was sharpened in Rosemary’s case by curiosity, in Antonia’s by anxiety.
Rosemary in her smart grey unobtrusive London clothes was tiny beside my
wife.

‘Antonia has been telling me about your flat,’ said Rosemary. ‘It

sounds ideal. And there’s a heavenly view over to Westminster Cathedral.’

‘Well, you know more about it than I do,’ I said. Palmer had found me

a flat in Lowndes Square. It appeared to be all right.

‘But you wouldn’t let me tell you this morning!’ exclaimed Antonia.

‘Isn’t he dreadful?’ to Rosemary. ‘Don’t you even want to see it?’

‘Not specially.’

‘Dear heart, don’t sulk,’ said Antonia. ‘You’ll have to make some

decision soon about the furniture. Rosemary and I have just been measuring
curtains, and the landing and Blue Room ones will fit exactly without
alteration.’

‘What luck.’

‘Well, I want to see it,’ said Rosemary, ‘even if you don’t. Antonia’s

given me the key and I’m going over there now. Are you sure you don’t
want to come, Martin?’

‘Yes.’

drop the key in this evening. ‘Bye, Martin darling, ‘bye, Antonia.’ She
patted my shoulder and then stood on her toes to peck Antonia’s cheek. She
and my wife seemed quite wrapped up in each other now.

Antonia saw her to the door. I could hear her saying, ‘And let me know

what you think about the pelmets.’ The door closed.

I stood by the fireplace watching the flames, and trying to clean out an

old pipe which I had found - I occasionally smoked a pipe. I heard Antonia
come back into the room. She came across to stand opposite to me. I stared
at her and she stared steadily back, unsmiling now. It was the first time we
had been alone together since I had returned accompanied by Rosemary.
Already, through the secret chemistry of the situation, Antonia and I were
two new and different people. We regarded each other with a dismay behind
which, in my case, there lurked an abject terror, ready to probe the
difference. I felt suddenly dizzy with pain and unable to face whatever
scene was to follow. I went back to scraping the pipe. I said, ‘Well, you’ve
made one person blissfully happy. Rosemary adores catastrophes.’

‘Martin, darling,’ said Antonia. She said it lingeringly, with an insistent

tenderness of reproach. She stood there before me, her stomach pouting, her
hip jutting, her body twisted in such a dear familiar way. A snowy white
silk blouse, falling well open, showed off her long neck. Her bun was coiled
in a neat golden ball almost as large as her head. I looked at her again and
saw her sharply for the first time since our rupture as a separate person and
no longer a part of myself.

‘You are pleased about the flat, aren’t you?’

‘Yes, very.’

‘Don’t be cross with me,’ said Antonia. ‘It hurts so much.’

‘I’m not cross.’

‘Anderson took a lot of trouble to find the flat.’

‘It’s very kind of him, especially when he has so many other things to

think about.’

thinking about,’ said Antonia, ‘but you? We think of nothing else!’

‘Sweet of you,’ I said. I began to fill the pipe.

‘Please, darling,’ said Antonia, ‘don’t do that.’

‘Don’t do what, for Christ’s sake?’

‘Be so sort of blank and sarcastic. And please, if you can, be nice to

Anderson. He’s so terribly worried about what you feel about him and so
terribly anxious to please you. You could hurt him dreadfully by the
smallest thing.’

‘I’m not being blank and sarcastic,’ I said. ‘I am grateful to Palmer. But

I do wish everyone would stop scheming for my welfare. I’m perfectly well
able to look after myself.’ I lit the pipe. It tasted foul.

‘But we want to look after you!’ said Antonia.

As I didn’t reply, she sighed and turned away to pull the curtains across

the darkened windows. A thick yellow fog had covered London all day,
turning the day to night, and filtering into the house to bring even to
Antonia’s, no longer Antonia’s, rose-scented drawing-room a faint bitter
smell and a fainter haze. The snow which had lain so thick and beautiful
when I left the country was scarcely to be seen in the city, lingering only in
diminishing white patches on roofs or on less frequented pavements in long
iron-grey streaks of ice. I sat down on the sofa and began knocking out the
pipe against the mantelpiece.

Antonia came back to me. ‘You’re making a nasty mark there.’

‘It doesn’t matter now.’

‘It does matter, Martin. Every single little thing matters.’

The cosier, the more enclosed, scene seemed to give her confidence.

She reached out and took the pipe away from me. Then she sat down beside
me and tried to take my hand. I withdrew it. It was like a strange courtship
scene. I said, ‘No, Antonia.’

She said, ‘Yes, Martin,’ and laid her hand again on the sleeve of my

coat. I began to tremble.

‘It isn’t enough,’ I said, ‘must you do this as well?’

‘It’s important, Martin,’ said Antonia. ‘Don’t flee from me. We must

still be able to touch each other.’

‘Does your psycho-analyst advise this?’

‘Please!’ said Antonia. ‘I know you’re hurt, Martin, more hurt inside

than you will let any of us see. But you mustn’t say these bitter things.’

‘I should have thought that was pretty mild,’ I said. ‘But I seem to have

set myself such a high standard. Well, I suppose I shall have to keep it up
now!’ I let her take my hand. I let her quiet me as one quiets an animal.

‘Yes, yes,’ said Antonia, ‘you will have to keep it up, won’t you!’

Laughing with relief and gratitude she fell to her knees before me and
kissed my hand and drew it to her breast. Then she looked at me steadily.
‘You are generous, my dear.’ Her voice was deep and resonant with
emotion.

I thought, but did not say, ‘I’m in love with you.’ That was too mad. I

said instead, ‘Look, sweetie, we must make those arrangements about the
bloody furniture and so on.’

‘There’s plenty of time,’ said Antonia. She sat back, her arms wrapped

round her knees, seeming completely relaxed now. ‘But we will, of course.
There’s lots of junk that can go straight to the sale room. You know, the
stuff we’ve wanted to get rid of for years. And the good stuff should divide
quite rationally.’

That ‘we’ still came naturally from Antonia’s lips. I wondered at her.

At the same time, I needed her. The devil of it was that I needed both of
them. The thread of intimacy was not yet broken after all between Antonia
and myself. I apprehended this fact with a sort of agony. I had only had
notice of my death. The stroke had not really fallen yet.

‘Look,’ said Antonia, ‘could you do a favour for Anderson and me?’

‘It seems to be my métier.’

‘Could you meet Honor at the station tonight?’

‘Honor?’

‘You know, Anderson’s sister. She’s arriving from Cambridge.’

‘Oh, Honor Klein. Yes, I suppose so. Only I scarcely know her. Why

can’t Palmer meet her?”

‘He’s got a dreadful cold,’ said Antonia. ‘He really mustn’t go out in

this fog.’

‘Can’t she take a taxi?’

‘She’s expecting Anderson, and he’s afraid that if he doesn’t come

she’ll wait indefinitely on the platform in this ghastly weather.’

‘She doesn’t sound very intelligent,’ I said. ‘All right, I’ll meet her.’

Antonia’s ‘Anderson’, which had once sounded so curiously formal, now
had a ring of hideous intimacy; and somehow the fact of Palmer having a
cold irritated me extremely.

Antonia squeezed my arm and moved round to lean her head against

my knee. I was beginning to be tormented by physical desire for her. She
said, ‘I feel rather nervous about Honor.’

‘You’ve met her before, though. She seems a pretty harmless old don.’

‘Yes, I’ve met her,’ said Antonia, ‘but I’ve never noticed her.’

‘Neither have I,’ I said. “This suggests that she’s harmless.’ I began to

stroke Antonia’s hair.

‘I wouldn’t worry,’ said Antonia, ‘only Anderson seems a bit worried.

He doesn’t say much, but I think he thinks that Honor thinks that I’m not
good enough for him.’

‘That’s a lot of thinking,’ I said. ‘You’re good enough for a king, and

quite good enough for our Palmer. There’s nothing to be nervous about.
You’re a goddess, and she’s just a poor old German spinster. Tell yourself
that. What time is the train?’

‘Five fifty-seven at Liverpool Street,’ said Antonia. ‘Martin, you’re an

ace. I’m afraid the train’s sure to be awfully late because of the fog. Perhaps
you could bring her straight to Pelham Crescent. I wonder if you have the
faintest idea how good you are?’

‘I’m beginning to realize,’ I said. ‘It hurts so much, for one thing.’

Antonia sat back on her heels. She was consciously, almost

shamelessly, exerting her power. She held me a while in the glow of her
attention; and I let her so hold me, with a sort of despair, knowing the
fruitlessness of taking her in my arms.

‘We won’t let go of you, Martin,’ she said. ‘We’ll never let go of you.’

I had feared the inevitable breaking of the thread of intimacy. In

Antonia’s intention this thread, somehow, would never be broken. I felt an
abject relief together with a spiritual nausea which made her look to me, for
a moment, almost hideous. I was near to breaking down. I said, ‘You can’t
have everything, Antonia.’

She put her two hands on my knees and leaned forward with glowing

eyes. ‘I can try, my darling, I can try!’

Eight

I had got the car out early in case I should get lost on the way.

However, flaring fog lights all along Piccadilly and Holborn had kept me
crawling steadily on, and I had arrived in fair time. I had already inquired
how late the train would be, which no one seemed to know, and had
inspected the bookstall at length and purchased a cheap edition of a book
about jungle warfare in Burma. I was now sitting in the comparative
brightness of the buffet sipping some rather cold tea. I shook out my scarf,
which was damp and soggy. I could have wrung the moisture from it. I was
chilled to the bone and so dejected that it was almost laughable. With that I
felt more than a little mad.

The scene with Antonia had left me stiff and weary, as if I had been

beaten, or had come a very long way. I was by now in a state which could
only be described as being in love. Yet it was a strange love, whose only
possible expression was my acquiescence in her will to keep that thread
unbroken between us. At the same time, to consent to this was torture and I
felt the tender bond like a strangler’s rope. I was confounded by the utter
impossibility of violence. Yet violence, veiled with misery, moved within.
What most appalled was the sense which I had so clearly had when I was
with Antonia of my need for her, my need for them; and what I now
abjectly craved was to see Palmer and to receive from him some impossible
inconceivable reassurance. I was their prisoner, and I choked with it. But I
too much feared the darkness beyond.

I looked at my watch. It was five fifty-four, still too early for a drink. I

got up and went out to inquire again at the platform where the train was
due. Still no one seemed to know how late it would be, and I stood about
for a while with my coat collar turned up, breathing the thick contaminated
air. It pressed down into my lungs, cold, damp, and filthy, doing me no
good at all. The place was an image of hell. I wondered if I would recognize
Dr Klein. I could not recall her face, and could conjure up only some
generalized image of a middle-aged Germanic spinster. I remembered being
disappointed at her lack of any resemblance to Palmer. Otherwise she had
seemed so true to type as to be without special points of interest. I took a
gloomy satisfaction in performing the disagreeable task of meeting her. To
be icily and inconveniently here, suffocating on this railway station and
faced with the discomfort of a long wait: this was after all the only thing I
could do just now to spite Antonia and Palmer. It was for this moment my
only weapon. Also it passed the time.

I bought an evening paper and read about how many people had been

killed already by the fog. The time was five fifty-nine. I began to think
about Georgie and about our meeting tomorrow. I could find somewhere in
my heart a warm germ of gladness at the thought of Georgie. Yet I was
terrified of seeing her too. I could not at present face anything in the way of
a showdown or argument about fundamentals with Georgie. I had been as it
were too completely reabsorbed into Antonia. I could think of nothing but
Antonia. The pressure upon me of Georgie’s needs, any requirement that I
should now imagine her situation, would be intolerable, and I felt sick at the
thought. Yet I did want to see her. I wanted consolation, I wanted love, I
wanted, to save me, some colossal and powerful love such as I had never
known before. ‘That train’s coming in now, sir,’ said the ticket collector.

The roar of the unseen train reached a crescendo and then died to a

rattle and its nose became visible at the near end of the platform. People
began to materialize very rapidly at the barrier, and I concentrated on my, as
it now seemed impossible, task of recognizing the person I was to meet.
Several middle-aged women passed by with strained preoccupied faces and
rapidly vanished. Everyone was hurrying and everyone looked ill. It was the
Inferno indeed. I began to cough. Dr Klein would be looking for her
brother, and I supposed I might identify her by her own searchings and

hesitations. But I would have to do it quickly, for if she wandered even a
few steps away from the barrier she would be lost in the fog.

When Palmer’s sister did at last appear I recognized her at once. The

face came back to me with a rush, as so often happens when what one
cannot picture appears unexpectedly as something well known. It was not a
very pleasant face: heavy, perceptibly Jewish, and dour, with just a hint of
insolence. The curving lips were combined with a formidable straightness
and narrowness of the eyes and mouth. Dr Klein advanced from the barrier
and stood still, looking about. She was frowning, and looked haggard in the
lurid yellowish light. She wore no hat and drops of foggy moisture stood
already upon her short black hair.

I said ‘Dr Klein?’

She turned towards me and glared. She had clearly no idea who I was.

I said, ‘I am Martin Lynch-Gibbon. We have met before, though you

may have forgotten. Palmer asked me to meet you. May I carry something?’

I noticed that she was hugging a lot of small parcels, which gave her

something of the air of a mid-European Hausfrau. When she spoke I
expected a thick German accent, and was surprised by her deep cultured
English voice. I had forgotten her voice.

‘Where is my brother?’ she said.

‘He’s at home,’ I said. ‘He’s got a cold. Nothing serious. I’ll take you

there at once. The car is just outside. Here, let me take this.’ I relieved her
of the largest parcel.

As she handed it over Dr Klein gave me a keen look. Her narrow dark

eyes, which seemed in the strange light to be shot with red, had the slightly
Oriental appearance peculiar to certain Jewish women. There was
something animal-like and repellent in that glistening stare. She said, ‘This
is an unexpected courtesy, Mr Lynch-Gibbon.’

It took me a moment to apprehend the scorn in this remark. It took me

by surprise, and I was surprised too how much it hurt. It occurred to me that
this was the first judgement I had received from an outsider since I had
officially taken up my position as a cuckold, and I was irritated to find that,

for a second, I minded cutting a poor figure. It certainly might seem an odd
moment to be running errands for Palmer. We walked in silence towards the
car through a shadowy and slightly hysterical crowd of arriving and
departing travellers and those whose trains were lost without trace.

Outside the fog was as thick as ever, and it took me some time to get

the car into the street. The baffled headlights glowed, tiny futile balls, in
front of a wall of darkness which their beams could not pierce. We began to
proceed at a walking pace along Cheapside. In order to say something I
asked, ‘Was it foggy in Cambridge?’

‘No, not foggy.’

‘Your train was very punctual. We expected it to be late.’

A grunt was the reply to this. I said to myself, I don’t care what this

object thinks of me. The fog came steadily over us in waves and it was
extremely difficult to see where one was on the road. People had abandoned
their cars here and there by the pavement, and there were a great many
obstacles to avoid on the left, while on the right the headlights of
approaching vehicles only at the last moment materialized out of the thick
darkness. To keep straight along the narrow channel in the middle seeing
traffic lights in time, and not starting to swerve crazily as soon as complete
obscurity descended was a feat demanding the utmost concentration. I
leaned forward over the wheel, my forehead nearly touching the windscreen
upon which the wipers were rubbing a mass of wet grime to and fro. I felt
with a sort of exhilaration that we were very likely to hit something pretty
soon. Enlivened by this, I said suddenly to my companion, ‘Well, Dr Klein,
what do you think of Palmer’s latest little exploit?’

She turned abruptly towards me and the hem of her coat fell across my

hand on the gear lever. Before she had time to reply a large lorry suddenly
appeared a foot away on my right. I must have wandered over the centre of
the road. I braked violently and swerved and must have shaved the lorry by
an inch. I said ‘Sorry.’ She turned back, gathering her coat about her legs.
The apology might have covered either thing.

I turned southward down what I took to be Shaftesbury Avenue. The

windscreen was becoming opaque and frosted; I Wound down the window

on my side and the cold choking air came in. My nose was beginning to
drop moisture. I said to her, ‘Would you mind opening your window and
keeping a look-out on that side?’ She opened the window in silence and we
proceeded thus for a while with our heads hanging out on opposite sides.
Honor Klein’s body sagged and jolted beside me like a headless sack, and I
could feel again the rough material of her coat grazing my hand. Great
orange flares at Hyde Park Corner showed us the way into Knightsbridge,
and by their light I stole a glance at my companion. I saw only her hunched
shoulders; and then, revealed momentarily, the back of her leg, turned and
braced, a stout crepe-soled shoe, and the plump curve of her calf clad in a
thick brown and white knitted stocking traversed by a dark seam. I returned
my attention to the road. That curving seam reminded me just for an instant
that she was a woman.

By the time we reached Pelham Crescent the fog had lifted a little. I

opened Palmer’s big close-fitting hall door, which is always unlocked, and
ushered Dr Klein inside. I felt a bond with her now because of our ordeal.
The hall was warm and deeply carpeted and after the vapours outside it
smelt sweet, a smell of polished wood and new textiles. Breathing was
suddenly a luxury. I paused while she took off her coat, and saw above her
head the huge tasselled Samurai sword which Palmer had inconsequently
suspended above a little rosewood chiffonier which Antonia and I had once
greatly coveted.

I wondered if Palmer and Antonia were indeed here, since we were

much earlier than the time I had predicted. I said in a friendly manner,
‘Would you like to go upstairs first? I’ll go and see if Palmer and Antonia
are in the drawing-room. Of course you know your way about.’

Dr Klein gave me her unsmiling stare. She said, ‘You are very

hospitable, Mr Lynch-Gibbon, but I have been in this house before.’ She
marched past me and threw open the drawing-room door.

The drawing-room was full of golden firelight and there was a strong

resinous smell of burning logs. The black-shaded lamps had been
extinguished and the dark furry wallpaper glowed reddish and soft in the
moving light. I saw at once and painfully that Palmer and Antonia were
indeed not expecting us. They were sitting side by side in two upright chairs

by the fire. Palmer had his arm round my wife and their faces, turned
tenderly full towards each other were seen clearly in profile, each outlined
with a pencil of gold. They seemed in that momentary vision of them like
deities upon an Indian frieze, enthroned, inhumanly beautiful, a pair of
sovereigns, distant and serene. They turned towards us, startled but not yet
risen, still gracious in their arrested communion. I came up beside Honor
Klein.

Something strange happened in that instant. As I turned to look at her

she seemed transfigured. Divested of her shapeless coat she seemed taller
and more dignified. But it was her expression that struck me. She stood
there in the doorway, her gaze fixed upon the golden pair by the fire, her
head thrown back, her face exceedingly pale; and she appeared to me for a
second like some insolent and powerful captain, returning booted and
spurred from a field of triumph, the dust of battle yet upon him, confronting
the sovereign powers whom he was now ready if need be to bend to his
will.

The impression was momentary. Antonia leapt up and came forward

with cries of welcome. Palmer began hastily turning on the lamps. Honor
Klein gave her attention to Antonia, answering her questions about the
journey and about the fog in a slow way which seemed at last, in its very
laboriousness a little Germanic.

Nine

Today, however, I could see only too clearly the emptiness of this

dream which was but the hollow correlate of my role of total victim. There
was nothing I could do; nothing, that is, except act out with dignity my
appointed task of being rational and charitable: a task whose charms, never
many, were likely to diminish as my charitableness and rationality came to
be, by all concerned, increasingly taken for granted. More precisely, there
was nothing to be done in the near future except to make sensible
arrangements with Antonia about the furniture, write a number of letters
about the Lowndes Square flat, and see my solicitor about the divorce
proceedings: that, and see Georgie.

I was sorry that I had made myself so drunk last night, not only

because of the hideous depression of the hangover, but because I felt it
would make me stupid in dealing with Georgie. I still had mixed feelings
about seeing her, and indeed my opposite wishes had both increased in
intensity. On the one hand I felt more than ever absorbed into the idea of
Antonia. I wanted to think about her all the time, although this activity was
entirely painful. In an obsessed way, what I most desired was to be talking
over ‘the situation’ with Antonia and Palmer, and if either of them had had
the time to indulge me that is what I would have been continually doing. On
the other hand, the image of Georgie, moved by some pure power of its

own, was active within me, and made in my tormented thoughts a cool and
even authoritative place for itself. Thither I did feel drawn. Georgie’s robust
cheerfulness, her good sense, her lucid toughness were perhaps just what I
required to pull me out of the region of fantasy which I was increasingly
inhabiting and return me to the real world. Yet could I, as things were, rely
on Georgie to be cheerful and lucid? What demands might she not now,
especially finding me in this weakened state, make upon me? I unutterably
wanted some simplicity of consolation. But Georgie too was a person
capable of being in torment.

I locked up my desk and put into my brief-case the list of clients whom

I had promised to visit in January and the draft of my chapter on the tactics
of Gustavus Adolphus at the battle of Leuthen. I had made arrangements so
as not to have to come to the office again for a little while. The clients
would receive a note to the effect that Mr Mytten, my young assistant,
would visit them instead, as I was indisposed. Mytten was at present still in
Bordeaux, where it was dangerous to send him since he prolonged his visits
so unconscionably, conducting some negotiations with a small house with
which we had newly begun to do some business. Mytten was a Roman
Catholic, a sybarite and an ass, but he was loyal and a decent judge of wine,
and went down splendidly with my more snobbish clientele. I could trust
him with the visiting, though not of course with the tasting, and I noted that
my next essential engagement was to taste hock, of which we still handled a
little, on 30 January. Of course I always politely consulted Mytten and very
occasionally listened to his advice on what to buy, but a director of a small
wine firm tends to become an omnipotent and jealous deity, and it was on
my palate alone that the firm of Lynch-Gibbon depended; and as I had no
paternal feelings towards Mytten and did not believe that I could train him
to be a second me, the little firm would doubtless perish with me, and the
particular piece of reality represented by the discerning taste which my
father had so carefully trained and fostered in his son would vanish away
for ever.

Until the truant Mytten’s return my two excellent secretaries, Miss

Hernshaw and Miss Seelhaft, could get on perfectly well on their own. I
prized these girls exceedingly as they could write accurate and even witty
business letters in French and German, and by now knew the business very

well indeed, though, quaintly, they had no understanding of wine and
praised anything that was offered to them. They had been with me for some
years now and I had been very worried in case one or other of them should
take it into her head to get married, until the day when I realized, through
some imperceptible but cumulative gathering of impressions, that they were
a happy and well-suited Lesbian couple.

Today I had, with each of them separately, gone through the painful

business of telling them about my divorce: I was made aware that they
already knew. So gleefully fast does bad news travel. They stood now by
the door waiting without visible impatience to see the last of me. Their
faces and attitudes expressed their respective modes of sympathy: tall fair
Miss Hernshaw, long vainly courted by the imperceptive Myt-ten, swaying
moist-eyed and ready to hold my hand, short dark Miss Seelhaft, frowning
with concern as she polished her spectacles, darting me glances of brisk
commiseration. I left them at last to the debris of the Christmas orders and
the joys of each other’s company and drove my car to Pelham Crescent.

neither of which I had seen before. She had never used to buy so much as a
handkerchief without consulting me. I noticed too, half relieved, that she
was in a state of restless irritation and in no mood to ply me with her
tenderness. She jumped up when she saw me and said, ‘Really, I think she
might have waited a bit before dismantling the house!’

‘Who?’

‘Honor Klein.’

I recalled this lady’s existence. ‘I suppose she’s taking her own stuff

away?’

‘Darling, shut the door,’ said Antonia. ‘I feel haunted. I suppose she

has a right to her own things, but really, when she appeared here this
morning it was like being hit by a tornado. Did you see all the junk piled up
in the hall?’

‘Appeared this morning? Isn’t she staying here?’

ready. She decided last night she wanted to stay in a hotel in Bloomsbury to
be near the British Museum or something, and poor Anderson had to take
her away in a taxi and he’s not at all well, and he took ages getting back in
the fog.’

‘How is Palmer?’

‘His temperature’s still up. It was ninety-nine this morning. I do think

she’s inconsiderate. All the same, I like her.’

I laughed at the determined way Antonia said this. ‘You have to. She’s

Palmer’s sister. I confess, I don’t feel myself obliged in this respect!’

‘About the furniture, darling,’ said Antonia, ‘may we do it tomorrow

afternoon? Anderson and I are just off to Marlow. We thought we’d stay at
the Compleat Angler, just for the night. It’s such a nice warm hotel. Poor
Anderson is so overtired, I thought the little change would do him good,
and we both hate seeing Honor mauling the house. I’m terribly sorry not to
be able to ask you to lunch, but we’re having it early in rather a rush and
leaving immediately after.’

I had introduced Antonia to the Compleat Angler. It had been one of

our haunts in the early days of our marriage. ‘I couldn’t anyway,’ I said.
‘I’m just leaving town myself. But I’ll be back early tomorrow. See you at
Hereford Square any time after three.’

I told this lie instinctively, as a rejoinder to Antonia’s air of somewhat

patronizing solicitude; and I had the satisfaction of seeing her inhibit her
impulse to ask me where I was going. She had, after all, surrendered certain
rights. The thread was not broken, but without our notice and without our
will the gulf had inevitably grown wider. She sighed; and I took my leave
before she could discover the words with which to draw me gently once
more towards her.

I closed the drawing-room door upon Antonia and almost fell over

Honor Klein, who was half carrying half dragging a large box of books
across the hall.

front room which Palmer always called the Library, although it contained
only one small bookcase. The room was in disorder now, piled up with tea
chests containing books, papers, and photographs. A number of pictures
were stacked against the wall, including the series of Japanese prints from
the study. I noticed too, half hidden by a heap of letters, a framed
photograph of what was obviously Palmer as a boy of sixteen. In the
dining-room opposite I saw through the door the table for lunch and an
open bottle of Lynch-Gibbon claret. Only two places were laid.

‘Thank you,’ said Honor Klein. ‘Now would you mind helping me

stack these boxes on top of each other? I shall need the space.’

When we had finished this and I wished to take my leave, but could

think of no suitable formula, I bowed rather awkwardly and was about to
withdraw when she said, ‘Yesterday you asked me what I thought of my
brother’s exploit. May I ask you what you think of it?’

This took me greatly by surprise and I hesitated for words. I was at

once aware that I must be very careful what I said to Honor Klein.

She went on, ‘Do you think they are doing the right thing?’

‘Do you mean morally?”

‘No, not morally,’ she said almost with scorn. ‘I mean for their life.’

She contrived to give the word a metaphysical ring.

I said, ‘Yes, I do think they are doing the right thing.’ There was

something hideously improper in discussing Antonia’s business with this
woman. Yet I found suddenly that I wanted to.

‘Do you mind if I close the door?” she said. She stood with her back to

it staring at me with a concentrated calculating expression. She was wearing
a dark green coat and skirt which had once had some pretension to
smartness and she looked rather less dumpy than she had seemed at the
station. Her blunt laced shoes had been polished since yesterday. Her short
straight oily hair, a lustrous black, sat like a cropped wig about her pale
rather waxen Jewish face. Her narrow eyes were like two black chips.

She said, ‘I wonder if you realize how much your soft behaviour

dismays them?’

am powerless. If I choose to be civilized it is my own affair.’ I glared back
at her. All the same, there was something refreshing, even exhilarating,
even liberating, after so much of the tender and the polite, after Antonia and
Palmer’s masterly ‘wrapping’, about this direct talk.

‘Civilized!’ she said it again with scorn. ‘As you must know perfectly

well, you could get your wife back if you wanted her even now. I don’t say
that you should have beaten her and kicked my brother; but there was no
need to press them so into each other’s arms. They are both persons with a
great capacity for self-deception. They have enchanted themselves into a
belief in this match. But they are both crammed with misgivings. They want
to be let off the final decision. They look to you for help. Can you not see
that?’

I was amazed. I said, ‘No, frankly I can’t see it. I can best help them by

being gentle and I propose to go on being gentle. I am after all in a position
to know the truth about both of them.’ I spoke firmly, but I was very upset
by what she had said, and confused, and unaware whether I ought not to be
offended. I took a step forward to indicate that I wished to go. But she stood
her ground, throwing her head back against the door and looking up at me.

‘Truth has been lost long ago in this situation,’ she said. ‘In such

matters you cannot have both truth and what you call civilization. You are a
violent man, Mr Lynch-Gibbon. You cannot get away with this intimacy
with your wife’s seducer.’

‘I am not one of your primitive savages, Dr Klein,’ I said, ‘and I do not

believe in vendettas.’ With that I recalled how she herself had been called
primitive. Strained back against the door, close to me now, she seemed
something black and untouchable.

‘You cannot cheat the dark gods, Mr Lynch-Gibbon,’ she said softly.

‘Perhaps it is no business of mine if you choose to be powerless and to
abandon your wife. But everything in this life has to be paid for, and love
too has to be paid for. Why does my brother, who is rich, always charge

high fees even to poor patients? Because without payment he could not
speak to their condition. Without payment they would be wretched. They
would be captives. I believe you love my brother. But you do him no good
by letting him off. He wants, he needs, your harshness, your criticism, even
your violence. By gentleness you only spare yourself and prolong this
enchantment of untruth which they have woven about themselves and about
you too. Sooner or later you will have to become a centaur and kick your
way out.’

I listened to her with great attention. I wanted to understand exactly

what she meant. ‘You said earlier that you thought they both wanted to back
out,’ I said, ‘but what you say now could imply that if I were violent it
might make them happier with each other.’

Honor Klein gave a tired gesture. The tension left her body and she

drooped, moving a little away from the door. ‘Could imply, could imply!’
she said. ‘Where logic breaks down anything can imply anything. While
you are all so soft nothing can be clear. It seems to me now that you do not
really want your wife back after all. And as I am surprised that you have not
yet told me, it is nothing to do with me, your side of the matter. If you want
to let them steal your mind and organize you as if you were an infant I
suppose that is your affair. All I say is that only lies and evil come from
letting people off.’

I looked at her harsh and melancholy profile. I said, ‘I don’t imagine

that you ever let people off, do you, Dr Klein?’

She turned towards me and suddenly smiled, revealing strong white

teeth, her eyes narrowing further to two black luminous slits. She said,
‘With me people pay as they earn. You have been patient. Good morning,
Mr Lynch-Gibbon.’ She opened the door.

Ten

I could have wept with relief. I loved her so much at that moment that I

nearly knelt down then and there and proposed. I kissed her hands humbly.
‘Yes, I am in a fix,’ I said, ‘but you’ll be kind to me, won’t you? You’ll let
me off?’

‘I love you, Martin,’ said Georgie. ‘You never seem to get this simple

point into your old head.’

‘And you don’t mind if we keep our thing secret still? I just can’t cope

otherwise, my darling.’

‘I don’t understand why,’ said Georgie. ‘But if you want to. For myself,

I’d like to publish our liaison in The Times!’

‘It would hurt Antonia so if she knew,’ I said. ‘And the least I can do is

make things easy for her. The way we’ve managed it all is really a
remarkable achievement. Without bitterness, I mean. I don’t want to add
any more strains at present.’

‘This “without bitterness” idea seems to me rather obscene,’ said

Georgie. ‘And I suspect you of wanting to play the virtuous aggrieved
husband so as to keep Palmer and Antonia in your power. But perhaps I
underrate your goodness!’

‘In my power!’ I said. ‘I’m in their power, it seems. No, it’s all much

simpler. I just want to finish the thing off perfectly without any more
complications. If Antonia knew, she’d want long intimate talks about it.
She’d want to understand. And I couldn’t bear that. Don’t you see, little
imbecile?’

‘You speak of “the thing” as if it were a work of art,’ said Georgie.

‘Sometimes I think you’re a very odd fish, Martin. However, I do see, about

the intimate talks. Promise you’ll never have an intimate talk about me with
Antonia?’

‘I promise, my darling, I promise!’

‘Anyhow, don’t worry,’ said Georgie. ‘You don’t have to do anything

special, here I mean. It’s only me.’

‘Thank God it’s only you,’ I said, ‘and thank God for you, Georgie.

You save my sanity. I knew you would.’

‘Well now stop looking so tall,’ said Georgie. She stroked down the tip

of her nose. The action and the words were beautifully familiar. I blessed
her in my heart and sat down at her feet.

Georgie was sitting back in the shabby green armchair in her lodgings.

A cold staring afternoon light revealed the room, the humpy half-made bed,
the bowl of cigarette ends, the table strewn with opened letters and dirty
glasses and half-eaten biscuits and books on economics. She was wearing
very tight oatmeal-coloured trousers and a white shirt, and had her hair in a
chaotic bun. Her face was pale, and in the creamy transparent pallor of her
skin the rose of her cheek glowed faint and deep. A few golden freckles,
revealed in the cold light, were scattered on the bridge of her uptilted nose,
which she was still absently mauling. Her large blue-grey eyes, lucid with
intelligence and honesty, held my gaze steadily. She was wearing no make-
up. Yet even as I adored her, looking to see in those eyes which held
nothing but good will, beyond the granular iris some more distant shapes of
my destiny, I realized that I did not desire her.

I was intensely grateful to her. It now seemed absurd to imagine that,

being herself, she could have reacted otherwise, less humanely, with less
sheer sense and kindness. I must have been in some irrational state of fear
to have been so nervous about Georgie’s reactions. I had feared some
persecution of her love, the exaction now of pledges half given. But she was
all gentleness and filled with so genuine a concern to save me here and now
from distress and anxiety; and as I thanked her from my heart I reflected a
little guiltily that after all there was nothing very much that Georgie could
do to me. Her power was limited. Here at least I was free.

because of a strange sense of guilt because I did not at that moment desire
her, I wished to do after all something significant which would please her. I
said suddenly, ‘Georgie, I want to take you to Hereford Square.’

Georgie sat up straight and put her hands on my shoulders. She studied

me, grave and intent. ‘Surely that is not wise.’

‘If you’re thinking of Antonia, she’s gone to the country with Palmer.

There’s not the slightest chance of her turning up.’

‘It’s not exactly that,’ said Georgie. ‘Do you really want to see me

there, so soon?’

We looked at each other, trying to guess at thoughts.

Georgie added, ‘Don’t misunderstand me, Martin.’ She meant that her

words held no implied expectation of ever living at Hereford Square.

‘I don’t misunderstand you,’ I said. ‘You mean it may upset me to see

you there. On the contrary. It will be good and liberating and somehow
natural. It will break down some of the doubleness.’

‘You don’t think you will just feel resentment?’ said Georgie. ‘I can see

that all this has made you fall in love again with Antonia.’

‘You’re a clever girl,’ I said. ‘But no, no resentment. I want to give you

something, Georgie. I want to give you that.’

‘You want to do something hostile to Antonia.’

‘No, no, no!’ I said. ‘I’m not in that sort of emotional state about

Antonia. I just want to break an obsession. I want you to know that
Hereford Square really exists.’ Georgie had never questioned me about my
home, and I knew how carefully she had averted her thoughts from all my
life away from her.

‘Yes,’ said Georgie softly. She stroked my nose now. ‘I do want to

know that it exists. But not yet, Martin. I’m frightened. You will see me
there as an intruder. As for breaking down the doubleness, we can’t really
do that until we stop telling lies.’

the doubleness. I want to see you there, Georgie. It will do something very
important for me to see you there.’

‘It’s odd,’ said Georgie. ‘I’m not usually superstitious. But I feel that

something disastrous will happen if we go to Hereford Square.’

‘You make me all the more determined to take you, primitive child,’ I

said. ‘I tell you, it will help me. I need air, Georgie. I need to recover a
sense of freedom. Seeing you there will open up a new world.’ Even as I
spoke I realized more fully that what I had thought of as a somewhat bizarre
treat for Georgie was in fact, as she had immediately seen, a move of great
importance: not something I would give her, but something she would do
for me, would do to me; and I conjectured, with a thrill both of joy and of
fear, that what I had just said might indeed prove true.

The drawing-room seemed mysteriously untouched since the evening

of Antonia’s declaration, as if a drowsy spell had been put on it at that
moment. The Christmas decorations and the cards were still there, covered
now with the dust which, since the departure of the daily help whom,
contrary to Antonia’s wishes, I had turned away, had rained down quietly, a
grey sleeping-powder, to dull the glow everywhere. I noticed that the silver
was tarnished. Outside the French windows, in the yellowish overcast
afternoon, the great magnolia grandiflora which occupied most of the small
garden drooped, its leaves still pinched and edged by last night’s frost. The
room felt damp and very cold, and we kept our coats on. My copy of Napier
was still on the sofa.

Georgie came in slowly. I could see in her the counterpart of my own

emotion. She stared at me, her lips parted, frowning, as if to see whether the
power of the room had given me a different face. Then she looked very
carefully around, nodding her head as she did so, seeming to count the
objects. I was absorbed in watching her, and in the spreading throughout my
whole being of the extraordinary experience of seeing her there. I had
spoken of ‘breaking down the doubleness’. With what a rush it was being
broken down, and what a vista of open spaces, I felt in those instants, were
not now being opened to my astounded gaze. My instinct in bringing
Georgie here, and at once, had been a sound one: and what I most

apprehended, in the mixture of feelings that possessed me, was the very
possibility of loving Georgie more, of loving her better.

I felt this: but felt it in the midst of a considerable and more immediate

pain at seeing, in the circumstances of a sort of treachery, the well-loved
room again. To lose somebody is to lose not only their person but all those
modes and manifestations into which their person has flowed outwards; so
that in losing a beloved one may find so many things, pictures, poems,
melodies, places lost too: Dante, Avignon, a song of Shakespeare’s, the
Cornish sea. The room was Antonia. It breathed the rich emphasis of her
personality. The rose smell was there, barely perceptible, waiting in vain to
be warmed to a full fragrance by the blaze of a wood fire. All these things
were her, the silky rugs, the plump cushions, especially the mantelpiece, her
little shrine; the Meissen cockatoos, the Italian silver cup, the Waterford
glass, the snuff-box, which I had given her when we were engaged, with the
legend: Friendship without Interest and Love without Deceit. It was a new
and fierce pain to look on all this and see it as something mortal, indeed as
something already perished, disintegrated, meaningless, and waiting to be
taken away. Tomorrow Antonia and I would be dividing up these objects as
so mush dreary loot, to be stored away in cupboards like guilty secrets or
desecrated by the labels of the auctioneer. I touched the Waterford glass
with my finger: and in its ring I heard the echo of a voice saying You do not
really want your wife back after all. I answered the voice in my heart: a
bond of this kind is deeper and stronger than wanting or not wanting.
Wherever I am in the world and whenever I am I shall always be Antonia.

I sat down on the sofa. Georgie turned from looking out of the window

and came towards me. The untidy bundle of her hair was contained in the
upturned collar of her coat and she kept her hands deep in her pockets as for
some time she stared down at me with a look of almost hostile tenderness.
She said at last, ‘Do you hate seeing me here?’

I said, ‘No. I can’t tell you how entirely good for me it is to see you

here. But there’s such pain too.’

‘I know,’ she said, her voice deep, weighted with understanding. ‘Don’t

be angry with me because of the pain.’

with so much from me.’ As I spoke these words I felt myself, obscurely yet
positively, upon the road towards making Georgie my wife. I had told her
once that secrecy was essential to our love. Seeing her in this room, and
thus joining the two halves of my life, seemed to prove me wrong and her
right. The lies should indeed be done away with: and so far from breaking
the texture of my love for Georgie this would set it free to be something
stronger and purer than anything I had yet known. Gratitude to her,
gratitude for her loyalty, her reason, her sheer kindness to me, possessed my
heart.

‘Ah, you’re hating me!’ said Georgie. She was still staring down at me

intently, as if to wrest the thoughts out of my head.

‘If you only knew how wrong you are!’ I said. I gave her back a steady

unsmiling stare, and felt pleasure at the idea of surprising her, rewarding
her, with my better love. God knows she deserved it.

I got up and began to collect the Christmas cards from the piano.

Beneath them it was thick with dust. The business of clearing up had begun.

‘It’s so strange and moving to be here!’ said Georgie. She had begun to

roam about the room again. ‘I can’t think what it’s like. It’s like possessing
you retrospectively. No, not quite. But you’ve no idea how completely I
assumed that I would never sec this place. I will now come to believe, and
this will be better, so much better, that in the past, all that time that you
were away from me, you really went on existing. It was too painful to
believe at the time. But I knew that not to believe it was a failure of love.
Now, with your help, I can put that right. I shall love you better, much
better, Martin, in the future.’

She came to a standstill in front of me. I was deeply affected by the

way in which her words echoed my thought. I sought for, but could not yet
find, some eloquence by which to draw her closer in a preliminary
exchange of vows.

I threw the pile of Christmas cards on the floor and led Georgie with

me towards the mantelpiece. I said, ‘I want you to touch everything. I want
you to touch all these things.’

She hesitated. ‘It would be sacrilege. I should suffer for it!’

‘No,’ I said. ‘It will be good sacrilege. You bring me closer to reality.

You have always done that for me.’

I took her hand and laid it on the Meissen cockatoo. We held each

other’s eyes. Georgie drew her hand back. Then after a moment she rapidly
touched all the other objects on the mantelpiece. I took her hand again. It
was marked with dust. I kissed it in the palm and raised my eyes to her
again. I could see she was on the point of tears. I began to take her in my
arms.

At that moment I heard a sound which made my heart violent with fear

even before my mind had understood it. It was the familiar sound of a key
turning in the front door. Georgie heard it too and her eyes became wide
and hard. We stood thus for a second, paralysed. Then I pulled myself
roughly out of the embrace.

It could only be Antonia. She had changed her mind about going to the

country, and had decided to come and look the furniture over before our
interview tomorrow. In another moment she would come straight into the
drawing-room and find me with Georgie. I could not bear it.

I acted quickly. I took Georgie’s wrist and pulled her over to the french

windows. I opened them and then drew her into the garden and round a
little to the side of the house so that we should be invisible from the room. I
whispered to her, ‘Go out of that little gate and you can get back into the
square. Then go straight home and I’ll join you.’ .

‘No!’ said Georgie, speaking softly but not whispering, ‘No!

Panic possessed me. I had to get her away. I felt horror and nausea at

the idea of an encounter between Antonia and Georgie at Hereford Square:
there was something here horrible, almost obscene. I put all my will into my
voice. ‘Go at once, damn you.’

‘I don’t want to,’ said Georgie, in the same tone. She glared at me. Our

heads were close together. ‘Let me meet your wife now. I won’t be made to
run away!’

‘Do as 1 tell you,’ I said. I took her arm and applied a pressure until she

winced.

She pulled her arm away and turned. ‘I haven’t any money.’

I gave her a pound quickly from my wallet, made a violent gesture of

dismissal, and went back into the drawing-room. To my relief the room was
still empty. I closed the doors quickly. I did not look back to the garden.

I waited a moment. There was a profound silence. What could Antonia

be doing? I wondered if I perhaps had been mistaken after all. I walked
across the room and out into the hall. Honor Klein was standing just inside
the door.

The appearance, so unexpectedly, of this absolutely immobile figure

had something of the uncanny, and she had for a moment the snapshot
presence of a ghost. We stared at each other. She was hunched up inside her
overcoat and her troll-like face was still moist with the raw air outside. She
did not smile or speak, but regarded me with a steady tense meditative gaze.
I felt, at seeing her, relief mingled with a profound dismay and a certain
deep unreasoning fear. I felt her dangerous. I said, ‘May I help you?’

She threw her head back, pulling her coat open at the neck. ‘You mean,

Mr Lynch-Gibbon, why the hell am I here.’

‘Precisely,’ I said. I never seemed destined to achieve politeness with

Palmer’s sister.

She said, ‘The explanation is this. Your wife told me that you would be

away today. I needed to have a certain key to a bureau. This key is in my
brother’s wallet. This wallet he lent to your wife for the paying of some bill.
She put it into a basket which she accidentally left here when she called in
yesterday. As my need was urgent, and as you and she were both to be
away, she lent me your front-door key. So here I am. And there is the
basket.’

She indicated a basket standing under the hall table. On the hall table I

saw Georgie’s handbag and two books on economics. I picked up the basket
and handed it to her.

pass slowly over Georgie’s bag.’

‘Not at all,’ I said. I experienced a sudden fierce desire to detain her. I

wanted to know what she was thinking. But I could not find the words. I felt
lame and foolish before her. She too seemed for a moment to want to stay.
But as neither of us could find the means to prolong the situation she turned
about and I opened the door. As she passed me I bowed.

I went back into the drawing-room. The garden was empty. I slipped

the copy of Napier into my pocket. I found I was breathless. I leaned on the
mantelpiece and began to stroke one of the cockatoos. The gritty dust came
off on my hand.

Eleven

I woke late the next day to hear the phone ringing. How well one sleeps

when one is in grief. It was not Georgie. It was Antonia. She said she was
glad to find me back, and asked if I would come to Pelham Crescent before
lunch instead of her coming to Hereford Square in the afternoon. I agreed to
this. Since I had made a fairly complete list of our belongings the matter
could be as well discussed there as here. I telephoned Georgie’s number
again and got no reply. I decided I would call on Antonia, leave the
furniture list with her, go to Georgie’s, and come back to Antonia later on. I
felt, still, hurt and cross rather than seriously anxious at Georgie’s
behaviour.

After I had washed and shaved I telephoned Georgie again, and tried

the school, still with no results. When I was about to leave the phone rang
again, but it was only Alexander to say that he and Rosemary were in
London. He had come up to speak at a debate at the Institute of
Contemporary Arts, and had stayed last night at Rosemary’s flat. He wanted
to know when he could see me. I told him I would ring him back.

but bright and clear with a light which, as it made the white crystals shine
upon the leaves in the Hereford Square garden, reminded me of Austria,
snow, skis, and old happiness. The painful elation which I had experienced
yesterday at seeing Georgie in my house had vanished without trace; I was
depressed, cross, weak, and terribly on edge. As I entered Palmer’s front
door I felt a sort of confused craven relief. At least here were people who
would be gentle with me.

There was no one in the drawing-room. Then as I heard from Palmer’s

study the sound of Antonia’s voice I knocked on the door. I opened it and
went in. Antonia and Palmer were both there. Antonia was dressed in a
quilted check housecoat which was new to me. Her hair hung down over
her breasts in two plaits in a fashion which I had not seen her use and which
disturbed me very much. She was tall, Greek. She was standing at the end
of the divan, leaning with one hand on Palmer’s desk. Palmer was sitting on
the divan facing the door. He was wearing his loosely woven French jacket,
a blue shirt, and a purple cravat. He looked sleek, clean, agile, young, a
little raffish. In the bright sunny light I saw both their eyes fixed on me with
concern, with a certain excitement, Antonia’s big soft and fawny, Palmer’s
blue clear and cold. Behind them on the wall was the row of empty marks
where the Japanese prints had been.

I realized instantly that something odd had happened. Neither of them

greeted me, they simply stared, not smiling, and yet with a certain gentle
retaining solicitude. I closed the door. For a wild moment I imagined that
they were going to tell me that they had changed their minds about getting
married. I took an upright chair from the wall by the door and placed it in
the centre of the carpet and sat down on it facing them. ‘Well, my friends?’

Antonia shook her head and half turned away. I began to feel rather

alarmed.

Palmer said, ‘Shall we tell him?’

Antonia, without looking at me, said, ‘Yes, of course.’

Palmer gave me his level cold stare. He said, ‘Martin, we have found

out about Georgie Hands.’

one hand. I drew it away quickly, to change the gesture of weakness into
one of surprise. I felt sick. I said, ‘I see. How did you learn this?”

Palmer glanced up at Antonia, who had by now turned her back to me.

He said after a moment, ‘We’d rather not tell you just now. Anyway that
doesn’t matter.’

I stared back at Palmer. His limpid expression contrived to be tender

and stony at the same time. He sat very straight and square, looking at me
across the length of the room.

I said, ‘What have you found out?’

Palmer again looked back towards Antonia. She spoke over her

shoulder. ‘Everything, Martin. The child, everything.’ Her voice was rich
with emotion.

I wished I could feel anger. I felt simply devastating guilt. I said, ‘Well,

there’s no need to make such a fuss about it.’

Antonia made an inarticulate sound. Palmer kept me in his cool stare

and shook his head very slightly. There was silence.

I said, ‘I think I’d better go. I brought a list of furniture for Antonia to

look at.’ I threw the list on the floor beside me and made to rise.

‘Wait, Martin,’ said Palmer, in a voice that made me wait. After a

moment, during which he seemed to wait for Antonia to speak, he said,
‘I’m afraid we can’t just leave this thing. Well, use your common sense,
Martin, of course we can’t. We have to talk about it. We have to react in an
honest way. We can’t pretend not to mind! Antonia has a right to hear from
you on this.’

‘To hell with Antonia’s right,’ I said. ‘Antonia has forfeited her rights.’

‘Martin,’ said Antonia, who had not yet turned to face me, ‘do not be

rude and unkind as well.’

‘I’m sorry I said that,’ I said. ‘I’m suffering from shock.’

‘Antonia is suffering from shock too,’ said Palmer. ‘You must be

considerate, Martin. We don’t want to be unpleasant or censorious. But we

must have this thing right out. See?’

‘I see,’ I said. ‘Well, suppose you go away and let me talk to Antonia.’

‘I think she would prefer me to be present,’ said Palmer. ‘Is that

correct, dear?’

‘Yes,’ said Antonia. She was holding her handkerchief to her mouth.

She turned about now and sat down on the divan beside Palmer, dabbing
her eyes but still not looking at me. Palmer put an arm round her shoulder.

‘Look here,’ I said. ‘What is there to talk about? You apparently have

the facts and I don’t deny them. Do we have to have the bloody court-
martial as well?’

‘You misunderstand us, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘There is no question of a

court-martial. Who are we to be your judges? On the contrary, we should
like to help you. But you must realize two things: first that we both love
you very much, and second, that you have deceived us on a matter of very
great importance.’

‘Martin, I can’t tell you how it hurts,’ said Antonia, still in a voice of

tears, looking at the floor and twisting the damp handkerchief.

‘I’m sorry, my dear,’ I said.

‘Ah, but are you?’ said Palmer. ‘We thought we knew you, Martin. We

have just had a surprise. I will not say that we are disillusioned, but I will
say that we are distressed. We have, in a sense, to start again. We have lost
our grip. We have to see where you are, we have to see what you are. We
are not trying to blame you, we are trying to help you.’

‘I don’t want your help,’ I said, ‘and as for blame, I can do that job

myself. I’ll talk to Antonia, but not to both of you.’

‘I’m afraid you must talk to both of us, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘We are

both wounded and we are both concerned. For our sake as well as your own
you must talk to us, and talk to us frankly.’

‘How can you have told such lies, Martin?’ said Antonia. At last she

managed to look at me. She had shed her tears and was more controlled
now. ‘I was so surprised,’ she said. ‘I know I sometimes tell lies myself, but

I thought you were so truthful. And I thought you loved me so much.’ She
choked on the last words and put the handkerchief to her face again.

‘I did love you so much,’ I said. ‘I do love you so much.’ I could not

stand much more of this. ‘I just loved Georgie too.’

‘And love her,’ said Palmer.

‘And love her,’ I said.

‘Honestly,’ said Antonia, ‘I just can’t think how you were capable of

it.’ A rational indignation was saving her from tears.

‘Christ, one can love two people,’ I said. ‘You ought to know that.’

‘All right,’ she said, ‘all right. And that you should deceive me - well, I

don’t exactly understand it, but I can imagine it. But when Palmer and I told
you about us, that you should not have been honest then … I can’t conceive
how you could sit there pretending to be virtuous and let us carry all the
guilt. It’s not like you, Martin.’

‘No, indeed, it isn’t like you,’ said Palmer, ‘yet it must belong to you.

Even psycho-analysts get surprises. We were very straight and honest with
you. It simply didn’t occur to us to deceive you. As Antonia says, you
might at least have been truthful then. However, it humbles one. We must
just try again to understand you. For understand you we will.’

‘I can’t explain,’ I said, ‘though there is an explanation. It doesn’t

matter.’ I felt sick in confusion and guilt. I could not possibly make it clear
to them the compulsion under which I had treasured the secret of Georgie.
Understanding was out of the question; and indeed how passionately, just
then, I did not want to be understood.

‘But it does matter, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘It matters very much. And

we are in no hurry. We can talk about this all day if necessary.’

‘Well, I can’t,’ I said. ‘What do you want to know? Georgie’s twenty-

six. She’s a lecturer at L.S.E. She’s been my mistress for nearly two years.
We had a child and got rid of it. That’s the lot.’

‘Oh, Martin,’ said Antonia, and she was quite in control by now, ‘don’t

pretend to be a cynic and not to care. It doesn’t ring true at all. We know

you love this girl and we want to help you. We know you haven’t it in you
to take a mistress without loving her deeply. I confess it was a shock to me
to learn this. But I can get over it and I know how to be generous. Of course
I’m jealous. It would be impossible not to be. I’ve already talked all this out
with Anderson. But I think I really and truly do want what’s best for you.
Only you must be more frank and simple with us now. Please.’

‘Antonia has been very honest with herself and with me,’ said Palmer.

‘You know how very much she loves you. She cannot but be shocked, not
only by your deceit, but by the very existence of this girl. And it is natural,
and indeed proper, that this revelation should arouse her love for you in an
active and jealous form. Which is, for all of us, a painful situation. But she
has behaved rationally, finely, and you need fear no resentment from either
of us. In fact we want, as it were, to give you our blessing. So you see how
wrong you were, and how unjust to us 1’

‘We’ll see you through, Martin,’ said Antonia, who had been nodding

her head throughout the previous speech. ‘Who knows but that this strange
tangle may not be for the best in the end for all of us? We’ll stand by you
and Georgie. This was really what I wanted to say. I’m sorry I seemed so
upset and cross. It did distress me terribly that you deceived me. But indeed
I do believe that you loved me all the time. So do not be guilty or worried,
darling Martin.’

‘I won’t be guilty or worried, I’ll be raving mad,’ I said. ‘I don’t want

you to see me through. I want to be left alone by both of you at long last.’

‘You are mistaken about your wishes,’ said Palmer. ‘You don’t so

easily escape the toils of love. The fact is that this discovery has cast a
shadow on us all, and we must all work to remove that shadow.’

‘You mean I must be tidied up so that you and Antonia can go ahead?’

‘You must be, as you put it, tidied up for your own sake also,’ said

Palmer. ‘A lot of lying must be compensated for by a lot of truth-telling.
I’m sure Georgie will agree with us. And then we shall be much happier, all
four of us.’

‘You were on about all three of us some time ago,’ I said. ‘Now it’s all

four. Why do you leave your sister out? Let’s have a quintet.’

some responsibility for what you’ve done. As I said, we’ve got to
understand you. And we shall understand you a good deal better after we’ve
met Georgie.’

‘Over my dead body.’

‘You will have to be reasonable in the end,” said Palmer. ‘After all, you

are hardly in a position of .strength. So you may as well be reasonable now.
Antonia has only just heard of this young woman. It is very natural that she
should wish to meet her. And you should both be thankful that she will do
so in no spirit of anger.’

‘I’m told she is beautiful and clever,’ said Antonia, ‘and young: which

is a lovely thing for you, Martin. Can you not see that I mean what I say?
Can you not be generous enough to receive the gift of my good will, my
blessing?’

‘I tell you I shall go mad,’ I said. ‘You talk as if you were arranging my

marriage. After all, for Christ’s sake, you’re not my parents!’

Palmer smiled his broad white American smile and drew Antonia

closer to him.

Twelve

When I escaped from Palmer and Antonia I went straight round to

Covent Garden. But I did not call on Georgie at once. I spent twenty
minutes sitting in a pub and trying to collect myself. I was shivering all over
and found it very difficult to think. What I chiefly felt, and this seemed
strange, was guilt, overwhelming annihilating guilt. Yet there was no
rational reason why Antonia and Palmer’s discovery of the fact should
make me feel guilt which the fact itself had not made me feel. I experienced
too an obscure dismay at the extent to which, in a moment, those two
seemed to have established over me a moral dictatorship even more
complete than that which they had enjoyed before. It appeared to me that
just this was what they wanted; and looking back on the scene, although it
was true that Antonia had been upset and felt genuine pain, yet there had
been a sort of excitement in her manner too. To have me presented as so
easy, so defenceless, a quarry to a mingled power of censure and of love
excited her, gave her a sort of sexual thrill.

When I turned my thoughts to Georgie I was no better off. A veil of

guilt seemed to divide me from her, and with it a sense that the blow of
discovery had at least crippled, if not killed, my love for her. An opening of
that love to the world would strengthen and purify it, I had thought: and this
might indeed have been so had I been able to make the revelation in my
own time and in my own way, with dignity and a serene face. But to be had
up like that by Palmer and Antonia, to have the thing thrust at me as a
crime, and at the same time stroked and cosseted in their benevolent
imagination, was to make it appear to me merely obscene: and it occurred
to me to wonder inconclusively whether this too were not precisely in their
intention. What had happened was just what I had wanted not to happen. I
had been right, not Georgie. The effect of being so accused was to call up a
positive fountain of guilt which covered now with its nauseating tar my

whole love for Georgie which had seemed so simple and so clean. Yet I
knew that this was deeply unfair to her; and I told myself that my mood
would change.

me that Georgie herself had betrayed us. Yet after a while I could not
believe this. I could not see her being so disloyal, nor could I see her
carrying out an action which required, which must require, so much of the
histrionic. The thing might have come out in hundreds of ways. Since
Antonia’s own revelation I had become careless. Something, a letter
perhaps, must have been found. I finished my drink and mounted Georgie’s
stairs. At least it was a sort of going home.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘how did she find out? Do you happen to know?’ I found

myself, on confronting Georgie, cold and almost angry with her. How angry
I was with myself did not bear contemplating.

Georgie was wearing an old skirt and a shapeless jersey. She looked as

if she had been up all night. She stared at me gloomily, scratching her nose,
and then cleared a space in the mess on the table, pushing the books and
papers into a dusty heap. The room was both cold and stuffy. She sat on the
table. She said, ‘I expect Honor Klein told her.’

This was so unexpected I gaped at her and then sat down in the

armchair as if I’d been pushed over. ‘However did she know?’ I asked.

‘I told her,’ said Georgie. She sat there gravely, very pale and dignified,

one black-stockinged leg under her. She adjusted her skirt and returned my
gaze with a face of iron.

‘I see,’ I said. I was blushing and breathless with anger and shock.

After a moment, when I felt able to speak again, I said, ‘As you may
imagine, I am utterly astonished. Would you mind explaining, please?’

‘After you pushed me out into the garden,’ said Georgie, ‘I didn’t go

home. I felt so angry. I’ll tell you more about that in a minute. I went to the
University Library and tried to read something, but it was no good. Well,
then I had a coffee and went home. I felt bloody miserable, and I rang you
up, but you weren’t there.’

‘I was out looking for you,’ I said.

‘Anyway,’ said Georgie, ‘I’d just put the phone down when the door-

bell rang. I thought it was you. Well, it was Honor Klein. She looked pale
and grim as hell. I asked her in and gave her a drink and we made some
conversation. Then she suddenly asked me about you.’

‘Good God,’ I said, ‘just like that?’

‘Yes,’ said Georgie. ‘So I told her.’

‘You told her everything?’

‘Everything.’

‘Why?’

‘Because it was impossible to lie to her,’ said Georgie. She straightened

her leg and massaged her ankle. Then she slithered slowly off the table and
hobbled to a cupboard where she found a bottle of gin. There seemed to be
no clean glasses. She looked exhausted.

‘You’re insane,’ I said, ‘and what’s more you’re a treacherous little

bitch. You let that woman bully you.’

‘I was tired of the bloody lies,’ said Georgie. ‘And I was so angry with

you about what happened in the afternoon. It would have been so much
better if you’d let me stay and see Antonia. I simply loathed that whispering
and being shoved out the back, as if you’d been caught kissing the
housemaid. I hated it, Martin.’ Her voice was harsh and cracked with
emotion. She took two glasses from the mantelpiece.

‘It wasn’t Antonia,’ I said. ‘It was Honor Klein.’

‘I see, I see,’ said Georgie slowly. She spilt some gin and began

soaking it up with a paper handkerchief. ‘Then that was how she found out.
I wondered. I left two books with my name in on the hall table.’

‘But why should she guess just this,’ I said, ‘and why should she

trouble to follow it up and make you confess?’

‘As for guessing just this,’ said Georgie, ‘anyone might. She probably

heard us whispering. Why she should have followed it up beats me.’

‘You didn’t ask her?’

Georgie laughed a dry grunting laugh.

‘Of course not! As I told you, she carries too many guns. And anyway

after spilling the beans and sitting in silent communion with Honor every
time you telephoned I was practically a stretcher case.’ She added slowly.
‘It was a relief, all the same.’

‘And it didn’t occur to you to ask her to keep quiet? Well, I suppose

you couldn’t.’

‘You suppose rightly,’ said Georgie. ‘If you can see me going down on

my knees afterwards, asking her not to tell on me, you know me better than
I know myself!’

‘I simply can’t understand you,’ I said. ‘You know how important it

was to me not to let this be known, especially now. I simply can’t cope with
Antonia’s knowing it. I can’t cope with the way she knows it. You just
don’t know what this is like. I’m in torment. And you go and blurt it all out
to some bloody stranger just because she was your superior at college!’

‘Indeed,’ said Georgie, stammering, her voice beginning to shake, ‘you

don’t understand me and you’ve never tried very hard. I put up with things
being secret when they had to be, but I loathed it. I suffered all the time,
every day, every bloody day. And I never spoke to you about it. Then when
it didn’t have to be secret, and you still kept on - it made me feel as if you
were ashamed of me. It began to poison things. Oh, I don’t mean that you
should instantly have married me - why should you? But there was no need
to keep me so deeply buried. And you ought to have told Antonia then. I
began to feel I didn’t exist. Oh, I love you, I love you entirely! I wish I
didn’t. But I feel utterly poisoned all the same. I would never have blown
the gaff of my own accord. But when Honor Klein came like that it was like
a message from the gods. I couldn’t have told lies then, I would have died
of it!’

She was practically in tears. She poured out some gin, jarring the bottle

on the edge of the glass, and then slopped some water in after it. As I rose
she handed it to me. My own anger had soured into despair.

‘Christ, darling,’ I said, ‘you don’t know what you’ve done. But it

doesn’t matter. It’s all my bloody fault anyway. I should never have put you
in this position at all.’

‘You’re saying you don’t love me and you never loved me,’ said

Georgie, and the tears brimmed over her eyes in a great flood.

‘Oh God!’ I said. I put the drink down and went to her. She stood stiffly

with her hands on the table while I put my arms round her. The tears
dripped on to her blue jersey.

‘You know perfectly well I love you, little imbecile,’ I said. ‘Please be

rational now and help me. I know I don’t make myself clear. It’s just that
there’s something terrible for me about those two knowing. They were
eating me up before. Now, if they choose to, they can assimilate me
entirely. But I can’t expect you to understand all this. You’d have to be me.
You’ve go to help me, Georgie.’ I shook her to and fro until she put a hand
on my arm. She took a paper handkerchief for her eyes and poured out
some more gin. She drank a little and handed the glass to me.

The familiar ritual steadied us both. I drew her limp being against

mine. She laid her head on my shoulder. Our bodies, at least, were old
friends.

‘What is so dreadful about the way she knows?’ said Georgie. ‘You

see, I do want to understand.’

‘Oh, something to do with the way it’s all hideously caught up in

intimacy and love. You’d have to see it. It’s like the nursery. For instance,
she’s dying to meet you.’

‘Is she?’ said Georgie, jerking back from me and brushing the moisture

from her jersey. ‘Well, that’s fine. I’m dying to meet her.’

‘Don’t be silly, darling,’ I said. ‘Don’t you start.’

‘When you took me to Hereford Square,’ said Georgie, ‘you took me

through the looking glass. There’s no going back now. I’ve had enough of
having things around that I am afraid to think of.’

‘Well, I’m not going to introduce you to Antonia, and that’s that.’

incredible words passing my lips. I was able to speak without stammering
or choking. No one fainted.

The interview took place in Palmer’s drawing-room. The purple velvet

curtains were drawn now upon the evening and the dark wallpaper covered
with furry black roses, lit by a dancing firelight, surrounded us like a
wicked forest. Dark-shaded lamps upon distant tables cast a narrow light
upon Palmer’s collection of crystals, which emitted here and there a
mysterious but significant ray. Antonia stood on the thick black rug by the
fire. In front of her on a low mosaic table was the tray of drinks and three
glasses. Warned by telephone, she was ready.

Antonia, who had taken more than usual pains with her appearance,

was wearing a dark green dress of light Italian wool which I had bought her
in Rome once. She wore no jewellery and had her great golden hair done in
a plain bun. She stood there, plump, tall, one hip thrown out and one hand
upon it turned back at the wrist, an elegant, anxious, tired, older woman,
and at that moment, and in the particular quality of her nervousness, to me
infinitely familiar and infinitely dear.

Georgie in her shabby brown skirt, blue pullover, and black stockings

looked like a child. She had, with a defiant deliberation, made no change in
her appearance. She wore no make-up. Her hair was plaited and twisted
carelessly, a little absurdly even, to the top of her head. She was very pale,
and the pallor emphasized the limpid clarity of her complexion. She bowed
a stiff little bow to Antonia, who fluttered, not deciding whether to extend
her hand. Both women were breathing quickly.

Antonia said, ‘Will you have a drink?’ Her voice was deep with

nervousness. ‘Do sit down, please.’ She began to pour out some sherry.

‘No, no thank you,’ said Georgie. ‘Don’t be silly,’ I said.

No one sat down. Antonia stopped pouring and looked at Georgie with

a sad appealing conscious look. Her big tawny eyes were pained. She was
very very anxious to please. She said in a tense little voice, ‘Don’t be angry
with me.’

Georgie shook her head and made a gesture with her hands which

seemed to set Antonia’s remark aside as being unmentionably
inappropriate.

overwhelmed by the dreadful tender pain of seeing them together.

She gave me the glass and poured out two more, placing one for

Georgie at the far end of the little table which extended between them. I
took my place in the middle facing the fire.

‘May I call you Georgie?’ said Antonia. ‘I feel as if I know you

already.’

‘Certainly,’ said Georgie. ‘if you want to.’

‘And will you call me Antonia?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Georgie. ‘Sorry. I don’t think I can. But it’s of no

importance.’

‘It’s of importance to me,’ said Antonia.

‘Oh, break it up!’ I said. I could not bear Antonia’s tone of tender

insistence.

‘Martin, please,’ said Antonia. Still looking at Georgie, she put her

hand on my sleeve and left it there. I could feel her trembling. I was
penetrated with pity for her.

‘Look,’ said Georgie. The muscles of her nose contracted. ‘I wanted to

see you, since you wanted to see me. I felt it was right, and a matter of
taking seriously what one has done. But I doubt if we can really talk to each
other.’

‘Don’t dislike me, Georgie,’ said Antonia. She bent her appealing look

upon Georgie, and I could feel her intimate insistent will bent upon the girl.
It was almost palpable, like a warm electric fan.

‘Why ever should I?’ said Georgie. ‘You are much more likely to

dislike me.’

I quietly removed my arm from Antonia’s pressure.

‘Ah, you mustn’t feel guilty!’ said Antonia.

‘You misunderstand me,’ said Georgie. ‘I was just replying to your

remark. I wasn’t implying anything else. I don’t feel guilt. I realize that I
may have harmed you. But that is quite another thing.’

I could feel Georgie’s stiffness. She seemed with it almost a

marionette. She was stiff as a piece of wood with her anxiety to be accurate,
to be truthful, to be precise, and to express no emotion whatsoever. In the
face of Antonia’s dewy radiance she was utterly closed and cold.

‘Don’t be so harsh with me, my child,’ said Antonia. She was desperate

to establish a relationship. She wanted here, to meet her special need, to
soothe and calm her, the warm human contact.

‘Sorry,’ said Georgie. ‘I wish you well. Perhaps you wish me well. It’s

just that it’s difficult to talk.’

‘I do wish you well, I do!’ said Antonia, clutching on to this. ‘I wish

you both so well. I hope you and Martin will be very very happy. Do
believe me, this will always be near my heart.’

‘Leave me out of it, Antonia,’ I said. I could not bear that she should

seem ridiculous to Georgie. A protective love for Antonia overwhelmed me,
a desire to carry her away and hide her, to shield her from the cold young
stare of a more exacting sincerity.

‘Whatever can you mean, leave you out?’ said Antonia, laughing a

little and fixing her hand again on my sleeve. ‘How can you, between us, be
left out, my dear? Isn’t he absurd!’ She turned with a gay feminine appeal
to Georgie again.

‘Martin means there’s nothing to discuss and some subjects are better

not touched on,’ said Georgie. She was rigid with strain. She kept a wide-
eyed level look on Antonia and did not glance in my direction. She was
conscious of Antonia’s hand.

‘But, Georgie, there is everything to discuss!’ said Antonia.

‘Perhaps we’d better go now,’ I said. ‘You’ve clapped eyes on each

other, which was what you wanted to do.’ I put my glass down, releasing

myself again from the tender clutch.

‘Oh, don’t go!’ said Antonia with a wail. ‘I haven’t had anything like

enough of simply looking at Georgie. You must forgive me, child. You
mustn’t be embarrassed by the way I go on, must she, Martin? I mean well,
I really do! Please sit down and drink your sherry.’

No one sat down and Georgie did not pick up her drink. She turned

towards me, wanting another prompting to go. If I was by then afraid that
she might pity Antonia her look should have reassured me. She was far too
anxious about herself, about being accurate, about preserving, as only the
young are ruthless enough at such time to do, the dignity of exact statement.
‘I think I ought to go,’ she said. ‘Will you come with me, Martin, or stay
here? I honestly don’t mind which you do. It was kind of you to ask me,’
she said to Antonia. ‘I am glad to have met you. I think it is a good thing for
both of us.’

‘My dear child, I am so glad too,’ said Antonia. ‘You must learn to be

patient with me. You will learn.’

‘I doubt if we shall meet again,’ said Georgie. ‘But, as I say, I am glad

to have seen you. It makes things more honest. I did not enjoy deceiving
you. I wish you well. And now I must really go.’

‘No, no,’ cried Antonia, ‘and don’t speak of our not meeting again,

why, that would be cruel! When you are married to Martin we shall often
meet. I love Martin still, you know, I do. In some ways I love him better
than ever.’

‘That is nothing to do with me, Mrs Lynch-Gibbon,’ said Georgie, ‘and

as for my being married to Martin, it seems to me very unlikely that this
will ever happen. In any case it is no one’s business but our own. I hope I
haven’t been rude. If I have, I apologize. I must go. Thank you very much
for asking me.’ She bowed again her stiff puppet bow and began to walk
away.

While Antonia raised her cry of protest the door opened to admit

Palmer. He raised his hands in a gesture of surprised delight, and then
spread them wide, advancing on the hesitating Georgie like a father greeting
a long-lost child.

are so demanding! Forgive me for being so informal, Georgie Hands. I
believe we have a lot of friends in common.’

‘She knows your sister,’ I said. I came up behind Georgie, ready to

pilot her out. I had had more than enough.

‘I saw you at a party once,’ said Georgie, ‘but you wouldn’t remember

me.’ She held out her hand.

‘Then I am the poorer for that!’ said Palmer. ‘Please don’t go. Do stay

and have another drink. We can at least start to get acquainted.’ He retained
Georgie’s hand, which she left woodenly in his grasp while he stood back,
extending his arm and looking at her with admiration.

‘We must be off,’ I said.

‘Well, Martin,’ said Palmer, still holding Georgie and turning to me,

‘you are a lucky man! No, I must insist on my rights. Georgie, I forbid you
to talk of going yet!’

A sound behind us made us turn. Antonia was holding her handkerchief

before her face. She took another deep breath and uttered a long sob.

Palmer released Georgie and I pushed her past him. As he approached

Antonia I hustled Georgie on towards the door. Antonia uttered a terrible
long trembling wail and then sat down in the chair in a storm of weeping. I
led Georgie out, leaving Palmer to use whatever were now the most up-to-
date psychological methods for dealing with hysterical women.

Thirteen

I took Georgie home in the car. We were both silent, exhausted really.

Once inside she offered me supper, and I stayed to eat bread and cheese.
Georgie was no cook and I had no heart for cooking anything myself. We
ate the bread and cheese, wolfishly and with surly looks, washing it down
with whisky and water. I felt I could not bear any display of emotion just
then from Georgie; I wanted to get away. She taxed me, as we were
finishing our meal, with just this, and I could not find the protestations
which would console her. She spared me her tears. But it was in both our
minds that she had said ‘it is unlikely that he will marry me’. For her, I
think, these words were a barrier between us which she wished me now
lovingly and tempestuously to remove. For me they constituted rather a
kind of moratorium, a momentary neutral zone where I could, and how very
much in my weariness I needed it, absolutely rest. I had not got it in me to
produce for Georgie the passionate reassuring speeches which she wanted.
Her words had been intended as a provocation. I accepted them gratefully
and in silence as a resting place.

Just before I left we achieved a sort of peace together, lying down for a

moment beside the gas fire, forehead to forehead and foot to foot. Georgie’s
so familiar face, close to mine, in repose at last, her big eyes gentle now, her

mouth relaxed, resting from my kisses, was a beloved landscape. Without
words we gazed and murmured each other into quietness, until it was as if
we had talked in detail for a long time, so spiritual a thing is the human
face.

I left Georgie taking aspirins and promising to go to bed at once. I did

not suggest and she did not demand that I should remain with her. The
prospect of a night together, so eagerly grasped in the old days, was now a
problem and not a prize. We were both in a state of emotional exhaustion,
and what we really needed for the moment was a rest from each other. In
addition I required, with anxiety and with eagerness, to see Antonia once
more, however briefly, before I went to bed. I drove the car back to
Palmer’s house.

It was beginning to be foggy again. A yellow sulphurous haze hung

about the street lamps of Pelham Crescent imposing its own infernal
curfew, and my steps as I crossed the pavement left moist sticky traces.
There were no traffic noises here. The place was sunk in the stricken silence
of the gathering fog. The great London night contracted about me into a
cold brown kernel, where the damp curled and crept, diminishing, and
already too opaque to return an echo. I hurried up to the door and stepped
quietly into the warm fresh-smelling hall. I had stayed long with Georgie.
The time was a little after ten o’clock.

The lights were on in the hall and the upstairs landing. I listened. There

was no sound of voices. I crossed to the drawing-room door and opened it.
The fire was burning brightly but there was no one there. I turned the lamps
on from the door. The room came into being before me, still, yet tense with
its own sinister life. I closed the door behind me and stood there a while.
Something of Palmer and Antonia was present, some tall shadow of them,
which illicitly and with an almost guilty relish I enjoyed, simply standing in
the empty room. I moved towards the fire and realized then that I was a bit
drunk. I had had no lunch and precious little supper and I had consumed,
with Georgie, a formidable amount of whisky. I sat heavily into an armchair
and reflected on how pleasant it was to be alone and not to have to think of
ways of justifying myself.

somebody. I suppose, after a little while, that it was Antonia that I wanted. I
had certainly not wanted Georgie. I had envisaged with a trapped gloom the
possibility that she might suggest our going to bed together; I had accepted
gratefully her obvious desire to be, for the moment, rid of me. I had not had,
for her, the right words, the proper consolations. Later, I knew, I would be
able to soothe and delight her with these. Now, however, with a resentment
which I knew to be unjust, I was prepared to keep her in suspense and to
greet her weary disappointed dismissal with a sigh of relief. No, it was
about Antonia, in a sad confused way, that my imagination now played; and
it was evident to me that I had not yet accepted that I had lost her. It was as
if recent events represented a mock barrier between us, an element as it
were in a flirtation, over and past which I would later sweep to a reunion. I
imagined myself, ultimately and safely, at home in her arms.

I shook myself out of these dreams. There were places where my

thoughts must not go; and as I then reflected how few places were left
where they could now go without incurring pain or guilt I decided that I
needed some more whisky and recalled that Palmer kept some in the
sideboard in the dining-room. Leaving the lights on I crossed the hall. The
dining-room door was closed. I opened it and went in.

The room was not dark and my hand hesitated on the electric-light

switch. Candles were burning still in the silver candlesticks on the long
table, making the room a cave of warm dim luminosity to which my eyes
became in a moment accustomed. I stood still, a little surprised, and closed
the door behind me. Then I saw that there was someone sitting alone at the
far end of the table.

It was Honor Klein. As I saw her the consciousness returned to me, but

without being distressing, that I was somewhat tipsy; and I stood there for a
moment longer leaning against the door. I could not see her clearly. But I
apprehended at once, and it struck me as a trifle strange, that she was not
particularly concerned about my arrival. It was like an arrival at the shrine
of some remote and self absorbed deity. She was plunged in thoughts of her
own.

and Antonia had dined. Again there were the two places set, and the bottle,
this time of Lynch-Gibbon Château Malmaison 1953, almost emptied. Two
table napkins lay in disarray beside the places and there was a wide
scattering of crumbs upon the polished surface beneath which the light of
the candles seemed to burn again. As I approached Honor Klein I saw that
without moving her head she was following me with her eyes. It was like
the animation of a corpse. I looked down at her with a sort of fastidious
surprise and then found that [ had sat down beside her.

I said, ‘Excuse me, I was looking for Palmer’s whisky. Where are they

anyway?’

‘At the opera,’ said Honor. She spoke in an abstracted tone, as if I had

only a smaller corner of her attention. She stared ahead of her now toward
the candles. I wondered for a moment if she was drunk, but decided
probably it was only I who was drunk.

‘At the opera,’ I said. It occurred to me as scandalous that Palmer and

Antonia, after the scene in which I had taken part in the drawing-room,
should have gone out to the opera. Antonia ought to have been waiting for
me to come back. I resented this indifference to the tempo of my own
drama.

‘What’s on?’ I said.

‘Götterdämmerung.’

I laughed.

Presently I got up and went to the cupboard to look for whisky. As I

passed behind her I saw something lying upon the table. It was the Japanese
sword, encased in its scabbard of lacquered wood, which usually hung in
the hall. Honor Klein had evidently been continuing her dismantling
activities. There was no whisky but I found a bottle of excellent brandy. I
returned to the table with the bottle and two glasses. ‘You’ll join me?’

With a sort of effort she gave me her glance. Her face, in which I now

apprehended a fugitive resemblance to Palmer, had a slumbrous look which
I could not decipher. It might have been sheer weariness, it might have been

resignation. She said after a moment, ‘Thank you, yes, why not.’ I realized,
but without understanding and without curiosity, that somehow, in some
way, she was in extremis. 1 poured out the brandy.

We sat in silence for a while. The room was beginning to seem

abnormally dark. Perhaps some of the fog had drifted in from outside. One
of the candles began to flicker, and its flame foundered sizzling in a sea of
melted wax. As I saw it go I felt frightened and then wondered if I had
rightly identified the thing which clutched at my heart.

I said to Honor Klein, ‘You didn’t waste much time in having me

brought to justice.’

She kept her eyes on the candles and smiled very slightly. ‘Was it

unpleasant?’

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘I suppose so. Everything is so unpleasant

nowadays it’s hard to tell.’ I found I could talk to her with remarkable
directness. Our conversations were refreshingly lacking in formality. As I
spoke I reached out automatically towards the sword, which lay with the
blunt-ended scabbard towards me; but Honor Klein drew it away a little and
I left my hand upon the table to fiddle with the bread crumbs.

I wondered if I should ask her why she had made Georgie confess, but

found that I could not bring myself to do so. A nervous shrinking which
was not exactly dislike made me hesitate to probe the motives of such a
being. Therewith some vague yet powerful train of thought led me to say,
‘I’m a broken reed after all.’

I was not sure why I said this, but some subterranean affinity with the

thoughts of my companion must have prompted it, for she replied at once,
‘Yes. It doesn’t matter.’

We both sighed. My hand moved restlessly upon the table. I began to

stare at the sword and to want very much to get hold of it. Honor was
holding it in a possessive predatory way, her two hands on the scabbard,
like a large animal holding down a small one. She faced the candles looking
pale and rather haggard, her eyes screwed up as against a great light, and I
tried in vain to detect what it was, other than a certain elusive air of
authority, which made her resemble her brother; for the fact was that Palmer

was beautiful while she was very nearly ugly. I contemplated her sallow
cheek which shone dully like wax, and the black gleaming hair, oily,
straight, and brutally short. She was a subject for Goya. Only the curve of
her nostril and the curve of her mouth hinted, with a Jewish strength, a
possible Jewish refinement. I said, ‘Is the sword yours?’ and as I spoke I
put my hand on the end of the scabbard.

She stared a little and said, ‘Yes. It’s a Japanese Samurai sword, a very

fine one. I used to have a great interest in Japan. I worked there for a time.’
She drew the sword away again.

‘You were with Palmer in Japan?’

‘Yes.’ She spoke as out of a deep dream.

I wanted her to know that I was present. I said, ‘May I see the sword?’

I thought for a moment that she was going to ignore me. But she turned

towards me as if taking thought. Then she twisted the thing about on the
polished surface of the table. I expected her to offer me the hilt, but instead,
as I reached for it, she took the hilt in her own hand and with a swift
movement drew the sword from the scabbard. At the same time she rose to
her feet.

The sword came out with a swishing clattering sound and disturbed

candles flashed for a moment in the blade. She laid the scabbard on the
table and let the blade descend more slowly until it lay along her thigh. Its
bright surface showed against the dark material of her dress as with head
bowed she gazed down along its slightly curving length.

When she spoke her voice was dry. She might have been in the lecture

room. ‘In Japan these swords are practically religious objects. They are
forged not only with great care but with great reverence. And the use of
them is not merely an art but a spiritual exercise.’

‘So I have heard,’ I said. I moved her chair out of the way so as to see

her better and made myself comfortable, crossing one leg over the other. ‘I
am not attracted by the idea of decapitating people as a spiritual exercise.’

Somewhere, seeming at first to be inside my head, I heard a small

sound. Then I realized it was a very distant peal of church bells; and I

brought to mind that it was New Year’s Eve. Some nearer bells took up the
peal. We both listened for a moment in silence. Soon it would be the turn of
the year.

Honor let the sword droop towards the floor. She said, ‘Being a

Christian, you connect spirit with love. These people connect it with
control, with power.’

‘What do you connect it with?’

She shrugged her shoulders. ‘I am a Jew.’

‘But you believe in the dark gods,’ I said.

‘I believe in people,’ said Honor Klein. It was a rather unexpected

reply.

I said, ‘You sound rather like a fox saying it believes in geese.’

She laughed suddenly, and with that she laid her other hand upon the

hilt and drew the sword upward with surprising swiftness to describe a great
arc at the level of her head. It made a sound like a whip moving. The point
came down within an inch of the arm of my chair and then descended again
to the floor. I resisted an impulse to move back. I said, ‘You can use it?’

‘I studied it for several years in Japan, but I never got beyond the

beginning.’

‘Show me something,’ I said. I wanted to see her moving again.

She said, ‘I am not a performer,’ and turned away again towards the

table. In the distance the church bells continued their mathematical
jargoning.

The remnants of Palmer and Antonia’s dinner lay derelict under the

falling candles. She drew towards her their two crumpled table napkins and
looked at them thoughtfully. Then with one hand she tossed one of the
napkins high in the air into the darkness of the high-ceilinged room. As it
descended the sword was already moving with immense speed. The two
halves of the napkin fluttered to the floor. She threw up the other napkin
and decapitated it. I picked up one of the pieces. It was cleanly cut.

drawing-room when I had first seen Honor Klein confronting the other two
like a young and ruthless captain. I laid the piece of linen on the table and
said, ‘That was a good trick.’

‘It was not a trick,’ said Honor. She had been standing before me, still

holding the hilt in a two-handed grip, and looking down at one of the
severed napkins. I saw that she was breathing deeply. Now she moved her
chair back to the table and sat down. For a moment or two she lifted the
sword, moving it as if it had become very heavy, and cooled her forehead
on the blade, turning her head slowly against it with a caressing motion.
Then she laid it down again on the table, still keeping one hand on the hilt. I
looked at the corded hilt, long and dark, continuing the gentle sinister
backward curve of the blade, the inner casing, which seemed like snake-
skin, decorated with silver flowers, appearing through the diamond-shaped
slits of the black cordage. Her large pale hand was firmly closed about it. I
felt an intense desire to take the sword from her, but something prevented
me. I put my hand on the blade, moving it up towards the hilt and feeling
the cutting edge. It was hideously sharp. My hand stopped. The blade felt as
if it were charged with electricity and I had to let go. No longer now
attending to me she moved the sword back and laid it across her knees in
the attitude of a patient executioner. I realized that the church bells had
become silent and it was the New Year.

Fourteen

I attempted to portray honestly to Antonia the exact state of my doubts

and hesitations about Georgie, and the effort made to do so cleared my
mind. Antonia was extremely sympathetic and perceptive. I could feel, and
I felt it with tenderness and almost with amusement, her subtle anxiety lest I
should keep anything back, lest I should, at a certain point, suddenly regret
my frankness and check the flood of revelation. She wanted to know
everything, she wanted, oh so lovingly, to draw back the stream of my life
towards her, she wanted to hold me and Georgie in her hands, to gaze down
upon us with solicitude and complete understanding. I did not deny her. She
was overjoyed.

We agreed that it was probably best that I should go right away for a

short holiday, not even to think things over but simply to rest; and indeed I
was worn out. We considered Brittany, Venice, Rome, though without
deciding. What she chiefly urged upon me was the desirability, the
necessity, of waiting calmly, even for a long time, before approaching a
decision. It was absurd to distress myself with such problems when I was,
after recent events, so upset and so tired. I must look after myself and spoil

myself a little; I needed rest: and Antonia promised herself, during my
absence, the pleasure of getting to know Georgie better.

We also managed, and this too relieved my mind, to make some

minimum decisions about furniture, such decisions anyway as would enable
both of us to move certain essentials out of Hereford Square; and now for
the first time I began to picture as a reality my life in the Lowndes Square
flat. I mentioned this to Antonia and she congratulated me. As the time
came for me to go she clung to me, covering me with kisses, and I let her
have her way.

‘Dearest Martin, come round again to see us tonight after dinner, will

you, please? Anderson so especially wants to see you. Just to see you, you
know. And now that I feel so much happier, tomorrow is far too far away!’

‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’ll drop in. I’ll bring you some wine if you like.

The ‘57 Château Lauriol de Barny is good, and I think you and Palmer
haven’t tried it.’

‘Oh, do that!’ said Antonia. ‘After all, you must still educate me,

mustn’t you? Darling, you will often see me alone, won’t you, in the time to
come?’

I said that I would, and also now for the first time envisaged this as

being perhaps not too painful to be possible. When I left her we were both
exhausted but feeling better.

I reflected, as I walked through the cold misty afternoon toward

Georgie’s lodging, that on the whole I was grateful to Georgie for having
forced my hand. That Antonia now knew about it did relieve a certain
pressure which although I had endured it stoically enough in the past I now
recognized to have been a pain. It was indeed better to be free of the lies;
and although I was still very unsure what this .revelation might not have
done to my relationship with Georgie, it was at least plain that nothing very
honest or clear could have been settled between us prior to it. There was
now, I felt, a beginning of sanity. Yes, I was grateful to Georgie; or rather, I
further reflected, to Honor Klein; and as I climbed Georgie’s stairs I saw
again the strange image of Honor Klein sitting with the Samurai sword
across her knees. The image returned to me with a certain resonance of

meaning which, as I neared Georgie’s door, I diagnosed as arising from the
fact that I must have dreamt about Honor last night. But I could not recall
the dream.

Georgie was not alone. I could hear voices as I approached and I

waited a while before knocking. The stairs and landing were being painted
and looked unfamiliar, and as I stood there I stared at a pile of painters’
litter, and tried with an envelope to rub some wet paint off my hand. The
place had an alien smell. Eventually, as the visitor showed no sign of
departing, and gay laughter seemed to indicate that things were indeed
going nicely, I knocked on the door and after a suitable interval went in.
Georgie was sitting by the gas fire dispensing coffee to a guest. The guest
was a man. It was my brother Alexander.

When I appeared they both started up and we all stared at each other.

Georgie put her hand to her breast. I could hardly believe what I saw and I
had the sense as in a nightmare of being involved in something both wildly
improbable and relentlessly inevitable. This had to happen. Yet how could it
have happened? And for a wild moment I wondered whether I hadn’t long
ago introduced Georgie and Alexander to each other and forgotten about it.
Then I wondered if I were going mad. I sat down on a chair near the door
and said ‘Why are you here?’ to my brother.

Alexander twisted his long form and gave me a deliberately rueful and

guilty look. In his smart dark grey London clothes he looked elegant, taller,
a thought more degenerate. He said, ‘I met Georgie at lunch today. I’m
sorry, Martin.’

‘Why are you saying sorry?’ said Georgie. ‘It’s not very polite! And

there’s nothing to apologize about.’ She was flushed and excited. I guessed
she had had a good deal to drink.

‘Well, it’s a shock to Martin, naturally,’ said Alexander, turning back to

Georgie. They stood one at each end, leaning against the mantelpiece and
looking at each other. ‘I’m sure he would prefer to have introduced us
himself.’

‘I asked him often enough!’ said Georgie, laughing harshly. ‘He’s only

got himself to thank.’

how you ran into each other?’

Georgie’s nostrils expanded rabbit-like then contracted, and she stroked

the tip of her nose with a forefinger. She was wearing her best black
corduroy coat and skirt and her hair was piled artfully and with care.
‘Honor Klein introduced us.’

‘That bloody woman again,’ I said. ‘I wish people would just stop

interfering with my affairs!’

‘If people interfere with you it’s because you like it,’ said Georgie.

‘You’re dying to be interfered with. You’re a sort of vacuum into which
interference rushes. Anyway, it wasn’t anything to do with you. Why do
you assume everyone is so interested in your doings? I asked Honor to
introduce me to Alexander and she kindly did so. She invited me to lunch
and I accepted. I’m a free agent after all!’

‘I wonder if you know how much you’re hurting me,’ I said. ‘Yes, I

suppose you do!’

‘Go easy, Georgie,’ said Alexander.

‘I can do without kind words from you,’ I said to my brother. ‘Do you

know that Georgie is my mistress?’

‘Yes,’ said Alexander. ‘She has told me.’ He gave me his gentle

solicitous apologetically ironical stare.

‘Don’t flatter yourself,’ I said. ‘She tells everybody. But you must have

had a delicious conversation. And now will you clear out?’

‘You’re being beastly, Martin,’ said Georgie. ‘It’s not Alexander’s

fault. And of course you should have introduced us long ago. I know all this
is unfortunate in a way, and it’s a great pity you turned up just now. But I’ve
felt so bloody miserable lately and so damnably tied up, I wanted to take
some action on my own, I wanted to feel a bit free. I didn’t do it to hurt you,
but just somehow to ease myself. And anyway it’s not so important.’

‘Now you’re being rude!’ said Alexander.

continue this chat when my dear brother has gone.’

‘Don’t be so excitable, Martin,’ said Alexander. ‘Surely you can carry

the thing off without all this shouting? Look, have some coffee. Georgie,
get him another cup. Do have some sense of proportion, Martin.’

‘It’s kind of you to act as host to me in my own house,’ I said.

‘It’s not your house,’ said Georgie, pouring out another cup of coffee.

‘That’s the point!’

‘Please don’t be angry,’ said Alexander.

‘All right,’ I said. ‘But go.’

Alexander dropped his hands and bowed to me in a way that was half

ironical, half submissive. He turned to Georgie and with a rueful admiring
stare he took her in. She stared back evenly, unsmiling, but with a candour
and a presence more telling than any smile. They must have had a good
talk. Then as if unable to help himself he reached out a hand and drew it
back over her head from the crown down toward the nape of the neck. She
remained perfectly still, but her eyes widened slightly. He murmured, ‘Yes.
I wonder if that was the head I was waiting for?’

‘Go,’ I said, ‘go, go, go.’

‘Ah, well,’ said Alexander. ‘Georgie, thank you. Martin, sorry. Good-

bye.’ He bowed this time to Georgie and left the room. I closed the door
behind him.

I went over to Georgie and struck her hard on the cheek with my open

hand.

She stepped back, but with dignity, and her face became scarlet. I had

never struck her in anger before. She turned her back to me and said in a
thick voice, ‘The reign of terror has started.’

I turned her round again to face me, holding her by the shoulders. Her

eyes filled with tears, but she had control of herself. She glared at me
furiously and then fumbled for a handkerchief.

‘All right,’ she said, ‘all right, Martin, all right, all right.’

‘It’s not all right,’ I said.

‘You don’t understand,’ said Georgie. ‘It was all much more accidental

than it seems. I just said that to Honor Klein on the spur of the moment,
about wanting to meet your brother. Then I forgot about it and I was quite
surprised when she rang me up and suggested this.’

‘You ought not to have gone,’ I said. ‘Oh well, it doesn’t matter.’ I sat

down on Georgie’s bed. I felt sunk in misery and confusion.

‘It does matter,’ said Georgie. ‘Martin, I’m miles nearer the edge than

you’ve got any notion of. I can’t tell you how much I’ve suffered not only
from the lies but from feeling so paralysed. I had to do something of my
own. I feel twice as real now. I was just stopping being free. And for me
that’s stopping existing. I was getting to be no good to either myself or to
you. You’ve got to see me, Martin. I’m to blame. I’ve never been quite and
entirely myself with you. The situation didn’t let me be. The untruthfulness
infected everything. I must break out a little. Do you see at all?’

‘Yes, yes, yes,’ I said. ‘It doesn’t matter.’

‘Don’t keep saying that,’ said Georgie, ‘and stop looking so bloody

dejected, for Christ’s sake.’

‘Anyway,’ I said, ‘the era of lies is over. We’ll tell everybody now.’

Georgie was silent. I looked up at her. She looked at me strangely, her

face, still marked with tears, poised and withdrawn, beautiful in a new way,
and older.

I said, ‘You don’t want it told now?’

‘I’m not sure,’ she said.

‘Will you marry me, Georgie?’ I said.

She turned away and drew in a sharp breath like a cry. After a moment

she said, ‘You don’t mean it, Martin. You’re just a little crazy at the
moment and jealous. Ask me again later if you still want to.’

‘I love you, Georgie,’ I said.

‘Ah, that.’ She gave a dry laugh.

arm about my shoulder. We rolled back on to the bed and I took her in my
arms. We lay quiet for a while.

Georgie said, ‘Martin. You said you used to pass your girls on to

Alexander. Are you sure it wasn’t that he always took them away from
you?’

‘Yes,’ I said, ‘that was how it was, in fact.’

‘Martin, I love you so much,’ said Georgie.

I buried my head in her shoulder and groaned.

Fifteen

I had found myself unable to make love to Georgie. I had stayed with

her too long, drunk too much, and ended up abjectly in tears. I left her with
relief, and I think she felt relief too at my going. We did not speak seriously
again, but treated each other with great gentleness, like a pair of invalids.

Now it was essential for me to see Palmer and Antonia. It was after

eleven o’clock, but the crate of wine which I had promised to bring served
as an excuse. I assumed that I would find them up. I knocked on the
drawing-room door and looked inside. The room was dark except for the
subdued glowing fire. Then I heard Palmer’s voice calling from upstairs,
‘Who is it?’

‘It’s Martin,’ I said. My voice sounded hollow, like someone talking in

a cavern. I added, ‘I’ve brought the wine.’

Antonia’s voice said, ‘Come and see us.’

I said, ‘Have you gone to bed? I’m sorry to come so late.’

‘It’s not late,’ said Palmer’s voice. ‘Come on up. Look, bring three

glasses and one of the bottles. We simply must see you.’

I found three glasses and took a bottle of the Château Lauriol and

began to mount the stairs. I had never been upstairs in Palmer’s house
before.

‘We’re here,’ said Antonia’s voice. A stream of golden light showed

the open door. I paused in the doorway.

with trails of gilded roses. The snow-white sheets were parted. A pair of
lamps, mounted on tall carved ecclesiastical candlesticks, also gilt, shed a
soft radiance from either side. There was a scattering of rosy Persian rugs
upon the white Indian carpet. I stepped in.

Palmer was sitting on the side of the bed. He was wearing a cream-

coloured embroidered robe of Chinese silk and, it was evident, nothing
underneath. Antonia was standing beside him well wrapped in her familiar
cherry-red Jaeger dressing-gown. I closed the door.

‘How very sweet of you to bring the wine!’ said Antonia. ‘Are you all

right?’

‘I’m fine,’ I said.

‘Let’s have some straight away!’ said Palmer. ‘I love a dormitory feast.

I’m so glad you’ve come. I’ve been looking forward to you all the evening.
Oh dear, there’s no corkscrew! Do you mind fetching one, Martin?’

‘I always carry one,’ I said. I unfolded it and opened the bottle.

‘I’m afraid we’re offending all your canons!’ said Palmer. ‘Do you

mind drinking it cold? Do pour out three glasses and then put the bottle by
the fire.’

I set the glasses upon a little table of pink marble beside the door and

poured them out. I set the bottle down carefully beside the electric fire
which was set low down in the wall. The muted yellow pattern in the satin
wallpaper flickered in my eyes. I returned to the glasses.

Antonia got on to the bed and knelt her way across on to the other side,

supporting herself on Palmer’s shoulder. She sat there, curling her softly
slippered feet under her, well enveloped in the glowing red gown. Her hair,
which had been contained in the lifted collar, spread now a little on to her
shoulders in flat heavy coils of faded gold. Without make-up she looked
older, paler, but her face was tender, alive, maternal, as she kept her tawny
eyes upon me, her big working mouth half smiling, posed and attentive.
Palmer opposite to her was calm, relaxed, formidably clean, looking in his
embroidered robe, with his small neat head, like some casual yet powerful

emperor upon a Byzantine mosaic. One long leg, slim and very white,
scattered with long black hairs, crossed over the other, was revealed by a
slit in the silk. His feet were bare.

I said, ‘Ares and Aphrodite.’

‘But you are not Hephaistos, are you, Martin?’ said Palmer.

I advanced and gave them the wine, first to Palmer and then to

Antonia. I said, ‘I can hardly get higher than this.’

‘You are very high indeed,’ said Palmer, ‘and we love you for it. This

constitutes an apex.’

‘That suggests a descent on the other side,’ I said.

‘Let us call it a plateau,’ said Antonia. ‘People live on plateaus.’

‘Only people with a good head for heights,’ I said. I raised my glass to

them and drank the wine. It was cold and tasted bitter. I was troubled by
Palmer’s naked body under the silk robe.

‘Antonia told me of your talk,’ said Palmer. ‘I felt quite jealous at

being left out, but I simply had to see patients this morning. I think you are
being very wise. A complete holiday, a complete rest, that is what you need.
Have you decided where you are going?’

‘I’ve changed my mind,’ I said. ‘I don’t think I’m going away after all.’

Palmer and Antonia exchanged glances. Antonia said in her softest

voice, ‘Darling, I do think you should go. Believe me, believe us, it is what
is best for you.’

‘Isn’t it odd,’ I said. ‘Here I am bringing you wine in bed. Instead of

which I ought to be killing both of you.’

‘Martin darling, you’re drunk,’ said Antonia. ‘Shall I order you a taxi

to go home in?’

‘Don’t bother,’ I said, ‘I have the car.’ I moved toward the claret bottle

to give myself some more. Somehow or other my foot came into contact
with it and it tilted soundlessly over. A big red stain spread on the white
absorbent carpet. I said, ‘Damnation!’

up and went through a white communicating door into the bathroom. In a
moment she was squatting at my feet deluging the carpet with water from a
bowl. The stain faded to pale pink.

‘And if it doesn’t come out,’ said Palmer, ‘we’ll put a rug over it. I

forbid you to worry about it, Martin. But, my dear fellow, can you get
yourself home all right? Shall I drive you?” He sat there smiling and
swinging his naked leg.

‘No, of course not,’ I said. ‘I’m perfectly capable. I’m terribly sorry

about the carpet. I’d better go. I’ve left the crate in the hall. Will it be all
right there?’

‘If you wouldn’t mind putting it in the cellar,” said Palmer. ‘Don’t

think of unpacking it, just leave it there. Our maid comes at some unearthly
hour, and what with paper boys and milkmen and other mysterious persons
who come and go when Antonia and I are asleep, it would be better to have
it out of the way. It’s very kind of you indeed.’

‘I’m terribly sorry,’ I said. I looked down at Antonia who was still

mopping the carpet.

She rose quickly and kissed me on the cheek. ‘You’re not to worry. Is

he, Anderson? Promise?’

‘I promise,’ I said with an embarrassed laugh. I began to back towards

the door.

Antonia sat down again on the bed and they both watched me go. The

light from the candlesticks shone upon her golden head and his soft silver
one. They watched me, smiling, she infinitely soft and tender, he candid,
confident, brilliant. Across the white bed their shoulders leaned together,
and they glowed at me out of a centre of white and golden light. I closed the
door on them as one closes the door of some rich reliquary or glorious
triptych. The light was left within.

Sixteen

I found that I had thrust my glass into my pocket, and it occurred to me

that I might as well drink some more wine. Reaching out from a sitting
position I got hold of the neck of a bottle and hauled it from the crate. I took
a little time unfolding my corkscrew again and getting the bottle open. I
poured out some wine, slopping it over my trousers and on to the floor. I
drank it quickly and poured out some more.

It was cold in the cellar and the smell which I had identified as fog

seemed to be getting stronger. I shivered and turned up the collar of my
overcoat. I found myself wondering what the inside of a gas chamber could
be like. The wine was cold too, harsh and unlike itself, a strange unfamiliar
potion. It left an ill taste on my tongue. My head was spinning a little and I
had an uneasy sensation in the stomach which was either fear or
indigestion.

There was a sudden noise very near by. I jumped up hastily and

retreated a few steps across the uneven cellar floor. My heart struck against
my side like a gong. A figure had appeared on the cellar steps. For a
moment in the obscurity I could not see who it was. Then I recognized it
was Honor Klein. We stared at each other. My heart knocked still, and for a
moment I had the strange experience of seeming to stand outside and see
myself, a tall stooping figure, my coat collar turned up, my hair wild, my
eyes staring, and the wine half spilt. I found it difficult to speak.

Honor Klein came down another two steps. She said, ‘Oh, it’s you. I

saw the light on and I thought it might be my brother.’ She stood there,

hands deep in the pockets of her tweed coat, looking down at me
broodingly, her eyes narrow, the line of her mouth equally hard and straight.

I said, ‘Your brother is in bed with my wife.’ I added, ‘I just took them

up some wine in bed.’

Honor Klein went on brooding at me. Then her face relaxed slightly

and her eyes opened a little with an ironical light. She said, ‘You are heroic,
Mr Lynch-Gibbon. The knight of infinite humiliation. One does not know
whether to kiss your feet or to recommend that you have a good analysis.’
She said it as one might say ‘a good thrashing’.

I said, ‘You kindly introduced my mistress to my brother. That was

charming of you.’

‘She asked me to,’ said Honor Klein after a pause.

‘And why did you do so with such alacrity? I cannot credit you with a

kind heart.’

The mockery had left her face and as she stared at me through the

gloom the grimness of her expression seemed more and more weighted with
melancholy. Her face was heavy and surly, like a face in a Spanish religious
painting, something looking out of darkness, barbarous yet highly
conscious. She said, ‘Oh it doesn’t matter. I did it on the spur of the
moment. I thought it was time for her to see a new face.’

‘It matters to me,’ I said. ‘I wonder if you have any idea what a

destructive person you are? I should be grateful if you would keep your
hands off my business in future.’

‘We are not likely to meet in the future,’ said Honor Klein. ‘I am going

back to Cambridge almost at once.’

‘You speak as if it were the North Pole,’ I said. ‘I wish it were! And

I’m not the only one who’ll heave a sigh of relief.’

‘What do you mean?’

‘Palmer and Antonia aren’t exactly delighted to have you hovering

over them like a carrion crow.’

said, ‘You are drunk, Mr Lynch-Gibbon, foully drunk, and even when you
are sober you are stupid. Good night.’ She turned to go.

I said, ‘Wait a minute.’

What happened next may seem a little improbable, but the reader must

just believe me that it did occur. She paused and turned round again to face
me. I set my foot on the lowest step and seized her arm roughly. Then I
pulled her down towards me. She came stumbling, and for a moment we
stood together at the foot of the steps, me breathing hard and crushing her
arm in my grip, she tense and glaring at me. I had in retrospect the illusion
that her entire face, then and during the moments that followed, had become
black.

She pulled away from me with a sudden violence, trying to free her

arm. It was odd that she did not seem particularly surprised. As she pulled I
changed my grip and began to turn her about, twisting her arm behind her
back. At this she kicked me very hard indeed in the shins. I pushed her wrist
upward towards her shoulder blade and captured her other hand. I could
hear her gasp with pain. I was behind her now and her weight came
backward against me as I increased my pressure. She kicked me again, very
painfully.

I relaxed my grip and curled one leg round hers, at the same time

pushing her violently forward. She fell on her knees, and I half fell on top
of her, losing hold of her arm. We rolled over each other on the floor. I gave
her my weight, trying to find her wrist. On her back now, she came against
me with both hands pushing and clawing, and endeavoured to drive her
knee into my stomach. She fought like a maniac; but it was remarkable too
that throughout our brief battle she did not cry out once.

We were both impeded by our overcoats, and I was also impeded by

being extremely drunk. She was even stronger than I would have expected.
But it took me only a moment to get hold of her wrists. I crushed them both
together in one hand, leaning my weight upon her until she became still. I
could see her face just below mine, the black hairs on her upper lip, the
white of her teeth. I lifted myself a little and with my free hand struck her

three times, a sideways blow across the mouth. She closed her eyes and
tried to turn her head away. I saw that clearly in retrospect too.

After I had hit her the third time I began to wonder what I was doing. I

let her go and rolled off her. She got up without haste while I got myself
into a sitting position. My head, suddenly asserting its existence, felt
terrible. She brushed down her coat and then without looking at me and still
without haste she mounted the cellar steps.

I sat quiet for a minute feeling extremely confused. Then holding my

head, which felt ready to break open, I got shakily to my feet. I got myself
up the steps and into the hall. The front door was open and outside, hung
like a blanket a yard from the opening, was the fog, yellow, opaque,
infernal, completely still. I stood in the doorway. In the hollow damp
silence I could hear the echo of receding footsteps. I went down into the
street, ran a little way, and stopped to listen. My footprints lay behind me, a
reeling progress, upon the damp pavement. With a choking sigh more
profound than silence the fog enclosed me. I opened my mouth to call out to
her but found that I had forgotten her name.

Seventeen

M.

My dearest child, I’m sorry I was so drunk
yesterday. I hope I didn’t tire you out. I should have
gone sooner. This is just a little note to say that I
may perhaps go away for a while, so I won’t see
you in the near future. I think honestly that this may
be a good thing, as I am afraid that if we meet now
we may quarrel. As I said yesterday, I am not really
aggrieved about Alexander. I have quite got over
that: and I do believe you when you say you love
me. But I just feel too bloody miserable and mixed
up to be able to see you without fretting terribly

about taking decisions which I do not feel myself
competent to take at present. You understand. It
may seem unreasonable to ask you to love me all
the same and to love me especially: but nothing
here is reasonable, and in love nothing is ever
reasonable. So, selfish, inconsiderate, and sorry for
myself, I ask just that.

Your M.

Dear Dr Klein,

I literally do not know how to apologize for what
happened last night. What form of words can I use
to say how very deeply I regret my extraordinary
conduct? You will have concluded, indeed you did,
if I remember, conclude that I was drunk. Mad
would perhaps describe it better. And perhaps all I
can do by way of apology is to offer some
explanation, however crude, of how I could have
behaved in so eccentric a fashion. Before this
however let me express the hope that I did not
seriously hurt you. Indeed, I am speechless with
contrition. I can only trust that, since you have seen
much of the world, you experienced no damaging
shock, however profound the dislike and contempt
which my actions cannot but have provoked in you.

As you know, I have been under an extreme

strain of late; how extreme, I did not fully know
until yesterday. You said once earlier on that I was a
violent man. I plead guilty to this charge, and to
having, as I now realize, grossly over-estimated my
powers of control. It was both unfortunate and
unjust that you, an innocent party, should have had
the benefit of my violence. I spoke wildly last night
when I implied that you had harmed me. Your
actions in my regard were, I fully realize, without

malice and indeed without interest: I would be a
fool in any case to imagine that I could have
inspired any concern in you which could find
expression in animosity. It is just that I am feeling
thoroughly persecuted at present and because you
arrived at a moment when I was particularly
strained and irrational I flew at you.

Yet also it was no accident. I owe it to you here

to attempt to understand myself. Indeed I am
grateful to you, because in some way, and not only
by occasioning last night’s outburst, you have
helped me to see what has gone wrong. I love my
wife and I still desire her. I also love your brother.
As may or may not have been obvious to you - it
was until lately by no means obvious to me - my
feelings for Palmer are of no normal intensity. I
have never been in the accepted sense, a
homosexual, but certainly my attachment to Palmer
has some-thing of this colour; and it is an odd thing,
though it may be for all I know a phenomenon well
known to clinical psychology, that Palmer’s liaison
with my wife has increased rather than diminished
my affection for him. The situation implied,
therefore, or perhaps I should say however, a two-
way jealousy: yet it has been a long time before I
have become aware of this implication. It may be
suggested that my slowness was due to a
preoccupation with moral principles, and indeed at
the conscious level I believe that I did make moral
efforts, if such things are ever really made, in the
direction of what I understand to be generosity and
compassion. A more profound and plausible
explanation may however be found in the particular
role which Palmer and Antonia have played
towards me, and with which I have so readily

cooperated. I mean of course the role of parents. It
was I fear, not by chance that I married a woman
considerably older than myself; and when that
woman turned her affections toward a yet older
man, to whom I was already related in a quasi-filial
manner, the stage was set for my regression to the
situation of a child.

But children, as we know, are savages, and

their immature love for their parents is often with
difficulty distinguished from hatred. Of such hatred
and such violence you were for a moment the
innocent, yet as I have said not the accidental,
victim. Although naturally I entertain no personal
feelings towards you whatsoever, not even, as I
have explained, those of the slightest resentment,
your connexion with Palmer made you serviceable
as a symbol, you became as it were the joker in the
pack whom I could imagine momentarily to be the
object of my fury. I should add that it was, needless
to say, an ephemeral fury, fully expended, as I
deeply regret, upon you: I have, I must assure you,
no real ill-feeling toward Palmer. Indeed this
solitary outburst has helped me, by making me
more profoundly conscious of myself, to purge my
imagination of evil humours and to render myself
more truly like the generous person whose part I
have endeavoured to play. I say this in case you
should, after last night’s exhibition, feel any
apprehension of possible violence to your brother. I
assure you sincerely that there is no such
possibility.

It only remains for me to apologize to you very

humbly and to hope that even if, as I fear, you find
my conduct inexcusable, you will at least, if you

have had the patience to read this letter, find it
somewhat more comprehensible.

I am yours sincerely, 
Martin Lynch-Gibbon

Dear Honor Klein,

I am afraid there is little point in trying to explain
my conduct of last night, and scarcely any point
even in apologizing. I was, as you observed, very
drunk, and I behaved like a wild beast. I can only
say that I am not only as shocked at myself, but also
as amazed, as you could possibly be. I cannot
account for it, nor would you be interested in a
rigmarole of implausible hypotheses about the state
of my psyche. It is enough to have assaulted you
without boring you into the bargain. I must,
however, write this letter to send, though without
any hope of its being acceptable, my very humble
and very sincere apology. I dare to hope that I did
not seriously hurt you. If I caused you any pain, I
assure you that my condition bums me more
sharply than the harshest blow. I cannot think what
came over me; nor can I at all conjecture what your
state of mind about me can now be. It would hardly
need saying, were it not that I fear I have
consistently behaved badly to you, but you are to
me an object of profound respect, not only because
you are Palmer’s sister but because you are you:
and I feel a most biting regret at having forfeited, I
must fear for ever, the possibility of your good
opinion. I will not prolong this letter. I hope,
contrary to your prediction, that we may meet
again: though I shall certainly not offer you my
company in the foreseeable future, nor of course

will I expect any answer to this communication. I
am very sorry indeed for my shocking behaviour.

Yours sincerely, 

Martin Lynch-Gibbon

Dear Honor,

I am sorry that I behaved to you like a beast and a
madman. I cannot offer any explanation - nor is this
indeed in the ordinary sense an apology. I feel that
things between us, after last night, have passed
beyond the region of apologies. I want to write to
you something brief and something honest to be, as
it were, in lieu of posturings of regret which might
not be entirely sincere. I have in the past felt
resentment against you, even dislike of you, and not
entirely without cause. Ever since you appeared on
the scene you have, for reasons which remain
obscure to me, behaved towards me with hostility,
and in two instances you have deliberately done me
harm. I am not aware that I have in any way
merited this treatment at your hands. I am at present
passing through a time of great anxiety, indeed a
time of great misery, and might have hoped at least
to escape irresponsible persecution from strangers.

I am not saying of course that the fact of what I

have called your persecution (which may indeed be
the result of thoughtlessness rather than malice) in
any way excuses or warrants my throwing you on
the ground and beating you about the head. I only
write down here what occurs to me when I set
myself the task of apologizing; I only write down
what seems to me to be the truth. You are, I add,
and for all my resentment I can see this clearly, a
person worthy of my respect and one who pre-
eminently deserves the truth. I am confident that
you will prefer this truthful letter to a conventional
apology. I hope that I did not hurt you much. I
believe that, since you know the world even better
than I do, you will not have suffered serious shock

or even experienced amazement. I hope we shall
meet again and that this incident may serve as a
stepping stone to an understanding of each other
which has so far been, on both sides, conspicuously
lacking.

With my good wishes, M. L.-G.

I sealed up the letters to Antonia and Georgie. I brooded for some time over
the three versions of my letter to Honor Klein, and finally, with some
misgivings, chose the second one. I was tempted to write a fourth version,
and the notion of there being some further development of my thought
which demanded expression became very compelling indeed. Yet when I
reflected more I could not see what that further development could possibly
be like. It remained though maddeningly present, shrouded in darkness. I
eventually gave up, copied out Honor’s letter and sealed it, and went to the
post. The fog had cleared. When I returned I ate some biscuits and dosed
myself with whisky and hot milk. I felt exhausted, having put more
intellectual effort into the letters to Honor than I had expended since I wrote
Sir Eyre Coote and the Campaign of Wandewash; yet I was quieted by an
irrational feeling of having done a good morning’s work. I went upstairs to
lie down and fell into the most profound and peaceful sleep that I had
experienced for a long time.

Eighteen

Alexander rang up just before leaving again for the country and we

talked some time on the phone. Our relations were such that scarcely any
‘patching up’ was either possible or needed. We simply fell back, half
articulately, upon an old understanding. He was cautious, rueful, tactful, I
was morose, ironical, complaining. We left it, with relief, at that. I was less
pleased to receive a call from Rosemary who was now installed once more
in London and very eager to come and organize my life. I felt I could not
bear at present to see Rosemary and face her bright bird-like
inquisitiveness. She suggested that she should come over and pack up my
Minton dinner service and one or two other things which she said must on
no account be trusted to the removal men. I said that she might do this, and
added that I had not yet made any removal arrangements. She replied that
this was just as well, as she knew of an excellent firm and would arrange it
all for me. She arrived within half an hour and in a business-like
conversation it was agreed that I should go as soon as possible to camp at
Lowndes Square, not waiting until the arrival of the furniture. I had no

desire to witness the gradual dismantling of the house. I was grateful to her:
and as her tasks seemed sufficiently to delight her without the addition of
my company I took myself off. As I shut the hall door I could hear
Rosemary, her precise little voice ringing with authority, telephoning
instructions to Harrods for the immediate delivery at my flat of the best
available kind of camp bed.

London was misty, with golden sun-pierced mist in which buildings

hung as insubstantial soaring presences. The beautiful dear city, muted and
softened, half concealed in floating and slightly shifting clouds, seemed a
city in the air, outlined in blurred dashes of grey and brown. I walked,
inevitably, by the river. As I turned on to Victoria Embankment I saw that
the tide was in, and upon the surface of the fast flowing water itself there
played a warm light, turning its muddy hue to an old gilt, as if some pure
part of the sunlight had escaped to play here under the great vault of the
mist. The strange light suited my mood and as I sauntered slowly along
beneath the shadowy cliff of New Scotland Yard I began to feel, if not
relieved of pain, at least a little more able to collect my wits.

It was too cold to sit down, but I paused every now and then to lean on

the parapet, and as I passed each damp dolphin-entwined lamp-post I felt a
little nearer to something. Yet I did not seem to be making any famous
progress with my troubles. I felt on the whole a thorough nausea about
recent events. That I should have had some time to ‘open up’ my relations
with Georgie seemed inevitable: yet I detested both the moment and the
manner of this particular revelation and there were times when I wondered
whether my love for Georgie was strong enough to support the sheer weight
of mess and muddle under which I felt it now laboured. All the same, when
I had found her with Alexander my sense of possessiveness had been
immediate and violent: a possessiveness which lingered on now as a sort of
aching resentment. It was odd that I felt no urgency about seeing her. What
I really wanted most just then was to put Georgie in cold storage. It is
unfortunate that other human beings cannot be conveniently immobilized.
Do what I might, Georgie would go on thinking, would go on acting, during
my absence and my silence. This thought caused me pain, but still did not
galvanize me into the simple action of ringing her up.

in the last day or two realized was that I was very far indeed from having
unravelled my thoughts and feelings concerning my wife. That I had so
readily jumped at a way of enduring, as it were acting my way through the
situation, had, it now seemed, merely postponed the moment of a more
radical and more dreadful estimate of what had happened. It occurred to me
particularly that I had never taken sufficient trouble to find out exactly what
Antonia herself was thinking and feeling. To have attempted it would, of
course, have been exquisitely painful, and it was partly to shun just that trial
that I had so jumped at my role, that I had accepted with such completeness
the picture of things which Palmer and Antonia had seemed to be offering. I
could not have borne, given that I despaired at once, to have kept things
‘open’ between Antonia and myself. But perhaps it was just my terrible
mistake to have despaired at once. Was it a mistake, or was it indeed the
acting out of some hidden desire? Whichever it was, it had been, I now felt,
my duty to inquire more closely, at whatever cost to myself. It had been
suggested that Antonia and Palmer were, for all the appearances, really in
two minds. What was certain was that my alacrity had helped to stabilize
their union; and as I thought this I wondered whether in some way my role
was just now destined to change, and that having, as Palmer put it, reached
an apex, I was now about to undertake some remarkable descent.

I greatly regretted too that I had been so frank with Antonia about

Georgie. My own former instinct, which Georgie had endorsed, that an
intimate talk about her with Antonia was something to be avoided, seemed
now to have been a sound one. That intimate talk had done nothing but
damage: damage to me since I had thereby in some way blunted my love
for my dear mistress, damage to Georgie since she was not only betrayed
but put positively in danger of being in Antonia’s power, and damage to
Antonia since she had been thereby disturbed and excited and filled with
schemes which could in the end only do harm. I was well aware, and it gave
me a twisted gloomy satisfaction, that Antonia was very far from having
made herself emotionally independent of me. She needed to have, and had
indeed almost announced this as a programme, both Palmer and, in a
subordinate role, myself. The discovery of Georgie’s existence had been a
bad shock and a challenge; and although I was sure that Antonia imagined

herself to be inspired by nothing but ingenious and affectionate
benevolence, she was certainly determined to hold, to organize, to gain
power over, the matter of Georgie and me: and if in the process the matter
of Georgie and me suffered shipwreck Antonia would not be exactly
heartbroken. She would then set herself, with oh such enthusiasm and
satisfaction, to the task of consoling me.

I watched, where a long golden streak had opened in the mist, the water

flowing under Waterloo Bridge. A concealed sun was shining on the great
white buttresses. And I thought about Honor Klein. I had in fact really been
thinking about her all the morning. It was with something of an effort that I
had given my mind to other matters, even to other people. For this was at
present the magnetic centre of my swinging thoughts, and with a
puzzlement which it was something of a luxury to indulge I found myself
brooding on Palmer’s curious sister. I was sorry now that I had sent her the
second letter, though I was very relieved that I had not sent her the first one.
The second letter was a poor trivial affair, making but little of what had
been, after all, a somewhat remarkable occasion. The third letter would
have been in many ways more suitable; or I regretted, rather, that I had not
taken time and trouble to write the fourth one, whatever that would have
turned out to be.

The third letter was certainly the most sincere, since I felt curiously

little remorse about the scene in the cellar. The only thing I regretted,
paradoxically, was that I had not been sober, although of course if I had
been sober the scene would not have occurred. But I recalled the scene
itself with a certain satisfaction: satisfaction mingled with some more
obscure and disturbing emotions. I kept returning with wonderment to the
thought that I had now touched her: ‘touched’ was putting it mildly, given
what had happened. But it seemed, perhaps for that very reason, almost
implausible in retrospect; and although I could picture her face screwed up
with pain and fury, although I could see her black oily hair rolling in the
dust and hear her gasp as I twisted her arm yet further, I could not
altogether recall any sense of the contact of my flesh with hers. It was as if
the extreme untouchability, which with a kind of repulsion I had earlier felt
her to possess, had cast, on this sacrilegious occasion, a cloak about her. It
was as if I had not really touched her.

Bridge and saw through the tilting, slightly lifting, mist the long gracious
pillared façade of Somerset House. Receding, swaying, variously browned
and greyed, it seemed like a piece of stage scenery. Below it upon the river,
clear yet infinitely soft and simple as in a Chinese print, two swans sailed
against a background of watery grey light, swept steadily downstream in the
company of a dipping branch of some unidentified foliage. They receded,
turning a little, and disappeared. I walked on, and then paused by the
parapet looking out to where in the much-curtained distance the great form
of St Paul’s must be. I could now just descry the warehouses directly
opposite across the river, their fronts touched by diffused but increasing
intimations of sunlight. The task of peering through the mist was becoming
exasperating and painful. I cannot see, I cannot see, I said to myself: it was
as if some inner blindness were being here tormentingly exteriorized. I saw
shadows and hints of things, nothing clearly at all.

I turned back from the swirling tawny flood with its shadow palaces to

look for reassurance at the solid pavement, and I saw that I was standing
near a telephone box. I looked at the telephone box; and as I looked it
seemed to take on a strange sudden glory, such as is said to invest the
meanest object in the eyes of those who claim to experience the proof of the
existence of God e contingentia mundi. Like one of Köhler’s apes, my
cluttered mind attempted to connect one thing with another. Very dimly and
distantly, but hugely, it began to dawn upon me what the nature of my
ailment was. It was something new and something, as I even then at once
apprehended, terrible. My pain was that of a perhaps fatal illness. I moved
towards the telephone box. My hands trembled so much that it was only at
the third attempt that I was able to dial the Pelham Crescent number
correctly. The maid answered. Dr Anderson and Mrs Lynch-Gibbon had
gone away for the week-end, and Dr Klein had gone back to Cambridge.

Nineteen

When the idea had come to me that I was desperately, irrevocably,

agonizingly in love with Honor Klein it had seemed at first to shed a great
light. It was clear to me that this, just this, was what so urgently and with
such novelty of torment ailed me, and also that the thing was inevitable.
Inevitable now Honor certainly seemed to be, vast across my way as the
horizon itself or the spread wings of Satan; and although I could not as yet
trace it out I could feel behind me like steel the pattern of which this and
only this could have been the outcome. I had never felt so certain of any
path upon which I had set my feet; and this in itself produced an
exhilaration.

Extreme love, once it is recognized, has the stamp of the indubitable. I

knew to perfection both my condition and what I must instantly do about it.
There was, however, as I began to realize as soon as I was safely stowed in
the train at Liverpool Street, much cause for anxiety, or rather for terror, and
also for puzzlement, or rather for sheer amazement. That I had no business,
with two women on my hands already, to go falling in love with a third,
troubled me comparatively little. The force that drew me now towards
Honor imposed itself with the authority of a cataclysm; and as I felt no
possibility of indecision I had, if not exactly no sense of disloyalty, at least
no anxieties about disloyalty. I was chosen, and relentlessly, not choosing.
Yet this very image brought home the insanity of my position. I was chosen,
but by whom or what? Certainly not by Honor, whose words to me, still
ringing like a box on the ear, had been far from flattering. I had never felt so

certain of any path; but it was a path that seemed likely to lead only to
humiliation and defeat.

Yet even this did not yet trouble me very much. The thought that,

whatever my reception, I would see Honor again was, in the frenzy of need
and desire which had now come upon me, enough. I was perhaps moreover
a little the dupe of that illusion of lovers that the beloved object must,
somehow, respond, that an extremity of love not only merits but compels
some return. I expected nothing very much, I certainly expected nothing
precise, but the future was sufficiently open, sufficiently obscure, to receive
the now so fierce onward rush of my purpose. I had to see her and that was
all.

What had more occupied my mind, as the train drew near to

Cambridge, was wonderment at the nature and genesis of this love. When
had I begun, unbeknown to myself, to love Honor Klein? Was it when I
threw her to the cellar floor? Or when I saw her cut the napkins in two with
the Samurai sword? Or at some earlier time, perhaps at that strange moment
when I had seen her dusty, booted and spurred, confront the golden
potentates who were my oppressors? Or even, most prophetically, when I
had glimpsed the curving seam of her stocking in the flaring orange lights at
Hyde Park Corner? It was hard to say, and the harder because of the
peculiar nature of this love. When I thought how peculiar it was it struck me
as marvellous that I had nevertheless such a deep certainty that it was love.
I seemed to have passed from dislike to love without experiencing any
intermediate stage. There had been no moment when I reassessed her
character, noticed new qualities, or passed less harsh judgements on the old
ones: which seemed to imply that I now loved her for the same things for
which I had previously disliked her heartily; if indeed I had ever disliked
her. None of this, on the other hand, made me doubt that now I loved her.
Yet it was in truth a monstrous love such as I had never experienced before,
a love devoid of tenderness and humour, a love practically devoid of
personality.

It was strange too how little this passion which involved, so it seemed,

a subjection of my whole being had to do in any simple or comprehensible
sense with the flesh. It had to do with it, as my blood at every moment told

me, but so darkly. I preserved the illusion of never having touched her. I had
knocked her down but I had never held her hand; and at the idea of holding
her hand I practically felt fault. How very different was this from my old
love for Antonia, so warm and radiant with golden human dignity, and from
my love for Georgie, so tender and sensuous and gay. Yet, too, how flimsy
these other attachments seemed by comparison. The power that held me
now was like nothing I had ever known: and the image returned to me of
the terrible figure of Love as pictured by Dante. El m’ha percosso in terra e
stammi sopra.

It occurred to me later as remarkable and somehow splendid that one

thing which I never envisaged in these early moments was that my
condition was in any way bogus or unreal. Where-ever it might lead, it was
sufficiently what it seemed and had utterly to do with me: I would not, I
could not, attempt to disown it or explain it away. If it was grotesque it was
a grotesqueness which was of my own substance and to which, beyond any
area of possible explanation, I laid an absolute claim. I had no idea what I
would do when I saw Honor. It seemed quite likely that I would simply
collapse speechless at her feet. Nothing of this mattered. I was doing what I
had to do and my actions were, with a richness, my own.

I glided, motley and all, into the great checkered picture of King’s

Parade. Beyond the slim street lamps the great crested form of King’s
chapel rose towards the moon, its pinnacles touched to a pallid blue against
the starry distance beyond. The moon-shadow of the Senate House lay with
a thicker obscurity across the grass until dispelled by the lamplight. The
majesty, the familiarity, of these buildings seemed to add solemnity to my
rite, as when old patriarchs come to grace a marriage. I felt now extremely
sick again and practically suffocated with excitement and with something
which I supposed must be desire. I turned into the street where Honor Klein
lived.

I checked the numbers and could see ahead the house which must be

hers. There was a single light on upstairs. The sight of that light made my
heart increase its pace so hideously that I had to slow down and then stop
and hold on to a lamp-post while I tried to breathe evenly and quietly. I
wondered if I had better wait a while and attempt, not to calm myself which

was impossible, but simply to organize my breathing so as to be sure not to
swoon. I stood for a few minutes and breathed steadily. I decided that I
must wait no longer in case Honor should take it into her head to go to bed.
I knew she could hardly be in bed at this hour, and pictured the upstairs
room as a study. Then I pictured her there sitting at a desk surrounded by
books. Then I pictured myself beside her. I advanced to the door and leaned
against the wall.

There was a single bell. I had not until that moment envisaged the

possibility that she might have lodgers. In any case there was only one bell
and I pressed it. I heard no sound within and after a moment I pressed the
bell again. Still no sound. I stepped back and looked up at the lit curtained
window. I returned to the door and pushed it gently, but it was locked. I
peered through the letter box. The hall was in darkness and there was no
sound of approaching feet. I held the letter box open and pressed the bell
again. I decided that the bell must be out of order and I wondered what to
do next. I might either call out, or bang on the door, or throw stones at the
window. I stood meditating on these various courses for a little while, and
they all seemed insuperably difficult. I was uncertain whether I could
control my voice sufficiently to produce the right sort of cry, and the other
methods were too brusque. In any case I did not relish a head thrust from a
window, a confused encounter at a street doorway. What I really wanted
was to slink quietly into some room and find myself at once in Honor’s
presence.

It then occurred to me that this was precisely what I might be able to

manage. I noticed a little gate at the side of the house which doubtless led
into the garden. I tried it and it was open. I passed down a narrow
passageway of mossy bricks which divided the houses and found myself in
a small garden. I stepped back a little. Above the black shape of a drooping
tree the high moon revealed the back of the house, which was in darkness.
French windows of a lower room gave on to the garden. I tiptoed back
across the grass and put my hand against the windows. Here I had to pause
again to subdue a wave of sheer panic. My breathing, even my heart-beat,
must I felt already be audible through the house like the panting of an
engine. I tried the doors, got my finger into a crack and pushed them
sharply away from me. They gave; I was not sure whether they were

unlatched anyway or whether my violent push had broken some weak
fastening. I opened them wide with both hands.

A dark room gaped before me, very faintly illuminated by the remains

of an open fire. By now I scarcely knew what I was doing. My movements
took on the quality of a dream. Things melted before me. I crossed the room
and opened a door whose white surface I saw glimmering in the darkness. I
came out into the hall. A little light from the street lamp in front, coming
through the open door of one of the front rooms, showed me the stairs. I
began to mount the stairs, leaning hard on the bannisters and stepping
softly. Once on the upper landing I could see the line of light under the door
of Honor’s room. I hesitated only a moment.

I advanced to the door and knocked. After so much breathless silence

the sound of the knock seemed thunderous. I let it die away and then as
there was no reply to it I opened the door. For a moment the light dazzled
me.

I saw opposite to me a large double divan bed. The room was brightly

lit. Sitting up in this bed and staring straight at me was Honor. She was
sitting sideways with the sheet over her legs. Upwards she was as tawny
and as naked as a ship’s figurehead. I took in her pointed breasts, her black
shaggy head of hair, her face stiff and expressionless as carved wood. She
was not alone. Beside the bed a naked man was hastily engaged in pulling
on a dressing gown. It was immediately and indubitably apparent that I had
interrupted a scene of lovers. The man was Palmer.

I closed the door and walked back down the stairs.

Twenty

Ever since the moment near Waterloo Bridge when I had come to

consciousness of my condition, I had felt like a man running towards a
curtain. Now that I had so suddenly and with such exceedingly unexpected
results passed through it I felt dazed and in great pain but also curiously
steady. I had entered the house like a thief. I stood in it now like a
conquering general. They would come, they would have to come, to attend
upon me.

I felt this steadiness, this setting as it were of my feet sturdily apart; yet

with it I was in a confusion amounting to agony. I had so rapaciously
desired and so obtusely expected to find Honor alone. The simple fact of
her not being alone was a wrench almost separately felt, even apart from the
nightmarish significance of who her companion was. From this there
shivered through me a violence of amazement not distinguishable from
horror; and I felt as a physical pain the shock of what I had done to them.
How naively had I imagined that Honor must be free; I had even, it now
occurred to me, imagined that she must be virgin: that I would be the first
person to discover her, that I would be her conqueror and her awakener.
Caught in the coils of such stupidity I could not yet even begin to touch
with my imagination the notion that she should have had her brother as a
lover.

it. He was wearing a dark silk dressing-gown and as was again apparent
was naked underneath it. He was barefoot. He leaned back against the door
and looked at me with a steady wide-eyed gaze. I looked back at him
meditatively, looked into the fire, looked at him again. I willed myself not
to shiver. We remained so in silence for a minute. Then I poured some
whisky into the other glass and motioned Palmer to approach.

He came forward and took the glass and stared into it for a while. He

seemed to be quietly and carefully deciding what he was going to say. I
resolved to let him begin. His first words surprised me. ‘How did you know
I was here?’

I hesitated and my mind began to waken up. This remark revealed two

things, two doubtless interconnected things: that Honor had not told Palmer
about the episode in the cellar and that Palmer imagined that I had come to
Cambridge in pursuit of him. If he had known of the cellar episode he
would surely at least have conjured that I might have come in pursuit of
Honor. Although my passion for Honor was something so improbable and
out of nature yet, given the fact of my violence, a psycho-analyst
particularly would be likely to have guessed at it. But no such idea seemed
to be in Palmer’s head and he appeared to believe that I had come
suspiciously on his track, that I had come positively to unmask him. My
first and overwhelming sensation was gratitude to Honor. I could not but
regard it as somehow significant and propitious that she had not told her
brother. My second and more obscure apprehension was that I was in
possession of an advantage which I must not lose.

I said, ‘Need we go into that?’ I hoped he would not press me.

‘Well, it doesn’t matter,’ said Palmer. ‘You’ve found out what you

came for and that’s what’s important. Does Antonia know?’

I thought for a moment. ‘No,’ I said.

‘Are you going to tell her?’

I was completely cool by now. I said, ‘I don’t know, Palmer. I honestly

don’t know.’

countenance had a stripped quality which I had never seen before. He put
his whisky on the mantelpiece and took a step towards me. For a moment
he put his two hands on my arms, pressing me slightly. Then he let them
drop to his sides. It was a supplication. He said, ‘This is desperately grave,
Martin. There are some things we must get clear.’

Looking back on the scene, I felt admiration for the way in which, from

the start, Palmer took it that something catastrophic and irrevocable had
occurred. He did not attempt -and indeed it would have been difficult - to
explain away the scene I had witnessed upstairs. Nor did he attempt to
minimize its importance or cover it with any veil of distracting
mystification. He faced me frankly as one faces a conqueror or a judge; and
as our interview progressed it was with a certain sick giddiness mingled
with an agony of compassion that I so felt, for the first time, the scales of
power inclined in my direction. We were indeed on the other side of the
mountain.

I said, out of an immediate sympathy for him, ‘Palmer, I’m sorry.’

‘Don’t,’ said Palmer. ‘You’ve acted cleverly, resolutely, doubtless

properly. I didn’t know you had it in you. Let’s have no nonsense here. It’s
just that what has happened may prove fatal. And I want us to understand
each other.’

‘Please,’ I said, ‘in one way at least don’t misconstrue me. I don’t

disapprove of incest. I don’t think that you’re committing any sin by
embracing your sister: that is, not any sin that arises from the fact that she’s
your sister.’

‘You are being frivolous as usual,’ said Palmer. ‘You don’t disapprove

of it. You feel total horror of it. You are trembling with horror at this very
minute. But your feelings are not important. The person we must think of is
Antonia.’

‘And Honor,’ I said. I saw again the vision of her dark breasts; and I

felt in a sudden agony her presence close to me in the house and the
probability that if she did not detest me already she would detest me for
this. I found I was indeed trembling and with an effort made myself still.

case. She is a great person. What is at stake is Antonia’s happiness. I will
not say exactly her sanity. But a revelation of this kind could disable her for
life.’

‘You are positively suggesting,’ I said, ‘that I say nothing of this to

Antonia?’

‘Of course I am positively suggesting that. It is not, you understand,

like the revelation of an ordinary unfaithfulness. We have to do with
something which can shake the mind to its foundations. Antonia stands on
the brink of a new life and a new happiness. Either she goes forward into
that - or she suffers a shipwreck from which, given her temperament, she
may take years to recover. It depends on you which of these things will
happen.’

‘What about you?’ I said. ‘Are you also on the brink of a new life and a

new happiness, with her?’ I eyed him closely. I was trying to see him as a
man desperately fighting himself free from a binding obsession. I could see
nothing. He retained his wide-eyed resolute look which by its very
frankness revealed nothing.

‘I want Antonia,’ said Palmer, ‘and I want only Antonia. And let me

say to you in the profoundest and most faithful seriousness that what you
saw tonight will have no sequel. No sequel. Do you believe me, Martin?’

‘But it had antecedents,’ I said.

‘That is not your business.’

‘It might concern Antonia.’

‘If you are here to torment and blackmail me,’ he said, ‘you had better

go at once. But if you want to understand what you are doing before you do
it, then stay.’ He was desperate to keep me with him.

‘Sorry, Palmer,’ I said. ‘I have no desire to torment you, you know that

perfectly well. I am confused and shaken and I honestly don’t know what I
shall do.’

can get any advantage for yourself out of destroying Antonia’s peace of
mind, if you imagine that you can settle down again happily with her after
-’

‘Oh shut up,’ I said. ‘It’s enough that my marriage has been wrecked.

Don’t now accuse me of selfishness because I hesitate to shield an adulterer
who has got himself into a muddle.’

‘You are the adulterer,’ said Palmer. ‘Stop thinking of yourself and

think of Antonia. I beg you, Martin, to reflect carefully. Do not be offended
at my words. You and I know each other too well to play at scoring points.
As I have said, the thing has no sequel.’

I wanted, in this perhaps unique moment, to find out something more. I

sought for the right words. I said, ‘I think I have a right to know a little
more. I conjecture that you have had a long-standing liaison with your
sister. Many things point to it. Am I to understand that now by mutual
consent it is coming to an end?’

Palmer was silent, staring, and breathing hard. Then he moved away

from me and put one hand to his brow for a moment. I found the gesture,
the sign of weakness, infinitely touching. He spread his hands. ‘I have
nothing to say here,’ he said. ‘There are things which are not one’s own
property. I have told you what is relevant. If Antonia is never told you may
be quite certain that I shall never betray her by thought or deed. What you
saw tonight was an ending. Indeed your arrival sealed it as such. But it was
an ending in any case.’

‘If I had not appeared there might perhaps have been a sequel?’

‘No, I have told you no,’ said Palmer impatiently. ‘Martin, have the

grace to understand plain words.’

‘I don’t know how much to believe you,’ I said. ‘I don’t say this to

persecute you, but just to express what is the case. And I don’t know what I
shall do. I can tell you now that I think it is very unlikely that I shall tell
Antonia. But I can’t at the moment promise not to tell her.’

recovered himself and gazed at me, dignified, his cropped head thrown
back, his dressing-gown falling open to reveal a white chest shadowed with
grey hair. He looked touchingly old, an old warrior.

I said, ‘My arrival at any rate has sealed the end of my friendship with

you.’ I said this to provoke him, indeed in some wild need myself of
comfort.

Palmer, and again I admired this as I remembered it, took it full in the

face. He replied quietly, ‘We shall have to see about that, Martin. This has
been a terrible shock for both of us — we do not yet realize how terrible.
We shall begin to realize it tomorrow morning. And you will find that it is
scarcely less of a shock for you because you saw what you expected to see.
There are some things which imagination cannot do for one. After such an
experience a friendship, if it is to survive, must be very deeply altered and
reorganized. It remains to be seen whether our friendship can be so altered.
I hope sincerely that it can - and for myself I shall make every effort to see
that it is.’

‘Provided I don’t tell Antonia,’ I said.

He looked at me sombrely. ‘If you tell Antonia we are all done for.’

In the silence that followed I finished my whisky, and then addressed

myself to departure. With a strange spontaneous formality I bowed to
Palmer. He inclined his head; and as I left the room I saw him with head
still bowed staring into the fire. He caressed the fender with a naked foot.
But even as I closed the front door I could hear him emerging from the
room and making for the stairs.

As I stopped for a moment to look back at the lighted window I

wondered in what terrible and unimaginable colloquy those two were now
wrapped.

Twenty-one

before him but as it moved the blade came away and flew upwards into the
winter darkness which had collected above us. Clinging in fear and guilt to
what remained in my hand I recognized my father.

and the camp bed felt damp as well as very hard and cold. I had a sharp
pain in my stomach, doubtless the result of drinking a great deal the night
before. Or was it still the night before? I got up, found my dressing-gown,
and switched on the light.

The naked bulb lit up a scene of gloomy disorder, the gaunt camp bed

with its trail of blankets, the bare floorboards, my suitcase disgorging
towels, underwear, packets of letters, and an electric razor. My jacket and
trousers lay in a heap where I had drunkenly fallen out of them. The half-
empty whisky bottle stood in the corner. There were various cigarette ends.
The glass which I had just overturned with my foot rolled slowly across the
floor until it came to rest against a leg of the bed. It made a hollow sound.
The famous oil-fired central heating seemed to be making little impression
on the temperature of the room. I turned on the electric fire which was set
into the wall and it glowed in the bright light with a cheerless pallor. The
demon asthma, defeated when I went to bed by drink and sheer exhaustion,
was present still, and I could feel it squeeze my chest like a broad band
wound about me and gradually tightening. Intermittent whines and gurgles
issued from my lungs, I tried to breathe slowly. I knotted the belt of my
dressing-gown and opened the window, but shut it at once after one sniff of
the cold thick air outside. I looked out.

Far below me in a kind of dark, Lowndes Square slumbered in the haze

of its street lamps out of which black trees soared almost to the level of my
window. I could not make out whether the diffused light in which I saw the
shapes below was a twilight or whether it was simply the glow of lamplight
spread out upon the night. The sky was dark and thick. I wondered what
time it was. My watch had stopped and the telephone was not connected
yet. In what I could discern of the square there seemed to be no one about.
Perhaps I had only slept for an hour or two. What was certain was that I
could not now sleep again. I turned back to the room.

the full shock came to me. I had returned to London in a daze, had come
straight to Lowndes Square and had then slept until late. That had been,
assuming that it was now after midnight, yesterday morning. When I woke I
woke to a state of terror and despair which was unlike anything I had ever
experienced. I had tasted despair in the past, but as I remember it had
always had a fairly clear cause and a clear nature. This present thing was
confused and irrational and its very obscurity was a source of fear. I was
frightened to be alone with it and yet there was no one to whom I could run.
I could not even make out what part in my condition was played by horror
of incest. I had never consciously felt any aversion from the idea of an
embrace of siblings. Yet perhaps it was just this idea at work in my soul
through some pattern which I could not discern which brought about this
almost tangible sense of darkness. What was strange too was that this
particular horror, whatever its source, was now indissolubly connected with
my passion for Honor, so that it was as if the object of my desire were
indeed my sister.

During my interview with Palmer my sense of Honor’s proximity had

been as it were diffused, a trembling in the atmosphere which was not quite
a sound but which if it had been audible might have been a shriek. Now
afterwards my thought of her, focused, was a round pain to the periphery of
which the torn fragments of my being adhered like rags of flesh. I could
indeed hardly put a name to my state, so unlike was it to anything which I
had experienced previously when in love. It seemed as if this condition had
with those no common feature. Yet I could not think what else to call it if it
was not love which so brought me to my knees.

I could not without agony recall the mounting level of my intention and

its terrible climax. Something still remained to torment me of a kind of
dream which I had had of some miraculous and magnificent encounter with
Honor in which the lurid light of battle which had so flashed over our past
meetings should be transformed into, or rather finally seen as, the glow of a
violent love. I had dreamed of her as free, as alone, as waiting in her still
slumbering consciousness for me, reserved, separated, sacred. The so-
different truth of the matter could scarcely be contemplated. I had not for a
second conceived of her possessing a lover; and at the idea that she had

taken to her in that role her brother my fascinated and appalled imagination
reeled. In any woman this dark love could not but be something of colossal
dimensions. Some sign of how great it was I could indeed now in retrospect
see, interpreting in the light of my knowledge Honor’s bewildering conduct.

I thought of myself as in every sense lost, sunk without trace in a love

which now seemed tinged with insanity, and deprived altogether of hope. I
attached little importance to Palmer’s statement that what I had seen would
be without a sequel. It seemed as if Honor’s will alone, bent upon Palmer,
must bring all that she wished to pass. I had of course no intention, had
never had any intention, of speaking to Antonia. Antonia seemed to me as
unconnected with this as if she were a complete stranger. She seemed too,
for such monstrous knowledge, too flimsy and too small. I could not have
spoken to Antonia about my falling in love and so I could not speak to her
about this which was inseparably a part of my falling in love. No one would
ever know about it. But I could not see Palmer, even married to Antonia, as
ever free from the clutches of that tawny-breasted witch the vision of
whom, her jagged black hair in disorder, her face stern and angelic above
her nakedness, never ceased now to be before me; and I felt equally that I
was cursed for life, like men who have slept with temple prostitutes and,
visited by a goddess, cannot touch a woman after.

I spent the day in a sort of limbo. I could not eat anything, nor could I

rest because of a dreadful aching and tingling in the limbs. I walked about
in Hyde Park, returned to the flat, and set out again at once through fear of
being alone. The misty park was desolate as a moon landscape but at least
there were forms of human beings upon it here and there. I thought a little
bit about Georgie, but her figure, seeming already to belong to a remote
past, looked so sadly upon me that I could not endure to contemplate it. I
could not ask Georgie to console me because I loved another, nor could the
old love, poor pathetic thing as it now seemed, heal me of the new. I drank a
great deal and went to bed about nine o’clock in a desperate desire for
oblivion.

I wondered now if I should not try after all to go to sleep again. There

was nothing I could do with myself waking. I pulled the blankets back on to
the camp bed and lay down on top of them without switching out the light;

but the ache had come back into my limbs and I knew it was useless to
attempt to rest. I got up again and began to hunt for my asthma tablets,
tilting the rest of the contents of my suitcase out on to the floor. I found
them, and retrieved the glass which turned out to be cracked. I trailed out to
the kitchen and began gloomily to wash a plastic mug which had been left
behind by the previous tenant.

A strange sudden sound echoed through the flat. It was close by, and

yet I could not locate its direction. It seemed to come from everywhere at
once. I jumped, with a violent trip of the heart, and then stood rigid
listening to the silence and wondering what I had heard. The sound came
again. After a terrified moment I realized that it was the door bell which I
had not heard before. I adjusted my dressing-gown and went into the dark
corridor, leaving the door open behind me to give some light. I fumbled
with the catch of the front door, my hands trembling with nervousness, and
eventually got it open. The lights were on on the landing. It was Antonia.

I stared at her with an idiotic surprise and my heart beat faster as if I

already knew that she had brought bad news. She had her back to the light
but her darkened face seemed to stare as madly as my own. Without
speaking I turned back towards the lighted sitting-room and Antonia
followed me in, closing both doors behind her.

I moved towards the window and then back to look at her. She looked

wild. She wore a scarf over her head from which great strands of greying
gold hair escaped on to the collar of her tweed coat. She seemed to be
wearing no make-up and was extremely pale. Her big mouth was drooping
as it sometimes did before she cried.

I said, ‘What time is it, Antonia?’

‘Ten o’clock.’

‘In the night or in the morning?’

‘In the morning,’ she said, staring at me with wider eyes.

‘But why is it so dark?’

‘It’s foggy.’

‘I must have slept for twelve hours,’ I said. ‘What is it, Antonia?’

‘Martin,’ said Antonia, ‘did anything odd happen when I was away?’

My breath came short. ‘Odd?’ I said. ‘No, not that I know of. Where

were you, anyway?’ I had not even wondered till now. I had not had a
thought to spare for her.

‘I went to see mother,’ said Antonia. ‘She hasn’t been well. I’m sure I

told you. I wanted Anderson to come too, but he had to go to Cambridge to
fetch away his things.’

‘Why did you ask if anything odd had happened?’

‘Well, something must have happened,” said Antonia, ‘or else I’m

going mad.’

‘You’re not the only one,’ I said. ‘But I still don’t understand.’

‘Did you see Anderson at the week-end?’

‘No.’

‘Well, something’s happened to him.’

‘What?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Antonia. ‘It’s like in stories when someone is

possessed by the devil, or in science fiction. He looks the same and yet he
seems to be a different person. It’s as if a different personality inhabited
him.’

‘This must be nonsense,’ I said. ‘Sit down, for heaven’s sake, Antonia,

and stop looking as if you were going to scream.’

‘But he is changed,’ said Antonia, her voice rising. ‘He’s turned against

me.’ She was staring at me as if she positively wanted to infect me with her
own craziness.

‘ “Turned against you”?’ I said. ‘Come, come, Antonia. And please

don’t be so intense. I’m not feeling at all well myself. Now just tell me
quietly and in detail what the hell you mean. And do sit down, for Christ’s
sake.’

Something must have happened. He behaves quite differently to me, he’s
cold and he looks at me in such a terrifying way as if he were thinking
about killing me. Of course I got quite tearful, and that seemed to annoy
him more. Then he went away for ages in the middle of the night. And
Honor Klein has come back to the house and she seems to be everywhere at
once like a sort of black cloud. And honestly, Martin, I’m frightened.’ She
ended with a little whine and sat down on the camp bed, getting out her
handkerchief.

‘Pull yourself together,’ I said. ‘You must be imagining all this.’ I was

exceedingly shaken to see my own fear mirrored in her unconsciousness, in
her innocence.

‘It was such a shock,’ said Antonia. The big tears now coursed down

her face. ‘I could hardly believe it at first, I thought I must be imagining it
too. But he kept watching me, and so cold. As if I’d committed a crime. I
wonder if anyone has told him some story about me?’

‘What story could anybody tell?’

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ said Antonia. ‘Something about me and Alexander

for instance. You know the way people love to invent things. Somebody
must have done something to put him against me. There must have been
some misunderstanding. You haven’t done anything, have you, Martin?’

‘No, of course not,’ I said. ‘I haven’t seen Palmer. Anyway you know

perfectly well I wouldn’t do anything like that.’ Palmer must be on the rack,
wondering if I had told Antonia. The thought did not displease me.

I became aware of a faint hissing sound behind me. It increased, and I

turned to the window. It had started to rain. Looking at the greyish
yellowish sky I saw it now as daylight. I turned back to the lighted room
and the lifted frightened face of Antonia. The place was as bleak and lurid
as a prison cell.

‘Perhaps he’s going mad,’ she said. ‘Martin, did you know that his

mother was insane?’

‘No, I didn’t,’ I said. ‘Was she? That’s interesting.’

She sobbed, wiped her face slowly all over with the handkerchief and
sobbed again.

pitied her, but only as an unconscious extension of my own dilemma.

‘So Honor Klein is there,’ I said.

‘I hate the woman,’ said Antonia. ‘She was supposed to be going back

to Cambridge, but there she still was and now she’s actually living in the
house. She gives me the creeps.’

‘Me too,’ I said. The door bell rang and we both jumped.

I looked at Antonia, and her wide eyes followed me to the door. I

crossed the hall and flung the front door open. It was the removal men.

I told them to dump the stuff anywhere and returned to Antonia. She

was standing up now, examining her face in her pocket mirror. She dabbed
a little powder on to her nose and was now rubbing her cheeks which were
still shiny with tears. She pushed the scarf back off her hair and gave an
exhausted sigh. She looked haggard.

‘Darling, do use your common sense,’ she said. ‘You may as well have

the stuff put in the right rooms.’ She seemed a little recovered and went out
to organize the removal men. A few minutes later two giants came shuffling
in carrying the Carl-ton House writing-table with the Audubon prints
stacked on top of it. I told them where to put it. When they had gone I cut
the string which held the prints together and began to lay them out against
the wall in a row: the puffins, the nightjars, the gold-winged woodpeckers,
the Carolina parrots, the scarlet tanagers, the great crested owls. The
uprooted familiar things affected me with a sad sick feeling as if I were
dimly remembering that someone had died. I could hear Antonia’s voice in
the hall instructing the men. What was my sickness? I stared through the
prints, unable to focus my eyes upon them, into another world. Behold her
bosom and half her side, a sight to dream of not to tell.

Antonia came back into the room and shut the door. She was carrying

the Meissen cockatoos one in each hand. She put them on the two ends of

the mantelpiece. She said, ‘That’s all for this room, I’ve told them. Oh, the
bird prints, yes, you’ve taken them. I’d forgotten that they were yours.’ She
looked at them sadly and began to take off her coat.

them back to you.’

‘No. no,’ said Antonia. ‘I don’t want them. You must have your own

things.’

‘Well, you must come and help me arrange them,’ I said. ‘You will,

won’t you?’

Antonia looked at me. Her face contracted, and she shook her head,

trying to speak. Then she said, ‘Oh, Martin, I’m so miserable, I’m so
miserable!’ She began to wail with a low keening sound, and sat down
heavily on the bed rocking herself to and fro. For a while I watched her.

The door bell rang again. Antonia’s weeping stopped as if at the turn of

a switch, and as I passed her she clutched my hand for a moment. I gave her
a reassuring squeeze and went on out into the hall. Someone was
silhouetted in the open doorway. It was, of course, Palmer.

Ever since Antonia had arrived I had been expecting him, and it was

with an extraordinary exhilaration that I now saw his tall figure confronting
me. I could not see his face properly, but I could feel my own becoming
expressionless and bland. I was glad he had come.

Palmer said, ‘Is Antonia here?’ His voice was low and harsh and t here

was emotion in him.

I said, ‘Yes, do you want to see her?’

‘I’ve come to take her away,’ said Palmer.

‘Really?’ I said. ‘But suppose she doesn’t want to go?’

Antonia had opened the sitting-room door and the light now showed

me Palmer’s face, the straight tense line of his mouth and his eyes
practically closed. It was the face of a man in danger and I exulted at the
sight of it. Antonia said in a clear voice, ‘Come in here, please.’ The
removal men were coming up the stairs again carrying the Chinese

Chippendale chairs. I could hear them bumping on the banisters. I went
back into the sitting-room and Palmer followed. I closed the door and we all
looked at each other.

Palmer said to Antonia, ‘Please come with me, Antonia.’ He spoke in a

cold dead manner and I could see what she meant about his having changed
into another person. He must by now be certain that I had told her.

She hesitated, looked at me, looked at Palmer, and said in an almost

inaudible voice, ‘All right.’

‘You’re not going,’ I said to her.

Palmer said, ‘Just keep out of this, will you, Martin? You’ve meddled

enough in things you don’t understand.’ He was looking at Antonia.

‘You meddled in things you didn’t understand,’ I said, ‘when you

destroyed my happy and successful marriage.’

‘It wasn’t happy and successful,’ said Palmer, still staring at Antonia.

‘Happy husbands don’t keep little girls as mistresses. Put your coat on,
Antonia.’

‘She isn’t going with you,’ I said. ‘Can’t you see she’s afraid of you?’

Antonia stood paralysed, swaying a little, her shoulders twisted,

looking from one to the other of us with big alarmed eyes. She did in fact
look the picture of terror.

Palmer said, ‘Martin, you and Antonia will do as I tell you.’

‘Not any more,’ I said. ‘Poor Palmer. Now get out.’

The notion that I was shortly going to hit Palmer came to us all at the

same time. It showed in Antonia in a sudden excited moistening of the lips,
and in Palmer in a relaxing of his expression, a return of the wide-eyed
stripped look which he had worn in Cambridge. He stopped looking at
Antonia and turned to face me.

He said softly, ‘You are a destroyer, aren’t you.’ Then he said to

Antonia. ‘Use your reason. I want to talk to you, and not here.’

I said, ‘For Christ’s sake go.’

who moved back against the window, her hand coming up to her mouth. He
put his hand on her arm as if to pull her and she gave a little cry at the
contact. I followed him and dug my fingers into his shoulder. He turned and
knocked my grip roughly away, and as his hands came up I hit him in the
face as hard as I could. He lost his balance and fell heavily. Antonia stepped
over him and ran from the room. The fight, such as it was, was over.

Violence, except on the screen, is always pathetic, ludicrous, and

beastly. Palmer got slowly to his knees and then manoeuvred himself to a
sitting position with his back to the wall. He kept his face covered with his
hand. I squatted beside him attentively. I noticed that the glass of one of the
prints was cracked. I felt no anger against Palmer now, just a satisfaction in
what had happened. The rain was still hissing down outside the window.
After a minute or two I said, ‘Are you all right?’

‘Yes, I think so,’ said Palmer through his hand. ‘No serious damage. It

hurts like hell.’

‘That was the general idea,’ I said. ‘Let me see.’ I gently pulled his

hand away. Palmer’s face, contracting against the light, showed me the
beginnings of a splendid black eye. The eye was closed completely and the
area round it was raw and swollen. A little blood marked the place on the
cheek where my fist had arrived.

‘I haven’t anything to treat you with,’ I said. ‘You’d better go home.

I’ll get you a taxi.’

‘Give me a handkerchief, would you?’ said Palmer. ‘I can’t see

anything at the moment.’

I gave him one and he held it to his damaged eye while he got

laboriously to his knees again. I helped him up and brushed down his
clothes. He stood there like a child while I did so. I kept my hands upon
him and he did not move away. It was like an embrace. What I experienced
in that moment was the complete surrender of his will to mine. Then I felt
him trembling. I could not bear it.

I said, ‘I’ll give you some whisky.’ I poured some into the cracked

glass. Palmer sipped it with docility.

some money? I haven’t enough.’

‘Could you lend me five bob, by any chance?’

He put the whisky down and, handkerchief still to eye, fished inside his

coat. He gave me the silver, and I passed it all through the door to Antonia.
I could hear the men departing. I wanted Palmer out of the house.

I said, ‘I’ll go down with you now. We can pick up a taxi at the door.’

He nodded. I pulled on my trousers and jacket over my pyjamas and we

went out. There was no sign of Antonia. In the lift Palmer dabbed his eye
and said softly to himself, ‘Well, well, well…’ I escorted him to the street,
holding his arm, and a cruising taxi appeared almost at once. The rain was
still falling relentlessly. When he was in the taxi we both tried to think of
something suitable to say and Palmer said ‘Well’ again. I said, ‘I’m sorry.’
He said, ‘Let me see you soon,’ and I said, ‘I don’t know.’ The taxi drove
off.

I crawled back to the lift. I felt I wanted to go away somewhere and

sleep. I didn’t even know whether Antonia was still in the flat. It occurred
to me that it was for Honor and not for Antonia that I had hit Palmer. Or
was it? I reached the door of the flat which was still wide open. I went
through into the sitting-room. Antonia was standing near the window. She
seemed calm. Hands behind back, head thrust forward, she surveyed me
and her tired face was alive with a sort of provocative quizzical concern.
She must have liked my hitting Palmer. Perhaps if I had hit Palmer on day
one everything would have been different. Everything was certainly
different now. Now I had power, but useless power.

‘Well, that appears to be that,’ said Antonia.

‘What appears to be what?’ I said. I sat down on the camp bed and

poured some whisky into the glass. I was trembling now.

‘You’ve got me back,’ said Antonia.

‘Have I?’ I said. ‘Good show.’ I drank the whisky.

She came and fell on her knees in front of me, clasping my legs, and the
great crystalline tears which she used began to pour again. I stroked her hair
with one hand in an abstracted way. I wanted to be by myself and to think
what I was going to do about Honor. It struck me as a bitter paradox that my
flight to Honor had had the result of reconciling her and Palmer, Antonia
and me: whatever vision it was that she through the brother and I through
the sister had momentarily had it seemed likely now to perish. It was that
that would have no sequel. I went on drinking the whisky.

‘Martin, you are so familiar,’ said Antonia. ‘It seems silly to say this

when I ought to be saying much more splendid things to you, because
you’ve been wonderful. But it’s just this that strikes me! You know, I was
afraid of Anderson, right from the start. It was never quite right, there was
something a little forced. Do you know? I might even never have gone on
with it if you had resisted, but no, you’ve been marvellous, you’ve been
perfect. And it’s so much better for me, don’t you think, to have tried it and
come through, and come back — if I’d dropped the idea at the start I would
have been so tormented, wondering if perhaps there might have been
something in it.’

‘But aren’t you in love with Palmer any more?’ I asked. I stared at the

sleeve of my pyjamas which protruded damply from under my jacket. I had
got soaked in my dash to the taxi.

‘It seems callous, doesn’t it,’ said Antonia. ‘But somehow yesterday

and last night - I can’t tell you what it was like. I felt he hated me. He is a
demon, you know. And love can die quickly, I think, just as it can be born
quickly. I fell in love with Anderson in a flash.’

‘Heigh-ho,’ I said. ‘All’s well that ends well.’ I noted in a spiritless

way Antonia’s perfect assumption that I wanted her back. There was
something almost magnificent about it. But I could not play out the grand
reconciliation scene which she obviously wanted.

‘Martin,’ said Antonia, still on the floor, ‘I can’t tell you what joy and

relief it is to be able to talk to you again. Though we never really lost touch,
did we? Wasn’t that quite miraculous, the way we kept in touch?’

‘Pretty good,’ I said. ‘That was mainly your doing. Anyway, now we

needn’t worry about the Audubon prints.’

‘Darling!’ She hid her face against my knee, weeping and laughing.

The door bell rang.

I was in no mood for further visitors, but I went to the door. A wild

idea occurred to me that it might be Honor. It was Rosemary.

‘Martin dear,’ said Rosemary in her precise manner, businesslike as

soon as the door was six inches open, ‘I’ve come about the curtains. There’s
a problem about the shape of the pelmets, whether you want wavy ones or
straight ones, and I thought I’d better ask you and have a look again myself
on the spot. Good, I see your stuff has come. We can do a little arranging
straightaway.’

‘Come in, flower,’ I said. I led her to the sitting-room.

Antonia had dried her tears and was powdering her nose again. She

greeted Rosemary. I said to Rosemary, ‘I don’t think we need bother about
pelmets. Antonia and I are going to stay married after all, so everything can
now go back to Hereford Square.’

If Rosemary was disappointed, she concealed it gallantly. She said,

‘I’m so glad, oh I’m so glad!’ Antonia flew to her with a little cry and they
began kissing each other. I finished the whisky.

Twenty-two

letter is, here, the only honest letter. Let me have a
little note in return to say you have received this. I
hope you are well. I kiss you.

M.

I completed this not only unsatisfactory, but in some ways dishonest,
missive under the frank and friendly eye of Miss Seelhaft, who at her desk
across the room was making copies of the latest price list. Mytten was away
visiting a bibulous titled client; he had been persuaded, not with difficulty I
dare say, to stay over the week-end. Some very serious tasting of Lynch-
Gibbon wines was apparently taking place. Mytten excelled at those
methods of business, especially favoured in the wine trade, where the
matter in hand is introduced with leisurely indirectness and a sale takes
place almost at an unconscious level, so little reference has there been to the
crude details of commerce. Such methods, however, demand time, and
Mytten always took his. I was not displeased at his absence.

Miss Seelhaft looked up every now and then to see if I was all right.

She and Miss Hernshaw, once again informed of my fortunes before I came
to tell them, had with a perfect tact combined discreet congratulations with
respectful solicitude. They gave their nod to the convention, but did not
pretend not to notice the extent to which I was worn out and wretched. They
were full of little kindnesses and generally treated me as an invalid, while at
the same time welcoming me back to work in a manner which in less
intelligent girls would have showed as patronizing. We all, they strenuously
and I with a languid acquiescence, kept up the fiction that the business had
scarcely been able to carry on without me.

I sealed up the letter to Georgie. I wondered what she would make of it.

There is a time limit to how long a spirited young person can be kept in
cold storage. Georgie’s time must be approaching the end. But there was
nothing I could do, I could not face seeing Georgie just now. If I saw her I
could not tell her the truth - and neither could I bear to lie to her face-to-
face. It was true that I didn’t want to lose her. I wanted her love. I was not
so flush with love that I could afford to dispense with it. But I did not yet
want to make the effort required to decide that I could not merit, and
therefore could not ask for, that love. I wanted, frankly, not to have to think

about Georgie at all for the present. There were other matters which
rapaciously claimed my soul. Miss Hernshaw, who played mother to us,
came in at that point with the tea. As she passed Miss Seelhaft she brushed
her arm against her friend’s shoulder as if by accident. I envied them.

I went home by tube. It was odd, this feeling of being integrated once

again into the ordinary life of London. For over a week now I had been
going to the office every day and returning at five-thirty to Hereford
Square, just like in the old days; and as I hung from my strap in the swaying
train, reading the short story in the Evening Standard, I was sometimes
tempted to think that I had been the victim of a rich and prolonged but now
completed hallucination. Yet I had not dreamed it. The constant pain was
enough of a reminder.

Antonia’s mood of exaltation was over. It had not lasted long; and now

she appeared to be, as I had said to Georgie in the letter, simply broken. I
found the spectacle of this broken-ness extremely pathetic and moving, and
I had not been insincere in telling Georgie how much Antonia now needed
and claimed my attention. The house at Hereford Square still seemed grey
and derelict; after having been half slaughtered it had not yet come back to
life. We had brought back the pictures and the smaller objects by car, but
the rest of the stuff that had gone to Lowndes Square was still there, and
Antonia to whom I had left the task of organizing its removal had not yet
had the energy to attend to it, so that notable gaps, especially that caused by
the absence of the Carlton House writing-table, figured to us as visible
scars. How deep were the invisible scars we were only just beginning to
learn.

We nursed each other. Antonia, who looked much older and whose face

had developed an expression of sulky irritability which was new to it,
showed a tendency to crossness which she tried visibly to control. We had
sharpish exchanges followed by periods of strenuous solicitude. We were
perpetually inquiring about each other’s health, fetching hot-water bottles,
boiling milk, making tea, and dosing each other with aspirins and
phenobarbitone. The house even smelt like a hospital. The fact is we were
both exhausted, and yet with nerves sufficiently on edge, both required each
other and found rest impossible together. For myself, what mainly sustained

me was feeling sorry for Antonia. It was not a pure compassion, but a
feeling, I very well knew, compounded with the vindictive. She was aware
that she had made me suffer; but she would never know the extent and the
nature of the suffering for which, no doubt irrationally, I could not help
somehow blaming her. We were both defeated.

It was in some ways fortunate that during this time Antonia was so

extremely self-absorbed. She assumed wearily and completely that I was
content to accept a return to our former situation. Georgie’s name was not
mentioned; and I could not make out whether Antonia was now indifferent
to my infidelity, or believed that it had ceased. It seemed, strangely, most
likely of all that she had simply forgotten about Georgie. I could not quite
suppose, mad as we both then were, that she had literally forgotten; but it
seemed as if her tired and confused spirit could only deal with a few matters
at a time, and evidently Georgie was not one of them.

Palmer’s name was not mentioned either. We both knew that it would

have to come up. But we were resting. There was no sign of life from
Pelham Crescent. Those two had vanished as if they had never been.
Antonia suggested of her own accord that she might go down and stay with
Alexander at Rembers. I would have been glad enough to have her looked
after yet off my hands. But it turned out that Alexander was not at Rembers,
but was in London on some mysterious ploy of his own, and in fact we saw
very little of him. Rosemary turned up regularly, bringing flowers, fruit,
magazines, and other toys for invalids, but neither of us was glad to see her.
So, with pity and with exasperation, we lived side by side, each of us sunk
in our own thoughts.

In so far as it was possible to do so I thought about Honor the whole

time. She filled my consciousness to the brim. She became the atmosphere
which I lived and breathed. I endlessly went over our various encounters in
my mind and marvelled at how necessarily and how vastly she now, after so
little acquaintance, existed for me. But what I chiefly clung to was one
thing: she had not told Palmer about the scene in the cellar. At least she had
not then told him; and with that, as my thoughts ran frantically again
through the same circuit, I measured with despair the gap between then and
now. Then I had been free and thought that she was. Now I was caught, and

somehow more profoundly and irrevocably caught than before, while she - I
did not know what to think. At times I attached importance to the idea that
Palmer had, through his relation to Antonia, been trying to free himself
from a burdensome obsession. At other times I felt equally certain that the
strange pair, after Palmer’s abortive experience, had become even more
united. In any case there was nothing I could do. I did not seriously
envisage leaving Antonia. I had her, and definitively so, on my hands. Nor
did I even know, though this was somehow the least of my concerns,
exactly what picture of me was present in Honor’s mind. In spite of
evidence to t he contrary, and coming back again to the fact of her silence to
Palmer, I was confident that I existed for Honor. Yet, and I concluded it for
the hundredth time, I was powerless. And yet, starting out again for the
hundred and first time, I could not stop thinking about Honor and with
every reason for despair, somewhere, through some minute cranny, there
filtered a ray of hope to make in the dark labyrinth of my bewildered
thoughts a little dim twilight.

Of course my mind returned continually with fascination to the fact of

incest. I even visited the public library and read up everything I could on
the subject. The psychological literature was scanty and unsatisfactory, and
I soon turned my attention to mythology where, with a curious gratification
which was almost consoling, I noted the frequency of brother and sister
marriages, particularly among royalty and gods. Who after all was fit for a
royal brother except his royal sister? The progeny of such unions, I also
noted, was various, often monstrous. When not so engaged my imagination,
in an incompetent and frustrated manner, followed the liaison of Palmer and
his sister back into their childhood. I reflected too, though not to much
purpose, on the insane mother. What lurid illumination I thus engendered
served merely to display with a vividness which prostrated me the figure of
Honor, aloof, frightening, sacred, and in a way which I now more clearly
understood, taboo.

It was still raining. It had been raining for days. I arrived at Hereford

Square, shook the water off my overcoat and hung it up, and tramped into
the drawing-room. A bright fire was burning and the lamps were all on. The
curtains were not yet drawn and I could see outside the light from the
window the dripping form of the magnolia tree. Antonia, who had been

reading by the fire, jumped up to welcome me. She had a Martini all ready
mixed, and a bowl of cocktail biscuits on the little table. She kissed me and
asked me what sort of day I had had. I told her and began to sip my drink. I
sat down heavily on the sofa. I was now, all the time, unutterably tired as if
simply keeping alive was a terrible effort. Absentmindedly I picked up my
latest volume of The Golden Bough.

‘Must you read over your drink?’ said Antonia sharply. ‘I’ve been

alone all day, except for Rosemary coming in this morning, which was
hardly a treat.’

‘Sorry,’ I said. I put the book aside.

‘And why are you reading mythology all the time now? You never used

to. You haven’t even looked at that book I got you on the war in the
Pacific.’

‘Sorry, darling,’ I said. ‘I’ll read it next.’ I closed my eyes. ‘And don’t

go to sleep either,’ said Antonia. ‘I want to ask you to do something for
me.’

‘Anything you like,’ I said rather sleepily. ‘What?’ ‘Will you go and

see Anderson for me?’ That woke me up. ‘Why?’ I said. ‘To achieve what?
And why don’t you go yourself?’

‘I don’t want to,’ said Antonia. ‘God knows what exactly I feel about

Anderson. Sometimes I think I hate him. But I’m quite clear that the whole
thing is utterly over.’

‘Then why should I see him?’ I said. But my heart burnt with desire.

‘Simply to finish it off,’ said Antonia. ‘And there are practical things.

There are a lot of my belongings at Pelham Crescent, which you might
bring away, or arrange for a van to take, I suppose, as you wouldn’t be able
to get them all into the car.’

I said, ‘Do you want me to find out whether Palmer still loves you?’

Antonia looked at me wearily, as if from far away, through infinite grey

curtains of gloom and resignation. She said, ‘He can’t love me, or else he
wouldn’t have given up just because you put your fist in his eye.’

This seemed true; and I was reminded again of Antonia’s innocence.

Her connexion with Palmer and Honor, since she did not share in the
knowledge that was crucial, seemed flimsy and abstract compared with
mine. How connected I was I felt through my bones and my blood as I
contemplated the possibility of seeing them again. I had known, of course,
that it would come to this, I had known that I would see them again. It was
perhaps just this certainty, secretly at work in my imagination, which had
shed the little glimmer of hope. But, resting, I had averted my attention.

‘You’re sure you want me to do this, not you?’ ‘Yes,’ she said, and

sighed heavily. ‘It’s an unfinished business. I shall be relieved when it’s
done and you and I can settle down to living a normal life again.’

She sounded so dejected that I got up and leaning over her kissed her

on the brow. I remained, leaning a little on her shoulder, my cheek touching
her crown of golden hair. It was fading into grey. One day, without having
noticed the transition, I would see that it was gold no longer.

Twenty-three

But Antonia was impatient, and I could get from her a grace of only

three days. Resolved at last, she wanted to make a quick end. Our
discussion had taken place on a Monday. It was agreed that I should write to
Palmer simply suggesting that I should come to see him at six o’clock on
the following Thursday. This gave him time to reply; and in fact I received
a postcard, brief but bland, by return to say that the time was suitable. By
nine o’clock on the Wednesday evening I was already in a state of almost
unbearable agitation and could settle to nothing. Not even a recently
discovered book of Japanese legends, wherein brothers and sisters regularly
lay together and procreated dragons, could retain my attention; and I would
at last in desperation have gone to the cinema, only I feared that at the sight
of anything sad or touching I might break into audible groans. Antonia was
equally restless and had been in a mood of nervous irritation throughout the
afternoon. We both wandered morosely about the house passing and re-
passing each other, profoundly connected yet unable to touch, in a silent
mutually hostile way.

replied to my letter. Pain at this neglect, a particular pain separable from my
other troubles, persisted, and I had had the intention of writing to her again
that very evening. But when the time came I was unable to. The figure of
Honor stood between us. I could not see Georgie any more. I could not, at
that moment, even distantly envisage going to call on her; and to write now
without suggesting a meeting seemed insuperably difficult. So I postponed
thinking about Georgie, as indeed I was now postponing everything, until
after my visit to Pelham Crescent.

I had just made another round of the house and was wondering if I

could decently go to bed and whether if I did I would have another attack of
asthma. Antonia had now got the entire contents of the linen cupboard out
on to the stairs and was quite unnecessarily folding and sorting them. I
stood on the landing for a while and watched her in silence. The telephone
rang.

‘I’ll go,’ I said, and took a long stride down over the piles of linen. ‘Be

careful,’ said Antonia. I entered the drawing-room, closed the door, and
picked up the receiver, as I always did now, with the expectation of
something strange. It was Alexander.

I was pleased to hear his voice. ‘Hello, you ruffian,’ I said. ‘Why are

you neglecting us? Antonia’s dying to see you. You’ve no idea how dull
we’ve become. Do come and cheer us up.’

Alexander sounded confused. He said, yes, he’d love to come and he

was sorry he’d been elusive, but first of all he had something important to
tell me and he had better not beat about the bush.

‘Beating about the bush,’ I said, ‘is exactly what you are doing. What

is it?’

‘I’m going to get married.’

I was shaken. I said, ‘Well done, at last, brother. Who is she? Do I

know her?’

‘Well, you do, actually,’ said Alexander. “It’s Georgie.’

talking still. I put my hand over my face.

With a hideous rush, like blood returning to a crushed limb, I was

invaded by my old love for Georgie; and in that instant I realized how very
much I had all the same, all the same, all the same, relied upon her
faithfulness. I had been mad.

I picked up the phone again and said, ‘Sorry, I missed that last bit.’

‘I said, I suppose it’s no use hoping that you won’t be displeased, even

angry. But I hope too that in the end you’ll wish us luck. Do you want to see
us, or would you prefer not?’

‘I’ll wish you luck now,’ I said, ‘and of course I want to see you. I

can’t think why you imagine I’d be displeased. I’m afraid I had nothing left
for Georgie except a bad conscience. You’re a cure for both of us. Honestly,
I’m delighted.’ With a fluency that amazed me lies and treachery streamed
from my lips. I was in extreme pain.

‘You’re an ace, Martin,’ said Alexander. ‘Would you mind breaking it

to Antonia?’

‘I’ll tell her surely,’ I said. ‘But won’t you both come round to see us

now, this evening? Where are you, anyway? Is Georgie with you?’ I felt
such misery, and such frenzy, at the news, I wanted now only to fall upon
the knife, to get the major shock over as rapidly as possible.

‘Yes, she’s here,’ said Alexander, ‘and sends her love.’ He muffled the

phone for a moment and I could hear him saying something
indistinguishable. ‘We’re at Gloucester Road station in fact. We’ve got to
make another phone call, but we could be with you in ten minutes if you’d
really like to see us.’ Alexander was obviously eager to get it over too.

‘Of course we would,’ I said. ‘It’s an occasion for champagne. Come

as soon as you can. Tell Georgie I’m very pleased with you both!’

‘Thanks, Martin,’ said Alexander. ‘I thought you’d blow me out of the

water.’

‘Admit you’re a fast worker!’

I heard Alexander’s relieved laugh at the other end. ‘I knew what I

wanted for once.’

black uncurtained garden. It had stopped raining and in the silence I could
hear the water dripping from the magnolia. Antonia came in.

She saw my face and said, ‘Christ, what is it?’

‘My dear brother Alexander is getting married to Georgie Hands.’

‘No!’ said Antonia. Struck by the vehemence of that no, its tone of

utter bewildered rejection, I looked at her face. It had become in an instant a
wrinkled mask of pain. Antonia minded.

I said, ‘Well, I expect it’s all for the best. You ought to be pleased. It

removes temptations from my path.’

Antonia drew her breath in sharply as if for an exclamation. But she

said nothing. She turned her head away and I thought for a moment that she
was going to burst into tears. I was surprised at her reaction. She must have
laid more store than I realized by her tender sentimental friendship with my
brother. But of course she was in an over-excited state.

I said, ‘I asked them to come round now to drink some champagne.

They’re at Gloucester Road. They should be arriving in a few minutes. I
hope that’s all right by you.’

‘You asked them round now?’ said Antonia. Her face, screwed up with

distress and anger, was positively ugly. ‘You perfect fool! Have you no
consideration? I’m going out.’ She turned to the door.

‘Dear Antonia,’ I said, ‘don’t be cross with me. I didn’t know you’d

mind. I should have asked you. I’ll entertain them alone if you like. But do
please stay.’

She stared at me for a moment almost with hatred. Then she left the

room, clapping the door sharply to behind her. I heard her feet going
heavily up the stairs. I waited, mastering a physical pain of jealousy so
severe that it almost doubled me up. The bell rang. I went out into the hall.

blew warm and fragrant in through the doorway, they stood tall and
indistinguishably close together. ‘Come in, you disgraceful pair,’ I said.

They entered in silence and I helped them off with their coats.

Alexander was wearing a stiff smile which must have been a duplicate of
my own. I led the way into the drawing-room and by the fireplace we
spread out and looked at each other’s faces. It was, for all three, an effort.
The shock was extreme. I could see Georgie trying to control a grimacing
smile which kept returning. She was not able to prevent the blood from
rushing visibly to redden her two cheeks. After the first quick glance she
avoided my eye. Alexander watched us both tensely, ruefully; but he had,
and could not conceal, the air of a successful man.

‘Well, Martin,’ he said, ‘so you forgive us?’

‘Of course, lunatics,’ I said. ‘There’s nothing to forgive.’ I went

forward and kissed Georgie on her burning cheek. It was not easy. I felt her
shiver. I shook Alexander by the hand. I said, ‘You’re bloody lucky.’

‘I know it,’ he said humbly, and cast a quick look at Georgie. He

added, ‘Life can be very sudden, can’t it? But the fastest things are often the
surest things. Once we got the idea we needed little convincing!’

I had no desire for these sentiments and confidences. I wanted to get

past the moment of hearing Georgie’s voice. I turned and said to her more
roughly than I had intended, ‘Come on, Georgie, speak up. It’s only your
old friend Martin. So my headlong brother carried you off?’

‘Yes,’ said Georgie in a low tone, still not looking at me.

‘Well, you’re lucky too,’ I said. ‘Come and sit by the fire and we’ll all

have some champagne. And you can stop looking as if you’d been caught
stealing the till.’ I plucked Georgie’s sleeve and drew her to the sofa. This
time I was really magnificent. They both sat down.

Alexander said, ‘We’ll soon stop looking hangdog. We’re terribly glad

we’ve told you. Where’s Antonia? Have you told her?’

‘Yes, indeed,’ I said. ‘She’s delighted too. She’s just powdering her

nose. She’ll be down in a minute.’ I hoped this was true.

deliberate attempt to relax. Her breath came slowly and deeply. She was
thinner and paler, wearing a black tweed pinafore dress with a high-necked
striped blouse. Her hair, cascaded on top and carefully pinned, was
immaculate. She seemed, with so much neatness, beautifully older.
Alexander, with a cautious veiled tenderness, returned her look. The sense
of my exclusion was for a moment almost unbearable; and I had a sudden
repetition of an impression which I had had before in relation to Palmer and
Antonia. They simply wanted me out of the way. I had to be somehow,
tenderly, carefully, lovingly, but relentlessly dealt with before they could
pass me by and get on with their lives together.

Georgie at last had steadily turned to look up at me and our eyes met.

Hers were big, intense, troubled, yet full of a vitality which might at any
moment shamelessly declare itself as happiness. God knows what she saw
in mine. In that interchange she could not help, very briefly, now that she
had a hold upon her emotions, exhibiting, almost flaunting before me, her
new sense of her freedom. She had said that without freedom she would not
exist. No wonder I had lost her. I went to fetch the champagne.

As I returned with bottles and glasses I became aware that Antonia was

quietly descending the stairs. She had changed her dress and put on a good
deal of make-up. She had evidently decided not to go out. When she saw
me she paused a moment, gave me a sombre hostile look, and then
proceeded slowly to the drawing-room door. I opened it for her and
followed her in. The other two, who were sitting together on the sofa and
ostentatiously not talking to each other, rose.

I caught a glimpse over her shoulder of Alexander’s face. His features

were drawn together as if focusing to a point. The moment passed.

‘Well, what a lovely surprise!’ said Antonia, her voice a little higher

than usual. She was the least under control of the four of us.

‘I hope we have your blessing,’ said Alexander in a low submissive

voice. He stooped towards her.

‘My most hearty blessing!’ said Antonia. ‘Can blessings be hearty? My

blessing anyway. Let me kiss the child.’ She kissed Georgie, who stared and

gripped Antonia’s arm as the kiss descended on her cheek. I poured out the
champagne.

Alexander and Georgie were exchanging looks. We raised our glasses

and I said, ‘Let me be the one to say, a happy ending to a strange tale! From
Antonia and Martin, to Georgie and Alexander, love and good wishes and
congratulations!’ Rather awkwardly we clicked the glasses and drank.

I poured out some more. Everybody was needing the stuff and we

drank it like addicts. During this ritual there was a curious silence, all of us
staring about at each other. I looked at Alexander. His face, seeming a little
harder and absurdly young, had the crazy dazed look which is born of
reckless behaviour or happiness. He had turned now to look at Antonia and
I saw his features focus once again, drawn out to a fine point of provocative
appeal. Georgie, not looking at him, was leaning very slightly in his
direction as if responding to a magnetic pull. Their bodies were already
acquainted. Georgie was gazing up at me now with a fugitive distressed
smile well under control, keeping her glass steady at her lips. Drink always
restored her. Antonia, holding her glass away from her in one hand in an
Egyptian attitude, was staring at Alexander. Her mouth drooped. I noticed
the rouge on her cheeks and how elderly she had become. But after all I had
become elderly myself. I reflected that we were two aged parents wishing
the young people well.

To end the silence which had gone on too long I said to Georgie, ‘How

smart you’re looking! Quite the up-to-date girl.’

Georgie smiled, Antonia sighed, we all fidgeted a little, and Alexander

murmured, ‘There was a young man of Pitlochry, Kissed an up-to-date girl
in the rockery …’

Still desperately kicking the conversation along I said, ‘And talking of

Pitlochry, where are you off to for your honeymoon?’

Alexander hesitated. He said, ‘New York, actually,’ and looked at

Georgie. I looked at her too. She looked down into her glass.

We were all silenced again. That had been an unlucky move and I

could see Georgie’s averted face stiffen and grow burning red.

I said hastily, ‘How nice. And where will you live? Mainly at

Rembers? Or up in town?’

‘Both, I expect,’ said Alexander. ‘But we certainly intend to inhabit

Rembers properly, not just at week-ends.’ He answered vaguely conscious
of Georgie’s mounting distress.

‘That will be good for Rembers,’ I said. ‘It’s a house that loves people.

It will be good for it to have a real family in it, to have children there
again.’

As I said this and promptly wished it unsaid, I heard Georgie draw a

sharp breath. She closed her eyes and two tears rolled suddenly down her
cheeks.

Antonia heard the indrawn breath and turned her head. She saw

Georgie’s face. Then she said Oh, her mouth worked, her brow reddened,
and her own eyes, like two great wells, were instantly overflowing. She
bowed her head over the glass which she was holding stiffly in front of her
and her tears fell into the champagne. Georgie had covered her face with
her handkerchief. I looked at Alexander and Alexander looked at me. After
all, for better and worse we had known each other a long time.

Twenty-four

I closed the front door behind me and hung up my dripping raincoat. I

had set out far too early from Hereford Square and had spent some time
walking about in the rain trying to become calm and rational. All the same,
my heart nearly choked me, so high did it leap, as I knocked on the door of
Palmer’s study and went in to the lamplight and the quiet interior, warm and
dry and close-fitting as the inside of a nut. Palmer was alone.

He lay outstreched on the divan. He was in pyjamas, with the purple

dressing-gown and thick red slippers. Although he had his back to the light
I saw at once the greenish shadow on his cheek, the remains of the black
eye. I saw it with surprise, having forgotten that I had struck him, or having
not quite in retrospect believed that his flesh was vulnerable. He was
fumbling when I came in with a large box of paper handkerchiefs. A
wastepaper basket full of crumpled paper was beside him and his first
words were, ‘My dear fellow, don’t come near me, I’ve got the most
devilish cold!’

looked at Palmer wearily, passively. Perhaps after all I had only come to be
judged and punished. I waited for him to act.

‘Do have some whisky. There’s some on the side, and ice in that barrel
thing. A cold always goes straight to my liver so I’ll stick to barley water.’

I helped myself and lit a cigarette and waited. It now seemed clear to

me, desolately, that I was not going to see Honor; and if this,
inconclusively, was the end it was a terrible one.

‘How is Antonia?’ said Palmer.

‘Very well,’ I said.

‘I doubt that,’ said Palmer, ‘but she will recover. Falling out of love is

chiefly a matter of forgetting how charming someone is. She will forget
soon.’

‘You demon,’ I said. ‘You speak as if you were not, yourself, in the

least involved.’ I spoke dully, however.

‘No, no,’ said Palmer. ‘Don’t misunderstand me. I was very carried

away by your wife, very carried away indeed.’ He sneezed again and said
‘Damn!’

‘Have you succeeded in forgetting how charming she is?’ I asked.

‘Do you want me to?’ said Palmer.

‘Leave me out,’ I said.

‘Dear boy, how can I?’ said Palmer.

‘That’s the trouble,’ I said. ‘No one can leave me out. Yet I don’t fit in

either. Never mind.’

‘Why did you come?’ said Palmer.

‘Just so as to close the matter. Antonia likes things neat.’

‘By “neat” do you mean tidy or pure?’

your cooperation is needed to make an end. How exactly you do it I leave to
you. These subtleties are in any case your province.’

‘Does Antonia want to see me?’ said Palmer. I looked at him closely.

His clever eyes were upon me. His hand moved slowly to jettison a
handkerchief. The darkly shadowed cheek seemed to suit him, suggestive of
some half remembered picture of Dionysus. I thought, he is sure I have told
her. I said, ‘No.’

Palmer watched me a while and then sighed and said, ‘It is better so.’

He added, ‘How are you, Martin?’

‘Dead,’ I said. ‘Otherwise fine.’

‘Come,’ said Palmer, ‘tell me, tell me.’ His voice was caressing and

persuasive.

I was surprised to find myself braced as for a resistance. I said,

‘Nothing, nothing.’

‘What do you mean, nothing?’

‘I mean, no loose ends.’

‘You are a liar, aren’t you,’ said Palmer.

I stared at him. It seemed impossible that he should not know all that

was in my mind. I wondered what Honor had told him. I said, ‘Palmer, I
came here to take leave of you, on behalf of Antonia, and to arrange to
remove the things which she left here. May we keep our attention on those
two matters?’

‘I’ve had her things packed,’ said Palmer. ‘That will be dealt with. But

do you seriously intend to stay with Antonia after all this?’

‘Yes.’

‘You are most unwise,’ he said. ‘You should take this opportunity to

part. It will be far better for both of you – and harder later. I speak quite
disinterestedly, of course.’

his words as to a longed-for summons. But I continued, ‘We are not going
to part. And anyway it’s our business.’

‘Your marriage is over, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘Why not recognize it?

Wouldn’t you like to talk it over with me? Indeed if you like “clinically”. I
don’t mean necessarily now this minute, but soon. I feel sure I could help
you.’

I laughed. ‘For the first time since I met you I find you capable of

stupidity.’

Palmer looked at me with the deliberate gentleness of the professional

doctor. I noticed that behind his head the row of Japanese prints had been
replaced. He said, ‘What seems to you my stupidity is simply my need. We
don’t want to lose you.’

‘We,’ I said, ‘for heaven’s sake?’

‘Honor and I,’ said Palmer.

I tried very hard, deepening my frown, to let my face reveal nothing.

‘What would not losing me consist in?’

‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘Why should we be able to define it

beforehand? Let me be simple. I think it is important for you both that you
should leave Antonia. You want to leave Antonia; and this is not a moment
for placating your very abstract sense of duty. On the whole, “do what you
want” costs others less than “do what you ought”. You will destroy Antonia
slowly if you stay with her. Be resolute. And don’t be ashamed to accept
help. The psyche abhors a vacuum. Honor and I are going away soon to
travel, far away, and for a long time. Nothing real detains you. Come with
us.’

I looked at the ground. Palmer had a talent for making me feel that I

was going mad. I had never heard speak more clearly the voice that says ‘all
is permitted’. And with that ‘all is permitted’ came also ‘all is possible’, and
a vision of Honor, somehow, somewhere, after all, existing in my future. I
looked up again and saw that, coming from the door behind Palmer, she had
entered the room.

the back of my chair, I saw myself confronting them as a prisoner confronts
his judges. This made me harden and I breathed and sat down again,
staring.

Honor was dressed in a high-necked black garment of which I could

not remember afterwards whether it was a silk dress or an overall. Her arms
were bare below the elbow. She stood behind Palmer, whose relaxed body
seemed to glow with awareness of her, and they both observed me, Honor
with her head lowered and her shining band of hair falling forward to frame
her eyes. She stood behind Palmer like a captor, and the voluptuous curve
of his relaxed body spoke the word ‘victim’. I felt I ought to turn away.

‘I’ve asked Martin to join us,’ said Palmer. He was watching me with a

broad half-smiling face, as one might watch a struggling fish or a fly.

‘Are you mocking me, Palmer?’ I said. I could not look at Honor.

‘Don’t fall below your destiny, Martin,’ said Palmer. ‘As a psycho-

analyst, I don’t of course imagine that freedom is to be won by convulsive
movements of the will. All the same, there are times of decision. You are
not a man to be bound by ordinary rules. Only let your imagination
encompass what your heart privately desires. Tell yourself: nothing is
impossible.’

I laughed and rose to my feet again. ‘You are mad,’ I said. ‘Do you

really imagine that I could live, for however short a while, with you two,
that I can even go on knowing you two? Am I to take this seriously?’ At
this my eyes met Honor’s over Palmer’s head.

In that instant a communication passed between us, and even as it did

so I reflected that it was perhaps the final one. I did not imagine it; she gave
me a very slight shake of the head and a curtain came down over her eyes.
It was a decisive and authoritative farewell: in the pain of which, as I
received it, I also knew for certain that she had not talked about me to her
brother. It was our first and last moment of intimacy, vivid, but concentrated
to a solitary point. I looked back instantly to Palmer.

I said, ‘We have finished with each other.’

if we shall meet again.’

‘Then good-bye,’ I said.

‘As you choose, Martin,’ said Palmer, ‘as you choose.’

Twenty-five

We had been over this a number of times. ‘I wonder how I know that

you’re lying?’ said Antonia.

It was breakfast-time, a late breakfast-time, on the next day. Antonia

and I, still in dressing-gowns, were sitting on over the cold toast and coffee.
It seemed that neither of us could move. She was pale, listless, and irritable.
I was exhausted.

‘I’m not lying,’ I said. ‘If you won’t believe what I say, why do you

keep asking me?’

Now that the taboo had been broken Antonia could talk of nothing but

Palmer, endlessly remaking her relationship with him retrospectively.

‘Whatever he said he didn’t say that,’ said Antonia.

I had not the heart to tell her that she had scarcely been mentioned.

‘Alexander’s right,’ I said. ‘He’s not quite human.’

‘When did he say that?’ said Antonia.

‘When he heard about you and Palmer.’

Antonia frowned down at the cold cloudy liquid in her cup. She pushed

back on to her shoulder the half-undone bundle of her weighty hair. She
said ‘Ach -’, and then ‘Nor is she.’

‘Nor is she,’ I agreed, and sighed. We both sighed.

don’t want to hear of them again, I don’t want to know that they exist.’

‘That’s what will happen, my darling,’ I said. ‘Falling out of love is a

matter of forgetting how charming someone is. You’ll be surprised how
soon you forget.’ We sighed again.

‘Forget! Forget!’ said Antonia. ‘We both seem to be half dead.’ She

lifted her eyes to mine, sombre, restless, cross.

I wondered whether I did indeed want to leave her. Yes, I suppose I did.

Not that it mattered. I wondered what, at that moment, she was thinking
about me. With curiosity and hostility we examined each other.

‘You do love me, don’t you, Martin?’ said Antonia. She asked it, not

tenderly, but with a sort of brisk anxiety.

I said, ‘Of course I do, of course.’

It sounded flimsy enough, and we went on looking at each other

morosely, our eyes dark with private grief. It would have needed a great
effort to take her hand and I did not make the effort. And as I stared and
stared at last Antonia became invisible and all I could see was Honor, her
dark assassin’s head bowed a little towards me, the curtain falling upon the
light of her eyes.

‘There’s a parcel for you, by the way.’

I returned with a start. I broke up some cold rubbery toast in my hand. I

wondered if I had the energy to make us some more hot coffee. ‘Oh,
where?’

‘In the hall,’ said Antonia. ‘Don’t move, I’ll get it. And I’ll put on the

kettle for more coffee.’

She came back in a moment carrying a long narrow box covered in

brown paper which she put down beside me with the words ‘Orchids from
some admirer!’ and then went away into the kitchen.

I looked at the box and picked at my lower lip. My lips were dry and

cracked with too much smoking. I lit another cigarette and wondered
distantly how I would get through the day. It was a problem demanding

some ingenuity. I glanced at the window and saw that it was still raining. I
cut the string of the parcel with the bread knife.

more lashes. Palmer had too much confused me. If he had deliberately
intended to place a barrier across the path of my desires he could not have
done better; and this made me half believe that, after all, he knew. But with
this, and with far more authority, there came the image of Honor shaking
her head: Honor utterly secret but lost. I began to pull t he paper off the box.

Palmer did not know, but it didn’t matter now whether he knew or not.

They would go, the infernal pair, to Los Angeles, to San Francisco, to
Tokyo, and Antonia and I would forget; and I would do, and she would do,
what defeated desire, together with a bored and dim conscience, suggested
as remaining for us to do. I opened the box.

There was a lot of dark stuff inside. I stared at it with a sort of puzzled

revulsion, wondering what it was. I stood up and moved the box to the light
to see it better. I felt I did not want to touch it. At last I did very gingerly
touch it, and as I did so I realized that it was human hair. It took me another
moment to recognize the long thick tress which filled the box as Georgie’s
hair, Georgie’s whole beautiful dark chestnut-tinted head of hair. I
cannoned violently into Antonia in the doorway.

‘Georgie,’ I called, ‘Georgie,’ and banged again upon the locked door

of her room. There was silence within.

As I got the car out I exclaimed to Antonia that of course Georgie must

be all right since she would be with Alexander, and Antonia had told me
that Alexander had rung up from Rembers last night when I was out and
had mentioned that Georgie was still in London. All the same, Antonia
thought my anxiety was completely irrational. I knocked again.

I listened to the silence. Of course it was ridiculous to be so afraid. The

arrival of the hair had had the heavy significance of a token in a dream; but
there was no need to apply nightmare logic to it. Georgie’s present was
doubtless a jest, though a rather bitter and macabre one. She herself was
probably at this moment in some nearby library, and I stood outside an
empty room. Yet I could not quite convince myself of this and I knew that I

could not go away. I wondered if I should make some more telephone calls;
but I had already rung all the numbers where she might be found. Almost
by now I simply wanted to get into the room as if this in itself would avert
disaster. The locked door had become magnetic. Still I waited, until,
prompted suddenly by something I thought I heard, I leaned down and put
my ear to the keyhole, holding my breath. After a moment I heard a sound
and then came the same sound repeated. It seemed to be a low regular sigh
of heavy breathing coming from just inside the door. I straightened up and
stood for a moment chilled and paralysed. What I had heard terrified me. ,

Georgie’s windows were inaccessible. There was no way in but

through the door. I threw myself against it once or twice in a futile manner.
Then I remembered the decorator’s tools which were still lying about
downstairs. I rushed down and began to turn them over. The street door was
open as usual and outside on the bright rainy pavements people were going
to and fro. I selected a heavy flat-ended cementing trowel and a hammer
and raced back upstairs. I dug the edge of the trowel as deeply as possible
into the crack of the door beside the lock and drove it farther in with blows
of the hammer. Then I used the trowel as a lever. Something cracked inside.
A moment later the handle of the trowel broke off. I pushed the door but it
was still firm. I took the hammer and struck the door with all my strength in
the region of the lock. There was more cracking and then I could see a
crevice growing wide. I gave it my shoulder and the door came open.

I went in and pushed it to behind me. There was a heavy silence within.

The room was dark, as the curtains were still drawn. The place was airless
and smelt vilely of alcohol and stale tobacco smoke whose fumes seemed to
linger visibly in the air as I pulled the curtains apart. Or perhaps I only
imagined that there was a grey haze. Someone was lying on the floor. It
took me a moment to be certain that it was Georgie. It was not just that her
shorn head made her hard to recognize: her face too, in a deep slumber of
unconsciousness, had quite lost the semblance of her usual self, had become
as it were anonymous. It seemed as if she had almost, already, gone.

I leaned over her and spoke her name and shook her by the shoulder.

She was completely inert and I realized that she had passed beyond any
such immediate recall. Her face was puffed and blueish, and she was

breathing raucously through her mouth. I did not hesitate for long. I found
the telephone book and dialled the number of Charing Cross Hospital and
explained that someone had accidentally taken an overdose of sleeping
pills. They promised an ambulance at once. In that area it was a daily
occurrence.

I knelt down on the floor beside Georgie. I wondered if I ought to go

on trying to wake her, but decided not to. I felt obscurely that I might do her
harm by touching her; her condition imposed a taboo and the limp half-
inhabited body filled me with a sort of revulsion. She looked like a drowned
girl. At first I kept looking at her face whose strangeness fascinated me. It
was indeed as if she had become a different person, as if an alien being had
taken her body. I could have been persuaded that this was merely a rough
semblance of Georgie; and as she lay there completely limp with her mouth
open, the lifeless air and the deep regular breathing made her seem like a
waxwork. She was lying on her side with one hand extended above her
head. She was wearing a blue shirt and black trousers. These I recognized.
Her feet were bare. I contemplated her feet. These I recognized too. I
touched them, They felt cold and waxen and I covered them with a cushion.
I looked at her long trousered legs and at the curve of her thigh. The shirt
was unbuttoned and I could see the rise of a breast within. I looked at her
neck and at one ear now more fully revealed by the shorn hair. I looked at
her extended familiar hand, the palm uppermost and open as in a gesture of
appeal or release. All these I had possessed. But now it was as if all had
disintegrated into pieces, the pieces of Georgie, the person lost.

I was scarcely at that moment capable of memories or speculations. But

I seemed again to hear her voice saying, ‘Martin, you don’t know how near
the edge I am.’ Indeed, there was so much I did not know, had not cared to
know. Georgie’s stoicism had helped to make me a brute. She had so
cunningly spared me her sufferings. I had enjoyed but never had to pay. But
someone had paid. As I looked down at her slim inert body I recalled the
nightmare of her pregnancy which had ended in relieved embraces and
champagne. If she died, I had killed her. I thought this, but stupidly and
without feeling. There was no whole presence in the flesh before me and I
still could not bring myself to touch her. It would have been like fingering
parts of a corpse. Yet with a sense of abasement in which there was an

element of desire I lay full length on the floor beside her with my face close
to hers. I could feel her breath.

Some moments passed. I heard a sound at the door and began to rise.

Reclining on one elbow I saw a figure enter. The door closed again. Honor
Klein was looking down at me.

I got as far as a sitting position and said, ‘The ambulance is coming.’

Honor said, ‘I was afraid of this. She sent me a very strange letter.’

I said, ‘She sent me her hair.”

Honor stared at me. Her face was closed and stiff. Then she looked at

Georgie and said, ‘I see. That’s it. I thought she looked rather odd.’ She
spoke with detachment and precision.

I thought, she is pitiless. Then I thought, so am I.

Honor was wearing a shabby unbelted mackintosh. She was hatless, her

black hair a little sleeked by the rain. As she stood there, hands in pockets,
surveying the room she had a sharp business-like air. She might have been a
detective. I rose to my feet.

She said, ‘As she let us both know let us hope that she has not made a

serious attempt. Have you found the tablets?’

I had not thought of that. We began to hunt, shifting books and papers,

upsetting loaded ash-trays and piles of underclothes, and tipping the
contents of drawers on the floor, stepping to and fro over Georgie’s inert
legs. I undid the dishevelled bed and looked under the pillow. Turning back
to see Georgie still lying there amid the disordered sea of her belongings
and glimpsing for a second the intent face of Honor as she rifled another
cupboard I wondered into what half-ludicrous nightmare I had strayed. At
last we found something, an empty bottle which had contained a well-
known brand of sleeping drug, and we left off our search.

I looked at my watch. It was hard to believe that it was less than ten

minutes since I had telephoned the hospital. The ambulance must arrive
soon. Suddenly still, Honor and I looked at each other across the recumbent
Georgie. It occurred to me that this was the first time that I had been alone

with Honor since the night in Cambridge. Only I was not alone with her. We
had a terrible chaperone. She was present to me, but only as a torment, as
an apparition; and I knew that I was looking at her as I had never looked at
any human being but as one might look at a demon. And she looked back
out of her shallow Jewish mask, the line of her mouth dead straight between
the curving lips, the narrow eyes black. Then we both looked down at
Georgie.

Honor knelt down beside her and began to clear away from round her

the various papers, garments, and other oddments which had a little snowed
upon her during our rifling of the room. I saw with a curious surprise that
Georgie was lying in exactly the same drowned attitude as when I had
arrived. When Honor had cleared a space about her she put her hand on the
girl’s shoulder and turned her on to her back, moving her outflung arm
down to her breast. Then she put a cushion under her head. I shivered. As I
knelt on the other side the two women composed for me for an instant into
an eerie pietà. Honor with bowed head, suddenly gentle with concern, and
Georgie slain, alienated, sleeping.

Honor was still touching Georgie’s shoulder. As if this contact lent an

articulate presence to the sleeping girl, I now felt able to touch her too and I
drew my finger down her thigh. I could feel the soft warm leg through the
material. But what I felt more, as in an electric circuit, was the shiver of
connexion between Honor’s hand and mine; and I remembered our two
hands almost touching on the blade of the Samurai sword. I covered my
face. The ambulance came.

Twenty-six

Georgie lying back, propped up with pillows, seemed indeed like an

over-excited little girl. Her face was rather red and retained a new look of
plumpness. Her hair, which she had shorn roughly at the nape of the neck,
had been a little trimmed up by the Sister, but was still jagged and stuck out
awkwardly on either side of her head, making her look very juvenile. She
nervously caressed a white fluffy toy dog which Antonia had brought her,
and looked at each of us in turn with a bright diffident imploring smile. We
leaned benevolently over her.

It was now the third day since Georgie’s exploit. She had been in a

coma for more than twelve hours, but was now out of danger and
considerably recovered. Palmer was sitting close to her at the head of the
bed and I was sitting opposite him. Antonia was perched on the bed, her
legs curled under her, and Alexander was leaning on the iron rail at the foot.
Honor Klein leaned against the window ledge behind Palmer.

‘Oh dear, I’ve caused you all so much trouble!’ said Georgie. ‘I do feel

bad.’

‘All’s well that ends well!’ said Antonia, her hand impulsively meeting

Georgie’s in the soft fur of the toy dog. Antonia had been positively
rejuvenated by the news of Georgie’s attempt. On hearing of it she had
completely cast aside her listless and defeated air. After three days of
exhilaration and excitement she looked distinctly handsomer and like her
old self. Yesterday she had bought three hats.

“And so you should feel bad!’ said Palmer. ‘Strictly speaking, we

should have given you a good thrashing, instead of spoiling you like this!’
He passed his hand affectionately over her dark cropped head, turning it
slightly towards him.

I could feel Honor Klein’s eyes upon me, but I did not look at her. She

leaned there with a bland cat-like expression which was almost a smile, and
did not join in the chatter. Alexander too was subdued, brooding on Georgie
with a sad gentle stare, immersed in the enjoyment of his private emotions.
I envied his evident ability to feel. I was hollow.

‘I felt such a sham when I came round,’ said Georgie, ‘and I thought to

myself, all the other women on this corridor are here with real illnesses, and
I am just a trouble-maker. But do you know, they’re all in for the same thing
as me! The woman in the end is quite proud because she took the largest
dose!’

We laughed. Alexander murmured, ‘ “To sleep! Perchance In dream

…” ‘ half audibly and then would not repeat what he had said.

I looked at Georgie’s nervously twisting hands. I felt com-passion for

those hands as they jumpily fondled the toy dog. But I could no longer
apprehend Georgie as a whole. She had never, after that strange scattering
of her, come together again. I felt no grain of passionate interest in the once
familiar body which lay extended so close to me. Something, even, in her
still changed and alien face repelled me. It was as if she had died indeed. I
wanted, when I thought of this, to kneel by her bed and bury my face and
groan as a sort of desperate act of mourning. But I went on sitting there
with a fixed half-smile. I wondered if, supposing I were to reach out and pat
her hands, the gesture would look intolerably artificial. I could still feel
Honor’s eyes upon me like a cold sun.

‘Well, it all makes employment for members of my profession,’ said

Palmer. ‘Though I must admit it doesn’t usually bring me in such delightful
patients!’

Georgie, as was usual in such cases, had been asked to undergo some

psychiatric treatment, and Palmer had under-taken to satisfy the

requirements by enrolling her as a patient. She was soon to travel to
Cambridge for a short stay.

‘It’s absurd, of course,’ said Georgie. ‘I’m perfectly sane, in fact - far

saner than most psycho-analysts!’

‘Thank you, my dear!’ said Palmer. ‘I’m sure you are. But a little

sorting out will do us no harm.’

I thought, soon Georgie will be telling Palmer all about her sex life. I

reached out and patted one of Georgie’s fidgeting hands. She shuddered.

Antonia said, ‘Well, my child, I mustn’t spend all day on your bed! I’ve

got a hairdressing appointment. I must dart off.’ She pulled herself off the
bed without looking at me and smoothed down her smart spring suit. She
looked radiant.

Alexander said, ‘I’ll drive you. I’ve got to fix up about that exhibition.’

He gave Georgie his deep sad look, pressed his two hands over her feet
through the bed-clothes, and left the room in the wake of Antonia.

The sun was shining, the bright, cool late-January sun, with misleading

hints of springtime, and the white room was gay with it. I wondered if I had
better go too and leave Honor and Palmer with Georgie. I ought to have
been tasting hock that afternoon. There was still time to get along. Only it
seemed to have become extremely difficult to move or speak, as if I were
being subjected to some paralysing ray. Palmer was holding Georgie’s
hand. He too looked exceptionally well, with his hard clean look, the skin
brown and unwrinkled, his crop of light grey hair as smooth and dry as an
animal’s fur. When I saw him too so positively glowing it passed through
my mind that he might conceivably have re-established some relation with
Antonia. But that was impossible. I looked at Honor Klein over Palmer’s
head. She was still smiling like an archaic statue.

‘Suppose you kids run along,’ said Palmer. ‘I want to talk seriously to

my patient!’

I got up and said, ‘Well, good-bye,’ and kissed Georgie on the brow.

She murmured something and smiled after me, her feverishly brilliant eyes

wrinkled up with anxiety. I went out and down the stairs. I could hear
footsteps behind me.

Twenty-seven

She said ‘Yes’ and I led the way in silence to the car.

I retain little memory of the drive to Pelham Crescent. Oddly, in

retrospect that journey is jumbled in my mind with my first journey with
Honor from Liverpool Street Station. I recall only a blaze of exhilaration
which came with the certainty of what I was about to do. Through the rush-
hour traffic the god that protects drunken men protected me.

When we arrived I got out of the car and followed her to the house,

which seemed not to surprise her. She opened the door, held it for me, and
then went into the drawing-room. The bright sun made the sombre room
seem bleak and soulless, taking the warmth out of its rich colours. It looked
dusty. I came in and shut the door behind me. We faced each other down the
length of the room.

It was now indeed that I felt that I might faint, and I remember grinding

my wrists against the panel of the door so that the pain might steady me.
She was watching, still with a trace of the archaic smile, and I felt the
power in her. I controlled my breathing.

With an evident and relentless attention Honor waited for me to speak.

I said at last, ‘I suppose you realize that I am in love with you?’

She considered this, with head slightly on one side as if listening, and

said, ‘Yes.’

I said, ‘I doubt if you realize how much.’

She turned away, giving me her shoulder, and said, ‘It doesn’t matter.’

She spoke quietly but without weariness.

‘That I love you, or how much?’

‘The latter. I’m touched that you love me. That’s all.’

‘It’s not all,’ I said. ‘Honor, I want you savagely and I shall fight for

you savagely.’

She shook her head and turned back now to meet my eyes. She said,

‘There is no place for such a love.’ Her ‘no place” seemed to search the
universe and fold it into a box.

I would not take this. I said, ‘When did you know I loved you?’ It was

a lover’s question.

‘When you attacked me in the cellar.’

‘So you know what it meant when I appeared in Cambridge?’

‘Yes.’

‘But you did not tell Palmer.’

She simply stared at me and I saw the old snake in her looking coldly

out through her eyes; and I saw again in a vision the darkness of her breasts
and how I had found her with her brother, and I shuddered not so much at
what I had seen as at the fact that I had seen it. She could never forgive me.

‘You wrote me a lying letter,’ she said. She stood looking at me, her

head thrust forward, the collar of her overcoat turned up behind her black
wig of hair, her hands in her pockets.

‘I wrote you a foolish letter,’ I said. ‘I didn’t know at the time it was

lying.’

There was a slight pause and I was afraid she would dismiss me. I

flattened my hands against the door behind me and almost prayed. I divined
distantly within her some obscure hesitation. If I could only find the right
words I could keep her talking, I could in this brief and vital moment for a
little longer hold her; but for a single blunder I would be sent away.

I said, picking my words carefully, ‘I am glad that you are not sceptical

about my being in love. If anything is evident at least this must be. And you
must also see my difficulties, since you and the circumstances have not
allowed me much opportunity for self-expression. It would profit me little
now if I were to tear your clothes off. But I would walk through sea and fire

if you called me.’ I spoke this in a low reasonable voice; and as I spoke I
thought of Palmer’s return and of the perilously limited time that remained
to me.

She listened as if attentively to this, her dark eyes pondering me, and

said, ‘You do not know what you are asking. Do you want my love?’

This startled me and I said, ‘I don’t know, I don’t even know if I think

you capable of love. I want you.’

After a moment she laughed, and then said, ‘Martin, you are talking

nonsense.’ She turned away and pulled off her overcoat with a sudden
gesture and went to the side-table where the drinks and the glasses stood.
She poured out two glasses of sherry. I noticed with ecstasy that her hand
was trembling.

I did not leave my post. She placed one of the glasses on a little table

half-way down the room and retired to the fireplace. I came and fetched it
and returned to the door. I felt that if I came too near her I might tear her in
pieces; and I felt a quivering joy in my blood which was my sense of her
realizing this too. Then with a delayed reaction I apprehended her having
used my first name, and I had to make an effort not to cover my face.

‘Nonsense about doubting your capacity to love, or nonsense about

simply wanting you?’ I said. I was terrified of putting a foot wrong.

‘You don’t know me,’ she said.

‘Let me know you. I have an apprehension of you which is deeper than

ordinary knowledge. You realize this also or you would not be talking to me
now. You are not a woman who wastes her time.’ I trembled too, yet
irrationally and almost with exasperation I felt that only some thin brittle
barrier divided us from a torrent of mutual surrender. If I could only see
what act of mine would break it.

‘Return to reality,’ she said. ‘Return to your wife, return to Antonia. I

have nothing for you.’

‘My marriage to Antonia is over,’ I said. ‘Palmer is right. It is dead.’

‘Palmer spoke out of his own conventions. You are not a fool. You

know that there are many ways in which your marriage is alive. In any case,
do not think that this is more than a dream.’ And she repeated, ‘Return to
reality.’ Yet still she did not dismiss me.

‘I love you,’ I said, ‘and I desire you and my whole being is prostrate

before you. This is reality. Let us indeed not be blinded by any convention
about where it is to be found.’

‘Convention!’ she said, and laughed again. I laughed too, and then we

were both tense and solemn once more. I was stiff with concentrating and
with bending my eyes and my will upon her. She stood there in her ancient
dark green suit, feet apart and hands behind her back, staring at me.

She said, ‘Your love for me does not inhabit the real world. Yes, it is

love, I do not deny it. But not every love has a course to run, smooth or
otherwise, and this love has no course at all. Because of what I am and
because of what you saw I am a terrible object of fascination for you. I am a
severed head such as primitive tribes and old alchemists used to use,
anointing it with oil and putting a morsel of gold upon its tongue to make it
utter prophecies. And who knows but that long acquaintance with a severed
head might not lead to strange knowledge. For such knowledge one would
have paid enough. But that is remote from love and remote from ordinary
life. As real people we do not exist for each other.’

‘I have at least with you,’ I said, ‘paid all the time. This precisely does

make you real for me. You give me hope.’

‘I do not intend to. Be clear about that.’

‘What anyway does a love do which has no course?’

‘It is changed into something else, something heavy or sharp that you

carry within and bind around with your substance until it ceases to hurt. But
that is your affair.’

I felt that I had displayed weakness and that this perhaps was fatal. She

moved and her shadow moved upon the floor in the cold sunshine. As she
fumbled for cigarettes in the pocket of her overcoat I felt sure that in a
moment now she would send me away.

moment; and then with deliberation went on lighting her cigarette. She
finished and looked at me, her hands hanging loosely at her sides, one
holding the smouldering cigarette. Her solemn face of a Hebrew angel
regarded me, ready, stripped of expression. But I could no more have
touched her than if she had been the Ark of the Covenant.

When I was near to her I fell on my knees and prostrated myself full

length with my head on the floor. It happened as spontaneously as if I had
been knocked to the ground. It was strange, but I could have lain there for a
long time.

After a moment or two she said, ‘Get up,’ in a steady voice, very deep.

I began to rise. She had moved back and was leaning against the

mantelpiece. I could not prevent myself from supplicating. On my knees I
said, ‘Honor, let us not fight like this. Only see me a little. I ask only that. I
know nothing of how you are situated yourself or what you want. But I feel
certain that this thing which has been shivering and trembling between us in
this half-hour is a real thing. Do not kill it. That is all I ask.’

She jerked her head, frowning in an exasperated way, and I realized

that I had broken whatever precarious spell it was by which I had in these
decisive minutes held her. I got up.

She said, ‘We are not fighting. Please do not deceive yourself. You are

living on dreams. You had better go now. Palmer will be here soon, and I
had rather you went first.’

‘But you will see me again?’

‘There would be absolutely no point in my doing so. Palmer and I are

going away almost at once.’

‘Do not speak so,’ I said. ‘I want you abjectly.’

‘Dear me,’ she said mockingly, ‘and whatever would you do with me if

you had me?’

These words, conveying to me the simple truth that she could not

regard me as an equal, stopped my mouth at last.

As I got into my car I saw Palmer getting out of a taxi near by. We

waved to each other.

Twenty-eight

At about ten o’clock the bell rang, but it was only the removal men

with the rest of the furniture from Lowndes Square. They carried it in, and
managed to knock a chip off the Carlton House writing table while bringing
it through the door. After they had gone I stood sadly beside the thing,
licking my finger and dabbing it on the scar to darken the wood. Then I got
some polish and rubbed it all over, but without persuading it to settle down.
It retained a derelict temporary air as if it thought it was already at
Sotheby’s. The room had never recovered.

I did some telephoning, including calls to local police stations to

inquire about accidents, and still to no avail. Just after eleven the telephone
rang, but that was Mytten ringing up about the hock. I was, to an extreme
and irrational degree, upset and worried. It was not like Antonia to
disappear without warning, and I could not help imagining her lying
unconscious in a hospital bed or floating face down in the Thames. The
quality of the anxiety brought back to me my frantic distresses as a child
about any prolonged absence of my mother; and as then, I tried to comfort
myself by saying: in an hour, in two hours, she will have returned,

everything will be explained, everything will be as usual. But meanwhile
the minutes ticked silently past without bringing any news.

Of course it was true, and this was the proof of it, that my marriage was

still in many ways very much alive. It may sound abject, but I came home
from Honor wanting to be comforted by Antonia. I had made her Martini as
usual, expecting her soon after six o’clock. There is no substitute for the
comfort supplied by the utterly taken-for-granted relationship; and after all,
in spite of all that had happened, Antonia and no one else was my wife. It
did not occur to me to reflect that there was anything illogical in this; and
indeed there was nothing illogical’.

When I left Honor I was in extreme pain, a pain produced by our last

exchanges. However, as I sat waiting for Antonia and before I began to be
anxious, I had been invaded rather by a profound exhilaration. Considering
the extreme difficulties and dangers of the enterprise the interview had not
gone too badly. I was impressed by the fact that Honor had been willing to
talk at all. I was pretty certain that she had even now not told Palmer of my
condition. I recalled with delight her trembling hand. She had told me that
she intended to give me no hope. But she had, effectively, given me hope;
and she was no fool. Of course I knew soberly that it was a small, a very
small hope. But when one is in love a little light shines a long way. What I
most needed was a sense of reprieve. I could not believe that Honor and
Palmer were really going away, far away or for long; and I was certain that I
should see her again. Of the claims of my wife and of her brother I made,
by a double method of thought, nothing; either I would lose Honor, in
which case all would be as before, or else, per impossible, I would gain her,
and this would create a new heaven and a new earth and the utter sweeping
away of all former things. I would be a new person; and if she were
relentlessly to draw me I would come to her even if I had to wade through
blood. To this soliloquy my worries about Antonia broke in; and it was not
until nearly noon on the following day, when sheer exhaustion brought
about a pause, that my thoughts returned fully to Honor, and I thought of
her words about the severed head. I had been glad on the previous day to
reflect that I had not sent her my original letter in which my behaviour had
been, in such dreary terms, explained. I did not love her as a substitute for
Palmer, whom I loved because he had seduced my wife: I was certain of

that; and I had as little sympathy for her own method of explanation. I did
not love her because incest inspired irrational horror; although, as I thought,
I knew that the scene in Cambridge was something still active and scarcely
touchable in my imagination, something unassimilated and dangerous. I
closed my eyes and saw again what I had seen then.

There was a flurry at the door and Antonia came running into the room.

I leapt up, both relieved and oddly frightened to see her. I ran to her and
shook her shoulders. She laughed as I did so, and then took off her hat and
coat and threw them on a chair. She looked elated, almost drunk. I stared at
her in amazement.

I said, ‘Damn you, I’ve been nearly off my head. Where were you?’

‘Darling,’ said Antonia. ‘We’re going to have a drink now, a nice big

one. Just be patient. I’ll tell you everything. I’m sorry I couldn’t let you
know. But you’ll see. Sit down and I’ll get the glasses.’

I sat down on the sofa. Now that she had come back I felt only

weariness and irritation. I decided I had better go off to bed. Last night’s
comatose sleep had done me no good.

Antonia sat beside me, put the drinks on the table, and then turned my

head gently with one hand so that I faced her. Then she poured most of her
drink out of her glass into mine. There was something vaguely reminiscent
about the gesture. She returned to looking at me with her bright moist
tawny eyes. Her hair shone like pale copper, and I could not think how I had
seen her as growing old. Her reddened mouth worked with inarticulate
tenderness.

‘All right, all right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad to see you!’ I took her hand.

‘Darling,’ said Antonia, ‘I don’t know how to say this, because I don’t

know how much you know.’

‘Know about what?’

‘About me and Alexander.’

‘You and Alexander?’ I said. ‘Are you sure you’ve got the name right?’

knew? You must have known for ages.’

‘Known what?’

‘Well, that I and Alexander - well, to put it quite bluntly that Alexander

has been my lover.’

‘Oh, Christ,’ I said. I got up. Antonia tried to retain my hand, but I

pulled it away.

‘You mean you didn’t know at all?’ said Antonia. ‘Surely you must

have guessed. I was sure you knew. Alexander wasn’t so certain.’

‘What a fool you must both think me.’ I said. ‘No, I didn’t know. Of

course I realized you were very fond of each other. But I didn’t know this.
Do you imagine I would have tolerated it? How little you know me.’

‘Well, you tolerated Anderson so well,’ said Antonia. ‘That was one

thing that made me feel you must have known, you must have understood,
about Alexander. Besides it was so obvious.’

‘You are stupid,’ I said. ‘Palmer was different.’

‘I don’t see why,’ said Antonia. ‘And what do you mean by saying you

wouldn’t have tolerated it? I loved you both, you loved both of us,
Alexander loved –’

‘You make me feel ill,’ I said.

‘You knew I had to have both of you,’ said Antonia.

‘Well, from now on you’re only having one of us.’

‘Don’t say that, darling,’ said Antonia with urgency. She got up and

tried again to take my hand. I put it in my pocket. ‘It’s true that we both
love you and we can’t do without you and we won’t do without you. You
were so splendid about Anderson. Don’t spoil things now.’

‘I’ve spent all my splendour.’

‘Be rational, my dearest Martin, my child,’ said Antonia. ‘And, oh

darling, don’t look like that. After all, this situation has existed for a long
time. It isn’t as if I’d only just thought of it.’

fact has it existed?’

‘Oh, always,’ said Antonia. ‘I don’t mean that we always met very

often. That varied. But the situation existed.’

‘Always? You mean ever since we got married?’

‘Really since before we got married. I fell in love with Alexander

practically as soon as I met him. Only I didn’t start to believe in my love
until it was too late. You remember you wouldn’t let me meet Alexander
until after our engagement was announced. You said he always took your
girls away. And then everything was so public. I hadn’t enough nerve.’

‘You mean our marriage never really existed at all?’

‘Of course it existed, darling. I loved you both. I love you both.’

‘I don’t think you understand that word,’ I said.

‘You hurt me terribly,’ said Antonia. We looked at each other. Her face

had a hard dignity and she withstood my gaze. She had certainly, since the
last occasion, travelled. She still looked like an actress. But a great actress.

I walked away to the window and looked out at the magnolia tree. The

weak sun revealed the moss upon its old trunk. It looked dead.

‘Why didn’t you tell me?’ I said.

‘As I say, I thought you knew. I thought you preferred it all being

gentle and inexplicit.’

‘Well, why are you making it all nasty and explicit now?’

‘Anderson woke me up,’ said Antonia. ‘He made me in some ways

more absolute. After that it was impossible to go on in quite this way. I was
in love with Anderson, I was terribly carried away by him. I couldn’t help
myself. It was both wonderful and terrible. I’d never felt the earth give way
under me quite like that. Of course it nearly killed Alexander. He saw it
coming from miles off - and I was practically afraid for his reason. He
suffered far more than you did.’

‘Did he know before I knew?’

‘Yes. I couldn’t deceive him. And anyway he guessed.’

‘But you could deceive me.’

‘You deceived me,’ said Antonia.

‘That was different,’ I said.

‘You keep saying things are different that aren’t,’ said Antonia. ‘Of

course our marriage could never have been quite right. You realized it, after
all. You had to have someone else too. I would have forgiven you.’

‘No marriage is ever quite right,’ I said. ‘But I believed in ours. Now

you tell me it never was. I haven’t even got the past left.’

‘You are such a dreamer, Martin,’ said Antonia. ‘You like to dream

along without facing things. Well, you must face things now. And do stop
being so sorry for yourself.’

‘Don’t be brutal to me, Antonia. I just want to understand. You say that

Palmer woke you up?’

‘Yes, he made me honest. Made me braver, perhaps. It is better to be

explicit and to try to hold things all the same. It was wonderful how I
managed it with you, over Anderson. And somehow I held on to Alexander
as well. However much he suffered, we never lost touch. That was
wonderful.’ ‘Wonderful. I see. So you’re trying it out on me again?’
‘Dearest,’ said Antonia, ‘I knew you’d come round!’ She came up behind
me and I could feel her gentle touch on my shoulder. I still stood looking
out at the magnolia, my hands behind my back.

‘What makes you think I’m coming round?’ I said. ‘You must, you

must!’ she said with tender urgency, and began to undo my hands and take
them in hers. Without turning I let her hold them. ‘But what about
Georgie?’

‘Oh, that was sheer despair,’ said Antonia. ‘Alexander had been so

dreadfully hurt by the Anderson business. While it was going on he was in
too much pain to be angry. He kept his anger until after it was over. Then he
wanted to punish me.’

‘You mean he never really intended to marry Georgie at all?’

dear. We were estranged from each other for a short time, and it was hell for
both of us. Surely you must have seen me suffering. He imagined he wanted
something new, and he started it off with Georgie just as a distraction.

He was half mad. But then of course he realized that it was no good.

That was why Georgie tried to kill herself, when she found out that
Alexander really loved me.’ Her voice droned on quietly over my shoulder.

‘Is that right?’ I said. I was becoming dazed and stupid. I felt like an

empty vessel that is struck again and again. Even Georgie’s love was being
taken away from me. It would take little now to make me believe that
Georgie had loved Alexander all along. At any rate she had been waiting for
Alexander all along. Yet she had sent me her dear hair.

I turned round and faced Antonia and we stood together in the window.

She caressed my arms, leaning her head forward with the old look of
possessive tenderness.

‘Poor Georgie,’ said Antonia. ‘But she’s young, she’ll soon find

someone else.’

‘You must be pleased with yourself,’ I said. ‘It turns out everyone loves

you in the end.’

Antonia smiled her triumphant smile. ‘I’m good at it!’ she said. Then

she touched my cheek. ‘Don’t resist my love, Martin. I must keep you in
my loving net. We’ll hold you, you know, we’ll never let you go! After all,
you were unconsciously living it before. Perhaps we were all a little in a
dream. Now it has come fully to consciousness, and things will be put right,
as they would have been at the start if I had had more courage. And if we
are brave and good it will all be better now that we are truthful, oh better,
far better!’ She spoke softly, rubbing my cheek as if she were rubbing into it
some spell-binding ointment.

I removed her hand and scratched the place where it had been. ‘Well,’ I

said, ‘it’s nice that you won’t have to change your name. It will be so much
less confusing for the trades-people. I’m glad we’re keeping you in the
family.’

you dear ironical creature! You move me so much when you try to conceal
your goodness in that flippant way.’

‘So I’ve got the same old part, have I? I can’t seem to stop being an

angel of light and mercy.’

‘Your goodness is too much for you, Martin,’ said Antonia. ‘You

couldn’t be harsh if you tried. You have a far better character than your
brother! Oh, I do love you!’ She embraced me in a flapperish manner,
lifting one high-heeled foot impetuously behind her. I suffered her embrace.

‘What did Palmer think of your capers with Alexander?’ I said over her

shoulder. I wanted to draw some blood.

She drew back from me and her face, touched by a real pain, looked

less histrionic. She hesitated, and then said, ‘I never told him.’

‘Why not?’

‘Because Alexander meant too much to me. I couldn’t bring myself to.

It was our secret. And Alexander didn’t want me to. I suppose I would have
told him in the end, but I kept putting it off. And then he found out.’

‘Did he? How? When?’

‘How, I don’t know,’ said Antonia. She was turned a little away from

me, her mouth agitated, twisting her hands. ‘I half thought for a while that
you’d told him, but of course that was impossible, and anyway you
wouldn’t have. When, was that week-end when I went to Mother’s. He
must have found out then. Perhaps he found a letter or something. And he
was too terribly hurt to go on.’

‘I see,’ I said, ‘I see. Poor Palmer. But it was all for the best in the end,

wasn’t it?’

‘Oh yes!’ Her face softened and the moist radiance returned. ‘Oh yes! I

am so terribly relieved that I shall not lose Alexander after all. Somehow
this test with Anderson has shown it to be so utterly the real thing. That’s
why I’ve got to have it in the open now and have my life properly in order.
I’m very grateful to Anderson, really.’

anyway. So aren’t you a lucky girl?’

‘Aren’t I a lucky girl!’ she echoed gaily, standing back and taking my

hands.

Someone knocked at the door of the drawing-room. We moved apart

like surprised lovers and I called ‘Come in.’ It was Rosemary. She was neat,
in a new little black hat, carrying an umbrella as thin as a pencil. ‘Oh,
hello,’ she said primly. ‘I’ve just got back and I thought I’d call in for a
moment.’ She advanced and put a bag down on the writing-table. ‘I’ve
brought you some avocado pears,’ she said. ‘I saw them in Harrods, and I
thought I’d better buy them while I could, they don’t always have them, you
know. They aren’t quite ripe, but the man said they should be all right to eat
in a day or two if you keep them in a warm room.’

I turned to Rosemary. ‘Great news for you, sister,’ I said. ‘My wife is

going to marry my brother. Isn’t that splendid?’

‘Darling!’ said Antonia.

‘It only remains,’ I said, ‘for me to fall madly in love with Rosemary

and then we can all go and live happily together at Rembers!’ I began to
laugh.

‘Martin!’ said Rosemary. She held out something to me. ‘This letter

was on the mat. It must have been delivered by hand.’

I took the letter and stopped laughing. It bore a Teutonic hand-writing

which I had not seen before. But I knew where it came from.

I said, ‘You girls entertain each other while I go and get some

champagne. I want to toast my wife’s engagement.’ I left the room banging
the door behind me.

I went into the dining-room and closed myself in and began to fumble

with the letter. I could hardly get it open. When I had ripped the envelope
across I recognized Palmer’s writing on the inside, and I felt cold. I pulled
out his letter which I had crumpled and torn. There was no other
communication. His letter read:

there, I shall probably be practising on the west coast, and Honor will be
with me at a university job. There is no reason why our paths should cross
again; and you will understand me when I say that it will be better for all of
us if they do not cross. On reflection I feel sure that in returning to Antonia
and mending your marriage you have done the right thing. You have, after
all, a talent for a gentler world. I mean of course the right thing for your
happiness and for the ultimate needs of your soul. I will not insult you with
hollow words about morality. Your freedom from those bonds was what
first made me take you as a companion. On what has passed you will not
require, or receive, any commentary from me or from any other. Let the
dignity of silence cover like the sea an enterprise which partook of madness
to an extent which I think even you never realized. I wish you and Antonia
well and will never forget that I loved you once. Do not reply to this letter
which constitutes, from both of us, a final and authoritative farewell.

two. Then opened the sideboard and fumbled for glasses. I went to the
cellar for champagne. I only realized after I had got the bottle that I had
somehow found it in the dark. I returned to the drawing-room.

The two women broke off their talk abruptly and looked at me

nervously to see what I would do or say. I put down the glasses and began
to open the champagne in silence.

‘Martin,’ said Rosemary, ‘you’re not being angry, are you?’ She spoke

as to a sulky child.

‘Of course I’m not being angry,’ I said. ‘Why ever should I be angry?’

I could see the two women exchanging glances. I realized then that

Rosemary must have known all along about Antonia’s relations with
Alexander, since doubtless it was at her flat that they met. The champagne
cork hit the ceiling.

‘Dear heart,’ said Antonia, ‘don’t fret, be still, be still. We all love you,

we do.’ She came up to pluck again at my sleeve and I gave her a glass. I
gave one to Rosemary.

I said, “I shall give you the Audubon prints as a wedding present.’ I

drank and began to laugh again. They watched me with disapproving
puzzlement.

Twenty-nine

love each other, Georgie, didn’t we? Didn’t we? In
the name of that reality -

M.

o’clock. I decided I had better move to the departure lounge so as to be well
installed in some unobtrusive position before they arrived. I wanted to see
the last of them.

It was the evening of the eleventh, and I had been at London Airport all

day. It had not been difficult to discover when Honor and Palmer were
going. They were on an evening flight. And having decided on this course
of action some time ago, when the day came I was unable to stay at home. I
had sat in various bars and eaten various sandwiches. At last in a desperate
effort to distract my mind I had started writing to Georgie; I was not sure if
the letter would do, I was not sure if it said what I felt, I was not sure what I
did feel. Only in the most abstract possible way was I able to attend to
Georgie. I was really conscious of nothing except that soon I should see
Honor and it would be for the last time.

I had not replied to Palmer’s letter. Of course I had started on half a

dozen replies, but in the end it seemed slightly less painful to accept the
blow in silence as, what it clearly was, final. I read his letter again and
again trying to see just what insight into my condition lay behind it, what
possible discussion between the pair of them about how best to finish me
off. One might as well have guessed at a conversation of gods. But it was
certain that now Palmer knew.

Antonia and Alexander had gone to Rome. I was profoundly relieved

when they went. I had moved back with all my belongings to Lowndes
Square. The removal men seemed to have got quite used to moving the
things to and fro. I did not know whether I would stay there, but I had had
to get out of Hereford Square, and had indeed got out on the very evening
of Antonia’s second revelation. I had of course proved a disappointment to
Antonia. I did not know quite how keenly she felt it and I did not at all
inquire. I treated her with a mocking friendliness which kept her puzzled,

and met her continual affection with continual irony. I could not forgive her
and I wanted her out of my sight. I too had become harder and more
absolute, and a constant and unmixed sense of my loss kept me so. The
talent for a gentler world which Palmer had remarked upon was precisely
what had now died in me. It had been at best no very saintly talent; merely a
quieter mode of selfishness. Yet I did not once break out, and neither
Antonia nor Alexander knew exactly what I was thinking. It gave me a little
satisfaction to keep them in the dark.

That the gentle Alexander had so long ago put horns on my head I

could not forgive either. This particular treachery had a quality so pure that
it seemed almost independent of Antonia. It was as if Alexander had done
something to the whole of my past, to years that stretched far back, beyond
my marriage, into the nursery, into the womb. That he in whom, more than
any other, my mother lived again should so quietly and so relentlessly have
defrauded me cast a shadow that was like a scar upon an innocence of the
past which I had believed to be impregnable. It was not that I judged him
morally. It was not that I believed he could not to some extent ‘explain’;
and indeed he wanted to. He suffered more than Antonia from my
misleading levity. He wanted, I knew, to tell me of his doubts, his scruples,
how he had been led imperceptibly from this position to that; in short how it
had all happened. I even occasionally sensed in him a desire for confidences
which would have excluded Antonia; and I wondered with a little sympathy
and curiosity how much of his own will had gone into the making of the
present situation. I had no doubt that the story would be a good one. After
all, I knew from my own case how gentle, how far from cold-blooded, can
seem to the deceiver the deliberate deception of a beloved person. But my
reaction to Alexander was something much more automatic than a
judgement, and much more relentless. It was odd that the pain of it felt so
like loneliness. Through him so much of my past had been peopled, which
was now a stricken solitude.

I settled myself in the departure lounge in the far corner and spread out

a large newspaper in front of me. I thought it very unlikely that they would
see me. In any case I was ready to take the risk. Outside the enormous
window lighted aircraft passed by slowly on their way to the runway. In the
warm lounge half-audible voices gave sing-song instructions through

loudspeakers to tense people who seemed to understand them. It was like a
waiting-room for the Last Judgement. I drank some whisky, keeping the
paper well up, and round the edge of it I kept a watch on the head of the
escalator. There was still nearly an hour to wait before their plane was due
to leave, but I was too sick by now to do anything but watch. I felt as if I
were about to be present at a murder, though as the victim or as the assassin
was not quite clear.

Extreme love has a voracious appetite. It is also true that, by some

metamorphosis brought about by its own violence, it can live on almost
anything. I had lived through this interval of time upon the thought that I
should see Honor again; and it was as if at that moment I would die. I saw
nothing beyond and was concerned with nothing beyond. To see her
actually going, to see her leaving my life forever through a certain door,
was like an act of self-destruction which held its own dark satisfaction. Yet
even this idea was, when the day came, obscured, and in my reeling
consciousness there was nothing left but the notion of actually seeing her.
This, it seemed, was miracle enough, was painful joy enough, even if it only
lasted for a moment.

I looked at my watch and wondered if I dared to go to the bar again for

some more whisky. I decided to stay where I was. I subsided behind the
paper. One arm was beginning to ache. A kind of blank exhaustion came
over me. The end-of-the-world atmosphere was beginning to be oppressive,
and I could not determine whether a distant roaring noise was made by
aeroplanes or by my own blood. The whole day had been a vigil. Perhaps I
was now falling asleep. I found my head nodding as if it would fall off. In a
few seconds I was adrift in a dream which I had had several times lately, a
dream concerning a sword and a severed head; and then I saw Palmer and
Honor naked in each other’s arms, enlaced, closer and closer, until they
seemed to have become one person.

I jerked my head upright and secured the paper which had wavered a

little. I had nodded only for a moment. I confirmed this by looking at my
watch; and I peered again round the edge of the paper. Then like demons
rising I saw them come. They were gliding up from below side by side, first
their two heads and then their shoulders as the escalator bore them up

towards the level. I moved the paper back into position and blotted them out
and closed my eyes. I wondered now if I could sustain the scene at all.

It took me several minutes to collect myself. When I ventured to look

again they had gone over to the bar and now had their backs to me. Palmer
was ordering drinks. He ordered three drinks. Then I saw that they had a
girl with them, a smart pale girl with neatly cropped hair wearing a new
Burberry overcoat. They sat down all three together still with their backs to
me. Something in the way the girl handled her drink was suddenly familiar
to me. She turned her head, stroking down her nose with a forefinger. It was
Georgie.

I lowered the paper a little farther and became absorbed in staring at

them. I could not quite believe that I was seeing them, so little did my eyes
feed the voracity of my mind. Honor and Palmer showed me each a turned
shoulder and part of a cheek. Georgie sat with her back to me directly,
revealing her uptilted profile as she turned from time to time, now towards
Palmer, now towards Honor. These two seemed to have their attention
centred on their young companion. They leanecj forward solicitously,
making a trio of heads, and now one hand and now another reached out to
pat their charge upon the shoulder. It might have been two parents with their
child. Georgie herself seemed over-excited and dazed. I observed her plump
face and her uncertain movements. Something was dulled in her. Perhaps it
was that glow of independence which I had so much loved, which had made
her, for my particular depraved purposes possible. For all her protestations,
I had never enslaved Georgie. She was, I conjectured, enslaved now. She
kept fumbling in her bag, and at last in response to some laughing inquiry
of Palmer’s brought out her passport and a long coloured ticket which she
laid on the table. It was only then that I realized that she was travelling too.

As they sat there talking and laughing, bathed in an almost unbearable

glow of significance, they seemed like actors, and I half expected everyone
else to fall silent so that their words might become suddenly audible. I had
prevented myself so far from looking especially at Honor. I looked at her
now. Her lips moved and smiled but her brow was gathered. Her face was
strained and sallow and I recalled how she had looked when I first saw her
in the fog at Liverpool Street Station with the drops of water upon her hair.

She looked to my eyes of farewell touchingly mortal, as she had looked
then, her demon splendour quenched. Only now I could see, in her ugliness,
her beauty. It was almost too much. She was hatless, and kept passing her
hand through her hair to smooth it back behind her ears. The oily black
strands kept falling forward again; and from time to time I saw her full
profile as she spoke to Georgie or Palmer. Her curving Jewish mouth, with
its natural red against the yellow tinge of the skin, was fixed in a stiff smile,
while the hand moved and moved. She looked very tired.

‘WILL PASSENGERS FOR FLIGHT D 167 TO NEW YORK

PLEASE COME FORWARD TO THE EMBARKATION DOOR,’ said a
superhuman voice. ‘HAVE YOUR TICKETS AND PASSPORTS READY
PLEASE.’

not noticed the time. It was too cruel. There was a little flurry as Georgie
dropped her handbag and Honor picked it up for her. Then the trio moved
forward together. Palmer in his soft tweed travelling-coat looked clean and
bland like a big bird. He looked, it came to me, a man in triumph. I could
hear his youthful laughter; and as if picked out by a spotlight I could see his
hand slip through Honor’s arm. The grip closed affectionately as he drew
her along beside him.

I had thought, once, that I might have run forward to her. But they were

already as remote from me as persons seen in a film. I saw them take their
places in the queue. All I could see now was Honor’s dark head, and her
shoulder pressed against Palmer’s. I knew that I could not wait to see them
go through the door. It was like witnessing an execution. I turned away
from them and walked towards the escalator.

Thirty

I pulled the curtains, using the cord at the side in the way Rosemary

had insisted I must. The problem of the pelmets was still unsolved. I turned
on the electric fire. The central heating was not quite sufficient. I examined
the Carlton House writing-table and noticed another scratch which had
appeared during the latest move. I licked my finger and dabbed it. I went
out into the kitchen and looked vaguely around for something to eat. There
was a tin of Bath Oliver biscuits somewhere which Rosemary had brought.
I took off my overcoat and felt in the pocket of my jacket for some matches.
I found my letter to Georgie which I read again and then tore up. I found the
matches and lit a cigarette. It appeared that I had run out of whisky again.
But perhaps in any case I had had enough alcohol for one day. I took a milk
bottle from the fridge and poured some milk into a glass. The Bath Olivers
were on the shelf where one would expect them to be. Rosemary had
evidently laid in a store of expensive-looking tins. That was kind of her. I
put the biscuits and the milk on to a tray. I took off my jacket and returned
to the sitting-room in my shirt sleeves. Perhaps it was rather hot after all. I
sat down on one of the Chinese Chippendale chairs with the tray at my feet.

After a discussion with Antonia in which she had been tearful but

vigorous and I had been flippant but listless, we had agreed to divide the set
of Audubon prints between us. A terrible energy pervaded Antonia at this
time and it tired me extremely to be with her. In a frank unassisted attempt

to select the prints which I liked least she had taken what seemed to her the
dullest ones, which were the ones in fact I liked best; the nightjars, the
puffins, and the great crested owls. The gold-winged woodpeckers, the
Carolina parrots, and the scarlet tanagers now stood in a dusty row against
the wall and I tried to wonder where I would put them. They seemed
meaningless without the others. I looked about the room and saw that
Rosemary had put the Meissen cockatoos one at each end of the writing-
table and I got up to put them together. They were better so. Then I decided
I would drink some wine and I went back to the kitchen. An emergency
rack had been fitted into one of the cupboards. The rest of my wine was still
at Hereford Square. That was another problem. I pulled out a bottle at
random. It weighed pleasantly in my hand like a familiar tool or a weapon. I
saw that it was Château Lauriol de Barny. That seemed suitable for a
libation of farewell. I opened the bottle and returned to the sitting-room
where the light were painfully bright. Rosemary had not yet had time to get
me any lamps.

Of course I was still in a shocked state. I noticed my trembling hand, a

tendency to shiver, a chattering of teeth. I poured out some of the wine.
Having been in the warm kitchen it was not in too bad heart. I recalled in
my mind the red stain spreading on Palmer’s carpet. But the wine itself was
innocent, empty of memories. This was as it should be. It was after all the
first moments of some entirely new era. I supposed I would survive. I
would find some new interests and revive old ones. I would get back to
Wallenstein and Gustavus Adolphus. I tried to think these thoughts but they
remained intolerably abstract, while a pain in my body told me what was
real. I pictured myself indeed as a survivor. There had been a drama, there
had been some characters, but now everyone else was dead and only in me
a memory remained of what had been; and perhaps mercifully that memory
too would fade, as in some crazed old prisoner who cannot recall his
sufferings and does not even know that he has been released. I attempted, as
the pain increased, to cover it with a haze of consciousness, making myself,
through some general chatter about my condition, anonymous and so not
really suffering. But the sharp truth would not be denied and I became silent
in the end and became myself in the knowledge of my unique loss. I
covered my face and if I could have found tears I would have wept.

which is the mark of a true emotion. Then suddenly I heard, as if inside my
head, a strange sound. I looked up sharply. The second time the sound came
I recognized the front-door bell. It resounded oddly in the empty rooms. I
half decided not to answer it. I could not see other human beings at present.
Rosemary was at Rembers, and there was no one else in London whom I
could endure. I sat stiffly waiting for the next ring. It came, repeated three
times, clamorous and urgent. The sound was so alarming that it forced me
to my feet and I went softly out into the hall. I could not stand the
intervening silence and rather than let it ring again I opened the door. Honor
Klein was standing in the semi-darkness outside.

We looked at each other in silence, I rigid with my hand on the door,

she with her head drooping, looking at me from under her eyebrows. On the
curving reddish lips the faint stiff smile was still there.

I turned back and let her follow me in towards the light. I went into the

sitting-room and crossed over to the window so that the camp bed was
between us. As I turned she closed the door behind her. We still looked at
each other silently.

She said at last, and her smile deepened a little, narrowing her eyes,

‘You left the airport so quickly, I was not able to catch you up.’

I was not sure whether I could speak, but when I tried the words

seemed to come out all right. I said, ‘I thought you were going.’

‘As you see –’

‘Did the other two go?’

‘Yes.’

‘When are you going?’ I said.

‘I’m not going.’

I sat down on the chair by the window and said, ‘I see,’ although I saw

nothing. She sat down opposite to me on the other chair. I shook my head
several times. I did not dare to feel anything but dismay and fear. This was
perhaps some ultimate torture. I held bitterly on to my dignity.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘what are you doing here?’ I spoke very evenly.

I let myself really see her now, and as she gave back the intelligence of

my look I could not but experience her consciousness of me as a kind of
ecstasy.

‘I came to see you,’ she said, her level narrow smile holding me like a

beam of light.

‘Why?’

‘Because you wanted me to.’

‘I didn’t ask you to,’ I said. ‘I thought I’d got rid of you.’ I kept my

face stony and intent.

She pursed her lips, altering her smile into a look of amused acuteness.

She still looked tired and some characters of recent suffering were written
on her face. But the demon was awake again. She looked round the room a
little, pushed her overcoat off on to the back of her chair, dug her hands
deep into the pockets of her green suit, crossed her legs, and returned to
watching me.

I said, ‘Have some wine. Take my glass.’ I pointed to the tray. She held

my look a moment and then poured out a little of the wine. As she did this I
felt deep in my consciousness the little germ of some great joy, tiny still as
the image of the whale far beneath the ship. But I kept my bitter front and
rose, putting one foot on my chair. I leaned on my knee and looked down at
her. It was easier so.

I said, ‘You’re not going at all?’

‘Not at all.’

‘How long is Palmer going for?’

‘For good, as far as he knows.’

‘So you’ve left Palmer?’ I said. ‘You’ve parted? It’s finished?’ I

wanted things to be clear. I wanted to be told very simply that what I so
unutterably desired was true.

now. ‘Yes.’

‘I see,’ I said. ‘And Georgie?’

‘Palmer and Georgie became very fond of each other,’ said Honor. ‘I

don’t know what they’ll make of it. But Palmer wanted to get away, he was
frantic to get away.’

‘Away from you?’

She gave me her still look. ‘Yes.’

‘And you yourself –?’

I had had her for just a moment, during those unavoidable questions, at

my disposition. But now, her body relaxing, she simply smiled back at me,
turning the wine a little in her glass before drinking it. I adored her
insolence.

‘Well, may I ask again why you’re here?’ I said. I came to lean against

the writing-table, still looking down at her. ‘If you’ve come merely to
torment me or to amuse yourself you’d better go at once.’ An intoxicating
sense possessed me that at last we were treating on equal terms. I kept my
face stern, but there was so much light within, it must have showed a little.

‘I haven’t come to torment you,’ said Honor. She was serious, but there

was an ironical lightness in her gaze.

‘Of course, I understand it may happen inadvertently,’ I said. ‘I know

you have the temperament of an assassin.’ I was taken with a trembling and
to control it I had to move. I walked to the window and back and as I faced
her once more I could not help smiling. She smiled too. Then, as if startled,
we both became serious again.

‘But why, Honor,’ I said, ‘why here, why me?’

She kept me in suspense. Then, ‘Have you ever read Herodotus?’

I was surprised. ‘Yes, a long time ago.’

‘Do you recall the story of Gyges and Candaules?’

the beauty of his wife and he wanted his friend Gyges to see her naked. He
concealed Gyges in the bedroom – but Candaules’ wife realized that he was
there. Then later, because he had seen her, she approached him and forced
him to kill Candaules and become king himself.’

‘Well,’ said Honor. She was watching me closely.

After a moment or two I said, ‘I see.’ I added, ‘You once accused me of

talking nonsense. If I’m only privileged because I saw you embracing your
brother –’

She was quiet, smiling again. I tried not to smile back. I said, ‘You told

me you were a severed head. Can one have human relations with a severed
head?’

She was silent still, compelling me with her smile. I said, ‘As you

yourself pointed out, I hardly know you!’ I could not now stop myself from
smiling.

She continued silent, leaning back, her smile now glowing with all its

insolence.

I said, ‘We have lived together in a dream up to now. When we awake

will we find each other still?’

I came round the bed and stood near to her. I worshipped her closeness.

I said, ‘Well, we must hold hands tightly and hope that we can keep hold of
each other through the dream and out into the waking world.’

As she still would not speak I said, ‘Could we be happy?’

She said, ‘This has nothing to do with happiness, nothing whatever.’

That was true. I took in the promise of her words. I said, ‘I wonder if I

shall survive it.’

She said, smiling splendidly, ‘You must take your chance!’

I gave her back the bright light of the smile, now softening at last out of

irony. ‘So must you, my dear!’

OceanofPDF.com

