M O D E R N 

C L A S S I C S

  Billion-Dollar
  Brain

  Len Deighton  

PENGUIN MODERN CLASSICS

Billion-Dollar Brain

Len Deighton was born in 1929 in London. He did his national service 
in the RAF, went to the Royal College of Art and designed many book 
jackets, including the original UK edition of Jack Kerouac’s On the 
Road. The enormous success of his first novel, The IPCRESS File (1962), 
was repeated in a remarkable sequence of books over the following 
thirty or so years. These varied from historical fiction (Bomber, perhaps 
his greatest novel) to dystopian alternative fiction (SS- GB) and a num-
ber of brilliant  non- fiction books on the Second World War (Fighter, 
Blitzkrieg and Blood, Tears and Folly  ).
His spy novels chart the twists and turns of Britain and the Cold War 
in ways which now give them a unique flavour. They preserve a world in 
which Europe contains many dictatorships, in which the personal can be 
ruined by the ideological and where the horrors of the Second World 
War are buried under only a very thin layer of soil. Deighton’s fascin-
ation with technology, his sense of humour and his brilliant evocation of 
time and place make him one of the key British espionage writers, along-
side John Buchan, Eric Ambler, Ian Fleming and John Le Carré.

Len Deighton in Penguin Modern Classics

The IPCRESS File
Horse Under Water
Funeral in Berlin

 Billion- Dollar Brain
An Expensive Place to Die
Only When I Larf
Bomber
 Close- Up
Spy Story
Yesterday’s Spy
Twinkle, Twinkle Little Spy

 SS- GB
XPD
Goodbye, Mickey Mouse
Berlin Game
Mexico Set
London Match
Winter
Spy Hook
Spy Line
Spy Sinker
MAMista
City of Gold
Violent Ward
Faith
Hope
Charity

Short stories
Declarations of War

 Non- fiction
Fighter
Blitzkrieg
Blood, Tears and Folly

Len Deighton

Billion-Dollar Brain

PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN CLASSICS

UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
India | New Zealand | South Africa

Penguin Books is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies 
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.

First published 1966
First published in Penguin Classics 2021
001

Copyright © Pluriform Publishing Company BV 1966
Afterword copyright © Pluriform Publishing Company BV 2009

The moral right of the author has been asserted

Set in 10.5/13 pt Dante MT Std
Typeset by Jouve (UK), Milton Keynes
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.

The authorized representative in the EEA is Penguin Random House Ireland, 
Morrison Chambers, 32 Nassau Street, Dublin D02 YH68

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN:  978– 0– 241– 50516– 8

www.greenpenguin.co.uk

Penguin Random House is committed to a 
sustainable future for our business, our readers 
and our planet. Tis book is made from Forest 
Stewardship Council® certiﬁed paper.

Contents

Section 1: London and Helsinki  1
Section 2: London  29
Section 3: Helsinki  57
Section 4: Leningrad and Riga  87
Section 5: New York  125
Section 6: San Antonio  155
Section 7: New York  185
Section 8: London  201
Section 9: Helsinki and Leningrad  227
Section 10: London  259

Appendices  281
Afterword  286

Spring is a virgin, summer a mother, autumn a widow, winter 
a stepmother.

russian proverb

Two mythical countries (Kalevala and Pohjola) fight a perpet-
ual war. They both want a magic mill that grinds endless salt, 
corn and money. The most important figure in this conflict is 
an old man named Vainamoinen. He is a wizard and a wise 
man. He is also a musician and plays tunes upon the bones of 
a pike. Vainamoinen woos a lovely young girl, Aino, but she 
drowns herself rather than marry an old man.

kalevala (a Finnish folk epic)

Mr Paul Getty . . . is quoted as having said that a billion dollars 
is not worth what it used to be.

nubar gulbenkian

Billion-Dollar Brain

Secret File No. 4

section 1

London and Helsinki

 See- saw, Margery Daw,
Jacky shall have a new master.

nursery rhyme

It was the morning of my hundredth birthday. I shaved the final  
 mirror-  disc of old tired face under the merciless glare of the bath-
room lighting. It was all very well telling oneself that Humphrey 
Bogart had that sort of face; but he also had a hairpiece, half a mil-
lion dollars a year and a  stand- in for the rough bits. I dabbed a  
 soda- stick at the razor nicks. In the magnifying mirror it looked 
like a white rocket landing on the uncharted side of the moon.
Outside was February and the first snow of the year. At first it 
was the sort of snow that a sharp PR man would make available to 
journalists. It sparkled and floated. It was soft yet crisp, like some 
new,  sugar- coated breakfast cereal. Girls wore it in their hair and 
the Telegraph ran a picture of a statue wearing some. It was hard to 
reconcile this benign snow with the stuff that caused paranoia 
among British Railways officials. That Monday morning it was 
building up in crunchy wedges under the heels of shoes and falling 
in dry white pyramids along the front hall of the Charlotte Street 
office where I worked. I said ‘Good morning’ to Alice, and she said, 
‘Don’t tread it in’ to me, which summed up our relationship nicely.
The Charlotte Street building was an ancient creaking slum. The 
wallpaper had great boils full of loose plaster and there were small 
metal patches in the floor where the boards were too rotten to 
repair. On the  first- floor landing was a painted sign that said ‘Acme 
Films. Cutting Rooms’, and under that a drawing of a globe that 
made Africa too thin. From behind the doors came the noise of a 
moviola and a strong smell of film cement. The next landing was 
painted with fresh green paint. On one door a   dog- eared piece of 
headed notepaper said ‘B Isaacs Theatrical Tailor’, which at one 

time I had considered very funny. Behind me I heard Alice puffing 
up the stairs with a  catering- size tin of Nescafé. Someone in the dis-
patch department put a  brass- band record on the gramophone. 
Dawlish, my boss, was always complaining about that gramophone, 
but even Alice couldn’t really control the dispatch department.
My secretary said, ‘Good morning.’ Jean was a tall girl in her 
middle twenties. Her face was as calm as Nembutal and with her 
high cheekbones and tightly  drawn- back hair she was beautiful 
without working at it. There were times when I thought that I was 
in love with Jean and there were times when I thought that she was 
in love with me, but somehow these times never coincided.
‘Good party?’ I asked.
‘You seemed to enjoy it. When I left you were drinking a pint of 
bitter while standing on your head.’
‘You do exaggerate. Why did you go home alone?’
‘I have two hungry cats to support. Two thirty is definitely my 
bedtime.’
‘I’m sorry,’ I said.
‘Don’t be.’
‘Truly.’
‘Going with you to a party is to be there alone. You plant me 
down, go around chatting with everyone, then wonder why I haven’t 
met them all.’
‘Tonight,’ I said, ‘we’ll go to some quiet place for dinner. Just us.’
‘I’m taking no chances. Tonight I’m cooking you a birthday feast 
at the flat. I’ll give you all your favourite things.’
‘You will?’
‘To eat.’
‘I’ll be there,’ I said.
‘You’d better be.’ She gave me a perfunctory  kiss – ‘Happy birth-
day’ –  and leaned across and put a glass of water and two Alka 
Seltzer tablets on my blotter.
‘Why not put the tablets into the water?’ I asked.
‘I wasn’t sure if you could bear the noise.’
She unlocked my trays and began to work steadily through 
the great pile of   paper-  work. By midday we hadn’t made much 

impression upon it. I said, ‘We aren’t even keeping up with the 
incoming.’
‘We can start a “pending” tray.’
‘Don’t be so female,’ I said. ‘All that does is call some of it another 
name. Why can’t you go through it and handle some of it without me?’
‘I already did.’
‘Then sort out the “information onlys”, mark them for return to 
us and pass them on. That would give us a breathing space.’
‘Now who’s kidding himself?’
‘Can you think of something better?’
‘Yes. I think we should get a written directive from Organiza-
tion to be sure we’re handling only files that we should handle. 
There may be things in this tray that are nothing to do with us.’
‘There are times, my love, when I think none of it is anything to 
do with us.’
Jean stared at me in an expressionless way that might have indi-
cated disapproval. Maybe she was thinking about her hair.
‘Birthday lunch at the Trat,’ I said.
‘But I look awful.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘I must do my hair. Give me five minutes.’
‘I’ll give you six,’ I said. She had been thinking about her hair.

We lunched at the Trattoria Terrazza: Tagliatelle alla carbonara, 
Osso buco, coffee. Pol Roger throughout. Mario complimented 
me on having a birthday and kissed Jean to celebrate it. He snapped 
his fingers and up came Strega. I snapped my fingers and up came 
more Pol Roger. We sat there, drinking champagne with Strega 
chasers, talking, snapping fingers and discovering ultimate truth 
and our own infinite wisdom. We got back to the office at three  
 forty- five and I realized for the first time how dangerous that loose 
lino on the stairs can be.
As I entered my office the intercom was buzzing like a trapped 
bluebottle. ‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Right away,’ said Dawlish, my boss.
‘Right away, sir,’ I said, slowly and carefully.

Dawlish had the only room in the building with two windows. 
It was a comfortable room, although overcrowded with pieces of not 
very valuable antique furniture. There was a smell of wet overcoats. 
Dawlish was a meticulous man who looked like an Edwardian 
coroner. His hair was grey moving towards white and his hands 
long and thin. When he read he moved his fingertips across the 
page as though getting a finer understanding from the sense of 
touch. He looked up from his desk.
‘Was that you falling down the stairs?’
‘I stumbled,’ I said. ‘It’s the snow on my shoes.’
‘Of course it is, my boy,’ said Dawlish. We both stared out of the 
window; the snow was falling faster, and great white snakes of it 
were wriggling along the gutter, for it was still dry enough to be 
lifted by the wind.
‘I’m just sending another 378 file to the PM. I hate this clearance 
business. It’s so easy to slip up.’
‘That’s true,’ I said, and was pleased that I didn’t have to sign that 
file.
‘What do you think?’ asked Dawlish. ‘Do you think that that 
boy is a security risk?’
The 378 file was a periodic review of the loyalty of S. 1s –  important 
chemists, engineers etc. –  but I knew that Dawlish just wanted to 
think aloud, so I grunted.
‘You know the one I’m worried about. You know him.’
‘I’ve never handled his file,’ and as long as choice was concerned 
I’d make damned certain I didn’t. I knew that Dawlish had another 
nasty little bomb called the 378 file  sub- section 14, which was a file 
about  trade- union officials. At the slightest show of intelligent 
interest I would find that file on my desk.
‘Personally: what do you feel about him personally?’ asked 
Dawlish.
‘Brilliant young student. Socialist.  Pleased with himself for 

 getting an honours degree. Wakes up one morning with a suede 
waistcoat, two kids, job in advertising and a  ten- thousand- quid 
mortgage in Hampstead. Sends for a subscription to the Daily Worker 
just so that he can read the Statesman with a clear conscience. 

Harmless.’ I hoped that reply carried the right blend of inefficient 
glibness.
‘Very good,’ said Dawlish, turning the pages of the file. ‘We 
should give you a job here.’
‘I’d never get on with the boss.’
Dawlish initialled a chit at the front of the file and tossed it into 
the out tray. ‘We have another problem,’ he said, ‘that won’t be 
solved as easily as that.’ Dawlish reached for a slim file, opened it 
and read a name. ‘Olaf Kaarna: you know him?’
‘No.’
‘Journalists who have  well- placed, indiscreet friends call them-
selves political commentators. Kaarna is one of the more 
responsible ones. He’s Finnish. Comfortable.’ (Dawlish’s word 
for a private income.) ‘He spends a great deal of time and money 
collecting his information. Two days ago he spoke to one of our 
embassy people in Helsinki. Asked him to confirm a couple of 
small technical points before an article is published next month. 
He’s thinking of sending it to Kansan Uutiset, which is the  left- wing 
newspaper. If it was something harmful to us, that would be a 
good place to set the fuses. Of course we don’t know what Kaarna 
has up his sleeve, but he says he can show that there is a vast Brit-
ish Military Intelligence operation covering northern Europe and 
centred in Finland.’ Dawlish smiled as he said this and so did I. The 
thought of Ross at the War Office   master-  minding a global net-
work was a little unreal.
‘And the clever answer is . . . ?’
‘Heaven knows,’ said Dawlish, ‘but one must follow it up. Ross 
will no doubt send someone. The Foreign Office have been told; 
O’Brien can hardly ignore the situation.’
‘It’s like one of those parties where the first girl to leave will have 
everyone talking about her.’
‘Quite so,’ said Dawlish. ‘That’s why I want you to go tomorrow 
morning.’
‘Wait a minute,’ I said. I knew there were all kinds of reasons 
why it was impossible, but the alcohol blurred my mind. ‘A pass-
port. Whether we get a good one from the Foreign Office or a 

quick job from the War Office we will tip our hand and they will 
delay us if they want to.’
‘See our friend in Aldgate,’ said Dawlish.
‘But it’s four thirty now.’
‘Exactly,’ said Dawlish. ‘Your plane leaves at nine fifty a.m. That 
gives you well over sixteen hours to arrange it.’
‘I’m overworked already.’
‘Being overworked is just a state of mind. You do far more work 
than you need on some jobs, less than you need on others. You 
should be more impersonal.’
‘I don’t even know what I’m supposed to do if I go to Helsinki.’
‘See Kaarna. Ask him about this article he’s preparing. He’s been 
silly in the past; show him a couple of pages of his dossier. He’ll be 
sensible.’
‘You want me to threaten him?’
‘Good heavens no. Carrot first: stick last. Buy this article he’s 
written if necessary. He’ll be sensible.’
‘So you keep saying.’ I knew it was no good betraying even the 
slightest amount of excitement. Patiently I said, ‘There are at least 
six men in this building who could do this job, even if it’s not as 
simple as you describe. I speak no Finnish, I have no close friends 
there, I’m not familiar with the country nor have I been handling 
any file that might have a bearing on this job. Why do I have to go?’
‘You,’ said Dawlish removing his spectacles and ending the dis-
cussion, ‘are the one best protected against cold.’

Old Montagu Street is a grimy slice of  Jack- the-  Ripper  real- estate in 
Whitechapel. Dark grocers’ shops, barrels of salt herring; a ruin; a 
kosher poultry shop; jewellers; more ruins. Here and there tiny 
groups of newly painted shops carry Arabic signs as a fresh wave of 
underprivileged immigrants probes into the ghetto. Three  dark- 
 skinned children on old bicycles pedalled away quickly, circled 
and stopped. Beyond the tenements the shops began again. One, a 
printer’s, had  fly-  specked business cards in the window. The printed 
lettering had faded to pale pastel colours and the cards were writh-
ing and twisting with bygone sunlight. The children made another 

sudden sortie on their bicycles, leaving arabesques in the thin skin 
of snow. The door was stiff and warped. Above my head a small 
bell jangled and shed dust.  The children watched me enter the 
shop. Inside the small front office there was an ancient counter, 
topped with a slab of glass. Under the glass were examples of 
invoices and business cards: faded ghosts of failed businesses. On a 
shelf there were boxes of paper clips, office sundries, a notice that 
said ‘We take orders for rubber stamps’ and a greasy catalogue.
As the bell echoes faded a voice from the back room called, ‘You 
the one that phoned?’
‘That’s right.’
‘Go on up, luv.’ Then very loudly in a different sort of voice she 
screamed, ‘He’s here, Sonny.’ I opened the  counter- flap and felt my 
way up the narrow stairs.
At the rear, grey windows looked down upon yards cluttered 
with broken bicycles and rusty  hip- baths all painted with a thin 
film of snow. The scale of the place seemed too small for me. I’d 
wandered into a house built for gnomes.
Sonny Sontag worked at the top of the building. This room was 
cleaner than any of the others but the clutter was worse. A table 
with a white plastic surface occupied much of the room. On the 
table there were  jam- jars crammed with punches, needles and 
scrapers, graving tools with wooden mushroom heads that fit into 
the palm of the hand, and two shiny oilstones. Most of the wall 
space was filled with brown cardboard boxes.
‘Mr Jolly,’ said Sonny Sontag, extending a soft white hand that 
gripped like a Stillson wrench. The first time I ever met Sonny he 
forged a Ministry of Works pass for me in the name of Peter Jolly. 
Since that day, with a faith in his own handiwork that typified him, 
he always called me Mr Jolly.
Sonny Sontag was an untidy man of medium height. He wore a 
black suit, black tie and a black  rolled- brim hat which he seldom 
removed. Under his open jacket there was a  hand- knitted grey car-
digan from which hung a loose thread. When he stood up he 
tugged at the cardigan and it came a little more unravelled.
‘Hello, Sonny,’ I said. ‘Sorry about this rush.’

‘No. A regular customer should expect special consideration.’
‘I need a passport,’ I said. ‘For Finland.’
Looking like a hamster dressed in a business suit, he lifted his 
chin and twitched his nose while saying ‘Finland’ two or three 
times. He said, ‘Mustn’t be Scandinavian, too easy to check the 
registration. Mustn’t be a country that needs a visa for Finland 
because I haven’t time to do a visa for you.’ He wiped his whiskers 
with a quick movement. ‘West Germany; no.’ He went humming 
and twitching around the shelves until he found a large cardboard 
box. He cleared a space with his elbows, then just as I thought he 
was going to start nibbling at the box he tipped its contents across 
the table. There were a couple of dozen mixed passports. Some of 
them were torn or had corners cut and some were just bunches of 
loose pages held together with a rubber band. ‘These are for can-
nibalizing,’ explained Sonny. ‘I take out pages with visas I need and 
doctor them. For cheap  jobs –  the hoop game* –  no good for you, 
but somewhere here I have a lovely little Republic of Ireland. I’d 
have it ready in a couple of hours if you fancy it.’ He scuffed through 
the mangled documents and produced an Irish passport. He gave it 
to me to look at and I gave him three blurred photos. Sonny studied 
the photos carefully and then brought a notebook from his pocket 
and read the microscopic writing at closer range.
‘Dempsey or Brody,’ he said, ‘which do you prefer?’
‘I don’t mind.’
He tugged at his cardigan, a long strand of wool fell away. Sonny 
wound it quickly round his finger and broke it free.
‘Dempsey then, I like Dempsey. How about Liam Dempsey?’
‘He’s a darling man.’
‘I wouldn’t attempt an Irish accent, Mr Jolly,’ said Sonny, ‘it’s 
very difficult the Irish.’
‘I’m joking,’ I said. ‘A man with a name like Liam Dempsey and 
a stage Irish accent would deserve all he got.’
‘That’s right, Mr Jolly,’ said Sonny.

* Hoop game: using a worthless thing as security when passing a cheque or taking 
a car, etc., on approval.

I got him to pronounce it a couple of times. He was good with 
names and I didn’t want to go around mispronouncing my own 
name. I stood against the measure on the wall and Sonny wrote down 
5', 11", blue eyes,  dark- brown hair, dark complexion, no visible scars.
‘Place of birth?’ inquired Sonny.
‘Kinsale?’
Sonny sucked in a breath of noisy disagreement. ‘Never. Tiny 
place like that. Too risky.’ He sucked his teeth again. ‘Cork,’ he said 
grudgingly. I was driving a hard bargain. ‘OK Cork,’ I said.
He walked back around the desk making little disapproving 
sounds with his lips and saying, ‘Too risky Kinsale,’ as if I had tried 
to outsmart him. He pulled the Irish passport towards him and 
then turned up the cuffs of his shirt over his jacket. He put a watch-
maker’s glass into his eye and peered closely at the ink entries. 
Then he stood up and stared at me as though comparing.
I said, ‘Do you believe in reincarnation, Sonny?’ He wet his lips 
and smiled, his eyes shining at me as though seeing me for the first 
time. Perhaps he was, perhaps he was discreet enough to let his cli-
entele pass unseen and unremembered. He said, ‘Mr Jolly, I see 
men of all kinds in my establishment. Men to whom the world has 
been unkind and men who have been unkind to the world, and 
believe me they are seldom the same men. But men do not escape 
the world except by death. We all have our appointments in Samarra. 
That great writer Anton Chekhov tells us, “When a man is born he 
can choose one of three roads. There are no others. If he takes the 
road to the right, the wolves will eat him up. If he takes the road to 
the left, he will eat up the wolves. And if he takes the road straight 
ahead of him, he’ll eat himself up.” That’s what Chekhov tells us, 
Mr Jolly, and when you leave here tonight you’ll be Liam Dempsey, 
but you won’t discard anything in this room. Destiny has given all 
her clients a number’ –  he swept a hand across the numbered card-
board  boxes – ‘and no matter how many changes we make she 
knows which number is ours.’
‘You’re right, Sonny,’ I said, surprised at mining a rich vein of 
philosophy.
‘I am, Mr Jolly, believe me, I am.’

Finland is not a communist satellite, it is a part of western Europe 
and shares its prosperity. The shops are jammed full of beefsteaks 
and LP records, frozen food and TV sets.
Helsinki airport is not a good place from which to make a confi-
dential phone call. Airports seldom are: they use rural exchanges, 
record calls and have too many cops with time on their hands. So I 
took a taxi to the railway station.
Helsinki is a   well- ordered provincial town where it never ceases 
to be winter. It smells of  wood- sap and  oil- heating, like a village 
shop. Fancy restaurants put smoked reindeer tongue on the menu 
next to the tournedos Rossini and pretend that they have come to 
terms with the endless lakes and forests that are buried silent and 
deep out there under the snow and ice. But Helsinki is just the 
appendix of Finland, an urban afterthought where half a million 
people try to forget that thousand upon thousand square miles of 
desolation and Arctic wasteland begin only a  bus- stop away.
The taxi pulled in to the main entrance of the railway station. It 
was a huge brown building that looked like a 1930 radio set.  Sauna- 
 pink men hurried down the long lines of  mud-  spattered buses, and 
every now and again there would be a violent grinding of gears as 
one struck out towards the long country roads.
I changed a   five- pound note in the money exchange, then used a  

 call- box. I put a  twenty- penni piece into the slot and dialled. The 
phone was answered very promptly, as though they were sitting on 
it at the other end.
I said, ‘Stockmann?’ It was the largest department store in Hel-
sinki and a name that even I could pronounce.

‘Ei,’ said the man at the other end. ‘Ei’ means ‘no’.
I said ‘Hyvää iltaa,’ having practised the words for ‘good evening’, 
and the man at the other end said ‘Kiitos’ –  thank  you –  twice. I hung 
up. I hailed another cab in the forecourt. I tapped the street map and 
the driver nodded. We pulled away into the afternoon traffic of the 
Aleksanterinkatu and finally stopped at the waterfront.
It was mild in Helsinki for the time of year. Mild enough for the 
ducks in the harbour to have a couple of   man-  made breaks in the 
ice to swim on, but not so mild that you could go around without a 
fur hat unless you wanted your ears to fall off and shatter into a 
thousand pieces.
One or two  tarpaulin- covered carts marked the site of the morn-
ing market. The great curve of the harbour was white; the churned 
water frozen into dirty boulders of ice. A small knot of soldiers and 
an army lorry were also waiting for the ferry. Now and again they 
laughed and punched each other playfully and their breath rose 
like Indian signals.
The ferry arrived following the clear channel of broken ice which 
grudgingly permitted its passage. The boat hooted and the freezing 
air formed new scar tissue over the wet wound of its path. I lit a 
Gauloise under cover of the bulkhead and watched the army lorry 
crawl up the loading ramp. Standing in the   market-  place beyond 
there was a man with a tall column of   hydrogen-  filled balloons. 
The wind caught them and they wavered over him like a brightly 
 coloured totem that he couldn’t quite balance. A   grey-  haired 
businessman in an astrakhan hat spoke briefly with the  balloon- 
 seller. The  balloon- seller nodded towards the ferry. The  grey- haired 
man didn’t buy. I felt the roll of the boat under the weight of the 
lorry. There was a hoot to warn the last passengers and a thrash 
of water before the stubby bow chopped back into the dense float-
ing ice.
The  grey- haired man joined me on the deck. He was big, and 
made even bigger by his heavy overcoat. The grey astrakhan hat 
and the fur collar exactly matched his hair and got mixed into it 
when he turned his head towards the sea. He was smoking a pipe 
and the wind blew sparks from it as he came through the door. He 

leaned over the rail beside me and we both watched the great heav-
ing slabs of ice. It looked like every cabaret act of the thirties had 
tipped its white grand piano into this harbour.
‘Pardon me,’ said the  grey- haired man. ‘Do you happen to know 
the phone number of Stockmann’s department store?’
‘It’s 12 181,’ I said, ‘unless you want the restaurant.’
‘The restaurant number I know,’ said the man. ‘It’s 37 350.’
I nodded.
‘Why have they started all this?’
I shrugged. ‘Someone in the Organization Department read one 
of those spy books.’ The man flinched a bit at the ‘spy’. It was one of 
those words to avoid, as the word ‘artist’ is avoided by painters. He 
said, ‘It takes me all my time to remember which bits you say and 
which bits I say.’
‘Me too,’ I said. ‘Perhaps we’ve both been saying it the wrong 
way round.’ The man in the fur collar laughed and more sparks 
flew from his pipe bowl. ‘There are two of them, as your message 
said. They are both in Hotel Helsinki and I think they know each 
other even though they’re not talking.’
‘Why?’
‘Well last night they were the only two people in the  dining- 

 room. They both ordered in English loud enough for the other to 
hear, and yet they didn’t introduce themselves. I mean, two Eng-
lishmen in a foreign country dining alone and not even exchanging 
a greeting. I mean, is it natural?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
The   grey-  haired man puffed at his pipe and nodded, carefully 
noting my reply and adding it to his experience. ‘One is about your 
height,  leaner  –   perhaps  seventy- five  kilos  –   cleanshaven, clear 
voice, walks and talks like an Army officer; about  thirty- two. The 
other is even taller, talks very loudly in an exaggerated English 
accent, very white face, ill at ease, about   twenty- seven years old, 
thin, maybe weighs . . .’
‘OK,’ I said. ‘I’ve got the picture. The first will be Ross’s man 
that the War Office have sent, the other from FO.’
‘I would think that too. The first one, who is registered as Seager, 

had a drink with your military attaché early yesterday evening. 
The other calls himself Bentley!’
‘You’ve really been thorough,’ I said.
‘It’s the least we can do.’ He suddenly pointed across the frozen 
sea as someone walked out on to the deck behind us. We stared at 
one of the   ice-  locked islands as if we had just exchanged a juicy 
piece of information about it. The newcomer stamped his feet. 
‘One Finnmark,’ he said. He collected the fare hastily and turned 
back into the warm cabin.
I said, ‘Apart from these  public- school punters are there other 
foreign contacts with Kaarna?’
‘It’s hard to say. The town is full of strange people; Americans, 
Germans, even Finns who dabble a little in . . .’ he wriggled his 
fingers to find a word ‘. . . informations.’
Across the ice I could see the island of Suomenlinna and a group 
of people waiting for the boat. ‘My two haven’t visited Kaarna?’ 
The man shook his head. ‘Then it’s time someone did,’ I said.
‘Will there be trouble?’ We were nearly there now. I heard the 
driver starting the lorry. ‘Don’t worry,’ I said. ‘This isn’t that sort 
of job.’

I woke up in the Hotel Helsinki at seven the next morning. Some-
one was coming into my room. The waitress put the tray down 
beside my bed. Two cups, two saucers, two pots of coffee, two of 
everything. I tried to look like a man with a friend in the bathroom. 
The waitress opened the shutters and let the cold northern light fall 
across my bed. When she had gone I dissolved half a packet of laxa-
tive chocolate into each pot of coffee. I rang for room service. A 
man came. I explained that there was some mistake. The coffee 
was for the two men down the hall, Mr Seager and Mr Bentley. I 
gave him their room number and a  one- mark note. Then I show-
ered, shaved, dressed and checked out of the hotel.
I walked across the street to the   first-  floor shopping promenade 
where the charladies were flicking a final mop across the shiny 
floors of unopened shops. Two   fur-  hatted cops were eating break-
fast in the Columbia Café. I took a seat near the window and stared 

across the square to the Saarinen railway station which dominated 
the town. More snow had fallen during the night and a small army 
of shovellers were clearing the   bus- park.
I ate my breakfast. Kellogg’s Riisi Muroja went ‘snap, crackle, 
pop’, the eggs were fine and so was the orange juice, but I didn’t 
fancy coffee that morning.

Helsinki is only a kilometre wide at the end of the peninsula. Here 
in the south part of the town where the diplomats live and work, 
the  old- fashioned granite buildings are quiet and parking is easy. 
Kaarna lived in a broody block of flats that still bore the scars of 
Russian attacks. Inside the foyer the furnishing had that restrained, 
colourless elegance that steel, glass and granite invariably produce. 
Kaarna’s flat was on the fourth floor: No. 44. A small light behind 
the   bell-  push said Dr Olaf Kaarna. I rang the bell three times. I had 
no appointment with Kaarna but I knew that he worked at home 
and seldom left his flat before  lunch- time. I hit the buzzer again 
and wondered if he was struggling into his bathrobe and cursing. 
There was still no reply, and looking through the letterbox I 
could see only a dark  hall- stand piled high with mail and three 
closed doors. I felt the cold metal of the   letter-  box against my fore-
head slide gently forward with a click. The heavy door swung 
open and almost toppled me across the welcome mat. I pushed the 
buzzer again, holding the door open with my toe as though I 
wasn’t really doing it. When it became evident that no one was 
going to come I moved quickly. I flipped through the pile of 
mail, and then into all the rooms. A kitchen, as tidy as you can get 
without dismantling the furniture. The lounge looked like the  
 Scandinavian- modern department of a big store. Only the study 
looked  lived- in. Books covered the walls and papers were unti-
dily heaped across the pine desk. Bottles of ink and wire staples 
were used as  paper- weights. Behind the desk was a   glass- fronted 
bookcase, inside which were rows of expanding files neatly titled 
in Finnish. There was a rack of  test- tubes, clean and unused, on 
the  window- sill, and under the window a secretary’s desk with a 
sheet of -.25 FM stamps, a  letter- opener, a balance, a bottle of 

gum, an empty bottle of nail varnish and a trace of spilled face 
powder. I found Kaarna in the bedroom.
Kaarna was a smaller man than his photos suggested and upside 
down the globular head was far too large for his body. The top of 
his bald head brushed lightly upon the superb carpet. His mouth 
was open enough to reveal his uneven upper teeth and from it 
blood had run along his nose and into his eyes, ending in a sort of 
Rorschach   caste-  mark in the centre of his forehead. His body was 
sprawled across the unmade bed with one shoe trapped in the  bed- 
 head, which prevented him sliding to the floor. Kaarna was fully 
dressed. His   polka- dot bow tie was twisted up under his collar and 
his white nylon laboratory coat was smothered in raw egg, still 
slimy and fresh. Kaarna was dead.
There was blood low down on the left side of his back. It looked 
dark, like a   blood- blister, under the  non- porous nylon coat. The 
window was wide open and, though the room was freezing cold, 
the blood was still  haemoglobin- fresh. I inspected his short clean 
fingernails where the lecturers tell us we’ll find all sorts of clues, 
but there was nothing there that could be seen without an electron 
microscope. If he had been shot through the open window it would 
account for his being thrown back across the bed. I decided to look 
for bruising around the wound, but as I gripped him by the shoul-
der he began to  slide –  he hadn’t even begun to   stiffen –  falling into 
a twisted heap on the floor. It was a loud noise and I listened for any 
movement from the flat below. I heard the lift moving.
Logically my best plan would have been to remain there, but I 
was in the hall, wiping doorknobs and worrying whether to steal 
the mail before you could say ‘scientific investigator’.
The lift stopped at Kaarna’s floor. A young girl got out of it, clos-
ing the gate with care before looking towards me. She wore a white  
 trench- coat and a fur hat. She carried a briefcase that appeared to 
be heavy. She came up to the locked door of No. 44 and we both 
looked at it for a moment in silence.
‘Have you rung the bell?’ she said in excellent English. I suppose I 
didn’t look much like a Finn. I nodded and she pressed the bell a long 
time. We waited. She removed her shoe and rapped on the door with 

the heel. ‘He’ll be at his office,’ she pronounced with certainty. 
‘Would you like to see him there?’ She slipped her shoe on again.
London said he didn’t have an office and that wasn’t the sort of 
thing that London got wrong. ‘I certainly would,’ I said.
‘Do you have papers or a message?’
‘Both,’ I said. ‘Papers and a message.’ She began to walk towards 
the lift,  half- turning towards me to continue the conversation. ‘You 
work for Professor Kaarna?’
‘Not full-time,’ I said. We went down in the lift in silence. The 
girl had a clear placid face with the sort of flawless complexion that 
responds to cold air. She wore no lipstick, a light dusting of powder 
and a touch of black on the eyes. Her hair was blonde but not very 
light and she’d tucked it up inside her fur hat. Here and there a 
strand hung down to her shoulder. In the foyer she looked at the 
man’s wristwatch she was wearing.
‘It’s nearly noon,’ she said. ‘We would do better to wait till after 
lunch.’
I said, ‘Let’s try his office first. If he’s not there we’ll have lunch 
near by.’
‘It’s not possible. His office is in a poor district alongside high-
way five, the Lahti road. There is nowhere to eat around there.’
‘Speaking for myself . . .’
‘You are not hungry.’ She smiled. ‘But I am, so please take me to 
lunch.’ She gripped my arm expectantly. I shrugged and began to 
walk back towards the centre of town. I glanced up at the open 
window to Kaarna’s flat; there were plenty of places in the building 
opposite where a rifleman could have sat waiting. But in this sort of 
climate where the  double- glazed windows are sealed with tape a 
man could wait all winter.
We walked up the wide streets on pavements that were brushed 
in patterns around humps of recalcitrant ice like a Japanese   sand- 
 garden. The signs were incomprehensible and   consonant-  heavy 
except for words like Esso,  Coca- Cola and Kodak sandwiched 
between the Finnish. The sky was getting greyer and lower every 
moment, and as we entered the Kaartingrilli Café small business-
like flakes began to fall.

The Kaartingrilli is a long narrow place full of heated air that 
smells of coffee. Half of the wall space is painted black and the 
other half is picture windows. The décor is all natural wood and 
copper and the place was crowded with young people shouting, 
flirting and drinking  Coca- Cola.
We sat down in the farthest corner staring out across a crowded  

 car- park where every car was white with snow. With her heavy 
coat off the girl was much younger than I thought. Helsinki teems 
with  fresh- faced girls born when the soldiers returned home. Nine-
teen   forty-  five was a boom year for gorgeous Finns. I wondered 
whether this girl was one of them.
‘I am Liam Dempsey, a citizen of Eire,’ I said. ‘I have been gath-
ering material for Professor Kaarna in connexion with a transfer of 
funds between London and Helsinki. I live in London most of the 
year.’ She presented her hand across the table and I shook it. She 
said, ‘My name is Signe Laine. I am a Finn. You work for Professor 
Kaarna, then we shall get along swell because Professor Kaarna 
works for me.’
‘For you,’ I said without making it a question.
‘Not for me personally,’ she smiled at the thought. ‘For the 
organization that employs me.’
She held her hands as though she’d seen too many copies of 
Vogue, picking up one hand with the other and holding it against 
her face and nursing it as if it was a sick canary.
‘What organization is that?’ I asked. The waitress came to our 
table. Signe ordered in Finnish without consulting me.
‘All in good time,’ she said. Outside in the   car- park the wind 
was carrying the snow in horizontal streaks and a man in a wool-
len hat with a bobble on it was struggling along with a car battery, 
leaning into the wind and trying not to slip on the hard, shiny, 
grey ice.
Lunch was open   cold-  beef sandwiches, soup, cream cake, coffee 
and a glass of cold milk, which is practically the national drink. 
Signe bit into it all like a buzz saw. Now and again she asked me 
questions about where I was born and how much I earned and 
whether I was married. She put the questions in the  off- hand 

