Gaudy Night

A Lord Peter Wimsey Mystery

Dorothy L. Sayers

Contents

Author’s Note

Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV
Chapter XVI
Chapter XVII
Chapter XVIII
Chapter XIX
Chapter XX
Chapter XXI
Chapter XXII
Chapter XXIII

A Biography of Dorothy L. Sayers

The University is a Paradise, Rivers of Knowledge are there, Arts and
Sciences flow from thence. Counsell Tables are Horti conclusi, (as it is said
in the Canticles) Gardens that are walled in, and they are Fontes signati,
Wells that are sealed up; bottomless depths of unsearchable Counsels there.

JOHN DONNE

AUTHOR’S NOTE

It would be idle to deny that the City and University of Oxford (in aetemum
floreant) do actually exist, and contain a number of colleges and other
buildings, some of which are mentioned by name in this book. It is
therefore the more necessary to affirm emphatically that none of the
characters which I have placed upon this public stage has any counterpart in
real life. In particular, Shrewsbury College, with its dons, students and
scouts, is entirely imaginary; nor are the distressing events described as
taking place within its walls founded upon any events that have occurred
anywhere. Detective-story writers are obliged by their disagreeable
profession to invent startling and unpleasant incidents and people, and are (I
presume) at liberty to imagine what might happen if such incidents and
people were to intrude upon the life of an innocent and well-ordered
community; but in so doing they must not be supposed to suggest that any
such disturbance ever has occurred or is ever likely to occur in any
community in real life.

Certain apologies are, however, due from me: first, to the University of

Oxford, for having presented it with a Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of
my own manufacture and with a college of 150 women students, in excess
of the limit ordained by statute. Next, and with deep humility, to Balliol
College—not only for having saddled it with so wayward an alumnus as
Peter Wimsey, but also for my monstrous impertinence in having erected
Shrewsbury College upon its spacious and sacred cricket-ground. To New
College, also to Christ Church, and especially to Queen’s, I apologize for
the follies of certain young gentlemen, to Brasenose for the facetiousness of
a middle-aged one, and to Magdalen for the embarrassing situation in which

I have placed an imaginary pro-Proctor. The corporation Dump, on the
other hand, is, or was, a fact, and no apology for it is due from me.

my thanks for help generously given in questions of proctorial rules and
general college discipline—though they are not to be held responsible for
details of discipline in Shrewsbury College, many of which I have invented
to suit my own purpose.

they already know of the Wimsey family that the action of the book takes
place in 1935; but if they do, they must not be querulously indignant
because the King’s Jubilee is not mentioned, or because I have arranged the
weather and the moon’s changes to suit my own fancy. For, however
realistic the background, the novelist’s only native country is Cloud-
Cuckooland, where they do but jest, poison in jest: no offense in the world.

CHAPTER I

Thou blind man’s mark, thou fool’s self-chosen snare,

Fond fancy’s scum, and dregs of scattered thought,

Band of all evils; cradle of causeless care;

Thou web of will, whose end is never wrought:

Desire! Desire! I have too dearly bought

With price of mangled mind, thy worthless ware.

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY

Harriet Vane sat at her writing-table and stared out into Mecklenburg
Square. The late tulips made a brave show in the Square garden, and a
quartet of early tennis-players were energetically calling the score of a
rather erratic and unpracticed game. But Harriet saw neither tulips nor
tennis-players. A letter lay open on the blotting-pad before her, but its
image had faded from her mind to make way for another picture. She saw a
stone quadrangle, built by a modern architect in a style neither new nor old,
but stretching out reconciling hands to past and present. Folded within its
walls lay a trim grass plot, with flower-beds splashed at the angles, and
surrounded by a wide stone plinth. Behind the level roofs of Cotswold slate
rose the brick chimneys of an older and less formal pile of buildings—a
quadrangle also of a kind, but still keeping a domestic remembrance of the
original Victorian dwelling-houses that had sheltered the first shy students
of Shrewsbury College. In front were the trees of Jowett Walk, and beyond
them, a jumble of ancient gables and the tower of New College, with its
jackdaws wheeling against a windy sky.

pairs. Students dashing to lectures, their gowns hitched hurriedly over light
summer frocks, the wind jerking their flat caps into the absurd likeness of
so many jesters’ cockscombs. Bicycles stacked in the porter’s lodge, their
carriers piled with books and gowns twisted about their handle-bars. A
grizzled woman don crossing the turf with vague eyes, her thoughts riveted
upon aspects of sixteenth-century philosophy, her sleeves floating, her
shoulders cocked to the academic angle that automatically compensated the
backward drag of the pleated poplin. Two male commoners in search of a
coach, bareheaded, hands in their trousers-pockets, talking loudly about
boats. The Warden—grey and stately—and the Dean—stocky, brisk,
birdlike, a Lesser Redpoll—in animated conference under the archway
leading to the Old Quadrangle. Tall spikes of delphinium against the grey,
quiveringly blue like flames, if flame were ever so blue. The college cat,
preoccupied and remote, stalking with tail erect in the direction of the
buttery.

It was all so long ago; so closely encompassed and complete; so cut off

as by swords from the bitter years that lay between. Could one face it now?
What would those women say to her, to Harriet Vane, who had taken her
First in English and gone to London to write mystery fiction, to live with a
man who was not married to her, and to be tried for his murder amid a roar
of notoriety? That was not the kind of career that Shrewsbury expected of
its old students.

well, and a clean break seemed better than a slow wrenching-away; and also
because, when her parents had died and left her penniless, the struggle to
earn a livelihood had absorbed all her time and thought. And afterwards, the

stark shadow of the gallows had fallen between her and that sundrenched
quadrangle of grey and green. But now—?

She picked up the letter again. It was an urgent entreaty that she should

attend the Shrewsbury Gaudy—an entreaty of the kind that it is difficult to
disregard. A friend whom she had not seen since they went down together;
married now and remote from her, but fallen sick, and eager to see Harriet
once again before going abroad for a delicate and dangerous operation.

play; so charming and finished in manner; so much the social center of her
year. It had seemed strange that she should take such a fancy to Harriet
Vane, rough and gawky and anything but generally popular. Mary had led
and Harriet had followed; when they punted up the Cher with strawberries
and thermos flasks; when they climbed Magdalen tower together before
sunrise on May-Day and felt it swing beneath them with the swing of the
reeling bells; when they sat up late at night over the fire with coffee and
parkin, it was always Mary who took the lead in all the long discussions
about love and art, religion and citizenship. Mary, said all her friends, was
marked for a First; only the dim, inscrutable dons had not been surprised
when the lists came out with Harriet’s name in the First Class and Mary’s in
the Second. And since then, Mary had married and scarcely been heard of;
except that she haunted the College with a sick persistence, never missing
an Old Students’ Meeting or a Gaudy. But Harriet had broken all her old
ties and half the commandments, dragged her reputation in the dust and
made money, had the rich and amusing Lord Peter Wimsey at her feet, to
marry him if she chose, and was full of energy and bitterness and the
uncertain rewards of fame. Prometheus and Epimetheus had changed their
parts, it seemed; but for one there was the box of troubles and for the other

the bare rock and the vulture; and never, it seemed to Harriet, could they
meet on any common ground again.

damned to it. Nothing can hurt me worse than I’ve been hurt already. And
what does it matter after all?”

She filled up her invitation form, addressed it, stamped it with a sharp

thump and ran quickly down to drop it in the pillar-box before she changed
her mind.

stone stair to her flat and, after a fruitless rummage in a cupboard, came out
and climbed up slowly again to a landing at the top of the house. She
dragged out an ancient trunk, unlocked it and flung back the lid. A close,
cold odor. Books. Discarded garments. Old shoes. Old manuscripts. A faded
tie that had belonged to her dead lover—how horrible that that should still
be hanging about! She burrowed to the bottom of the pile and dragged a
thick, black bundle out into the dusty sunlight. The gown, worn only once
at the taking of her M.A. degree, had suffered nothing from its long
seclusion: the stiff folds shook loose with hardly a crease. The crimson silk
of the hood gleamed bravely. Only the flat cap showed a little touch of the
moth’s tooth. As she beat the loose fluff from it, a tortoise-shell butterfly,
disturbed from its hibernation beneath the flap of the trunk-lid, fluttered out
into the brightness of the window, where it was caught and held by a
cobweb.

Her entry into Oxford would bear no resemblance to those earlier arrivals
by train. For a few hours longer she could ignore the whimpering ghost of
her dead youth and tell herself that she was a stranger and a sojourner, a
well-to-do woman with a position in the world. The hot road span away

behind her; towns rose from the green landscape, crowded close about her
with their inn-signs and petrol-pumps, their shops and police and
perambulators, then reeled back and were forgotten. June was dying among
the roses, the hedges were darkening to a duller green; the blatancy of red
brick sprawled along the highway was a reminder that the present builds
inexorably over the empty fields of the past. She lunched in High
Wycombe, solidly, comfortably, ordering a half-bottle of white wine and
tipping the waitress generously. She was eager to distinguish herself as
sharply as possible from that former undergraduate who would have had to
be content with a packet of sandwiches and a flask of coffee beneath the
bough in a by-lane. As one grew older, as one established one’s self, one
gained a new delight in formality. Her dress for the Garden-party, chosen to
combine suitably with full academicals, lay, neatly folded, inside her
suitcase. It was long and severe, of plain black georgette, wholly and
unimpeachably correct. Beneath it was an evening dress for the Gaudy
Dinner, of a rich petunia color, excellently cut on restrained lines, with no
unbecoming display of back or breast; it would not affront the portraits of
dead Wardens, gazing down from the slowly mellowing oak of the Hall.

qualm cramped her stomach. Headington Hill, up which one had toiled so
often, pushing a decrepit bicycle. It seemed less steep now, as one made
decorous descent behind four rhythmically pulsating cylinders; but every
leaf and stone hailed one with the intrusive familiarity of an old
schoolfellow. Then the narrow street, with its cramped, untidy shops, like
the main street of a village; one or two stretches had been widened and
improved, but there was little real change to take refuge in.

Magdalen Bridge. Magdalen Tower. And here, no change at all—only

the heartless and indifferent persistence of man’s handiwork. Here one must

begin to steel one’s self in earnest. Long Wall Street. St. Cross Road. The
iron hand of the past gripping at one’s entrails. The college gates; and now
one must go through with it.

There was a new porter at the St. Cross lodge, who heard Harriet’s

name unmoved and checked it off upon a list. She handed him her bag, took
her car round to a garage in Mansfield Lane*, and then, with her gown over
her arm, passed through the New Quad into the Old, and so, by way of an
ugly brick doorway, into Burleigh Building.

contemporaries of a far senior generation were greeting one another with
effusive and belated girlishness at the door of the Junior Common Room;
but she knew none of them, and went by unspeaking and unspoken to, like a
ghost. The room allotted to her she recognized, after a little calculation, as
one that had been occupied in her day by a woman she particularly disliked,
who had married a missionary and gone to China. The present owner’s
short gown hung behind the door; judging by the bookshelves, she was
reading History; judging by her personal belongings, she was a Fresher with
an urge for modernity and very little natural taste. The narrow bed, on
which Harriet flung down her belongings, was covered with drapery of a
crude green color and ill-considered Futuristic pattern; a bad picture in the
neo-archaic manner hung above it; a chromium-plated lamp of angular and
inconvenient design swore acidly at the table and wardrobe provided by the
college, which were of a style usually associated with the Tottenham Court
Road; while the disharmony was crowned and accentuated by the presence,
on the chest of drawers, of a curious statuette or three-dimensional diagram
carried out in aluminum, which resembled a gigantic and contorted
corkscrew, and was labeled upon its base: ASPIRATION. It was with
surprise and relief that Harriet discovered three practicable dress-hangers in

the wardrobe. The looking glass, in conformity with established college use,
was about a foot square, and hung in the darkest corner of the room.

dressinggown and set out in search of a bathroom. She had allowed herself
three-quarters of an hour for changing, and Shrewsbury’s hot-water system
had always been one of its most admirable minor efficiencies. She had
forgotten exactly where the bathrooms were on this floor, but surely they
were round here to the left. A pantry, two pantries, with notices on the
doors: NO WASHING-UP TO BE DONE AFTER 11 P.M.; three lavatories,

with notices on the doors: KINDLY EXTINGUISH THE LIGHT WHEN
LEAVING; yes, here she was—four bathrooms, with notices on the doors:
NO BATHS TO BE TAKEN AFTER 11 P.M., and, underneath, an
exasperated addendum to each: IF STUDENTS PERSIST IN TAKING
BATHS AFTER 11 P.M. THE BATHROOMS WILL BE LOCKED AT
10:30 P.M. SOME CONSIDERATION FOR OTHERS IS NECESSARY IN
COMMUNITY LIFE. Signed: L. MARTIN, DEAN. Harriet selected the
largest bathroom. It contained a notice: REGULATIONS IN CASE OF
FIRE, and a card printed in large capitals: THE SUPPLY OF HOT WATER
IS LIMITED. PLEASE AVOID UNDUE WASTE. With a familiar
sensation of being under authority, Harriet pushed down the waste-plug and
turned on the tap. The water was boiling, though the bath badly needed a
new coat of enamel and the cork mat had seen better days.

Once bathed, Harriet felt better. She was lucky again in returning to

her room to meet no one whom she knew. She was in no mood for
reminiscent gossipings in dressinggowns. She saw the name “Mrs. H.
Attwood” on the door next but one to hers. The door was shut, and she was
grateful. The next door bore no name, but as she went by, someone turned

the handle from within, and it began to open slowly. Harriet leapt quickly
past it and into shelter. She found her heart beating absurdly fast.

yoke and long, close sleeves, softened by a wristfrill falling nearly to the
knuckles. It outlined her figure to the waist and fell full-skirted to the
ground, with a suggestion of the medieval robe. Its dull surface effaced
itself, not outshining the dull gleam of the academic poplin. She pulled the
gown’s heavy folds forward upon her shoulders, so that the straight fronts
fell stole-wise, serene. The hood cost her a small struggle, before she
remembered the right twist at the throat which turned the bright silk
outwards. She pinned it invisibly on her breast, so that it sat poised and
balanced—one black shoulder and one crimson. Standing and stooping
before the inadequate looking-glass (the present student who owned the
room was obviously a very short woman), she adjusted the soft cap to lie
flat and straight, peak down in the center of the forehead. The glass showed
her her own face, rather pale, with black brows fronting squarely either side
of a strong nose, a little too broad for beauty. Her own eyes looked back at
her—rather tired, rather defiant—eyes that had looked upon fear and were
still wary. The mouth was the mouth of one who has been generous and
repented of generosity; its wide corners were tucked back to give nothing
away. With the thick, waving hair folded beneath the black cloth, the face
seemed somehow stripped for action. She frowned at herself and moved her
hands a little up and down upon the stuff of her gown; then, becoming
impatient with the looking-glass, she turned to the window, which looked
out into the Inner or Old Quad. This, indeed, was less a quad than an oblong
garden, with the college buildings grouped about it. At one end, tables and
chairs were set out upon the grass beneath the shade of the trees. At the far
side, the new Library wing, now almost complete, showed its bare rafters in

a forest of scaffolding. A few groups of women crossed the lawn; Harriet
observed with irritation that most of them wore their caps badly, and one
had had the folly to put on a pale lemon frock with muslin frills, which
looked incongruous beneath a gown.

enough. And at any rate, the women are no worse than the men. I once saw
old Hammond walk in the Encaenia procession in a Mus. Doc. gown, a grey
flannel suit, brown boots and a blue spotted tie, and nobody said anything to
him.”

She laughed suddenly, and for the first time felt confident.
“They can’t take this away, at any rate. Whatever I may have done

since, this remains. Scholar; Master of Arts; Domina; Senior Member of
this University (statutum est quod Juniores Senioribus debitam et congruam
reverentiam tum in privato tum in publico exhibeant); a place achieved,
inalienable, worthy of reverence.

one to her own.

The four women walked down to the garden together—slowly,

because Mary was ill and could not move fast. And as they went, Harriet
was thinking:

“It’s a mistake—it’s a great mistake—I shouldn’t have come. Mary is a

dear, as she always was, and she is pathetically pleased to see me, but we
have nothing to say to one another. And I shall always remember her, now,
as she is today, with that haggard face and look of defeat. And she will
remember me as I am—hardened. She told me I looked successful. I know
what that means.”

She was glad that Betty Armstrong and Dorothy Collins were doing all

the talking. One of them was a hardworking dog-breeder; the other ran a

bookshop in Manchester. They had evidently kept in touch with one
another, for they were discussing things and not people, as those do who
have lively interests in common. Mary Stokes (now Mary Attwood) seemed
cut off from them, by sickness, by marriage, by—it was no use to blink the
truth—by a kind of mental stagnation that had nothing to do with either
illness or marriage. “I suppose,” thought Harriet, “she had one of those
small, summery brains, that flower early and run to seed. Here she is—my
intimate friend—talking to me with a painful kind of admiring politeness
about my books. And I am talking with a painful kind of admiring
politeness about her children. We ought not to have met again. It’s awful.”

about publishers’ contracts, and the reply to this tided them over till they
emerged into the quad. A brisk figure came bustling along the path, and
stopped with a cry of welcome.

“Why, it’s Miss Vane! How nice to see you after all this long time.”
Harriet thankfully allowed herself to be scooped up by the Dean, for

whom she had always had a very great affection, and who had written
kindly to her in the days when a cheerful kindliness had been the most
helpful thing on earth. The other three, mindful of reverence toward
authority, passed on; they had paid their respects to the Dean earlier in the
afternoon.

“It was splendid that you were able to come.”
“Rather brave of me, don’t you think?” said Harriet.
“Oh, nonsense!” said the Dean. She put her head on one side and fixed

Harriet with a bright and birdlike eye. “You mustn’t think about all that.
Nobody bothers about it at all. We’re not nearly such dried-up mummies as
you think. After all, it’s the work you are doing that really counts, isn’t it?
By the way, the Warden is longing to see you. She simply loved The Sands

of Crime. Let’s see if we can catch her before the Vice-Chancellor arrives
… How did you think Stokes was looking—Attwood, I mean? I never can
remember all their married names.”

“Pretty rotten, I’m afraid,” said Harriet. “I came here to see her, really,

you know—but I’m afraid it’s not going to be much of a success.”

friend of yours—but I always thought she had a head like a day-old chick.
Very precocious, but no staying power. However, I hope they’ll put her right
…Bother this wind—I can’t keep my cap down. You manage yours
remarkably well; how do you do it? And I notice that we are both decently
sub-fusc. Have you seen Trimmer in that frightful frock like a canary
lampshade?”

“That was Trimmer, was it? What’s she doing?”
“Oh, lord! My dear, she’s gone in for mental healing. Brightness and

love and all that …Ah! I thought we should find the Warden here.”

days, it had been dignified by a woman of position; in the difficult period
when it fought for Women’s degrees it had been guided by a diplomat; and
now that it was received into the University, its behavior was made
acceptable by a personality: Dr. Margaret Baring wore her scarlet and
French grey with an air. She was a magnificent figure-head on all public
occasions, and she could soothe with tact the wounded breasts of crusty and
affronted male dons. She greeted Harriet graciously, and asked what she
thought of the new Library Wing, which would complete the North side of
the Old Quad. Harriet duly admired what could be seen of its proportions,
said it would be a great improvement, and asked when it would be finished.

“By Easter, we hope. Perhaps we shall see you at the Opening.”

Vice-Chancellor’s gown flutter into sight in the distance, drifted tactfully
away to join the main throng of old students.

after ten years or more. That in the blue-and-rabbit-skin hood must be
Sylvia Drake—she had taken that B.Litt. at last, then. Miss Drake’s B.Litt.
had been the joke of the college; it had taken her so long; she was
continually rewriting her thesis and despairing over it. She would hardly
remember Harriet, who was so much her junior, but Harriet remembered her
well—always popping in and out of the J.C.R. during her year of residence,
and chattering away about medieval Courts of Love. Heavens! Here was
that awful woman, Muriel Campshott, coming up to claim acquaintance.
Campshott had always simpered. She still simpered. And she was dressed in
a shocking shade of green. She was going to say, “How do you think of all
your plots?” She did say it. Curse the woman. And Vera Mollison. She was
asking: “Are you writing anything now?”

“Yes, certainly,” said Harriet. “Are you still teaching?”
“Yes—still in the same place,” said Miss Mollison. “I’m afraid my

doings are very small beer compared with yours.”

Harriet laughed deprecatingly. A movement took place. People were
drifting into the New Quad, where a Presentation Clock was to be unveiled,
and taking up their positions upon the stone plinth that ran round behind the
flower-beds. An official voice was heard exhorting the guests to leave a
path for the procession. Harriet used this excuse to disentangle herself from
Vera Mollison and establish herself at the back of a group, all of whose
faces were strange to her. On the opposite side of the Quad she could see
Mary Attwood and her friends. They were waving. She waved back. She

was not going to cross the grass and join them. She would remain detached,
a unit in an official crowd.

appearance in public, chimed and struck three. Footsteps crunched along
the gravel. The procession came into sight beneath the archway; a small
crocodile-walk of elderly people, dressed with the incongruous brilliance of
a more sumptuous era, and moving with the slovenly dignity characteristic
of university functions in England. They crossed the quad; they mounted
the plinth beneath the clock; the male dons removed their Tudor bonnets
and mortar-boards in deference to the Vice-Chancellor; the female dons
adopted a reverential attitude suggestive of a prayer-meeting. In a thin,
delicate voice, the Vice-Chancellor began to speak. He spoke of the history
of the college; he made a graceful allusion to achievements which could not
be measured by the mere passing of time; he cracked a dry and nutty little
jest about relativity and adorned it with a classical tag; he referred to the
generosity of the donor and the beloved personality of the deceased
Member of Council in whose memory the clock was presented; he
expressed himself happy to unveil this handsome clock, which would add
so greatly to the beauty of the quadrangle—a quadrangle, he would add,
which, although a newcomer in point of time, was fully worthy to take its
place among those ancient and noble buildings which were the glory of our
University. In the name of the Chancellor and University of Oxford, he now
unveiled the clock. His hand went out to the rope; an agitated expression
came over the face of the Dean, resolving itself into a wide smile of triumph
when the drapery fell away without any unseemly hitch or disaster; the
clock was revealed, a few bold spirits started a round of applause; the
Warden, in a short, neat speech, thanked the Vice-Chancellor for his
kindness in coming and his friendly expressions; the golden hand of the

clock moved on, and the quarter-chime rang out mellowly. The assembly
heaved a sigh of satisfaction; the procession collected itself and made the
return journey through the archway, and the ceremony was happily over.

Mollison had bobbed up again beside her, and was saying she supposed all
mystery-writers must feel a strong personal interest in clocks, as so many
alibis turned upon clocks and time-signals. There had been a curious
incident one day at the school where she taught; it would, she thought,
make a splendid plot for a detective-story, for anybody who was clever
enough to work such things out. She had been longing to see Harriet and
tell her all about it. Planting herself firmly on the lawn of the Old Quad, at a
considerable distance from the refreshment-tables, she began to retail the
curious incident, which required a good deal of preliminary explanation. A
scout advanced, carrying cups of tea. Harriet secured one, and instantly
wished she hadn’t; it prevented swift movement, and seemed to nail her to
Miss Mollison’s side to all eternity. Then, with a heart-lifting surge of
thankfulness, she saw Phoebe Tucker. Good old Phoebe, looking exactly the
same as ever. She excused herself hurriedly to Miss Mollison, begging that
she might hear the clock incident at a more leisured moment, made her way
through a bunch of gowns and said, “Hullo!”

think there wasn’t a soul of our year here, except Trimmer and that ghastly
Mollison female. Come and get some sandwiches; they’re quite good,
strange to say. How are you these days; flourishing?”

“Not too bad.”
“You’re doing good stuff, anyhow.”
“So are you. Let’s find something to sit upon. I want to hear all about

the digging.”

Phoebe Tucker was a History student, who had married an

archaeologist, and the combination seemed to work remarkably well. They
dug up bones and stones and pottery in forgotten corners of the globe, and
wrote pamphlets and lectured to learned societies. At odd moments they
had produced a trio of cheerful youngsters, whom they dumped casually
upon delighted grandparents before hastening back to the bones and stones.

about a new set of burial-places, and has evolved an entirely original and
revolutionary theory about funerary rites. He’s writing a paper that
contradicts all old Lambard’s conclusions, and I’m helping by toning down
his adjectives and putting in deprecatory footnotes. I mean, Lambard may
be a perverse old idiot, but it’s more dignified not to say so in so many
words. A bland and deadly courtesy is more devastating, don’t you think?”

“Infinitely.”
Here at any rate was somebody who had not altered by a hair’s-

breadth, in spite of added years and marriage. Harriet was in a mood to be
glad of that. After an exhaustive inquiry into the matter of funerary rites,
she asked after the family.

thrilled by the burial-places. His grandmother was horrified the other day to
find him very patiently and correctly excavating the gardener’s rubbish-
heap and making a collection of bones. Her generation always get so
agitated about germs and dirt. I suppose they’re quite right, but the
offspring doesn’t seem any the worse. So his father gave him a cabinet to
keep the bones in. Simply encouraging him, Mother said. I think we shall
have to take Richard out with us next time, only Mother would be so
worried, thinking about no drainage and what he might pick up from the
Greeks. All the children seem to be coming out quite intelligent, thank

goodness. It would have been such a bore to be the mother of morons, and
it’s an absolute toss-up, isn’t it? If one could only invent them, like
characters in books, it would be much more satisfactory to a well-regulated
mind.”

factors and Brave New World. It was cut short by the emergence of Harriet’s
former tutor from a crowd of old students. Harriet and Phoebe made a
concerted rush to greet her. Miss Lydgate’s manner was exactly what it had
always been. To the innocent and candid eyes of that great scholar, no moral
problem seemed ever to present itself. Of a scrupulous personal integrity,
she embraced the irregularities of other people in a wide, unquestioning
charity. As any student of literature must, she knew all the sins of the world
by name, but it was doubtful whether she recognized them when she met
them in real life. It was as though a misdemeanor committed by a person
she knew was disarmed and disinfected by the contact. So many young
people had passed through her hands, and she had found so much good in
all of them; it was impossible to think that they could be deliberately
wicked, like Richard III or Iago. Unhappy, yes; misguided, yes; exposed to
difficult and complicated temptations which Miss Lydgate herself had been
mercifully spared, yes. If she heard of a theft, a divorce, even worse things,
she would knit puzzled brows and think how utterly wretched the offenders
must have been before they could do so dreadful a thing. Only once had
Harriet ever heard her speak with unqualified disapproval of anyone she
knew, and that was of a former pupil of her own who had written a popular
book about Carlyle. “No research at all,” had been Miss Lydgate’s verdict,
“and no effort at critical judgment. She has reproduced all the old gossip
without troubling to verify anything. Slipshod, showy, and catchpenny. I am

really ashamed of her.” And even then she had added: “But I believe, poor
thing, she is very hard up.”

contrary, she greeted her warmly, begged her to come and see her on
Sunday morning, spoke appreciatively of her work, and commended her for
keeping up a scholarly standard of English, even in mystery fiction.

Miss de Vine is also a fervent admirer of yours.”

“Miss de Vine?”
“Ah, of course, you don’t know her. Our new Research Fellow. She’s

such a nice person, and I know she wants to talk to you about your books.
You must come and make her acquaintance. We’ve got her for three years,
you know. That is, she only comes into residence next term, but she’s been
living in Oxford for the last few weeks, working in Bodley. She’s doing a
great work on National Finance under the Tudors, and makes it perfectly
fascinating, even for people like me, who are stupid about money. We are
all so glad that the College decided to offer her the Jane Barraclough
Fellowship, because she is a most distinguished scholar, and has had rather
a hard time.”

“I think I’ve heard of her. Wasn’t she Head of one of the big provincial

colleges?”

really her job; too much administration, though of course she was
marvelous on the financial side. But she was doing too much, what with her
own work, and examining for doctorates and so on, and coping with
students—the University and the College between them wore her out. She’s
one of those people who always will give of her best; but I think she found
all the personal contacts uncongenial. She got ill, and had to go abroad for a

couple of years. In fact, she has only just got back to England. Of course,
having to give up Flamborough made a good deal of difference from the
financial point of view; so it’s nice to think that for the next three years
she’ll be able to get on with her book and not worry about that side of
things.”

somewhere or other, last Christmas or thereabouts.”

very proud to have her here. She ought really to have a professorship, but I
doubt if she could stand the tutorial side of it. The fewer distractions she
has, the better, because she’s one of the real scholars. There she is, over
there—and, oh, dear! I’m afraid she’s been caught by Miss Gubbins. You
remember Miss Gubbins?”

An excellent soul, but rather earnest, and an appalling bore at College
Meetings.”

rather an unfortunate knack of making any subject sound dull. It’s a great
pity, because she is exceptionally sound and dependable. However, that
doesn’t greatly matter in her present appointment; she holds a librarianship
somewhere—Miss Hillyard would remember where—and I believe she’s
researching on the Bacon family. She’s such a hard worker. But I’m afraid
she’s putting poor Miss de Vine through a cross-examination, which doesn’t
seem quite fair on an occasion like this. Shall we go to the rescue?”

an enormous nostalgia. If only one could come back to this quiet place,
where only intellectual achievement counted; if one could work here
steadily and obscurely at some close-knit piece of reasoning, undistracted

and 
uncorrupted 
by 
agents, 
contracts, 
publishers, 
blurb-writers,

interviewers, 
fan-mail, 
autograph-hunters, 
notoriety-hunters, 
and

competitors; abolishing personal contacts, personal spites, personal
jealousies; getting one’s teeth into something dull and durable; maturing
into solidity like the Shrewsbury beeches—then, one might be able to forget
the wreck and chaos of the past, or see it, at any rate, in a truer proportion.
Because, in a sense, it was not important. The fact that one had loved and
sinned and suffered and escaped death was of far less ultimate moment than
a single footnote in a dim academic journal establishing the priority of a
manuscript or restoring a lost iota subscript. It was the hand-to-hand
struggle with the insistent personalities of other people, all pushing for a
place in the limelight, that made the accidents of one’s own personal
adventure bulk so large in the scheme of things.

But she doubted whether she were now capable of any such

withdrawal. She had long ago taken the step that put the grey-walled
paradise of Oxford behind her. No one can bathe in the same river twice,
not even in the Isis. She would be impatient of that narrow serenity—or so
she told herself.

introduced to Miss de Vine. And, looking at her, she saw at once that here
was a scholar of a kind very unlike Miss Lydgate, for example, and still
more grotesquely unlike anything that Harriet Vane could ever become.
Here was a fighter, indeed; but one to whom the quadrangle of Shrewsbury
was a native and proper arena: a soldier knowing no personal loyalties,
whose sole allegiance was to the fact. A Miss Lydgate, standing serenely
untouched by the world, could enfold it in a genial warmth of charity; this
woman, with infinitely more knowledge of the world, would rate it at a just
value and set it out of her path if it incommoded her. The thin, eager face,

with its large grey eyes deeply set and luminous behind thick glasses, was
sensitive to impressions; but behind that sensitiveness was a mind as hard
and immovable as granite. As the Head of a woman’s college she must,
thought Harriet, have had a distasteful task; for she looked as though the
word “compromise” had been omitted from her vocabulary; and all
statesmanship is compromise. She would not be likely to tolerate any
waverings of purpose or woolliness of judgment. If anything came between
her and the service of truth, she would walk over it without rancour and
without pity—even if it were her own reputation. A formidable woman
when pursuing the end in view—and the more so, for the deceptive
moderation and modesty she would display in dealing with any subject of
which she was not master. As they came up, she was saying to Miss
Gubbins:

unless you take all the characters and circumstances concerned into
account, you are reckoning without the facts. The proportions and relations
of things are just as much facts as the things themselves; and if you get
those wrong, you falsify the picture really seriously.”

preparing to expostulate, Miss de Vine caught sight of the English tutor and
excused herself. Miss Gubbins was obliged to withdraw; Harriet observed
with regret that she had untidy hair, an ill-kept skin and a large white safety-
pin securing her hood to her dress.

woman? She seems very much annoyed with my review of Mr.
Winterlake’s book on Essex. She seems to think I ought to have torn the
poor man to pieces because of a trifling error of a few months made in
dealing, quite incidentally, with the early history of the Bacon family. She

attaches no importance to the fact that the book is the most illuminating and
scholarly handling to date of the interactions of two most enigmatic
characters.”

doubt she feels strongly about it.”

background. The error should be corrected, of course; I did correct it—in a
private letter to the author, which is the proper medium for trifling
corrections. But the man has, I feel sure, got hold of the master-key to the
situation between those two men, and in so doing he has got hold of a fact
of genuine importance.”

“you seem to have taken a strong line with Miss Gubbins. Now I’ve
brought along somebody I know you’re anxious to meet. This is Miss
Harriet Vane—also an artist in the relating of details.”

Harriet, and her face lit up. “This is delightful. Do let me say how much I
enjoyed your last book. I thought it quite the best thing you’d done—though
of course I’m not competent to form an opinion from the scientific point of
view. I was discussing it with Professor Higgins, who is quite a devotee of
yours, and he said it suggested a most interesting possibility, which had not
before occurred to him. He wasn’t quite sure whether it would work, but he
would do his best to find out. Tell me, what did you have to go upon?”

qualm of uncertainty, and cursing Professor Higgins from the bottom of her
heart. “But of course—”

At this point, Miss Lydgate espied another old pupil in the distance and

Harriet was left to her fate. After ten minutes, during which Miss de Vine
ruthlessly turned her victim’s brain inside out, shook the facts out of it like a
vigorous housemaid shaking dust from a carpet, beat it, refreshed it, rubbed
up the surface of it, relaid it in a new position and tacked it into place with a
firm hand, the Dean mercifully came up and burst into the conversation.

can get rid of this filthy old bombazine and show off our party frocks. Why
did we ever clamor for degrees and the fun of stewing in full academicals
on a hot day? There! He’s gone! Give me those anything-but-glad-rags and
I’ll shove them into the S.C.R. with mine. Has yours got a name on it, Miss
Vane? Oh, good girl! I’ve got three unknown gowns sitting in my office
already. Found lying about at the end of term. No clue to owners, of course.
The untidy little beasts seem to think it’s our job to sort out their miserable
belongings. They strew them everywhere, regardless, and then borrow each
other’s; and if anybody’s fined for being out without a gown, it’s always
because somebody pinched it. And the wretched things are always as dirty
as dishclouts. They use them for dusters and drawing the fire up. When I
think how our devoted generation sweated to get the right to these garments
—and these young things don’t care that for them! They go about looking
all bits and pieces, like illustrations to Pendennis—so out of date of them!
But their idea of being modern is to imitate what male undergraduates were
like half a century ago.”

“Some of us old students aren’t much to write home about,” said

Harriet. “Look at Gubbins, for instance.”

pins. And I wish she’d wash her neck.”

“I think,” said Miss de Vine, with painstaking readiness to set the facts

in a just light, “that the color is natural to her skin.”

snatching Harriet’s gown from her. “No, don’t you bother. It won’t take me
a minute to chuck them through the S.C.R. window. And don’t you dare to
run away, or I shall never find you again.”

and hesitating with the loss of her cap and gown.

quantity of overworked hair-pins stood out like croquet-hoops, “it’s coming
down just a trifle.”

think I shall have to cut it short. It must be much less trouble that way.”

“I like it as it is. That big coil suits you. Let me have a go at it, shall

I?”

the pins thrust into place. “I am very stupid with my fingers. I do possess a
hat somewhere,” she added, with an irresolute glance round the quad, as
though she expected to see the hat growing on a tree, “but the Dean said
we’d better stay here. Oh, thank you. That feels much better—a marvelous
sense of security. Ah! here’s Miss Martin. Miss Vane has kindly been acting
as hairdresser to the White Queen—but oughtn’t I to put on a hat?”

proper tea, and so are you. I’m ravenous. I’ve been tagging after old
Professor Boniface who’s ninety-seven and practically gaga, and screaming
in his deaf ear till I’m almost dead. What’s the time? Well, I’m like Marjory
Fleming’s turkey—I do not give a single damn for the Old Students’
Meeting; I simply must eat and drink. Let’s swoop down upon the table
before Miss Shaw and Miss Stevens collar the last ices.”

* For the purposes of this book, Mansfield Lane is deemed to run from
Mansfield Road to St. Cross Road, behind Shrewsbury College and
somewhere about the junction between the Balliol and Morton Cricket
grounds as they stand at present.

CHAPTER II

’Tis proper to all melancholy men, saith Mercurialis, what conceit they
have once entertained, to be most intent, violent and continually about it.
Invitis occurrit, do what they may, they cannot be rid of it, against their
wills they must think of it a thousand times over, perpetuo molestantur, nec
oblivisci possunt, they are continually troubled with it, in company, out of
company; at meat, at exercise, at all times and places, non desinunt ea,
quae minime volunt, cogitare; if it be offensive especially, they cannot
forget it.

ROBERT BURTON

So far, so good, thought Harriet, changing for dinner. There had been
baddish moments, like trying to renew contact with Mary Stokes. There had
also been a brief encounter with Miss Hillyard, the History tutor, who had
never liked her, and who had said, with wry mouth and acidulated tongue,
“Well, Miss Vane, you have had some very varied experiences since we saw
you last.” But there had been good moments too, carrying with them the
promise of permanence in a Heraclitean universe. She felt it might be
possible to survive’ the Gaudy Dinner, though Mary Stokes had dutifully
bagged for her a place next herself, which was trying. Fortunately, she had
contrived to get Phoebe Tucker on her other side. (In these surroundings,
she thought of them still as Stokes and Tucker.)

The first thing to strike her, when the procession had slowly filed up to

the High Table, and grace had been said, was the appalling noise in Hall.
“Strike” was the right word. It fell upon one like the rush and weight of a
shouting waterfall; it beat on the ear like the hammer-clang of some infernal

smithy; it savaged the air like the metallic clatter of fifty thousand
monotype machines casting type. Two hundred female tongues, released as
though by a spring, burst into high, clamorous speech. She had forgotten
what it was like, but it came back to her tonight how, at the beginning of
every term, she had felt that if the noise were to go on like that for one
minute more, she would go quite mad. Within a week, the effect of it had
always worn off. Use had made her immune. But now it shattered her
unaccustomed nerves with all and more than all its original violence. People
screamed in her ear, and she found herself screaming back. She looked
rather anxiously at Mary; could any invalid bear it? Mary seemed not to
notice; she was more animated than she had been earlier in the day and was
screaming quite cheerfully at Dorothy Collins. Harriet turned to Phoebe.

hoarse as a crow. I’m going to bellow at you in a fog-horn kind of voice. Do
you mind?”

women such shrill voices? Though I don’t mind frightfully. It reminds me
of native workmen quarreling. They’re doing us rather well, don’t you
think? Much better soup than we ever got.”

rather good, I believe; she was something to do with Domestic Economy.
Dear old Straddles had a mind above food.”

ill just before Schools. Do you remember?”

“What happened to Straddles when she left?”
“Oh, she’s Treasurer at Bronte College. Finance was really her line,

you know. She had a real genius for figures.”

“And what became of that woman—what’s her name?—Peabody?

Freebody?—you know—the one who always said solemnly that her great
ambition in life was to become Bursar of Shrewsbury?”

and joined an extraordinary sect somewhere or other where they go about in
loin-cloths and have agapemones of nuts and grape-fruit. That is, if you
mean Brodribb?”

people! So intensely practical and sub-fusc”.

was frightfully sentimental inside, you know.”

Perhaps we were all rather inhibited in those days.”

“Well, the present generation doesn’t suffer from that, I’m told. No

inhibitions of any kind.”

Women’s Degrees. We weren’t monastic.”

“No, but we were born long enough before the War to feel a few

restrictions. We inherited some sense of responsibility. And Brodribb came
from a fearfully rigid sort of household—Positivists, or Unitarians or
Presbyterians or something. The present lot are the real War-time
generation, you know.”

“So they are. Well, I don’t know that I’ve any right to throw stones at

Brodribb.”

“Oh, my dear! That’s entirely different. One thing’s natural; the other’s

—I don’t know, but it seems to me like complete degeneration of the grey
matter. She even wrote a book.”

“About agapemones?”

thing. Full of bad syntax.”

religions should have such a ghastly effect on one’s grammar.”

“It’s a kind of intellectual rot that sets in, I’m afraid. But which of

them causes the other, or whether they’re both symptoms of something else,
I don’t know. What with Trimmer’s mental healing, and Henderson going
nudist—”

“No!”
“Fact. There she is, at the next table. That’s why she’s so brown.”
“And her frock so badly cut. If you can’t be naked, be as ill-dressed as

possible, I suppose.”

“I sometimes wonder whether a little normal, hearty wickedness

wouldn’t be good for a great many of us.”

side of the table, leaned across her neighbors and screamed something.

“What?” screamed Phoebe.
Miss Mollison leaned still further, compressing Dorothy Collins, Betty

Armstrong and Mary Stokes almost to suffocation.

“I hope Miss Vane isn’t telling you anything too bloodcurdling!”
“No,” said Harriet, loudly. “Mrs. Bancroft is curdling my blood.”
“How?”
“Telling me the life-histories of our year.”
“Oh!” screamed Miss Mollison, disconcerted. The service of a dish of

lamb and green peas intervened and broke up the formation, and her
neighbors breathed again. But to Harriet’s intense horror, the question and
reply seemed to have opened up an avenue for a dark, determined woman

with large spectacles and rigidly groomed hair, who sat opposite to her, and
who now bent over and said, in piercingly American accents:

for one term, but I would know you anywhere. I’m always recommending
your books to my friends in America who are keen to study the British
detective story, because I think they are just terribly good.”

“Very kind of you,” said Harriet, feebly.
“And we have a very dear mutual acquaintance,” went on the

spectacled lady.

out of obscurity now? And who is this frightful female?

memory. “Who’s that, Miss—”

“Schuster-Slatt,” prompted Phoebe’s voice in her ear.
“Schuster-Slatt.” (Of course. Arrived in Harriet’s first summer term.

Supposed to read. Law. Left after one term because the conditions at
Shrewsbury were too restrictive of liberty. Joined the Home Students, and
passed mercifully out of one’s life.)

when I tell you, but in my work I see so many of your British aristocracy.”

even the surrounding uproar.

interested when I told him I was at college with you. I think he’s just a
lovely man.”

“He has very nice manners,” said Harriet. But the implication was too

subtle. Miss Schuster-Slatt proceeded:

wonder what it is, thought Harriet.) “And of course I wanted to hear all
about his thrilling detective cases, but he was much too modest to say
anything. Do tell me, Miss Vane, does he wear that cute little eyeglass
because of his sight, or is it part of an old English tradition?”

“I have never had the impertinence to ask him,” said Harriet.
“Now isn’t that just like your British reticence!” exclaimed Miss

Schuster-Slatt; when Mary Stokes struck in with:

charming, if he’s at all like his photographs. Of course you know him very
well, don’t you?”

“I worked with him over one case.”
“It must have been frightfully exciting. Do tell us what he’s like.”
“Seeing,” said Harriet, in angry and desperate tones, “seeing that he

got me out of prison and probably saved me from being hanged, I am
naturally bound to find him delightful.”

“Oh!” said Mary Stokes, flushing scarlet, and shrinking from Harriet’s

furious eyes as if she had received a blow. “I’m sorry—I didn’t think—”

very tactless. My mother always said to me, ‘Sadie, you’re the most tactless
girl I ever had the bad luck to meet.’ But I am enthusiastic. I get carried
away. I don’t stop to think. I’m just the same with my work. I don’t
consider my own feelings; I don’t consider other people’s feelings. I just
wade right in and ask for what I want, and I mostly get it.”

might have credited her with, carried the conversation triumphantly away to
the subject of her own work, which turned out to have something to do with

the sterilization of the unfit, and the encouragement of matrimony among
the intelligentsia.

to display every disagreeable trait in her character at the mere mention of
Wimsey’s name. He had done her no harm; he had only saved her from a
shameful death and offered her an unswerving personal devotion; and for
neither benefit had he ever claimed or expected her gratitude. It was not
pretty that her only return should be a snarl of resentment. The fact is,
thought Harriet, I have got a bad inferiority complex; unfortunately, the fact
that I know it doesn’t help me to get rid of it. I could have liked him so
much if I could have met him on an equal footing …

The Warden rapped upon the table. A welcome silence fell upon the

Hall. A speaker was rising to propose the toast of the university.

She spoke gravely, unrolling the great scroll of history, pleading for the

Humanities, proclaiming the Pax Academica to a world terrified with
unrest. “Oxford has been called the home of lost causes: if the love of
learning for its own sake is a lost cause everywhere else in the world, let us
see to it that here at least, it finds its abiding home.” Magnificent, thought
Harriet, but it is not war. And then, her imagination weaving in and out of
the spoken words, she saw it as a Holy War, and that whole wildly
heterogeneous, that even slightly absurd collection of chattering women
fused into a corporate unity with one another and with every man and
woman to whom integrity of mind meant more than material gain—
defenders in the central keep of Man-soul, their personal differences
forgotten in face of a common foe. To be true to one’s calling, whatever
follies one might commit in one’s emotional life, that was the way to
spiritual peace. How could one feel fettered, being the freeman of so great a
city, or humiliated, where all enjoyed equal citizenship? The eminent

professor who rose to reply spoke of a diversity of gifts but the same spirit.
The note, once struck, vibrated on the lips of every speaker and the ear of
every hearer. Nor was the Warden’s review of the Academic year out of key
with it: appointments, degrees, fellowships—all these were the domestic
details of the discipline without which the community could not function. In
the glamour of one Gaudy night, one could realize that one was a citizen of
no mean city. It might be an old and an old-fashioned city, with
inconvenient buildings and narrow streets where the passersby squabbled
foolishly about the right of way; but her foundations were set upon the holy
hills and her spires touched heaven.

invited to take coffee with the Dean.

by doctor’s orders and had therefore no claim upon her company. She
therefore made her way along to the New Quad and tapped upon Miss
Martin’s door. Gathered together in the sitting-room she found Betty
Armstrong, Phoebe Tucker, Miss de Vine, Miss Stevens the Bursar, another
of the Fellows who answered to the name of Barton, and a couple of old
students a few years senior to herself. The Dean, who was dispensing
coffee, hailed her arrival cheerfully.

the Hall coffee, Steve?”

“Yes, if you’ll start a coffee-fund,” replied the Bursar. “I don’t know if

you’ve ever worked out the finance of really first-class coffee for two
hundred people.”

“I know,” said the Dean. “It’s so trying to be grovelingly poor. I think

I’d better mention it to Flackett. You remember Flackett, the rich one, who
was always rather odd. She was in your year, Miss Fortescue. She has been

following me round, trying to present the College with a tankful of tropical
fish. Said she thought it would brighten the Science Lecture-Room,”

might be a good thing. Miss Hillyard’s Constitutional Developments were a
bit gruesome in our day.”

“Oh, my dear! Those Constitutional Developments! Dear me, yes—

they still go on. She starts every year with about thirty students and ends up
with two or three earnest black men, who take every word down solemnly
in notebooks. Exactly the same lectures; I don’t think even fish would help
them. Anyway, I said, ‘It’s very good of you, Miss Flackett, but I really
don’t think they’d thrive. It would mean putting in a special heating system,
wouldn’t it? And it would make extra work for the gardeners.’ She looked
so disappointed, poor thing; so I said she’d better consult the Bursar.”

endowment of a coffee-fund.”

we do turn out some oddities. And yet, you know, I believe Flackett is
extremely sound upon the life-history of the liver-fluke. Would anybody
like a Benedictine with the coffee? Come along, Miss Vane. Alcohol
loosens the tongue, and we want to hear all about your latest mysteries.”

Harriet obliged with a brief résumé of the plot she was working on.
“Forgive me, Miss Vane, for speaking frankly,” said Miss Barton,

leaning earnestly forward, “but after your own terrible experience, I wonder
that you care about writing that kind of book.”

The Dean looked a little shocked.
“Well,” said Harriet, “for one thing, writers can’t pick and choose until

they’ve made money. If you’ve made your name for one kind of book and
then switch over to another, your sales are apt to go down, and that’s the

brutal fact.” She paused. “I know what you’re thinking—that anybody with
proper sensitive feeling would rather scrub floors for a living. But I should
scrub floors very badly, and I write detective stories rather well. I don’t see
why proper feeling should prevent me from doing my proper job.”

“Quite right,” said Miss de Vine.
“But surely,” persisted Miss Barton, “you must feel that terrible crimes

and the sufferings of innocent suspects ought to be taken seriously, and not
just made into an intellectual game.”

say that anybody who had tragic experience of sex, for example, should
never write an artificial drawing-room comedy?”

lighter side to love; whereas there’s no lighter side to murder.”

“Perhaps not, in the sense of a comic side. But there is a purely

intellectual side to the detection.”

“You did investigate a case in real life, didn’t you? How did you feel

about that?”

“It was very interesting.”
“And, in the light of what you knew, did you like the idea of sending a

man to the dock and the gallows?”

“Miss Barton,” she added, a little apologetically, to Harriet, “is interested in
the sociological aspects of crime, and very eager for the reform of the penal
code.”

completely savage and brutal. I have met so many murderers when visiting
prisons; and most of them are very harmless, stupid people, poor creatures,
when they aren’t definitely pathological.”

to meet the victims. They are often still stupider and more harmless than the
murderers. But they don’t make a public appearance. Even the jury needn’t
see the body unless they like. But I saw the body in that Wilvercombe case
—I found it; and it was beastlier than anything you can imagine.”

description in the papers was more than enough for me.”

actively engaged in murdering. You see them when they’re caught and
caged and looking pathetic. But the Wilvercombe man was a cunning,
avaricious brute, and quite ready to go on and do it again, if he hadn’t been
stopped.”

“That’s an unanswerable argument for stopping them,” said Phoebe,

“whatever the law does with them afterwards.”

“All the same,” said Miss Stevens, “isn’t it a little coldblooded to catch

murderers as an intellectual exercise? It’s all right for the police—it’s their
duty.”

people don’t know that.”

“And this man Wimsey,” said Miss Barton, “who seems to make a

hobby of it—does he look upon it as a duty or as an intellectual exercise?”

“I’m not sure,” said Harriet, “but, you know, it was just as well for me

that he did make a hobby of it. The police were wrong in my case—I don’t
blame them, but they were—so I’m glad it wasn’t left to them.”

accused me of doing something I hadn’t done, I should be foaming at the
mouth.”

seeing the strength of the police case. It’s a matter of a + b, you know. Only
there happened to be an unknown factor.”

said the Dean. “Planck’s constant, or whatever they call it.”

anybody feels about it, the important thing is to get at the facts.”

“Yes,” said Harriet; “that’s the point. I mean, the fact is that I didn’t do

the murder, so that my feelings are quite irrelevant. If I had done it, I should
probably have thought myself thoroughly justified, and been deeply
indignant about the way I was treated. As it is, I still think that to inflict the
agonies of poisoning on anybody is unpardonable. The particular trouble I
got let in for was as much sheer accident as falling off a roof.”

said Miss Barton. “It’s very good of you to discuss it so frankly.”

“I don’t mind—now. It would have been different just after it

happened. But that awful business down at Wilvercombe shed rather a new
light on the matter—showed it up from the other side.”

“Tell me,” said the Dean, “Lord Peter—what is he like?”
“To look at, do you mean? Or to work with?”
“Well, one knows more or less what he looks like. Fair and Mayfair. I

meant, to talk to.”

comes to that.”

“A little merry and bright, when you’re feeling off-color?”
“I met him once at a dog-show,” put in Miss Armstrong unexpectedly.

“He was giving a perfect imitation of the silly-ass-about-town.”

Harriet, laughing. “I know that frivolous mood, and it’s mostly camouflage
—but one doesn’t always know for what.”

obviously very intelligent. But is it only intelligence, or is there any genuine
feeling?”

cup, “accuse him of any lack of feeling. I’ve seen him very much upset, for
instance, over convicting a sympathetic criminal. But he is really rather
reserved, in spite of that deceptive manner.”

a lot often are. I think they are very much to be pitied.”

covers a lot. But he doesn’t exactly seem to call for pity.”

see much need to pity a young man who has everything he can possibly
want.”

with a gravity that her eyes belied.

(This was Miss Barton’s age.)

“I think it’s rather an impertinence to pity people,” said the Dean.
“Hear, hear!” said Harriet. “Nobody likes being pitied. Most of us

enjoy self-pity, but that’s another thing.”

“Caustic,” said Miss de Vine, “but painfully true.”
“But what I should like to know,” pursued Miss Barton, refusing to be

diverted, “is whether this dilettante gentleman does anything, outside his

hobbies of detecting crimes and collecting books, and, I believe, playing
cricket in his off-time.”

she was keeping her temper, was seized with irritation.

else? Catching murderers isn’t a soft job, or a sheltered job. It takes a lot of
time and energy, and you may very easily get injured or killed. I dare say he
does it for fun, but at any rate, he does do it. Scores of people must have as
much reason to thank him as I have. You can’t call that nothing.”

grateful to people who do dirty jobs for nothing, whatever their reason is.”

stopped up last Sunday, and a most helpful neighbor came and unstopped
them. He got quite filthy in the process and I apologized profusely, but he
said I owed him no thanks, because he was inquisitive and liked drains. He
may not have been telling the truth, but even if he was, I certainly had
nothing to grumble about.”

“Talking of drains,” said the Bursar—
The conversation took a less personal and more anecdotal turn (for

there is no chance assembly of people who cannot make lively conversation
about drains), and after a little time Miss Barton retired to bed. The Dean
breathed a sigh of relief.

terribly downright person, and she was determined to get all that off her
chest. She is a splendid person, but hasn’t very much sense of humor. She
can’t bear anything to be done except from the very loftiest motives.”

Harriet apologized for having spoken so vehemently.

sounds a most interesting person. But I don’t see why you should be forced
to discuss him; poor man.”

deal too much in this university. We argue about this and that and why and
wherefore, instead of getting the thing done.”

“But oughtn’t we to ask what things we want done,” objected the

Dean.

wrangle begin. Before ten minutes had passed, somebody had introduced
the word “values.” An hour later they were still at it. Finally the Bursar was
heard to quote:

“God made the integers; all else is the work of man.”
“Oh, bother!” cried the Dean. “Do let’s keep mathematics out of it.

And physics. I cannot cope with them.”

“Who mentioned Planck’s constant a little time ago?”
“I did, and I’m sorry for it. I call it a revolting little object.”
The Dean’s emphatic tones reduced everybody to laughter, and,

midnight striking, the party broke up.

“I am still living out of College,” said Miss de Vine to Harriet. “May I

walk across to your room with you?”

stepped out together into the New Quad. The moon was up, painting the
buildings with cold washes of black and silver whose austerity rebuked the
yellow gleam of lighted windows behind which old friends reunited still
made merry with talk and laughter.

“It might almost be term-time,” said Harriet.

windows, you would find it was the middle-aged ones who were making the
noise. The old have gone to bed, wondering whether they have worn as
badly as their contemporaries. They have suffered some shocks, and their
feet hurt them. And the younger ones are chattering soberly about life and
its responsibilities. But the women of forty are pretending they are
undergraduates again, and finding it rather an effort. Miss Vane—I admired
you for speaking as you did tonight. Detachment is a rare virtue, and very
few people find it lovable, either in themselves or in others. If you ever find
a person who likes you in spite of it—still more, because of it—that liking
has very great value, because it is perfectly sincere, and because, with that
person, you will never need to be anything but sincere yourself.”

it?”

across a number of people who are disconcerted by the difference between
what you do feel and what they fancy you ought to feel. It is fatal to pay the
smallest attention to them.”

much. I never know what I do feel.”

“I don’t think that matters, provided one doesn’t try to persuade one’s

self into appropriate feelings.”

They had entered the Old Quad, and the ancient beeches, most

venerable of all Shrewsbury institutions, cast over them a dappled and
changing shadow-pattern that was more confusing than darkness.

“But one has to make some sort of choice,” said Harriet. “And

between one desire and another, how is one to know which things are really
of overmastering importance?”

“We can only know that,” said Miss de Vine, “when they have

overmastered us.”

silver chains. Each after each, from all the towers of Oxford, clocks struck
the quarter-chime, in a tumbling cascade of friendly disagreement. Miss de
Vine bade Harriet good night at the door of Burleigh Building and vanished,
with her long, stooping stride beneath the Hall archway.

Harriet’s own tragedy had sprung from “persuading herself into appropriate
feelings” towards a man whose own feelings had not stood up to the test of
sincerity either. And all her subsequent instability of purpose had sprung
from the determination that never again would she mistake the will to feel
for the feeling itself. “We can only know what things are of overmastering
importance when they have overmastered us.” Was there anything at all that
had stood firm in the midst of her indecisions? Well, yes; she had stuck to
her work—and that in the face of what might have seemed overwhelming
reasons for abandoning it and doing something different. Indeed, though she
had shown cause that evening for this particular loyalty, she had never felt it
necessary to show cause to herself. She had written what she felt herself
called upon to write; and, though she was beginning to feel that she might
perhaps do this thing better, she had no doubt that the thing itself was the
right thing for her. It had overmastered her without her knowledge or
notice, and that was the proof of its mastery.

and sleep. As she did so, her eye was caught by a sheet of paper, fluttering
untidily across the trim turf. Mechanically she picked it up and, seeing that
it was not blank, carried it into Burleigh Building with her for examination.
It was a sheet of common scribbling paper, and all it bore was a childish

drawing scrawled heavily in pencil. It was not in any way an agreeable
drawing—not at all the kind of thing that one would expect to find in a
college quadrangle. It was ugly and sadistic. It depicted a naked figure of
exaggeratedly feminine outlines, inflicting savage and humiliating outrage
upon some person of indeterminate gender clad in a cap and gown. It was
neither sane nor healthy; it was, in fact, a nasty, dirty and lunatic scribble.

questions formed themselves in her mind. Then she took it upstairs with her
into the nearest lavatory, dropped it in and pulled the plug on it. That was
the proper fate for such things, and there was an end of it; but for all that,
she wished she had not seen it.

CHAPTER III

They do best who, if they cannot but admit love, yet make it keep quarter,
and sever it wholly from their serious affairs and actions of life; for if it
check once with business it troubleth men’s fortunes, and maketh men that

they can no ways be true to their own ends.

FRANCIS BACON

Sunday, as the S.C.R. always declared, was invariably the best part of a
Gaudy. The official dinner and speeches were got out of the way; the old
students resident in Oxford, and the immensely busy visitors with only one
night to spare had all cleared off. People began to sort themselves out, and
one could talk to one’s friends at leisure, without being instantly collared
and hauled away by a collection of bores.

Harriet paid her visit of state to the Warden, who was holding a small

reception with sherry and biscuits, and then went to call upon Miss Lydgate
in the New Quad. The English tutor’s room was festooned with proofs of
her forthcoming work on the Prosodic elements in English verse from
Beowulf to Bridges. Since Miss Lydgate had perfected, or was in process of
perfecting (since no work of scholarship ever attains a static perfection), an
entirely new prosodic theory, demanding a novel and complicated system of
notation which involved the use of twelve different varieties of type; and
since Miss Lydgate’s handwriting was difficult to read and her experience
in dealing with printers limited, there existed at that moment five successive
revises in galley form, at different stages of completion, together with two
sheets in page-proof, and an appendix in typescript, while the important
Introduction which afforded the key to the whole argument still remained to

be written. It was only when a section had advanced to page-proof
condition that Miss Lydgate became fully convinced of the necessity of
transferring large paragraphs of argument from one chapter to another, each
change of this kind naturally demanding expensive over-running on the
page-proof, and the elimination of the corresponding portions in the five
sets of revises; so that in the course of the necessary cross-reference, Miss
Lydgate would be discovered by her pupils and colleagues wound into a
kind of paper cocoon and helplessly searching for her fountain-pen amid the
litter.

Harriet’s polite inquiries as to the magnum opus, “I am dreadfully ignorant
about the practical side of book-making. I find it very confusing and I’m
not at all clever at explaining myself to the printers. It will be a great help
having Miss de Vine here. She has such an orderly mind. It’s really an
education to see her manuscript, and of course her work is far more intricate
than mine—all sorts of little items out of Elizabethan pay-rolls and so on,
all wonderfully sorted out and arranged in a beautiful clear argument. And
she understands setting out footnotes properly, so that they fit in with the
text. I always find that so difficult, and though Miss Harper is kindly doing
all my typing for me, she really knows more about Anglo-Saxon than about
compositors. I expect you remember Miss Harper. She was two years junior
to you and took a second in English and lives in the Woodstock Road.”

Harriet said she thought footnotes were always very tiresome, and

might she see some of the book.

“Well, if you’re really interested,” said Miss Lydgate, “but I don’t want

to bore you.” She extracted a couple of paged sheets from a desk stuffed
with papers. “Don’t prick your fingers on that bit of manuscript that’s
pinned on. I’m afraid it’s rather full of marginal balloons and

interlineations, but you see, I suddenly realized that I could work out a big
improvement in my notation, so I’ve had to alter it all through. I expect,”
she added wistfully, “the printers will be rather angry with me.”

Harriet privately agreed with her, but said comfortingly that the Oxford

University Press was no doubt accustomed to deciphering the manuscripts
of scholars.

“I sometimes wonder whether I am a scholar at all,” said Miss

Lydgate. “It’s all quite clear in my head, you know, but I get muddled when
I put it down on paper. How do you manage about your plots? All that time-
table work with the alibis and so on must be terribly hard to bear in mind.”

yet succeeded in producing a plot without at least six major howlers.
Fortunately, nine readers out of ten get mixed up too, so it doesn’t matter.
The tenth writes me a letter, and I promise to make the correction in the
second edition, but I never do. After all, my books are only meant for fun;
it’s not like a work of scholarship.”

“You always had a scholarly mind, though,” said Miss Lydgate, “and I

expect you find your training a help in some ways, don’t you? I used to
think you might take up an academic career.”

“Are you disappointed that I didn’t?”
“No, indeed. I think it’s so nice that our students go out and do such

varied and interesting things, provided they do them well. And I must say,
most of our students do do exceedingly good work along their own lines.”

“What are the present lot like?”
“Well,” said Miss Lydgate, “we’ve got some very good people up, and

they work surprisingly hard, when you think of all the outside activities
they manage to carry on at the same time. Only sometimes I’m afraid they
rather overdo it, and don’t get enough sleep at night. What with young men

and motor-cars and parties, their lives are so much fuller than they were
before the War—even more so than in your day, I think. I’m afraid our old
Warden would be very greatly disconcerted if she saw the college as it is
today. I must say that I am occasionally a little startled myself, and even the
Dean, who is so broad-minded, thinks a brassiere and a pair of drawers
rather unsuitable for sunbathing in the quad. It isn’t so much the male
undergraduates—they’re used to it—but after all, when the Heads of the
men’s colleges come to call on the Warden, they really ought to be able to
get through the grounds without blushing. Miss Martin has really had to
insist on bathing dresses—backless if they like, but proper bathing dresses
made for the purpose, and not ordinary underwear.”

Harriet agreed that this seemed only reasonable.
“I am so glad you think so,” said Miss Lydgate. “It is rather difficult

for us of the older generation to hold the balance between tradition and
progress—if it is progress. Authority as such commands very little respect
nowadays, and I expect that is a good thing on the whole, though it makes
the work of running any kind of institution more difficult. I am sure you
would like a cup of coffee. No, really—I always have one myself about this
time. Annie!—I think I hear my scout in the pantry—Annie! Would you
please bring in a second cup for Miss Vane.”

Harriet was fairly well satisfied already with eatables and drinkables,

but politely accepted the refreshment brought in by the smartly uniformed
maid. She made some remark, when the door was shut again, as to the great
improvements made since her own day in the staff and service at
Shrewsbury, and again heard the praise awarded to the new bursar.

“Though I am afraid,” added Miss Lydgate, “we may have to lose

Annie from this staircase. Miss Hillyard finds her too independent; and
perhaps she is a little absent-minded. But then, poor thing, she is a widow

with two children, and really ought not to have to be in service at all. Her
husband was in quite a good position, I believe, but he went out of his
mind, or something, poor man, and died or shot himself, or something
tragic of that kind, leaving her very badly off, so she was glad to take what
she could. The little girls are boarded out with Mrs. Jukes—you remember
the Jukeses, they were at the St. Cross Lodge in your time. They live down
in St. Aldate’s now, so Annie is able to go and see them at weekends. It is
nice for her and brings in a trifle extra for Mrs. Jukes.”

“Did Jukes retire? He wasn’t very old, was he?”
“Poor Jukes,” said Miss Lydgate, her kind face clouding. “He got into

sad trouble and we were obliged to dismiss him. He turned out to be not
quite honest, I am sorry to say. But we found him work as a jobbing
gardener,” she went on more cheerfully, “where he wouldn’t be exposed to
so much temptation in the matter of parcels and so on. He was a most
hardworking man, but he would put money on horse-races, and so,
naturally, he found himself in difficulties. It was so unfortunate for his
wife.”

“She was a good soul,” agreed Harriet.
“She was terribly upset about it all,” went on Miss Lydgate. “And so,

to do him justice, was Jukes. He quite broke down, and there was a sad
scene with the Bursar when she told him he must go.”

“Ye-es,” said Harriet. “Jukes always had a pretty glib tongue.”
“Oh, but I’m sure he was really very sorry for what he’d done. He

explained how he’d slipped into it, and one thing led to another. We were all
very much distressed about it. Except, perhaps, the Dean—but then she
never did like Jukes very much. However, we made a small loan to his wife,
to pay off his debts, and they certainly repaid it most honestly, a few
shillings each week. Now that he’s put straight I feel sure he will keep

straight. But of course, it was impossible to keep him on here. One could
never feel absolutely easy, and one must have entire confidence in the
porter. The present man, Padgett, is most reliable and a very amusing
character. You must get the Dean to tell you some of Padgett’s quaint
sayings.”

popular, on that account. Jukes took bribes, you know—if one came in late,
and that sort of thing.”

“We were afraid he did,” said Miss Lydgate. “Of course, it’s a

responsible post for a man who isn’t of very strong character. He’ll do much
better where he is.”

“You’ve lost Agnes, too, I see.”
“Yes—she was Head-Scout in your time; yes, she has left. She began

to find the work too much for her and had to retire. I’m glad to say we were
able to squeeze out a tiny pension for her—only a trifle, but as you know,
our income has to be stretched very carefully to cover everything. And we
arranged a little scheme by which she takes in odd jobs of mending and so
on for the students and attends to the College linen. It all helps; and she’s
especially glad because that crippled sister of hers can do part of the work
and contribute something to their small income. Agnes says the poor soul is
so much happier now that she need not feel herself a burden.”

Harriet marveled, not for the first time, at the untiring

conscientiousness of administrative women. Nobody’s interests ever
seemed to be overlooked or forgotten, and an endless goodwill made up for
a perennial scarcity of funds.

After a little more talk about the doings of past dons and students, the

College Buildings are substantially complete. It does seem rather wonderful
to those of us who remember the early days when we only had the one
funny old house with ten students, and were chaperoned to lectures in a
donkey-carriage. I must say we rather wept to see the dear old place pulled
down to make way for the Library. It held so many memories.”

was no moment of the past upon which this experienced and yet innocent
soul could not dwell with unaffected pleasure. The entrance of another old
pupil cut short her interview with Miss Lydgate, and she went out, vaguely
envious, to encounter the persistent Miss Mollison, primed with every
remorseless detail of the clock incident. It gave her pleasure to inform Miss
Mollison that Mr. A. E. W. Mason had hit on the same idea earlier.
Unquenchable, Miss Mollison proceeded to question her victim eagerly
about Lord Peter Wimsey, his manners, customs and appearance; and when
Miss Mollison was driven away by Miss Schuster-Slatt, the irritation was
little relieved, for Harriet was subjected to a long harangue about the
sterilization of the unfit, to which (it appeared) a campaign to encourage the
marriage of the fit was a necessary corollary. Harriet agreed that intellectual
women should marry and reproduce their kind; but she pointed out that the
English husband had something to say in the matter and that, very often, he
did not care for an intellectual wife.

and that she was preparing a questionnaire to be circulated to the young
men of the United Kingdom, with a view to finding out their matrimonial
preferences.

“But English people won’t fill up questionnaires,” said Harriet.
“Won’t fill up questionnaires?” cried Miss Schuster-Slatt, taken aback.

conscious.”

will join the British Branch of our League for the Encouragement of
Matrimonial Fitness. Our President, Mrs. J. Poppelhinken, is a wonderful
woman. You would so much like to meet her. She will be coming to Europe
next year. In the meantime I am here to do propaganda and study the whole
question from the angle of British mentality.”

Harriet (for she felt she owed Miss Schuster-Slatt a riposte for her
unfortunate observations of the night before), “whether your intentions are
as disinterested as you make out. Perhaps you are thinking of investigating
the loveliness of English husbands in a personal and practical way.”

good-humor. “No. I’m just the little worker-bee, gathering honey for the
queens to eat.”

“How all occasions do inform against me!” muttered Harriet to herself.

One would have thought that Oxford at least would offer a respite from
Peter Wimsey and the marriage question. But although she herself was a
notoriety, if not precisely a celebrity, it was an annoying fact that Peter was
a still more spectacular celebrity, and that, of the two, people would rather
know about him than about her. As regards marriage—well, here one
certainly had a chance to find out whether it worked or not. Was it worse to
be a Mary Attwood (née Stokes) or a Miss Schuster-Slatt? Was it better to
be a Phoebe Bancroft (née Tucker) or a Miss Lydgate? And would all these
people have turned out exactly the same, married or single?

She wandered into the J.C.R., which was empty, but for one drab and

ill-dressed woman who sat desolately reading an illustrated paper. As

Harriet passed, this woman looked up and said, rather tentatively, “Hullo!
it’s Miss Vane, isn’t it?”

much senior to herself—she looked nearer fifty than forty. Who on earth?

“I don’t suppose you remember me,” said the other. “Catherine

Freemantle.”

(Catherine Freemantle, good God! But she had been only two years

senior to Harriet. Very brilliant, very smart, very lively and the outstanding
scholar of her year. What in Heaven’s name had happened to her?)

about names. What have you been doing?”

had gone wrong. Slumps and sickness and tithe and taxes and the Milk
Board and the Marketing Board, and working one’s fingers to the bone for a
bare living and trying to bring up children—Harriet had read and heard
enough about agricultural depression to know that the story was a common
one enough. She was ashamed of being and looking so prosperous. She felt
she would rather be tried for life over again than walk the daily treadmill of
Catherine’s life. It was a saga, in its way, but it was preposterous. She broke
in rather abruptly upon a complaint against the hard-heartedness of the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

“But, Miss Freemantle—I mean, Mrs.—Mrs. Bendick—it’s absurd that

you should have to do this kind of thing. I mean, pick your own fruit and
get up at all hours to feed poultry and slave like a navvy. Surely to goodness
it would have paid far better for you to take on some kind of writing or
intellectual job and get someone else to do the manual work.”

“Yes, it would. But at the beginning I didn’t see it like that. I came

time, my husband wouldn’t have liked it much if I’d separated myself from
his interests. Of course, we didn’t think it would turn out like this.”

brilliance, all that trained intelligence, harnessed to a load that any
uneducated country girl could have drawn, and drawn far better. The thing
had its compensations, she supposed. She asked the question bluntly.

was worth doing. One was serving the land. And that, she managed to
convey, was a service harsh and austere indeed, but a finer thing than
spinning words on paper.

nobler object than a razor. But if your natural talent is for barbering,
wouldn’t it be better to be a barber, and a good barber—and use the profits
(if you like) to speed the plough? However grand the job may be, is it your
job?”

“It’s got to be my job now,” said Mrs. Bendick. “One can’t go back to

things. One gets out of touch and one’s brain gets rusty. If you’d spent your
time washing and cooking for a family and digging potatoes and feeding
cattle, you’d know that that kind of thing takes the edge off the razor. You
needn’t think I don’t envy you people your easy life; I do. I came to the
Gaudy out of sentiment, and I wish I’d stopped away. I’m two years older
than you, but I look twenty. None of you care in the least for my interests,
and yours all seem to me to be mere beating the air. You don’t seem to have
anything to do with real life. You are going about in a dream.” She stopped
speaking, and her angry voice softened. “But it’s a beautiful dream in its
way. It seems queer to me now to think that once I was a scholar …I don’t
know. You may be right after all. Learning and literature have a way of
outlasting the civilization that made them.”

“The word and nought else
in time endures.
Not you long after,
perished and mute
will last, but the defter
viol and lute,”

quoted Harriet. She stared vaguely out into the sunshine. “It’s curious—
because I have been thinking exactly the same thing—only in a different
connection. Look here! I admire you like hell, but I believe you’re all
wrong. I’m sure one should do one’s own job, however trivial, and not
persuade one’s self into doing somebody else’s, however noble.”

As she spoke, she remembered Miss de Vine; here was a new aspect of

persuasion.

“That’s all very well,” replied Mrs. Bendick. “But one’s rather apt to

marry into somebody else’s job.”

True; but Harriet was offered the opportunity of marrying into a job as

near her own as made no great difference. And into money enough to make
any job supererogatory. Again she saw herself unfairly provided with
advantages which more deserving people desired in vain.

“I suppose,” she said, “marriage is the really important job, isn’t it?”
“Yes, it is,” said Mrs. Bendick. “My marriage is happy as marriages

go. But I often wonder whether my husband wouldn’t have been better off
with another kind of wife. He never says so, but I wonder. I think he knows
I miss—things, and resents it sometimes. I don’t know why I should say
this to you—I’ve never said it to anybody and I never knew you very well,
did I?”

“No; and I haven’t been very sympathetic, either. In fact, I’ve been

disgustingly rude.”

voice to be rude in.”

“Good gracious!” said Harriet.
“Our farm’s on the Welsh border, and the people all speak in the most

hideous local sing-song. Do you know what makes me feel most homesick
here? The cultured speech. The dear old much-abused Oxford accent.
That’s funny, isn’t it?”

“I thought the noise in Hall was more like a cage full of peacocks.”
“Yes; but out of Hall you can pick out the people who speak the right

way. Lots of them don’t, of course; but some do. You do; and you have a
lovely voice into the bargain. Do you remember the old Bach Choir days?”

Welsh can sing.”

“I haven’t much time for music. I try to teach the children.”
Harriet took advantage of this opening to make suitable domestic

inquiries. She parted eventually from Mrs. Bendick with a depressed feeling
that she had seen a Derby winner making shift with a coal-cart.

Sunday lunch in Hall was a casual affair. Many people did not attend

it, having engagements in the town. Those who did, dropped in as and when
they liked, fetched their food from the serving-hatches and consumed it in
chattering groups wherever they could find seats. Harriet, having seized a
plate of cold ham for herself, looked round for a lunch partner, and was
thankful to see Phoebe Tucker just come in and being helped by the
attendant scout to a portion of cold roast beef. The two joined forces, and
sat down at the far end of a long table which ran parallel to the High and at
right angles to the other tables. From there they commanded the whole
room, including the High Table itself and the row of serving-hatches. As her
eye wandered from one briskly occupied luncher to the next, Harriet kept

on asking herself, which? Which of all these normal and cheerful-looking
women had dropped that unpleasant paper in the quad the night before?
Because you never knew; and the trouble of not knowing was that you
dimly suspected everybody. Haunts of ancient peace were all very well, but
very odd things could crawl and creep beneath lichen-covered stones. The
Warden in her great carved chair was bending her stately head and smiling
at some jest of the Dean’s. Miss Lydgate was attending, with eager courtesy,
to the wants of a very old student indeed, who was almost blind. She had
helped her stumbling feet up the three steps of the dais, fetched her lunch
from the hatch and was now putting salad on her plate for her. Miss Stevens
the Bursar and Miss Shaw the Modern Language Tutor had collected about
them three other old students of considerable age and attainments; their
conversation was animated and apparently amusing. Miss Pyke, the
Classical Tutor, was deep in a discussion with a tall, robust woman whom
Phoebe Tucker had recognized and pointed out to Harriet as an eminent
archaeologist, and in a momentary flash of comparative silence, the Tutor’s
high voice rang out unexpectedly: “The tumulus at Halos appears to be an
isolated instance. The cist-graves of Theotokou …” Then the clamor again
closed over the argument. Two other dons, whom Harriet did not recognize
(they were new since her day) appeared from their gestures to be discussing
millinery. Miss Hillyard, whose sarcastic tongue tended to isolate her from
her colleagues, was slowly eating her lunch and glancing at a pamphlet she
had brought in with her. Miss de Vine, arriving late, sat down beside Miss
Hillyard and began to consume ham in a detached way with her eyes fixed
on vacancy.

varieties of costume. Was it the curious round-shouldered woman in a
yellow djibbah and sandals, with her hair coiled in two snail-shells over her

ears? Or the sturdy, curly-headed person in tweeds, with a masculine-
looking waistcoat and the face like the back of a cab? Or the tightly-
corseted peroxide of sixty, whose hat would better have suited an eighteen-
year-old debutante at Ascot? Or one of the innumerable women with
“schoolteacher” stamped on their resolutely cheery countenances? Or the
plain person of indeterminate age who sat at the head of her table with the
air of a chairman of committee? Or that curious little creature dressed in
unbecoming pink, who looked as though she had been carelessly packed
away in a drawer all winter and put into circulation again without being
ironed? Or that handsome, well-preserved business woman of fifty with the
well-manicured hands, who broke into the conversation of total strangers to
inform them that she had just opened a new hairdressing establishment “just
off Bond Street”? Or that tall, haggard, tragedy-queen in black silk
marocain who looked like Hamlet’s aunt, but was actually Aunt Beatrice
who ran the Household Column in the Daily Mercury? Or the bony woman
with the long horseface who had devoted herself to Settlement work? Or
even that unconquerably merry and bright little dumpling of a creature who
was the highly-valued secretary of a political secretary and had secretaries
under her? The faces came and went, as though in a dream, all animated, all
inscrutable.

dozen present students, still lingering in Oxford for viva voce examinations.
They babbled continually among themselves, rather obviously ignoring the
invasion of their college by all these quaint old freaks who were what they
themselves would be in ten years’ time, or twenty or thirty. They were a
badly-turned-out bunch, Harriet thought, with an end-of-term crumpled
appearance. There was an odd, shyfaced, sandy girl with pale eyes and
restless fingers, and next to her a dark, beautiful one, for whose face men

might have sacked cities, if it had had any sort of animation; and there was
a gawky and unfinished-looking young person, very badly made up, who
had a pathetic air of seeking to win hearts and never succeeding; and, most
interesting of the bunch, a girl with a face like eager flame who was dressed
with a maddening perversity of wrongness, but who one day would
undoubtedly hold the world in her hands for good or evil. The rest were
nondescript, as yet undifferentiated—yet nondescripts, thought Harriet,
were the most difficult of all human beings to analyze. You scarcely knew
they were there, until—bang! Something quite unexpected blew up like a
depth charge and left you marveling, to collect strange floating débris.

serving-hatches. “And what they think of us all, God only knows,” mused
Harriet.

“Are you plotting an exceptionally intricate murder?” demanded

Phoebe’s voice in her ear. “Or working out a difficult alibi? I’ve asked you
three times to pass the cruet.”

“I’m sorry,” said Harriet, doing as she was requested. “I was

meditating on the impenetrability of the human countenance.” She
hesitated, on the verge of telling Phoebe about the disagreeable drawing,
but her friend went on to ask some other question, and the moment passed
by.

empty Hall, later in the day, she stopped to stare at the portrait of that Mary,
Countess of Shrewsbury, in whose honor the college had been founded. The
painting was a well-executed modern copy of the one in St. John’s College,
Cambridge, and the queer, strong-featured face, with its ill-tempered mouth
and sidelong, secretive glance, had always exercised a curious fascination
over her—even in her student days, a period when the portraits of dead and

gone celebrities exposed in public places incur more sarcastic comment
than reverential consideration. She did not know, and indeed had never
troubled to inquire, how Shrewsbury College had come to adopt so ominous
a patroness. Bess of Hardwick’s daughter had been a great intellectual,
indeed, but something of a holy terror; uncontrollable by her menfolk,
undaunted by the Tower, contemptuously silent before the Privy Council, an
obstinate recusant, a staunch friend and implacable enemy and a lady with a
turn for invective remarkable even in an age when few mouths suffered
from mealiness. She seemed, in fact, to be the epitome of every alarming
quality which a learned woman is popularly credited with developing. Her
husband, the “great and glorious Earl of Shrewsbury,” had purchased
domestic peace at a price; for, said Bacon, there was “a greater than he,
which is my Lady of Shrewsbury.” And that, of course, was a dreadful thing
to have said about one. The prospect seemed discouraging for Miss
Schuster-Slatt’s matrimonial campaign, since the rule seemed to be that a
great woman must either die unwed, to Miss Schuster-Slatt’s distress, or
find a still greater man to marry her. And that limited the great woman’s
choice considerably, since, though the world of course abounded in great
men, it contained a very much larger number of middling and commonplace
men. The great man, on the other hand, could marry where he liked, not
being restricted to great women; indeed, it was often found sweet and
commendable in him to choose a woman of no sort of greatness at all.

greatness, or at any rate great renown, by merely being a wonderful wife
and mother, like the mother of the Gracchi; whereas the men who have
achieved great renown by being devoted husbands and fathers might be
counted on the fingers of one hand. Charles I was an unfortunate king, but
an admirable family man. Still, you would scarcely class him as one of the

world’s great fathers, and his children were not an unqualified success. Dear
me! Being a great father is either a very difficult or a very sadly unrewarded
profession. Wherever you find a great man, you will find a great mother or
a great wife standing behind him—or so they used to say. It would be
interesting to know how many great women have had great fathers and
husbands behind them. An interesting thesis for research. Elizabeth Barrett?
Well, she had a great husband, but he was great in his own right, so to speak
—and Mr. Barrett was not exactly—The Brontës? Well, hardly. Queen
Elizabeth? She had a remarkable father, but devoted helpfulness towards his
daughters was scarcely his leading characteristic. And she was so wrong-
headed as to have no husband. Queen Victoria? You might make a good
deal out of poor Albert, but you couldn’t do much with the Duke of Kent.”

With a mischievous determination to get some response out of this
antagonistic personality, Harriet laid before her the new idea for a historical
thesis.

believe many female singers, dancers, Channel swimmers and tennis stars
owe everything to their devoted fathers.”

“But the fathers are not famous.”
“No. Self-effacing men are not popular with either sex. I doubt

whether even your literary skill would gain recognition for their virtues.
Particularly if you select your women for their intellectual qualities. It will
be a short thesis in that case.”

“Graveled for lack of matter?”
“I’m afraid so. Do you know any man who sincerely admires a woman

for her brains?”

“Well,” said Harriet, “certainly not many.”

emphasis. “Most of us think at some time or other that we know one. But
the man usually has some other little axe to grind.”

opinion of men—of the male character, I mean, as such.”

talent for imposing their point of view on society in general. All women are
sensitive to male criticism. Men are not sensitive to female criticism. They
despise the critics.”

“Do you, personally, despise male criticism?”
“Heartily,” said Miss Hillyard. “But it does damage. Look at this

University. All the men have been amazingly kind and sympathetic about
the Women’s Colleges. Certainly. But you won’t find them appointing
women to big University posts. That would never do. The women might
perform their work in a way beyond criticism. But they are quite pleased to
see us playing with our little toys.”

“Excellent fathers and family men,” murmured Harriet.
“In that sense—yes,” said Miss Hillyard, and laughed rather

unpleasantly.

How difficult it was not to be embittered by personal experience. She went
down to the J.C.R. and examined herself in the mirror. There had been a
look in the History Tutor’s eyes that she did not wish to discover in her
own.

Sunday evening prayers. The College was undenominational, but some

form of Christian worship was held to be essential to community life. The
chapel, with its stained glass windows, plain oak panelling and unadorned
Communion Table was a kind of Lowest Common Multiple of all sects and

creeds. Harriet, making her way towards it, remembered that she had not
seen her gown since the previous afternoon, when the Dean had taken it to
the S.C.R. Not liking to penetrate uninvited into that Holy of Holies, she
went in search of Miss Martin, who had, it appeared, taken both gowns
together to her own room. Harriet wriggled into the gown, one fluttering
sleeve of which struck an adjacent table with a loud bang.

“Mercy!” said the Dean, “what’s that?”
“My cigarette-case,” said Harriet. “I thought I’d lost it. I remember

now. I hadn’t a pocket yesterday, so I shoved it into the sleeve of my gown.
After all, that’s what these sleeves are for, aren’t they?”

of term. When I have absolutely no clean handkerchiefs left in the drawer,
my scout turns out my gown sleeves. My best collection worked out at
twenty-two—but then I’d had a bad cold one week. Dreadful insanitary
garments. Here’s your cap. Never mind taking your hood—you can come
back here for it. What have you been doing today?—I’ve scarcely seen
you.”

again she refrained. She felt she was getting rather unbalanced about it.
Why think about it at all? She mentioned her conversation with Miss
Hillyard.

as Mrs. Gamp would say. Of course men don’t like having their poor little
noses put out of joint—who does? I think it’s perfectly noble of them to let
us come trampling over their University at all, bless their hearts. They’ve
been used to being lords and masters for hundreds of years and they want a
bit of time to get used to the change. Why, it takes a man months and
months to reconcile himself to a new hat. And just when you’re preparing to

send it to the jumble sale, he says, ‘That’s rather a nice hat you’ve got on,
where did you get it?’ And you say, ‘My dear Henry, it’s the one I had last
year and you said made me look like an organ-grinder’s monkey.’ My
brother-in-law says that every time, and it does make my sister so wild.”

They mounted the steps of the chapel.

It had not, after all, been so bad. Definitely not so bad as one had expected.
Though it was melancholy to find that one had grown out of Mary Stokes,
and a little tiresome, in a way, that Mary Stokes refused to recognize the
fact. Harriet had long ago discovered that one could not like people any the
better, merely because they were ill, or dead—still less because one had
once liked them very much. Some happy souls could go through life
without making this discovery, and they were the men and women who
were called “sincere.” Still, there remained old friends whom one was glad
to meet again, like the Dean and Phoebe Tucker. And really, everybody had
been quite extraordinarily decent. Rather inquisitive and silly about “the
man Wimsey,” some of them, but no doubt with the best intentions. Miss
Hillyard might be an exception, but there had always been something a little
twisted and uncomfortable about Miss Hillyard.

As the car wound its way over the Chilterns, Harriet grinned to herself,

thinking of her parting conversation with the Dean and Bursar.

“Be sure and write us a new book soon. And remember, if ever we get

a mystery at Shrewsbury we shall call upon you to come and disentangle
it.”

“All right,” said Harriet. “When you find a mangled corpse in the

buttery, send me a wire—and be sure you let Miss Barton view the body,
and then she won’t so much mind my haling the murderess off to justice.”

And suppose they actually did find a bloody corpse in the buttery, how

surprised they would all be. The glory of a college was that nothing drastic

ever happened in it. The most frightful thing that was ever likely to happen
was that an undergraduate should “take the wrong turning.” The purloining
of a parcel or two by a porter had been enough to throw the whole Senior
Common Room into consternation. Bless their hearts, how refreshing and
soothing and good they all were, walking beneath their ancient beeches and
meditating on k κÆd c k and the finance of Queen Elizabeth.

after all. I shall go back, from time to time. I shall go back.”

Then she remembered that her cigarette-case was still in her gown. She had
brought the garment in with her on her arm, and, thrusting her hand down to
the bottom of the long sleeve, she extracted the case. A piece of paper came
out with it—an ordinary sheet of scribbling paper folded into four. She
frowned at a disagreeable memory as she unfolded it.

There was a message pasted across it, made up of letters cut apparently

from the headlines of a newspaper.

YOU DIRTY MURDERESS. AREN’T YOU ASHAMED TO SHOW

YOUR FACE?

“Hell!” said Harriet. “Oxford, thou too?” She sat very still for a few

moments. Then she struck a match and set light to the paper. It burned
briskly, till she was forced to drop it upon her plate. Even then, the letters
showed grey upon the crackling blackness, until she pounded their spectral
shapes to powder with the back of a spoon.

CHAPTER IV

Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,

To set a form upon desired change,

As I’ll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,

I will, acquaintance strangle and look strange,

Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong

And haply of our old acquaintance tell.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

There are incidents in one’s life which, through some haphazard
coincidence of time and mood, acquire a symbolic value. Harriet’s
attendance at the Shrewsbury Gaudy was of this kind. In spite of minor
incongruities and absurdities, it had shown itself to have one definite
significance; it had opened up to her the vision of an old desire, long
obscured by a forest of irrelevant fancies, but now standing up
unmistakable, like a tower set on a hill. Two phrases rang in her ears: the
Dean’s, “It’s the work you’re doing that really counts”; and that one
melancholy lament for eternal loss: “Once, I was a scholar.”

“Time is,” quoth the Brazen Head; “time was; time is past.” Philip

Boyes was dead; and the nightmares that had haunted the ghastly midnight
of his passing were gradually fading away. Clinging on, by blind instinct, to
the job that had to be done, she had fought her way back to an insecure
stability. Was it too late to achieve wholly the clear eye and the untroubled

mind? And what, in that case, was she to do with one powerful fetter which
still tied her ineluctably to the bitter past? What about Peter Wimsey?

Immediately after the horrible business that they had investigated together
at Wilvercombe, Harriet—feeling that something must be done to ease a
situation which was fast becoming intolerable—had carried out a long-
cherished scheme, now at last made practicable by her increasing reputation
and income as a writer. Taking a woman friend with her as companion and
secretary, she had left England, and traveled slowly about Europe, staying
now here, now there, as fancy dictated or a good background presented
itself for a story. Financially the trip had been a success. She had gathered
material for two full-length novels, the scenes laid respectively in Madrid
and Carcassonne, and written a series of short stories dealing with detective
adventures in Hitlerite Berlin, and also a number of travel articles; thus
more than replenishing the treasury. Before her departure, she had asked
Wimsey not to write. He had taken the prohibition with unexpected
meekness.

Old Firm at the usual stand.”

all. At the beginning of the following June, she had returned home, feeling
that, after so long a break, there should be little difficulty in bringing the
relationship to a cool and friendly close. By this time he was probably
feeling as much settled and relieved as she was. As soon as she got back to
London, she moved to a new flat in Mecklenburg Square, and settled down
to work at the Carcassonne novel.

young woman writer and her barrister husband—partly for fun and partly
because she wanted to get local color for a short story, in which an unhappy
victim was due to fall suddenly dead in the Royal Enclosure, just at the
exciting moment when all eyes were glued upon the finish of a race.
Scanning those sacred precincts, therefore, from without the pale, Harriet
became aware that the local color included a pair of slim shoulders tailored
to swooning-point and carrying a well-known parrot profile, thrown into
prominence by the acute backward slant of a pale-grey topper. A froth of
summer hats billowed about this apparition, so that it resembled a slightly
grotesque but expensive orchid in a bouquet of roses. From the expressions
of the parties, Harriet gathered that the summer hats were picking long-
priced and impossible outsiders, and that the topper was receiving their
instructions with an amusement amounting to hilarity. At any rate, his
attention was well occupied.

came home rejoicing in the exceptional tranquility of her own spirits. Three
days later, while reading in the morning paper that among the guests at a
literary luncheon-party had been seen “Miss Harriet Vane, the well-known
detective authoress,” she was interrupted by the telephone. A familiar voice
said, with a curious huskiness and uncertainty:

you dine with me one evening?”

disconcerting “Who is that speaking, please?” Being unprepared and
naturally honest, Harriet feebly replied:

“Oh, thank you, Peter. But I don’t know whether …”
“What?” said the voice, with a hint of mockery. “Every night booked

from now till the coming of the Coqcigrues?”

headed and much-run-after celebrity.

“Then say when.”
“I’m free tonight,” said Harriet, thinking that the shortness of the

notice might force him to plead a previous engagement.

By the way, you have changed your telephone number.”

“Yes; I’ve got a new flat.”
“Shall I call for you? Or will you meet me at Ferrara’s at 7 o’clock?”
“At Ferrara’s?”
“Yes. Seven o’clock, if that’s not too early. Then we can go on to a

show, if you care about it. Till this evening, then. Thank you.”

not the place she would have chosen. It was both fashionable and
conspicuous. Everybody who could get there, went there; but its charges
were so high that, for the present at least, it could afford not to be crowded.
That meant that if you went there you were seen. If one intended to break
off a connection with anyone, it was perhaps not the best opening move to
afficher one’s self with him at Ferrara’s.

End with Peter Wimsey. During the first year or so after her trial, she had
not wanted to appear anywhere, even had she then been able to afford the
frocks to appear in. In those days, he had taken her to the quieter and better
restaurants in Soho, or, more often, carried her off, sulky and rebellious, in
the car to such roadside inns as kept reliable cooks. She had been too
listless to refuse these outings, which had probably done something to keep
her from brooding, even though her host’s imperturbable cheerfulness had

often been repaid only with bitter or distressful words. Looking back, she
was as much amazed by his patience as fretted by his persistence.

ready speech, but with a more formal courtesy than she remembered in him.
He listened with interest, and indeed with eagerness, to the tale of her
journeyings abroad; and she found (as was to be expected) that the map of
Europe was familiar ground to him. He contributed a few amusing incidents
from his own experience, and added some well-informed comments on the
conditions of life in modern Germany. She was surprised to find him so
closely acquainted with the ins-and-outs of international politics, for she
had not credited him with any great interest in public affairs. She found
herself arguing passionately with him about the prospects of the Ottawa
Conference, of which he appeared to entertain no very great hopes; and by
the time they got to the coffee she was so eager to disabuse his mind of
some perverse opinions about Disarmament that she had quite forgotten
with what intentions (if any) she had come to meet him. In the theater she
contrived to remind herself from time to time that something decisive ought
to be said; but the conversational atmosphere remained so cool that it was
difficult to introduce the new subject.

should give the driver, requested formal permission to see her home and
took his seat beside her. This, to be sure, was the moment; but he was
babbling pleasantly about the Georgian architecture of London. It was only
as they were running along Guilford Street that he forestalled her by saying
(after a pause, during which she had been making up her mind to take the
plunge):

“I take it, Harriet, that you have no new answer to give me?”
“No, Peter. I’m sorry, but I can’t say anything else.”

put up with me occasionally, as you have done tonight, I should be very
grateful to you.”

“I don’t think that would be at all fair to you.”
“If that’s the only reason, I am the best judge of that.” Then, with a

return of his habitual self-mockery: “Old habits die hard. I will not promise
to reform altogether. I shall, with your permission, continue to propose to
you, at decently regulated intervals—as a birthday treat, and on Guy
Fawkes Day and on the Anniversary of the King’s Accession. But consider
it, if you will, as a pure formality. You need not pay the smallest attention to
it.”

“Peter, it’s foolish to go on like this.”
“And, of course, on the Feast of All Fools.”
“It would be better to forget all about it—I hoped you had.”
“I have the most ill-regulated memory. It does those things which it

ought not to do and leaves undone the things it ought to have done. But it
has not yet gone on strike altogether.”

handed her out and waited gravely while she disentangled her latch-key.
Then he took it from her, opened the door for her, said goodnight and was
gone.

Mounting the stone staircase, she knew that, as far as this situation was

concerned, her flight had been useless. She was back in the old net of
indecision and distress. In him, it appeared to have worked some kind of
change; but it had certainly not made him any easier to deal with.

He had kept his promise, and troubled her very little. He had been out

of town a good deal, hard at work upon cases, some of which trickled
through into newspaper columns, while others appeared to settle themselves

in discreet obscurity. For six months he had himself been out of the country,
offering no explanation except “business.” One summer, he had been
involved in an odd affair, which had led him to take a post in an Advertising
Agency. He had found office life entertaining; but the thing had come to a
strange and painful conclusion. There had been an evening when he had
turned up to keep a previously-made dinner appointment, but had obviously
been unfit either to eat or talk. Eventually he had confessed to a splitting
headache and a temperature and suffered himself to be personally
conducted home. She had been sufficiently alarmed not to leave him till he
was safely in his own flat and in the capable hands of Bunter. The latter had
been reassuring: the trouble was nothing but reaction—of frequent
occurrence at the end of a trying case, but soon over. A day or two later, the
patient had rung up, apologized, and made a fresh appointment, at which he
had displayed a quite remarkable effervescence of spirits.

ever violated the seclusion of Mecklenburg Square. Two or three times,
courtesy had moved her to invite him in; but he had always made some
excuse, and she understood that he was determined to leave her that place,
at least, free from any awkward associations. It was clear that he had no
fatuous intention of making himself more valued by withdrawal: he had
rather the air of trying to make amends for something. He renewed his offer
of marriage on an average once in three months, but in such a way as to
afford no excuse for any outbreak of temperament on either side. One First
of April, the question had arrived from Paris in a single Latin sentence,
starting off dispiritedly. “Num …?”—a particle which notoriously “expects
the answer No.” Harriet, rummaging the Grammar book for “polite
negatives,” replied, still more briefly, “Benigne.”

unsettling effect. She had begun to take Wimsey for granted, as one might
take dynamite for granted in a munitions factory. But the discovery that the
mere sound of his name still had the power to provoke such explosions in
herself—that she could so passionately resent, at one and the same time,
either praise or blame of him on other people’s lips—awakened a misgiving
that dynamite was perhaps still dynamite, however harmless it might come
to look through long custom.

and rather difficult writing. It informed her that he had been called away by
Chief-Inspector Parker, who was in difficulties over a murder in the north of
England. He must therefore regretfully cancel their appointment for that
week. Could she oblige him by making use of the tickets, of which he had
no time to dispose otherwise?

one frightful occasion, during the first year of their acquaintance, when he
had ventured to send her a Christmas present and she, in an access of
mortified pride, had returned it to him with a stinging rebuke, he had been
careful never to offer her anything that could possibly be looked upon as a
material gift. Had he been wiped out of existence at any moment, there was
nothing among her possessions to remind her of him. She now took up the
tickets and hesitated over them. She could give them away, or she could go
herself and take a friend. On the whole, she thought she would rather not sit
through the performance with a kind of Banquo’s ghost disputing
possession of the next stall with somebody else. She put the tickets in an
envelope, dispatched them to the married couple who had taken her to
Ascot, and then tore the note across and deposited it in the waste-paper

basket. Having thus disposed of Banquo, she breathed more freely, and
turned to deal with the day’s next nuisance.

reading of one’s own works is usually a dismal matter; and when she had
completed her task she felt thoroughly jaded and displeased with herself.
The books were all right, as far as they went; as intellectual exercises, they
were even brilliant. But there was something lacking about them; they read
now to her as though they had been written with a mental reservation, a
determination to keep her own opinions and personality out of view. She
considered with distaste a clever and superficial discussion between two of
the characters about married life. She could have made a much better thing
of that, if she had not been afraid of giving herself away. What hampered
her was this sense of being in the middle of things, too close to things,
pressed upon and bullied by reality. If she could succeed in standing aside
from herself she would achieve self-confidence and a better control. That
was the great possession in which—with all his limitations—the scholar
could account himself blessed: the single eye, directed to the object, not
dimmed nor distracted by private motes and beams. “Private, indeed?”
muttered Harriet to herself, as she smacked her proofs irritably into brown
paper.

“You not alone, when you are still alone,
O God, from you that I could private be!”

She was exceedingly glad that she had got rid of the theater tickets.

she went to meet him in a belligerent spirit. He had asked her to dine with
him, this time, at the Egotists’ Club—an unusual venue. It was a Sunday

night, and they had the room to themselves. She mentioned her Oxford visit
and took the opportunity to recite to him a list of promising scholars,
distinguished in their studies and subsequently extinguished by matrimony.
He agreed mildly that such things did happen, far too often, and instanced a
very brilliant painter who, urged on by a socially ambitious wife, had now
become a slick machine for the production of Academy portraits.

merely jealous or selfish. But half the time it’s sheer stupidity. They don’t
mean it. It’s surprisin’ how few people ever mean anything definite from
one year’s end to the other.”

“I don’t think they could help it, whatever they meant. It’s the pressure

of other people’s personalities that does the mischief.”

say you won’t interfere with another person’s soul, but you do—merely by
existing. The snag about it is the practical difficulty, so to speak, of not
existing. I mean, here we all are, you know, and what are we to do about
it?”

relationships their life-work. If so, it’s all right for them. But what about the
others?”

her. “Do you think they ought to cut out human contacts altogether? It’s not
easy. There’s always the butcher or the baker or the landlady or somebody
one has to wrestle with. Or should the people with brains sit tight and let the
people with hearts look after them?”

“They frequently do.”
“So they do.” For the fifth time he summoned the waiter to pick up

Harriet’s napkin for her. “Why do geniuses make bad husbands, and all

that? But what are you going to do about the people who are cursed with
both hearts and brains?”

that’s just the problem, isn’t it? I’m beginning to believe they’ve got to
choose.”

“Not compromise?”
“I don’t think the compromise works.”
“That I should live to hear any person of English blood blaspheme

against compromise!”

away somewhere.”

“That proves you’re English. No other race ever boasts of being

mongrel. I’m quite offensively English myself, because I’m one-sixteenth
French, besides all the usual nationalities. So that compromise is in my
blood. However. Should you catalogue me as a heart or a brain?”

“Nobody,” said Harriet, “could deny your brain.”
“Who déniges of it? And you may deny my heart, but I’m damned if

you shall deny its existence.”

“You argue like an Elizabethan wit—two meanings under one word.”
“It was your word. You will have to deny something, if you intend to

be like Caesar’s sacrifice.”

“Caesar’s …?”
“A beast without a heart. Has your napkin gone again?”
“No—it’s my bag this time. It’s just under your left foot.”
“Oh!” He looked round, but the waiter had vanished. “Well,” he went

on, without moving, “it is the heart’s office to wait upon the brain, but in
view of—”

“Please don’t trouble,” said Harriet, “it doesn’t matter in the least.”

because if I once got down I should probably never get up again.”

your manner. Why on earth didn’t you say so before, instead of sitting there
like a martyr and inveigling me into misjudging you?”

“I don’t seem able to do anything right,” he said plaintively.
“How did you manage to do it?”
“Fell off a wall in the most inartistic manner. I was in a bit of a hurry;

there was a very plain-looking bloke on the other side with a gun. It wasn’t
so much the wall, as the wheelbarrow at the bottom. And it isn’t really so
much the ribs as the sticking-plaster. It’s strapped as tight as hell and itches
infernally.”

gun?”

“Ah! I’m afraid personal complications won’t trouble him any longer.”
“If the luck had been the other way, I suppose they wouldn’t have

troubled you any longer?”

my mind had been where my heart was, I might have welcomed that
settlement. But my mind being momentarily on my job, I ran away with the
greatest rapidity, so as to live to finish the case.”

“Well, I’m glad of that, Peter.”
“Are you? That shows how hard it is for even the most powerful brain

to be completely heartless. Let me see. It is not my day for asking you to
marry me, and a few yards of sticking-plaster are hardly enough to make it
a special occasion. But we’ll have coffee in the lounge, if you don’t mind,
because this chair is getting as hard as the wheelbarrow, and seems to be
catching me in several of the same places.”

together with some letters which she had taken from the postman as she left
the house and thrust into the outer pocket of the bag without reading.
Wimsey steered his guest into the lounge, established her in a chair and
lowered himself with a grimace into one corner of a low couch.

“Rather a long way down, isn’t it?”
“It’s all right when you get there. Sorry to be always presenting myself

in such a decrepit state. I do it on purpose, of course, to attract attention and
awaken sympathy; but I’m afraid the maneuver’s getting rather obvious.
Would you like a liqueur with the coffee or a brandy? Two old brandies,
James.”

room, madam.”

“More of your scattered belongings?” said Wimsey, as she took the

postcard; then, seeing her flush and frown of disgust, “What is it?”

“Nothing,” said Harriet, pushing the ugly scrawl into her bag.
He looked at her.
“Do you often get that kind of thing?”
“What kind of thing?”
“Anonymous dirt.”
“Not very often now. I got one at Oxford. But they used to come by

every post. Don’t worry; I’m used to it. I only wish I’d looked at it before I
got here. It’s horrible of me to have dropped it about your club for the
servants to read.”

“Careless little devil, aren’t you? May I see it?”
“No, Peter; please.”
“Give it to me.”

the title if he likes arsenic in his soup. What did you give him to get you
off?” it inquired, disagreeably.

“God, what muck!” said he, bitterly. “So that’s what I’m letting you in

for. I might have known it. I could hardly hope that it wasn’t so. But you
said nothing, so I allowed myself to be selfish.”

anything about it.”

you’ve tried hard enough to get rid of me. In fact, I think you’ve used every
possible lever to dislodge me, except that one.”

“Well, I knew you would hate it so. I didn’t want to hurt you.”
“Didn’t want to hurt me?”
She realized that this, to him, must sound completely lunatic.
“I mean that, Peter. I know I’ve said about every damnable thing to

you that I could think of. But I have my limits.” A sudden wave of anger
surged up in her. “My God, do you really think that of me? Do you suppose
there’s no meanness I wouldn’t stoop to?”

things more difficult for you by hanging round.”

my reputation, when I had none to compromise? To point out that you’d
saved me from the gallows, thank you very much, but left me in the pillory?
To say, my name’s mud, but kindly treat it as lilies? I’m not quite such a
hypocrite as that.”

“I see. The plain fact is, that I am doing nothing but making life a little

bitterer for you. It was generous of you not to say so.”

“Why did you insist on seeing that thing?”

of the postcard, “while I am quite ready to take flight from plug-uglies with
guns, I prefer to look other kinds of trouble in the face.” He dropped the
burning paper on to the tray and crushed the ashes together, and she was
again reminded of the message she had found in her sleeve. “You have
nothing to reproach yourself with—you didn’t tell me this; I found it out for
myself. I will admit defeat and say good-bye. Shall I?”

own hands, sat plaiting her fingers together. Peter watched her for some
minutes, and then said gently:

“Don’t look so tragic about it. The coffee’s getting cold. After all, you

know, I have the consolation that ‘not you but Fate has vanquished me.’ I
shall emerge with my vanity intact, and that’s something.”

“Peter. I’m afraid I’m not very consistent. I came here tonight with the

firm intention of telling you to chuck it. But I’d rather fight my own battles.
I—I—” she looked up and went on rather quaveringly—“I’m damned if I’ll
have you wiped out by plug-uglies or anonymous-letter writers!”

into an anguished grunt.

you? Give me your hand, and we’ll fight on until we drop. Here! none of
that. You can’t cry in this club. It’s never been done, and if you disgrace me
like this, I shall get into a row with the Committee. They’ll probably close
the Ladies’ Rooms altogether.”

“I’m sorry, Peter.”
“And don’t put sugar in my coffee.”

Later in the evening, having lent a strong arm to extricate him,

swearing loudly, from the difficult depths of the couch, and dispatched him

to such rest as he might reasonably look for between the pains of love and
sticking-plaster, she had leisure to reflect that if fate had vanquished either
of them it was not Peter Wimsey. He knew too well the wrestler’s trick of
letting the adversary’s own strength defeat itself. Yet she knew with
certainty that if, when he had said, “Shall I go?” she had replied with firm
kindness, “I’m sorry, but I think it would be better,” there would have been
the desired end of the matter.

firm line of some kind.”

knows what he wants. The trouble is that you don’t. I know it isn’t pleasant
putting an end to things, but I don’t see why he should do all your dirty
work for you, particularly as he doesn’t want it done. As for anonymous
letters, it seems to me quite ridiculous to pay any attention to them.”

It was easy for the friend to say this, having no vulnerable points in her

brisk and hard-working life.

“Peter says I ought to get a secretary and have them weeded out.”
“Well,” said the friend, “that’s a practical suggestion, anyway. But I

suppose, since it’s his advice, you’ll find some ingenious reason for not
taking it.”

“I’m not as bad as that,” said Harriet; and engaged the secretary.

So matters went on for some months. She made no further effort to

discuss the conflicting claims of heart and brain. That line of talk led to a
perilous exchange of personalities, in which he, with a livelier wit and
better self-control, could always drive her into a corner without exposing
himself. It was only by sheer brutal hacking that she could beat down his
guard; and she was beginning to be afraid of those impulses to savagery.

one day in the Michaelmas Term there was a paragraph in one of the more
foolish London dailies about an “Undergraduettes’ Rag,” informing the
world that somebody had made a bonfire of gowns in Shrewsbury Quad and
that the “Lady Head” was said to be taking disciplinary measures. Women,
of course, were always news. Harriet wrote a tart letter to the paper,
pointing out that either “undergraduate” or “woman student” would be
seemlier English than “undergraduette,” and that the correct method of
describing Dr. Baring was “the Warden.” The only result of this was to
provoke a correspondence headed “Lady Undergrads,” and a reference to
“sweet girl-graduates.”

She informed Wimsey—who happened to be the nearest male person

handy for scarifying—that this kind of vulgarity was typical of the average
man’s attitude to women’s intellectual interests. He replied that bad
manners always made him sick; but was it any worse than headlining
foreign monarchs by their Christian names, untitled?

About three weeks before the end of the Easter term, however,

Harriet’s attention was again called to college affairs in a way that was
more personal and more disquieting.

February was sobbing and blustering its lachrymose way into March,

when she received a letter from the Dean.

My dear Miss Vane,

I am writing to ask you whether you will be able to get up to

Oxford for the opening of the New Library Wing by the Chancellor
next Thursday. This, as you know, has always been the date for the
official opening, though we had hoped that the buildings themselves
would be ready for habitation at the beginning of this term. However,

what with a dispute in the contractors’ firm, and the unfortunate illness
of the architect, we got badly held up, so that we shall only just be
ready in time. In fact, the interior decoration of the ground floor isn’t
finished yet.—Still, we couldn’t very well ask Lord Oakapple to
change the date, as he is such a busy man; and after all, the Library is
the chief thing, and not the Fellows’ sets, however badly they may
need a home to go to, poor dears.

We are particularly anxious—I am speaking for Dr. Baring as

well as myself—that you should come, if you can manage to find time
(though of course you have a lot of engagements). We should be very
glad to have your advice about a most unpleasant thing that has been
happening here. Not that one expects a detective novelist to be a
practical policeman; but I know you have taken part in one real
investigation, and I feel sure you know a lot more than we do about
tracking down malefactors.

Don’t think we are all getting murdered in our beds! In some

ways I’m not sure that a “nice, clean murder” wouldn’t be easier to
deal with! The fact is, we are being victimized by a cross between a
Poltergeist and a Poison-Pen, and you can imagine how disgusting it is
for everybody. It seems that the letters started coming some time ago,
but at first nobody took much notice. I suppose everyone gets vulgar
anonymous communications from time to time; and though some of
the beastly things didn’t come by post, there’s nothing in a place like
this to prevent an outsider from dropping them at the Lodge or even
inside the College. But wanton destruction of property is a different
matter, and the last outbreak has been so abominable that something
really must be done about it. Poor Miss Lydgate’s English Prosody—
you saw that colossal work in progress—has been defaced and

mutilated in the most revolting manner, and some important
manuscript portions completely destroyed, so that they will have to be
done all over again. She was almost in tears, poor dear—and the
alarming thing is that it now looks as though somebody in college
must be responsible. We suppose that some student must have a grudge
against the S.C.R.—but it must be more than a grudge—it must be a
very horrid kind of pottiness.

One can scarcely call in the police—if you’d seen some of the

letters you’d realize that the less publicity the better, and you know
how things get about. I dare say you noticed there was a wretched
newspaper paragraph about that bonfire in the quad last November. We
never discovered who did that, by the way; we thought, naturally, it
was a stupid practical joke; but we are now beginning to wonder
whether it wasn’t all part of the same campaign.

So if you could possibly snatch time to give us the benefit of your

experience, we should be exceedingly grateful. There must be some
way of coping—this sort of persecution simply CAN’T GO ON. But
it’s an awfully difficult job to pin anything down in a place like this,
with 150 students and all doors open everywhere night and day.

I am afraid this is rather an incoherent letter, but I’m feeling that

put about, with the Opening looming ahead and all the entrance and
scholarship papers blowing about me like leaves in Vallombrosa!
Hoping very much to see you next Thursday,

Yours very sincerely,
Letitia Martin

Here was a pretty thing! Just the kind of thing to do the worst possible

damage to University women—not only in Oxford, but everywhere. In any
community, of course, one always ran the risk of harboring somebody

undesirable; but parents obviously would not care to send their young
innocents to places where psychological oddities flourished unchecked.
Even if the poison campaign led to no open disaster (and you never knew
what people might be driven to under persecution) a washing of dirty linen
in public was not calculated to do Shrewsbury any good. Because, though
nine-tenths of the mud might be thrown at random, the remaining tenth
might quite easily be, as it usually was, dredged from the bottom of the well
of truth, and would stick.

Dean’s letter. “The benefit of your experience”; yes, indeed. The words had,
of course, been written in the most perfect innocence, and with no suspicion
that they could make the galled jade wince. Miss Martin herself would
never dream of writing abusive letters to a person who had been acquitted
of murder, and it had undoubtedly never occurred to her that to ask the
notorious Miss Vane for advice about how to deal with that kind of thing
was to talk of rope in the house of the hanged. This was merely an instance
of that kind of unworldly tactlessness to which learned and cloistered
women were prone. The Dean would be horrified to know that Harriet was
the last person who should, in charity, have been approached in the matter;
and that, even in Oxford itself, in Shrewsbury College itself—

The letter she had found in her sleeve had been put there in Shrewsbury
College and at the Gaudy. Not only that; there had been the drawing she
had picked up in the quad. Was either, or were both of these, part only of
her own miserable quarrel with the world? Or were they rather to be
connected with the subsequent outbreak in the college itself? It seemed
unlikely that Shrewsbury should have to harbor two dirty-minded lunatics
in such quick succession. But if the two lunatics were one and the same

lunatic, then the implication was an alarming one and she herself must, at
all costs, interfere at least so far as to tell what she knew. There did come
moments when all personal feelings had to be set aside in the interests of
public service; and this looked like being one of them.

Oxford. While she waited for it, she thought the matter over in this new
light. The Dean had given no details about the poison letters, except that
they suggested a grudge against the S.C.R. and that the culprit appeared to
belong to the college. It was natural enough to attribute destructive ragging
to the undergraduates; but then, the Dean did not know what Harriet knew.
The warped and repressed mind is apt enough to turn and wound itself.
“Soured 
virginity”—“unnatural 
life”—“semi-demented

spinsters”—“starved appetites and suppressed impulses”—“unwholesome
atmosphere”—she could think of whole sets of epithets, ready-minted for
circulation. Was this what lived in the tower set on the hill? Would it turn
out to be like Lady Athaliah’s tower in Frolic Wind, the home of frustration
and perversion and madness? “If thine eye be single, the whole body is full
of light”—but was it physically possible to have the single eye? “What are
you to do with the people who are cursed with both hearts and brains?” For
them, stereoscopic vision was probably a necessity; as for whom was it not?
(This was a foolish play on words, but it meant something.) Well, then,
what about this business of choosing one way of life? Must one, after all,
seek a compromise, merely to preserve one’s sanity? Then one was doomed
forever to this miserable inner warfare, with confused noise and garments
rolled in blood—and, she reflected drearily, with the usual war aftermath of
a debased coinage, a lowered efficiency and unstable conditions of
government.

sounding full of agitation. Harriet, after hurriedly disclaiming all pretence
to detective ability in real life, expressed concern and sympathy and then
asked the question that, to her, was of prime importance.

“How are the letters written?”
“That’s just the difficulty. They’re mostly done by pasting together bits

out of newspapers. So, you see, there’s no handwriting to identify.”

That seemed to settle it; there were not two anonymous

correspondents, but only one. Very well, then:

“Are they merely obscene, or are they abusive or threatening too?”
“All three. Calling people names that poor Miss Lydgate didn’t know

existed—the worst she knows being Restoration Drama—and threatening
everything from public exposure to the gallows.”

Then the tower was Lady Athaliah’s tower.
“Are they sent to anybody besides the S.C.R.?”
“It’s difficult to say, because people don’t always come and tell you

things. But I believe one or two of the students here have had them.”

“And they come sometimes by post and sometimes to the Lodge?”
“Yes. And they are beginning to come out on the walls now, and lately

they’ve been pushed under people’s doors at night. So it looks as though it
must be somebody in college.”

“When did you get the first one?”
“The first one I definitely know about was sent to Miss de Vine last

Michaelmas Term. That was her first term here, and of course, she thought
it must be somebody who had a personal grudge against her. But several
people got them shortly afterwards, so we decided it couldn’t be that. We’d
never had anything of that sort happening before, so just at present we’re
inclined to check up on the First Year students.”

only said, however:

right for a time, till something sets them off. The whole difficulty with these
things is that the person generally behaves quite normally in other respects.
It might be anybody.”

so horrible. Yes, I know—elderly virgins, and all that. It’s awful to know
that at any minute one may be sitting cheek by jowl with somebody who
feels like that. Do you think the poor creature knows that she does it
herself? I’ve been waking up with nightmares, wondering whether I didn’t
perhaps prowl round in my sleep, spitting at people. And, my dear! I’m so
terrified about next week! Poor Lord Oakapple, coming to open the Library,
with venomous asps simply dripping poison over his boots! Suppose they
send him something!”

“Well,” said Harriet, “I think I’ll come along next week. There’s a very

good reason why I’m not quite the right person to handle this, but on the
other hand, I think I ought to come. I’ll tell you why when we meet.”

something. I suppose you’ll want to see all the specimens there are. Yes?
Very well. Every fragment shall be cherished next our hearts. Do we handle
them with the tongs for the better preservation of finger-prints?”

advised that precautions should be taken on principle. When she had rung
off, with the Dean’s reiterated thanks still echoing from the other end of the
line, she sat for a few moments with the receiver in her hand. Was there any
quarter to which she might usefully turn for advice? There was; but she was
not eager to discuss the subject of anonymous letters, still less the question

of what lived in academic towers. She hung up resolutely, and pushed the
instrument away.

She woke\next morning with a change of heart. She had said that

personal feeling ought not to stand in the way of public utility. And it
should not. If Wimsey could be made useful to Shrewsbury College, she
would use him. Whether she liked it or not, whether or not she had to put up
with his saying “I told you so,” she would put her pride in her pocket and
ask him the best way to go about the job. She had her bath and dressed,
glowing all the time with a consciousness of her own disinterested devotion
to the cause of truth. She came into the sitting-room and enjoyed a good
breakfast, still congratulating herself. As she was finishing her toast and
marmalade, the secretary arrived, bringing in the morning’s post. It
contained a hurried note from Peter, sent off the previous evening from
Victoria.

Hauled off abroad again at a moment’s notice. Paris first, then Rome.
Then God knows. If you should want me—per impossible—you can
get me through the Embassies, or the post-office will forward letters
from the Piccadilly address. In any case, you will hear from me on
April 1st.

P. D. B. W.

Post occasio calva. One could scarcely bombard the Embassies with

letters about an obscure and complicated little affair in an Oxford college,
especially when one’s correspondent was urgently engaged in investigating
something else all over Europe. The call must have been urgent, for the note
was very ill and hastily written, and looked, in fact, as though it had been
scribbled at the last moment in a taxi. Harriet amused herself with

wondering whether the Prince of Ruritania had been shot, or the Master-
Crook of the Continent had brought off a fresh coup, or whether this was
the International Conspiracy to Wreck Civilization with a Death-Ray—all
those situations being frequent in her kind of fiction. Whatever it was all
about, she would have to carry on unaided and find consolation in a proper
independence of spirit.

CHAPTER V

Virginity is a fine picture, as Bonaventure calls it, a blessed thing in itself,
and if you will believe a Papist, meritorious. And although there be some
inconveniences, irksomeness, solitariness, etc., incident to such persons …
yet they are but toys in respect, easily to be endured, if conferred to those
frequent incumbrances of marriage …And methinks sometime or other,
amongst so many rich Bachelors, a benefactor should be found to build a
monastical College for old, decayed, deformed, or discontented maids to
live together in, that have lost their first loves, or otherwise miscarried, or
else are willing howsoever to lead a single life. The rest, I say, are toys in
respect, and sufficiently recompensed by those innumerable contents and
incomparable privileges of Virginity.

ROBERT BURTON

Harriet drove out to Oxford through a vile downpour of sleet that forced its
way between the joints of the all-weather curtains and kept the windscreen-
wiper hard at work. Nothing could have been less like her journey of the
previous June; but the greatest change of all was in her own feelings: Then,
she had been reluctant and uneasy; a prodigal daughter without the romantic
appeal of husks and very uncertain of the fatted calf. Now, it was the
College that had blotted its copybook and had called her in as one calls in a
specialist, with little regard to private morals but a despairing faith in
professional skill. Not that she cared much for the problem, or had very
much hope of solving it; but she was able by now to look upon it as pure
problem and a job to be done. In June, she had said to herself, at every
landmark on the way: “Plenty of time yet—thirty miles before I need begin

to feel uncomfortable—twenty miles more respite—ten miles is still a good
way to go.” This time, she was plainly and simply anxious to reach Oxford
as quickly as possible—a state of mind for which the weather was perhaps
largely responsible. She slithered down Headington Hill with no concern
beyond a passing thought for possible skids, crossed Magdalen Bridge with
only a caustic observation addressed to a shoal of push-cyclists, muttered
“Thank God!” as she reached the St. Cross Road gate, and said “Good
afternoon” cheerfully to Padgett the porter.

miss, as you was to be put in the Guest Room over at Tudor and she was out
at a meeting but would be back for tea. Do you know the Guest Room,
miss? That would be since your time, perhaps. Well, it’s on the New Bridge,
miss, between Tudor Building and the North Annexe where the Cottage
used to be, miss, only of course that’s all done away now and you has to go
up by the main staircase past the West Lecture-Room, miss, what used to be
the Junior Common Room, miss, before they made the new entrance and
moved the stairs, and then turn right and it’s half-way along the corridor.
You can’t mistake it, miss. Any of the Scouts would show you, miss, if you
can find one about just now.”

“Thank you, Padgett. I’ll find it all right. I’ll just take the car round to

the garage.”

round for you later on. She won’t ’urt in the street for a bit. And I’ll have
your bag up in half a moment, miss; only I can’t leave the gate till Mrs.
Padgett comes back from running over to the Buttery, or I’m sure I’d show
you the way myself.”

Harriet again begged him not to trouble.

here and building up there and altering this and that, there’s a many of our
old ladies gets quite lost when they comes back to see us.”

finding the mysterious Guest Room by the shifting stair and the non-
existent Cottage. She noticed that its windows gave her a commanding view
over the Old Quad, though the New Quad was out of range and the greater
part of the new Library Building hidden by the Annexe Wing of Tudor.

Senior Common Room at an informal meeting of the Fellows and Tutors,
presided over by the Warden. Before her lay the documents in the case—a
pitiful little heap of dirty imaginations. Fifteen or so of them had been
collected for inspection. There were half-a-dozen drawings, all much of a
same kind with the one she had picked up on the Gaudy night. There were a
number of messages, addressed to various members of the S.C.R., and
informing them, with various disagreeable epithets, that their sins would
find them out, that they were not fit for decent society and that unless they
left men alone, various unpleasing things would occur to them. Some of
these missives had come by post; others had been found on window-sills or
pushed under doors; all were made up of the same cut-out letters pasted on
sheets of rough scribbling-paper. Two other messages had been sent to
undergraduates: one, to the Senior Student, a very well-bred and inoffensive
young woman who was reading Greats; the other to a Miss Flaxman, a
brilliant Second Year scholar. The latter was rather more definite than most
of the letters, in that it mentioned a name: “IF YOU DON’T LEAVE
YOUNG FARRINGDON ALONE,” it said, adding an abusive term, “IT
WILL BE THE WORSE FOR YOU.”

written by Miss Barton: The Position of Women in the Modern State. The
copy belonged to the Library, and had been discovered one Sunday morning
merrily burning on the fire in the Junior Common Room in Burleigh House.
Secondly, there were the proofs and manuscript of Miss Lydgate’s English
Prosody. The history of these was as follows. Miss Lydgate had at length
transferred all her corrections in the text to the final page-proof and
destroyed all the earlier revises. She had then handed the proofs, together
with the manuscript of the Introduction, to Miss Hillyard, who had
undertaken to go through them with a view to verifying certain historical
allusions. Miss Hillyard stated that she had received them on a Saturday
morning and taken them to her own rooms (which were on Miss Lydgate’s
staircase and on the floor immediately above). She had subsequently taken
them into the Library (that is to say, the Library in Tudor, now about to be
superseded by the New Library), and had there worked upon them for some
time with the aid of some reference books. She said she had been alone in
the Library at the time, except for someone, whom she had never seen, who
was moving about in the bay at the far end. Miss Hillyard had then gone out
to lunch in Hall, leaving the papers on the Library table. After lunch, she
had gone on the river to put a group of First-Year students through a
sculling-test. On her return to the Library after tea to resume work, she
found that the papers had disappeared from the table. She had at first
supposed that Miss Lydgate had come in and, seeing them there, carried
them off to make a few more of her celebrated corrections. She went to
Miss Lydgate’s rooms to ask about them, but Miss Lydgate was not there.
She said she had been a little surprised that Miss Lydgate should have
removed them without leaving a note to say what she had done; but she was
not actually alarmed until, knocking again at Miss Lydgate’s door shortly

before Hall, she suddenly remembered that the English Tutor had said that
she was leaving before lunch to spend a couple of nights in Town. An
inquiry was, of course, immediately set on foot, but nothing had come of it
until, on the Monday morning, just after Chapel, the missing proofs had
been found sprawled over the table and floor of the Senior Common Room.
The finder had been Miss Pyke, who had been the first don to enter the
room that morning. The scout responsible for dusting the S.C.R. was
confident that nothing of the kind had been there before Chapel; the
appearance of the papers suggested that they had been tossed into the room
by somebody passing the window, which would have been an easy enough
thing for anybody to do. Nobody, however, had seen anything suspicious,
though the entire college, particularly late-comers to Chapel and those
students whose windows overlooked the S.C.R., had been interrogated.

The proofs, when found, had been defaced throughout with thick

copying ink. All the manuscript alterations in the margins had been heavily
blacked out and on certain pages offensive epithets had been written in
rough block capitals. The manuscript Introduction had been burnt, and a
triumphant note to this effect pasted in large printed letters across the first
sheet of the proofs.

This was the news with which Miss Hillyard had had to face Miss

Lydgate when the latter returned to College immediately after breakfast on
the Monday. Some effort had been made to find out when, exactly, the
proofs had been taken from the Library. The person in the far bay had been
found, and turned out to have been Miss Burrows, the Librarian. She,
however, said that she had not seen Miss Hillyard, who had come in after
her and gone to lunch before her. Nor had she seen, or at any rate noticed,
the proofs lying on the table. The Library had not been very much used on
the Saturday afternoon; but a student who had gone in there at about 3

o’clock to consult Ducange’s Late Latin Dictionary, in the bay where Miss
Hillyard had been working, had said that she had taken the volume down
and laid it on the table, and she thought that if the proofs had been there,
she would have noticed them. This student was a Miss Waters, a second-
year French student and a pupil of Miss Shaw’s.

Bursar, who had seen Miss Hillyard apparently entering the Senior
Common Room just before Chapel on Monday morning. Miss Hillyard
explained that she had only gone as far as the door, thinking that she had
left her gown there; but remembering in time that she had hung it up in the
cloakroom of Queen Elizabeth Building, had come out immediately without
entering the S.C.R. She demanded, angrily, whether the Bursar suspected
her of having done the damage herself. Miss Stevens said, “Of course not,
but if Miss Hillyard had gone in, she could have seen whether the proofs
were already in the room, and so provided a terminus a quo, or alternatively
ad quern, for that part of the investigation.”

This was really all the material evidence available, except that a large

bottle of copying ink had disappeared from the office of the College
Secretary and Treasurer, Miss Allison. The Treasurer had not had occasion
to enter the office during Saturday afternoon or Sunday; she could only say
that the bottle had been in its usual place at one o’clock on Saturday. She
did not lock the door of her office at any time, as no money was kept there,
and all important papers were locked up in a safe. Her assistant did not live
in college and had not been in during the weekend.

of unpleasant scribbling on the walls of passages and lavatories. These
inscriptions had, of course, been effaced as soon as noticed and were not
available.

subsequent disfigurement of Miss Lydgate’s proofs. The whole college had
been addressed by Dr. Baring and asked whether anybody had any evidence
to bring forward. Nobody offered any; and the Warden had thereupon
issued a warning against making the matter known outside the college,
together 
with 
an 
intimation 
that 
anybody 
sending 
indiscreet

communications to either the University papers or the daily press might find
herself liable to severe disciplinary action. Delicate interrogation among the
other Women’s Colleges had made it fairly clear that the nuisance was, so
far, confined to Shrewsbury.

had started before the previous October, suspicion rather naturally centered
upon the First-Year students. It was when Dr. Baring had reached this point
of her exposition that Harriet felt obliged to speak.

“I am afraid, Warden,” she said, “that I am in a position to rule out the

First Year, and in fact the majority of the present students altogether.”

the two specimens of the anonymous writer’s work that she had discovered
at and after the Gaudy.

am extremely sorry that you should have had so unpleasant an experience.
But your information of course narrows the field a great deal. If the culprit
is someone who attended the Gaudy, it must have been either one of the few
present students who were then waiting up for vivas, or one of the scouts, or
—one of ourselves.”

“Yes. I’m afraid that is the case.”
The dons looked at one another. “It cannot, of course,” went on Dr.

nor can it be an Oxford resident outside the college, since we know that
certain papers have been pushed under people’s doors during the night, to
say nothing of inscriptions on the walls which have been proved to have
come into existence between, say, midnight and the next morning. We
therefore have to ask ourselves who, among the comparatively small
number of persons in the three categories I have mentioned, can possibly be
responsible.”

scouts than one of ourselves. I can scarcely imagine that a member of this
Common Room would be capable of anything so disgusting. Whereas that
class of persons—”

strongly that we ought not to allow ourselves to be blinded by any sort of
class prejudice.”

said the Bursar, “and you may be sure that I take very great care in
engaging the staff. The scrubbing-women and others who come in by the
day are, naturally, excluded from suspicion. Also, you will remember that
the greater number of the scouts sleep in their own wing. The outer door of
this is locked at night and the ground-floor windows have bars. Besides
this, there are the iron gates which cut off the back entrance from the rest of
the college buildings. The only possible communication at night would be
by way of the buttery, which is also locked. The Head Scout has the keys.
Carrie has been with us fifteen years, and is presumably to be trusted.”

“I have never understood,” said Miss Barton, acidly, “why the

unfortunate servants should be locked up at night as though they were
dangerous wild beasts, when everybody else is free to come and go at
pleasure. However, as things are, it seems to be just as well for them.”

is no porter at the tradesmen’s entrance, and that it would not be difficult for
unauthorized persons to climb over the outer gates. And I will remind you
that all the ground-floor windows that open directly upon the street or the
kitchen yard are barred, including those belonging to the Fellows. As for
the locking of the buttery, I may say that it is done to prevent the students
from raiding the pantry as they frequently did in my predecessor’s time, or
so I am informed. The precautions are taken quite as much against the
members of the college as against the scouts.”

“How about the scouts in the other buildings?” asked the Treasurer.
“There are perhaps two or three occupying odd bedrooms in each

building,” replied the Bursar. “They are all reliable women who have been
in our service since before my time. I haven’t the list here at the moment;
but I think there are three in Tudor, three or four in Queen Elizabeth, and
one in each of the four little dormer rooms in the New Quad. Burleigh is all
students’ rooms. And there is, of course, the Warden’s own domestic staff,
besides the Infirmary maid who sleeps there with the Infirmarian.”

my own household is at fault. You, Bursar, had better do the same by the
Infirmary. And, in their own interests, the scouts sleeping in College had
better be subjected to some kind of supervision.”

“Surely, Warden—” began Miss Barton, hotly.
“In their own interests,” said the Warden, with quiet emphasis. “I

entirely agree with you, Miss Barton, that there is no greater reason for
suspecting them than for suspecting one of ourselves. But that is the more
reason why they should be cleared completely and at once.”

“By all means,” said the Bursar.

scouts, or upon anybody else, I feel strongly that the fewer people who
know anything about that, the better. Perhaps Miss Vane will be able to put
forward a good suggestion, in confidence to myself, or to …”

nobody among us can be taken on trust.”

“That is unfortunately quite true,” said the Warden, “and the same

thing applies to myself. While I need not say that I have every confidence in
the senior members of the College, both jointly and severally, it appears to
me that, exactly as in the case of the scouts, it is of the highest importance
that we should be safeguarded, in our own interests. What do you say, Sub-
Warden?”

made at all. I am perfectly willing to submit to any measures of supervision
that may be recommended.”

“Well, you at least can scarcely be suspected,” said the Dean. “You are

the greatest sufferer.”

“We have nearly all suffered to some extent,” said Miss Hillyard.
“I am afraid,” said Miss Allison, “we shall have to allow for what I

understand is the well-known practice of these unfortunate—um, ah—
anonymous-letter writers, of sending letters to themselves to distract
suspicion. Isn’t that so, Miss Vane?”

“Yes,” said Harriet, bluntly. “It seems unlikely, on the face of it, that

anybody would do herself the kind of material damage Miss Lydgate has
received; but if we once begin to make distinctions it is difficult to know
where to stop. I don’t think anything but a plain alibi ought to be accepted
as evidence.”

the Saturday till after Miss Hillyard had gone to lunch. What is more, I
went over to Tudor during lunchtime, to return a book to Miss Chilperic’s
room before I left; so that I might quite easily have taken the manuscript
from the Library then.”

S.C.R.,” said Harriet.

arrived when everybody was in Chapel. I should have had to be rather quick
to run across and throw the proofs into the S.C.R. and be back in my rooms
again before the discovery was made; but I suppose I could have done it. In
any case, I would much rather be treated on the same footing as other
people.”

same?”

“I am sure we must all feel the same,” said the Dean. “But there is one

set of people we are overlooking.”

“Yes; how about them?”

them were Schools people, and have since gone down. I will look up the
lists and see. Oh, and, of course, there was Miss Cattermole who was up for
Responsions—for the second time of asking.”

“Ah!” said the Bursar. “Yes. Cattermole.”
“And that woman who was taking Mods—what’s her name? Hudson,

isn’t it? Wasn’t she still up?”

“Yes,” said Miss Hillyard, “she was.”

Harriet. “By the way, is it known who ‘young Farringdon’ is, in this note
addressed to Miss Flaxman?”

“There’s the point,” said the Dean. “Young Farringdon is an

undergraduate of—New College, I think it is—who was engaged to
Cattermole when they both came up, but is now engaged to Flaxman.”

“Is he, indeed?”
“Mainly, I understand, or partly, in consequence of that letter. I am told

that Miss Flaxman accused Miss Cattermole of sending it and showed it to
Mr. Farringdon; with the result that the gentleman broke off the engagement
and transferred his affections to Flaxman.”

“Not pretty,” said Harriet.
“No. But I don’t think the Cattermole engagement was ever anything

much more than a family arrangement, and that the new deal was not much
more than an open recognition of the fait accompli. I gather there has been
some feeling in the Second Year about the whole thing.”

“I see,” said Harriet.
“The question remains,” said Miss Pyke, “what steps do we propose to

take in the matter? We have asked Miss Vane’s advice, and personally I am
prepared to agree—particularly in view of what we have heard this evening
—that it is abundantly necessary that some outside person should lend us
assistance. To call in the police authorities is clearly undesirable. But may I
ask whether, at this stage, it is suggested that Miss Vane should personally
undertake an investigation? Or alternatively, would she propose our placing
the matter in the hands of a private inquiry agent? Or what?”

“I feel I am in a very awkward position,” said Harriet. “I am willing to

give any help I can; but you do realize, don’t you, that this kind of inquiry is
apt to take a long time, especially if the investigator has to tackle it single-

handed. A place like this, where people run in and out everywhere at all
hours, is almost impossible to police or patrol efficiently. It would need
quite a little squad of inquiry agents—and even if you disguised them as
scouts or students a good deal of awkwardness might arise.”

the documents themselves?” asked Miss Pyke. “Speaking for myself, I am
quite ready to have my fingerprints taken or to undergo any other kind of
precautionary measure that may be considered necessary.”

“I’m afraid,” said Harriet, “the evidence of finger-prints isn’t quite so

easy a matter as we make it appear in books. I mean, we could take finger-
prints, naturally, from the S.C.R. and, possibly, from the scouts—though
they wouldn’t like it much. But I should doubt very much whether rough
scribbling-paper like this would show distinguishable prints. And besides
—”

about finger-prints to wear gloves.”

“And,” said Miss de Vine, speaking for the first time, and with a

slightly grim emphasis, “if we didn’t know it before, we know it now.”

“Great Scott!” cried the Dean, impulsively, “I’d forgotten all about its

being us.”

better not to discuss methods of investigation too freely.”

“How many people have handled all these documents already?”

inquired Harriet.

“Ever so many, I should think,” said the Dean.
“But could not a search be made for—” began Miss Chilperic. She was

the most junior of the dons; a small, fair and timid young woman, assistant-
tutor in English Language and Literature, and remarkable chiefly for being

engaged to be married to a junior don at another college. The Warden
interrupted her.

to be made here. It might convey a warning.”

angrily at Harriet, as though she were responsible for the position; which, in
a sense, she was.

Miss Vane to come and give us her advice, it is impossible for us to take it,
or even to hear what it is. The situation is rather Gilbertian.”

advise the private inquiry agent, Miss Vane?”

But I do know of an organization where you could get the right type of
person and the greatest possible discretion.”

who ran what was ostensibly a Typing Bureau but was in fact a useful
organization of women engaged in handling odd little investigations. The
Bureau was self-supporting, though it had, she knew, Peter Wimsey’s
money behind it. She was one of the very few people in the Kingdom who
did know it.

The Treasurer coughed.
“Fees paid to a Detective Agency,” she observed, “will have an odd

appearance in the Annual Audit.”

“I think that might be arranged,” said Harriet. “I know the organization

personally. A fee might not be necessary.”

“That,” said the Warden, “would not be right. The fees would, of

course, have to be paid. I would gladly be personally responsible.”

should not like that.”

likely to be.” She had, in fact, no idea how this part of the business was
worked.

“There would be no harm in inquiring,” said the Warden. “In the

meantime—”

Warden, that the evidence should be handed over to Miss Vane, as she is the
only person in this room who cannot possibly come under suspicion.
Perhaps she would like to sleep upon the matter and make a report to you in
the morning. At least, not in the morning, because of Lord Oakapple and
the Opening; but at some time during tomorrow.”

“Very well,” said Harriet, in response to an inquiring look from the

Warden. “I will do that. And if I can think of any way in which I can be
helpful, I’ll do my best.”

The Warden thanked her. “We all appreciate,” she added, “the extreme

awkwardness of the situation, and I am sure we shall all do what we can to
cooperate in getting the matter cleared up. And I should like to say this:
Whatever any of us may think or feel, it is of the very greatest importance
that we should dismiss, as far as possible, all vague suspicions from our
minds, and be particularly careful how we may say anything that might be
construed as an accusation against anybody at all. In a close community of
this kind, nothing can be more harmful than an atmosphere of mutual
distrust. I repeat that I have the very greatest confidence in every Senior
Member of the College. I shall endeavour to keep an entirely open mind,
and I shall look to all my colleagues to do the same.”

The dons assented; and the meeting broke up.

“that is the most uncomfortable meeting I have ever had to sit through. My
dear, you have thrown a bombshell into our midst!”

“I’m afraid so. But what could I do?”
“You couldn’t possibly have done anything else. Oh, dear! It’s all very

well for the Warden to talk about an open mind, but we shall all feel
perfectly ghastly wondering what other people are thinking about us, and
whether our own conversation doesn’t sound a little potty. It’s the pottiness,
you know, that’s so awful.”

You’re quite the sanest person I ever met.”

for those few kind words. And one can’t possibly suspect the Warden or
Miss Lydgate, can one? But I’d better not say even that, I suppose.
Otherwise, by a process of elimination—oh, lord! For Heaven’s sake can’t
we find some handy outsider with a cast-iron alibi ready for busting?”

scouts to be disposed of.” They turned in at the Dean’s door. Miss Martin
savagely poked up the fire in the sitting-room, sat down in an armchair and
stared at the leaping flames. Harriet coiled herself on a couch and
contemplated Miss Martin.

“Look here,” said the Dean; “you had better not tell me too much

about what you think, but there’s no reason why any of us shouldn’t tell you
what we think, is there? No. Well. Here’s the point. What is the object of all
this persecution? It doesn’t look like a personal grudge against anybody in
particular. It’s a kind of blind malevolence, directed against everybody in
College. What’s at the back of it?”

injured her. Or it might be a personal grudge masking itself under a general
attack. Or it might be just somebody with a mania for creating disturbance
in order to enjoy the fun; that’s the usual reason for this kind of outbreak, if
you can call it a reason.”

throw furniture about and the servants who pretend to be ghosts. And,
talking of servants, do you think there’s anything in that idea that it’s more
likely to be somebody of that class? Of course, Miss Barton wouldn’t agree;
but after all, some of the words used are very coarse.”

“Yes,” said Harriet; “but actually there isn’t one that I, for example,

don’t know the meaning of. I believe, when you get even the primmest
people under an anaesthetic, they are liable to bring the strangest
vocabulary out of the subconscious—in fact, the primmer the coarser.”

whole bunch of messages?”

though the converse isn’t necessarily true. I mean, educated people often
put in mistakes on purpose, so that spelling mistakes don’t prove much. But
an absence of mistakes is a more difficult thing to manage, if it doesn’t
come natural. I’m not putting this very clearly.”

speller can’t pretend to be a good one, any more than I could pretend to be a
mathematician.”

“She could use a dictionary.”
“But then she would have to know enough to be dictionary-conscious

—as the new slang would call it. Isn’t our poison-pen rather silly to get all
her spelling right?”

badly; misspells easy words and gets quite difficult ones right. It’s not so
hard to tell when people are putting it on. I think it’s probably cleverer to
make no pretence about it.”

far better than we do. They so often are better educated. And I’m sure they
dress better. But that’s rather off the point. Stop me when I dither.”

true. At present I don’t see how anybody is to be excluded.”

“And what,” demanded the Dean, “becomes of the mutilated

newspapers?”

about this. That’s just one of the things I was wondering about.”

“We’ve checked up on all the S.C.R. and J.C.R. papers ever since this
business came to our notice—that is, more or less, since the beginning of
this term. Before anything goes to be pulped, the whole lot are checked up
with the list and examined to see that nothing has been cut out.”

“Who has been doing that?”
“My secretary, Mrs. Goodwin. I don’t think you’ve met her yet. She

lives in College during term. Such a nice girl—woman, rather. She was left
a widow, you know, very hard up, and she’s got a little boy of ten at a prep
school. When her husband died—he was a schoolmaster—she set to work
to train as a secretary and really did splendidly. She’s simply invaluable to
me, and most careful and reliable.”

“Was she here at Gaudy?”
“Of course, she was. She—good gracious! You surely don’t think—my

very grateful to the College for having found her the job, and she certainly
wouldn’t want to run the risk of losing it.”

she been here?”

you know, and she’d been here a year before that.”

longer, most of them. We can’t make exceptions along those lines. How
about the other secretaries?”

“The Warden’s secretary—Miss Parsons—lives at the Warden’s

Lodgings. The Bursar’s and the Treasurer’s secretaries both live out, so they
can be crossed off.”

“Miss Parsons been here long?”
“Four years.”
Harriet noted down the names of Mrs. Goodwin and Miss Parsons.
“I think,” she said, “for Mrs. Goodwin’s own sake we’d better have a

second check on those newspapers. Not that it really matters; because, if the
poison-pen knows that the papers are being checked, she won’t use those
papers. And I suppose she must know, because of the care taken to collect
them.”

“Very likely. That’s just the trouble, isn’t it?”
“How about people’s private newspapers?”
“Well, naturally, we couldn’t check them. We’ve kept an eye on the

waste-paper baskets as well as we can. Nothing is ever destroyed, you
know. It’s all thriftily collected in sacks and sent to the paper-makers or
whoever it is that gives pence for old papers. The worthy Padgett is
instructed to examine the sacks—but it’s a terrific job. And then, of course,

since there are fires in all the rooms, why should anybody leave evidence in
the W.P.B.?”

“How about the gowns that were burnt in the quad? That must have

taken some doing. Surely more than one person would have been needed to
work that.”

About ten or a dozen people had left their gowns in various places—as they
do, you know—before Sunday supper. Some were in the Queen Elizabeth
portico, and some at the foot of the Hall stairs and so on. People bring them
over and dump them, ready for evening Chapel.” (Harriet nodded; Sunday
evening Chapel was held at a quarter to eight, and was compulsory; being
also a kind of College Meeting for the giving-out of notices.) “Well, when
the bell started, these people couldn’t find their gowns and so couldn’t go in
to Chapel. Everybody thought it was just a rag. But in the middle of the
night somebody saw a blaze in the quad, and it turned out to be a merry
little bonfire of bombazine. The gowns had all been soaked in petrol and
they went up beautifully.”

“Where did the petrol come from?”
“It was a can Mullins keeps for his motor-cycle. You remember

Mullins—the Jowett Lodge porter. His machine lies in a little outhouse in
the Lodge garden. He didn’t lock it up—why should he? He does now, but
that doesn’t help. Anybody could have gone and fetched it. He and his wife
heard nothing, having retired to their virtuous rest. The bonfire happened
bang in the middle of the Old Quad and burnt a nasty patch in the turf. Lots
of people rushed out when the flare went up, and whoever did it probably
mingled with the crowd. The victims were four M.A. gowns, two scholars’
gowns and the rest commoners’ gowns; but I don’t suppose there was any
selection; they just happened to be lying about.”

bonfire. Anybody carrying a whole bunch of gowns round College would
be a bit conspicuous.”

could easily have been bundled into a lecture room to be left till called for.
There wasn’t a proper organized search over College, you see. The poor
victims who were left gownless thought somebody was having a joke; they
were very angry, but not very efficient. Most of them rushed round to
accuse their friends.”

of day. Well—I suppose I’d better go and wash-and-brush-up for Hall.”

Hall was an embarrassed meal at the High Table. The conversation was

valiantly kept to matters of academic and world interest. The
undergraduates babbled noisily and cheerfully; the shadow that rested upon
the college did not seem to have affected their spirits. Harriet’s eye roamed
over them.

“Is that Miss Cattermole at the table on the right? In a green frock,

with a badly made-up face?”

“That’s the young lady,” replied the Dean. “How did you know?”
“I remember seeing her at Gaudy. Where is the all-conquering Miss

Flaxman?”

“I don’t see her. She may not be dining in Hall. Lots of them prefer to

boil an egg in their rooms, so as to avoid the bother of changing. Slack little
beasts. And that’s Miss Hudson, in a red jumper, at the middle table. Black
hair and horn rims.”

“She looks quite normal.”
“So far as I know, she is. So far as I know, we all are.”

murderers look much like other people, Miss Vane. Or do you hold any
opinions about the theories put forward by Lombroso? I understand that
they are now to a considerable extent exploded.”

Harriet was quite thankful to be allowed to discuss murderers.

After Hall, Harriet felt herself rather at a loose end. She felt she ought

to be doing something or interviewing somebody; but it was hard to know
where to begin. The Dean had announced that she would be busy with some
lists, but would be open to receive visitors later on. Miss Burrows the
Librarian was to be engaged in putting the final touches to the Library
before the Chancellor’s visit; she had been carting and arranging books the
greater part of the day and had roped in a small band of students to assist
her with the shelving of them. Various other dons mentioned that they had
work to do; Harriet thought they seemed a little shy of one another’s
company.

Catching hold of the Bursar, Harriet asked whether it was possible to

get hold of a plan of the College and a list of the various rooms and their
occupants. Miss Stevens offered to supply the list and said she thought there
was a plan in the Treasurer’s office. She took Harriet across into the New
Quad to get these things.

“I hope,” said the Bursar, “you will not pay too much attention to that

unfortunate remark of Miss Burrows’ about the scouts. Nothing would
please me more, personally, than to transfer all the maids to the Scouts’
Wing out of reach of suspicion, if that were practicable; but there is no
room for them there. Certainly I do not mind giving you the names of those
who sleep in College, and I agree, certainly, that precautions should be
taken. But to my mind, the episode of Miss Lydgate’s proofs definitely rules
out the scouts. Very few of them would be likely to know or care anything

about proofsheets; nor would the idea of mutilating manuscripts be likely to
come into their heads. Vulgar letters—yes, possibly. But damaging those
proofs was an educated person’s crime. Don’t you think so?”

“I’d better not say what I think,” said Harriet.
“No; quite right. But I can say what I think. I wouldn’t say it to

anybody but you. Still, I do not like this haste to make scapegoats of the
scouts.”

Lydgate, of all-people, should have been chosen as a victim. How could
anybody—particularly one of her own colleagues—have any grudge against
her? Doesn’t it look rather as though the culprit knew nothing about the
value of the proofs, and was merely making a random gesture of defiance to
the world in general?”

today has made matters very complicated. I would rather suspect the scouts
than the S.C.R., I admit; but when these hasty accusations are made by the
last person known to have been in the same room with the manuscript, I can
only say that—well, that it appears to me injudicious.”

Harriet said nothing to this. The Bursar, apparently feeling that she had

gone a little too far, added:

not to be made without proof.”

Bursar’s list, went to find the Treasurer.

of the rooms occupied by various people.

“I hope this means,” she said, “that you intend to undertake the

time for any such thing. But I do most strongly feel that the presence of
paid detectives in this college would be most unpleasant, however discreet
they might be. I have served the College for a considerable number of years
and have its interests very much at heart. You know how undesirable it is
that any outsider should be brought into a matter of this kind.”

deficient servant is a misfortune that might occur anywhere. Surely the
important thing is to get to the bottom of the mystery as quickly as possible;
and a trained detective or two would be very much more efficient than I
should be.”

fro slowly on their gold chain.

But there is the other possibility. Mind you, I quite see that from your own
point of view, you would not wish to take part in an exposure of a member
of the Senior Common Room. But if it came to the point, I would put more
faith in your tact than in that of an outside professional detective. And you
start with a knowledge of the workings of the collegiate system, which is a
great advantage.”

when she had made a preliminary review of all the circumstances.

only fair to warn you that you may meet with some opposition. It has
already been said—but perhaps I ought not to tell you this.”

“That is for you to judge.”
“It has already been said that the narrowing-down of the suspects

within the limits mentioned at today’s meeting rests only upon your
assertion. I refer, of course, to the two papers you found at the Gaudy.”

“I see. Am I supposed to have invented those?”
“I don’t think anybody would go as far as that. But you have said that

you sometimes received similar letters on your own account. And the
suggestion is that—”

That would be quite likely, only that the style of the things was so like the
style of these others. However, I admit you have only my word for that.”

experience in these affairs is—if anything—a disadvantage. Forgive me.
That is not what I say.”

with the inquiry. It is absolutely true. I haven’t lived a perfectly blameless
life, and you can’t get over it.”

to blame for a good deal. I am not a fool, Miss Vane. No doubt my own life
has been blameless as far as the more generous sins are concerned. But
there are points upon which I should expect you to hold more balanced
opinions than certain people here. I don’t think I need say more than that,
need I?”

what she should do with the mutilated proofs in her possession. She found
the English Tutor patiently correcting a small pile of students’ essays.

“Come in, come in,” said Miss Lydgate, cheerfully. “I have nearly

done with these. Oh, about my poor proofs? I’m afraid they’re not much use
to me. They’re really quite undecipherable. I’m afraid the only thing is to
do the whole thing again. The printers will be tearing their hair, poor souls.
I shan’t have very much difficulty with the greater part of it, I hope. And I
have the rough notes of the Introduction, so it isn’t as bad as it might have

been. The worst loss is a number of manuscript footnotes and two
manuscript appendices that I had to put in at the last moment to refute what
seemed to me some very ill-considered statements in Mr. Elkbottom’s new
book on Modern Verse-Forms. I stupidly wrote those in on the blank pages
of the proofs and they are quite irrecoverable. I shall have to verify all the
references again in Elkbottom. It’s so tiresome, especially as one is always
so busy towards the end of term. But it’s all my own fault for not keeping a
proper record of everything.”

“I wonder,” said Harriet, “if I could be of any help to you in getting the

proofs put together. I’d gladly stay up for a week or so if it would do any
good. I’m quite used to juggling with proof-sheets, and I think I can
remember enough of my Schools work to be reasonably intelligent about
the Anglo-Saxon and Early English.”

lighting up. “But wouldn’t it be trespassing far too much on your time?”

enjoy putting in a little time on English Prosody. It was in her mind that, if
she really meant to pursue inquiries at Shrewsbury, Miss Lydgate’s proofs
would offer a convenient excuse for her presence in College.

the outrages, Miss Lydgate could make no suggestion; except that, whoever
it was, the poor creature must be mentally afflicted.

who was descending the staircase from her own abode.

I ought not to ask that. You have contrived to cast the Apple of Discord
among us with a vengeance. However, as you are so well accustomed to the

receipt of anonymous communications, you are no doubt the fittest person
to handle the situation.”

deserved. But this is a very different matter. It’s not the same problem at all.
Miss Lydgate’s book could offend nobody.”

Miss Hillyard. “However, circumstances seem to exclude the male sex from
the scope of the inquiry. Otherwise, this mass-attack on a woman’s college
would suggest to me the usual masculine spite against educated women.
But you, of course, would consider that ridiculous.”

no men running about the college at night.”

“I wouldn’t be too sure of that,” said Miss Hillyard, smiling

sarcastically. “It is quite ridiculous for the Bursar to talk about locked gates.
What is to prevent a man from concealing himself about the grounds before
the gates are locked and escaping again when they are opened in the
morning? Or climbing the walls, if it comes to that?”

Harriet thought the theory far-fetched; but it interested her, as evidence

of the speaker’s prejudice, which amounted almost to obsession.

“is the destruction of Miss Barton’s book, which is strongly pro-feminist. I
don’t suppose you have read it; probably it would not interest you. But why
else should that book be picked out?”

over to Tudor Building. She had not very much doubt who it was that was
likely to offer opposition to her inquiries. If one was looking for a twisted
mind, Miss Hillyard’s was certainly a little warped. And, when one came to
think of it, there was no evidence whatever that Miss Lydgate’s proofs had

ever been taken to the Library or ever left Miss Hillyard’s hands at all.
Also, she had undoubtedly been seen on the threshold of the S.C.R. before
Chapel on the Monday morning. If Miss Hillyard was sufficiently demented
to inflict a blow of this kind on Miss Lydgate, then she was fit for a lunatic
asylum. But, indeed, this would apply to whoever it was.

she was admitted, whether she might borrow a copy of Woman’s Place in
the Modern State.

By the way, I should like to apologize to you for some of the things I said
when you were here last. I shall be very glad to see you handle this most
unpleasant business, which can scarcely be an agreeable thing for you. I
admire exceedingly anyone who can subordinate her own feelings to the
common advantage. The case is obviously pathological—as all anti-social
behavior is, in my opinion. But here there is no question of legal
proceedings, I imagine. At least, I hope not. I feel extremely anxious that it
should not be brought into court; and on that account I am against hiring
detectives of any kind. If you are able to get to the bottom of it, I am ready
to give you any help I can.”

Harriet thanked the Fellow for her good opinion and for the book.
“You are probably the best psychologist here,” said Harriet. “What do

you think of it?”

create a public uproar. The adolescent and the middle-aged are the most
likely suspects. I should very much doubt whether there is much more to it
than that. Beyond, I mean, that the incidental obscenities point to some kind
of sexual disturbance. But that is a commonplace in cases of this kind. But
whether you ought to look for a man-hater or a man-trap,” added Miss

Barton, with the first glimmer of humour Harriet had ever seen in her, “I
can’t tell you.”

Having put away her various acquisitions in her own room, Harriet

thought it was time to go and see the Dean. She found Miss Burrows with
her, very tired and dusty after coping with the Library, and being refreshed
with a glass of hot milk, to which Miss Martin insisted on adding just a
dash of whisky to induce slumber.

“What new light one gets on the habits of the S.C.R. when one’s an old

student,” said Harriet. “I always imagined that there was only one bottle of
ardent spirits in the college, kept under lock and key by the Bursar for life-
and-death emergencies.”

“It used to be so,” said the Dean, “but I’m getting frivolous in my old

age. Even Miss Lydgate cherishes a small stock of cherry brandy, for high-
days and holidays. The Bursar is even thinking of laying down a little port
for the College.”

“Great Scott!” said Harriet.
“The students are not supposed to imbibe alcohol,” said the Dean, “but

I shouldn’t like to go bail for the contents of all the cupboards in College.”

“After all,” said Miss Burrows, “their tiresome parents bring them up

to have cocktails and things at home, so it probably seems ridiculous to
them that they shouldn’t do the same thing here.”

“And what can one do about it? Make a police search through their

belongings? Well, I flatly refuse. We can’t keep the place like a gaol.”

“The trouble is,” said the Librarian, “that everybody sneers at

restrictions and demands freedom, till something annoying happens; then
they demand angrily what has become of the discipline.”

“You can’t exercise the old kind of discipline in these days,” said the

Dean, “it’s too bitterly resented.”

said the Librarian. “But do they?”

passionately had College Meetings about everything. Now, they won’t be
bothered. Half the old institutions, like the College debates and the Third
Year Play, are dead or moribund. They don’t want responsibility.”

“They’re all taken up with their young men,” said Miss Burrows.
“Drat their young men,” said the Dean. “In my day, we simply thirsted

for responsibility. We’d all been sat on at school for the good of our souls,
and came up bursting to show how brilliantly we could organize things
when we were put in charge.”

discipline and so on. Children are sick to death of running things and doing
prefect duty; and when they get up to Oxford they’re tired out and only
want to sit back and let somebody else run the show. Even in my time, the
people from the up-to-date republican schools were shy of taking office,
poor brutes.”

did get my Library volunteers to do a job of work today. We’ve got most of
the shelves decently filled, and the pictures hung and the curtains up. It
looks very well. I hope the Chancellor will be impressed. They haven’t
finished painting the radiators downstairs, but I’ve bundled the paintpots
and things into a cupboard and hoped for the best. And I borrowed a quad
of scouts to clean up, so as not to leave anything to be done tomorrow.”

“What times does the Chancellor arrive?” asked Harriet.
“Twelve o’clock; reception in the S.C.R. and show him round the

fed up with Openings. We’ve opened the New Quad, the Chapel (with
choral service), the S.C.R. Dining Room (with lunch to Former Tutors and
Fellows), the Tudor Annexe (with Old Students’ Tea), the Kitchens and
Scouts’ Wing (with Royalty), the Sanatorium (with address by the Lister
Professor of Medicine), the Council Chamber and the Warden’s Lodgings,
and we’ve unveiled the late Warden’s Portrait, the Willett Memorial Sundial
and the New Clock. And now it’s the Library. Padgett said to me last term,
when we were making those alterations in Queen Elizabeth, ‘Excuse me,
madam Dean, miss, but could you tell me, miss, the date of the Opening?’
‘What Opening, Padgett?’ said I. ‘We aren’t opening anything this term.
What is there to open?’ ‘Well, miss,’ says Padgett, ‘I was thinking of these
here new lavatories, if you’ll excuse me, madam Dean, miss. We’ve opened
everything there was to open up to the present, miss, and if there was to be
a Ceremony, miss, it would be convenient if I was to know in good time, on
account of arranging for taxis and parking accommodation.’”

academy.” She yawned again. “I’m dead.”

day.”

CHAPTER VI

Often when they were gone to Bed, the inner doors were flung open, as also
the Doors of a Cupboard which stood in the Hall; and this with a great deal
of Violence and Noise. And one Night the Chairs, which when they went to
Bed stood all in the Chimney-corner, were all removed and placed in the
middle of the Room in very good order, and a Meal-sieve hung upon one cut
full of Holes, and a Key of an inner Door upon another. And in the Day-
time, as they sate in the House spinning, they could see the Barn-doors
often flung open, but not by whom. Once, as Alice sate spinning the Rock or
Distaff leapt several times out of the Wheel into the middle of the room …
with much more such ridiculous stuff as this is, which would be tedious to
relate.

WILLIAM TURNER

“Peter,” said Harriet. And with the sound of her own voice she came
drowsing and floating up out of the strong circle of his arms, through a
green sea of sun-dappled beech leaves into darkness.

“Oh, damn,” said Harriet softly to herself. “Oh, damn. And I didn’t

want to wake up.”

The clock in the New Quad struck three musically.
“This won’t do,” said Harriet. “This really will not do. My sub-

conscious has a most treacherous imagination.” She groped for the switch
of her bedside lamp. “It’s disquieting to reflect that one’s dreams never
symbolize one’s real wishes, but always something Much Worse.” She
turned the light on and sat up.

dream of something like dentists or gardening. I wonder what are the
unthinkable depths of awfulness that can only be expressed by the polite
symbol of Peter’s embraces. Damn Peter! I wonder what he would do about
a case like this.”

the anonymous letter; and thence back to his absurd fury with the sticking-
plaster.

“… but my mind being momentarily on my job …”
You’d think he was quite bird-witted, sometimes, she thought. But he

does keep his mind on the job, when he’s doing it. One’s mind on the job.
Yes. What am I doing, letting my mind stray all over the place. Is this a job,
or isn’t it? …Suppose the Poison-Pen is on its rounds now, dropping letters
at people’s doors …Whose door, though? One can’t watch all the doors … I
ought to be sitting up at the window, keeping an eye open for creeping
figures in the quad …Somebody ought to do it—but who’s to be trusted?
Besides, dons have their jobs to do; they can’t sit up all night and work all
day …The job … keeping one’s mind on the job …

was no moon, and nothing at all to be seen. Not even a late essay-writer
seemed to be burning the midnight lamp.

herself. She could scarcely see even the outline of the roofs of Tudor on her
right, or the dark bulk of the New Library jutting out on her left from
behind the Annexe.

opened her door softly. It was bitterly cold. She found the wall-switch and
went down the central corridor of the Annexe, past a row of doors behind

which students were sleeping and dreaming of goodness knew what—
examinations, sports, undergraduates, parties, all the queer jumble of things
that are summed up as “activities.” Outside their doors lay little heaps of
soiled crockery for the scouts to collect and wash. Also shoes. On the doors
were cards, bearing their names: Miss H. Brown, Miss Jones, Miss Colburn,
Miss Szleposky, Miss Isaacson—so many unknown quantities. So many
destined wives and mothers of the race; or, alternatively, so many potential
historians, scientists, schoolteachers, doctors, lawyers; as you liked to think
one thing of more importance than the other. At the end of the passage was
a large window, hygienically open at top and bottom. Harriet gently pushed
up the bottom sash and looked out, shivering.

look at the Library had taken a very just view of the situation. The New
Library should have been quite dark. It was not. One of the long windows
was split from top to bottom by a narrow band of light.

Harriet thought rapidly. If this was Miss Burrows, carrying on

legitimately (though at an unreasonable and sacrificial hour) with her
preparations, why had she troubled to draw the curtains? The windows had
been curtained, because a Library that faces south must have some
protection against strong sunlight. But it would be absurd for the Librarian
to protect herself and her proper functions from scrutiny in the middle of a
dark March night. College authorities were not so secretive as all that.
Something was up. Should one go and investigate on one’s own, or rouse
somebody else?

those curtains, it would not be politic to bring a student to witness the
discovery. What dons slept in Tudor? Without consulting the list, Harriet
remembered that Miss Barton and Miss Chilperic had rooms there, but on

the far side of the building. Here was an opportunity to check up on them, at
any rate. With a last glance at the Library window, Harriet made her way
quickly back past her own room on the Bridge and through into the main
building. She cursed herself for not having a torch; she was delayed by
fumbling with the switches. Along the corridor, past the stair-head and
round to the left. No don on that floor; it must be on the floor below. Back,
and down the stairs and along to the left again. She was leaving all the
passage-lights burning behind her, and wondered whether they would
arouse attention in other buildings. At last. A door on her left labeled “Miss
Barton.” And the door stood open.

Beyond it, the bedroom door stood open too. “Gracious!” said Harriet.
“Miss Barton!” There was no reply; and, looking in, she saw that the
bedroom was as empty as the sitting-room. The bed-clothes were flung
back and the bed had been slept in; but the sleeper had risen and gone.

moment, considering; and then called to mind that the window of the room
overlooked the quad. The curtains were drawn back; she looked out into the
darkness. The light still shone in the Library window; but while she looked,
it went out.

She ran back to the foot of the stair and through the entrance-hall. The

front door of the building was ajar. She pulled it open and ran out and
across the quad. As she ran, something seemed to loom up ahead of her. She
made for it and closed with it. It caught her in a muscular grip.

“Who’s that?” demanded Harriet, fiercely.
“And who’s that?”
The grip of one hand was released and a torch was switched on into

Harriet’s face.

“Miss Vane! What are you doing here?”
“Is that Miss Barton? I was looking for you. I saw a light in the New

Library.”

“So did I. I’ve just been over to investigate. The door’s locked.”
“Locked?”
“And the key inside.”
“Isn’t there another way up?” asked Harriet.
“Yes, of course there is. I ought to have thought of that. Up through the

Hall passage and the Fiction Library. Come along!”

watch the main door, to see they don’t get out that way. I’ll go up through
the Hall.”

take mine. You’ll waste time turning on lights.”

sounded plausible enough. She had woken up (why?), seen the light (very
likely she slept with her curtains drawn open) and gone out to investigate
while Harriet was running about the upper floors hunting for the right room.
In the meantime, the person in the Library had either finished what she was
doing or, possibly, peeped out and been alarmed by seeing the lights go up
in Tudor. She had switched out the light. She had not gone out by the main
door; she was either still somewhere in the Hall-Library Wing, or she had
crept out by the Hall stair while Miss Barton and Harriet were grappling
with one another in the quad.

Harriet found the Hall stair and started up it, using her torch as little as

possible and keeping the light low. It came forcibly into her mind that the
person she was hunting was—must be—unbalanced, if not mad, and might
possibly deliver a nasty swipe out of a dark corner. She arrived at the head

of the stair, and pushed back the swinging glass double door that led to the
passage between the Hall and the Buttery. As she did so, she fancied she
heard a slight scuffling sound ahead, and almost simultaneously she saw the
gleam of a torch. There ought to be a two-way switch just on the right,
behind the door. She found it, and pressed it down. There was a quick
flicker, and then darkness. A fuse? Then she laughed at herself. Of course
not. The person at the other end of the passage had flicked the switch at the
same moment as herself. She pushed the switch up again, and the lights
flooded the passage.

On her left she saw the three doorways, with the serving-hatches

between, that led into the Hall. On the right was the long blank wall
between the passage and the kitchens. And ahead of her, at the far end of
the passage, close to the Buttery door, stood somebody clutching a
dressing-gown about her with one hand and a large jug in the other.

Harriet advanced swiftly upon this apparition, which came meekly

enough to meet her. Its features seemed familiar, and in a moment she
identified them. It was Miss Hudson, the Third Year student who had been
up at Gaudy.

“What in the world are you doing here at this time of night?”

demanded Harriet, severely. Not that she had any particular right to
question students about their movements. Nor did she feel that her own
appearance, in pyjamas and a jaeger dressing-gown, suggested dignity or
authority. Miss Hudson, indeed, seemed quite flabbergasted at being thus
accosted by a total stranger at three in the morning. She stared, speechless.

don’t know who you are. I’ve as much right to walk about as you have …
Oh, gosh!” she added, and burst out laughing. “I suppose you’re one of the
scouts. I didn’t recognize you without your uniform.”

you? But your room isn’t here. Have you been along to the Buttery?” Her
eyes were on the jug; Miss Hudson blushed.

“Yes—I wanted some milk. I’ve got an essay.”
She spoke of it as though it were a disease. Harriet chuckled.
“So that still goes on, does it? Carrie’s just as softhearted as Agnes was

in my day.” She went up to the Buttery hatch and shook it, but it was
locked. “No, apparently she isn’t.”

forgot. I say—don’t give Carrie away. She’s awfully decent.”

open. You ought to get your milk before ten o’clock.”

the same thing in your time, I expect.”

When did you come up here?”

“Just now. Just a few seconds before you did.”
“Did you meet anybody?”
“No.” Miss Hudson looked alarmed. “Why? Has anything happened?”
“Not that I know of. Get along to bed.”
Miss Hudson escaped and Harriet tried the Buttery door which was as

firmly locked as the hatch. Then she went on, through the Fiction Library,
which was empty, and put her hand on the handle of the oak door that led to
the New Library.

The door was immovable. There was no key in the lock. Harriet

looked round the Fiction Library. On the window-sill lay a thin pencil,
beside a book and a few papers. She pushed the pencil into the key-hole; it
encountered no resistance.

looked on to the roof of a small loggia. Two people were not enough for this
game of hide-and-seek. She pulled a table across the Library door, so that if
anybody tried to come out that way behind her back she should have notice
of it; then she climbed out on to the loggia roof and leaned over the
balcony. She could see nothing distinctly beneath her, but she pulled her
torch from her pocket and signalled with it.

“Hullo!” said Miss Barton’s voice, cautiously, from below.
“The other door’s locked, and the key gone.”
“That’s awkward. If either of us goes, somebody may come out. And if

we yell for help there’ll be an uproar.”

“That’s about the size of it,” said Harriet.
“Well, listen; I’ll try and get in through one of the groundfloor

windows. They all seem to be latched, but I might break a pane of glass.”

pause, and presently the sound of a moving sash. There was a longer pause.
Harriet came back into the Fiction Library and pulled the table away from
the door. In about six or seven minutes’ time she saw the door handle move
and heard a tap on the other side of the oak. She stooped to the key-hole,
and called: “What’s up?” and bent her ear to listen.

gone. And the most ghastly mess-up.”

“I’ll come round.”
She hurried back through the Hall and round to the front of the

Library. Here she found the window that Miss Barton had opened, climbed
through and ran on up the stairs into the Library.

“Well!” said Harriet.

South side, lit by as many windows running nearly from the floor to the
ceiling. On the North side, the wall was windowless, and shelved to a
height of ten feet. Above this was a space of blank wall, along which it
would be possible, at some future time, to run an extra gallery when the
books should become too many for the existent shelving. This blank space
had been adorned by Miss Burrows and her party with a series of
engravings, such as every academic community possesses, representing the
Parthenon, the Colosseum, Trajan’s Column and other topographical and
classical subjects.

by the simple expedient of removing the shelves bodily. The pictures had
been thrown down. And the blank wall-space thus exposed had been
adorned with a frieze of drawings, roughly executed in brown paint, and
with inscriptions in letters a foot high, all of the most unseemly sort. A pair
of library steps and a pot of paint with a wide brush in it stood triumphantly
in the midst of the wreckage, to show how the transformation had been
accomplished.

“That’s torn it,” said Harriet.
“Yes,” said Miss Barton. “A very nice reception for Lord Oakapple.”
There was an odd note in her voice—almost of satisfaction. Harriet

looked sharply at her.

a magnifying glass? Or send for the police?”

“Neither,” said Harriet. She considered for a moment.
“The first thing,” she said, “is to send for the Dean. The next is to find

either the original keys or a spare set. The third, is to clean off these filthy
inscriptions before anybody sees them. And the fourth is to get the room

straight before twelve o’clock. There’s plenty of time. Will you be good
enough to wake the Dean and bring her with you. In the meantime, I’ll have
a look round for clues. We can discuss afterwards who did the job and how
she got out. Please make haste.”

“H’m!” said the Fellow. “I like people who know their own minds.”
She went with surprising promptness.
“Her dressing-gown is all over paint,” said Harriet aloud to herself.

“But she may have got it climbing in.” She went downstairs and examined
the open window. “Yes, here’s where she scrambled over the wet radiator. I
expect I’m marked too. Yes, I am. Nothing to show whether it all came
from there. Damp footmarks—hers and mine, no doubt. Wait a moment.”

faint and ceased. She could find no third set; but the footmarks of the
intruder would probably have had time to dry. Whoever it was must have
begun operations very soon after midnight at latest. The paint had splashed
about a good deal; if it were possible to search the whole college for paint-
stained clothing, well and good. But it would cause a terrific scandal. Miss
Hudson—had she shown any marks of paint anywhere? Harriet thought not.

She looked about her again, and realized unexpectedly that she had the

lights full on, and that the curtains were drawn open. If anybody was
looking across from one of the other buildings, the interior of the room
would show up like a lighted stage. She snapped the lights off, and drew the
curtains again carefully before putting them on again.

while the job was done. Then the lights were turned off and the curtains
opened. Then the artist escaped, leaving the doors locked. In the morning,
everything would look quite ordinary from the outside. Who would have
been the first to try and come in? An early scout, to do a final clean-round?

She would find the door locked, think Miss Burrows had left it like that,
and probably do nothing about it. Miss Burrows would probably have come
up first. When? A little after Chapel, or a little before. She would not have
been able to get in. Time would have been wasted hunting for the keys.
When anybody did get in, it would have been too late to straighten things
up. Everybody would have been about. The Chancellor—?

the last to leave, and was the person who knew best where the paint pots
had been put. Would she have wrecked her own job, any more than Miss
Lydgate would have wrecked her own proofs? How far was that
psychological premise sound? One would surely damage anything in the
world, except one’s own work. But on the other hand, if one were cunning
enough to see that people would think exactly that, then one would
promptly take the precaution of seeing that one’s own work did suffer.

paint on the parquet. And at the edge of it—oh, yes! It would be very useful
to hunt the place over for paint-stained clothes. But here was evidence that
the culprit had worn no slippers. Why should she have worn anything? The
radiators on this floor were working at full blast, and a complete absence of
clothing would be not merely politic but comfortable.

be trusted) nor Harriet had met anyone on the way up. But there had been
plenty of time for escape, after the lights were put out. A stealthy figure
creeping away under the Hall archway could not have been seen from the
far side of the Old Quad. Or, if it came to that, there might quite well have
been somebody lurking in the Hall while Harriet and Miss Hudson were
talking in the passage.

lights to make sure.”

said “Mercy!” She looked like a stout little mandarin, with her long red
pigtail and quilted blue dressing-gown sprawled over with green-and-scarlet
dragons. “What idiots we were not to expect it. Of course, the obvious
thing! If we’d only thought about it, Miss Burrows could have locked up
before she went. And what do we do now?”

Padgett.”

Like charity, he never fails. What a mercy you people spotted what was
going on. As soon as we get these disgusting inscriptions cleaned off, we
can put on a coat of quick-drying distemper or something, or paper the wall
over, and—goodness! I don’t know where the turpentine will come from,
unless the painters have left a lot. It’ll need a young bath. But Padgett will
manage.”

collar Miss Burrows. We’ll have to get these books back into place. What’s
the time? Five to four. I think it can be done all right. Will you hold the fort
till I come back?”

fortunately. A beautiful plated key—all ready for Lord Oakapple. But we’ll
have to get a locksmith to the other door, unless the builders have a spare.”

The most remarkable thing about that remarkable morning was the

imperturbability of Padgett. He answered Harriet’s summons attired in a
handsome pair of striped pyjamas, and received her instructions with
monumental stolidity.

some very disagreeable tricks in the New Library.”

“Have they indeed, miss?”
“The whole place has been turned upside down, and some very vulgar

words and pictures scrawled on the wall.”

“Very unfortunate, miss, that is.”
“In brown paint.”
“That’s awkward, miss.”
“It will have to be cleaned at once, before anybody sees it.”
“Very good, miss.”
“And then we shall have to get hold of the decorators or somebody to

paper or wash it over before the Chancellor arrives.”

“Very good, miss.”
“Do you think you can manage it, Padgett?”
“Just you leave it to me, miss.”

Harriet’s next job was to collect Miss Burrows, who received the news

with loud expressions of annoyance.

“How loathsome! And do you mean to say all those books have got to

be done again? Now? Oh, lord, yes—I suppose there’s no help for it. What
a blessing I hadn’t put the Folio Chaucer and the-other valuables in the
showcases. Lord!”

The Librarian scrambled out of bed. Harriet looked at her feet. They

were quite clean. But there was an odd smell in the bedroom. She traced it
after a moment or two to the neighbourhood of the permanent basin.

“I say—is that turps?”
“Yes,” replied Miss Burrows, struggling into her stockings. “I brought

it across from the library. I got paint on my hands when I moved those pots
and things.”

over a wet radiator.”

“Yes, rather.”
Harriet went out, puzzled. Why should Miss Burrows have bothered to

bring the can over to the New Quad, when she could have cleaned off the
paint on the spot? But she could well understand that if anyone had wanted
to remove paint from her feet, after being disturbed in the middle of a piece
of dirty work, there might have been nothing for it but to snatch up the can
and bolt for it.

with her feet bare. She would have put on her slippers again. If you put
paint-stained feet into slippers, the slippers ought to show signs of it.

New Quad. Miss Burrows had gone. Her bedroom slippers lay by the bed.
Harriet examined them minutely, inside and out, but they were quite free
from paint.

sedately across the lawn, carrying a large can of turpentine in each hand.

“Where did you rake that up, Padgett, so early in the morning?”
“Well, miss, Mullins went on his motor-bike and knocked up a chap he

knows what lives over his own oil-shop, miss.”

As simple as that.
Some time later, Harriet and the Dean, decorously robed and gowned,

found themselves passing along the East side of Queen Elizabeth Building
in the wake of Padgett and the decorators’ foreman.

as young gentlemen.”

ladies. And young gentlemen was young gentlemen. If you get my
meaning.”

“Wot this country wants,” said Padgett, “is a ’Itler.”
“That’s right,” said the foreman. “Keep the girls at ’ome. Funny kind

o’ job you got ’ere, mate. Wot was you, afore you took to keepin’ a ’en
’ouse?”

“Assistant camel and at the Zoo. Very interesting job it was, too.”
“Wot made you chuck it?”
“Blood-poison. I was bit in the arm,” said Padgett, “by a female.”
“Ah!” said the foreman decorator.

By the time Lord Oakapple arrived, the Library presented nothing

unseemly to the eye, beyond a certain dampness and streakiness in its upper
parts, where the new paper was drying unevenly. The glass had been swept
up and the paint stains cleaned from the floor; twenty photographs of
classical statuary had been unearthed from a store-cupboard to replace the
Colosseum and the Parthenon; the books were back on their shelves, and
the showcases duly displayed the Chaucer Folio, the Shakespeare First
Quarto, the three Kelmscott Morrises, the autographed copy of The Man of
Property, and the embroidered glove belonging to the Countess of
Shrewsbury.

The Dean hovered about the Chancellor like a hen with one chick, in a

martyrdom of nervous apprehension lest some indelicate missive should
drop from his table-napkin or flutter out unexpectedly from the folds of his
robes; and when, in the Senior Common Room after lunch, he took out a
bunch of notes from his pocket and riffled them over with a puzzled frown,
the tension became so acute that she nearly dropped the sugar-basin. It
turned out, however, that he had merely mislaid a Greek quotation. The

Warden, though the history of the Library was known to her, displayed her
usual serene poise.

decorators had done their part, in the Library, watching the movements of
everyone who came in or out, and seeing that they left nothing undesirable
behind them.

lunch was brought up to the self-appointed invigilator. A napkin covered it;
but nothing lurked beneath its folds beyond a plate of ham sandwiches and
other such harmless matter. Harriet recognized the scout.

“It’s Annie, isn’t it? Are you on the kitchen staff now?”
“No, madam. I wait upon the Hall and Senior Common Room.”
“How are your little girls getting on? I think Miss Lydgate said you

had two little girls?”

“Yes, madam. How kind of you to ask.” Annie’s face beamed with

pleasure. “They’re splendid. Oxford suits them, after living in a
manufacturing town, where we were before. Are you fond of children,
madam?”

children; but one can scarcely say so, bluntly, to those possessed of these
blessings.

“You ought to be married and have some of your own, madam. There!

I oughtn’t to have said that—it’s not my place. But it seems to me a
dreadful thing to see all these unmarried ladies living together. It isn’t
natural, is it?”

right person to come along.”

husband had been queer, or committed suicide, or something unfortunate,
and wondered whether her commonplace had been a tactful one. But Annie
seemed quite pleased with it. She smiled again; she had large, light blue
eyes, and Harriet thought she must have been a good-looking woman before
she got so thin and worried-looking. “I’m sure I hope he’ll come along for
you—or perhaps you are engaged to be married?”

not want to discuss her private affairs with the college servants. But there
seemed to be no impertinent intention behind the inquiry, so she answered
pleasantly, “Not just yet; but you never know. How do you like the new
Library?”

“It’s a very handsome room, isn’t it, madam? But it seems a great

shame to keep up this big place just for women to study books in. I can’t
see what girls want with books. Books won’t teach them to be good wives.”

job in a women’s college, Annie?”

The scout’s face clouded. “Well, madam, I’ve had my misfortunes. I

was glad to take what I could get.”

“Yes, of course; I was only joking. Do you like the work?”
“It’s quite all right. But some of these clever ladies are a bit queer,

don’t you think, madam? Funny, I mean. No heart in them.”

Hillyard.

haven’t much time for outside interests. But they are all very kind.”

thing.”

Harriet looked up sharply and caught an odd look in the scout’s eyes.
“What do you mean by that, Annie?”
“Nothing at all, madam. Only funny things go on sometimes, but of

course, being a visitor, you wouldn’t know, and it’s not my place to mention
them—being only a servant, nowadays.”

of the kind you suggest to outside people or visitors. If you have any
complaint to make, you should speak to the Bursar, or the Warden.”

words being written up on the walls, and about the things that were burnt in
the Quad—why, there was a bit in the papers about that. Well, you’ll find,
madam, they all happened since a certain person came into the college.”

“What person?” said Harriet sternly.
“One of these learned ladies, madam. Well, perhaps I’d better not say

anything more about that. You write detective books, don’t you, madam?
Well, you’ll find something in that lady’s past, you may be sure of it. At
least, that’s what a good many people are saying. And it isn’t a nice thing
for anybody to be in the same place with a woman like that.”

careful how you spread about a tale of that kind. You’d better run along
back to the Hall, now; I expect they’ll be needing you.”

she was the “learned lady” whose arrival had coincided with the beginning
of the disturbances— coincided more exactly than Annie could know,
unless she too had seen that drawing in the quad at the Gaudy. A curious
woman, Miss de Vine, and undoubtedly with a varied experience behind
those disconcerting eyes. But Harriet was inclined to like her, and she

certainly did not look mad in the way that the “Poison-Pen” was mad;
though it would not be surprising to learn that she had a streak of fanaticism
somewhere. What, by the way, had she been doing the previous night? She
had rooms at the moment in Queen Elizabeth; there was probably little
likelihood of proving an alibi for her now. Miss de Vine—well, she would
have to be put on the same footing as everybody else.

The opening of the Library took place without a hitch. The Chancellor

unlocked the main door with the plated key, unaware that the same key had
opened it, under curious circumstances, the night before. Harriet watched
carefully the faces of the assembled dons and scouts; none of them showed
any sign of surprise, anger or disappointment at the decorous appearance of
the Library. Miss Hudson was present, looking cheerfully unconcerned;
Miss Cattermole, too, was there. She looked as though she had been crying;
and Harriet noticed that she stood in a corner by herself and talked to
nobody until, at the conclusion of the ceremony, a dark girl in spectacles
made her way through the crowd to her and they walked away together.

Later in the day, Harriet went to the Warden to make her promised

report. She pointed out the difficulty of dealing with an outbreak like that of
the previous night single-handed. A careful patrol of the quads and passages
by a number of helpers would probably have resulted in the capture of the
culprit; and the whole of the suspects could in any case have been checked
up at an early moment. She strongly advised enlisting some women from
Miss Climpson’s Agency, the nature of which she explained.

“I see the point,” replied the Warden; “but I find that at least two

members of the Senior Common Room feel very strong objections to that
course of action.”

“I know,” said Harriet. “Miss Allison and Miss Barton. Why?”

“that the matter presents certain difficulties. What would the students think
of these strangers prowling about the college at night? They will wonder
why police duties cannot be undertaken by ourselves, and we can hardly
inform them that we ourselves are particularly under suspicion. And to
perform such duties as you suggest, properly, quite a large number would be
required—if all the strategic points are to be held. Then these persons
would be quite ignorant of the conditions of college life, and might easily
make unfortunate mistakes by following and questioning the wrong people.
I do not see how we could avoid a very unpleasant scandal and some
complaints.”

“I see all that, Warden. But all the same, that is the quickest solution.”
The Warden bent her head over a handsome piece of tapestry-work on

which she was engaged.

whole situation is undesirable. I quite agree with you.” She looked up. “I
suppose, Miss Vane, you could not yourself spare the time to assist us?”

going to be very difficult. If there were only one or two people who were
exonerated without a shadow of doubt, it would be very much easier.”

“Miss Barton assisted you very ably last night.”
“Yes,” said Harriet; “but—how shall I put it? If I were writing a story

about this, the person first on the spot would be the first person to be
suspected.”

needle deliberately.

“Will you explain that, please?”
Harriet explained carefully.

Now, about this student, Miss Hudson. Her explanation does not seem to be
satisfactory. She could not possibly have expected to get food from the
Buttery at that hour; and in fact, she did not.”

“No,” said Harriet; “but I know quite well that in my day it wasn’t too

difficult to get round the right side of the Head Scout to leave the hatch
open all night. Then, if one had a late essay or anything and felt hungry, one
went down and got what one wanted.”

“Dear me,” said the Warden.
“We were always quite honourable about it,” said Harriet, “and entered

it all on the slate, so that it figured in our battles at the end of term.
Though,” she added thoughtfully, “there were some items of cold meat and
dripping that must have been camouflaged a bit. Still—I think Miss
Hudson’s explanation will pass muster.”

“Actually, the hatch was locked.”
“Actually, it was. As a matter of fact, I have seen Carrie, and she

assures me that it was locked at 10:30 last night as usual. She admits that
Miss Hudson asked her to leave it open, but says she didn’t do so, because,
only last night, the Bursar had given special instructions about the locking
of the hatch and Buttery. That would be after the meeting, no doubt. She
also says she has been more particular this term than she used to be,
because of a little trouble there was over the same thing last term.”

rather a lively young woman, however; so it may be as well to keep an eye
on her. She is very able; but her antecedents are not particularly refined, and
I dare say, it is possible that she might look upon even the disagreeable
expressions found in the—er—the communications in the light of a joke. I

tell you this, not to create any prejudice against the girl, but merely for
whatever evidential value it may possess.”

outside help, I suggest that I should stay in College for a week or so,
ostensibly to help Miss Lydgate with her book and to do some research on
my own account in Bodley. I could then make a few more investigations. If
nothing decisive results by the end of the term, I really think the question of
engaging professionals will have to be faced.”

exceedingly grateful to you.”

Members do not approve of me.”

“That may make it a little more difficult. But if you are ready to put up

with that unpleasantness in the interests of the College, it can only increase
our sense of gratitude. I cannot too strongly emphasize how exceedingly
important it is to avoid publicity. Nothing is more prejudicial to the College
in particular and to University women in general than spiteful and ill-
informed gossip in the press. The students, so far, seem to have been very
loyal. If any of them had been indiscreet we should certainly have heard of
it by now.”

“How about Miss Flaxman’s young man at New College?”
“Both he and Miss Flaxman have behaved quite well. At first,

naturally, it was taken to be a purely personal matter. When the situation
developed, I spoke to Miss Flaxman, and received her assurance that she
and her fiancé would keep the whole thing to themselves until it could be
properly cleared up.”

left on at night. It is difficult enough to patrol a large set of buildings in the
light: in the dark, it is impossible.”

about it.”

content.

CHAPTER VII

O my deare Cloris be not sad,
Nor with these Furies daunted,

But let these female fooles be mad,

With Hellish pride inchanted;

Let not thy noble thoughts descend

So low as their affections,

Whom neither counsell can amend,

Nor yet the Gods corrections.

MICHAEL DRAYTON

It was a matter of mild public interest at Shrewsbury College that Miss
Harriet Vane, the well-known detective novelist, was spending a couple of
weeks in College, while engaged in research at the Bodleian upon the life
and works of Sheridan Le Fanu. The excuse was good enough; Harriet
really was gathering material, in a leisurely way, for a study of Le Fanu,
though the Bodleian was not, perhaps, the ideal source for it. But there must
be some reason given for her presence, and Oxford is willing enough to
believe that the Bodleian is the hub of the scholar’s universe. She was able
to find enough references among the Periodical Publications to justify an
optimistic answer to kindly inquiries about her progress; and if, in fact, she
snoozed a good deal in the arms of Duke Humphrey by day, to make up for
those hours of the night spent in snooping about the corridors, she was
probably not the only person in Oxford to find the atmosphere of old leather
and central heating favorable to slumber.

among Miss Lydgate’s chaotic proofs. The introduction was re-written, and
the obliterated passages restored, from the author’s capacious memory; the
disfigured pages were replaced from fresh proof-sheets; fifty-nine errors
and obscurities in the cross-references were eliminated; the rejoinder to Mr.
Elkbottom was incorporated in the text and made more vigorous and
conclusive; and the authorities at the Press began to speak quite hopefully
about the date of publication.

Whether because Harriet’s night prowlings, or because the mere

knowledge that the circle of suspects was so greatly narrowed, had
intimidated the Poison-Pen, or from whatever cause, there were few
outbreaks during the next few days. One tiresome episode was the complete
stopping-up of the lavatory basin drain in the S.C.R. cloak-room. This was
found to be due to some torn fragments of material, which had been
rammed firmly down through the grid with the help of a fine rod, and
which, when the plumber had got them out, proved to be the remains of a
pair of fabric gloves, stained with brown paint and quite unidentifiable as
anybody’s property. Another was the noisy emergence of the missing
Library keys from the interior of a roll of photographs which Miss Pyke had
left for half an hour in one of the lecture-rooms before using them to
illustrate some remarks about the Parthenon Frieze. Neither of these
episodes led to any discovery.

and impersonal respect for a person’s mission in life which the scholarly
tradition imposes. It was clear to them that, once established as the official
investigator, she must be allowed to investigate without interference. Nor
did they hasten to her with protestations of innocence or cries of
indignation. They treated the situation with a fine detachment, making little

reference to it, and confining the conversation in Common Room to matters
of general and University interest. In solemn and ritual order, they invited
her to consume sherry or coffee in their rooms, and refrained from comment
upon one another. Miss Barton, indeed, went out of her way to invite
Harriet’s opinions upon Women in the Modern State and to consult her on
the subject of conditions in Germany. It is true that she flatly disagreed with
many of the opinions expressed, but only objectively and without personal
rancor; the vexed subject of the amateur’s right to investigate crimes was
decently shelved. Miss Hillyard also, setting aside animosity, took pains to
interrogate Harriet about the technical aspect of such historical crimes as
the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey and the alleged poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury by the Countess of Essex. Such overtures might, of
course, be policy; but Harriet was inclined to attribute them to a careful
instinct for propriety.

With Miss de Vine she had many interesting conversations. The

Fellow’s personality attracted and puzzled her very much. More than with
any other of the dons, she felt that with Miss de Vine the devotion to the
intellectual life was the result, not of the untroubled following of a natural
or acquired bias, but of a powerful spiritual call, over-riding other possible
tendencies and desires. She felt inquisitive enough, without any prompting,
about Miss de Vine’s past life; but inquiry was difficult, and she always
emerged from an encounter with the feeling that she had told more than she
had learnt. She could guess at a history of conflict; but she found it difficult
to believe that Miss de Vine was unaware of her own repressions or unable
to control them.

With a view to establishing friendly relations with the Junior Common

perilous work. To the unfortunate case in which she had herself figured as
the suspected party she naturally made no allusion; nor in the ensuing
discussion was anybody so tactless as to mention it. The Wilvercombe
murder was a different matter. There was no obvious reason why she should
not tell the students about that, and it seemed unkind to deprive them of a
legitimate thrill on the purely personal grounds that it was a bore to have to
mention Peter Wimsey in every second sentence. Her exposition, though
perhaps erring slightly on the dry and academic side, was received with
hearty applause, and at the end of the meeting the Senior Student, one Miss
Millbanks, invited her to coffee.

with a good deal of taste. She was a tall, elegant girl, obviously well-to-do,
much better dressed than the majority of the students, and carrying her
intellectual attainments easily. She held a minor scholarship without
emoluments, declaring publicly that she was only a scholar because she
would not be seen dead in the ridiculous short gown of a commoner. As
alternatives to coffee, she offered Harriet the choice of madeira or a
cocktail, politely regretting that the inadequacy of college arrangements
made it impossible to provide ice for the shaker. Harriet, who disliked
cocktails after dinner, and had consumed madeira and sherry on an almost
wearisome number of occasions since her arrival in Oxford, accepted the
coffee, and chuckled as cups and glasses were filled. Miss Millbanks
inquired courteously what the joke was.

the Morning Star that ‘undergraduettes,’ in the journalist’s disgusting
phrase, lived entirely on cocoa.”

“Journalists,” said Miss Millbanks, condescendingly, “are always

Fowler?”

“Oh, yes,” said Miss Fowler. She was a dark, thick-set Third Year,

dressed in a very grubby sweater which, as she had previously explained,
she had not had time to change, having been afflicted with an essay up to
the moment of attending Harriet’s talk. “Yes, I’ve seen it in dons’ rooms.
Occasionally. But I’ve always looked on that as a kind of infantilism.”

les beaux jours que ce siècle de fer. And so on.”

an eager, scornful face, and made no apology for her sweater, apparently
thinking such matters beneath her notice.

“But they are oh! so tender to the failings of others,” said Miss

Millbanks. “Miss Layton was ‘changed’ once, but she has now changed
back. It was good while it lasted.”

Miss Layton, curled on a pouffe by the fire, lifted a wicked little heart-

shaped face alight with mischief.

Especially confessing in public the evil, evil thoughts I had had about that
woman Flaxman.”

and she was, as Harriet presently discovered, considered to be a safe
History First. “She’s setting the whole Second Year by the ears. I don’t like
her influence at all. And if you ask me, there’s something very wrong with
Cattermole. Goodness knows, I don’t want any of this business of being my
brother’s keeper—we had quite enough of that at school—but it’ll be
awkward if Cattermole is driven into doing something drastic. As Senior
Student, Lilian, don’t you think you could do something about it?”

forbid Flaxman to make people’s lives a burden to them. If I could, I
wouldn’t. You don’t surely expect me to exercise authority? It’s bad enough
hounding people to College Meetings. The S.C.R. don’t understand our sad
lack of enthusiasm.”

“In their day,” said Harriet, “I think people had a passion for meetings

and organization.”

discuss things a great deal, and are indignant about the Proctorial Rules for
Mixed Parties. But our enthusiasm for internal affairs is more restrained.”

laisser-aller side of it. If there’s a big blowup, it won’t pay anybody.”

ragging affair? By the way, Miss Vane, I suppose you have heard about the
College Mystery.”

“I’ve heard something,” replied Harriet, cautiously. “It seems to be all

very tiresome.”

“I say we ought to do a spot of private investigation ourselves. The S.C.R.
don’t seem to be making much progress.”

“Well, the last effort at investigation wasn’t very satisfactory,” said

Miss Millbanks.

“Meaning Cattermole? I don’t believe it’s Cattermole. She’s too

obvious. And she hasn’t the guts. She could and does make an ass of
herself, but she wouldn’t go about it so secretively.”

somebody wrote Flaxman an offensive letter on the occasion of her swiping

Cattermole’s young man. Cattermole was the obvious suspect then, but why
should she do all these other things?”

is always innocent.”

Harriet laughed; and Miss Millbanks said:
“Yes; but I do think Cattermole is getting to the stage when she’d do

almost anything to attract attention.”

should she write letters to me?”

“Did you have one?”
“Yes; but it was only a kind of wish that I should plough in Schools.

The usual silly thing made of pasted-up letters. I burnt it, and took
Cattermole in to dinner on the strength of it.”

“Good for you,” said Miss Fowler.
“I had one too,” said Miss Layton. “A beauty—about there being a

reward in hell for women who went my way. So, acting on the suggestion
given, I forwarded it to my future address by way of the fireplace.”

mind the letters so much. It’s the rags, and the writing on the wall. If any
snoopy person from outside happened to get hold of it, there’d be a public
stink, and that would be a bore. I don’t pretend to much public spirit, but I
admit to some. We don’t want to get the whole College gated by way of
reprisals. And I’d rather not have it said that we were living in a
madhouse.”

“Too shame-making,” agreed Miss Layton; “though of course, you

may get an isolated queer specimen anywhere.”

“There are some oddities in the First Year all right,” said Miss Fowler.

“Why is it that every year seems to get shriller and scrubbier than the last?”

“They always did,” said Harriet.
“Yes,” said Miss Haydock, “I expect the Third Year said the same

about us when we first came up. But it’s a fact that we had none of this
trouble before we had this bunch of freshers in.”

Harriet did not contradict this, not wishing to focus suspicion on either

the S.C.R. or on the unfortunate Cattermole who (as everybody would
remember) was up during the Gaudy, waging simultaneous war against
despised love and Responsions. She did ask, however, whether any
suspicion had fallen upon other students besides Miss Cattermole.

course—she came-up from school with a bit of a reputation for ragging, but
in my opinion she’s quite sound. I should call the whole of our year pretty
sound; And Cattermole really has only herself to thank. I mean, she’s
asking for trouble.”

“How?” asked Harriet.
“Various ways,” said Miss Millbanks, with a caution which suggested

that Harriet was too much in the confidence of the S.C.R. to be trusted with
details. “She is rather inclined to break rules for the sake of it—which is all
right if you get a kick out of it; but she doesn’t.”

to show young what’s-his-name—Farringdon—he isn’t the only pebble on
the beach. All very well. But she’s being a bit blatant. She’s simply
pursuing that lad Pomfret.”

“That fair-faced goop at Queen’s?” said Miss Fowler. “Well, she’s

going to be unlucky again, because Flaxman is steadily hauling him off.”

men alone? She’s bagged Farringdon; I do think she might leave Pomfret
for Cattermole.”

“She hates to leave anybody anything,” said Miss Layton.
“I hope,” said Miss Millbanks, “she has not been trying to collect your

Geoffrey.”

grin. “Geoffrey’s sound—yes, darlings, definitely sound—but I’m taking no
chances. Last time we had him to tea in the J.C.R., Flaxman came
undulating in—so sorry, she had no idea anybody was there, and she’d left a
book behind. With the Engaged Label on the door as large as life. I did not
introduce Geoffrey.”

“Did he want you to?” inquired Miss Haydock.
“Asked who she was. I said she was the Templeton Scholar and the

world’s heavyweight in the way of learning. That put him off.”

“What’ll Geoffrey do when you pull off your First, my child?”

demanded Miss Haydock.

make him believe I only did it by looking fragile and pathetic at the viva.”

And Miss Layton did, indeed, contrive to look fragile and pathetic, and

anything but learned. Nevertheless, on inquiry from Miss Lydgate, Harriet
discovered that she was an exceptionally well-fancied favorite for the
English School, and was taking, of all things, a Language Special. If the dry
bones of Philology could be made to live by Miss Layton, then she was a
very dark horse indeed. Harriet felt a respect for her brains; so unexpected a
personality might be capable of anything.

So much for Third-Year opinion. Harriet’s first personal encounter

with the Second Year was more dramatic.

The College had been so quiet for the last week that Harriet gave

herself a holiday from police-duty and went to a private dance given by a
contemporary of her own, who had married and settled in North Oxford.

Returning between twelve and one, she garaged the car in the Dean’s
private garage, let herself quietly through the grille dividing the Traffic
Entrance from the rest of College and began to cross the Old Quad towards
Tudor. The weather had turned finer, and there was a pale glimmer of
cloudy moonlight. Against that glimmer, Harriet, skirting the corner of
Burleigh Building, observed something humped and strange about the
outline of the eastern wall, close to where the Principal’s private postern led
out into St. Cross Road. It seemed clear that here, in the words of the old
song, was “a man where nae man should be.”

If she shouted at him, he would drop over on the outer side and be lost.

She had the key of the postern with her—having been trusted with a
complete set of keys for patrol purposes. Pulling her black evening cloak
about her face and stepping softly, Harriet ran quickly down the grass path
between the Warden’s House and the Fellows’ Garden, let herself silently
out into St. Cross Road and stood beneath the wall. As she emerged, a
second dark form stepped out from the shadows and said urgently, “Oy!”

scrambled down in a hurry. His friend made off at a smart pace, but the
wall-climber seemed to have damaged himself in his descent, and made but
poor speed. Harriet, who was nimble enough, for all she was over nine
years down from Oxford, gave chase and came up with him a few yards
from the corner of Jowett Walk. The accomplice, now well away, looked
back, hesitating.

remarked with a sheepish grin, “Well, it’s a fair cop. I’ve bust my ankle or
something.”

and, at the moment, disturbed by an expression of mingled apprehension
and amusement. He was a very tall and very large young man; but Harriet
had clasped him in a wiry grip that he could scarcely shake off without
hurting her, and he showed no disposition to use violence.

know, and all that. Hang my cap on the tiptop branch of the Shrewsbury
beeches. My friend there was the witness. I seem to have lost, don’t I?”

gown, if it comes to that? And, sir, your name and college?”

and what are yours?”

away, such a question is flattering. Harriet laughed.

“My dear young man, do you take me for an undergraduate?”
“A don—a female don, God help us!” exclaimed the young man,

whose spirits appeared to be sustained, though not unduly exalted, by
spirituous liquors.

“Well?” said Harriet.
“I don’t believe it,” said the young man, scanning her face as closely

as he could in the feeble light. “Not possible. Too young. Too charming.
Too much sense of humor.”

my lad. And no sense of humor at all about this intrusion.”

“I say,” said the young man, “I’m really most frightfully sorry. Mere

light-heartedness and all that kind of thing. Honestly, we weren’t doing any
harm. Quite definitely not. I mean, we were just winning the bet and going
away quietly. I say, do be a sport. I mean, you’re not the Warden or the
Dean or anything. I know them. Couldn’t you overlook it?”

“It’s all very well,” said Harriet. “But we can’t have this kind of thing.

It doesn’t do. You must see that it doesn’t do.

silly thing to do. Open to misinterpretation.” He winced, and drew up one
leg to rub his injured ankle. “But when you do see a tempting bit of wall
like that—”

me, will you?” She led him firmly, despite his protests, towards the postern.
“Oh, I see, yes. A brick or two out of that buttress. Excellent foothold.
You’d almost think they’d been knocked out on purpose, wouldn’t you?
And a handy tree in the Fellows’ Garden. The Bursar will have to see to it.
Are you well acquainted with that buttress, young man?”

weren’t—we weren’t calling on anybody or anything of that kind, you
know, if you know what I mean.”

“I hope not,” said Harriet.
“No, we were all on our own,” explained the young man, eagerly.

“Nobody else involved. Good Heavens, no. And, look here, I’ve bust my
ankle and we shall be gated anyhow, and, dear, kind lady—”

The young man’s face became filled with agonized alarm.

“What’s that?” asked Harriet.
“I really couldn’t say,” said the young man.
The groan was repeated. Harriet grasped the undergraduate tightly by

the arm and led him along to the postern.

mustn’t—please don’t think—”

“I’m going to see what’s the matter,” said Harriet.

the gate. Under the wall, just beneath the spot where the young man had
been perched, lay a huddled figure, which was apparently suffering acute
internal agonies of some kind.

frightfully sorry about this. I’m afraid we were a bit thoughtless. I mean, we
didn’t notice. I mean, I’m afraid she isn’t very well, and we didn’t notice
how it was, you know.”

“The girl’s drunk,” said Harriet, uncompromisingly.
She had, in the bad old days, seen too many young poets similarly

afflicted to make any mistake about the symptoms.

will mix ’em so strong. But look here, honestly, there’s no harm done, and I
mean—”

Lodgings.”

going to be sporting?”

“That depends,” said Harriet. “As a matter of fact, you’ve been

extraordinarily lucky. I’m not one of the dons. I’m only staying in College.
So I’m a free agent.”

“Bless you!” exclaimed the young man, fervently.
“Don’t be in a hurry. You’ll have to tell me about this. Who’s the girl,

by the way?”

The patient here gave another groan.
“Oh, dear!” said the undergraduate.
“Don’t worry,” said Harriet. “She’ll be sick in a minute.” She walked

gentlemanly reticence. I know her. Her name’s Cattermole. What’s yours?”

“My name’s Pomfret—of Queen’s.”
“Ah!” said Harriet.
“We threw a party round in my friend’s rooms,” explained Mr.

Pomfret. “At least, it started as a meeting, but it ended as a party. Nothing
wrong whatever. Miss Cattermole came along for a joke. All clean fun.
Only there were a lot of us, and what with one thing and another we had a
few too many, and then we found Miss Cattermole was rather under the
weather. So we got her collected up, and Rogers and I—”

“Yes, I see,” said Harriet. “Not very creditable, was it?”
“No, it’s rotten,” admitted Mr. Pomfret.
“Had she got leave to attend the meeting? And late leave?”
“I don’t know,” said Mr. Pomfret, disturbed. “I’m afraid—look here!

It’s all rather tiresome. I mean, she doesn’t belong to the Society—”

“What Society?”
“The Society that was meeting. I think she pushed in for a joke.”
“Gate-crashed you? H’m. That probably means no late leave.”
“Sounds serious,” said Mr. Pomfret.
“It’s serious for her,” said Harriet. “You’ll get off with a fine or a

gating, I suppose; but we have to be more particular. It’s a nasty-minded
world, and our rules have to remember that fact.”

“I know,” said Mr. Pomfret. “As a matter of fact we were dashed

worried. We had a devil of a job getting her along,” he burst out
confidentially. “Fortunately it was only from this end of Long Wall. Phew!”

He pulled out his handkerchief and wiped his forehead.
“Anyhow,” he went on, “I’m thankful you aren’t a don.”
“That’s all very well,” said Harriet austerely; “but I’m a Senior

thing one wants.”

She turned a cold glance on the unfortunate Miss Cattermole, to whom

the worst was happening.

“I’m sure we didn’t want it,” said Mr. Pomfret, averting his eyes; “but

what could we do? It’s no good trying to corrupt your porter,” he added
ingenuously; “it’s been tried.”

“Indeed?” said Harriet. “No; you wouldn’t get much change out of

Padgett. Was anybody else there from Shrewsbury?”

“Yes—Miss Flaxman and Miss Blake. But they had ordinary leave to

come and went off at about eleven. So they’re all right.”

“They ought to have taken Miss Cattermole with them.”
“Of course,” said Mr. Pomfret. He looked gloomier than ever.

Obviously, thought Harriet, Miss Flaxman would not mind at all if Miss
Cattermole got into trouble. Miss Blake’s motives were more obscure; but
she was probably only weak-minded. Harriet was fired with a quite
unscrupulous determination that Miss Cattermole should not get into
trouble if she could prevent it. She went across to the limp form and hauled
it to its feet. Miss Cattermole groaned dismally. “She’ll do now,” said
Harriet. “I wonder where the little fool’s room is. Do you know?”

“Well, as a matter of fact, I do,” replied Mr. Pomfret. “Sounds bad, but

there—people do show people their rooms, you know, all regulations
notwithstanding and all that. It’s somewhere over there, through that
archway.”

He waved a vague hand towards the New Quad at the other end of

nowhere.

“Heavens!” said Harriet, “it would be. I’m afraid you’ll have to give

me a hand with her. She’s a bit too much for me, and she can’t stay here in

the damp. If anybody sees us, you’ll have to go through with it. How’s the
ankle?”

a bit. I say, you’re being very decent.”

speeches.”

Miss Cattermole was a thickly-built young woman, and no

inconsiderable weight. She had also reached the stage of complete inertia.
For Harriet, hampered by high-heeled shoes, and to Mr., Pomfret, afflicted
with a game ankle, the progress across the quads was anything but
triumphal. It was also rather noisy, what with the squeak of stone and gravel
under their feet, and the grunts and shufflings of the limp figure between
them. At every moment, Harriet expected to hear a window thrust up, or to
see the shape of an agitated don come rushing out to demand some
explanation of Mr. Pomfret’s presence at that early hour of the morning. It
was with very great relief that she at last found the right doorway and
propelled Miss Cattermole’s helpless form through it.

“What next?” inquired Mr. Pomfret in a hoarse whisper.
“I must let you out. I don’t know where her room is, but I can’t have

you wandering all over College. Wait a minute. We’ll deposit her in the
nearest bathroom. Here you are. Round the corner. Easy does it.”

Mr. Pomfret again bent obligingly to the task.
“There!” said Harriet. She laid Miss Cattermole on her back on the

bathroom floor, took the key from the lock and came out, securing the door
behind her. “She must stay there for the moment. Now we’ll get rid of you.
I don’t think anybody saw us. If we’re met on the way back, you were at
Mrs. Hemans’ dance and saw me home. Get that? It’s not very convincing,

because you ought not to have done any such thing, but it’s better than the
truth.”

Pomfret. “I’d have danced every dance with you and all the extras. Do you
mind telling me who you are?”

soon. I’m not considering your welfare particularly. Do you know Miss
Cattermole well?”

people and that sort of thing. As a matter of fact, she used to be engaged to
an old schoolfellow of mine—New College man—only that fell through
and all that. No affair of mine; but you know how it is. One knows people
and one kind of goes on knowing them. And there you are.”

Miss Cattermole into a row—”

“I knew you were a sport!” cried Mr. Pomfret.
“(Don’t shout)—but this sort of thing cannot go on. There must be no

more late parties and no more climbing over walls. You understand. Not
with anybody. It’s not fair. If I go to the Dean with this story, nothing much
will happen to you, but Miss Cattermole will be lucky if she’s not sent
down. For God’s sake, stop being an ass. There are much better ways of
enjoying Oxford than fooling round at midnight with the women students.”

“I know there are. I think it’s all rather rot, really.”
“Then why do it?”
“I don’t know. Why does one do idiotic things?”
“Why?” said Harriet. They were passing the end of the Chapel, and

Harriet stood still to give emphasis to what she was saying. “I’ll tell you
why, Mr. Pomfret. Because you haven’t the guts to say No when somebody

asks you to be a sport. That tom-fool word has got more people in trouble
than all the rest of the dictionary put together. If it’s sporting to encourage
girls to break rules and drink more than they can carry and get themselves
into a mess on your account, then I’d stop being a sport and try being a
gentleman.”

“Oh, I say,” said Mr. Pomfret, hurt.
“I mean it,” said Harriet.
“Well, I see your point,” said Mr. Pomfret, shifting his feet uneasily.

“I’ll do my best about it. You’ve been dashed spor—I mean you’ve behaved
like a perfect gentleman about all this—” he grinned—“and I’ll try to—
good Lord! here’s somebody coming.”

Queen Elizabeth was approaching rapidly.

On an impulse, Harriet stepped back and pushed open the Chapel door.
“Get in,” she said.
Mr. Pomfret slipped hastily in behind her. Harriet shut the door on him

and stood quietly in front of it. The footsteps came nearer, came opposite
the porch and stopped suddenly. The night-walker uttered a little squeak.

“Ooh!”
“What is it?” said Harriet.
“Oh, miss, it’s you! You gave me such a start. Did you see anything?”
“See what? Who is it, by the way?”
“Emily, miss. I sleep in the New Quad, miss, and I woke up, and I

made sure I heard a man’s voice in the quadrangle, and I looked out and
there he was, miss, as plain as plain, coming this way with one of the young
ladies. So I slipped on my slippers, miss …”

“Damn!” said Harriet to herself. Better tell part of the truth, though.

wanted very much to see the New Quad by moonlight. So we just walked
across and back again.”

(A poor excuse, but probably less suspicious than a flat denial.)
“Oh, I see, miss. I beg your pardon. But I get that nervous with one

thing and another. And it’s unusual, if you’ll excuse me saying so, miss …”

New Quad, so that the scout was bound to follow her. “It was stupid of me
not to think that it might disturb people. I’ll mention it to the Dean in the
morning. You did quite right to come down.”

particular. And with all these queer things happening …”

thoughtless. The gentleman has gone now, so you won’t get woken up
again.”

they have said a thing till they have said it three times over. She paused at
the foot of her staircase to say everything again. Harriet listened
impatiently, thinking of Mr. Pomfret, fuming in the Chapel. At last she got
rid of the scout and turned back.

Complicated, thought Harriet; silly situation, like a farce. Emily thinks

she’s caught a student: I think I’ve caught a poltergeist. We catch each
other. Young Pomfret parked in the Chapel. He thinks I’m kindly shielding
him and Cattermole. Having carefully hidden Pomfret, I have to admit he
was there. But if Emily had been the Poltergeist—and perhaps she is—then
I couldn’t have had Pomfret helping to chase her. This kind of sleuthing is
very confusion-making.

She pushed open the Chapel door. The porch was empty.

gone inside, though.”

figure faintly outlined against the pale oak of the stalls. Then, with a
sudden, violent shock, she became aware of a second dark figure, poised
strangely, it seemed, in midair.

the flash of a white shirt-front as Mr. Pomfret turned. “It’s only me. What’s
that?”

beam showed a dismal shape dangling from the canopy above the stalls. It
was swinging a little to and fro and turning slowly as it swung. Harriet
darted forward.

Mr. Pomfret.

and bolster hitched by a thin cord to one of the terminals with which the
architect had decorated the canopies.

“Gave me quite a turn, as my aunt would say. Did you catch the young
woman?”

“No. Was she in here?”
“Oh, definitely,” said Mr. Pomfret. “Thought I’d retreat a bit further,

you know. So in I came. Then I saw that. So I came along to investigate and
heard somebody scrambling out by the other door—over there.”

door led into the vestry. Harriet hastened to look. The door was open, and

the outer vestry door, though shut, had been unlocked from within. She
peered out. All was quiet.

meet the lady. She must have got away while I was taking Emily back to the
New Quad. Just my luck!” She muttered the last exclamation under her
breath. It was really sickening to have had the Poltergeist under her hand
like that, and to have been distracted by Emily. She went up to the dummy
again, and saw that a paper was pinned to its middle by the bread-knife.

though somebody had a grouse against your dons.”

“Silly young fools!” said Harriet. “Very convincing bit of work,

though, come to look at it. If we hadn’t found it first, it would have created
quite a sensation when we all filed into prayers. A little investigation is
indicated. Well, now, it’s time you went quietly home and were gated for
the good of your soul.”

She led him down to the postern and let him out.
“By the way, Mr. Pomfret, I’d be obliged if you didn’t mention this rag

to anybody. It’s not in the best of taste. One good turn deserves another.”

round tomorrow—at least, it’s this morning, isn’t it?—and make inquiries
and all that? Only proper, you know. When shall you be in? Please!”

what I shall be doing in the afternoon. But you can always ask at the
Lodge.”

“Oh, I may? That’s top-hole. I’ll call—and if you’re not there I’ll leave

a note. I mean, you must come round and have tea or a cocktail or
something. And I do honestly promise it shan’t happen again, if I can help
it.”

friend’s place?”

“Oh—about half-past nine, I think. Couldn’t be sure. Why?”
“I only wondered whether her initials were in the porter’s book. But

I’ll see to it. Good-night.”

“Good-night,” said Mr. Pomfret, “and thanks frightfully.”

Harriet locked the postern behind him and returned across the

quadrangle, feeling that, Out of all this absurd tiresomeness, something had
been most definitely gained. The dummy could scarcely have been put in
position before 9:30; so that Miss Cattermole, through sheer folly, had
contrived to give herself a cast-iron alibi. Harriet was so grateful to her for
advancing the inquiry by even this small step that she determined the girl
should, if possible, be let off the consequences of her escapade.

This reminded her that Miss Cattermole still lay on the bathroom floor,

waiting to be dealt with. It would be awkward if she had come to her senses
in the interval and started to make a noise. But on reaching the New Quad
and unlocking the door, Harriet found her prisoner in the somnolent stage of
her rake’s progress. A little research along the corridors revealed that Miss
Cattermole slept oh the first floor. Harriet opened the door of the room, and
as she did so the door next it opened also, and a head popped out.

“Is that you, Cattermole?” whispered the head. “Oh, I’m sorry.” It

popped in again.

Harriet recognized the girl who had gone up and spoken to Miss

Cattermole after the Opening of the Library. She went to her door, which
bore the name of “C. I. Briggs,” and knocked gently. The head reappeared.

“Were you expecting to see Miss Cattermole come in?”
“Well,” said Miss Briggs, “I heard somebody at her door—oh! it’s

Miss Vane, isn’t it?”

“Yes. What made you sit up and wait for Miss Cattermole?”
Miss Briggs, who was wearing a woolly coat over her pyjamas, looked

a little alarmed.

“I had some work to do. I was sitting up in any case. Why?”
Harriet looked at the girl. She was short and sturdily built, with a plain,

strong, sensible face. She appeared trustworthy.

come and help me upstairs with her. She’s down in the bathroom. I found
her being helped over the wall by a young man, and she’s rather under the
weather.”

“Oh, dear!” said Miss Briggs. “Tight?”
“I’m afraid so.”
“She is a fool,” said Miss Briggs. “I knew there’d be trouble some day.

All right, I’ll come.”

Between them they lugged Miss Cattermole up the noisy, polished

stairs and dumped her upon her bed. In grim silence they undressed her and
put her between the sheets.

explanation wouldn’t be a bad idea. How about it?”

“Come into my room,” said Miss Briggs. “Would you like any hot

milk or Ovaltine or coffee, or anything?”

pantry opposite, came in, stirred up the fire and sat down on a pouffe.

“Please tell me,” said Miss Briggs, “what has happened.”
Harriet told her, omitting the names of the gentlemen concerned. But

Miss Briggs promptly supplied the omission.

He always gets left with the baby. After all, what is the lad to do, if people

go chasing him?”

“It’s awkward,” said Harriet. “I mean, you need some knowledge of

the world to get out of it gracefully. Does the girl really care for him?”

“No,” said Miss Briggs. “Not really. She just wants somebody or

something. You know. She got a nasty knock when her engagement was
broken. You see, she and Lionel Farringdon had been childhood friends and
so on, and it was all settled before she came up. Then Farringdon got
collared by our Miss Flaxman, and there was a frightful bust-up. And there
were complications. And Violet Cattermole has gone all unnerved.”

of my own—that kind of thing.”

complex, or something. One must do idiotic things and assert one’s self.
Am I making myself clear?”

to make one’s self out no end of a little devil …Has this kind of thing
happened often?”

keep Violet reasonable, but what’s the good of preaching to people? When
they get into that worked-up state you might as well talk to the man in the
moon. And though it’s very tiresome for young Pomfret, he’s awfully
decent and safe. If he were strong-minded, of course he’d get out of it. But
I’m rather thankful he’s not, because, if it wasn’t for him it might be some
frightful tick or other.”

“Is anything likely to come of it?”
“Marriage, do you mean? No-o. I think he has enough sense of self-

protection to avoid that. And besides—Look here, Miss Vane, it really is an
awful shame. Miss Flaxman simply cannot leave anybody alone, and she’s

trying to get Pomfret away too, though she doesn’t want him. If only she’d
leave poor Violet alone, the whole thing would probably work itself out
quite quietly. Mind you, I’m very fond of Violet. She’s a decent sort, and
she’d be absolutely all right with the right kind of man. She’s no business to
be up at Oxford at all, really. A nice domestic life with a man to be devoted
to is what she really wants. But he’d have to be a solid, decided kind of
man, and frightfully affectionate in a firm kind of way. But not Reggie
Pomfret, who is a chivalrous young idiot.”

Miss Briggs poked the fire savagely.
“Well,” said Harriet, “something has got to be done about all this. I

don’t want to go to the Dean, but—”

“Of course, something must be done,” said Miss Briggs. “It’s

extraordinarily lucky it should have been you who spotted it and not one of
the dons. I’ve been almost wishing that something might happen. I’ve been
frightfully worried about it. It isn’t the kind of thing I know how to cope
with at all. But I had to stand by Violet more or less—otherwise I should
simply have lost her confidence altogether and goodness knows what stupid
thing she’d have done then.”

“I think you’re quite right,” said Harriet. “But now, perhaps, I can have

a word with her and tell her to mind her step. After all, she has got to give
some guarantee of sensible behavior if I’m not to report her to the Dean. A
spot of benevolent blackmail is indicated, I fancy.”

you. I’ll be thankful to be relieved of the responsibility. It’s all rather
wearing—and it does upset one’s work. After all, work’s what one’s here
for. I’ve got Honor Mods, next term, and it’s frightfully upsetting, never
knowing what’s going to happen next.”

“I expect Miss Cattermole relies on you a lot.”

take such a time, and I’m not awfully good at wrestling with fits of
temperament.”

“It’s not surprising if she goes mad in white linen. It’s more surprising if she
keeps sane and sensible like you. But I agree that you ought to have the
burden taken off your shoulders. Are you the only one?”

“Pretty well. Poor old Violet lost a lot of friends over the uproar.”
“And the business of the anonymous letters?”
“Oh, you’ve heard about that? Well, of course, it wasn’t Violet. That’s

ridiculous. But Flaxman spread the story all over the college, and once
you’ve started an accusation like that, it takes a lot of killing.”

“It does. Well, Miss Briggs, you and I had better get to bed. I’ll come

along and see Miss Cattermole after breakfast. Don’t worry too much. I
dare say this upset will be a blessing in disguise. Well, I’ll be going now.
Can you lend me a strong knife?”

good-night. On her way over, to Tudor, Harriet cut down the dangling
dummy and carried it away with her for scrutiny and action at a later hour.
She felt she badly needed to sleep on the situation.

bed, and dreamed neither of Peter Wimsey nor of anything else.

CHAPTER VIII

Tho marking him with melting eyes

A thrilling throbbe from her hart did aryse,

And interrupted all her other speache

With some old sorowe that made a newe breache:

Seemed shee sawe in the younglings face
The old lineaments of his fathers grace.

EDMUND SPENSER

“The fact remains,” said Miss Pyke, “that I have to lecture at nine. Can
anybody lend me a gown?”

A number of the dons were breakfasting in the S.C.R. dining-room.

Harriet entered in time to hear the request, formulated in a high and rather
indignant tone.

“Have you lost your gown, Miss Pyke?”
“You could have mine with pleasure, Miss Pyke,” said little Miss

Chilperic, mildly, “but I’m afraid it wouldn’t be nearly long enough.”

“It isn’t safe to leave anything in the S.C.R. cloakroom these days,”

said Miss Pyke. “I know it was there after dinner, because I saw it.”

“Sorry,” said Miss Hillyard, “but I’ve got a 9 o’clock lecture myself.”
“You can have mine,” suggested Miss Burrows, “if you can get it back

to me by 10 o’clock.”

“Ask Miss de Vine or Miss Barton,” said the Dean. “They have no

lectures. Or Miss Vane—hers wouldn’t you.”

“Certainly,” said Harriet, carelessly. “Do you want a cap as well?”

lecture; but it would be convenient to know where my property has gone
to.”

“It’s surprising the way things disappear,” said Harriet, helping herself

to scrambled eggs. “People are very thoughtless. Who, by the way, owns a
black semi-evening crêpe de Chine, figured with bunches of red and green
poppies, with a draped cross-over front, deep hip-yoke and flared skirt and
sleeves about three years out of date?”

with dons. “Miss Shaw—you have a very good eye for a frock. Can you
identify it?”

“I might if I saw it,” said Miss Shaw. “I don’t recollect one like it from

your description.”

“Have you found one?” asked the Bursar.
“Another chapter in the mystery?” suggested Miss Barton.
“I’m sure none of my students has one like it,” said Miss Shaw. “They

like to come and show me their frocks. I think it’s a good thing to take an
interest in them.”

“I don’t remember a frock like that in the Senior Common Room,”

said the Bursar.

“Didn’t Miss Wrigley have a black figured crêpe de Chine?” asked

Mrs. Goodwin.”

neck and no hip-yoke. I remember it very well.”

“Can’t you tell us what the mystery is, Miss Vane?” inquired Miss

Lydgate. “Or is it better that you shouldn’t say anything?”

When I came in last night after my dance I—er—went the rounds a bit—”

outside my window. And whispering.”

“Yes—Emily came out and caught me. I think she thought I was the

Practical Joker. Well—I happened to go into the Chapel.”

saying that the culprit had apparently left by the vestry door.

yours, Miss Pyke, and you can have them any time. The bread-knife was
taken from the Hall, presumably, or from here. And the bolster—I can’t say
where they got that.”

lives on the ground floor of Burleigh. It would be easy to nip in and bag her
bolster.”

“Why is Trotman away?” asked Miss Shaw. “She never told me.”
“Father taken ill,” said the Dean. “She went off in a hurry yesterday

afternoon.”

students always come to me with their troubles. It’s rather upsetting, when
you think your pupils value your sympathy—”

“But you were out to tea,” said the Treasurer, practically.
“I put a note in your pigeon-hole,” said the Dean.
“Oh,” said Miss Shaw. “Well, I didn’t see it. I knew nothing about it.

It’s very odd that nobody should have mentioned it.”

“Who did know it?” asked Harriet.
There was a pause; during which everybody had time to think it

strange and improbable that Miss Shaw should riot have received the note
or heard of Miss Trotman’s departure.

“It was mentioned at the High last night, I think,” said Miss Allison.

there.”

together and not sealed in an envelope.

“Well,” said Miss Shaw; “I never saw it.”
“Anybody might have read that and put it back,” said Harriet.
“Yes—including myself, you mean.”
“I didn’t say that, Miss Shaw. Anybody.”
They returned gloomily to the Common Room.
“The—er—the joke was perpetrated between dinnertime, when Miss

Pyke lost her gown, and about a quarter to one, when I found it out,” said
Harriet. “It would be convenient if anybody could produce a water-tight
alibi for the whole of that time. Particularly for the time after 11:15. I
suppose I can find out whether any students had late leave till midnight.
Anybody coming in then might have seen something.”

names of those who came in after nine.”

“That will be a help.”
“In the meantime,” said Miss Pyke, pushing away her plate and rolling

her napkin, “the ordinary duties of the day must be proceeded with. Could I
have my gown—or a gown?”

She went over to Tudor with Harriet, who restored the gown and

displayed the crêpe de Chine frock.

Pyke; “but I cannot pretend to be observant in these matters. It appears to be
made for a slender person of medium height.”

there,” said Harriet, “any more than your gown.”

glance from her sharp, black eyes. “But the owner might provide some clue
to the thief. Would it not—pardon me if I am trespassing upon your
province—would it not be possible to draw some deduction from the name
of the shop where it was bought?”

“Obviously it would have been,” said Harriet; “the tab has been

removed.”

find leisure I will endeavour to provide you with a time-table of my
movements last night. I fear, however, it will scarcely be illuminating. I was
in my room after dinner and in bed by half-past ten.”

and then took out a piece of paper from a drawer. The message upon it was
pasted up in the usual way, and ran: tristius haud illis monstrum nec saevior
ulla pestis et ira deum Stygiis sese extulit undis. Virginei volucrum vultus
foedissima ventris proluvies uncaeque manus et pallida semper ora fame.

“Harpies,” said Harriet aloud. “Harpies. That seems to suggest a train

of thought. But I’m afraid we can’t suspect Emily or any of the scouts of
expressing their feelings in Virgilian hexameters.”

She frowned. Matters were looking rather bad for the Senior Common

Room.

Harriet tapped on Miss Cattermole’s door, regardless of the fact that it

bore a large notice: HEADACHE—DO NOT DISTURB. It was opened by
Miss Briggs, whose brow was anxious, but cleared when she saw who the
visitor was.

“I was afraid it might be the Dean,” said Miss Briggs.
“No,” said Harriet, “so far I have held my hand. How is the patient?”

“Not too good,” said Miss Briggs.
“Ah! ‘His lordship has drunk his bath and gone to bed again.’ That’s

about it, I suppose.” She strode across to the bed and looked down at Miss
Cattermole, who opened her eyes with a groan. They were large, light, hazel
eyes, set in a plump face that ought to have been of a pleasant rose-leaf
pink. A quantity of fluffy brown hair tumbled damply about her brow,
adding to the general impression of an Angora rabbit that had gone on the
loose and was astonished at the result.

“Feeling bloody?” inquired Harriet, with sympathy.
“Horrible,” said Miss Cattermole.
“Serve you right,” said Harriet. “If you must take your drink like a

man, the least you can do is to carry it like a gentleman. It’s a great thing to
know your own limitations.”

Miss Cattermole looked so woebegone that Harriet began to laugh.

“You don’t seem to be a very practised hand at this kind of thing. Look
here; I’ll get you something to pull you together and then I’m going to talk
to you.”

She went out briskly and nearly fell over Mr. Pomfret in the outer

doorway.

makes a noise in the quad and is contrary to regulations.”

Miss Hillyard’s lecture on Constitutional Developments.”

“God help you!”
“And seeing you cross the quad in this direction, I turned in that

direction like the needle to the North. Dark,” said Mr. Pomfret, with
animation, “and true and tender is the North. That’s a quotation. It’s very
nearly the only one I know, so it’s a good thing it fits.”

“It does not fit. I am not feeling tender.”
“Oh! … how’s Miss Cattermole?”
“Bad hang-over. As you might expect.”
“Oh! … sorry … No row, I hope?”
“No.”
“Bless you!” said Mr. Pomfret. “I was lucky too. Friend of mine has a

dashed good window. All quiet on the Western Front. So—look here! I wish
there was something I could do to—”

under his arm and scribbled in it.

“Get that made up at the chemist’s and bring it back.
“I’m damned if I want to go myself and ask for a recipe for hobnailed

liver.”

Mr. Pomfret looked at her with respect.
“Where did you learn that one?” said he.
“Not at Oxford. I may say I have never had occasion to taste it; I hope

it’s nasty. The quicker you can get it made up, the better, by the way.”

“I know, I know,” said Mr. Pomfret, disconsolately. “You’re fed up

with the sight of me, and no wonder. But I do wish you’d come round some
time and meet old Rogers. He’s incredibly penitent. Come and have tea. Or
a drink or something. Come this afternoon. Do. Just to show there’s no ill-
feeling.”

Harriet was opening her mouth to say No, when she looked at Mr.

Pomfret, and her heart softened. He had the appeal of a very young dog of a
very large breed—a kind of amiable absurdity.

“All right,” said Harriet. “I will. Thank you very much.”
Mr. Pomfret exhausted himself in expressions of delight, and, still

act of stepping out, he had to step back to allow the entrance of a tall, dark
student wheeling a bicycle.

“Hullo, Reggie!” cried the young woman, “looking for me?”
“Oh, good morning,” said Mr. Pomfret, rather taken aback. Then,

catching sight of a handsome leonine head over the student’s shoulder, he
added with more assurance, “Hullo, Farringdon!”

fitted him well enough, thought Harriet. He had an arrogant profile, a mass
of close chestnut curls, hot brown eyes and a sulky mouth, and looked less
pleased to see Mr. Pomfret than Mr. Pomfret to see him.

murmured that of course Miss Flaxman was known to her. Miss Flaxman
stared coolly at Harriet and said how much she had enjoyed her detective
talk the other night.

Pomfret. She pulled off her scholar’s gown and stuffed it unceremoniously
into her bicycle-basket. “Care to come? In Leo’s room. Six o’clock. I think
we’ve room for Reggie, haven’t we, Leo?”

“I suppose so,” said Mr. Farringdon, rather ungraciously. “There’ll be

an awful crowd anyway.”

mind Leo, Reggie; he’s mislaid his manners this morning.”

been mislaid, for he replied with more spirit than Harriet had expected of
him:

me.”

“Another time will do for that,” said Harriet.

“Oh, no,” said Mr. Pomfret.
“Couldn’t you both come along, then, afterwards?” said Mr.

Farringdon. “Always room for one more, as Catherine says.” He turned to
Harriet. “I hope you will come, Miss Vane. We should be delighted.”

“Well—” said Harriet. It was Miss Flaxman’s turn to look sulky.
“I say,” said Mr. Farringdon, suddenly putting two and two together,

“are you the Miss Vane? the novelist …You are! Then, look here, you
simply must come. I shall be the most envied man in New College. We’re
all detective fans there.”

“What about it?” said Harriet, deferring to Mr. Pomfret.
It was so abundantly clear that Miss Flaxman did not want Harriet, that

Mr. Farringdon did not want Mr. Pomfret, and that Mr. Pomfret did not
want to go, that she felt the novelist’s malicious enjoyment in a foolish
situation. Since none of the party could now very well get out of the
situation without open rudeness, the invitation was eventually accepted. Mr.
Pomfret stepped into the street to join Mr. Farringdon; Miss Flaxman could
scarcely get out of accompanying Miss Vane back through the quadrangle.

“I didn’t know you knew Reggie Pomfret,” said Miss Flaxman.
“Yes, we have met,” said Harriet. “Why didn’t you bring Miss

Cattermole home with you last night? Especially as you must have seen she
was unwell.”

Miss Flaxman looked startled.
“It was nothing to do with me,” she said. “Was there a row?”
“No; but did you do anything to prevent it? You might have done,

mightn’t you?”

“I can’t be Violet Cattermole’s guardian.”
“Anyway,” said Harriet, “you may be glad to know that some good has

come of this stupid business. Miss Cattermole is now definitely cleared of

all suspicion about the anonymous letters and other disturbances. So it
would be quite a good idea to behave decently to her, don’t you think?”

about it.”

“No; but you started the rumours about her; it’s up to you to stop them,

now you know. I think it would be only fair to tell Mr. Farringdon the truth.
If you do not, I shall.”

“You seem to be very much interested in my affairs, Miss Vane.”
“They seem to have aroused a good deal of general interest,” said

Harriet, bluntly. “I don’t blame you for the original misunderstanding, but
now it is cleared up—and you can take my word for it that it is—I am sure
you will see it is unfair that Miss Cattermole should be made a scapegoat.
You can do a lot with your own year. Will you do what you can?”

what status she was to accord to Harriet, said, rather grudgingly:

“Of course, if she didn’t do it, I’m glad. Very well. I’ll tell Leo.”
“Thank you very much,” said Harriet.

Mr. Pomfret must have run very fast both ways, for the prescription

appeared in a remarkably short space of time, along with a large bunch of
roses. The draught was a potent one, and enabled Miss Cattermole not only
to appear in Hall, but to eat her lunch. Harriet pursued her as she was
leaving and carried her off to her own room.

“Well,” said Harriet, “you are a young idiot, aren’t you?”
Miss Cattermole dismally agreed.
“What’s the sense of it?” said Harriet. “You have contrived to commit

every crime in the calendar and got dashed little fun out of it, haven’t you?
You’ve attended a meeting in a man’s rooms after Hall without leave, and
you oughtn’t to have got leave, because you gate-crashed the meeting.

That’s a social crime as well as a breach of rules. In any case, you were out
after nine, without putting your initials in the book. That would cost you
two bob. You came back to College after 11:15 without extra late leave—
which would be five shillings. You returned, in fact, after midnight, which
would be ten shillings, even if you had had leave. You climbed the wall, for
which you ought to be gated; and finally, you came in blotto, for which you
ought to be sent down. Incidentally, that’s another social crime. What have
you got to say, prisoner at the bar? Is there any reason why sentence should
not be passed upon you? Have a cigarette.”

“Thank you,” said Miss Cattermole, faintly.
“If,” said Harriet, “you hadn’t, by this silly piece of work, contrived to

clear yourself of the suspicion of being the College lunatic, I should go to
the Dean. As it is, the episode has had its usefulness, and I’m inclined to be
merciful.”

Miss Cattermole looked up.
“Did something happen while I was out?”
“Yes, it did.”
“Oh-h-h!” said Miss Cattermole, and burst into tears.
Harriet watched her for a few minutes and then brought out a large

clean handkerchief from a drawer and silently handed it over.

“You can forget all that,” said Harriet, when the victim’s sobs had died

down a little. “But do chuck all this nonsense. Oxford isn’t the place for it.
You can run after young men any time—God knows the world’s full of
them. But to waste three years which are unlike anything else in one’s
lifetime is ridiculous. And it isn’t fair to College. It’s not fair to other
Oxford women. Be a fool if you like—I’ve been a fool in my time and so
have most people—but for Heaven’s sake do it somewhere where you
won’t let other people down.”

hated College and loathed Oxford, and felt no responsibility towards those
institutions.

“Then why,” said Harriet, “are you here?”
“I don’t want to be here; I never did. Only my parents were so keen.

My mother’s one of those people who work to get things open to women—
you know—professions and things. And father’s a lecturer in a small
provincial University. And they’ve made a lot of sacrifices and things.”

Harriet thought Miss Cattermole was probably the sacrificial victim.
“I didn’t mind coming up, so much,” went on Miss Cattermole;

“because I was engaged to somebody, and he was up, too, and I thought it
would be fun and the silly old Schools wouldn’t matter much. But I’m not
engaged to him any more and how on earth can I be expected to bother
about all this dead-and-gone History?”

go, and were engaged.”

ought to have a University education, even if she married. And now, of
course, they say what a good thing it is I still have my College career. And I
can’t make them understand that I hate it! They can’t see that being brought
up with everybody talking education all round one is enough to make one
loathe the sound of it. I’m sick of education.”

Harriet was not surprised.
“What should you have liked to do? I mean, supposing the

complication about your engagement hadn’t happened?”

and taking another cigarette, “I think I should have liked to be a cook. Or
possibly a hospital nurse, but I think I should have been better at cooking.

Only, you see, those are two of the things Mother’s always trying to get
people out of the way of thinking women’s sphere ought to be restricted to.”

“There’s a lot of money in good cooking,” said Harriet.
“Yes—but it’s not an educational advance. Besides, there’s no school

of Cookery at Oxford, and it had to be Oxford, you see, or Cambridge,
because of the opportunity of making the right kind of friends. Only I
haven’t made any friends. They all hate me. Perhaps they won’t so much,
now that the beastly letters—”

“Quite so,” said Harriet, hastily, fearing a fresh outburst. “How about

Miss Briggs? She seems to be a very good sort.”

very depressing. It makes me want to bite.”

the solar plexus. “I know. Gratitude is simply damnable.”

to be grateful to you.”

tell you what I’d do. I’d stop trying to do sensational things, because it’s apt
to get you into positions where you have to be grateful. And I’d stop
chasing undergraduates, because it bores them to tears and interrupts their
work. I’d tackle the History and get through Schools. And then I’d turn
round and say, ‘Now I’ve done what you want me to, and I’m going to be a
cook.’ And stick to it.”

“Would you?”
“I expect you want to be very truly run after, like Old Man Kangaroo.

Well, good cooks are. Still, as you’ve started here on History, you’d better
worry on at it. It won’t hurt you, you know. If you learn how to tackle one
subject—any subject—you’ve learnt how to tackle all subjects.”

“Well,” said Miss Cattermole, in rather an unconvinced tone, “I’ll try.”

Harriet went away in a rage and tackled the Dean.
“Why do they send these people here? Making themselves miserable

and taking up the place of people who would enjoy Oxford. We haven’t got
room for women who aren’t and never will be scholars. It’s all right for the
men’s colleges to have hearty passmen who gambol round and learn to play
games, so that they can gambol and game in Prep. Schools. But this dreary
little devil isn’t even hearty. She’s a wet mess.”

“I know,” said the Dean, impatiently. “But schoolmistresses and

parents are such jugginses. We do our best, but we can’t always weed our
their mistakes. And here’s my secretary—called away, just when we’re all
so busy, because her tiresome little boy’s got chicken-pox at his infuriating
school. Oh, dear! I oughtn’t to talk like that, because he’s a delicate child
and naturally children must come first, but it is too crushing!”

“I’ll be off,” said Harriet. “It’s a shame you should have to be working

of an afternoon and a shame of me to interrupt. By the way, I may as well
tell you that Cattermole had an alibi for last night’s affair.”

“Had she? Good! That’s something. Though I suppose it means more

suspicion on our miserable selves. Still, facts are facts. Miss Vane, what
was the noise in the quad last night? And who was the young man you were
bear-leading? I didn’t ask this morning in Common-Room, because I had an
idea you didn’t want me to.”

“I didn’t,” said Harriet.
“And you don’t?”
“As Sherlock Holmes said on another occasion: ‘I think we must ask

for an amnesty in that direction.’”

The Dean twinkled shrewdly at her.
“Two and two make four. Well, I trust you.”

the Fellows’ Garden.”

it’s sheer cussedness. They want to make heroes and heroines of
themselves. Last week of term’s the worst for wall-climbing. They make
bets. Have to work ’em off before the end of term. Tiresome little cuckoos.
All the same, it can’t be allowed.”

“It won’t happen again, I fancy, with this particular lot.”
“Very well. I’ll speak to the Bursar—in a general way—about spikes.”

Harriet changed her frock, pondering on the social absurdities of the

party to which she was invited. Clearly, Mr. Pomfret clung to her as a
protection against Miss Flaxman, and Mr. Farringdon, as a protection
against Mr. Pomfret, while Miss Flaxman, who was apparently her hostess,
did not want her at all. It was a pity that she could not embark on the
adventure of annexing Mr. Farringdon, to complete a neat little tail-chasing
circle. But she was both too old and too young to feel any thrill over the
Byronic profile of Mr. Farringdon; there was more amusement to be had out
of remaining a buffer state. She did, however, feel sufficient resentment
against Miss Flaxman for her handling of the Cattermole affair, to put on an
exceedingly well-cut coat and skirt and a hat of unexceptionable smartness,
before starting out for the first item in her afternoon’s program.

She had little difficulty in finding Mr. Pomfret’s staircase, and none

whatever in finding Mr. Pomfret. As she wound her way up the dark and
ancient stair, past the shut door of one, Mr. Smith, the sported oak of one,
Mr. Banerjee, and the open door of one, Mr. Hodges, who seemed to be
entertaining a large and. noisy party of male friends, she became aware of
an altercation going on upon the landing above, and presently Mr. Pomfret

himself came into view, standing in his own doorway and arguing with a
man whose back was turned towards the stair.

“You can go to the devil,” said Mr. Pomfret.
“Very good, sir,” said the back; “but how about me going to the young

lady? If I was to go and tell her that I seen you a-pushing of her over the
wall—”

“Blast you!” exclaimed Mr. Pomfret. “Will you shut up?”
At this point, Harriet set her foot upon the top stair, and encountered

the eye of Mr. Pomfret.

now; I’m busy. You’d better come again.”

“Quite a man for the ladies, ain’t you, sir?” said the man, disagreeably.
At these words, he turned, and, to her amazement, Harriet recognized a

familiar face.

“Dear me, Jukes,” said she. “Fancy seeing you here!”
“Do you know this blighter?” said Mr. Pomfret.
“Of course I do,” said Harriet. “He was a porter at Shrewsbury, and

was sacked for petty pilfering. I hope you’re going straight now, Jukes.
How’s your wife?”

“All right,” said Jukes, silkily. “I’ll come again.”
He made a move to slip down the staircase, but Harriet had set her

umbrella so awkwardly across it as to bar the way pretty effectively.

minute, will you?” He stretched out a powerful arm, and yanked the
reluctant Jukes over the threshold.

Harriet followed them in, shutting oak and door after her with a bang.

“That’s over and done with. It ain’t got nothing to do with that other little
affair what I mentioned.”

“What’s that?” asked Harriet.
“This nasty piece of work,” said Mr. Pomfret, “has had the blasted

neck to come here and say that if I don’t pay him to keep his mouth shut,
he’ll lay an information about what happened last night.”

“Blackmail,” said Harriet, much interested. “That’s a serious offense.”
“I didn’t mention no money,” said Jukes, injured. “I only told this

gentleman as I seen something as didn’t ought to have happened and was
uneasy in my mind about it. He says I can go to the devil, so I says in that
case I’ll go to the lady, being troubled in my conscience, don’t you see.”

“Very well,” said Harriet. “I’m here. Go ahead.”
Mr. Jukes stared at her.
“I take it,” said Harriet, “you saw Mr. Pomfret help me in over the

Shrewsbury wall last night when I’d forgotten my key. What were you
doing out there, by the way? Loitering with intent? You then probably saw
me come out again, thank Mr. Pomfret and ask him to come in and see the
College Buildings by moonlight. If you waited long enough, you saw me let
him out again. What about it?”

“Nice goings-on, I don’t think,” said Jukes, disconcerted.
“Possibly,” said Harriet. “But if Senior Members choose to enter their

own college in an unorthodox way, I don’t see who’s to prevent them.
Certainly not you.”

“I don’t believe a word of it,” said Jukes.
“I can’t help that,” said Harriet. “The Dean saw Mr. Pomfret and me,

so she will. Nobody’s likely to believe you. Why didn’t you tell this man
the whole story at once, Mr. Pomfret, and relieve his conscience? By the
way, Jukes, I’ve just told the Dean she ought to have that wall spiked. It

was handy for us, but it really isn’t high enough to keep out burglars and
other undesirables. So it’s not much good your loitering about there any
more. One or two things have been missed from people’s rooms lately,” she
added, with some truth, “it might be as well to have that road specially
policed.”

away. If it’s as you say, then I’m sure I’d be the last to want to make trouble
for a lady like yourself.”

like to have something to remember it by.”

Don’t you go to lay ’ands on me!”

opening the door, “I’ll kick you downstairs and right through the quad. Get
that? Then get out!”

through it with the other. A crash and a curse proclaimed that the swiftness
of Jukes’s exit had carried him over the head of the stairs.

That was marvelous of you. How did you come to think of it?”

“It was fairly obvious. I expect it was all bluff, really. I don’t see how

he could have known who Miss Cattermole was. I wonder how he got on to
you.”

through this window—obviously—so how did he—? Oh! yes, when I
knocked Brown up I believe he stuck his head out and said, ‘That you,
Pomfret?’ Careless blighter. I’ll talk to him. …I say, you do seem to be

everybody’s guardian angel, don’t you? It’s marvelous, being able to keep
your wits about you like that.”

the tea entered the room together.

Mr. Rogers was in his third year—tall, dark, lively and full of an easy

kind of penitence.

“Why do we do it? Because somebody says it is fun, and one believes it.
Why should one believe it? I can’t imagine. One should look at these things
more objectively. Is the thing beautiful in itself? No. Then let us not do it.
By the way, Pomfret, have you been approached about debagging
Culpepper?”

“I am all for it,” said Mr. Pomfret.
“True, Culpepper is a wart. He is a disgusting object. But would he

look any better debagged? No, Socrates, he would not. He would look much
worse. If anybody is to be debagged, it shall be somebody with legs that
will stand exposure—your own, Pomfret, for example.”

“You try, that’s all,” said Mr. Pomfret.
“In any case,” pursued Mr. Rogers, “debagging is otiose and out of

date. The modern craze for exposing unaesthetic legs needs no
encouragement from me. I shall not be a party to it. I intend to be a
reformed character. From now on, I shall consider nothing but the value of
the Thing-in-Itself, unmoved by any pressure of public opinion.”

amendment, Mr. Rogers gracefully led the conversation to topics of general
interest, and, about 5 o’clock, departed, murmuring something in an
apologetic way about work and his tutor, as though they were rather
indelicate necessities. At this point, Mr. Pomfret suddenly went all solemn,

as a very young man occasionally does when alone with a woman older
than himself, and told Harriet a good deal about his own view of the
meaning of life. Harriet listened with as much intelligent sympathy as she
could command; but was slightly relieved when three young men burst in to
borrow Mr. Pomfret’s beer and remained to argue over their host’s head
about Komisarjevsky. Mr. Pomfret seemed faintly annoyed, and eventually
asserted his right to his own guest by announcing that it was time to pop
round to New College for old Farringdon’s party. His friends let him go
with mild regret and, before Harriet and her escort were well out of the
room, took possession of their armchairs and continued the argument.

“Very able fellow, Marston,” said Mr. Pomfret, amiably enough.

“Great noise on O.U.D.S. and spends his vacations in Germany. I don’t
know how they contrive to get so worked up about plays. I like a good play,
but I don’t understand all this stuff about stylistic treatment and planes of
vision. I expect you do, though.”

“Now a word,” said Harriet, cheerfully. “I dare say they don’t, either.

Anyhow, I know I don’t like plays in which all the actors have to keep on
tumbling up and down flights of steps, or where the lighting’s so artistically
done that you can’t see anything, or where you keep on wondering all the
time what the symbolical whirligig in the center of the stage is going to be
used for, if anything. It distracts me. I’d rather go to the Holborn Empire
and have my fun vulgar.”

a show with me in Town in the vac, would you?”

Harriet made a vague kind of promise, which seemed to delight Mr.

Pomfret very much, and they presently found themselves in Mr.
Farringdon’s sitting-room, packed like sardines among a mixed crowd of

undergraduates and struggling to consume sherry and biscuits without
moving their elbows.

first to last. Mr. Farringdon did, however, struggle through to them,
bringing with him a bunch of young men and women who wanted to talk
about detective fiction. They appeared to have read a good deal of this kind
of literature, though very little of anything else. A School of Detective
Fiction would, Harriet thought, have a fair chance of producing a goodly
crop of Firsts. The fashion for psychological analysis had, she decided,
rather gone out since her day: she was instinctively aware that a yearning
for action and the concrete was taking its place. The pre-War solemnity and
the post-War exhaustion were both gone; the desire now was for an
energetic doing of something definite, though the definitions differed. The
detective story, no doubt, was acceptable, because in it something definite
was done, the “what” being comfortably decided beforehand by the author.
It was borne in upon Harriet that all these young men and women were
starting out to hoe a hardish kind of row in a very stony ground. She felt
rather sorry for them.

Something definite done. Yes, indeed. Harriet, reviewing the situation

next morning, felt deeply dissatisfied. She did not like this Jukes business at
all. He could scarcely, she supposed, have anything to do with the
anonymous letters: where could he have got hold of that passage from the
Aeneid? But he was a man with a grudge, a nasty-minded man, and a thief;
it was not pleasant that he should make a habit of hanging round the
College walls after dark.

Harriet was alone in the Senior Common Room, everybody else

having departed to her work. The S.C.R. scout came in, carrying a pile of

clean ash-trays, and Harriet suddenly remembered that her children lodged
with the Jukeses.

Oxford for, after dark?”

think.”

might easily get over. Is he keeping honest, do you know?”

Jukes very much, and I’d be sorry to add to her troubles. But I never have
trusted Jukes. I’ve been thinking I ought to put my little girls somewhere
else. He might be a bad influence on them, don’t you think?”

“I certainly do think so.”
“I’m the last person to wish to put difficulties into the way of a

respectable married woman,” went on Annie, slapping an ash-tray smartly
down, “and naturally she’s right to stick by her husband. But one’s own
children must come first, mustn’t they?”

“Of course,” said Harriet, rather inattentively. “Oh, yes. I should find

somewhere else for them. I suppose you haven’t ever heard either Jukes or
his wife say anything to suggest that he—well, that he was stealing from the
College or cherishing bad feelings against the dons.”

“I don’t have much to say to Jukes, madam, and if Mrs. Jukes knew

anything, she wouldn’t tell me. It wouldn’t be right if she did. He’s her
husband, and she has to take his part. I quite see that. But if Jukes is
behaving dishonestly, I shall have to find somewhere else for the children.
I’m much obliged to you for mentioning it, madam. I shall be going round
there on Wednesday, which is my free afternoon, and I’ll take the

opportunity to give notice. May I ask if you have said anything to Jukes,
madam?”

more he will have to do with the police.”

“I’m very glad to hear that, madam. It isn’t right at all that he should

come here like that. If I’d known about it, I really shouldn’t have been able
to sleep. I feel sure it ought to be put a stop to.”

College in a dress of this description?”

beside her. Annie examined it carefully.

“No, madam, not to my recollection. Perhaps one of the maids that

been here longer than me might know. There’s Gertrude in the dining-room;
should you like to ask her?”

dress and catechize the rest of the staff. This was done, but with no result.
An inquiry among the students produced no identification, either. The dress
was brought back, still unclaimed and unrecognized. One more puzzle.
Harriet concluded that it must actually be the property of the Poison-Pen;
but if so, it must have been brought to College and kept in hiding till the
moment of its dramatic appearance in Chapel; for if it had ever been worn
in College, it was almost inconceivable that no one should be able to
recognize it.

were none of them water-tight. That was not surprising; it would have been
more surprising if they had been. Harriet (and Mr. Pomfret, of course) alone
knew the exact time for which the alibi was required; and though many
people were able to show themselves covered up to midnight or

thereabouts, all had been, or claimed to have been, virtuously in their own
rooms and beds by a quarter to one. Nor, though the porter’s book and late-
leave tickets had been examined, and all students interrogated who might
have been about the quad at midnight, had anybody seen any suspicious
behavior with gowns or bolsters or bread-knives. Crime was too easy in a
place like this. The College was too big, too open. Even if a form had been
seen crossing the quad with a bolster, or indeed for that matter a complete
set of bedding and a mattress, nobody would ever think anything of it.
Some hardy fresh-air fiend sleeping out; that would be the natural
conclusion.

Harriet, exasperated, went over to Bodley and plunged into her

researches upon Lefanu. There, at least, one did know what one was
investigating.

She felt so much the need of a soothing influence that, in the

afternoon, she went down to Christ Church to hear service at the Cathedral.
She had been shopping—purchasing, among other things, a bag of
meringues for the entertainment of some students she had asked to a small
party in her room that evening—and it was only when her arms were
already full of parcels that the idea of Cathedral suggested itself. It was
rather out of her way; but the parcels were not heavy. She dodged across
Carfax, angrily resenting its modern bustle of cars and complication of
stop-and-go lights, and joined the little sprinkling of foot-passengers who
were tripping down St. Aldate’s and through Wolsey’s great unfinished
quadrangle, bound on the same pious errand as herself.

It was quiet and pleasant in Cathedral: She lingered in her seat for

some little time after the nave had emptied and until the organist had
finished the voluntary. Then she came slowly out, turning left along the

plinth with a vague idea of once more admiring the great staircase and the
Hall, when a slim figure in a grey suit shot with such velocity from a dark
doorway that he cannoned full tilt against her, nearly knocking her down,
and sending her bag and parcels flying in disorder along the plinth.

“Hell!” said a voice which set her heart beating by its unexpected

familiarity, “have I hurt you? Me all over—bargin’ and bumpin’ about like
a bumble-bee in a bottle. Clumsy lout! I say, do say I haven’t hurt you.
Because, if I have, I’ll run straight across and drown myself in Mercury.”

towards the pond.

“Not in the least, thank you,” said Harriet, recovering herself.
“Thank God for that. This is my unlucky day. I’ve just had a most

unpleasant interview with the Junior Censor. Was there anything breakable
in the parcels? Oh, look! your bag’s opened itself wide and all the little
oojahs have gone down the steps. Please don’t move. You stand there,
thinkin’ up things to call me, and I’ll pick ’em all up one by one on my
knees sayin’ ‘meâ culpâ’ to every one of ’em.”

He suited the action to the words.
“I’m afraid it hasn’t improved the meringues.” He looked up

apologetically. “But if you’ll say you forgive me, we’ll go and get some
new ones from the kitchen—the real kind—you know—specialty of the
House, and all that.”

“Please don’t bother,” said Harriet.
It wasn’t he, of course. This was a lad of twenty-one or two at the

most, with a mop of wavy hair tumbling over his forehead and a handsome,
petulant face, full of charm, though ominously weak about the curved lips
and upward-slanting brows. But the color of the hair was right—the pale
yellow of ripe barley; and the light drawling voice, with its clipped syllables

and ready babble of speech; and the quick, sidelong smile; and above all,
the beautiful, sensitive hands that were gathering the “oojahs” deftly up into
their native bag.

“You haven’t called me any names yet,” said the young man.
“I believe I could almost put a name to you,” said Harriet. “Isn’t it—

are you any relation of Peter Wimsey’s?”

my uncle; and a dashed sight more accommodating than the Jewish kind,”
he added, as though struck by a melancholy association of ideas. “Have I
met you somewhere? Or was it pure guesswork? You don’t think I’m like
him, do you?”

you’re very like him, in some ways.”

grin. “Uncle Peter’s not approved. I wish to God he was here, though. He’d
come in uncommonly handy at the moment. But he seems to have beetled
off somewhere as usual. Mysterious old tom-cat, isn’t he? I take it you
know him—I forgot the proper bromide about how small the world is, but
we’ll take it as read. Where is the old blighter?”

“I believe he’s in Rome.”
“He would be. That means a letter. It’s awfully hard to be persuasive in

a letter, don’t you think? I mean, it all takes so much explaining, and the
famous family charm doesn’t seem to go over so well in black and white.”

straying copper.

an appeal to Uncle Peter’s better feelings?”

know, if you go about him the right way. Besides, you see, I’ve got the
bulge on Uncle Peter. If the worst comes to the worst, I can always threaten
to cut my throat and land him with the strawberry leaves.”

Oxford version of giving the raspberry.

and the ball. Four rows of moth-eaten ermine. To say nothing of that dashed
great barracks down at Denver, eating its moldy head off.” Seeing that
Harriet still looked blankly at him, he explained further: “I’m sorry; I
forgot. My name’s Saint-George and the Governor forgot to provide me
with any brothers. So the minute they write d.s.p. after me, Uncle Peter’s
for it. Of course, my father might outlive him; but I don’t believe Uncle
Peter’s the sort to die young, unless one of his pet criminals manages to
bump him off.”

“That might easily happen,” said Harriet, thinking of the plug-ugly.
“Well, that makes it all the worse for him,” said Lord Saint-George,

shaking his head. “The more risks he takes, the quicker he’s got to toe the
line for the matrimonial stakes. No more bachelor freedom with old Bunter
in a Piccadilly flat. And no more spectacular Viennese singers. So you see,
it’s as much as his life’s worth to let anything happen to me.”

“Obviously,” said Harriet, fascinated by this new light on the subject.
“Uncle Peter’s weakness,” went on Lord Saint-George, carefully

disentangling the squashed meringues from their paper, “is his strong sense
of public duty. You mightn’t think it to look at him, but it’s there. (Shall we
try these on the carp? I don’t think they’re really fit for human
consumption.) He’s kept out of it so far—he’s an obstinate old devil. Says
he’ll have the right wife or none.”

“But suppose the right one says No.”
“That’s the story he puts up. I don’t believe a word of it. Why should

anybody object to Uncle Peter? He’s no beauty and he’d talk the hind leg
off a donkey; but he’s dashed well-off and he’s got good manners and he’s
in the stud-book.” He balanced himself on the edge of Mercury and peered
into its tranquil waters. “Look! there’s the big old one. Been here since the
foundation, by the looks of him—see him go? Cardinal Wolsey’s particular
pet.” He tossed a crumb to the great fish, which took it with a quick snap
and submerged again.

“I don’t know how well you know my uncle,” he proceeded, “but if

you do get a chance, you might let him know that when you saw me I was
looking rather unwell and hag-ridden and hinted darkly at felo-de-se.”

“I’ll make a point of it,” said Harriet. “I will say you seemed scarcely

able to crawl and, in fact, fainted into my arms, accidentally crushing all my
parcels. He won’t believe me, but I’ll do my best.”

shall have to write, after all, and produce the evidence. Still, I don’t know
why I should bore you with my personal affairs. Come on down to the
kitchen.”

the ancient and famous College oven; and when Harriet had duly admired
the vast fireplace with its shining spits and heard statistics of the number of
joints roasted and the quantity of fuel consumed per week in term-time, she
followed her guide out into the quadrangle again with all proper expressions
of gratitude.

banging you all over the place and throwing your property about. May I
know, by the way, whom I have had the honor of inconveniencing?”

“My name’s Harriet Vane.”
Lord Saint-George stood still, and smote himself heavily over the

forehead.

“My God, what have I done? Miss Vane, I do beg your pardon—and

throw myself abjectly on your mercy. If my uncle hears about this he’ll
never forgive me, and I shall cut my throat. It is borne in upon me that I
have said every possible thing I should not.”

ought to have warned you.”

anybody. I’m afraid I’ve inherited my uncle’s tongue and my mother’s want
of tact. Look here, for God’s sake forget all that rot. Uncle Peter’s a dashed
good sort, and as decent as they come.”

“I’ve reason to know it,” said Harriet.
“I suppose so. By the way—hell! I seem to be putting my foot in it all

round, but I ought to explain that I’ve never heard him talk about you. I
mean, he’s not that sort. It’s my mother. She says all kinds of things. Sorry.
I’m making things worse and worse.”

know—well enough, anyhow, to know what sort he is. And I certainly
won’t give you away.”

more out of him—and I’m in a devil of a mess—but he makes one feel such
an appalling tick. I don’t suppose you’ve ever been given the wrong side of
my uncle’s tongue—naturally not. But of the two, I recommend skinning.”

and many thanks for the meringues.”

She was half-way up St. Aldate’s when the viscount caught her up.

up—”

“The Viennese dancer?”
“Singer—music’s his line. Please forget that. I mean, it’s got whiskers

on it—it’s six years old, anyway. I was a kid at school and I dare say it’s all
rot.”

Harriet laughed, and promised faithfully to forget the Viennese singer.

CHAPTER IX

Come hether freind, I am ashamed to hear that what I hear of you …You
have almost attayned to the age of nyne yeeres, at least to eight and a halfe,
and seeing that you knowe your dutie, if you neglect it you deserve greater
punishment then he which through ignorance doth it not. Think not that the
nobilitie of your Ancestors doth free you to doe all that you list,
contrarywise, It bindeth you more to followe vertue.

PIERRE ERONDELL

“So,” said the Bursar, coming briskly up to the High Table for lunch on the
following Thursday; “Jukes has come to grief once more …”

“Has he been stealing again?” asked Miss Lydgate. “Dear me, how

disappointing!”

“Annie tells me she’s had her suspicions for some time, and yesterday

being her half-day she went down to tell Mrs. Jukes she would have to
place the children somewhere else—when lo, and behold! in walked the
police and discovered a whole lot of things that had been stolen a fortnight
ago from an undergraduate’s rooms in Holywell. It was most unpleasant for
her—for Annie, I mean. They asked her a lot of questions.”

“I always thought it was a mistake to put those children there,” said the

Dean.

“So that’s what Jukes did with himself at night,” said Harriet. “I heard

he’d been seen outside the College here. As a matter of fact, I gave Annie
the tip. It’s a pity she couldn’t have removed the children earlier.”

“I thought he was doing quite well,” said Miss Lydgate. “He had a job

—and I know he kept chickens—and there was the money for the little

Wilsons, Annie’s children, I mean—so he ought not to have needed to steal,
poor man. Perhaps Mrs. Jukes is a bad manager.”

He’s much best out of the way.”

“Had he taken much?” inquired the Dean.
“I gather from Annie,” said the Bursar, “that they rather think they can

trace a lot of petty thieving to Jukes. I understand it’s a question of finding
out where he sold the things.”

pawnbroker or somebody of that kind. Has he been inside—in prison—
before?”

“Not that I know of,” said the Dean, “though he ought to have been.”
“Then I suppose he’ll get off lightly as a first offender.”
“Miss Barton will know all about that. We’ll ask her. I do hope poor

Mrs. Jukes isn’t involved,” said the Bursar.

“Surely not,” cried Miss Lydgate, “she’s such a nice woman.”
“She must have known about it,” said Harriet, “unless she was a

perfect imbecile.”

“What a dreadful thing, to know your husband was a thief!”
“Yes,” said the Dean. “It would be very uncomfortable to have to live

on the proceeds.”

to an honest person’s feelings.”

guilty as he was.”

“What a terrible hope!” exclaimed Miss Lydgate.
“Well, she’s got to be either guilty or unhappy,” said Harriet, passing

the bread to the Dean with a twinkle in her eye.

and unhappy or guilty and unhappy—I don’t see how she can be happy,
poor creature.”

“Let us ask the Warden next time we see her,” said Miss Martin,

“whether it is possible for a guilty person to be happy. And if so, whether it
is better to be happy or virtuous.”

Vane, a bowl of hemlock for the Dean, if you please. To return to the
subject under discussion, the police have not, so far, taken up Mrs. Jukes, so
I suppose there’s nothing against her.”

that moment, full of woe about one of her pupils who was suffering from
perpetual headache, and an incapacity to work, the conversation wandered
into other channels.

Term was drawing to a close, and the investigation seemed little farther

advanced; but it appeared possible that Harriet’s nightly perambulations and
the frustration of the Library and Chapel scandals had exercised a
restraining influence on the Poltergeist, for there was no further outbreak of
any kind, not so much as an inscription in a lavatory or an anonymous
letter, for three days. The Dean, exceedingly busy, was relieved by the
respite, and also cheered by the news that Mrs. Goodwin the secretary
would be back on the Monday to cope with the end-of-term rush. Miss
Cattermole was seen to be more cheerful, and wrote a quite respectable
paper for Miss Hillyard about the naval policy of Henry VIII. Harriet asked
the enigmatic Miss de Vine to coffee. As usual, she had intended to lay bare
Miss de Vine’s soul, and, as usual, found herself laying bate her own.

combining intellectual and emotional interests. I don’t think it affects
women only; it affects men as well. But when men put their public lives
before their private lives, it causes less outcry than when a woman does the
same thing, because women put up with neglect better than men, having
been brought up to expect it.”

Suppose,” said Harriet, falling back on words which were not her own,
“suppose one is cursed with both a heart and a brain?”

mistakes you make. I’m quite sure that one never makes fundamental
mistakes about the thing one really wants to do. Fundamental mistakes arise
out of lack of genuine interest. In my opinion, that is.”

I don’t think that arose out of lack of interest. It seemed at the time the most
important thing in the world.”

to it, do you think? Your mind? Were you really being as cautious and
exacting about it as you would be about writing a passage of fine prose?”

with emotional excitements in that detached spirit.”

“Isn’t the writing of good prose an emotional excitement?”
“Yes, of course it is. At least, when you get the thing dead right and

know it’s dead right, there’s no excitement like it. It’s marvelous. It makes
you feel like God on the Seventh Day—for a bit, anyhow.”

any mistakes—and then you experience the ecstasy. But if there’s any

subject in which you’re content with the second-rate, then it isn’t really
your subject.”

interested one knows how to be patient, and let time pass, as Queen
Elizabeth said. Perhaps that’s the meaning of the phrase about genius being
eternal patience, which I always thought rather absurd. If you truly want a
thing, you don’t snatch; if you snatch, you don’t really want it. Do you
suppose that, if you find yourself taking pains about a thing, it’s a proof of
its importance to you?”

“I think it is, to a large extent. But the big proof is that the thing comes

right, without those fundamental errors. One always makes surface errors,
of course. But a fundamental error is a sure sign of not caring. I wish one
could teach people nowadays that the doctrine of snatching what one thinks
one wants is unsound.”

“I saw six plays this winter in London,” said Harriet, “all preaching the

doctrine of snatch. I agree that they left me with the feeling that none of the
characters knew what they wanted.”

find that everything else goes down before it like grass under a roller—all
other interests, your own and other people’s. Miss Lydgate wouldn’t like
my saying that, but it’s as true of her as of anybody else. She’s the kindest
soul in the world, in things she’s indifferent about, like the peculations of
Jukes. But she hasn’t the slightest mercy on the prosodical theories of Mr.
Elkbottom. She wouldn’t countenance those to save Mr. Elkbottom from
hanging. She’d say she couldn’t. And she couldn’t, of course. If she actually
saw Mr. Elkbottom writhing in humiliation, she’d be sorry, but she wouldn’t
alter a paragraph. That would be treason. One can’t be pitiful where one’s

own job is concerned. You’d lie cheerfully, I expect, about anything except
—what?”

“Oh, anything!” said Harriet, laughing. “Except saying that

somebody’s beastly book is good when it isn’t. I can’t do that. It makes me
a lot of enemies, but I can’t do it.”

always one thing one has to deal with sincerely, if there’s any root to one’s’
mind at all. I ought to know, from my own experience. Of course, the one
thing may be an emotional thing; I don’t say it mayn’t. One may commit all
the sins in the calendar, and still be faithful and honest towards one person.
If so, then that one person is probably one’s appointed job. I’m not
despising that kind of loyalty; it doesn’t happen to be mine, that is all.”

“Did you discover that by making a fundamental mistake?” asked

Harriet, a little nervously.

“Yes,” said Miss de Vine. “I once got engaged to somebody. But I

found I was always blundering—hurting his feelings, doing stupid things,
making quite elementary mistakes about him. In the end I realized that I
simply wasn’t taking as much trouble with him as I should have done over a
disputed reading. So I decided he wasn’t my job.” She smiled. “For all that,
I was fonder of him than he was of me. He married an excellent woman
who is devoted to him and does make him her job. I should think he was a
full-time job. He is a painter and usually on the verge of bankruptcy; but he
paints very well.”

make him a full-time job.”

look on themselves as jobs but as fellow-creatures.”

Harriet. “You met her at the Gaudy. That collaboration seems to work. But
what with the wives who are jealous of their husbands’ work and the
husbands who are jealous of their wives’ interests, it looks as though most
of us imagined ourselves to be jobs.”

effect it has on one’s character. I’m very sorry for the person who is
somebody else’s job; he (or she, of course) ends by devouring or being
devoured, either of which is bad for one. My painter has devoured his wife,
though neither of them knows it; and poor Miss Cattermole is in great
danger of being identified with her parents’ job and being devoured.”

“Then you’re all for the impersonal job?”
“I am,” said Miss de Vine.
“But you say you don’t despise those who make some other person

their job?”

dangerous.”

CHRIST CHURCH,
FRIDAY.

Dear Miss Vane,

If you can forgive my idiotic behavior the other day, will you

come and lunch with me on Monday at 1 o’clock? Please do. I am still
feeling suicidal, so it would really be a work of charity all round. I
hope the meringues got home safely.

Very sincerely yours,

SAINT-GEORGE

this naive invitation, if you think I can’t see through that, you’re mightily
mistaken. This is not for me, but for les beaux yeux de la cassette de l’oncle
Pierre. But there are worse meals’ than those that come out of the House
kitchen, and I will go. I should like to know how much money you’re
managing to get through, by the way. The heir of Denver should be rich
enough in his own right without appealing to Uncle Peter. Gracious! when I
think that I was given my college fees and my clothes and five pounds a
term to make whoopee on! You won’t get much sympathy or support from
me, my lord.

Still in this severe mood, she drove down St. Aldate’s on Monday and

inquired of the porter beneath Tom Tower for Lord Saint-George; only to be
told that Lord Saint-George was not in College.

“Oh!” said Harriet, disconcerted, “but he asked me to lunch.”
“What a pity you weren’t let know, miss. Lord Saint-George was in a

nasty motor-accident on Friday night. He’s in the Infirmary. Didn’t you see
it in the papers?”

“No, I missed it. Is he badly hurt?”
“Injured his shoulder and cut his head open pretty badly, so we hear,”

said the porter, with regret, and yet with a slight relish at the imparting of
bad news. “He was unconscious for twenty-four hours; but we are informed
that his condition is now improving. The Duke and Duchess have left for
the country again.”

“Dear me!” said Harriet. “I’m very sorry to hear this. I’d better go

round and inquire. Do you know whether he is allowed to see anybody
yet?”

The porter looked her over with a paternal eye, which somehow

suggested to her that if she had been an undergraduate the answer would

have been No.

“I believe, miss,” said the porter, “that Mr. Danvers and Lord Warboys

were permitted to visit his lordship this morning. I couldn’t say further than
that. Excuse me— there is Mr. Danvers just crossing the quadrangle. I will
ascertain.”

He emerged from his glass case and pursued Mr. Danvers, who

immediately came running to the lodge.

“I say,” said Mr. Danvers, “are you Miss Vane? Because poor old

Saint-George has only just remembered about you. He’s terribly sorry, and I
was to catch you and give you some grub. No trouble at all—a great
pleasure. We ought to have let you know, but he was knocked clean out,
poor old chap. And then, what with the family fussing round—do you know
the Duchess?—No?—Ah! Well, she went off this morning, and then I was
allowed to go round and got my instructions. Terrific apologies and all
that.”

“How did it happen?”
“Driving a racing car to the danger of the public,” said Mr. Danvers,

with a grimace. “Trying to make it before the gates were shut. No police on
the spot, as it happened, so we don’t know exactly what did happen.
Nobody killed, fortunately. Saint-George took a telegraph-pole in his stride,
apparently, went out head first and pitched on his shoulder. Lucky he had
the windscreen down, or he’d have had no face to speak of. The car’s a total
wreck, and I don’t know why he isn’t. But all those Wimseys have as many
lives as cats. Come along in. These are my rooms. I hope you can eat the
usual lamb cutlets—there wasn’t time to think up anything special. But I
had particular orders to hunt out Saint-George’s Niersteiner ’23 and
mention Uncle Peter in connection with it. Is that right? I don’t know

whether Uncle Peter bought it or recommended it or merely enjoyed it, or
what he had to do with it, but that’s what I was told to say.”

Harriet laughed. “If he did any of those things, it’ll be all right.”
The Niersteiner was excellent, and Harriet heartlessly enjoyed her

lunch, finding Mr. Danvers a pleasant host.

her at length to the gate. “He’s quite fit to receive company, and it’ll cheer
him up no end. He’s in a private ward, so you can get in any time.”

“I’ll go straight away,” said Harriet.
“Do,” said Mr. Danvers. “What’s that?” he added, turning to the porter,

who had come out with a letter in his hand. “Oh, something for Saint-
George. Right. Yes. I expect the lady will take it up, if she’s going now. If
not, it can wait for the messenger.”

Church, Oxford, Inghilterra.” Even without the Italian stamp, there was no
mistaking where that came from. “I’ll take it,” she said—“it might be
urgent.”

Lord Saint-George, with his right arm in a sling, his forehead and one

eye obscured by bandages and the other eye black and bloodshot, was
profuse in welcome and apology.

“I hope Danvers looked after you all right. It’s frightfully decent of

you to come along.”

Harriet asked if he was badly hurt.
“Well, it might be worse. I fancy Uncle Peter had a near squeak of it

this time, but it’s worked out at a cut head and a busted shoulder. And shock
and bruises and all that. Much less than I deserve. Stay and talk to me. It’s
dashed dull being all alone, and I’ve only got one eye and can’t see out of
that.”

“Won’t talking make your head ache?”
“It can’t ache worse than it does already. And you’ve got a nice voice.

Do be kind and stay.”

“I’ve brought a letter along for you from College.”
“Some dashed dun or other, I suppose.”
“No. It’s from Rome.”
“Uncle Peter. Oh, my God! I suppose I’d better know the worst.”
She put it into his left hand, and watched his fingers fumble across the

broad red seal.

“Ugh! Sealing-wax and the family crest. I know what that means.

Uncle Peter at his stuffiest.”

He struggled impatiently with the tough envelope.
“Shall I open it for you?”
“I wish you would. And, look here—be an angel and read it to me.

Even with two good eyes, his fist’s a bit of a strain.”

Harriet drew out the letter and glanced at the opening words.
“This looks rather private.”
“Better you than the nurse. Besides, I can bear it better with a spot of

womanly sympathy. I say, is there any enclosure?”

“No enclosure. No.”
The patient groaned.
“Uncle Peter turns to bay. That’s torn it. How does it start? If it’s

‘Gherkins’ or ‘Jerry’ or even ‘Gerald,’ there’s hope yet.”

“It starts, ‘My dear Saint-George,’”
“Oh, gosh! Then he’s really furious. And signed with all the initials he

can rake up, what?”

Harriet turned the letter over.
“Signed with all his names in full.”

take it very well. I don’t know what the devil I’m going to do now.”

He looked so ill that Harriet said, rather anxiously:
“Hadn’t we better leave it till tomorrow?”
“No. I must know where I stand. Carry on. Speak gently to your little

boy. Sing it to me. It’ll need it.”

My dear Saint-George,

If I have rightly understood your rather incoherent statement of

your affairs, you have contracted a debt of honor for a sum which you
do not possess. You have settled it with a cheque which you had no
money to meet. As cover for this, you have borrowed from a friend,
giving him a post-dated cheque which you have no reason to suppose
will be met either. You suggest that I should accommodate you by
backing your bill at six months; failing which, you will either (a) “try
Levy again,” or (b) blow your brains out. The former alternative
would, as you admit, increase your ultimate liability; the second, as I
will myself venture to point out, would not reimburse your friend but
merely add disgrace to insolvency.

Lord Saint-George shifted restlessly upon his pillows. “Nasty clear-headed
way he has of putting things.”

You are good enough to say that you approach me rather than your
father, because I am, in your opinion, more likely to be sympathetic to
this dubious piece of finance. I cannot say I feel flattered by your
opinion.

“I didn’t mean that, exactly,” groaned the viscount. “He knows quite

well what I mean. The Governor would fly right off the handle. Damn it,

it’s his own fault! He oughtn’t to keep me so short. What does he expect?
Considering the money he got through in his giddy youth, he should know
something about it. And Uncle Peter’s rolling—it wouldn’t hurt him to
cough up a bit.”

“I don’t think it’s the money so much as the dud cheques, is it?”
“That’s the trouble. Well, why the devil does he go barging off to

Rome just when he’s wanted? He knows I wouldn’t have given a dud if I
could have got cover for it. But I couldn’t get at him if he wasn’t there.
Well, read on. Let’s hear the worst.”

I am quite aware that your premature decease would leave me heir-
presumptive to the title—

“Heir-presumptive? …Oh, I see. My mother might peg out and my

father marry again. Calculating brute.”

—heir-presumptive to the title and estate. Tedious as such an
inheritance might be, you will forgive me for suggesting that I might
prove a more honest steward than yourself.

“Hell! That’s one in the eye,” said the viscount. “If that line of defense

has gone, it’s all up.”

You remind me that when you attain your majority next July, you will
receive an increased allowance. Since, however, even the sum you
have mentioned amounts to about a year’s income on the higher scale
of payment, your prospect of redeeming your bill in six months’ time
seems to be remote; nor do I understand what you propose to live on
when you have anticipated your income to this extent. Further, I do not

for one moment suppose that the sum in question represents the whole
of your liabilities.

“Damned thought-reader!” growled his lordship. “Of course it doesn’t.

But how does he know?”

Under the circumstances, I must decline to back your bill or to lend
you money.

“Well, that’s flat. Why didn’t he say so at once?”

Since, however, you have put your name to a cheque, and that name
must not be dishonored, I have instructed my bankers—

“Come! that sounds a bit better. Good old Uncle Peter! You can always

get him on the family name.”

—instructed my bankers to arrange to cover your cheques—

“Cheque, or cheques?”

“Cheques, in the plural; quite distinctly.”

—cover your cheques from now until the time of my return to
England, when I shall come and see you. This will probably be before
the end of the Trinity Term. I will ask you to see to it that the whole of
your liabilities are discharged by that time, including your outstanding
Oxford debts and your obligations to the children of Israel.

“First gleam of humanity,” said the viscount.

May I offer you, in addition, a little advice? Bear in mind that the

amateur professional is peculiarly rapacious. This applies both to

women and to people who play cards. If you must back horses, back
them at a reasonable price and both ways. And, if you insist on
blowing out your brains, do it in some place where you will not cause
mess and inconvenience.

Your affectionate Uncle,

PETER DEATH BREDON WIMSEY

“Whew!” said Lord Saint-George, “that’s a stinker! I fancy I detect a

little softening in the last paragraph. Otherwise, I should say that a nastier
kind of letter never came to soothe the sufferer’s aching brow. What do you
think?”

Harriet privately agreed that it was not the kind of letter she should

care to receive. It displayed, in fact, almost everything that she resented
most in Peter; the condescending superiority, the arrogance of caste and the
generosity that was like a blow in the face. However:—

“He’s done far more than you asked him,” she pointed out. “So far as I

can see, there’s nothing to prevent you from drawing a cheque for fifty
thousand and blueing the lot.”

“That’s the devil of it. He’s got me by the short hairs. He’s trusted me

with the whole dashed outfit. I did think he might offer to settle up for me,
but he’s left me to do it and hasn’t even asked for an account. That means
it’ll have to be done. I don’t see how I can get out of it. He has the most
ingenious ways of making a fellow feel a sweep. Oh, hell! my head’s
splitting.”

“You’d better keep quiet and try to go to sleep. You’ve nothing to

worry about now.”

“No. Wait a minute. Don’t go away. The cheque’s all right, that’s the

chief thing. Just as well, because I’d have had a job to raise the wind

elsewhere, laid up like this. There’s one thing about it—I can’t use this arm,
so I shan’t have to write a long screed full of grateful penitence.”

“Does he know about your accident?”
“Not unless Aunt Mary’s written to him. My grandmother’s on the

Riviera, and I don’t suppose it would occur to my sister. She’s at school.
The Governor never writes to anybody, and my mother certainly wouldn’t
bother with Uncle Peter. Look here, I must do something. I mean, the old
boy’s been thoroughly decent, really. Couldn’t you write a line for me,
explaining all about it! I don’t want to let my family in on this.”

“I’ll do that, certainly.”
“Tell him I’ll settle the blasted debts as soon as I can produce a

recognizable signature. I say! think of having a free hand with Uncle Peter’s
pile and not being able to sign a cheque. Enough to make a cat laugh, isn’t
it? Say I—what’s the phrase?—appreciate his confidence and won’t let him
down. Here! you might give me a spot of the stuff in that jug, would you? I
feel like Dives in what’s-his-name.”

He gulped the iced drink down gratefully.
“No, damn it! I must do something. The old boy’s really worried. I

think I can work these fingers after a fashion. Find me a pencil and paper
and I’ll have a shot.”

“I don’t think you’d better.”
“Yes, I had better. And I will if it kills me. Find me something, there’s

a darling.”

She found writing materials, and held the paper in place while he

scrawled a few staggering words. The pain made him sweat; a shoulder
joint which has been dislocated and returned to position is no cushion of
ease the day after; but he set his teeth and went through with it gamely.

it’s up to you. Do your best for me, won’t you?”

Perhaps, thought Harriet, Peter knew the right way with his nephew.

The boy was unblushingly ready to consider other people’s money his own;
and probably, if Peter had simply backed his bill, he would have thought his
uncle easy game and proceeded to issue more paper on the same terms. As
it was, he seemed inclined to stop and think. And he had, what she herself
lacked, the grace of gratitude. His facile acceptance of favors might be a
sign of shallowness; still, it had cost him something to scribble that painful
note.

It was only when, in her own room after Hall, she set about writing to

Peter, that she realized how awkward her own task was going to be. To put
down a brief explanation of her own acquaintance with Lord Saint-George
and a reassuring account of his accident was child’s play. The difficulties
began with the matter of the young man’s finances. Her first draft ran
easily; it was slightly humorous and rather gave the benefactor to
understand that his precious balms were calculated to break the recipient’s
head, where other agents had not already broken it. She rather enjoyed
writing this one. On reading it over, she was disappointed to find that it had
an air of officious impertinence. She tore it up.

The students were making a vast noise of trampling and laughter in the

corridor. Harriet briefly cursed them and tried again.

The second draft began stiffly: “Dear Peter—I am writing on behalf of

your nephew, who has unfortunately—”

This one, when finished, conveyed the impression that she disapproved

strongly of uncle and nephew alike, and was anxious to dissociate herself as
far as possible from their affairs.

She tore it up, cursed the students again and made a third draft.
This, when completed, turned out to be a moving, and indeed,

powerful piece of special pleading on the young sinner’s behalf, but
contained remarkably little of the gratitude and repentance which she had
been instructed to convey. The fourth draft, erring in the opposite direction,
was merely fulsome.

noisy brats!) Why can’t I write a straightforward piece of English on a set
subject?”

detached intellect bent meekly to its academic task and produced the
answer.

“Because, however you put it, all this is going to hurt his pride

damnably.”

Answer adjudged correct.
What she had to say, stripped of its verbiage, was: Your nephew has

been behaving foolishly and dishonestly, and I know it; he gets on badly
with his parents, and I know that, too; he has taken me into his confidence
and, what is more, into yours, where I have no right to be; in fact, I know a
great many things you would rather I did not know, and you can’t lift a hand
to prevent it.

In fact, for the first time in their acquaintance, she had the upper hand

of Peter Wimsey, and could rub his aristocratic nose in the dirt if she wanted
to. Since she had been looking for such an opportunity for five years, it
would be odd if she did not hasten to take advantage of it.

Slowly and with extreme pains, she started on Draft No. 5.

Dear Peter,

I don’t know whether you know that your nephew is in the

Infirmary, recovering from what might have been a nasty motor
accident. His right shoulder is dislocated and his head badly cut; but he
is getting on all right and is lucky not to have been killed. Apparently
he skidded into a telegraph pole. I don’t know the details; perhaps you
have already heard from his people. I met him by chance a few days
ago, and only heard of the accident today, when I went round to see
him.

So far, so good; now for the awkward bit.

One of his eyes was bandaged up and the other badly swollen, so

he asked me to read him the letter he had just that moment received
from you. (Please don’t think his sight is damaged—I asked the nurse,
and it’s only cuts and bruises.) There was nobody else to read it to him,
as his parents left Oxford this morning. As he can’t write much
himself, he asks me to send you the enclosed and to say he thanks you
very much and is sorry. He appreciates your confidence and will do
exactly as you ask him, as soon as he is well enough.

She hoped there was nothing there that could offend. She had started to
write “honorably do as you ask,” and then erased the first word: to mention
honor was to suggest its opposite. Her consciousness seemed to have
become all one exposed nerve-center, sensitive to the lightest breath of
innuendo in her own words.

I didn’t stay long, as he was really a good bit under the weather,

but they assure me he is doing very well. He insisted on writing this
note himself, though I suppose I oughtn’t to have let him. I’ll look him
up again before I leave Oxford—entirely for my own sake, because he

is perfectly charming. I hope you don’t mind my saying so, though I’m
sure you don’t need to be told it.

Yours,

Harriet D. Vane

I seem to be taking a lot of trouble about this, she thought, as she

carefully re-read it. If I believed Miss de Vine, I might begin to imagine—
damn those students!—Would anybody believe it could take one two hours
to write a simple letter?

She put the letter resolutely into an envelope, and addressed and

stamped it. Nobody, having put on a twopenny-half-penny stamp, was ever
known to open the envelope again. That was done. For a couple of hours
now she would devote herself to the affairs of Sheridan Le Fanu.

She worked away happily till half-past ten; the racket in the passage

calmed down; words flowed smoothly. From time to time, she looked up
from her paper, hesitating for a word, and saw through the window the
lights of Burleigh and Queen Elizabeth burning back across the quad,
counterparts of her own. Many of them, no doubt, illumined cheerful
parties, like the one in the Annexe; others lent their aid to people who, like
herself, were engaged in the elusive pursuit of knowledge, covering paper
with ink and hesitating now and again over a word. She felt herself to be a
living part of a community engaged in a common purpose. “Wilkie
Collins,” wrote Harriet, “was always handicapped in his treatment of the
supernatural by the fatal itch” (could one be handicapped by an itch? Yes,
why not? Let it go, anyway, for the moment)—“the fatal itch to explain
everything. His legal training—” Bother! Too long. “…was handicapped by
the lawyer’s fatal habit of explaining everything. His ghaisties and
ghoulies”—no; worn-out humor—“His dream-phantasies and apparitions
are too careful to tuck their shrouds neatly about them and leave no loose

ends to trouble us. It is in Le Fanu that we find the natural maker of—
natural master of—the master of the uncanny whose mastery comes by
nature. If we compare—”

Before the comparison could be instituted, the lamp went suddenly

out.

Nothing happened. “Fused!” said Harriet, opening the door to investigate.
The corridor was in darkness, and a lamentable outcry on either side
proclaimed that the lights were out in the whole of Tudor.

main block of the building. She was soon swept into a crowd of students,
some with torches and some clinging to those that had them, all clamoring
and wanting to know what was wrong with the lights.

to find anybody she recognized. “The main fuse must have gone. Where’s
the fuse-box?”

“I think it’s under the stairs,” said somebody.
“Stay where you are,” said Harriet. “I’ll go and see.”
Nobody, naturally, stayed where she was. Everybody came helpfully

and angrily downstairs.

“It’s the Poltergeist,” said somebody.
“Let’s catch her this time,” said somebody else.
“Perhaps it’s only blown,” suggested a timid voice out of the darkness.
“Blown be blowed!” exclaimed a louder voice, scornfully. “How often

does a main fuse blow?” Then, in an agitated whisper, “Hellup, it’s the
Chilperic. Sorry I spoke.”

member of the Senior Common Room. “Have you met Miss Barton

anywhere?”

“No, I’ve only just got out of bed.”
“Miss Barton isn’t there,” said a voice from the hall below, and then

another voice chimed in:

“Somebody’s pulled out the main fuse and taken it away!”
And then, in a shrill cry from someone at the end of the lower corridor:

“There she goes! Look! running across the quad!”

students into the midst of those already milling in the hall. There was a
cram in the doorway. She lost Miss Chilperic and was left behind in the
struggle. Then, as she thrust her way through on to the terrace, she saw
under the dim sky a string of runners stretched across the quad. Voices were
calling shrilly. Then, as the first half-dozen or so of the pursuers were
outlined against the blazing lower windows of Burleigh, those lights too
were blacked out.

itself, but to Queen Elizabeth, which, she judged, would be the next point of
attack. The side-door would, she knew, be locked. She dashed past the hall
stair and through to the portico, where she flung herself upon the main door.
That was locked also. She stepped back and shouted through the nearest
window: “Look out! There’s somebody in here playing tricks. I’m coming
in.” A student put out a tousled head. Other heads appeared. “Let me get
past,” said Harriet, flinging the sash up, and hauling herself up over the sill.
“They’re putting out all the lights in College. Where’s your fuse-box?”

“I’m sure I don’t know,” said the student, as Harriet plunged across the

room.

cry outside had reached Queen Elizabeth. Somebody found the front door
and unlocked it, and the tumult increased, those within surging out and
those outside surging in. A voice said: “Somebody came through my room
and went out of the window, just after the lights went out.” Torches
appeared. Here and there a face—mostly unfamiliar—was momentarily lit
up. Then the lights in the New Quad began to go out also, beginning on the
South side. Everybody was running aimlessly. Harriet, dashing along the
plinth, cannoned full tilt into somebody and flashed the torch in her face. It
was the Dean.

held on to her.

“What’s happening?” said the Dean.
“Stand still,” said Harriet: “I’ll have an alibi for you if I die for it.” As

she spoke, the lights on the North-East angle went out. “You’re all right,”
said Harriet. “Now then! make for the West Staircase and we’ll catch her.”

for the entrance to the West Staircase was blocked with a crowd of students,
while a crowd of scouts, released by Carrie from their own Wing, added to
the congestion. Harriet and the Dean forced a pathway through them, and
found Miss Lydgate standing bewildered, and clasping her proof-sheets to
her bosom, being determined that this time nothing should happen to them.
They scooped her up with them—“like playing ‘Staggie,’” thought Harriet
—and made their way to the fuse-boxes under the stair. There they found
Padgett, grimly on guard, with his trousers hastily pulled on over his
pajamas and a rolling-pin in his hand.

“They don’t get this,” said Padgett. “You leave it to me, madam Dean,

miss. Just turning into my bed, I was, all the late-leave ladies being in. My
wife’s telephoning across to Jackson to fetch over some new fuses. Have

you seen the boxes, miss? Wrenched open with a chisel, they was, or
summat of that. A nice thing to happen. But they won’t get this.”

House, the Infirmary, and the Scouts’ Wing entrenched behind its relocked
grille, the lights burned on steadily. But when Jackson arrived with the new
fuses, every darkened building showed its trail of damage. While Padgett
had sat by the mouse-hole, waiting for the mouse that did not come, the
Poltergeist had passed through the college, breaking ink-bottles, flinging
papers into the fire, smashing lamps and crockery and throwing books
through the windowpanes. In the Hall, where the main fuse had also been
taken, the silver cups on the High Table had been hurled at the portraits,
breaking the glass, and the plaster bust of a Victorian benefactor pitched
down the stone stair, to end in a fragmentary trail of detached side-whiskers
and disintegrated features.

grateful for. We’ve seen the last of the Reverend Melchisedek Entwistle.
But, oh, lord!”

CHAPTER X

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;

Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;

Thou makst faults graces that to thee resort.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

It would seem, at first sight, as though, in an episode witnessed by so many
people and lasting altogether about an hour (counting, that is, from the first
alarm in Tudor to the refitting of the final fuse) it should have been easy to
find alibis for all the innocent. In practice, it was not so at all, chiefly owing
to the stubborn refusal of human beings to stay where they are put. It was
the very multiplicity of witnesses that made the difficulty; for it seemed
likely that the culprit had mixed with the crowd over and over again in the
dark. Some alibis were established for certain: Harriet and the Dean had
been standing together when the lights were extinguished on the North-east
angle of the New Quad; the Warden had not left her own house till after the
uproar had started, as her household staff could attest; the two porters were
vouched for by their respective wives, and had, in fact, never been
suspected, since on various earlier occasions disturbances had occurred
while they were at their posts; the Infirmarian and the Infirmary maid had
also been together the whole time. Miss Hudson, the student who had been
considered a “possible,” had been at a coffee-party when the trouble began,
and was clear; Miss Lydgate also, to Harriet’s great relief, had been in
Queen Elizabeth, enjoying the hospitality of a party of Third Years; she had
just risen to say good night, remarking that it was past her usual time, when

the lights had gone out. She had then been caught up in the throng and, as
soon as she could free herself, had run hastily up to her own room to rescue
her proofs.

Miss Barton was exciting and mysterious. According to her own account,
she had been sitting working when the fuse was pulled out in Tudor. After
trying the wall-switch, she had looked out of the window, seen the figure
hastening across the quad, and gone immediately in pursuit. The figure had
dodged her round Burleigh twice, and had then suddenly come upon her
from behind, flung her against the wall “with extraordinary strength” and
knocked her torch from her hand. Before she could recover herself, the evil-
doer had extinguished the Burleigh lights and gone again. Miss Barton
could give no description of this person, except that it wore “something
dark” and ran very fast. She had not seen its face. The only proof of this
story was that Miss Barton certainly had received a heavy bruise on the side
of the face where, so she said, she had been flung against an angle of the
building. She had remained where she lay for a few minutes after receiving
the blow; by that time the excitement had spread to the New Quad. Here she
had certainly been seen for a few seconds together by a pair of students. She
had then run to look for the Dean, found her room empty, run out again and
joined Harriet and the rest in the West Staircase.

“There she goes!” had been raised at Tudor, she had been among the first to
run out, but, having no torch, and being too much excited to notice where
she was going, she had tripped and fallen down the steps of the terrace,
twisting her foot slightly. This had made her late in arriving on the scene.
She had come up with the crowd at Queen Elizabeth, been carried in with it
through the portico and run straight into the New Quadrangle Buildings.

She had thought she heard footsteps scurrying along to her right, and had
followed them, when the lights had gone out and, not knowing the building
at all well, she had wandered about in some confusion, till at last she found
the way out into the Quad. Nobody seemed able to remember seeing Miss
Chilperic at all after she left Tudor; she was that kind of person.

lights in her building had been the last to go out, and her windows looked
outward upon the road and not upon the quad, so that she had known
nothing about the affair till a late stage in the proceedings. When the
darkness fell on her she went (so she said) to the Bursar’s set opposite,
electrical replacements being in the Bursar’s department. The Bursar was
not in her bedroom or office; but as Miss Allison came out from looking for
her, she emerged from the place where the fuse-boxes were, to announce
the disappearance of the main fuse. Treasurer and Bursar had then joined
the crowd in the quadrangle.

most incredible of all. She lived above the Treasurer and had been working
at an article for a learned Society’s transactions. When her lights had gone
out, she had said, “Bother!” taken a pair of candles from a stock which she
kept for such emergencies, and gone quietly on working.

Miss Burrows asserted that she had been having a bath when the

Burleigh Building Lights failed, and, by an extraordinary coincidence, had
found, on getting hastily out of it, that she had left her towel in her
bedroom. She did not possess a self-contained set with a private bathroom,
and so was obliged to grope, with her dressing-gown clutched about her
dripping body, along the passage to her bedroom, and there dry and dress
herself in the dark. This had taken a surprisingly long time and, when she

came up with the main party, most of the fun was over. No proof, except the
undoubted presence of soapy water in a bathroom on her floor.

St. Cross Road. She had gone to bed and to sleep, being very tired, and
knew nothing about it till it was all over. The same story was told by Mrs.
Goodwin, who had returned to College only that day, rather exhausted by
sick-nursing. As for Miss Hillyard and Miss de Vine, living above Miss
Lydgate; their lights had never gone out at all, and, their windows facing on
the road, they had never known that anything was wrong, putting down a
vague noise in the quad to the natural cussedness of undergraduates.

the mousehole, that Harriet had done what she should have done earlier, and
attempted to make a count of the Senior Common Room. She had then
found them all in the places where, by their subsequent accounts of
themselves, they should have been. But to collect them all into one lighted
room and keep them there was not so easy. She established Miss Lydgate in
her own room and went to look for the rest, asking them to go straight down
to Miss Lydgate’s room and stay there. The Warden, meanwhile, had
arrived and was addressing the students, imploring them also to stay where
they were and keep quiet. Unfortunately, just as it began to seem possible to
make sure of everybody’s whereabouts, some inquisitive person, who had
broken away from the rest, had gone roaming through the Old Quad,
arrived, breathless, to announce the tale of damage in the Hall. Instantly,
pandemonium broke loose again. Dons who were trotting like lambs into
the sheep-fold suddenly lost their heads and raced with the students into the
darkness. Miss Burrows screamed “The Library!” and tore away, and the
Bursar, with an anguished cry for the College property, dashed after her.
The Dean called, “Stop them!” and Miss Pyke and Miss Hillyard, taking the

command to themselves, rushed out and disappeared. In the resulting
confusion, everybody got lost twenty times over; and by the time the fuses
were replaced and the community at last gathered and numbered, the
damage had all been done.

It is surprising how much can be done in a very few minutes. Harriet

calculated that the Hall had probably been wrecked first of all, being in a
detached wing, where noise was not likely to attract much attention; all that
was done there could have been done in a couple of minutes. From the
extinguishing of the first lights in Tudor to that of the last lights in the New
Quad, rather less than ten minutes had elapsed. The third, and longest part
of the business—the wrecking of the rooms in the darkened buildings, had
taken anything from a quarter to half an hour.

The Warden addressed the College after Chapel, again enjoining

discretion, begging the culprit to come forward, and promising that all
possible measures should be taken to identify her in case she did not
confess.

“I have no intention,” said Dr. Baring, “of inflicting any restriction or

punishment upon the college in general for the act of one irresponsible
person. I will ask anyone who has any suggestion to make or any evidence
to offer with regard to the identity of this foolish practical joker to come
privately, either to the Dean or myself, and make the communication in
strict confidence.”

She added a few words about the solidarity of the College and

departed with a grave face, her gown flowing behind her.

The glaziers were already at work restoring damaged window-panes.

In the Hall, the Bursar was affixing neat cards in the places of portraits
whose glass had been broken: “Portrait of Miss Matheson: Warden 1899–

1912. Removed for cleaning.” Broken crockery was being swept from the
grass of the Old Quad. The College was engaged in presenting a serene face
to the world.

It did not improve anybody’s temper to discover a printed message,

consisting of “HA! HA!” and a vulgar epithet, pasted across the mirror in the

Senior Common Room, shortly before lunch. The Common Room had been
empty from 9 o’clock onwards, so far as was known. The Common Room
maid, going in at lunch-time with the coffee-cups, had been the first to see
the notice; and it had by then dried hard. The Bursar, who had missed her
pot of Gloy after the night’s excitement, found it placed neatly in the center
of the S.C.R. mantelpiece.

The feeling in the Senior Common Room after this episode underwent

a subtle alteration. Tongues were sharpened; the veneer of detachment
began to wear thin; the uneasiness of suspicion began to make itself felt;
only Miss Lydgate and the Dean, being proved innocent, remained
unmoved.

“Your bad luck seems to have repeated itself, Miss Barton,” observed

Miss Pyke, acidly. “Both in the Library affair and in this last outbreak, you
seem to have been first on the spot and yet unhappily prevented from
securing the culprit.”

“Yes,” said Miss Barton. “It’s very unfortunate. If next time my gown

gets taken as well, the College sleuth will begin to smell a rat.”

“Very trying for you, Mrs. Goodwin,” said Miss Hillyard, “to come

back to all this upset, just when you needed a rest. I trust your little boy is
better. It is particularly tiresome, because all the time you were away we
had no disturbance at all.”

does these things must be quite demented. Of course these disorders do tend
to occur in celibate, or chiefly celibate communities. It is a kind of
compensation, I suppose, for the lack of other excitements.”

“The great mistake,” said Miss Burrows, “was, of course, our not

keeping together. Naturally I wanted to see if any damage had been done in
the Library—but why so many people should have come pelting after me
—”

“The Hall was my concern,” said the Bursar.
“Oh! you did get to the Hall? I completely lost sight of you in the

quad.”

“That,” said Miss Hillyard, “was exactly the catastrophe I was trying

to avoid when I pursued you. I called loudly to you to stop. You must have
heard me.”

“There was too much noise to hear anything,” said Miss Stevens.
“I came to Miss Lydgate’s room,” said Miss Shaw, “the moment I

could get dressed, understanding that everybody was to be there. But there
was really nobody. I thought I must have misunderstood, so I tried to find
Miss Vane, but she seemed to have gone off into the Ewigkeit.”

“It must have taken you a remarkably long time to dress,” said Miss

Burrows. “Anybody could run three times round College in the time it takes
you to pull your stockings on.”

“Somebody,” said Miss Shaw, “apparently did.”

“They’re beginning to get fractious,” said Harriet to the Dean.
“What can you expect? The silly cuckoos! If they’d only sat tight on

their little behinds last night, we could have cleared the whole business up.
It’s not your fault. You couldn’t be everywhere at once. How we can expect

discipline from the students, when a whole bunch of middle-aged seniors
behave like a flock of hens in a crisis, I can’t think. Who’s that out there,
conducting that strident conversation with a top window? Oh! I think it’s
Baker’s young man. Well, discipline must be observed, I suppose. Give me
the house-telephone, would you? Thanks. I don’t see how we’re to prevent
this last outbreak from getting—Oh! Martha! The Dean’s compliments, if
you please, to Miss Baker, and will she kindly bear in mind the rule about
morning visitors—And the students are getting rather annoyed about the
destruction of their property. I think they’re actually getting worked up to
calling a J.C.R. meeting, and it’s very unfair on them, poor lambs, to let
them go on suspecting one another, but what can we do about it? Thank
God, it’s the last week of term! I suppose we’re not making a ghastly
mistake? It must be one of us, and not a student or a scout.”

“We seem to have eliminated the students—unless it’s a conspiracy

between two of them. It might be that. Hudson and Cattermole together. But
as for the scouts—I can show you this, now, I suppose. Would any of the
scouts quote Virgil?”

seem likely. Oh, dear!”

The reply to Harriet’s letter arrived by return.

My dear Harriet,

It is exceedingly good of you to be bothered with my graceless

nephew. I am afraid the episode must have left you with an unfortunate
impression of both of us.

I am very fond of the boy, and he is, as you say, attractive; but he

is rather easily led, and my brother is not, in my opinion, handling him
in the wisest way. Considering his expectations, Gerald is kept
absurdly short of money, and naturally he feels he has a right to

anything he can lay hands on. Still, he must learn to draw the line
between carelessness and dishonesty. I have offered to augment his
allowance myself, but the suggestion was not well received at home.
His parents, I know, feel that I am stealing his confidence from them;
but if I refused to help him, he would go elsewhere and get himself
into worse trouble. Though I do not like the position into which I am
forced of “Codlin is the friend, not Short,” I still think it better that he
should turn to me than to an outsider. I call this family pride; it may be
mere vanity; I know it is vexation of spirit.

Let me assure you that so far, when I have trusted Gerald with

anything, he has not let me down. He is amenable to some of the
shibboleths. But he is not amenable to a discipline of alternate
indulgence and severity; and indeed I do not know who is.

I must again apologize for troubling you with our family affairs.

What on earth are you doing in Oxford? Have you retired from the
world to pursue the contemplative life? I will not attempt to dissuade
you now, but shall address you on the subject in the usual form on the
1st April next.

Yours in all gratitude,

P.D.B.W.

I had forgotten to say, thank you for telling me about the accident and
reassuring me as to its results. It was the first I had heard of it—as old
James Forsyte says, “Nobody ever tells me anything.” I will oblige
with a few kind words.

“Poor old Peter!” said Harriet.
The remark probably deserves to be included in an anthology of Great

First Occasions.

considerably improved in appearance; but his expression was worried. His
bed strewn with untidy papers, he seemed to be trying to cope with his
affairs and to be making but heavy weather of it. He brightened up
considerably at sight of Harriet.

for this kind of thing, and all the beastly bills keep sliding off the bed. I can
write my name pretty well, but I can’t keep track of things. I’m sure I’ve
paid some of these brutes twice over.”

“Let me help; can I?”
“I hoped you’d say that. It’s so nice of you to spoil me, isn’t it? I can’t

think how things mount up so. They rook one shockingly at these places.
But one must have something to eat, mustn’t one? And belong to a few
clubs. And play a game or two. Of course polo comes a bit expensive, but
it’s rather done just now. It’s nothing, really. Of course, the mistake was
going round with that bunch in Town last vac. Mother imagines they’re
O.K. because they’re in the stud-book, but they’re pretty hot, really. She’ll
be no end surprised if they end up in gaol, and her white-headed boy with
them. Sad degeneracy of old landed families, and that kind of thing. Solemn
rebuke by learned judge. I somehow got behindhand with things about the
New Year, and never caught up again. It looks to me as though Uncle Peter
was going to get a bit of a shock. He’s written, by the way. Much more like
himself.”

He tossed the letter over.

Dear Jerry,

Of all the thundering nuisances that ever embittered the lives of

their long-suffering relatives, you are the worst. For God’s sake put
down that racing car before you kill yourself; strange as it may appear,

I still retain some lingering remnants of affection for you. I hope they
take your license away for life, and I hope you feel like hell. You
probably do. Don’t worry any more about the money.

I am writing to thank Miss Vane for her kindness to you. She is a

person whose good opinion I value, so be merciful to my feelings as a
man and an uncle.

Bunter has just found three silver threads among the gold. He is

incredibly shocked. He begs to tender you his respectful
commiseration, and advises scalp-massage (for me, I mean).

When you can manage it, send a line to report progress to your

querulous and rapidly-decaying uncle.

P.W.

“He’ll get a whole crop of silver threads when he realizes that I hadn’t

paid up the insurance,” said the viscount, callously, as he took the letter
back.

“What!”
“Fortunately there was nobody else involved, and the police weren’t

on the spot. But I suppose I shall hear from the Post Office about their
blasted telegraph pole. If I have to go before the magistrates and the
Governor hears of it, he’ll be annoyed. It’ll cost a bit to get the car put right.
I’d throw the damned thing away, only Dad gave it to me in one of his
generous fits. And of course, about the first thing he asked when I came out
from under was whether the insurance was all right. And being in no state
to argue, I said Yes. If only it doesn’t get into the papers about the
insurance, we’re all right—only the repairs will make a nice little item in
Uncle Peter’s total.”

“Is it fair to make him pay for that?”

ought to pay the insurance himself. He’s like the Old Man of Thermopylae
—never does anything properly. If you come to that, it isn’t fair to make
Uncle Peter pay for all the horses that fall down when one backs them. Or
for all the rotten little gold-diggers one carts round, either—I shall have to
lump them together under ‘Sundries.’ And he’ll say, ‘Ah, yes! Postage
stamps, telephone calls and live wires.’ And then I shall lose my head and
say, ‘Well, Uncle—’ I hate those sentences that start with ‘Well, Uncle.’
They always seem to go on and on and lead anywhere.”

Look! I’ve got all these bills sorted. Shall I write out the cheques for you to
sign?”

till I tell him. I suppose that’s the way he gets criminals to come across with
it. It’s not a nice characteristic. Have you got that note from Levy? That’s
the main thing. And there’s a letter from a chap called Cartwright that’s
rather important. I borrowed a bit from him up in Town once or twice.
What’s he make it come to? …Oh, rot! It can’t be as much as that …Let’s
see …Well, I suppose he’s right …And Archie Campbell—he’s my
bookmaker—God! what a lot of screws! they oughtn’t to allow the poor
beasts out. And the odds-and-ends here? What a marvelously neat way you
have with these things, haven’t you? Shall we tot them all up and see where
we get to? Then if I faint, you can ring the bell for Nurse.”

bit unlikely, but I can’t make it come any less.”

we’ll see. Oh, hell! what have we here?”

“The portrait of a blinking idiot,” said Harriet, irresistibly.

there’s a ‘Well, Uncle’ look about this, all right. Of course, I get my
quarter’s allowance at the end of the month, but there’s the vac. to get
through and all next term. One thing, I’ll have to go home and be good;
can’t get about the place much like this. The Governor more or less hinted
that I ought to pay my own doctor’s bill, but I wasn’t taking the hint.
Mother blames Uncle Peter for the whole thing.”

“Why on earth?”
“Setting me a bad example of furious driving. He is a bit hot, of

course, but he never seems to get my foul luck.”

“Can he possibly be a better driver?”
“Darling Harriet, that’s unkind. You don’t mind my calling you

Harriet?”

“As a matter of fact, I do, rather.”
“But I can’t keep on saying ‘Miss Vane’ to a person who knows all my

hideous secrets. Perhaps I’d better accustom myself to saying ‘Aunt
Harriet’ …What’s wrong with that? You simply can’t refuse to be an
adopted aunt to me. My Aunt Mary has gone all domestic and hasn’t time
for me, and my mother’s sisters are the original gorgons. I’m dreadfully
unappreciated and quite auntless for all practical purposes.”

“You deserve neither aunts nor uncles, considering how you treat

them. Do you mean to finish these cheques today? Because, if not, I have
other things to do.”

what a good influence you have over me. Unbending devotion to duty. If
you’d only take me in hand I might turn out quite well after all.”

“Sign, please.”
“But you don’t seem very susceptible. Poor Uncle Peter!”

“It will be poor Uncle Peter by the time you’ve finished.”
“That’s what I mean. Fifty-three, nineteen, four—it’s shocking the way

other people smoke one’s fags, and I’m sure my scout bags half of them.
Twenty-six, twelve, eight. Nineteen, seven, two. A hundred quid gone
before you’ve time to look at it. Thirty-one, fourteen. Twelve, nine, six.
Five, fifteen, three. What’s all this tale about ghosts playing merry hell in
Shrewsbury?”

that?”

no doubt, but too grubby. There’s a chap on my staircase who came up
today with a story … I forget, he told me not to mention it. What’s it all
about? and why the hush-hush?”

harm this kind of thing does to the College.”

“Well, but it’s only a rag, isn’t it?”
“I’m afraid it’s a bit more than that. Look here, if I tell you why it’s

hush-hush, will you promise not to pass it on?”

“Well,” said Lord Saint-George, candidly, “you know how my tongue

runs away with me. I’m not very dependable.”

“Your uncle says you are.”
“Uncle Peter? Good-lord! he must be potty. Sad to see a fine brain

going to rack and ruin. Of course, he’s not as young as he was …You’re
looking very sober about it.”

“It is rather grim, really. We’re afraid the trouble’s caused by

somebody who’s not quite right in her head. Not a student—but of course
we can’t very well tell the students that, especially when we don’t know
who it is.”

point. Naturally you don’t want a thing like that to get about. Well, I’ll not
say a word—honestly, I won’t. And if anybody mentions it I’ll register a
concentrated expression of no enthusiasm. I say! Do you know, I wonder if
I’ve met your ghost.”

“Met her?”
“Yes. I certainly met somebody who didn’t seem quite all there. It

scared me a bit. You’ll be the first person I’ve told about it.”

“When was this? Tell me about it.”
“End of last term. I was awfully short of cash, and I’d had a bet with a

man that I’d get into Shrewsbury and—” He stopped and looked up at her
with the smile that was so uncannily not his own. “What do you know about
that?”

“If you mean that bit of the wall by the private gate, it’s having a set of

spikes put on it. The revolving sort.”

moon and all that—but it seemed about the last chance to get that ten quid,
so I hopped over. There’s a bit of a garden there.”

“The Fellows’ Garden. Yes.”
“Yes. Well, I was just pushing along there, when somebody hopped out

from behind a bush and grabbed me. My heart nearly shot right out of my
mouth on to the lawn. I wanted to do a bunk.”

“What was the person like?”
“It was in black and had a bit of black stuff sort of twisted round its

head. I couldn’t see anything but its eyes, and they looked beastly. So I said,
‘Oh, gosh!’ and she said, ‘Which of ’em do you want?’ in a horrid voice,
like glue. Well, that wasn’t nice and not what I expected. I don’t pretend to
be a good boy, but such were not my intentions at the time. So I said,

‘Nothing of that sort; I only made a bet I wouldn’t be caught, and I have
been caught, so I’ll go away and I’m sorry.’ So she said, ‘Yes, go away. We
murder beautiful boys like you and eat their hearts out.’ So I said, ‘Good
God! how very unpleasant!’ I didn’t like it a bit.”

“Are you making all this up?”
“Honestly, I’m not. Then she said, ‘The other one had fair hair, too.’

And I said, ‘No, did he really?’ And she said something, I forget what—it
seemed to me she had a kind of hungry look about her, if you know what I
mean—and anyhow, it was all most uncomfortable, and I said, ‘Excuse me,
I think I’d better be getting along,’ and I pulled free (she was uncommonly
strong in the wrists) and legged it over the wall like one, John Smith.”

Harriet looked at him, but he appeared to be perfectly serious.
“How tall was she?”
“About your height, I should think, or a bit less. Honestly, I was too

scared to notice much. I couldn’t recognize her again, I don’t think. She
didn’t give me the impression of being a young thing, and that’s about all I
can tell you.”

“And you say you’ve kept this remarkable story to yourself?”
“Yes. Doesn’t sound like me, does it? But there was something about it

—I don’t know. If I’d told any of the men, they’d have thought it howlingly
funny. But it wasn’t. So I didn’t mention it. It didn’t seem the right thing,
somehow.”

“I’m glad you didn’t want it laughed at.”
“No. The boy has quite nice instincts. Well, that’s all. Twenty-five,

eleven, nine; that blasted car simply eats oil and petrol—all those big
engines do. It’s going to be awfully awkward about that insurance. Please,
dear Aunt Harriet, need I do any more of these? They depress me.”

envelopes yourself.”

“Slave-driver. I shall burst into tears.”
“I’ll fetch you a handkerchief.”
“You are the most unwomanly woman I ever met. Uncle Peter has my

sincere sympathy. Look at this! Sixty-nine, fifteen—account rendered; I
wonder what it was all about.”

Harriet said nothing but continued to make out the cheques.
“One thing, there doesn’t seem to be much at Blackwell’s. A mere

trifle of six pounds twelve.”

“One halfpennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack.”
“Did you catch that habit of quotation from Uncle Peter?”
“You needn’t lay any more burdens on your uncle’s shoulders.”
“Must you rub it in? There’s practically nothing at the wine-merchant’s

either. Hard drinking has quite gone out. Isn’t that satisfactory? Of course,
the Governor obliges with a bottle or two from time to time. Did you like
that Niersteiner the other day? Uncle Peter obliged with that. How many
more of these things are there?”

“Quite a few.”
“Oh! My arm aches horribly.”
“If you’re really too tired—”
“No, I can manage.”
Half an hour later, Harriet said. “That’s the lot.”
“Thank God! Now talk prettily to me.”
“No; I must get back now. I’ll post these on my way.”
“You’re not really going? Right away?”
“Yes; right away to London.”
“Wish I was you. Shall you be up next term?”

“I don’t know.”
“Oh, dear, oh, dear! Well, kiss me good-bye nicely.”
Since she could think of no form of refusal that might not provoke

some nerve-shattering comment, Harriet sedately complied. She was
turning to go, when the nurse arrived to announce another visitor. This was
a young woman, dressed in the more foolish extreme of the current fashion,
with an intoxicated-looking hat and bright purple fingernails, who
advanced, crying sympathetically:

“Oh, darling Jerry! How too ruinously shattering!”
“Good lord, Gillian!” said the viscount, without very much

enthusiasm. “How did you—?”

“My lamb! You don’t sound very pleased to see me.”
Harriet escaped, and found the nurse in the passage, putting an armful

of roses in a bowl.

“I hope I haven’t tired your patient too much with all that business.”
“I’m glad you came to help him out with it; it was on his mind. Aren’t

these roses beautiful? The young lady brought them from London. He gets a
lot of visitors. But you can’t wonder, can you? He’s a dear boy, and the
things he says to Sister! It’s as much as one can do to keep a straight face.
He’s looking a lot better now, don’t you think? Mr. Whybrow’s made a
beautiful job of the cut on his head. He’s got his stitches out now—oh, yes!
it’ll hardly show at all. It is a mercy, isn’t it? Because he’s ever so
handsome.”

“Yes; he’s a very good-looking young man.”
“He takes after his father. Do you know the Duke of Denver? He’s

ever so handsome, too: I shouldn’t call the Duchess good-looking; more
distinguished. She was terribly afraid he might be disfigured for life, and it
would have been a pity. But Mr. Whybrow’s a splendid surgeon. You’ll see

he’ll be quite all right. Sister’s ever so pleased—we tell her she’s quite lost
her heart to Number Fifteen. I’m sure we shall all be sorry to say good-bye
to him; he keeps us all lively.”

“I expect he does.”
“And the way he pulls Matron’s leg. Impudent young monkey, she

calls him, but she can’t help laughing at his ways. Oh, dear! there’s Number
Seventeen ringing again. I expect she wants a bed-pan. You know your way
out, don’t you?”

Harriet departed; feeling that it might be rather an onerous position to

be aunt to Lord Saint-George.

“Of course,” said the Dean, “if anything should happen in vacation—”
“I rather doubt if it will,” said Harriet. “Not a big enough audience. A

public scandal is the thing aimed at, I imagine. But if another episode
should occur, it will narrow the field.”

“Yes; most of the S.C.R. will be away. Next term, what with the

Warden, Miss Lydgate and myself definitely clear of suspicion, we ought to
be able to patrol the place better. What are you going to do?”

altogether for a time, to do some work. This place gets you. It’s so
completely uncommercial. I think I’m getting a little shrill in my mind. I
need mellowing.”

“Why not work for a B.Litt.?”
“That would be rather fun. I’m afraid they wouldn’t accept Le Fanu,

would they? It would have to be somebody duller. I should enjoy a little
dullness. One would have to go on writing novels for bread and butter, but
I’d like an academic and meaty egg to my tea for a change.”

can’t leave Miss Lydgate now till those proofs are in the printer’s hands.”

“I’m almost afraid to set her loose this vac. She is dissatisfied with her

chapter on Gerard Manley Hopkins; she feels she may have attacked him
from the wrong angle altogether.”

“Oh, no!”
“I’m afraid it’s Oh, yes! …Well, I’ll cope with that, anyway. And the

rest—well, we shall see what happens.”

the car, Padgett came up to her.

“Excuse me, miss, but the Dean thinks you would like to see this, miss.

In Miss de Vine’s fireplace it was found this morning, miss.”

had been cut out from the advertising columns.

“Is Miss de Vine still in College?”
“She left by the 10:10, miss.”
“I’ll keep this, Padgett, thank you. Does Miss de Vine usually read the

Daily Trumpet?”

“I shouldn’t think so, miss. It would be more likely the Times or

Telegraph. But you could easy find out.”

“Of course, anybody might have dropped this in the fireplace. It proves

nothing. But I’m very glad to have seen it. Good morning, Padgett.”

“Good morning, miss.”

CHAPTER XI

Leave me, o love, which reachest but to dust;
And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things;
Grow rich in that which never taketh rust,
Whatever fades, but fading pleasures brings.
Draw in thy beams, and humble all thy might
To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be;
Which breaks the clouds, and opens forth the light
That doth both shine and give us sight to see.

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY

Town seemed remarkably empty and uninteresting. Yet a lot of things were
going on. Harriet saw her agent and publisher, signed a contract for serial
rights, heard the inner history of the quarrel between Lord Gobbersleigh,
the newspaper proprietor, and Mr. Adrian Cloot, the reviewer, entered
warmly into the triangular dispute raging among Gargantua Colour-Talkies
Ltd., Mr. Garrick Drury, the actor, and Mrs. Snell-Wilmington, author of
Passion-flower Pie, and into the details of Miss Sugar Toobin’s monstrous
libel action against the Daily Headline, and was, of course, passionately
interested to learn that Jacqueline Squills had made a malicious exposé of
her second divorced husband’s habits and character in her new novel, Gas-
Filled Bulbs.

Yet, somehow, these distractions failed to keep her amused. To make

matters worse, her new mystery novel had got somehow stuck. She had five
suspects, neatly confined in an old water-mill with no means of entrance or
egress except by a plank bridge, and all provided with motives and alibis

for a pleasantly original kind of murder. There seemed to be nothing
fundamentally wrong with the thing. But the permutations and
combinations of the five people’s relationships were beginning to take on an
unnatural, an incredible symmetry. Human beings were not like that; human
problems were not like that; what you really got was two hundred or so
people running like rabbits in and out of a college, doing their work, living
their lives, and actuated all the time by motives unfathomable even to
themselves, and then, in the midst of it all—not a plain, understandable
murder, but an unmeaning and inexplicable lunacy.

feelings, when one’s own remained mysterious? Why did one look forward
with irritation to the receipt of a letter on April 1st, and then feel alarmed
and affronted when it did not arrive by the first post? Very likely the letter
had been sent to Oxford. There was no possible urgency about it, since one
knew what it would contain and how it had to be answered; but it was
annoying to sit about, expecting it.

unnecessary cable from American magazine representative to say she was
shortly arriving in England and very anxious to talk to Miss Harriet Vane
about a story for their publication. Cordially. What on earth did these
people want to talk about? You did not write stories by talking about them.

Ring. Second post. Letter with Italian stamp. (Slight delay in sorting,

no doubt.) Oh, thank you, Miss Bracey. Imbecile, writing very bad English,
was eager to translate Miss Vane’s works into Italian. Could Miss Vane
inform the writer of what books she had composed? Translators were all
like that—no English, no sense, no backing. Harriet said briefly what she
thought of them, told Miss Bracey to refer the matter to the agent and
returned to her dictation.

Winchester’s bedroom? With a curious feeling of …”

would be ridiculous to put through an expensive foreign call.) Hullo! Yes.
Speaking. Oh?

She might have known it. There was a kind of mild determination

about Reggie Pomfret. Would Miss Vane, could Miss Vane put up with his
company for dinner and the new show at the Palladium? That night? the
next night? Any night? That very night? Mr. Pomfret was inarticulate with
pleasure. Thank you. Ring off. Where were we, Miss Bracey?

Wilfrid to find his young woman’s handkerchief in the murdered man’s
bedroom. Agonizing. A curious feeling of—What should you feel like
under the circumstances, Miss Bracey?”

“I should think the laundry had made a mistake, I expect.”
“Oh, Miss Bracey! Well—we’d better say it was a lace handkerchief.

Winchester couldn’t have mistaken a lace handkerchief for one of his own,
whatever the laundry sent him.”

she’s been made rather a boyish, out-door person. And it’s not as if she was
in evening dress, because it was so important she should turn up in a tweed
costume.”

lace. Plain but good. Turn back to the description of the handkerchief …Oh,
dear! No, I’ll answer it. Yes? Yes? YES! … No, I’m afraid I can’t possibly.

No, really. Oh? Well, you had better ask my agents. Yes, that’s right. Good-
bye …Some club wanting a debate on ‘Should Genius Marry?’ The
question’s not likely to concern any of their members personally, so why do

they bother? …Yes, Miss Bracey? Oh, yes, Wilfrid. Bother Wilfrid! I’m
taking quite a dislike to the man.”

away in a rage and sallied out to attend a literary cocktail party. The room in
which it was held was exceedingly hot and crowded, and all the assembled
authors were discussing (a) publishers, (b) agents, (c) their own sales, (d)
other people’s sales, and (e) the extraordinary behavior of the Book of the
Moment selectors in awarding their ephemeral crown to Tasker
Hepplewater’s Mock Turtle. “I finished this book,” one distinguished
adjudicator had said, “with the tears running down my face.” The author of
Serpent’s Fang confided to Harriet over a petite saucisse and a glass of
sherry that they must have been tears of pure boredom; but the author of
Dust and Shiver said, No—they were probably tears of merriment, called
forth by the unintentional humor of the book; had she ever met
Hepplewater? A very angry young woman, whose book had been passed
over, declared that the whole thing was a notorious farce. The Book of the
Moment was selected from each publisher’s list in turn, so that her own
Ariadne Adams was automatically excluded from benefit, owing to the mere
fact that her publisher’s imprint had been honored in the previous January.
She had, however, received private assurance that the critic of the Morning
Star had sobbed like a child over the last hundred pages of Ariadne, and
would probably make it his Book of the Fortnight, if only the publisher
could be persuaded to take advertising space in the paper. The author of The
Squeezed Lemon agreed that advertising was at the bottom of it: had they
heard how the Daily Flashlight had tried to blackmail Humphrey Quint into
advertising with them? And how, on his refusal, they had said darkly, “Well,
you know what will happen, Mr. Quint?” And how no single Quint book
had received so much as a review from the Flashlight ever since? And how

Quint had advertised that fact in the Morning Star and sent up his net sales
50 per cent in consequence? Well, by some fantastic figure, anyhow. But
the author of Primrose Dalliance said that with the Book of the Moment
crowd, what counted was Personal Pull—surely they remembered that
Hepplewater had married Walton Strawberry’s latest wife’s sister. The
author of Jocund Day agreed about the Pull, but thought that in this instance
it was political, because there was some powerful anti-Fascist propaganda
in Mock Turtle and it was well known that you could always get old Sneep
Fortescue with a good smack at the Blackshirts.

“But what’s Mock Turtle about?” inquired Harriet.
On this point the authors were for the most part vague; but a young

man who wrote humorous magazine stories, and could therefore afford to
be wide-minded about novels, said he had read it and thought it rather
interesting, only a bit long. It was about a swimming instructor at a
watering-place, who had contracted such an unfortunate anti-nudity
complex through watching so many bathing-beauties that it completely
inhibited all his natural emotions. So he got a job on a whaler and fell in
love at first sight with an Eskimo, because she was such a beautiful bundle
of garments. So he married her and brought her back to live in a suburb,
where she fell in love with a vegetarian nudist. So then the husband went
slightly mad and contracted a complex about giant turtles, and spent all his
spare time staring into the turtle-tank at the Aquarium, and watching the
strange, slow monsters swimming significantly round in their encasing
shells. But of course a lot of things came into it—it was one of those books
that reflect the author’s reactions to Things in General. Altogether,
significant was, he thought, the word to describe it.

nothing in particular.

Harriet went back, irritated, to Mecklenburg Square. As she entered

the house, she could hear her telephone ringing apoplectically on the first
floor. She ran upstairs hastily—one never knew with telephone calls. As she
thrust her key into the lock, the telephone stopped dead.

contained press cuttings. One referred to her as Miss Vines and said she had
taken her degree at Cambridge; a second compared her work unfavorably
with that of an American thriller-writer; a third was a belated review of her
last book, which gave away the plot; a fourth attributed somebody else’s
thriller to her and stated that she “adopted a sporting outlook on life”
(whatever that might mean). “This,” said Harriet, much put out, “is one of
those days! April the First, indeed! And now I’ve got to dine with this
dashed undergraduate, and be made to feel the burden of incalculable age.”

There was a refreshing lack of complication about Reggie Pomfret. He
knew nothing about literary jealousies; he had no views about the
comparative importance of personal and professional loyalties; he laughed
heartily at obvious jokes; he did not expose your nerve-centers or his own;
he did not use words with double meanings; he did not challenge you to
attack him and then suddenly roll himself into an armadillo-like ball,
presenting a smooth, defensive surface of ironical quotations; he had no
overtones of any kind; he was a good-natured, not very clever, young man,
eager to give pleasure to someone who had shown him a kindness. Harriet
found him quite extraordinarily restful.

Harriet, on her own doorstep.

“Thanks awfully,” said Mr. Pomfret, “if it isn’t too late.”

opened the door of the flat and switched the light on. Mr. Pomfret stooped
courteously to pick up the letter lying on the mat.

“Oh, thank you,” said Harriet.
She preceded him into the sitting-room and let him remove her cloak

for her. A moment or two later, she became aware that she was still holding
the letter in her hand and that her guest and she were still standing.

“I beg your pardon. Do sit down.”
“Please—” said Mr. Pomfret, with a gesture that indicated, “Read it

and don’t mind me.”

what’s in it. What will you have? Will you help yourself?”

asked what he might mix for her. The drink question being settled, there
was a pause.

haven’t seen very much of her since—since that night when I made your
acquaintance, you know. Last time we met she said she was working rather
hard.”

“Oh, yes. I believe she is. She’s got Mods next term.”
“Oh, poor girl! She has a great admiration for you.”
“Has she? I don’t know why. I seem to remember ticking her off rather

brutally.”

Absolutely. I mean, we agree about having a great admiration for you.”

“How nice of you,” said Harriet, inattentively.
“Yes, really. Rather. I’ll never forget the way you tackled that fellow

Jukes. Did you see he got himself into trouble only a week or so later?”

“Yes. I’m not surprised.”
“No. A most unpleasant wart. Thoroughly scaly.”
“He always was.”
“Well, here’s to a long stretch for comrade Jukes. Not a bad show

tonight, don’t you think?”

Harriet pulled herself together. She was all at once tired of Mr. Pomfret

and wished he would go; but it was monstrous of her not to behave politely
to him. She exerted herself to talk with bright interest of the entertainment
to which he had kindly taken her and succeeded so well that it was nearly
fifteen minutes before Mr. Pomfret remembered his waiting taxi, and took
himself off in high spirits.

want to. It had spoilt the evening for her.

Dear Harriet,
I send in my demand notes with the brutal regularity of the

income-tax commissioners; and probably you say when you see the
envelopes, ‘Oh, God! I know what this is.’ The only difference is that,
some time or other, one has to take notice of the income-tax.

Will you marry me?—It’s beginning to look like one of those lines

in a farce—merely boring till it’s said often enough; and after that, you
get a bigger laugh every time it comes.

I should like to write you the kind of words that burn the paper

they are written on—but words like that have a way of being not only
unforgettable and unforgivable. You will burn the paper in any case;
and I would rather there should be nothing in it that you cannot forget
if you want to.

Well, that’s over. Don’t worry about it.

My nephew (whom you seem, by the way, to have stimulated to the
most extraordinary diligence) is cheering my exile by dark hints that
you are involved in some disagreeable and dangerous job of work at
Oxford about which he is in honor bound to say nothing. I hope he is
mistaken. But I know that, if you have put anything in hand,
disagreeableness and danger will not turn you back, and God forbid
they should. Whatever it is, you have my best wishes for it.

I am not my own master at the moment, and do not know where I

shall be sent next or when I shall be back—soon, I trust. In the
meantime may I hope to hear from time to time that all is well with
you?

Yours, more than my own,

PETER WIMSEY

After reading that letter, Harriet knew that she could not rest till it was

answered. The bitter unhappiness of its opening paragraphs was readily
explained by the last two. He probably thought—he could not possibly help
thinking—that she had known him all these years, only to confide in the
end, not in him, but in a boy less than half his age and his own nephew,
whom she had known only a couple of weeks and had little reason to trust.
He had made no comment and asked no questions—that made it worse.
More generously still, he had not only refrained from offers of help and
advice which she might have resented; he had deliberately acknowledged
that she had the right to run her own risks. “Do be careful of yourself; “I
hate to think of your being exposed to unpleasantness”; “If only I could be
there to protect you”; any such phrase would express the normal male
reaction. Not one man in ten thousand would say to the woman he loved, or
to any woman: “Disagreeableness and danger will not turn you back, and
God forbid they should.” That was an admission of equality, and she had

not expected it of him. If he conceived of marriage along those lines, then
the whole problem would have to be reviewed in that new light; but that
seemed scarcely possible. To take such a line and stick to it, he would have
to be, not a man but a miracle. But the business about Saint-George must be
cleared up immediately. She wrote quickly, without stopping to think too
much.

Dear Peter,

No. I can’t see my way to it. But thank you all the same. About

the Oxford business—I would have told you all about it long ago, only
that it is not my secret. I wouldn’t have told your nephew, only that he
had stumbled on part of it and I had to trust him with the rest to keep
from making unintentional mischief. I wish I could tell you; I should
be very glad of your help; if ever I get leave to, I will. It is rather
disagreeable but not dangerous, I hope. Thank you for not telling me to
run away and play—that’s the best compliment you ever paid me.

I hope your case, or whatever it is, is getting on all right. It must

be a tough one to take so long.

Harriet

Lord Peter Wimsey read this letter while seated upon the terrace of an

hotel overlooking the Pincian Gardens, which were bathed in brilliant
sunshine. It astonished him so much that he was reading it for the fourth
time, when he became aware that the person standing beside him was not
the waiter.

“My dear Count! I beg your pardon. What manners! My head was in

the clouds. Do me the favor to sit down and join me. Servitore!”

“I beg you will not apologize. It is my fault for interrupting you. But

fearing that last night might have somewhat entangled the situation—”

children who are allowed to sit up till midnight. I admit that we were all
very fractious, myself not least.”

word with you alone—We are both reasonable men.”

I should find it too difficult to refuse you.” Wimsey folded the letter away
in his pocketbook. “The sun is shining, and I am in the mood to make
mistakes through overconfidence.”

elbows on the table and leaned forward, thumb-tip to thumb-tip and little-
finger-tip to little-fingertip, smiling, irresistible. Forty minutes later, he took
his leave, still smiling, having ceded, without noticing it, rather more than
he had gained, and told in ten words more than he had learned in a
thousand.

But of this interlude Harriet naturally knew nothing. On the evening of

the same day, she was dining alone, a little depressed, at Romano’s. She had
nearly finished, when she saw a man, just leaving the restaurant, who was
sketching a vague gesture of recognition. He was in the forties, going a little
bald, with a smooth, vacant face and a dark mustache. For a moment she
could not place him; then something about his languid walk and impeccable
tailoring brought back an afternoon at Lord’s. She smiled at him, and he
came up to her table.

that?”

“Very well, thanks.”
“That’s grand. Thought I must just ooze over and pass the time of day.

was bein’ a nuisance.”

“Of course I remember you. You’re Mr. Arbuthnot—the Honorable

Frederick Arbuthnot—and you’re a friend of Peter Wimsey’s, and I met you
at the Eton and Harrow match two years ago, and you’re married and have
two children. How are they?”

afternoon that was, too. Can’t think why harmless women should be
dragged along to be bored while a lot of little boys play off their Old School
Ties. (That’s meant for a joke.) You were frightfully well-behaved, I
remember.”

Harriet said sedately that she always enjoyed a good cricket match.
“Do you? I thought it was politeness. It’s pretty slow work, if you ask

me. But I was never any good at it myself. It’s all right for old Peter. He can
always work himself into a stew thinking how much better he’d have done
it himself.”

Harriet offered him coffee.
“I didn’t know anybody ever got into a stew at Lord’s. I thought it

wasn’t done.”

but mild old gentlemen do sometimes break out into a spot of tut-tuttery.
How about a brandy? Waiter, two liqueur brandies. Are you writing any
more books?”

Suppressing the rage that this question always rouses in a professional

writer, Harriet admitted that she was.

“It must be splendid to be able to write,” said Mr. Arbuthnot. “I often

think I could spin a good yarn myself if I had the brains. About the odd
things that happen, you know. Queer deals, and that kind of thing.”

labyrinth of Harriet’s mind. Money. That was the connection between the
two men. Mr. Arbuthnot, moron as he might be in other respects, had a flair
for money. He knew what that mysterious commodity was going to do; it
was the one thing he did know, and he only knew that by instinct. When
things were preparing to go up or down, they rang a little warning bell in
what Freddy Arbuthnot called his mind, and he acted on the warning
without being able to explain why. Peter had money, and Freddy understood
money; that must be the common interest and bond of mutual confidence
that explained an otherwise inexplicable friendship. She admired the
strange nexus of interests that unites the male half of mankind into a close
honeycomb of cells, each touching the other on one side only, and yet
constituting a tough and closely adhering fabric.

“Funny kind of story popped up the other day,” went on Mr.

Arbuthnot. “Mysterious business. Couldn’t make head or tail of it. It would
have amused old Peter. How is old Peter, by the way?”

he’s doing there, but I suppose he’s on a case of some kind.”

“No. I expect he’s left his country for his country’s good. It’s usually

that. I hope they manage to keep things quiet. The exchanges are a bit
nervy.”

Mr. Arbuthnot looked almost intelligent.
“What’s Peter got to do with the exchange?”
“Nothing. But if anything blows up, it’s bound to affect the exchange.”
“This is Greek to me. What is Peter’s job out there?”
“Foreign Office. Didn’t you know?”
“I hadn’t the slightest idea. He’s not permanently attached there, is

he?”

“In Rome, do you mean?”
“To the Foreign Office.”
“No; but they sometimes push him out when they think he’s wanted.

He gets on with people.”

“I see. I wonder why he never mentioned it.”
“Oh, everybody knows; it’s not a secret. He probably thought it

wouldn’t interest you.” Mr. Arbuthnot balanced his spoon across his coffee-
cup in an abstracted way. “I’m damned fond of old Peter,” was his next,
rather irrelevant, contribution. “He’s a dashed good sort. Last time I saw
him, I thought he seemed a bit under the weather …Well, I’d better be
toddling.”

He got up, a little abruptly, and said good-night.
Harriet thought how humiliating it was to have one’s ignorance

exposed.

longer. The final touch was put to her disgust by the sight of an advance
notice of Death ’twixt Wind and Water, embodying an exceptionally fulsome
blurb. She developed an acute homesickness for Oxford and for the Study of
Le Fanu—a book which would never have any advertising value, but of
which some scholar might some day moderately observe, “Miss Vane has
handled her subject with insight and accuracy.” She rang up the Bursar,
discovered that she could be accommodated at Shrewsbury, and fled back to
Academe.

Barton, who vanished daily into the Radcliffe Camera and was only seen at
meals. The Warden was up, but remained in her own house.

April was running out, chilly and fickle, but with the promise of good

wraps her about in vacation. No clamor of young voices echoed along her
ancient stones; the tumult of flying bicycles was stilled in the narrow strait
of the Turl; in Radcliffe Square the Camera slept like a cat in the sunshine,
disturbed only by the occasional visit of a slow-footed don; even in the
High, the roar of car and charabanc seemed minished and brought low, for
the holiday season was not yet; punts and canoes, new-fettled for the
summer term, began to put forth upon the Cherwell like the varnished buds
upon the horse-chestnut tree, but as yet there was no press of traffic upon
the shining reaches; the mellow bells, soaring and singing in tower and
steeple, told of time’s flight through an eternity of peace; and Great Tom,
tolling his nightly hundred-and-one, called home only the rooks from off
Christ Church Meadow.

gilding of Duke Humphrey, snuffing the faint, musty odor of slowly
perishing leather, hearing only the discreet tippety-tap of Agag-feet along
the padded floor; long afternoons, taking an outrigger up the Cher, feeling
the rough kiss of the sculls on unaccustomed palms, listening to the
rhythmical and satisfying ker-klunk of the rowlocks, watching the play of
muscle on the Bursar’s sturdy shoulders at stroke, as the sharp spring wind
flattened the thin silk shirt against them; or, if the day were warmer, flicking
swiftly in a canoe under Magdalen walls and so by the twisting race at
King’s Mill by Mesopotamia to Parson’s Pleasure; then back, with mind
relaxed and body stretched and vigorous, to make toast by the fire; and
then, at night, the lit lamp and the drawn curtain, with the flutter of the
turned page and soft scrape of pen on paper the only sounds to break the
utter silence between quarter and quarter chime. Now and again, Harriet
took out the dossier of the poison-pen and looked it over; yet, viewed by
that solitary lamp, even the ugly, printed scrawls looked harmless and

impersonal, and the whole dismal problem less important than the
determining of a first edition date or the settlement of a disputed reading.

dumb and dead ever since the old, innocent undergraduate days. The
singing voice, stifled long ago by the pressure of the struggle for existence,
and throttled into dumbness by that queer, unhappy contact with physical
passion, began to stammer a few uncertain notes. Great golden phrases,
rising from nothing and leading to nothing, swam up out of her dreaming
mind like the huge, sluggish carp in the cool waters of Mercury. One day
she climbed up Shotover and sat looking over the spires of the city, deep-
down, fathom-drowned, striking from the round bowl of the river-basin,
improbably remote and lovely as the towers of Tirnan-Og beneath the green
sea-rollers. She held on her knee the looseleaf notebook that contained her
notes upon the Shrewsbury scandal; but her heart was not in that sordid
inquiry. A detached pentameter, echoing out of nowhere, was beating in her
ears—seven marching feet—a pentameter and a half:—

To that still center where the spinning world
Sleeps on its axis—

Had she made it or remembered it? It sounded familiar, but in her heart she
knew certainly that it was her own, and seemed familiar only because it was
inevitable and right.

She opened the notebook at another page and wrote the words down.

She felt like the man in the Punch story: “Nice little barf-room, Liza—what
shall we do with it?” Blank verse? …No … it was part of the octave of a
sonnet … it had the feel of a sonnet. But what a rhyme-sound! Curled?
furled? … she fumbled over rhyme and meter, like an unpracticed musician
fingering the keys of a disused instrument.

erasing painfully as she went, she began to write again, knowing with a
deep inner certainty that somehow, after long and bitter wandering, she was
once more in her own place.

Here, then, at home …

the center, the middle sea, the heart of the labyrinth …

Here, then, at home, by no more storms distrest, Stay we our steps—course
—flight—hands folded and wings furled.

Here, then, at home, by no more storms distrest, Folding laborious hands
we sit, wings furled; Here in close perfume lies the rose-leaf curled, Here
the sun stands and knows not east nor west, Here no tide runs; we have
come, last and best, From the wide zone through dizzying circles hurled, To
that still center where the spinning world Sleeps on its axis, to the heart of
rest.

Yes; there was something there, though the meter halted

monotonously, lacking a free stress-shift, and the chime “dizzying-
spinning” was unsatisfactory. The lines swayed and lurched in her clumsy
hands, uncontrollable. Still, such as it was, she had an octave.

And there it seemed to end. She had reached the full close, and had

nothing more to say. She could find no turn for the sestet to take, no
epigram, no change of mood. She put down a tentative line or two and
crossed them out. If the right twist would not come of itself, it was useless
to manufacture it. She had her image—the world sleeping like a great top
on its everlasting spindle—and anything added to that would be mere verse-
making. Something might come of it some day. In the meanwhile she had
got her mood on to paper—and this is the release that all writers, even the

feeblest, seek for as men seek for love; and, having found it, they doze off
happily into dreams and trouble their hearts no further.

make her way slowly down the steep path. Halfway down, she met a small
party coming up: two small, flaxen-haired girls in charge of a woman
whose face seemed at first only vaguely familiar. Then, as they came close,
she realized that it was Annie, looking strange without her cap and apron,
taking the children for a walk.

As in duty bound, Harriet greeted them and asked where they were

living now.

stopping there myself for my holiday. These are my little girls. This one’s
Beatrice and this is Carola. Say how do you do to Miss Vane.”

how they were getting on.

“It’s nice for you having them so close.”
“Yes, madam. I don’t know what I should do without them.” The look

of quick pride and joy was almost fiercely possessive. Harriet got a glimpse
of a fundamental passion that she had, as it were, forgotten when she made
her reckoning; it blazed across the serenity of her sonnet-mood like an
ominous meteor.

“They’re all I have—now that I’ve lost their father.”
“Oh, dear, yes,” said Harriet, a little uncomfortably. “Has he—how

long ago was that, Annie?”

ought not, and it preyed on his mind. But I didn’t care. He never did any
harm to anybody, and a man’s first duty is to his wife and family, isn’t it?
I’d have starved with him gladly, and worked my fingers to the bone to

keep the children. But he couldn’t get over it. It’s a cruel world for anyone
with his way to make and so much competition.”

at her mother with eyes that were too intelligent for her eight years. It
would be better to get off the subject of the husband’s wrongs and
iniquities, whatever they might be. She murmured that the children must be
a great comfort.

make life worth living. Beatrice here is her father’s living image, aren’t
you, darling? I was sorry not to have a boy; but now I’m glad. It’s difficult
to bring up boys without a father.”

“And what are Beatrice and Carola going to be when they grow up?”
“I hope they’ll be good girls, madam, and good wives and mothers—

that’s what I’ll bring them up to be.”

her curls assertively.

“Oh, no, darling. What things they say, don’t they, madam?”
“Yes, I do,” said Beatrice. “I’m going to have a motorcycle and keep a

garage.”

That’s a boy’s job.”

“But lots of girls do boys’ jobs nowadays,” said Harriet.
“But they ought not, madam. It isn’t fair. The boys have hard enough

work to get jobs of their own. Please don’t put such things into her head,
madam. You’ll never get a husband, Beatrice, if you mess about in a garage,
getting all ugly and dirty.”

“I don’t want one,” said Beatrice, firmly. “I’d rather have a

motorcycle.”

Annie looked annoyed; but laughed when Harriet laughed.
“She’ll find out some day, won’t she, madam?”
“Very likely she will,” said Harriet. If the woman took the view that

any husband was better than none at all, it was useless to argue. And she
had rather got into the habit of shying at all discussion that turned upon men
and marriage. She said good-afternoon pleasantly and strode on, a little
shaken in her mood, but not unduly so. Either one liked discussing these
matters or one did not. And when there were ugly phantoms lurking in the
corners of one’s mind, skeletons that one dared not show to anybody, even
to Peter—

rate, had no niche in the gray stones of Oxford. He stood for London, for
the swift, rattling, chattering, excitable and devilishly upsetting world of
strain and uproar. Here, at the still center (yes, that line was definitely
good), he had no place. For a whole week, she had scarcely given him a
thought.

And then the dons began to arrive, full of their vacation activities and

ready to take up the burden of the most exacting, yet most lovable term of
the academic year. Harriet watched them come, wondering which of those
cheerful and determined faces concealed a secret. Miss de Vine had been
consulting a library in some ancient Flemish town, where was preserved a
remarkable family correspondence dealing with trade conditions between
England and Flanders under Elizabeth. Her mind was full of statistics about
wool and pepper, and it was difficult to get her to think back to what she
had done on the last day of the Hilary Term. She had undoubtedly burnt
some old papers—there might have been newspapers among them—
certainly she never read the Daily Trumpet—she could throw no light on the
mutilated newspaper found in the fireplace.

weeks to make havoc of her proofs. She was apologetic. She had spent a
most interesting long weekend with Professor Somebody, who was a great
authority upon Greek quantitative measures; and he had discovered several
passages that contained inaccuracies and thrown an entirely fresh light upon
the argument of Chapter Seven. Harriet groaned dismally.

four new plays and bought a rather exciting summer outfit. Miss Pyke had
spent an enthralling time assisting the curator of a local museum to put
together the fragments of three figured pots and a quantity of burial-urns
that had been dug up in a field in Essex. Miss Hillyard was really glad to be
back in Oxford; she had had to spend a month at her sister’s house while the
sister was having a baby; looking after her brother-in-law seemed to have
soured her temper. The Dean, on the other hand, had been helping to get a
niece married and had found the whole business full of humor. “One of the
bridesmaids went to the wrong church and only turned up when it was all
over, and there were at least two hundred of us squeezed into a room that
would only hold fifty, and I only got half a glass of champagne and no
wedding-cake, my tummy was flapping against my spine; and the
bridegroom lost his hat at the last moment, and, my dear! would you
believe it? people still give plated biscuit-barrels!” Miss Chilperic had gone
with her fiancé and his sister to a number of interesting places to study
medieval domestic sculpture. Miss Burrows had spent most of her time
playing golf. There arrived also a reinforcement in the person of Miss
Edwards, the Science tutor, just returned from taking a term’s leave. She
was a young and active woman, square in face and shoulder, with bobbed
hair and a stand-no-nonsense manner. The only member missing from the
Senior Common Room was Mrs. Goodwin, whose small son (a most

unfortunate child) had come out with measles immediately upon his return
to school and again required his mother’s nursing.

nuisance, just at the beginning of the Summer Term. If I’d only known, I
could have come back earlier.”

expect, if you give jobs to widows with children. You have to be prepared
for these perpetual interruptions. And for some reason, these domestic
preoccupations always have to be put before the work.”

illness.”

“But all children get measles.”
“Yes; but he’s not a very strong child, you know. His father was

tubercular, poor man—in fact, that’s what he died of—and if measles
should turn to pneumonia, as it so often does, the consequences might be
serious.”

“But has it turned to pneumonia?”
“They’re afraid it may. He’s got it very badly. And, as he’s a nervous

little creature, he naturally likes to have his mother with him. And in any
case, she’d be in quarantine.”

“The longer she stays with him, the longer she’ll be in quarantine.”
“It’s very tiresome of course,” put in Miss Lydgate, mildly. “But if

Mrs. Goodwin had isolated herself and come back at the earliest possible
moment—as she very bravely offered to do—she would have been
suffering a great deal of anxiety.”

“A great many of us have to suffer from anxiety in one way or

another,” said Miss Hillyard, sharply. “I have been very anxious about my
sister. It is always an anxious business to have a first baby at thirty-five. But

if the event had happened to occur in term-time, it would have had to take
place without my assistance.”

“It is always difficult to say which duty one should put first,” said Miss

Pyke. “Each case must be decided individually. I presume that, in bringing
children into the world, one accepts a certain responsibility towards them.”

“I’m not denying it,” said Miss Hillyard. “But if the domestic

responsibility is to take precedence of the public responsibility, then the
work should be handed over to someone else to do.”

“But the children must be fed and clothed,” said Miss Edwards.
“Quite so. But the mother should not take a resident post.”
“Mrs. Goodwin is an excellent secretary,” said the Dean. “I should be

very sorry to lose her. And it’s nice to think that we are able to help her in
her very difficult position.”

Miss Hillyard lost patience.
“The fact is, though you will never admit it, that everybody in this

place has an inferiority complex about married women and children. For all
your talk about careers and independence, you all believe in your hearts that
we ought to abase ourselves before any woman who has fulfilled her animal
functions.”

“That is absolute nonsense,” said the Bursar.
“It is natural, I suppose, to feel that married women lead a fuller life,”

began Miss Lydgate.

that’s made over ‘Shrewsbury grandchildren’! Look how delighted you all
are when old students get married! As if you were saying Aha! education
doesn’t unfit us for real life after all!’ And when a really brilliant scholar
throws away all her prospects to marry a curate, you say perfunctorily,
‘What a pity! But of course her own life must come first.’”

say they’re perfect fools to marry.”

that intellectual interests were only a second-best; but you pretend to put
them first in theory and are ashamed of them in practice.”

in upon the angry protest of Miss Pyke. “After all, some of us may have
deliberately chosen not to marry. And, if you will forgive my saying so—”

At this ominous phrase, always the prelude to something quite

unforgivable, Harriet and the Dean broke hastily into the discussion.

“Considering that we are devoting our whole lives—”
“Even for a man, it is not always easy to say—”
Their common readiness confounded their good intention. Each broke

off and begged the other’s pardon, and Miss Barton went on unchecked:

“It is not altogether wise—or convincing—to show so much animus

against married women. It was the same unreasonable prejudice that made
you get that scout removed from your staircase—”

preferential treatment. I do not see why we should put up with slackness on
duty because a servant or a secretary happens to be a widow with children. I
do not see why Annie should be given a room to herself in the Scouts’
Wing, and charge over a corridor, when servants who have been here for
longer than she has have to be content to share a room. I do not—”

“Well,” said Miss Stevens, “I think she is entitled to a little

consideration. A woman who has been accustomed to a nice home of her
own—”

“Very likely,” said Miss Hillyard. “At any rate, it was not my lack of

a common thief.”

“I was always against that,” said the Dean.
“And why did you give in? Because poor Mrs. Jukes was such a nice

woman and had a family to keep. She must be considered and rewarded for
being fool enough to marry a scoundrel. What’s the good of pretending that
you put the interests of the College first, when you hesitate for two whole
terms about getting rid of a dishonest porter, because you’re so sorry for his
family?”

ought to come first in a case like that.”

resign her post if she can’t carry out her duties properly.” She stood up.
“Perhaps, however, it is as well that she should be away and stay away. You
may remember that, last time she was away, we had no trouble from
anonymous letters or monkey-tricks.”

Everybody looked uncomfortable.

“Bless my heart!” said the Dean.
“Something very wrong there,” said Miss Edwards, bluntly.
“She’s so prejudiced,” said Miss Lydgate. “I always think it’s a very

great pity she never married.”

Miss Lydgate had a way of putting into language that a child could

understand things which other people did not say, or said otherwise.

“I should be sorry for the man, I must say,” observed Miss Shaw; “but

perhaps I am showing an undue consideration for the male sex. One is
almost afraid to open one’s mouth.”

“Poor Mrs. Goodwin!” exclaimed the Bursar. “The very last person!”

Chilperic, who had said nothing, but looked quite alarmed, murmured that
she must get along to work. The Common Room slowly cleared, and
Harriet was left with the Dean.

head,” said Miss Martin; “because it is obviously much more likely that—”

“A great deal more likely,” said Harriet.

Mr. Jenkyn was a youngish and agreeable don whom Harriet had met

the previous term at a party in North Oxford—the same party, in fact, which
had led to her acquaintance with Mr. Reginald Pomfret. He resided at
Magdalen, and was incidentally one of the pro-Proctors. Harriet had
happened to say something to him about the Magdalen Mayday ceremony,
and he had promised to send her a ticket for the Tower. Being a scientist and
a man of scrupulously exact mind, he remembered his promise; and the
ticket duly arrived.

None of the Shrewsbury S.C.R. was going. Most of them had been up

on May mornings before. Miss de Vine, had not; but though she had been
offered tickets, her heart would not stand the stairs. There were students
who had received invitations; but they were not students whom Harriet
knew. She therefore set off alone, well before sunrise, having made an
appointment to meet Miss Edwards when she came down and take an
outrigger down to the Isis for a pipe-opener before having breakfast on the
river.

The choristers had sung their hymn. The sun had risen, rather red and

angry, casting a faint flush over the roofs and spires of the waking city.
Harriet leaned over the parapet, looking down upon the heart-breaking
beauty of the curved High Street, scarcely disturbed as yet by the roar of

petrol-driven traffic. Under her feet, the tower began to swing to the
swinging of the bells. The little group of bicyclists and pedestrians far
below began to break up and move away. Mr. Jenkyn came up, said a few
pleasant words, remarked that he had to hurry off to go bathing with a
friend at Parson’s Pleasure; there was no need for her to hurry—could she
get down the stairs all right alone?

head. She moved to the East side of the tower. There lay the river and
Magdalen Bridge, with its pack of punts and canoes. Among them, she
distinguished the sturdy figure of Miss Edwards, in a bright orange jumper.
It was wonderful to stand so above the world, with a sea of sound below
and an ocean of air above, all mankind shrunk to the proportions of an ant-
heap. True, a cluster of people still lingered upon the tower itself—her
companions in this airy hermitage. They too, spell-bound with beauty—

Great Scott! What was that girl trying to do?
Harriet made a dive at the young woman who was just placing one

knee on the stonework and drawing herself up between two crenellations of
the parapet.

“Here!” she said, “you mustn’t do that. It’s dangerous.”
The girl, a thin, fair, frightened-looking child, desisted at once.
“I only wanted to look over.”
“Well, that’s very silly of you. You might get giddy. You’d better come

along down. It would be very unpleasant for the Magdalen authorities if
anyone fell over. They might have to stop letting people come up.”

“I’m so sorry. I didn’t think.”
“Well, you should think. Is anybody with you?”
“No.”
“I’m going down now; you’d better come too.”

“Very well.”
Harriet shepherded the girl down the dark spiral. She had no proof of

anything but rash curiosity, but she wondered. The girl spoke with a slightly
common accent, and Harriet would have put her down for a shop-assistant,
but for the fact that tickets for the Tower were more likely to be restricted to
University people and their friends. She might be an undergraduate, come
up with a County Scholarship. In any case, one was perhaps attaching too
much importance to the incident.

loud and insistent. It reminded her of a story that Peter Wimsey had told
her, years ago now, one day when only a resolute determination to talk on
and on had enabled him to prevent a most unfortunate outing from ending
in a quarrel. Something about a body in a belfry, and a flood, and the great
bells bawling the alarm across three counties.

recollection with it; but she had paused for a moment in the awkward
descent, and the girl, whoever she was, had got ahead of her. When she
reached the foot of the stair and came out into clear daylight, she saw the
slight figure scurrying off through the passage into the quad. She was
doubtful whether to pursue it or not. She followed at a distance, watched it
turn downwards up the High, and suddenly found herself almost in the arms
of Mr. Pomfret, coming down from Queen’s in a very untidy grey flannel
suit, with a towel over his arm.

“Hullo!” said Mr. Pomfret. “You been saluting the sunrise?”
“Yes. Not a very good sunrise, but quite a good salute.”
“I think it’s going to rain,” said Mr. Pomfret. “But I said I would bathe

and I am bathing.”

sculling.”

Magdalen Bridge, was hailed by an irritable friend in a canoe, who said he
had been waiting for half an hour, and went off upriver, grumbling that
nobody loved him and that he knew it was going to rain.

Harriet joined Miss Edwards, who said, on hearing about the girl:
“Well, you might have got her name, I suppose. But I don’t see what

one could do about it. It wasn’t one of our people, I suppose?”

“I didn’t recognize her. And she didn’t seem to recognize me.”
“Then it probably wasn’t. Pity you didn’t get the name, all the same.

People oughtn’t to do that kind of thing. Inconsiderate. Will you take bow
or stroke?”

CHAPTER XII

As a tulipant to the Sun (which our herbalists call Narcissus) when it
shines, is admirandus flos ad radios solis se pandens, a glorious Flower
exposing itself; but uhen the Sun sets, or a tempest comes, it hides itself,
pines away, and hath no pleasure left … do all Enamoratoes to their
Mistress.

ROBERT BURTON

The mind most effectually works upon the body, producing by his passions
and perturbations miraculous alterations, as melancholy, despair, cruel
diseases, and sometimes death itself …They that live in fear are never free,
resolute, secure, never merry, but in continual pain …It causeth oft-times
sudden madness.

ID.

The arrival of Miss Edwards, together with the rearrangements of
residences due to the completion of the Library Building, greatly
strengthened the hands of authority at the opening of the Trinity Term. Miss
Barton, Miss Burrows and Miss de Vine moved into the three new sets on
the ground floor of the Library; Miss Chilperic was transferred to the New
Quad, and a general redistribution took place; so that Tudor and Burleigh
Buildings were left entirely denuded of dons. Miss Martin, Harriet; Miss
Edwards and Miss Lydgate established a system of patrols, by which the
New Quad, Queen Elizabeth and the Library Building could be visited
nightly at irregular intervals and an eye kept on all suspicious movements.
Thanks to this arrangement, the more violent demonstrations of the Poison-

Pen received a check. It is true that a few anonymous letters continued to
arrive by post, containing scurrilous insinuations and threats of revenge
against various persons. Harriet was carefully docketing as many of these as
she could hear of or lay hands on—she noticed that by this time every
member of the S.C.R. had been persecuted, with the exception of Mrs.
Goodwin and Miss Chilperic; in addition, the Third Year taking Schools
began to receive sinister prognostications about their prospects, while Miss
Flaxman was presented with an ill-executed picture of a harpy tearing the
flesh of a gentleman in a mortar-board. Harriet had tried to eliminate Miss
Pyke and Miss Burrows from suspicion, on the ground that they were both
fairly skillful with a pencil, and would therefore be incapable of producing
such bad drawings, even by taking thought; she discovered, however, that,
though both were dexterous, neither of them was ambidextrous, and that
their left-handed efforts were quite as bad as anything produced by the
Poison-Pen, if not worse. Miss Pyke, indeed, on being shown the Harpy
picture, pointed out that it was, in several respects, inconsistent with the
classical conception of this monster; but there again it was clearly easy
enough for the expert to assume ignorance; and perhaps the eagerness with
which she drew attention to the incidental errors told as much against her as
in her favor. Another trifling but curious episode, occurring on the third
Monday in term, was the complaint of an agitated and conscientious First-
Year that she had left a harmless modern novel open upon the table in the
Fiction Library, and that on her return to fetch it after an afternoon on the
river, she had found several pages from the middle of the book—just where
she was reading—ripped out and strewn about the room. The First-Year,
who was a County Council Scholar, and as poor as a church mouse, was
almost in tears; it really wasn’t her fault; should she have to replace the
book? The Dean, to whom the question was addressed, said, No; it certainly

didn’t seem to be the First-Year’s fault. She made a note of the outrage:
“The Search by C. P. Snow, pp. 327 to 340 removed and mutilated, May
13th,” and passed the information on to Harriet, who incorporated it in her
diary of the case, together with such items as: “March 7—abusive letter by
post to Miss de Vine,” “March 11, do. to Miss Hillyard and Miss Layton,”
“April 29—Harpy drawing to Miss Flaxman,” of which she had now quite a
formidable list.

whirled on wind-spurred feet towards a splendor of May. Tulips danced in
the Fellows’ Garden; a fringe of golden green shimmered and deepened
upon the secular beeches; the boats put out upon the Cher between the
budding banks, and the wide reaches of the Isis were strenuous with
practicing eights. Black gowns and summer frocks fluttered up and down
the streets of the city and through the College gates, making a careless
heraldry with the green of smooth turf and the silver-sable of ancient stone;
motor-car and bicycle raced perilously side by side through narrow turnings
and the wail of gramophones made hideous the water-ways from Magdalen
Bridge to far above the new Bypass. Sun-bathers and untidy tea-parties
desecrated Shrewsbury Old Quad, newly-whitened tennis-shoes broke out
like strange, unwholesome flowers along plinth and window-ledge, and the
Dean was forced to issue a ukase in the matter of the bathing-dresses which
flapped and fluttered, flag-fashion, from every coign of vantage. Solicitous
tutors began to cluck and brood tenderly over such ripening eggs of
scholarship as were destined to hatch out damply in the Examination
Schools after their three years’ incubation; candidates, realizing with a pang
that they had now fewer than eight weeks in which to make up for cut
lectures and misspent working hours, went flashing from Bodley to lecture-
room and from Camera to coaching; and the thin trickle of abuse from the

Poison-Pen was swamped and well-nigh forgotten in that stream of genial
commination always poured out from the lips of examinees elect upon
examining bodies. Nor, in the onset of Schools Fever, was a lighter note
lacking to the general delirium. The draw for the Schools Sweep was made
in the Senior Common Room, and Harriet found herself furnished with the
names of two “horses,” one of whom, a Miss Newland, was said to be well
fancied. Harriet asked who she was, having never to her knowledge seen or
heard of her.

Miss Shaw thinks she’s pretty safe for a First.”

isn’t going to have a break-down or anything. I told her the other day she
ought not to cut Hall so often.”

“They will do it,” said the Dean. “It’s all very well to say they can’t be

bothered to change when they come off the river and prefer pajamas and an
egg in their rooms; but I’m sure a boiled egg and a sardine aren’t sustaining
enough to do Schools on.”

Bursar. “It’s almost impossible to get the rooms done by eleven when
they’re crammed with filthy crockery.”

“It isn’t being out on the river that’s the matter with Newland,” said the

Dean. “That child works.”

“All the worse,” said the Bursar. “I distrust the candidate who swots in

her last term. I shouldn’t be a bit surprised if your horse scratched, Miss
Vane. She looks nervy to me.”

“That’s very depressing,” said Harriet. “Perhaps I’d better sell half my

ticket while the price is good. I agree with Edgar Wallace, ‘Give me a good
stupid horse who will eat his oats.’ Any offers for Newland?”

“What’s that about Newland?” demanded Miss Shaw, coming up to

them. They were having coffee in the Fellows’ Garden at the time. “By the
way, Dean, couldn’t you put up a notice about sitting on the grass in the
New Quad? I have had to chase two parties off. We cannot have the place
looking like Margate Beach.”

undergraduates so sloppy?”

Hillyard, sarcastically, “but I notice the likeness doesn’t extend to showing
respect for the College grounds.”

“Even you must admit that men have some virtues,” said Miss Shaw.
“More tradition and discipline, that’s all,” said Miss Hillyard.
“I don’t know,” said Miss Edwards. “I think women are messier by

nature. They are naturally picnic-minded.”

Miss Chilperic, almost apologetically (for her student days were not far
behind her), “and they don’t think how awful it looks.”

“men have the common sense to stay indoors, where it’s cooler.”

“Men,” said Miss Hillyard, “have a passion for frowst.”
“Yes,” said Miss Shaw, “but what were you saying about Miss

Newland? You weren’t offering to sell your chance, Miss Vane, were you?
Because, take it from me, she’s a hot favorite. She’s the Latymer Scholar,
and her work’s brilliant.”

“Somebody suggested she was off her feed and likely to be a

nonstarter.”

any right to say such things.”

hardworking and conscientious. She hasn’t got the wind-up about Schools,
has she?”

look a little pale, but I expect it’s the sudden heat.”

“Possibly she’s worried about things at home,” suggested Mrs.

Goodwin. She had returned to College on the May 9th, her boy having
taken a fortunate turn for the better, though he was still not out of the wood.
She looked anxious and sympathetic.

my students to confide in me. Of course she’s a very reserved girl, but I
have done my best to draw her out, and I feel sure I should have heard if
there was anything on her mind.”

“Well,” said Harriet, “I must see this horse of mine before I decide

what to do about my sweepstake ticket. Somebody must point her out.”

saw her stewing away there just before dinner—cutting Hall as usual. I
nearly spoke to her. Come and stroll through, Miss Vane. If she’s there,
we’ll chase her out for the good of her soul. I want to look up a reference,
anyhow.”

Harriet got up, laughing, and accompanied the Dean.
“I sometimes think,” said Miss Martin, “that Miss Shaw would get

more real confidence from her pupils if she wasn’t always probing into their
little insides. She likes people to be fond of her, which I think is rather a
mistake. Be kind, but leave ’em alone, is my motto. The shy ones shrink
into their shells when they’re poked, and the egotistical ones talk a lot of
rubbish to attract attention. However, we all have our methods.”

book and verify a quotation, and then led the way through the long room.
At a table near the center, a thin, fair girl was working amid a pile of
reference books. The Dean stopped.

“You still here, Miss Newland? Haven’t you had any dinner?”
“I’ll have some later, Miss Martin. It was so hot, and I want to get this

language paper done.”

from her forehead. The whites of her eyes showed like those of a fidgety
horse.

simply silly in your Schools term. If you go on like this, we’ll have to send
you away for a rest-cure and forbid work altogether for a week or so. Have
you got a headache? You look as if you had.”

“Not very much, Miss Martin.”
“For goodness’ sake,” said the Dean, “chuck that perishing old

Ducange and Meyer-Lübke or whoever it is and go away and play. I’m
always having to chase the Schools people off to the river and into the
country,” she added, turning to Harriet. “I wish they’d all be like Miss
Camperdown—she was after your time. She frightened Miss Pyke by
dividing the whole of her Schools term between the river and the tennis
courts, and she ended up with a First in Greats.”

Miss Newland looked more alarmed than ever.
“I don’t seem able to think,” she confessed, “I forget things and go

blank.”

too much. Stop it at once. Get up now and get yourself some food and then

take a nice novel or something, or find somebody to have a knock-up with
you.”

feel like eating and I don’t care about tennis—I wish you wouldn’t bother!”
she finished, rather hysterically.

sensible.”

“I will, really, Miss Martin. I’ll just finish this paper. I couldn’t feel

comfortable if I hadn’t. I’ll have something to eat then and go to bed. I
promise I will.”

to Harriet:

“I don’t like to see them getting into that state. What do you think of

your horse’s chance?”

I saw her last on Magdalen Tower.”

“What?” said the Dean. “Oh, lord!”

Of Lord Saint-George, Harriet had not seen very much during that first

fortnight of term. His arm was out of a sling; but a remaining weakness in it
had curbed his sporting activities, and when she did see him, he informed
her that he was working. The matter of the telegraph pole and the insurance
had been safely adjusted, and the parental wrath avoided. “Uncle Peter,” to
be sure, had had something to say about it, but Uncle Peter, though
scathing, was as safe as houses. Harriet encouraged the young gentleman to
persevere with his work and refused an invitation to dine and meet “his
people.” She had no particular wish to meet the Denvers, and had hitherto
successfully avoided doing so.

her on the river, and had included Miss Cattermole in the party. They had
all been on their best behavior, and a pleasant time had been enjoyed by all,
the mention of previous encounters having, by common consent, been
avoided. Harriet was pleased with Miss Cattermole; she seemed to have
made an effort to throw off the blight that had settled upon her, and Miss
Hillyard’s report had been encouraging. Mr. Pomfret had also asked Harriet
to lunch and to play tennis; on the former occasion she had truthfully
pleaded a previous engagement and, on the second, had said, with rather
less truth, that she had not played for years, was out of form and was not
really keen. After all, one had one’s work to do (Le Fanu, ’Twixt Wind and
Water, and the History of Prosody among them made up a fairly full
program), and one could not spend all one’s time idling with
undergraduates.

On the evening after her formal introduction to Miss Newland,

however, Harriet encountered Mr. Pomfret accidentally. She had been to see
an old Shrewsburian who was attached to the Somerville Senior Common
Room, and was crossing St. Giles on her way back, shortly before midnight,
when she was aware of a group of young men in evening dress, standing
about one of the trees which adorn that famous thoroughfare. Being
naturally inquisitive, Harriet went to see what was up. The street was
practically deserted, except for through traffic of the ordinary kind. The
upper branches of the tree were violently agitated, and Harriet, standing on
the outskirts of the little group beneath, learned from their remarks that Mr.
Somebody-or-the-other had undertaken, in consequence of an after-dinner
bet, to climb every tree in St. Giles without interference from the Proctor.
As the number of trees was large and the place public, Harriet felt the wager
to be rather optimistic. She was just turning away to cross the street in the

direction of the Lamb and Flag, when another youth, who had evidently
been occupying an observation-post, arrived, breathless, to announce that
the Proggins was just coming into view round the corner of Broad Street.
The climber came down rather hastily, and the group promptly scattered in
all directions—some running past her, some making their way down side-
streets, and a few bold spirits fleeing towards the small enclosure known as
the Fender, within which (since it belongs not to the Town but to St. John’s)
they could play at tig with the Proctor to their hearts’ content. One of the
young gentlemen darting in this general direction passed Harriet close,
stopped with an exclamation, and brought up beside her.

“Why, it’s you!” cried Mr. Pomfret, in an excited tone.
“Me again,” said Harriet. “Are you always out without your gown at

this time of night?”

“Funny you should always catch me at it. Amazing luck, isn’t it? …I say,
you’ve been avoiding me this term. Why?”

“Oh, no,” said Harriet; “only I’ve been rather busy.”
“But you have been avoiding me,” said Mr. Pomfret. “I know you

have. I suppose it’s ridiculous to expect you to take any particular interest in
me. I don’t suppose you ever think about me. You probably despise me.”

sort. I like you very much, but—”

see you. There’s something I’ve got to tell you. When can I come and talk
to you?”

“What about?” said Harriet, seized with a sudden and awful qualm.
“What about? Hang it, don’t be so unkind. Look here, Harriet—No,

stop, you’ve got to listen. Darling, wonderful Harriet—”

“Mr. Pomfret, please—”
But Mr. Pomfret was not to be checked. His admiration had run away

with him, and Harriet, cornered in the shadow of the big horse-chestnut by
the Lamb and Flag, found herself listening to as eager an avowal of
devotion as any young gentleman in his twenties ever lavished upon a lady
considerably his senior in age and experience.

quite impossible. I’m at least ten years older than you are. And besides—”

swept away the difference of age and plunged on in a flood of eloquence,
which Harriet, exasperated with herself and him, could not stop. He loved
her, he adored her, he was intensely miserable, he could neither work nor
play games for thinking of her, if she refused him he didn’t know what he
should do with himself, she must have seen, she must have realized—he
wanted to stand between her and all the world—

Mr. Pomfret was six feet three and broad and strong in proportion.
“Please don’t do that,” said Harriet, feeling as though she were feebly

saying “Drop it, Caesar,” to somebody else’s large and disobedient Alsatian.
“No, I mean it. I can’t let you—” And then in a different tone:

“Look out, juggins! Here’s the Proctor.”
Mr. Pomfret, in some consternation, gathered himself together and

turned as to flee. But the Proctor’s bulldogs, who had been having a lively
time with the tree-climbers in St. Giles, and were now out for blood, had
come through the archway at a smart trot, and seeing a young gentleman
not only engaged in nocturnal vagation without his gown but actually
embracing a female (mulier vel meretrix, cujus consortio Christianis
prorsus interdictum est) leapt gleefully upon him, as upon a lawful prey.

“Oh, blast!” said Mr. Pomfret. “Here, you—”

“The Proctor would like to speak to you, sir,” said the Bulldog, grimly.
Harriet debated with herself whether it might not be more tactful to

depart, leaving Mr. Pomfret to his fate. But the Proctor was close on the
heels of his men; he was standing within a few yards of her and already
demanding to know the offender’s name and college. There seemed to be
nothing for it but to face the matter out.

“Just a moment, Mr. Proctor,” began Harriet, struggling, for Mr.

Pomfret’s sake, to control a rebellious uprush of laughter. “This gentleman
is with me, and you can’t—Oh! good evening, Mr. Jenkyn.”

struck dumb with embarrassment.

“I say,” broke in Mr. Pomfret, awkwardly, but with a gentlemanly

feeling that some explanation was due from him; “it was entirely my fault. I
mean, I’m afraid I was annoying Miss Vane. She—I—”

“can you now?”

“Come to think of it,” replied Mr. Jenkyn, “I suppose I can’t. You’re a

Senior Member, aren’t you?” He waved his bulldogs to a distance. “I beg
your pardon,” he added, a little stiffly.

“Not at all,” said Harriet. “It’s a nice night. Did you have good hunting

in St. Giles?”

Proctor, rather more cheerfully. “I suppose nobody came through here?”

haven’t been climbing trees.”

A wicked facility in quotation tempted her to add “except in the

Hesperides”; but she respected Mr. Pomfret’s feelings and restrained
herself.

hitched his gown with its velvet facings protectively about his shoulders. “I
had better be away in pursuit of those that have.”

“Good-night,” said Harriet.
“Good-night,” said Mr. Jenkyn, courteously raising his square cap. He

turned sharply upon Mr. Pomfret. “Goodnight, sir.”

He stalked away with brisk steps between the posts into Museum

Road, his long liripipe sleeves agitated and fluttering. Between Harriet and
Mr. Pomfret there occurred one of those silences into which the first word
spoken falls like the stroke of a gong. It seemed equally impossible to
comment on the interruption or to resume the interrupted conversation. By
common consent, however, they turned their backs upon the pro-Proctor
and moved out once more into St. Giles. They had turned left and were
passing through the now-deserted Fender before Mr. Pomfret found his
tongue.

“A nice fool I look,” said Mr. Pomfret, bitterly.
“It was very unfortunate,” said Harriet, “but I must have looked much

the more foolish. I very nearly ran away altogether. However, all’s well that
ends well. He’s a very decent sort and I don’t suppose he’ll think twice
about it.”

an expression in use among the irreverent: “to catch a Senior girling.” “To
boy” was presumably the feminine equivalent of the verb “to girl”; she
wondered whether Mr. Jenkyn would employ it in Common Room next day.
She did not grudge him his entertainment; being old enough to know that
even the most crashing social bricks make but a small ripple in the ocean of
time, which quickly dies away. To Mr. Pomfret, however, the ripple must

inevitably appear of the dimensions of a maelstrom. He was muttering
sulkily something about a laughingstock.

don’t mind one bit.”

seriously. You’re treating me like a child.”

“Indeed I’m not. I’m very grateful—I’m very much honored by

everything you said to me. But really and truly, it’s quite impossible.”

“Oh, well, never mind,” said Mr. Pomfret, angrily.
It was too bad, thought Harriet. To have one’s young affections

trampled upon was galling enough; to have been made an object of official
ridicule as well was almost unbearable. She must do something to restore
the young gentleman’s self-respect.

believe that my objection isn’t personal at all. We have been very good
friends. Can’t we—?”

Mr. Pomfret greeted this fine old bromide with a dreary snort.
“I suppose,” he said, in a savage tone, “there’s somebody else.”
“I don’t know that you’ve any right to ask that.”
“Of course not,” said Mr. Pomfret, affronted. “I’ve no right to ask you

anything. I ought to apologize for asking you to marry me. And for making
a scene in front of the Proggins—in fact, for existing. I’m exceedingly
sorry.”

vanity of Mr. Pomfret would be the assurance that there was somebody else.
But Harriet was not prepared to make any such admission; and besides,
whether there was anybody else or not, nothing could make the notion of
marrying Mr. Pomfret anything but preposterous. She begged him to take a

reasonable view of the matter; but he continued to sulk; and indeed, nothing
that could possibly be said could mitigate the essential absurdity of the
situation. To offer a lady one’s chivalrous protection against the world in
general, and to be compelled instead to accept her senior standing as a
protection for one’s self against the just indignation of the Proctor is, and
remains, farcical.

Their ways lay together. In resentful silence they paced the stones, past

the ugly front of Balliol and the high iron gates of Trinity, past the fourteen-
fold sneer of the Caesars and the top-heavy arch of the Clarendon Building,
till they stood at the junction of Cat Street and Holywell.

It’s just going twelve.”

“Yes. Don’t bother about me. Good-night …And thank you again very

much.”

“Good-night.”
Mr. Pomfret ran hurriedly in the direction of Queen’s College, pursued

by a yelping chorus of chimes.

and she did laugh. She had no fear of any permanent damage to Mr.
Pomfret’s heart; he was far too cross to be suffering in anything but his
vanity. The incident had that rich savor of the ludicrous which neither pity
nor charity can destroy. Unfortunately, she could not in decency share it
with anybody; she could only enjoy it in lonely ecstasies of mirth. What Mr.
Jenkyn must be thinking of her she could scarcely imagine. Did he suppose
her to be an unprincipled cradle-snatcher? or a promiscuous sexual maniac?
or a disappointed woman eagerly grasping at the rapidly disappearing skirts
of opportunity? or what? The more she thought about her own part in the

episode, the funnier it appeared to her. She wondered what she should say
to Mr. Jenkyn if she ever met him again.

proposal had elated her. She ought to have been thoroughly ashamed of
herself. She ought to be blaming herself for not having seen what was
happening to Mr. Pomfret and taken steps to stop it. Why hadn’t she?
Simply, she supposed, because the possibility of such a thing had never
occurred to her. She had taken it for granted that she could never again
attract any man’s fancy, except the eccentric fancy of Peter Wimsey. And to
him she was, of course, only the creature of his making and the mirror of
his own magnanimity. Reggie Pomfret’s devotion, though ridiculous, was at
least single-minded; he was no King Cophetua; she had not to be humbly
obliged to him for kindly taking notice of her. And that reflection, after all,
was pleasurable. However loudly we may assert our own unworthiness, few
of us are really offended by hearing the assertion contradicted by a
disinterested party.

by the postern. There were lights in the Warden’s Lodgings, and somebody
was standing at the gate, looking out. At the sound of Harriet’s footsteps,
this person called out, in the Dean’s voice:

“It that you, Miss Vane. The Warden wants to see you.”
“What’s the matter, Dean?”
The Dean took Harriet by the arm.
“Newland hasn’t come in. You haven’t seen her anywhere?”
“No—I’ve been round at Somerville. It’s only just after twelve. She’ll

probably turn up. You don’t think—?”

leave. And we’ve found things.”

at her desk, her handsome face stern and judicial. In front of her stood. Miss
Haydock, with her hands thrust into her dressing-gown pockets; she looked
excited and angry. Miss Shaw, curled dismally in a corner of the big couch,
was crying; while Miss Millbanks the Senior Student, half-frightened and
half-defiant, hovered uneasily in the background. As Harriet came in with
the Dean, everybody looked hopefully towards the door and then away
again.

Newland behaving in a peculiar manner on Magdalen Tower last May-Day.
Can you give me any more exact details about that?”

Harriet told her story again.
“I am sorry,” she added in conclusion, “that I didn’t get her name at the

time; but I didn’t recognize her as one of our students. As a matter of fact, I
don’t remember ever noticing her at all, until she was pointed out to me
yesterday by Miss Martin.”

shouldn’t have known her. She’s very quiet and shy and seldom comes in to
Hall or shows herself anywhere. I think she works nearly all day at the
Radcliffe. Of course, when you told me about the May-Day business, I
decided that somebody ought to keep an eye on her. I informed Dr. Baring
and Miss Shaw, and I asked Miss Millbanks whether any of the Third Year
had noticed that she seemed to be in any trouble.”

come to me about it? I always encourage my pupils to give me their full
confidence. I asked her again and again. I really thought she had a real
affection for me …”

She sniffed hopelessly into a damp handkerchief.

know what it was. The more questions you asked, the less she’d tell you—
so I didn’t ask many.”

“Has the girl no friends?” asked Harriet.
“I thought she looked on me as a friend,” complained Miss Shaw.
“She didn’t make friends,” said Miss Haydock.
“She’s a very reserved child,” said the Dean. “I don’t think anybody

could make much out of her. I know I couldn’t.”

“But what has happened, exactly?” asked Harriet.
“When Miss Martin spoke to Miss Millbanks about her,” said Miss

Haydock, cutting in without respect of persons upon the Warden’s reply,
“Miss Millbanks mentioned the matter to me, saying she couldn’t see that
we could be expected to do anything.”

“But I scarcely knew her …” began Miss Millbanks.
“Nor did I,” said Miss Haydock. “But I thought something had better

be done about it. I took her out on the river this afternoon. She said she
ought to work, but I told her not to be an idiot, or she’d crack up. We took a
punt up over the Rollers and had tea along by the Parks. She seemed all
right then. I brought her back and persuaded her to come and dine properly
in Hall. After that, she said she wanted to go and work at the Radder. I had
an engagement, so I couldn’t go with her—besides, I thought she’d think it
funny if I trailed after her all day. So I told Miss Millbanks that somebody
else had better carry on.”

took my own work across there. I sat in a desk where I could see her. She
was there till half-past nine. I came away at ten and found she’d gone.”

“Didn’t you see her go?”

was I to know? I’ve got Schools this term. It’s all very well to say I oughtn’t
to have taken my eyes off her, but I’m not a nurse or anything—”

She was defending herself angrily and clumsily like a school-girl.

“On returning,” pursued the Warden, “Miss Millbanks—”
“But has anything been done about it?” interrupted Harriet, impatient

with this orderly academic exposition. “I suppose you asked whether she’d
been up to the gallery of the Radcliffe.”

search should be made there. I understand that it has been made, without
result. However, a subsequent—”

“How about the river?”
“I am coming to that. Perhaps I had better continue in chronological

order. I can assure you that no time has been wasted.”

“Very well, Warden.”
“On returning,” said the Warden, taking up her tale exactly where she

had left it, “Miss Millbanks told Miss Haydock about it, and they
ascertained that Miss Newland was not in College. They then, very
properly, informed the Dean, who instructed Padgett to telephone through
as soon as she came in. At 11:15 she had not returned, and Padgett reported
that fact. He mentioned at the same time that he had himself been feeling
uneasy about Miss Newland. He had noticed that she had taken to going
about alone, and that she looked strained and nervous.”

more about the students than any of us.”

“Up till tonight,” wailed Miss Shaw, “I should have said I knew all my

pupils intimately.”

at the Lodge for Miss Newland.”

“He ought to have reported that,” said Harriet.
“No,” said the Dean. “It was after you came last term that we

instructed him to report. The ones he saw came before that.”

“I see.”
“By that time,” said the Warden, “we were beginning to feel alarmed,

and Miss Martin rang up the police. In the meantime, Miss Haydock made a
search in Miss Newland’s room for anything that might throw light on her
state of mind; and found—these.”

Harriet, who said, “Good God.”

There were the letters, thirty or more of them (“and I don’t suppose that’s
the lot, either,” was the Dean’s comment)—menacing, abusive, insinuating
—all hammering remorselessly upon the same theme. “You needn’t think
you will get away with it”—“What will you do when you fail in
Schools?”—“You deserve to fail and I shall see that you do”—then more
horrible suggestions: “Don’t you feel your brain going?”—“If they see you
are going mad they will send you down”—and finally, in a sinister series:
“You’d better end it now”—“Better dead than in the loony-bin”—“In your
place I should throw myself out of the window”—“Try the river”—and so
on; the continuous, deadly beating on weak nerves that of all things is
hardest to resist.

“If only she had shown them to me!” Miss Shaw was crying.
“She wouldn’t, of course,” said Harriet. “You have to be very well

balanced to admit that people think you’re going mad. That’s what’s done
the mischief.”

child collecting all these horrors and brooding over them! I’d like to kill
whoever it is!”

“It’s a definite effort at murder,” said Harriet. “But the point is, has it

come off?”

There was a pause. Then the Warden said in an expressionless voice:
“One of the boathouse keys is missing.”
“Miss Stevens and Miss Edwards have gone upstream in the Water-

fly,” said the Dean, “and Miss Burrows and Miss Barton have taken the
other sculler down to the Isis. The police are searching too. They’ve been
gone about three-quarters of an hour. We didn’t discover till then that the
key was gone.”

angry comment that the boathouse keys should have been checked the
moment Miss Newland’s absence had been remarked. “Miss Haydock—did
Miss Newland say anything to you—anything at all—while you were out,
that might suggest where she was likely to go in case she wanted to drown
herself?”

Miss Haydock put her head in her hands.

up through the Parks—Yes—It was after tea, and we went a bit further
before turning. I struck a bad bit of water and nearly lost the pole. I
remember saying it would be a nasty place to go in, because of the weeds.
It’s a bad bottom—all mud with deep holes in it. Miss Newland asked if
that wasn’t the place where a man had been drowned last year. I said I
didn’t know, but I thought it was near there. She didn’t say anything more,
and I’d forgotten it till this moment.”

Harriet looked at her watch.
“Half-past nine, she was last seen. She’d have to get to the boathouse.

Had she a bicycle? No? Then it would take her nearly half an hour. Ten. Say
another forty minutes to the Rollers, unless she was very quick—”

“She’s not a quick punter. She’d take a canoe.”
“She’d have the wind and stream against her. Say 10:45. And she’d

have to get the canoe over the Rollers by herself. That takes time. But she
would still have over an hour. We may be too late, but it’s just worth
trying.”

“But she might have gone in anywhere.”
“Of course she might. But there’s just the chance. People get an idea

and stick to it. And they don’t always make their minds up instantly.”

“If I know anything of the girl’s psychology,” began Miss Shaw.
“What’s the good of arguing?” said Harriet. “She’s either dead or alive

and we’ve got to risk a guess. Who’ll come with me? I’ll get the car—we
shall go quicker by road than by river. We can commandeer a boat
somewhere above the Parks—if we have to break open a boathouse. Dean
—”

“I’m with you,” said Miss Martin.
“We want torches and blankets. Hot coffee. Brandy. Better get the

police to send up a constable to meet us at Timms’s. Miss Haydock, you’re
a better oar than I am—”

“I’ll come,” said Miss Haydock. “Thank God for some thing to do.”

Lights on the river. The plash of sculls. The steady chock of the

rowlocks.

The boat crept slowly downstream. The constable, crouched in the

bows, swept the beam of a powerful torch from bank to bank. Harriet
holding the rudder-lines, divided her attention between the dark current and

the moving light ahead. The Dean, setting a slow and steady stroke, kept
her eyes before her and her wits on the job.

drift down towards a dismal shape, black and slimy on the black water. The
boat lurched as the man leaned out. In the silence came the answering
groan, plash, chuck of oars on the far side of the next bend.

“All right,” said the policeman. “Only a bit o’ sacking.”
“Ready? Paddle!”
The sculls struck the water again.
“Is that the Bursar’s boat coming up?” said the Dean.
“Very likely,” said Harriet.
Just as she spoke, someone in the other boat gave a shout. There was a

heavy splash and a cry ahead, and an answering shout from the constable:

“There she goes!”
“Pull like blazes,” said Harriet. As she drew on the rudder-lines to

bring their nose round the bend, she saw, across stroke’s shoulder in the
beam of the torch, the thing they had come to find—the shining keel of a
canoe adrift in midstream, with the paddles floating beside it; and all around
it the water ran, ringed and rippling with the shock of the plunge.

“Look out, ladies. Don’t run her down. She can’t be far off.”
“Easy!” said Harriet. And then, “Back her! Hold her!”
The stream chuckled and eddied over the reversed oar-blades. The

constable shouted to the upcoming sculler, and then pointed away towards
the left bank.

“Over by the willow there.”
The light caught the silver leaves, dripping like rain towards the river.

Something swirled below them, pale and ominous.

One. Two. Three. Easy. Paddle on stroke, backwater on bow. One. Two.
Easy. Look out for your bow oars.”

The boat swung across the stream and turned, following the

policeman’s signal. He was kneeling and peering into the water on the bow
side. A white patch glimmered up to the surface and sank again.

“Fetch her round a bit more, miss.”
“Ready? One on stroke, paddle. Another. Easy. Hold her.” He was

leaning out, groping with both hands among the ribbonweed. “Back a little.
Easy. Keep those bow oars out of the water. Trim the boat. Sit over to
stroke. Have you got her?”

“I’ve got her—but the weeds are cruel strong.”
“Mind you don’t go over or there’ll be two of you. Miss Haydock—

ready, ship! See if you can help the constable. Dean—paddle one very
gentle stroke and sit well over.”

weeds, razor-sharp and strong as grave-bands. The Water-fly had come up
now and was pulling across the stream. Harriet yelled to Miss Stevens to
keep her sculls out of mischief. The boats edged together. The girl’s head
was out of the water, dead-white and lifeless, disfigured with black slime
and dark stripes of weed. The constable was supporting the body. Miss
Haydock had both hands in the stream, slashing with a knife at the ribbon-
weed that was wrapped viciously about the legs. The other boat, hampered
by its own lightness, was heeling over to stroke with gunwales awash, as
her passengers reached and grappled.

having two fresh corpses to see to, and forgetting in her wrath to whom she
was speaking. Miss Stevens paid no attention; but Miss Edwards threw her

weight over; and as the boat lifted the body lifted too. Harriet, keeping her
torch steady so that the rescuers could see what they were doing, watched
the reluctant weeds loose their last coils and slip back.

room in it, but the stronger arms and the better balance. There was a strong
heave and a violent lurch as the dead weight was hauled over the side and
rolled in a dripping heap at Miss Haydock’s feet.

first-aid measures in hand with admirable promptness. The women,
gathered on the bank, watched with anxious faces. Other help had now
arrived from the boathouse. Harriet took it upon herself to stem the stream
of questions.

had taken a canoe out alone. Reckless. Yes, we were afraid there might be
an accident. Wind. Strong current. Yes. No. Quite against the rules.” (If
there was going to be an inquest, other explanations might have to be made
there. But not here. Not now.) “Very unwise. High spirits. Oh, yes. Most
unfortunate. Taking risks …”

“She’ll do now,” said the constable.
He sat up and wiped the sweat from his eyes.
Brandy. Blankets. A melancholy little procession along the fields to

the boathouse, but less melancholy than it might have been. Then an orgy of
telephoning. Then the arrival of the doctor. Then Harriet found herself,
suddenly shaking with nerves, being given whisky by some kindly person.
The patient was better. The patient was quite all right. The capable
policeman and Miss Haydock and Miss Stevens were having their hands
dressed, where the sharp weeds had slashed them to the bone. People were
talking and talking; Harriet hoped they were not talking foolishly.

“Well,” said the Dean in her ear, “we are having a night!”
“Who’s with Miss Newland?”
“Miss Edwards. I’ve warned her not to let the child say anything if she

can help it. And I’ve muzzled that nice policeman. Accident, my dear,
accident. It’s quite all right. We’ve taken your cue. You kept your head
wonderfully. Miss Stevens lost hers a bit, though. Started to cry and talk
about suicide. I soon shut her up.”

“Damn!” said Harriet. “What did she want to do that for?”
“What indeed? You’d think she wanted to make a scandal.”
“Somebody obviously does.”
“You don’t think Miss Stevens—? She did her bit with the rescue-

work, you know.”

thought she and Miss Edwards would have that boat over between them.”

The girl’s safe and that’s all that matters. What we’ve got to do now is to
put the best face on it.”

It was nearly five in the morning when the rescuers, weary and

bandaged, sat once again in the Warden’s house. Everybody was praising
everybody else.

“It was so clever of Miss Vane,” said the Dean, “to realize that the

wretched child would go up to that particular place. What a mercy that we
arrived just when we did.”

“I’m not so sure about that,” said Harriet. “We may have done more

harm than good. Do you realize that it was only when she saw us coming
that she made up her mind to do it?”

“Do you mean she mightn’t have done it at all if we hadn’t gone after

her?”

“Difficult to say. She was putting it off, I think. What really sent her in

was that shout from the other boat. Who shouted, by the way?”

her. So I shouted.”

“What was she doing when you saw her?”
“Standing up in the canoe.”
“No, she wasn’t,” said Miss Edwards. “I looked round when you

shouted, and she was just getting to her feet then.”

standing up when I saw her, and I shouted to stop her. You couldn’t have
seen past me.”

“I saw perfectly plainly,” said Miss Edwards. “Miss Vane is quite

right. It was when she heard the shout that she got up.”

“I know what I saw,” said the Bursar, obstinately.
“It’s a pity you didn’t take somebody to cox,” said the Dean. “Nobody

can see clearly what’s going on behind her back.”

sharply. “The tragedy has been prevented, and that is all that matters. I am
exceedingly grateful to everybody.”

“I resent the suggestion,” said Miss Stevens, “that I drove the

unfortunate girl to destroy herself. And as for saying that we ought not to
have gone in search of her—”

“I never said that,” said Harriet, wearily. “I only said that if we had not

gone it might not have happened. But of course we had to go.”

“What does Newland say herself?” demanded the Dean.
“Says, why couldn’t we leave her alone?” replied Miss Edwards. “I

told her not to be an inconsiderate little ass.”

“Poor child!” said Miss Shaw.

people. Bracing up is what does them good. You let them talk too much
about themselves—”

“But she didn’t talk to me,” said Miss Shaw. “I tried very hard to make

her.”

“They’d talk much more if you’d only leave them alone.”
“I think we’d better all go to bed,” said Miss Martin.

“What a night,” said Harriet, as she rolled, dog-weary, between the

sheets. “What a gaudy night!” Her memory, thrashing round her brain like a
cat in a sack, brought up the images of Mr. Pomfret and the pro-Proctor.
They seemed to belong to another existence.

CHAPTER XIII

My sad hurt it shall releeve,
When my thoughts I shall disclose,
For thou canst, not chuse but greeve,
When I shall recount my woes;
There is nothing to that friend,
To whose close uncranied breast,
We our secret thoughts may send,
And there safely let it rest;
And thy faithfull counsel may
My distressed case assist,
Sad affliction else may sway
Me a woman as it list.

MICHAEL DRAYTON

“You must see,” said Harriet, “that it’s impossible to go on like this. You’ve
got to call in expert help and risk the consequences. Any scandal is better
than a suicide and an inquest.”

“I think you are right,” said the Warden.
Only Miss Lydgate, the Dean and Miss Edwards sat with Dr. Baring in

the Warden’s sitting-room. The brave pretense at confidence had been given
up. In the Senior Common Room, members averted their eyes from one
another and set a guard upon their lips. They were no longer angry and
suspicious. They were afraid.

“The girl’s parents are not likely to keep quiet about it,” went on

Harriet, remorselessly. “If she had succeeded in drowning herself, we

should have the police and the reporters in at this moment. Next time, the
attempt may come off.”

“Next time—”began Miss Lydgate.
“There will be a next time,” said Harriet. “And it may not be suicide; it

may be open murder. I told you at the beginning that I did not think the
measures adequate. I now say that I refuse to take any further share in the
responsibility. I have tried, and I have failed, every time.”

in once—about those thefts, you remember, Warden. They made a great
deal of fuss and arrested the wrong person. It was a very troublesome
business.”

“Your idea was a firm of private detectives, wasn’t it?”

She turned to Harriet.
“Yes; but if anybody else has anything better to suggest—”
Nobody had any very helpful suggestion. The discussion went on. In

the end:

get into communication with these people?”

“Very well, Warden. I will ring up the head of the firm.”
“You will use discretion.”
“Of course,” said Harriet. She was becoming a little impatient; the

time for discretion seemed to her to be past. “If we call people in, we shall
have to give them a free hand, you know,” she added.

admitted. Harriet could foresee endless hampering restrictions placed upon
the investigators, and felt the difficulties that went with a divided authority.
The police were answerable to nobody but themselves, but paid private

detectives were compelled to do more or less as they were told. She looked
at Dr. Baring, and wondered whether Miss Climpson or any of her
underlings was capable of asserting herself against that formidable
personality.

“And now,” said the Dean, as she and Harriet crossed the quad

together, “I’ve got to go and tackle the Newlands.

I’m not looking forward to it. They’ll be terribly upset, poor things.

He’s a very minor civil servant, and their daughter’s career means
everything to them. Quite apart from the personal side of it, it’ll be a
frightful blow if this ruins her Schools. They’re very poor and hardworking,
and so proud of her—”

Miss Martin made a little despairing gesture, squared her shoulders

and went to face her task.

Miss Hillyard, in her gown, was making for one of the lecture-rooms.

She looked hollow-eyed and desperate, Harriet thought. Her glance shot
from side to side, as though she were pursued.

From an open window on the ground floor of Queen Elizabeth came

the voice of Miss Shaw, giving a coaching:

“You might have quoted also from the essay De la Vanité. You

remember the passage. Je me suis couché mille fois chez moi, imaginant
qu’on me trahirait et assomeroit cette nuit-là—his morbid preoccupation
with the idea of death and his—”

The academic machine was grinding on. At the entrance leading to

their offices, the Bursar and Treasurer stood together, their hands full of
papers. They seemed to be discussing some question of finance. Their
glances were secretive and mutually hostile; they looked like sullen dogs,

chained together and forced into a grumbling amity by the reprimand of
their master.

Still without a word, she passed Harriet and turned along the plinth. Her
head was held high and defiantly. Harriet went in and along to Miss
Lydgate’s room. Miss Lydgate, as she knew, was lecturing; she could use
her telephone undisturbed. She put her call through to London.

A quarter of an hour later, she hung up the receiver with a sinking

heart. Why she should be surprised to learn that Miss Climpson was absent
from Town “engaged on a case” she could not have said. It seemed vaguely
monstrous that this should be so; but it was so. Would she like to speak to
anyone else? Harriet had asked for Miss Murchison, the only other member
of the firm who was personally known to her. Miss Murchison had left a
year ago to be married. Harriet felt this as almost a personal affront. She did
not like to pour all the details of the Shrewsbury affair into the ears of a
complete stranger. She said she would write, rang off, and sat feeling
curiously helpless.

It is all very well to take a firm line about things, and rush to the

telephone, determined to “do something” without delay; other people do not
sit with folded hands waiting upon the convenience even of our highly
interesting and influential selves. Harriet laughed at her own annoyance.
She had made up her mind to instant action, and now she was furious
because a business firm had affairs of its own to attend to. Yet to wait any
longer was impossible. The situation was becoming a nightmare. Faces had
grown sly and distorted overnight; eyes fearful; the most innocent words
charged with suspicion. At any moment some new terror might break
bounds and carry all before it.

signati, they were walled in, sealed down, by walls and seals that shut her
out. Sitting there in the clear light of morning, staring at the prosaic
telephone on the desk, she knew the ancient dread of Artemis, moon-
goddess, virgin-huntress, whose arrows are plagues and death.

another brood of spinsters; even if she succeeded in getting hold of Miss
Climpson, how was she to explain matters to that desiccated and elderly
virgin? The very sight of some of the poison letters would probably make
her sick, and the whole trouble would be beyond her comprehension. In
this, Harriet did the lady less than justice; Miss Climpson had seen many
strange things in sixty-odd years of boarding-house life, and was as free
from repressions and complexes as any human being could very well be.
But, in fact, the atmosphere of Shrewsbury was getting on Harriet’s nerves.
What she wanted was someone with whom she did not need to mince her
words, somebody who would neither show nor feel surprise at any
manifestation of human eccentricity, somebody whom she knew and could
trust.

There were plenty of people in London—both men and women—to

whom the discussion of sexual abnormalities was a commonplace; but most
of them were very little to be trusted. They cultivated normality till it stood
out of them all over in knobs, like the muscles upon professional strong
men, and scarcely looked normal at all. And they talked interminably and
loudly. From their bouncing mental health ordinary ill-balanced mortals
shrank in alarm. She ran over various names in her mind, but found none
that would do.

want a doctor or a detective. But I’ve got to have somebody.”

of Peter Wimsey. Not, of course, that this was the kind of case he could
very suitably have investigated himself; but he would probably have known
the right person. He at least would be surprised at nothing, shocked at
nothing; he had far too wide an experience of the world. And he was
completely to be trusted. But he was not there. He had vanished from view
at the very moment when the Shrewsbury affair had first come to her
notice; it seemed almost pointed. Like Lord Saint-George, she began to feel
that Peter really had no right to disappear just when he was wanted. The
fact that she had spent five years angrily refusing to contract further
obligations towards Peter Wimsey had no weight with her now; she would
readily have contracted obligations towards the devil himself, if she could
have been sure that the prince of darkness was a gentleman of Peter’s
kidney. But Peter was as far beyond reach as Lucifer.

Was he? There was the telephone at her elbow. She could speak to

Rome as easily as to London—though at a trifle more expense. It was
probably only the financial modesty of the person whose income is all
earned by work that made it seem more momentous to ring somebody up
across a continent than across a city. At any rate, it could do no harm to
fetch Peter’s last letter and find the telephone number of his hotel. She went
out quickly, and encountered Miss de Vine.

better show you this.”

odiously familiar:

YOUR TURN’S COMING

“It’s nice to be warned,” said Harriet, with a lightness she did not feel.
“Where? when? and how?”

behind her glasses at the questions, “just now.”

“When did you use the book last?”
“That,” said Miss de Vine, blinking again, “is the odd thing about it. I

didn’t. Miss Hillyard borrowed it last night, and Mrs. Goodwin brought it
back to me this morning.”

Harriet was faintly surprised that she should have chosen her to run her
errands. But in certain circumstances the choice might, of course, be a wise
one.

“Are you sure the paper wasn’t there yesterday?”
“I don’t think it could have been. I was referring to various pages, and

I think I should have seen it.”

“Did you give it directly into Miss Hillyard’s own hands?”
“No; I put it in her pigeon-hole before Hall.”
“So that anybody might have got hold of it.”
“Oh, yes.”
Exasperating. Harriet took possession of the paper and passed on. It

was now not even clear against whom the threat was directed, much less
from whom it came. She fetched Peter’s letter, and discovered that in the
interval she had made up her mind. She had said she would ring up the head
of the firm; and so she would. If he was not technically the head, he was
certainly the brains of it. She put the call through. She did not know how
long it would take, but left instructions at the Lodge that when it came she
was to be searched for and found without fail. She felt abominably restless.

between Miss Shaw and Miss Stevens, who were normally the closest of
friends. Miss Shaw, having heard the full story of the previous night’s
adventure, had accused Miss Stevens of frightening Miss Newland into the
river; Miss Stevens had in her turn accused Miss Shaw of deliberately
playing on the girl’s feelings, so as to work her up into a state of nerves.

The next disturber of the peace was Miss Allison. As Harriet had

discovered the previous term, Miss Allison had a way of passing on to
people the things other people had said of them. In a spirit of candor she
had now chosen to pass on to Mrs. Goodwin the hints thrown out by Miss
Hillyard. Mrs. Goodwin had tackled Miss Hillyard about it; and there had
been a most unpleasant scene, in which Miss Allison, the Dean and poor
little Miss Chilperic, who had been drawn into the discussion by malignant
chance, took sides with Mrs. Goodwin against Miss Pyke and Miss
Burrows, who, though they thought Miss Hillyard had spoken ill-advisedly,
resented any aspersions cast against the unmarried state as such. This
unpleasantness took place in the Fellows’ Garden.

Finally, Miss Allison had further inflamed the situation by passing on a

vivid account of the matter to Miss Barton, who had gone away indignantly
to tell Miss Lydgate and Miss de Vine exactly what she thought of the
psychology both of Miss Hillyard and Miss Allison.

It was not an agreeable morning.

Between the married (or about-to-be-married) and the unmarried,

Harriet felt herself to be like Aesop’s bat between the birds and beasts; an
odd result, she felt, of having sown her wild oats in public. Lunch was a
strained meal. She came into Hall rather late, to find that the High Table had
sorted itself out into opposing camps, with Miss Hillyard at one end and

Mrs. Goodwin at the other. She found an empty chair between Miss de Vine
and Miss Stevens, and amused herself by drawing them and Miss Allison,
who was next to Miss de Vine on the other side, into a discussion of
currency and inflation. She knew nothing of the subject, but they, naturally,
knew a great deal, and her tact was rewarded. Conversation spread; the
table presented a less sullen front to the assembled students; and Miss
Lydgate beamed approval. Things were moving nicely when a scout,
leaning between Miss Allison and Miss de Vine, murmured a message.

“From Rome?” said Miss de Vine. “Who can that be, I wonder?”
“Telephoning from Rome?” said Miss Allison, in piercing accents.

“Oh, one of your correspondents, I suppose. He must be better off than most
historians.”

sure they said de Vine and not Vane?”

The scout was not very sure.
“If you’re expecting it, it must be for you,” said Miss de Vine. Miss

Allison made some rather sharp observation about writers of international
celebrity and Harriet left the table, flushing uncomfortably and angry with
herself for doing so.

the call had been put through, she tried to arrange in her own mind what to
say. A brief sentence of apology; another brief sentence of explanation; and
a request for advice; into whose hands should the case be put? There was,
surely, nothing difficult about that.

Peter Wimsey was in the hotel, but would inquire. A pause, during which
she could hear feet passing to and fro on the other side of the continent.
Then the voice again, suave and apologetic.

“His lordship left Rome three days ago.”
Oh! Did they know for what destination?
They would inquire. Another pause, and voices speaking Italian. Then

the same voice again.

“His lordship left for Warsaw.”
“Oh! Thank you very much.”
And that was that.
At the thought of ringing up the British Embassy at Warsaw, her heart

failed her. She replaced the receiver and went upstairs again. She did not
seem to have gained very much by taking a firm line.

Friday afternoon. Crises always, thought Harriet, occurred at the

weekend, when there were no posts. If she wrote now to London and they
replied by return, she would still, in all probability, be able to take no action
till Monday. If she wrote to Peter, there might be an Air-Mail—but suppose
he wasn’t at Warsaw after all. He might by now have gone on to Bucharest
or Berlin. Could she possibly ring up the Foreign Office and demand to
know his whereabouts? Because, if the letter got to him over the weekend
and he wired a reply, she would not be losing so very much time. She was
not sure if she would be very good at dealing with the Foreign Office. Was
there anybody who could? How about the Hon. Freddy?

It took a little time to locate Freddy Arbuthnot, but eventually she ran

him down, by phone, at an office in Throgmorton Street. He was definitely
helpful. He had no idea where old Peter was, but he would take steps to find
out, and if she liked to send a letter care of him (Freddy) he would see that
it was forwarded on at the earliest possible moment. No trouble at all.
Charmed to be of use.

So the letter was written, and dispatched so as to reach Town first post

on the Saturday morning. It contained a brief outline of the case, and

finished up:

“Can you tell me whether you think Miss Climpson’s people could

handle it? And who, in her absence, is the most competent person there? Or,
if not, can you suggest anybody else I could ask? Perhaps it should be a
psychologist and not a detective. I know that anybody you recommend will
be trustworthy. Would you mind wiring as soon as you get this? I should be
immensely grateful. We are all getting rather worked up, and I’m afraid
something drastic may happen if we don’t cope with it quickly.”

She hoped that last sentence did not sound as panicky as she felt.

“I rang up your hotel in Rome and they said you had gone on to

Warsaw. As I don’t know where you may be by this time, I’m getting Mr.
Arbuthnot to forward this through the Foreign Office.”

That sounded faintly reproachful, but it couldn’t be helped. What she

really wanted to say was, “I wish to God you were here and could tell me
what to do”; but she felt that that might make him feel uncomfortable, since
he obviously couldn’t be there. Still, it could do no harm to ask, “How soon
do you think you will be back in England?” And with this addition, the
letter was finished and posted.

“And to put the lid on things,” said the Dean, “there’s this man coming

to dinner.”

“This man” was Dr. Noel Threep, a very worthy and important man, a

Fellow of a distinguished college and a member of the Council by which
Shrewsbury was governed. Friends and benefactors or this kind were not
infrequently entertained in College, and as a rule the High Table was glad of
their presence. But the moment was scarcely auspicious. However, the

engagement had been made early in the term, and it was quite impossible to
put Dr. Threep off. Harriet said she thought his visit might be a good thing,
and help to keep the minds of the S.C.R. off their troubles.

interestingly. He’s a political economist.”

“Hard-boiled or soft-boiled?”
“Hard, I think.”
This question had no reference to Dr. Threep’s politics or economics,

but only to his shirt-front. Harriet and the Dean had begun to collect shirt-
fronts. Miss Chilperic’s “young man” had started the collection. He was
extremely tall and thin and rather hollow-chested; by way of emphasizing
this latter defect, he always wore a soft pleated dress-shirt, which made him
look (according to the Dean) like the scooped-out rind of a melon. By way
of contrast, there had been an eminent and ample professor of chemistry—a
visitor from another university—who had turned up in a front of intense
rigidity, which stood out before him like the chest of a pouter pigeon,
bulging out of all control and displaying a large area of the parent shirt at
either side. A third variety of shirt fairly common among the learned was
that which escaped from the center stud and gaped in the middle; and one
never-to-be-forgotten happy day a popular poet had arrived to give a lecture
on his methods of composition and the future of poetry, whereby, at every
gesticulation (and he had used a great many), his waistcoat had leapt in the
air, allowing a line of shirt, adorned with a little tab, to peep out, rabbit-like,
over the waistline of the confining trouser. On this occasion, Harriet and the
Dean had disgraced themselves badly.

appeared to present no loophole for sartorial criticism. But he had not been
seated at table three minutes before Harriet realized that he was doomed to

form one of the most notable additions to the collection. For he popped.
When he bent over his plate, when he turned to pass the mustard, when he
courteously inclined himself to catch what his neighbor was saying, his
shirt-front exploded with a merry little report like the opening of ginger-
beer. The clamor in Hall seemed louder than usual that night, so that the
poppings were inaudible beyond a few places to right and left of him; but
the Warden and the Dean, who sat beside him, heard them, and Harriet,
sitting opposite, heard them; she dared not catch the Dean’s eye. Dr. Threep
was too well-bred, or perhaps too much embarrassed, to allude to the
matter; he talked on imperturbably, raising his voice more and more to be
heard above the din of the undergraduates. The Warden was frowning.

“—the excellent relations between the Women’s Colleges and the

University,” said Dr. Threep. “All the same—”

The Warden summoned a scout, who presently went down to the

Junior High and thence to the other tables, with the usual message:

be rather less noise.”

“I beg your pardon, Dr. Threep. I didn’t quite catch.”
“All the same,” repeated Dr. Threep, with a polite bend and pop, “it is

curious to see how traces of the old prejudice linger. Only yesterday the
Vice-Chancellor showed me a remarkably vulgar anonymous letter sent to
him that very morning …”

intervals of a storm.

“… making the most absurd accusations—oddly enough against your

own Senior Common Room in particular. Accusations of murder, of all
things. The Vice-Chancellor …”

Threep’s voice rang out in the comparative quiet, the heads at the High
Table jerked towards him, as though pulled by wires.

“… pasted on paper—quite ingenious. I said, ‘My dear Mr. Vice-

Chancellor, I doubt whether the police can do much; it is probably the work
of some harmless crank.’ But is it not curious that such peculiar delusions
should exist—and persist—at this day?”

“Very curious indeed,” said the Warden, with stiff lips.
“So I advised against police interference—for the moment, at any rate.

But I said I would put the matter before you, since Shrewsbury was
particularly mentioned. I defer, of course, to your opinion.”

the Warden’s decision, popped—with so loud and violent an explosion that
it resounded from end to end of the table, and the major embarrassment was
swallowed up in the minor. Miss Chilperic suddenly broke out into a spasm
of high, nervous laughter.

How dinner ended, Harriet could never properly recall. Dr. Threep

went over to have coffee with the Warden, and Harriet found herself in the
Dean’s room, helpless between mirth and alarm.

“It’s really very serious,” said Miss Martin.
“Horribly. ‘I said to the Vice-Chancellor—’”
“Pop!”
“No; but honestly, what are we to do about it?”
“I defer to your opinion.”
“Pop!”
“I can’t imagine what makes shirts do that. Can you?”
“I’ve no idea. And I meant to be so clever this evening. Here, said I, is

went Pop!”

“It’s no good watching reactions to Dr. Threep,” said the Dean.

“Everyone’s too used to him. And anyhow, he has half a dozen children.
But it’s going to be very awkward if the Vice-Chancellor—”

“Very.”

Saturday dawned dull and lowering.
“I believe it’s going to thunder,” said Miss Allison.
“Rather early in the year for that,” said Miss Hillyard.
“Not at all,” retorted Mrs. Goodwin; “I’ve known plenty of

thunderstorms in May.”

“There is certainly something electrical in the atmosphere,” said Miss

Lydgate.

“I agree with you,” said Miss Barton.

Harriet had slept badly. She had, in fact, been walking about College

half the night, a prey to imaginary alarms. When at length she had gone to
bed, she had had the tiresome dream about trying to catch a train, hampered
all the time by a quantity of luggage which she strove vainly to pack in
misty and unmanageable suitcases. In the morning, she struggled
desperately with the proofs of Miss Lydgate’s chapter on Gerard Manley
Hopkins, finding it as unmanageable as the suitcases and very nearly as
misty. In the intervals of disentangling the poet’s own system of sprung,
counterpoint and logaoedic rhythm, with its rove-over lines and outrides,
from Miss Lydgate’s rival system of scansion (which required five
alphabets and a series of pothooks for its expression), she wondered
whether Freddy Arbuthnot had succeeded in doing what he had promised
and whether she ought to leave it at that or do something else: in which
case, what? In the afternoon, she could bear herself no longer and set out,

under a threatening sky, to wander about Oxford, and walk herself, if
possible, into exhaustion. She started up the High, pausing for a few
moments to stare into the window of an Antique shop; there was a set of
carved ivory chessmen there, for which she had conceived an unreasonable
affection. She even played with the idea of going boldly in and buying
them; but she knew they would cost too much. They were Chinese, and
each piece was a complicated nest of little revolving balls, delicate as fine
lace. It would be jolly to handle them, but idiotic to buy them; she was not
even a good chess-player, and in any case, one couldn’t play chess
comfortably with pieces like that. She put temptation aside and moved on.
There was a shop full of wooden objects embellished with the painted
shields of colleges: bookends, matchstands, pens shaped like oars and
horribly top-heavy, cigarette-boxes, ink-pots and even powder-compacts.
Did it add a zest to facial repairs to have them watched over by the lions of
Oriel or the martlets of Worcester? To be reminded during the process that
one had a betrothed among the tripping stags of Jesus or a brother nourished
by the pious pelican of Corpus? She crossed the street before she came to
Queen’s (for Mr. Pomfret might conceivably pop out of the gate, and she
was rather avoiding an encounter with Mr. Pomfret) and went on up the
other side. Books and prints—fascinating at most times, but insufficiently
exciting to hold her attention. Robes and gowns, colorful, but too academic
for her mood. A chemist’s shop. A stationer’s, with more college bric-à-
brac, this time in glass and pottery. A tobacconist’s, with more coats of
arms, on ashtrays and tobacco-jars. A jeweler’s, with college arms on
spoons and brooches and napkin-rings. She grew weary of college arms and
turned down a side-street into Merton Street. In this untouched and cobbled
thoroughfare there should be peace, if anywhere. But peace is in the mind,
and not in streets, however old and beautiful. She passed through the iron

gate into Merton Grove, and so, crossing over Dead Man’s Walk, into the
Broad Walk of Christ Church and along this and round to the towing path
where the New Cut meets the Isis. And there, to her horror, she was hailed
by a well-known voice. Here, by special interposition of all the powers of
evil, was Miss Schuster-Slatt, whose presence in Oxford she had till that
moment mercifully forgotten, convoying a party of American visitors, all
eager for information. Miss Vane was the very person to tell them
everything. Did she know which of these barges belonged to which college?
Were those cute little blue-and-gold heads griffins or phoenixes and were
there three of them to symbolize the Trinity or was that just accident? Were
those the Magdalen lilies? If so, why was there the initial “W” painted all
round the barge and what did it stand for? Why did Pembroke have the
English rose and the Scotch thistle at the top of the shield? Were the roses
of New College English roses, too? Why was it called New when it was so
old, and why mustn’t you call it “New” but always “New College”? Oh!
look, Sadie—are those geese flying across? Swans? How interesting! Were
there many swans on the river? Was it true that all the swans in England
belonged to the King? Was that a swan on that barge? Oh, an eagle. Why
did some barges have figureheads and some not? Did the boys ever have
tea-parties on the barges? Gould Miss Vane explain about those bumping
races, because nobody had been able to understand from Sadie’s
description. Was that the University barge? Oh, the University College
barge. Was the University College the place where all the classes were
held?

long-avenue to the Meadow Buildings and all the way round Christ Church,
from Hall to Kitchen, from Cathedral to Library, from Mercury to Great
Tom, while all the time the sky brooded lower and the weather became

more oppressive, until Harriet, who had started out feeling as though her
skull were stuffed with wool, ended up with a raging headache.

The storm held off till after Hall, except for threatenings and

grumblings of thunder. At 10 o’clock the first great flash went across the
sky like a searchlight, picking out roof and treetop violet-blue against the
blackness, and followed by a clap that shook the walls. Harriet flung her
window open and leaned out. There was a sweet smell of approaching rain.
Another flash and crash; a swift gust of wind; and then the swish and rush
of falling water, the gurgle of overflowing gutters, and peace.

CHAPTER XIV

Truce gentle love, a parly now I crave,

Me thinks, ’tis long since first these wars begun,

Nor thou nor I, the better yet can have:

Bad is the match where neither party won.

I offer free conditions of faire peace,

My hart for hostage, that it shall remaine,

Discharge our forces heere, let malice cease,
So for my pledge, thou give me pledge againe.

MICHAEL DRAYTON

“It was a good storm,” said the Dean.

“First-class,” said the Bursar, dryly, “for those that like it and don’t

have to cope with those that don’t. The scouts’ quarters were a
pandemonium; I had to go over. There was Carrie in hysterics, and Cook
thinking her last hour had come, and Annie shrieking to Heaven that her
darling children would be terrified and wanting to rush off to Headington
then and there to comfort them—”

“I wonder you didn’t send her there at once in the best car available,”

put in Miss Hillyard in sarcastic tones.

“—and one of the kitchen-maids-having an outbreak of religious

blues,” went on Miss Stevens, “and confessing her sins to an admiring
circle. I can’t think why people have so little self-control.”

“I’m horribly afraid of thunder,” said Miss Chilperic.
“The wretched Newland was all upset again,” said the Dean. “The

Infirmarian was quite frightened about her. Said the Infirmary maid was

hiding in the linen-cupboard and she didn’t like to be left alone with
Newland. However, Miss Shaw obligingly coped.”

dresses?” inquired Miss Pyke. “They had quite a ritual appearance. I was
reminded of the ceremonial dances of the—”

“I sometimes wonder whether it’s safe to have them so near the buildings. If
they came down—”

rain came in like a waterspout—just over my bed. I had to move all the
furniture, and the carpet is quite—”

the air. Look at it. Could anybody want a better and brighter Sunday
morning?”

blew fresh and cool.

“It’s taken my headache away, thank goodness! I’d like to do

something calm and cheerful and thoroughly Oxonian. Isn’t everything a
lovely color? Like the blues and scarlets and greens in an illuminated
missal!”

along like two good little people and hear the University Sermon. I can’t
think of anything more soothingly normal and academic than that. And Dr.
Armstrong’s preaching. He’s always interesting.”

thing I should have thought of for myself. But it’s an idea; definitely an
idea. We’ll go.”

its most soothing and ceremonial. The solemn procession of doctors in hood
and habit; the Vice-Chancellor bowing to the preacher, and the beadles
tripping before them; the throng of black gowns and the decorous gaiety of
the summer-frocked wives of dons; the hymn and the bidding-prayer; the
gowned and hooded preacher austere in cassock and bands; the quiet
discourse delivered in a thin, clear, scholarly voice, and dealing gently with
the relations of the Christian philosophy to atomic physics. Here were the
Universities and the Church of England kissing one another in
righteousness and peace, like the angels in a Botticelli Nativity: very
exquisitely robed, very cheerful in a serious kind of way, a little mannered,
a little conscious of their fine mutual courtesy. Here, without heat, they
could discuss their common problem, agreeing pleasantly or pleasantly
agreeing to differ. Of the grotesque and ugly devil-shapes sprawling at the
foot of the picture these angels had no word to say. What solution could
either of them produce, if challenged, for the Shrewsbury problem? Other
bodies would be bolder: the Church of Rome would have its answer,
smooth, competent and experienced; the queer, bitterly-jarring sects of the
New Psychology would have another, ugly, awkward, tentative and applied
with a passionate experimentalism. It was entertaining to imagine a
Freudian University indissolubly wedded to a Roman Establishment: they
certainly would not live so harmoniously together as the Anglican Church
and the School of Litterae Humaniores. But it was delightful to believe, if
only for an hour, that all human difficulties could be dealt with in this
detached and amiable spirit. “The University is a Paradise”—true, but
—“then saw I that there was a way to hell even from the gates of Heaven
…”

pre-Bach; the procession reformed and dispersed again, passing out south
and north; the congregation rose to their feet and began to stream away in
an orderly disorder. The Dean, who was fond of early fugues, remained
quietly in her place and Harriet sat dreamily beside her, with eyes fixed on
the softly-tinted saints in the rood-screen. At length they both rose and
made their way to the door. A mild, clear gust of wind met them as they
passed between the twisted columns of Dr. Owen’s porch, making the Dean
clutch at the peak of her rebellious cap and bellying out their gowns into
wide arcs and volutes. The sky, between pillow and pillow of rounded
cloud, was the pale and transparent blue of aquamarine.

with animation—among them, two Fellows of All Souls and a dignified
figure which Harriet recognized as that of the Master of Balliol. Beside him
was another M.A. who, as Harriet and the Dean went by, conversing of
counterpoint, turned suddenly and lifted his mortar-board.

Wimsey. Peter, of all people. Peter, who was supposed to be in Warsaw,
planted placidly in the High as though he had grown there from the
beginning. Peter, wearing cap and gown like any orthodox Master of Arts,
presenting every appearance of having piously attended the University
Sermon, and now talking mild academic shop with two Fellows of All
Souls and the Master of Balliol.

a Master of Arts. He was at Balliol. Why shouldn’t he talk to the Master if
he likes? But how did he get here? And why? And when did he come? And
why didn’t he let me know?”

Lord Peter to the Dean.

out.” And then more explanations—something about flying over from
Warsaw, and “my nephew at the House,” and “the Master’s kind
hospitality,” and sending a note round to College. Then, out of the jumble
of polite nothings, a sentence she grasped clearly.

come round and look you up?”

herself together. “I suppose it’s no good asking you to lunch?”

All Souls men was lunching also. In fact, a little lunch-party with, she
gathered, some kind of historical basis, with mention of somebody’s article
for the Proceedings of Something or Other, which Wimsey was going to
“step into All Souls and look at—it won’t take you ten minutes,” and
references to the printing and distribution of Reformation polemical
pamphlets—to Wimsey’s expert knowledge—to the other man’s expert
knowledge—and to the inexpert pretense at knowledge of some historian
from another university.

away, reminding Wimsey and the historian that lunch would be at 1:15;
Peter said something to Harriet about being “round in twenty minutes,” and
then vanished with the two Fellows into All Souls, and Harriet and the
Dean were walking together again.

“Well!” said the Dean, “so that’s the man.”
“Yes,” said Harriet weakly, “that’s him.”

Oxford.”

to be coming up some time this term to see his nephew, but I’d no idea he
could get away so soon. As a matter of fact, I wanted to ask him—only I
don’t suppose he could have got my letter—”

the end she made a clean breast of the whole affair to the Dean.

if he doesn’t, I ought to tell him. I know he’s absolutely safe. But whether
the Warden and the S.C.R.—I didn’t expect him to turn up like this.”

Martin. “I shouldn’t say too much at College. Bring him along, if he’ll
come, and let him turn the whole lot of us inside out. A man with manners
like that could twist the whole High Table round his little finger. What a
mercy he’s a historian—that will put him on the right side of Miss
Hillyard.”

“I never thought of him as a historian.”
“Well, he took a First, anyway … didn’t you know?”
She had not known. She had not even troubled to wonder. She had

never consciously connected Wimsey and Oxford in her mind. This was the
Foreign Office business all over again. If he had realized her
thoughtlessness it must have hurt him. She saw herself as a monster of
callous ingratitude.

“I’m told he was looked upon as one of the ablest scholars of his year,”

pursued the Dean. “A. L. Smith thought highly of him. It’s a pity, in a way,
he didn’t stick to History—but naturally, his chief interests wouldn’t be
academic.”

“No,” said Harriet.
So the Dean had been making inquiries. Naturally, she would.

Probably the whole S.C.R. could by now give her detailed information
about Wimsey’s University career. That was comprehensible enough: they
thought along those lines. But she herself might surely have found the
energy for two minutes’ study of the Calendar.

my own room it will set a bad example to the students. And it is a bit
cramped.”

rooms, if you’re going to discuss this beastly business. I wonder if he did
get that letter. Perhaps the eager interest behind that penetrating eye was
due to his suspicions of me. And I put it all down to my personal
fascination! The man’s dangerous, though he doesn’t look it.”

isn’t you.”

Some minor confusions were cleared up when they reached College

and found a note from Peter in Harriet’s pigeonhole. It explained that he
had reached London early on Saturday afternoon and found Harriet’s letter
waiting for him at the Foreign Office. “I tried to ring you, but left no name,
as I did not know whether you wanted me to appear personally in this
matter.” He had been engaged in London that afternoon, motored to Oxford
for dinner, been captured by some Balliol friends and kindly invited by the
Master to stay the night, and would call “some time tomorrow” in the hope
of finding her in.

So she waited in the Dean’s room, idly watching the summer sun play
through the branches of the plane-tree in the New Quad and make a dancing

pattern upon the plinth, until she heard his knock. When she said “Come
in!” the commonplace formula seemed to take on a startling significance.
For good or evil, she had called in something explosive from the outside
world to break up the ordered tranquility of the place; she had sold the
breach to an alien force; she had sided with London against Oxford and
with the world against the cloister.

came into the quiet room as though he belonged there, and had never
belonged to any other place.

Then he stripped off his gown and tossed it on the couch beside her own,
laying his mortar-board on the table.

“I found your note when I got back. So you did get my letter?”
“Yes; I’m sorry you should have had all this bother. It seemed to me,

as I was coming to Oxford in any case, I had better push along and see you.
I meant to come round yesterday evening, but I got tied up with people—
and I thought perhaps I had better announce myself first.”

“It was good of you to come. Sit down.”
She pulled an armchair forward, and he dropped into it rather heavily.

She noticed, with a curious little prick of anxiety, how the clear light picked
out the angles of the skull on jaw and temple.

“Peter! You look tired to death. What have you been doing with

yourself?”

interminable weeks. I’m the professional funny man of the Foreign Office.
You didn’t know that? Well, I am. Not often, but waiting in the wings if
wanted. Some turn goes wrong—some Under-Secretary’s secretary with
small discretion and less French uses an ill-considered phrase in an after-

dinner speech, and they send on the patter-comedian to talk the house into a
good humor again, I take people out to lunch and tell them funny stories
and work them up to mellowing point. God! what a game!”

selfish even to try and know anything. But it isn’t like you to sound so
dreadfully discouraged. You look—”

do. An eternal childishness is my one diplomatic asset.”

“You only look as though you hadn’t slept for weeks.”
“I’m not sure that I have, now you mention it. I thought—at one point

we all thought—something might be going to happen. All the old, filthy
uproar. I got as far as saying to Bunter one night: ‘It’s coming; it’s here;
back to the Army again, sergeant.’ …But in the end, you know, it made a
noise like a hoop and rolled away—for the moment.”

“Thanks to the comic cross-talk?”
“Oh, no. Great Scott, no. Mine was a very trivial affair. Slight frontier

skirmish. Don’t get it into your head that I’m the man who saved the
Empire.”

“Then who did?”
“Dunno. Nobody knows. Nobody ever does know, for certain. The old

bus wobbles one way, and you think, ‘That’s done it!’ and then it wobbles
the other way and you think, ‘All serene’; and then, one day, it wobbles
over too far and you’re in the soup and can’t remember how you got there.”

“That’s what we’re all afraid of, inside ourselves.”
“Yes. It terrifies me. It’s a relief to get back and find you here—and all

this going on as it used to do. Here’s where the real things are done, Harriet
—if only those bunglers out there will keep quiet and let it go on. God! how
I loathe haste and violence and all that ghastly, slippery cleverness.

Unsound, unscholarly, insincere—nothing but propaganda and special
pleading and ‘what do we get out of this?’ No time, no peace, no silence;
nothing but conferences and newspapers and public speeches till one can’t
hear one’s self think …If only one could root one’s self in here among the
grass and stones and do something worth doing, even if it was only
restoring a lost breathing for the love of the job and nothing else.”

She was astonished to hear him speak with so much passion.
“But, Peter, you’re saying exactly what I’ve been feeling all this time.

But can it be done?”

“No; it can’t be done. Though there are moments when one comes

back and thinks it might.”

ye shall find rest for your souls.’”

walk therein.’ Rest? I had forgotten there was such a word.”

“So had I.”
They sat silent for a few minutes. Wimsey offered her his cigarette-

case and struck a match for them both.

remember that horrible time at Wilvercombe when we could find nothing to
throw at one another but cheap wit and spiteful remarks? At least, I was
spiteful: you never were.”

vulgar at watering-places. It is the one haunting terror of my life that some
day some perfectly irresistible peach of a problem will blossom out at
Brighton or Blackpool, and that I shall be weak-minded enough to go and
meddle with it.” The laughter had come back to his voice and his eyes were
tranquil. “Thank Heaven, it’s extremely difficult to be cheap in Oxford—

after one’s second year, at any rate. Which reminds me that I haven’t yet
properly thanked you for being so kind to Saint-George.”

“Have you seen him yet?”
“No; I have threatened to descend on him on Monday, and show him a

damned disinheriting countenance. He has gone off somewhere today with
a party of friends. I know what that means. He’s getting thoroughly spoilt.”

“Well, Peter, you can’t wonder. He’s terribly good-looking.”
“He’s a precocious little monkey,” said his uncle, without enthusiasm.

“Though I can’t blame him for that; it runs in the blood. But it’s
characteristic of his impudence that he should have gate-crashed your
acquaintance, after you had firmly refused to meet any of my people.”

“I found him for myself, you see, Peter.”
“Literally, or so he says. I gather that he nearly knocked you down,

damaged your property and generally made a nuisance of himself, and that
you instantly concluded he must be some relation to me.”

couldn’t very well miss the likeness.”

“Yet people have been known to speak slightingly of my personal

appearance! I congratulate you on a perception worthy of Sherlock Holmes
at his keenest.”

It amused and touched her to discover this childish streak of vanity in

him. But she knew that he would see through her at once if she tried to
pander to it by saying anything more flattering than the truth.

hands; I shouldn’t think anybody has ever spoken slightingly about those.”

“Confound it, Harriet! My one really shameful weakness. My most

jealously guarded bit of personal conceit. Dragged into the light of day and
remorselessly exposed. I am idiotically proud of having inherited the

Wimsey hands. My brother and my sister both missed them, but they go
back in the family portraits for three hundred years.” His face clouded for a
moment. “I wonder all the strength hasn’t been bred out of them by this
time; our sands are running down fast. Harriet, will you come with me one
day to Denver and see the place before the new civilization grows in on it
like the jungle? I don’t want to go all Galsworthy about it. They’ll tell you I
don’t care a damn for the whole outfit, and I don’t know that I do. But I was
born there, and I shall be sorry if I live to see the land sold for ribbon-
building and the Hall turned over to a Hollywood Color-Talkie king.”

“Lord Saint-George wouldn’t do that, would he?”
“I don’t know, Harriet. Why shouldn’t he? Our kind of show is dead

and done for. What the hell good does it do anybody these days? But he
may care more than he thinks he does.”

“You care, don’t you, Peter?”
“It’s very easy for me to care, because I’m not called upon to do a

hand’s turn in the matter. I am the usual middle-aged prig, with an
admirable talent for binding heavy burdens and laying them on other men’s
shoulders. Don’t think I envy my nephew his job. I’d rather live at peace
and lay my bones in the earth. Only I have a cursed hankering after certain
musty old values, which I’m coward enough to deny, like my namesake of
the Gospels. I never go home if I can help it, and I avoid coming here; the
cocks crow too long and too loudly.”

“Peter, I’d no idea you felt like that. I’d like to see your home.”
“Would you? Then we’ll go, one of these days. I won’t inflict the

family on you—though I think you’d like my mother. But we’ll choose a
time when they’re all away—except a dozen or so harmless dukes in the
family vault. All embalmed, poor devils, to linger on dustily to the Day of

Judgment. Typical, isn’t it, of a family tradition that it won’t even let you
rot.”

years, and found out nothing but his strength; now, within half an hour, he
had exposed all his weaknesses, one after the other. And she could not in
honesty say: “Why didn’t you tell me before?” because she knew perfectly
well what the answer ought to be. Fortunately, he did not seem to expect
any comment.

maunder on, and we’ve never said a word about your problem.”

“I’ve been only too thankful to forget it for a bit.”
“I dare say you have,” he said, looking thoughtfully at her. “Listen,

Harriet, couldn’t we make today a holiday? You’ve had enough of this
blasted business. Come and be bothered with me for a change. It’ll be a
relief for you—like getting a nice go of rheumatism in exchange for
toothache. Equally damnable, but different. I’ve got to go to this lunch-
party, but it needn’t take too long. How about a punt at 3 o’clock from
Magdalen Bridge?”

was, especially on a Sunday. More like Bank Holiday at Margate, with
gramophones and bathing-dresses and everybody barging into everybody
else.”

populace. Unless you’d rather come in the car and fly with me to the
world’s end. But the roads will be worse than the river. And if we find a
quiet spot, either I shall make a pest of myself or else we shall start on the
infernal problem. There’s safety in publicity.”

“Very well, Peter. We’ll do exactly as you like.”

the problem. If we can’t see our way through it together, we’ll find
somebody who can. There are no seas innavigable nor lands unhabitable.”

He got up and held out a hand.
“Peter, what a rock you are! The shadow of a great rock in a weary

land. My dear, what are you thinking about? One doesn’t shake hands at
Oxford.”

brought my formal cosmopolitan courtesy with me. My God! talk of
courtesy—I’m going to be late for lunch.”

to think of seeing him down to the Lodge.

like an undergraduate, “he hasn’t too much time as it is. Bless the man, if he
hasn’t taken my gown instead of his own! Oh, well, it doesn’t matter. We’re
much of a height and mine’s pretty wide on the shoulders, so it’s exactly the
same thing.”

And then it struck her as strange that it should be the same thing.

Harriet smiled to herself as she went to change for the river. If Peter

was keen on keeping up decayed traditions he would find plenty of
opportunity by keeping to a pre-War standard of watermanship, manners
and dress. Especially dress. A pair of grubby shorts or a faded regulation
suit rolled negligently about the waist was the modern version of Cherwell
fashions for men; for women, a sunbathing costume with (for the tender-
footed) a pair of gaily-colored beach-sandals. Harriet shook her head at the
sunshine, which was now hot as well as bright. Even for the sake of
startling Peter, she was not prepared to offer a display of grilled back and
mosquito-bitten legs. She would go seemly and comfortable.

surprise at her dazzling display of white linen and pipe-clay.

river.”

“I am. Hand in hand with a statelier past.”
The Dean groaned gently. “I’m afraid you are making yourself

conspicuous. That kind of thing is not done. You are clothed, clean and
cool. On a Sunday afternoon, too. I am ashamed of you. I hope, at least, the
parcel under your arm contains the records of crooners.”

“Not even that,” said Harriet.
Actually, it contained her diary of the Shrewsbury scandal. She had

thought that the best thing would be to let Peter take it away and study it for
himself. Then he could decide what was best to be done about it.

obsolete politeness in this respect was emphasized by the presence of Miss
Flaxman and another Shrewsburian, who were sitting on the raft, apparently
waiting for their escort, and looking rather hot and irritable. It amused
Harriet to let Wimsey take charge of her parcel, hand her ceremoniously
into the punt and arrange the cushions for her, and to know, by his ironical
eyes, that he perfectly well understood the reason of her unusual meekness.

“Is it your pleasure to go up or down?”
“Well, going up there’s more riot but a better bottom; going down

you’re all right as far as the fork, and then you choose between thick mud
and the Corporation dump.”

command. My ear is open like a greedy shark to catch the tunings of a voice
divine.”

“Great heavens! Where did you find that?”

sonnet by Keats. True, it is a youthful effort; but there are some things that
even youth does not excuse.”

“Let us go downstream. I need solitude to recover from the shock.”
He turned the punt out into the stream and shot the bridge accurately.

Then:

“Admirable woman! You have allowed me to spread the tail of vanity

before that pair of deserted Ariadnes. Would you now prefer to be
independent and take the pole? I admit it is better fun to punt than to be
punted, and that a desire to have all the fun is nine-tenths of the law of
chivalry.”

outdone in generosity. I will sit like a perfect lady and watch you do the
work. It’s nice to see things well done.”

“If you say that, I shall get conceited and do something silly.”
He was, in fact, a pretty punter to watch, easy in action and quite

remarkably quick. They picked their way at surprising speed down the
crowded and tortuous stream until, in the narrow reach above the ferry, they
were checked by another punt, which was clumsily revolving in midstream
and cramming a couple of canoes rather dangerously against the bank.

“Before you come on this water,” cried Wimsey, thrusting the

offenders off with his heel and staring offensively at the youth in charge (a
stringy young man, naked to the waist and shrimp-pink with the sun), “you
should learn the rule of the river. Those canoes have the right of way. And if
you can’t handle a pole better than that, I recommend you to retire up the
backwater and stay there till you know what God gave you feet for.”

Whereat a middle-aged man, whose punt was moored a little way

further on, turned his head sharply and cried in ringing tones:

“Good lord! Wimsey of Balliol!”
“Well, well, well,” said his lordship, abandoning the pink youth, and

ranging up alongside the punt. “Peake of Brasenose, by all that’s holy. What
brings you here?”

“Dash it,” said Mr. Peake, “I live here. What brings you here is more to

the point. You haven’t met my wife—Lord Peter Wimsey, my dear—the
cricket blue, you know. The rest is my family.”

He waved his hand vaguely over a collection of assorted offspring.
“Oh, I thought I’d look the old place up,” said Peter, when the

introductions were completed all round. “I’ve got a nephew here and all
that. What are you doing? Tutor? Fellow? Lecturer?”

“Oh, I coach people. A dog’s life, a dog’s life. Dear me! A lot of water

has flowed under Folly Bridge since we last met. But I’d have known your
voice anywhere. The moment I heard those arrogant, off-hand, go-to-blazes
tones I said, ‘Wimsey of Balliol.’ Wasn’t I right?”

Wimsey shipped the pole and sat down.
“Have pity, old son, have pity! Let the dead bury their dead.”
“You know,” said Mr. Peake to the world at large, “when we were up

together—shocking long time, ago that is—never mind! If anyone got
landed with a country cousin or an American visitor who asked, as these
people will, ‘What is this thing called the Oxford manner?’ we used to take
’em round and show ’em Wimsey of Balliol. He fitted in very handily
between St. John’s Gardens and the Martyrs’ Memorial.”

“But suppose he wasn’t there, or wouldn’t perform?”
“That catastrophe never occurred. One never failed to find Wimsey of

Balliol planted in the center of the quad and laying down the law with
exquisite insolence to somebody.”

Wimsey put his head between his hands.

have preserved an undergraduate taste in humor, owing, no doubt, to
continuous contact with First-Year mentality, “upon what they would say
about him afterwards. The Americans mostly said, ‘My, but isn’t he just the
perfect English aristocrat!’ but some of them said, ‘Does he need that glass
in his eye or is it just part of the costume?’”

Harriet laughed, thinking of Miss Schuster-Slatt.
“My dear—” said Mrs. Peake, who seemed to have a kindly nature.
“The country cousins,” said Mr. Peake remorselessly, “invariably

became speechless and had to be revived with coffee and ices at Buol’s.”

tip of a crimson ear.

“But you’re wearing very well, Wimsey,” pursued Mr. Peake,

benevolently. “Kept your waistline. Still good for a sprint between the
wickets? Can’t say I’m much use now, except for the Parents’ Match, eh,
Jim? That’s what marriage does for a man—makes him fat and lazy. But
you haven’t changed. Not an atom. Not a hair. Absolutely unmistakable.
And you’re quite right about these louts on the river. I’m sick and tired of
being barged into and getting their beastly punts over my bows. They don’t
even know enough to apologize. Think it’s dashed funny. Stupid oafs. And
gramophones bawling in your ears. And look at ’em! Just look at ’em!
Enough to make you sick. Like the monkey-house at the Zoo!”

“Noble and nude and antique?” suggested Harriet.
“I don’t mean that. I mean the pole-climbing. Watch that girl—hand

over hand, up she goes! And turning round to shove as if she was trying to
clear a drain. She’ll be in if she isn’t careful.”

“She’s dressed for it,” said Wimsey.

reason for the costume. They expect to fall in. It’s all right to come out with
those beautiful creases down your flannels, but if you do go in it makes it
all the funnier.”

getting on. I’ll look you up one day, if Mrs. Peake will allow me. So long.”

The punts parted company.
“Dear me,” said Peter, when they were out of earshot; “it’s pleasant to

meet old friends. And very salutary.”

same joke they were making about a hundred years ago?”

place. It keeps you young. Too young.”

“It’s rather pathetic, isn’t it?”
The river was wider here, and by way of answer he bent his knees to

the stroke, making the punt curtsey and the water run chuckling under the
bows.

“Would you have your youth back if you could, Harriet?”
“Not for the world.”
“Nor I. Not for anything you could give me. Perhaps that’s an

exaggeration. For one thing you could give me I might want twenty years of
my life back. But not the same twenty years. And if I went back to my
twenties, I shouldn’t be wanting the same thing.”

Mr. Pomfret and the pro-Proctor.

tell me that all young men in their twenties are not fools?” He stood, trailing

the pole, and looking down at her; his raised eyebrows lent his face a touch
of caricature.

would be a most unfortunate domestic complication.”

“No, not Saint-George.”
“I thought not; his follies are less ingenuous. But somebody. Well, I

refuse to be alarmed, since you have sent him about his business.”

“I like the rapidity of your deductions.”
“You are incurably honest. If you had done anything drastic you would

have told me so in your letter. You would have said, ‘Dear Peter, I have a
case to submit to you; but before doing so I think it only right to inform you
that I am engaged to Mr. Jones of Jesus.’ Should you not?”

“Probably. Should you have investigated the case all the same?”
“Why not? A case is a case. What is the bottom like in the Old River?”
“Foul. You’re pulled back two strokes for every stroke you make.”
“Then we will stick to the New Cut. Well, Mr. Jones of Jesus has my

sincere sympathy. I hope his troubles will not affect his class.”

“He is only in his Second year.”
“Then he has time to get over it. I should like to meet him. He is

probably the best friend I have in the world.”

round her own more slowly-moving wits. It was quite true that the
spontaneous affections of Reggie Pomfret had, somehow, made it easier to
believe that Peter’s own feelings might be something more than an artist’s
tenderness for his own achievement. But it was indecent of Peter to teach
that conclusion so rapidly. She resented the way in which he walked in and
out of her mind as if it was his own flat.

the dark green water. A string of oily bubbles floated slowly to the surface,
showing where the pole had struck a patch of mud; and at the same moment
their nostrils were assaulted by a loathsome stench of decay.

“What’s the matter?”
“I’ve struck something horrible. Can’t you smell it? It’s scandalous the

way corpses pursue me about. Honestly, Harriet …”

“My dear idiot, it’s only the Corporation garbage dump.”
His eye followed her pointing hand to the farther bank, where a cloud

of flies circled about a horrid mound of putrefaction.

that?” He passed a wet hand across his forehead. “For a moment I really
thought I had run across Mr. Jones of Jesus. I was beginning to be sorry I
had spoken so light-heartedly about the poor chap. Here! Let’s get out of
this!”

He drove the punt vigorously forward.
“The Isis for me. There is no romance left on this river.”

CHAPTER XV

Do but consider what an excellent thing sleep is: it is so inestimable a jewel
that, if a tyrant would give his crown for an hour’s slumber, it cannot be
bought: of so beautiful a shape is it, that though a man lie with an Empress,
his heart cannot beat quiet till he leaves her embracements to be at rest
with the other: yea, so greatly indebted are we to this kinsman of death, that
we owe the better tributary, half of our life to him: and there is good cause
why we should do so: for sleep is that golden chain that ties health and our
bodies together. Who complains of want? of wounds? of cares? of great
men’s oppressions? of captivity? whilst he sleepeth? Beggars in their beds
take as much pleasure as kings: can we therefore surfeit on this delicate
Ambrosia? Can we drink too much of that whereof to taste too little tumbles
us into a churchyard, and to use it but indifferently throws us into Bedlam?
No, no, look upon Endymion, the moon’s minion, who slept three score and
fifteen years, and was not a hair the worse for it.

THOMAS DEKKER

“You will find the tea-basket,” said Wimsey, “behind you in the bows.”

They had put in under the dappled shade of an overhanging willow a

little down the left bank of the Isis. Here there was less crowd, and what
there was could pass at a distance. Here, if anywhere, they might hope for
comparative peace. It was, therefore, with more than ordinary irritation that
Harriet, with the thermos yet in her hand, observed a heavily-laden punt
approaching.

“Miss Schuster-Slatt and her party. Oh, God! and she says she knows

you.”

impossible. Ineluctably the American contingent advanced upon them.
They were alongside. Miss Schuster-Slatt was crying out excitedly. It was
Harriet’s turn to blush for her friends. With incredible coyness Miss
Schuster-Slatt apologized for her intrusion, effected introductions, was sure
they were terribly in the way, reminded Lord Peter of their former
encounter, recognized that he was far too pleasantly occupied to wish to be
bothered with her, poured out a flood of alarming enthusiasm about the
Propagation of the Fit, again drew strident attention to her own tactlessness,
informed Lord Peter that Harriet was a lovely person and just too
sympathetic, and favored each of them with an advance copy of her new
questionnaire. Wimsey listened and replied with imperturable urbanity,
while Harriet, wishing that the Isis would flood its banks and drown them
all, envied his self-command. When at length Miss Schuster-Slatt removed
herself and her party, the treacherous water wafted back her shrill voice
from afar:

aristocrat?”

and became hysterical.

unconquerable sweetness of disposition is very shaming. I lose my temper
with that harmless woman. Have some more tea.”

perfect English aristocrat and become the great detective after all. Fate
seems to be turning my one-day romance into a roaring farce. If that is the
dossier, let me have it. We’ll see,” he added with a faint chuckle, “what kind
of a detective you make when you’re left to yourself.”

various anonymous documents, all endorsed, where possible, with the date
and manner of publication. He examined the documents first, separately and
carefully, without manifesting surprise, disgust, or, indeed, any emotion
beyond meditative interest. He then put them all back in the envelope, filled
and lit a pipe, curled himself up among the cushions and devoted his
attention to her manuscript. He read slowly, turning back every now and
again to verify a date or a detail. At the end of the first few pages he looked
up to remark:

to put your story together; how to arrange the evidence.”

indeed.”

He read on.
His next observation was:
“I see you have eliminated all the servants in the Scouts’ Wing on the

strength of one locked door.”

“I’m not so simple-minded as that. When you come to the Chapel

episode, you’ll find that it eliminates them all, for another reason.”

ahead of my data.”

Accepting rebuke, he relapsed into silence, while she studied his half-

averted face. Considered generally, as a façade, it was by this time tolerably
familiar to her, but now she saw details, magnified as it were by some glass
in her own mind. The flat setting and fine scroll-work of the ear, and the
height of the skull above it. The glitter of close-cropped hair where the
neck-muscles lifted to meet the head. A minute sickle-shaped scar on the
left temple. The faint laughter-lines at the corner of the eye and the droop of

the lid at its outer end. The gleam of gold down on the cheekbone. The wide
spring of the nostril. An almost imperceptible beading of sweat on the upper
lip and a tiny muscle that twitched the sensitive corner of the mouth. The
slight sun-reddening of the fair skin and its sudden whiteness below the
base of the throat. The little hollow above the points of the collarbone.

dipped in boiling water. Through the confusion of her darkened eyes and
drumming ears some enormous bulk seemed to stoop over her. Then the
mist cleared. His eyes were riveted upon the manuscript again, but he
breathed as though he had been running.

only new thing that has happened is that now I have got to admit it to
myself. I have known it for some time. But does he know it? He has very
little excuse, after this, for not knowing it. Apparently he refuses to see it,
and that may be new. If so, it ought to be easier to do what I meant to do.

conscious of his every movement, of every page he turned, of every breath
he drew. She seemed to be separately conscious of every bone in his body.
At length he spoke, and she wondered how she could ever have mistaken
another man’s voice for his.

“Well, Harriet, it’s not a pretty problem.”
“It’s not. And it simply musn’t go on, Peter. We can’t have any more

people frightened into the river. Publicity or no publicity, it’s got to be
stopped. Otherwise, even if nobody else gets hurt, we shall all go mad.”

“That’s the devil of it.”
“Tell me what we are to do, Peter.”
She had once again lost all consciousness of him except as the familiar

intelligence that lived and moved so curiously behind an oddly amusing set

of features.

“Well—there are two possibilities. You can plant spies all over the

place and wait to pounce on this person when the next outbreak occurs.”

ghastly waiting for the outbreak. And suppose we don’t catch her and
something horrible happens.”

frighten this lunatic into keeping quiet while we dig out the motive behind
the whole thing. I’m sure it’s not mere blind malignity; there’s a method in
it.”

“Isn’t the motive only too painfully obvious?”
He stared pensively at her, and then said:
“You remind me of a charming old tutor, now dead, whose particular

subject of research was the relations of the Papacy to the Church in England
between certain dates which I do not precisely recall. At one time, a special
subject on these lines was set for the History School, and undergraduates
taking that subject were naturally sent to the old boy for coaching and did
very well. But it was noticed that no man from his own college ever entered
for that particular special—the reason being that the tutor’s honesty was
such that he would earnestly dissuade his pupils from taking his own
subject for fear lest his encouragement might influence their decision.”

I don’t see the point.”

to a spot of celibacy you are eagerly peopling the cloister with bogies? If
you want to do without personal relationships, then do without them. Don’t
stampede yourself into them by imagining that you’ve got to have them or
qualify for a Freudian casebook.”

beastly case in College.”

vaguely that sex is at the bottom of all these phenomena—that’s about as
helpful as saying that human nature is at the bottom of them. Sex isn’t a
separate thing functioning away all by itself. It’s usually found attached to a
person of some sort.”

“That’s rather obvious.”
“Well, let’s have a look at the obvious. The biggest crime of these

blasted psychologists is to have obscured the obvious. They’re like a man
packing for the weekend and turning everything out of his drawers and
cupboards till he can’t find his pajamas and toothbrush. Take a few obvious
points to start with. You and Miss de Vine met at Shrewsbury for the first
time at the Gaudy, and the first letter was put into your sleeve at that time;
the people attacked are nearly all dons or scholars; a few days after your
tea-party with young Pomfret, Jukes goes to prison; all the letters received
by post come either on a Monday or a Thursday; all the communications are
in English except the Harpy quotation; the dress found on the dummy was
never seen in College: do all those facts taken together suggest nothing to
you beyond a general notion of sex repression?”

them taken together.”

“You are usually better than that at a synthesis. I wish you could clear

this personal preoccupation out of your mind. My dear, what are you afraid
of? The two great dangers of the celibate life are a forced choice and a
vacant mind. Energies bombinating in a vacuum breed chimaeras. But you
are in no danger. If you want to set up your everlasting rest, you are far
more likely to find it in the life of the mind than the life of the heart.”

“You say that?”
“I say that. It is your needs we are considering, you know; not anybody

else’s. That is my opinion as an honest scholar, viewing the question
academically and on its merits.”

main theme of the discussion:

“Then you think we can solve the problem by straight detection,

without calling in a mental specialist?”

reasoning.”

to—to get clear of people and feelings and go back to the intellectual side is
that that is the only side of life I haven’t betrayed and made a mess of.”

“I know that,” he said, more gently. “And it’s upsetting to think that it

may betray you in its turn. But why should you think that? Even if much
learning makes one person mad it need not make everybody mad. All these
women are beginning to look abnormal to you because you don’t know
which one to suspect, but actually even you don’t suspect more than one.”

capable of it.”

every frustrate person is heading straight for the asylum I know at least one
danger to Society who ought to be shut up.”

“Damn you, Peter. Will you keep to the point!”
“Meaning: what steps ought we to take? Will you give me tonight to

think it over? If you will trust me to deal with it, I fancy I see one or two
lines that might be followed up with profit.”

“I would rather trust you than anybody.”

Oh, my lost youth. Here are the ducks coming up for the remains of our
sandwiches. Twenty-three years ago I fed these identical ducks with these
identical sandwiches.”

“Ten years ago, I too fed them to bursting-point.”
“And ten and twenty years hence the same ducks and the same

undergraduates will share the same ritual feast, and the ducks will bite the
undergraduates’ fingers as they have just bitten mine. How fleeting are all
human passions compared with the massive continuity of ducks …Be off,
cullies, that’s the lot.”

the cushions and lay watching the ripples with half-shut eyes …A punt
went past, full of silent, sun-stupefied people, with a plop and a tinkle
alternately as the pole entered and left the water; then a noisy party with a
gramophone bawling “Love in Bloom”; then a young man in spectacles, by
himself in a canoe, and paddling as though for dear life; then another punt,
paddled at a funeral pace by a whispering man and girl; then a hot and
energetic party of girls in an outrigger; then another canoe, driven swiftly
by two Canadian undergraduates kneeling to their work; then a very small
canoe, punted dangerously by a giggling girl in a bathing-dress, with a
jeering young man crouched in the bows, costumed, and obviously
prepared, for the inevitable plunge; then a very sedate and fully clothed
party in a punt—mixed undergraduates being polite to a female don; then a
bunch of both sexes and all ages in an inrigger with another gramophone
whining “Love in Bloom”—the Town at play; then a succession of shrill
cries which announced the arrival of a hilarious party teaching a novice to
punt; then, in ludicrous contrast, a very stout man in a blue suit and linen
hat, solemnly propelling himself all alone in a two-pair tub, and a slim,

singleted youth shooting contemptuously past him in a pair-oar skiff; then
three punts side by side, in which everybody seemed to be asleep except
those actually responsible for pole and paddle. One of these passed within a
paddle’s length of Harriet: a tousle-headed, rather paunchy young man lay
with his knees cocked up, his mouth slightly open and his face flushed with
the heat; a girl sprawled against his shoulder, while the man opposite, his
hat over his face and his hands clasped over his chest with the thumbs
beneath his braces, had also given up all interest in the outer world. The
fourth passenger, a woman, was eating chocolates. The punter had a
crumpled cotton frock and bare legs, much bitten. Harriet was reminded of
a third-class railway compartment in an excursion train on a hot day; it was
fatal to sleep in public; and how tempting to throw something at the
paunchy youth. At that moment, the chocolate-eater screwed her remaining
lollipops tightly in the bag and did throw it at the paunchy youth. It caught
him in the midriff, and he woke with a loud snort. Harriet took a cigarette
from her case and turned to ask her companion for a match. He was asleep.

described as the half-hedgehog, and offered neither mouth nor stomach as a
target for missiles. But asleep he undoubtedly was. And here was Miss
Harriet Vane, gone suddenly sympathetic, afraid to move for fear of waking
him and savagely resenting the approach of a boatload of idiots whose
gramophone was playing (for a change) “Love in Bloom.”

“How wonderful,” says the poet, “is Death, Death and his brother

Sleep!” And, having asked whether Ianthe will wake again and being
assured that she will, he proceeds to weave many beautiful thoughts about
Ianthe’s sleep. From this we may fairly deduce that he (like Henry who
kneeled in silence by her couch) felt tenderly towards Ianthe. For another
person’s sleep is the acid test of our own sentiments. Unless we are savages,

we react kindly to death, whether of friend or enemy. It does not exasperate
us; it does not tempt us to throw things at it; we do not find it funny. Death
is the ultimate weakness, and we dare not insult it. But sleep is only an
illusion of weakness and, unless it appeals to our protective instincts, is
likely to arouse in us a nasty, bullying spirit. From a height of conscious
superiority we look down on the sleeper, thus exposing himself in all his
frailty, and indulge in derisive comment upon his appearance, his manners
and (if the occasion is a public one) the absurdity of the position in which
he has placed his companion, if he has one, and particularly if we are that
companion.

had plenty of opportunity to examine herself. After careful consideration,
she decided that what she most needed was a box of matches. Peter had
used matches to light his pipe: where were they? He had gone to sleep on
the whole outfit, confound him! But his blazer was beside him on the
cushions; had anybody ever known a man to carry only one box of matches
in his pockets?

at every movement and she had to lift the garment over his knees; but his
sleep was the deep sleep of physical fatigue, and she crawled back in
triumph without having wakened him. With a curious sense of guilt she
ransacked his pockets, finding three boxes of matches, a book and a
corkscrew. With tobacco and literature one could face out any situation,
provided, of course, that the book was not written in an unknown tongue.
The spine was untitled, and as she turned back the worn calf cover the first
thing she saw was the engraved bookplate with its achievement of arms: the
three silver mice on a field sable and the “domestick Catt” couched
menacingly on the helmet-wreath. Two armed Saracens supported the

shield, beneath which ran the mocking and arrogant motto: “As my
Whimsy takes me.” She turned on to the title-page. Religio Medici. Well!
… Well? Was that so very unexpected?

detection and diplomacy with musing upon the “strange and mystical”
transmigrations of silkworms and the “legerdemain of changelings”? Or
with considering how “we vainly accuse the fury of guns and the new
inventions of death”? “Certainly there is no happiness within this circle of
flesh; nor is it in the optics of these eyes to behold felicity. The first day of
our jubilee is death.” She had no wish to suppose that he could find any
personal application for that; she would rather have him secure and happy
in order that she might resent his happy security. She flicked the pages over
hurriedly. “When I am from him, I am dead till I be with him. United souls
are not satisfied with embraces, but desire to be truly each other; which
being impossible, these desires are infinite, and must proceed without a
possibility of satisfaction.” That was a most uncomfortable passage,
whichever way you looked at it. She turned back to the first page and began
to read steadily, with critical attention to grammar and style, so as to occupy
the upper current of her mind without prying too closely into what might be
going on beneath the surface.

The sun moved down the sky and the shadows lengthened upon the

water. There were fewer craft on the river now; the tea-parties were
hurrying home to dinner and the supper-parties had not yet put out.
Endymion had the air of being settled for the night; it was really time to
harden her heart and pull up the poles. She put off decision from moment to
moment, till a loud shriek and a bump at her end of the punt came to spare
her the trouble. The incompetent novice had returned with her crew and,
having left her pole in the middle of the river, had let her craft drift across

their stern. Harriet pushed the intruders off with more vigor than sympathy
and turned to find her host sitting up and grinning rather sheepishly.

“Have I been asleep?”
“Getting on for two hours,” said Harriet, with a pleased chuckle.
“Good lord, what disgusting behavior! I’m frightfully sorry. Why

didn’t you give me a shout? What time is it? My poor girl, you’ll get no
dinner tonight if we don’t hurry up. Look here, I do apologize most
abjectly.”

“It doesn’t matter a bit. You were awfully tired.”
“That’s no excuse.” He was on his feet now, extricating the punt-poles

from the mud. “We might make it by double-punting—if you’ll forgive the
infernal cheek of asking you to work to make up for my soul-destroying
sloth.”

“What’s the hurry? I mean, is the Master expecting you, or anything?”

Lodgings as a hotel; besides, they’ve got people coming in.”

make a day of it? I mean, if you feel like it. Or must you have a proper
dinner?”

thistles. Preferably thistles. You are a most forgiving woman.”

steering.”

“And watch you bring the pole up in three.”
“I promise to do that.”
She was conscious, nevertheless, of Wimsey of Balliol’s critical eye

look ghastly; there is no middle way in punting. They set their course
towards Iffley.

“On the whole,” said Harriet, as they took boat again some little time later,
“thistles would have been preferable.”

“That kind of food is provided for very young people whose minds are

elsewhere. Men of passions but no parts. I am glad to have dined on apricot
flan and synthetic lemonade; it enlarges one’s experience. Shall I, you or we
pole? Or shall we abandon aloofness and superiority and paddle in beauty
side by side?” His eyes mocked her. “I am tame; pronounce.”

“Whichever you prefer.”
He handed her gravely to the stern seat and coiled himself down beside

her.

“What the devil am I sitting on?”
“Sir Thomas Browne, I expect. I’m afraid I rifled your pockets.”
“Since I was such a bad companion, I’m glad I provided you with a

good substitute.”

“Is he a constant companion of yours?”
“My tastes are fairly catholic. It might easily have been Kai Lung or

Alice in Wonderland or Machiavelli—”

“Or Boccaccio or the Bible?”
“Just as likely as not. Or Apuleius.”
“Or John Donne?”
He was silent for a moment, and then said in a changed voice:
“Was that a bow drawn at a venture?”
“A good shot?”
“Whang in the gold. Between the joints of the harness …If you would

paddle a little on your side it would make it handier to steer.”

“Sorry …Do you find it easy to get drunk on words?”

accounts for my talking so much.”

passion for balance and order—no beauty without measure.”

“One may have a passion for the unattainable.”
“But you do attain it. At least, you appear to attain it.”
“The perfect Augustan? No; I’m afraid it’s at most a balance of

opposing forces …The river’s filling up again.”

“Lots of people come out after supper.”
“Yes—well, bless their hearts, why shouldn’t they? You’re not feeling

cold?”

“Not the least bit.”
That was the second time within five minutes that he had warned her

off his private ground. His mood had changed since the early hours of the
afternoon and all his defenses were up once more. She could not again
disregard the “No Thoroughfare” sign; so she left it to him to start a fresh
subject.

He did so, courteously enough, by asking how the new novel was

getting on.

“It’s gone sticky.”
“What’s happened to it?”
This involved a full rehearsal of the plot of Death ’twixt Wind and

Water. It was a complicated story, and the punt had covered a good deal of
water before she reached the solution.

“There’s nothing fundamentally wrong with that,” said he; and

proceeded to offer a few suggestions about detail.

the whole story sound so dead and alive?”

“If you ask me,” said Wimsey, “it’s Wilfrid. I know he marries the girl

—but must he be such a mutt? Why does he go and pocket the evidence and
tell all those unnecessary lies?”

“Because he thinks the girl’s done it.”
“Yes—but why should he? He’s dotingly in love with her—he thinks

she’s absolutely the cat’s pajamas—and yet, merely because he finds her
handkerchief in the bedroom he is instantly convinced, on evidence that
wouldn’t hang a dog, that she not only is Winchester’s mistress but has also
murdered him in a peculiarly diabolical way. That may be one way of love,
but—”

“But, you would like to point out, it isn’t yours—and in fact, it wasn’t

yours.”

savagely for the pleasure of seeing him wince.

“No,” he said, “I was considering the question impersonally.”
“Academically, in fact.”
“Yes—please …From a purely constructional point of view, I don’t

feel that Wilfrid’s behavior is sufficiently accounted for.”

admit that Wilfrid is the world’s worst goop. But if he doesn’t conceal the
handkerchief, where’s my plot?”

people, who have been brought up to think that anything pleasant must be
wrong—so that, if he wants to believe the girl an angel of light she is, for
that very reason, all the more likely to be guilty. Give him a puritanical
father and a hell-fire religion.”

“Peter, that’s an idea.”

that he can only purge himself by taking the young woman’s sins upon him
and wallowing in vicarious suffering …He’d still be a goop, and a
pathological goop, but he would be a bit more consistent.”

lifelike feelings, he’ll throw the whole book out of balance.”

about human beings for a change.”

“I’m afraid to try that, Peter. It might go too near the bone.”
“It might be the wisest thing you could do.”
“Write it out and get rid of it?”
“Yes.”
“I’ll think about that. It would hurt like hell.”
“What would that matter, if it made a good book?”
She was taken aback, not by what he said, but by his saying it. She had

never imagined that he regarded her work very seriously, and she had
certainly not expected him to take this ruthless attitude about it. The
protective male? He was being about as protective as a can-opener.

you tried. Probably you couldn’t write it when you were too close to things.
But you could do it now, if you had the—the—”

“The guts?”
“Exactly.”
“I don’t think I could face it.”
“Yes, you could. And you’ll get no peace till you do. I’ve been running

away from myself for twenty years, and it doesn’t work. What’s the good of
making mistakes if you don’t use them? Have a shot. Start on Wilfrid.”

Wilfrid, anyhow.”

deprecatingly.

I’m sorry.”

But it was true, she thought, that she had had to accept a good deal more
than that. She was quite surprised by her own lack of resentment.

They parted at the postern.
“Good-night, Harriet. I’ll bring back your manuscript tomorrow.

Would some time in the afternoon suit you? I must lunch with young
Gerald, I suppose, and play the heavy uncle.”

“Come round about six, then. Good-night—and thank you very much.”
“I am in your debt.”
He waited politely while she shut and locked the heavy grille against

him.

behind So-o-onia!”

and reeled away almost into the arms of the Dean, who was coming up the
road at her usual brisk trot.

“Serve him right,” said Harriet, and fled up the path without waiting to

see what happened.

As she got into bed she recalled the extempore prayer of a well-

meaning but incoherent curate, heard once and never forgotten:

difficult it may be.”

CHAPTER XVI

From noise of scare-fires rest ye free,

From Murders Benedicite.

From all mischances, they may fright
Your pleasing slumbers in the night:

Mercie secure ye all, and keep

The Goblin from ye, while ye sleep.

ROBERT HERRICK

“Oh, miss!”

“We are so sorry to disturb you, madam.”
“Good gracious, Carrie, what is it?”
When you have been lying awake for an hour or so wondering how to

reconstruct a Wilfrid without inflicting savage mayhem upon your plot, and
have just tumbled into an uneasy slumber haunted by the embalmed bodies
of dukes, it is annoying to be jerked into consciousness again by two
excited and partly hysterical maid-servants in dressing-gowns.

“Oh, miss, the Dean said to come and tell you. Annie and me have

been so frightened. We nearly caught it.”

“Caught what?”
“Whatever it is, miss. In the Science lecture-room, miss. We saw it

there. It was awful.”

Harriet sat up, dazed.
“And it’s gone off, miss, rampaging something horrible, and nobody

knows what it mayn’t be up to, so we thought we ought to tell somebody.”

begin from the beginning.”

darkroom window, that’s where it went, and it may be murdering people at
this very minute. And the room locked and the key inside—there might be a
dead body lying there, all blood.”

less, and began to hunt for her slippers. “If somebody’s playing another
practical joke, we must try and stop it. But don’t let’s have any nonsense
about blood and bodies. Where did it go to?”

“We don’t know, miss.”
Harriet looked at the stout and agitated Carrie, whose face was

puckered and twitching and her eyes bolting with imminent hysteria. She
had never thought the present head scout any too dependable, and was
inclined to put down her abundant energy to an excess of thyroid.

“Where is the Dean, then?”
“Waiting by the lecture-room door, miss. She said to fetch you—”
“All right.”
Harriet put her torch into her dressing-gown pocket and hustled her

visitors out.

“Now tell me quickly what’s the matter, and don’t make a noise.”
“Well, miss, Annie comes to me and says—”
“When was this?”
“About a quarter of an hour ago, miss, or it might be more or less.”
“About that, madam.”
“I was in bed and asleep, never dreaming of nothing, and Annie says,

‘Have you got the keys, Carrie? There’s something funny going on in the
lecture-room.’ So I says to Annie—”

“Just a minute. Let Annie tell her part first.”
“Well, madam, you know the Science lecture-room at the back of the

New Quad, and how you can see it from our wing. I woke up about half-
past one and happened to look out of my window and I saw a light in the
lecture room. So I thought, that’s funny, as late as this. And I saw a shadow
on the curtain, like somebody moving about.”

“The curtains were drawn, then?”
“Yes, madam; but they’re only buff casement-cloth, you know, so I

could see the shadow as plain as plain. So I watched a bit, and the shadow
went away but the light stayed on and I thought it was funny. So I went and
woke Carrie and said to her to give me the keys ‘so as I could go and look
in case it was something that wasn’t quite right. And she saw the light, too.
And I said, Oh, Carrie, come with me; I don’t like to go alone.’ So Carrie
came down with me.”

“Did you go through the Hall or across the yard?”
“Across the yard, madam. We thought it would be quicker. Through

the yard and the iron gate. And we tried to look through the window, but it
was tight shut and the curtains pulled close.”

They were out of Tudor Building now; its corridors as they passed

through had seemed quiet enough. Nor did there seem to be any disturbance
in the Old Quad. The Library Wing was dark, except for a lamp burning in
Miss de Vine’s window and the dim illumination of the passage lights.

it, because I stooped down to look through the hole, but I couldn’t see
anything. And then I saw that the curtain wasn’t quite drawn across the door
—it has glass panels, you know, miss. So I looked through the crack and
saw something all in black, madam. And I said, ‘Oh, there it is!’ And Carrie
said, ‘Let me see,’ and she gave me a bit of a push and my elbow bumped

against the door and that must have frightened it, because the light went
out.”

there was a most awful crash inside—dreadful, it was, and something
bumping, and I calls out, ‘Oh, it’s coming out after us!’”

So Carrie went for the Dean and I heard whoever it was moving about a bit,
and then I didn’t hear anything more.”

you think it’s lying in there with its throat cut?’ and the Dean said, ‘There,
now! How silly we’ve been. It’ll have gone out through the window.’ And I
says, ‘But all them windows are barred,’ I says. And the Dean says, ‘The
darkroom window, that’s where it’s gone.’ The darkroom door was locked
too, so we run round outside and sure enough, there’s the window wide
open. So the Dean says, ‘Fetch Miss Vane.’ So we comes for you, miss.”

Miss Martin stood waiting.

been quick enough to think of that window. I’ve been round this quad, but I
can’t find anything wrong there. Let’s hope the creature’s gone back to
bed.”

Harriet examined the door. It was certainly locked from the inside, and

the curtain over the glass panel did not fit quite closely. But everything
within was dark and silent.

“What does Sherlock Holmes do now?” inquired the Dean.
“I think we go in,” said Harriet. “I suppose you haven’t such a thing as

a pair of long-nosed pliers? No. Well, it’s probably just as good to break the
glass.”

“Don’t cut yourself.”
How many times, thought Harriet, had her detective, Robert

Templeton, broken through doors to discover the dead body of the murdered
financier! With a ludicrous feeling that she was acting a part, she laid a fold
of her dressing-gown across the panel and delivered a sharp blow upon it
with her closed fist. Rather to her astonishment, the panel broke inwards
exactly as it should have done, to the accompaniment of a modest tinkle of
glass. Now—a scarf or handkerchief wrapped round to protect the hand and
wrist, and prevent leaving extra fingerprints on key and handle. The Dean
obligingly fetched this needful accessory, and the door was opened.

“Off’ position, and she struck it down with the handle of the torch. The
room stood revealed.

long tables, a quantity of hard chairs and a blackboard. It was called the
Science lecture-room partly because Miss Edwards occasionally used it for
coachings that needed little in the way of apparatus, but chiefly because
some dead-and-damned benefactor had left to the College a sum of money,
together with a quantity of scientific books, anatomical casts, portraits of
deceased scientists and glass cases filled with geological specimens;
saddling this already sufficiently embarrassing bequest with the condition
that all the bric-à-brac should be housed in one room together. Otherwise
there was nothing that particularly fitted the room for scientific study,
except that it communicated on one side with a closet containing a sink.
The closet was occasionally used by photographic enthusiasts as a
darkroom, and was so called.

to the ground and a few chairs displaced, as though somebody, hurriedly
making her way from the room in the dark, had become entangled among
the furniture. The most interesting thing about the room was the collection
of things that lay on one of the tables. There was a spread sheet of
newspaper, on which stood a paste-pot with a brush in it, part of a cheap
scribbling block and the lid of a cardboard box, filled with cutout letters.
Also, laid out upon the table were several messages, couched in the Poison-
Pen’s now familiar style, and pasted together in the usual way; while a half-
finished work in the same style of art had fluttered to the floor, showing that
the Pen had been interrupted in the middle of her work.

“So here’s where she does it!” cried the Dean.
“Yes,” said Harriet. “I wonder why. It seems unnecessarily public.

Why not her own room? …I say, Dean—don’t pick that up, if you don’t
mind. Better leave everything as it is.”

the sink, and the open window above it. Marks in the dust showed clearly
where something had scrambled over the sill.

“What’s underneath this window outside?”
“It’s a flagged path. I’m afraid you won’t find much there.”
“No; and it happens to be a spot that’s overlooked by absolutely

nothing except those bathroom windows in the corridor. It’s very unlikely
that the person should have been seen getting out. If the letters had to be
concocted in a lecture -room, this is as good a place as any. Well! I don’t
see that we can do much here at the moment.” Harriet turned sharply on the
two scouts. “You say you saw the person, Annie.”

black and was sitting at the far table with her back to the door. I thought she
was writing.”

the light?”

bumped the door, and while I was telling her not to make a noise the light
went out.”

“Didn’t you see anything, Carrie?”
“Well, I don’t hardly know, miss. I was in such a fluster. I saw the

light, and then I didn’t see nothing.”

“Perhaps she crept round the wall to get to the light,” said the Dean.
“Must have, Dean. Will you go in and sit at the table on the chair that’s

pulled out a bit, while I see what I can see from the door. Then, when I
knock on the glass, will you get up and out of sight as quickly as you can
and work round to the switch and turn it off? Is the curtain much as it was,
Annie, or did I disarrange it when I broke the glass?”

“I think it’s much the same, madam.”
The Dean went in and sat down. Harriet shut the door and put her eye

to the chink in the curtain. This was at the hinge side of the door, and gave
her a sight of the window, the ends of the two tables and the place where the
blackboard had stood beneath the window.

“Have a look, Annie; was it like that?”
“Yes, madam. Only the blackboard was standing up then, of course.”
“Now—do as you did then. Say to Carrie whatever it was you said,

and Carrie, you knock on the door and then look in as you did the first
time.”

like this.”

caught against Annie and knocked—like that.”

“And I said, ‘Look out—now you’ve done it.’”
“And I says, ‘Coo!’ or something like that, and I looked in and I didn’t

see nobody—”

“Can you see anybody now?”
“No, miss. And I was trying to see when the light went out all of a

sudden.”

The light went out.
“How did that go off?” asked the Dean, cautiously, with her mouth at

the hole in the panel.

“First-rate performance,” said Harriet. “Dead on time.”
“The second I heard the knock, I just nipped away to the right and

crept round the wall. Did you hear me?”

“Not a sound. You’ve got soft slippers on, haven’t you?”
“We didn’t hear the other one either, miss.”
“She’d be wearing soft slippers, too. Well, I suppose that settles that.

We’d better have a look round College to see that all’s well and get back to
bed. You two can be off now, Carrie—Miss Martin and I can see to things.”

how anybody’s to get to sleep—”

“Will you stop making that filthy row!”
An exasperated voice heralded the appearance of an exceedingly angry

student in pajamas.

“Do remember some people want to get a bit of rest at night. This

corridor’s a—Oh, I’m sorry, Miss Martin. Is anything wrong?”

left the lights on in the lecture room and we came to see if it was all right.”

turned to Harriet.

“Why all that business of reconstructing the crime?”
“I wanted to find out whether Annie could really have seen what she

said she saw. These people sometimes let their imagination run away with
them. If you don’t mind, I’m going to lock these doors and remove the
keys. I’d rather like a second opinion.”

St. Cross Road, crying, Vera incessu patuit dean?”

“That sounds characteristic. Well, Dean, you have got pretty feet. I’ve

noticed them.”

in so public a place or after five minutes’ acquaintance. I said to his
lordship, ‘You are a foolish young man.’ He said, ‘A man, certainly; and
sometimes foolish enough to be young.’ ‘Well,’ I said, ‘please get up; you
can’t be young here.’ So then he said, very nicely, ‘I beg your pardon for
behaving like a mountebank; I have no excuse to offer, so will you forgive
me?’ So I asked him to dinner.”

Harriet shook her head.
“I’m afraid you’re susceptible to fair hair and a slim figure. That in the

slender’s but a humorous word which in the stout is flat impertinence.”

shall be interested to know what he makes of tonight’s affair. We’d better go
and see if there’s been any more funny business.”

Nothing unusual was, however, to be observed.

Harriet rang up the Mitre before breakfast.
“Peter, could you possibly come round this morning instead of at six

o’clock?”

will go barefoot to Jerusalem, to the great Cham’s court, to the East Indies,
to fetch her a bird to wear in her hat.’ Has anything happened?”

bacon and eggs.”

“I will be at the Jowett Walk Lodge in half an hour.”

He came accompanied by Bunter and a camera. Harriet took them into

the Dean’s room and told them the story, with some assistance from Miss
Martin, who asked whether he would like to interview the two scouts.

“Not for the moment. You seem to have asked all the necessary

questions. We’ll go and look at the room. There’s no way to it, I take it,
except along this passage. Two doors on the left—students’ rooms, I
suppose. And one on the right. And the rest bathrooms and things. Which is
the door of the darkroom? This? In full view of the other door—so there
was no escape except by the window. I see. The key of the lecture room was
inside and the curtain left exactly like that? You’re sure? All right. May I
have the key?”

He threw the door open and glanced in.
“Get a photograph of this, Bunter. You have very nice, well-fitting

doors in this building. Oak. No paint, no polish.”

He took a lens from his pocket and ran it, rather perfunctorily, over the

light switch and the door handle.

“Am I really going to see fingerprints discovered?” asked the Dean.
“Why, of course,” said Wimsey. “It won’t tell us anything, but it

impresses the spectator and inspires confidence. Bunter, the insufflator. You
will now see,” he pumped the white powder rapidly over the frame and
handle of the door, “how inveterate is the habit of catching hold of doors
when you open them.” An astonishing number of superimposed prints

sprang into view above the lock as he blew the superfluous powder away.
“Hence the excellent old-fashioned institution of the fingerplate. May I
borrow a chair from the bathroom? …Oh, thank you, Miss Vane; I didn’t
mean you to fetch it.”

the upper edge of the frame.

“You surely don’t expect to find fingerprints up there,” said the Dean.
“Nothing would surprise me more. This is merely a shop-window

display of thoroughness and efficiency. All a matter of routine, as the
policeman says. Your college is kept very well dusted; I congratulate you.
Well, that’s that. We will now direct our straining eyes to the darkroom door
and do the same thing there. The key? Thank you. Fewer prints here, you
see. I deduce that the room is usually approached by way of the lecture
room. That probably also accounts for the presence of dust along the top of
the door. Something always gets overlooked, doesn’t it? The linoleum,
however; has been honorably swept and polished. Must I go down on my
knees and do the floor-walk for footprints? It is shockingly bad for one’s
trousers and seldom useful. Let us rather examine the window. Yes—
somebody certainly seems to have got out here. But we knew that already.
She climbed over the sink and knocked that beaker off the draining-board.”

“She trod in the sink,” said Harriet, “and left a damp smear on the sill.

It’s dried up now, of course.”

“Yes; but that proves she really did get out this way and at that time.

Though it scarcely needed proving. There is no other way out. This isn’t the
old problem of a hermetically-sealed chamber and a body. Have you
finished in there, Bunter?”

“Yes, my lord; I have made three exposures.”

turned, smiling, on the Dean. “You see, even if we did identify all those
fingerprints, they would all belong to people who had a perfect right to be
here. And in any case, our culprit, like everybody else these days, probably
knows enough to wear gloves.”

He surveyed the lecture room critically.
“Miss Varie!”
“Yes?”
“Something worried you about this room. What was it?”
“You don’t need to be told.”
“No; I am convinced that our two hearts beat as one. But tell Miss

Martin.”

the door. Then she went out by way of the darkroom. Why did she knock
over the blackboard, which is right out of the line between the two doors?”

“Exactly.”
“Oh!” cried the Dean, “but that’s nothing. One often loses one’s way in

a dark room. My reading lamp fused one night, and I got up to try and find
the wall switch and brought up with my nose against the wardrobe.”

conjectures like cold water on hot glass, and shatters them to bits. But I
don’t believe it. She had only to feel her way along the wall. She must have
had some reason for going back into the middle of the room.”

“She’d left something on one of the tables.”
“That’s more likely. But what? Something identifiable.”
“A handkerchief or something that she’d been using to press down the

letters as she pasted them on.”

imagine. Did you test them to see if the paste was still wet?”

“I just felt this unfinished one on the floor. You see how it’s done. She

drew a line of paste right across the paper and then dabbed the letters on.
The unfinished line was just tacky, but not wet. But then, you see, we didn’t
get in till after she’d been gone five or ten minutes.”

“You didn’t test any of the others?”
“I’m afraid not.”
“I only wondered how long she’d been working here. She’s managed

to get through a good bit. But we may be able to find out another way.” He
took up the box lid containing the odd letters.

“Rough brown cardboard; I don’t think we’ll bother to look for

fingerprints on this. Or to trace it; it might have come from anywhere.
She’d nearly finished her job; there are only a couple of dozen letters left,
and a lot of them are Q’s and K’s and Z’s and such-like unhandy
consonants. I wonder how this last message was meant to end.”

He picked the paper from the floor and turned it over.
“Addressed to you, Miss Vane. Is this the first time you have been

honored?”

“The first time—since the first time.”
“Ah! ‘You needn’t think you’ll get me, you make me laugh, you …’

Well, the epithet remains to be supplied—from the letters in the box. If your
vocabulary is large enough you may discover what it was going to be.”

“But … Lord Peter—”
It was so long since she had addressed him by his title that she felt

self-conscious about it. But she appreciated his formality.

“What I want to know is, why she came to this room at all.”
“That is the mystery, isn’t it?”

clicking the light on and off. “Yes. Why couldn’t she do it in her own room?
Why invite discovery?”

“Excuse me, my lord.”
“Yes, Bunter?”
“Would this be any contribution to the inquiry?”
Bunter dived beneath the table and came up, holding a long black

hairpin.

How many people use these things?”

neck have come back. I use them myself, but mine are bronze ones. And
some of the students. And Miss Lydgate—but I think hers are bronze, too.”

pleasure of sticking them in for her.”

drop them all over the place. But I should think she was about the only
person in College who would never, by any chance, come into this room.
She gives no lectures or classes and never uses the darkroom or consults
scientific works.”

Harriet.

“Did you see her?” said Wimsey, quickly.
“I’m sorry. I’m an idiot. I only meant that her reading lamp was on,

close to her window.”

Wimsey. “I’m afraid I shall have to do the floor-walk after all.”

one might most reasonably expect to find it—in a corner near the sink in the
darkroom. She was so pleased with herself as a detective that she almost
forgot the implications of the discovery, till Harriet’s distressed exclamation
forced them upon her.

“We haven’t identified the hairpins for certain,” said Peter,

comfortingly. “That will be a little task for Miss Vane.” He gathered up the
papers. “I’ll take these and add them to the dossier. I suppose there’s no
message for us on the blackboard?”

He picked up the board, which contained only a few chemical

formulae, scribbled in chalk, in Miss Edwards’s handwriting, and restored
the easel to an upright position, on the far side of the window.

She meant to get out by the lecture room window, and had forgotten the
bars. It was only when she pulled the curtain aside and saw them that she
remembered the darkroom and plunged away in a hurry, knocking over the
blackboard and tumbling into the chairs on the way. She must have been
between the window and the easel, because the board and the easel fell
forward into the room, and not backwards towards the wall.”

and lowered and raised the windowsash. It moved easily and almost in
silence.

“If this place wasn’t so well built,” he said, almost accusingly, to the

Dean, “somebody would have heard this window go up and run round in
time to catch the lady. As it is, I wonder that Annie didn’t notice the noise
of the beaker falling into the sink …But if she did, she probably thought it
was something in the lecture room—one of those glass cases or what not.
You didn’t hear anything after you arrived, did you?”

“Not a thing.”
“Then she must have got out while Carrie was fetching you out of bed.

I suppose nobody saw her go.”

and they saw nothing,” said Harriet.

whether they noticed, as they came past, if the darkroom window was open
or shut. I don’t suppose they noticed anything, but you never can tell.”

“What does it matter?” asked the Dean.
“Not very much. But if it was shut, it rather supports Miss Vane’s idea

about the blackboard. If it was open, it would suggest that a retreat had been
planned in that direction. It’s a question of whether we’re dealing with a
short-sighted or a long-sighted person—mentally, I mean. And you might
inquire at the same time whether any of the other women in the Scouts’
Wing saw the light in the lecture room, and if so, how early.”

Harriet laughed.
“I can tell you that at once. None of them. If they had, there would

have been an eager rush to tell us all about it. You may be perfectly certain
that Annie’s and Carrie’s adventure formed the staple of conversation in the
servants’ hall this morning.”

“That,” said his lordship, “is very true indeed.”
There was a pause. The lecture room seemed to offer no further field

for research. Harriet suggested that Wimsey might like to look round the
College.

“I was about to suggest it,” said he, “if you can spare the time.”
“Miss Lydgate is expecting me in half an hour for a fresh attack on the

Prosody,” said Harriet. “I mustn’t cut that, because her time is so precious,
poor dear, and she’s suddenly thought of a new appendix.”

“Oh, no!” cried the Dean.
“Alas, yes! But we could just go round and view the more important

battlefields.”

“I should like particularly to see the Hall and Library and the

connection between them, the entrance to Tudor Building, with Miss
Barton’s former room, the layout of the Chapel with reference to the postern
and the place where, with the help of God, one leaps over the wall, and the
way from Queen Elizabeth into the New Quad.”

dossier?”

start being solicitous. Men have died and the worms have eaten them, but
not for early rising. In fact, it is said that it’s the early worm that gets the
bird.”

waiting in my room to get the bird this minute. Three late-without-leaves,
two gramophones-out-of-hours, and an irregular motor vehicle. We shall
meet again at dinner, Lord Peter.”

Harriet to make their tour. From Peter’s comments, Harriet could make out
little of his mind; she fancied, indeed, that he was somewhat abstracted
from the matter in hand.

where he had left the car, “that you will have very little more trouble at
night.”

“Why?”
“Well, for one thing, the nights are getting very short, and the risks

that you should take some personal precautions?”

“What sort of precautions?”
“I won’t offer you a revolver to take to bed with you. But I have an

idea that from now on you and at least one other person may be in some
danger of attack. That may be imagination. But if this joker is alarmed and
bottled up for a bit—and I think she has been alarmed—the next outrage
may be a serious one—when it comes.”

funny.”

His attention seemed to be attracted by something among the

dashboard fittings, and he said, looking not at her but at the car:

“Yes. But without any vanity, I wish I were your husband or your

brother or your lover, or anything but what I am.”

“You mean, your being here is a danger—to me?”
“I dare say I’m flattering myself.”
“But it wouldn’t stop you to damage me.”
“She may not think very clearly about that.”
“Well, I don’t mind the risk, if it is one. And I don’t see why it would

be any less if you were a relation of mine.”

Don’t think I’m trying to make capital out of this on my own account. I’m
being careful to observe the formalities, as you may have noticed. I’m only
warning you that I’m sometimes a dangerous person to know.”

this person desperate and that she may try to take it out of me. And you are
trying to tell me, very delicately, that it might be safer if we camouflaged
your interest in the case as another kind of interest.”

“Safer for you.”

die than make such an embarrassing pretense.”

“Well, wouldn’t you?”
“And on the whole you’d rather see me dead than embarrassed.”
“That is probably another form of egotism. But I am entirely at your

service.”

“Of course, if you’re such a perilous ally, I could tell you to go away.”
“I can see you urging me to go away and leave a job undone.”
“Well, Peter, I’d certainly rather die than make any sort of pretense to

you or about you. But I think you’re exaggerating the whole thing. You
don’t usually get the wind up like this.”

let it blow. When it comes to other people—”

“Your instinct is to clap the women and children under hatches.”
“Well,” he admitted, deprecatingly, “one can’t suppress one’s natural

instincts altogether; even if one’s reason and self-interest are all the other
way.”

who adores being protected.”

me, in the kindest manner, for my own good; and that I could not stand. I
object to being tactfully managed by somebody who ought to be my equal.
If I want tactful dependents, I can hire them. And fire them if they get too
tactful. I don’t mean Bunter. He braces me by a continual cold shower of
silent criticism. I don’t protect him; he protects me, and preserves an
independent judgment; …However; without presuming to be protective,
may I yet suggest that you should use a reasonable caution? I tell you

frankly, I don’t like your friend’s preoccupation with knives and
strangling.”

“Are you serious?”
“For once.”
Harriet was about to tell him not to be ridiculous; then she

remembered Miss Barton’s story about the strong hands that had seized her
from behind. It might have been quite true. The thought of perambulating
the long corridors by night was suddenly disagreeable.

“Very well; I’ll be careful.”
“I think it would be wise. I’d better push off now. I’ll be round in time

to face the High Table at dinner. Seven o’clock?”

morning instead of at six.” She went, feeling a little blank, to cope with
Miss Lydgate’s proofs.

CHAPTER XVII

He that questioneth much shall learn much, and content much: but

especially if he apply his questions to the skill of the persons whom he

asketh; for he shall give them occasion to please themselves in speaking,

and himself shall continually gather knowledge. But let his questions not be

troublesome, for that is fit for a poser; and let him be sure to leave other

men their turns to speak.

FRANCIS BACON

“You look,” said the Dean, “like a nervous parent whose little boy is about
to recite The Wreck of the Hesperus at a School Concert.”

“I feel,” said Harriet, “more like the mother of Daniel.

King Darius said to the lions:—
Bite Daniel. Bite Daniel.
Bite him. Bite him. Bite him.”

“G’rrrrr!” said the Dean.
They were standing at the door of the Senior Common Room, which

conveniently overlooked the Jowett Walk Lodge. The Old Quad was
animated. Latecomers were hurrying over to change for dinner; others,
having changed, were strolling about in groups, waiting for the bell; some
were still playing tennis; Miss de Vine emerged from the Library Building,
still vaguely pushing in hairpins (Harriet had checked up on those hairpins
and identified them); an elegant figure paraded towards them from the
direction of the New Quadrangle.

“Miss Shaw’s got a new frock,” said Harriet.

“So she has! How posh of her!

And she was as fine as a melon in the cornfield,
Gliding and lovely as a ship upon the sea.

That, my dear, is meant for Daniel.”

“Dean, darling, you’re being a cat.”
“Well, aren’t we all? This early arrival of everybody is exceedingly

sinister. Even Miss Hillyard is arrayed in her best black gown with a train to
it. We all feel there’s safety in numbers.”

It was not out of the way for the Senior Common Room to collect

outside their own door before dinner of a fine summer’s day, but Harriet,
glancing round, had to admit that there were more of them there that
evening than was usual before 7 o’clock. She thought they all seemed
apprehensive and some, even hostile. They tended to avoid one another’s
eyes; yet they gathered together as though for protection against a common
menace. She suddenly found it absurd that anybody should be alarmed by
Peter Wimsey; she saw them as a harmless collection of nervous patients in
a dentist’s waiting room.

“We seem,” said Miss Pyke’s harsh voice in her ear, “to be preparing a

somewhat formidable reception for our guest. Is he of a timid disposition?”

“I should say he was completely hard-boiled,” said Harriet.
“That reminds me,” said the Dean. “In the matter of shirt-fronts—”
“Hard, of course,” said Harriet, indignantly. “And if he pops or bulges,

I will pay you five pounds.”

“I have been meaning to ask you,” said Miss Pyke. “How is the

popping sound occasioned? I did not like to ask Dr. Threep so personal a
question, but my curiosity was very much aroused.”

“You’d better ask Lord Peter,” said Harriet.

seriousness, “I will do so.”

quarters and struck the hour.

“seems to be one of the gentleman’s virtues. You’d better go and meet him
and settle his nerves before the ordeal.”

Yownie.”

wide quadrangle under a fire of glances from a collection of collegiate
females; but it is child’s play compared, for example, with the long trek
from the pavilion at Lord’s to the far end of the pitch, with five wickets
down and ninety needed to save the follow-on. Thousands of people then
alive might have recognized that easy and unhurried stride and confident
carriage of the head. Harriet let him do three-quarters of the journey alone,
and then advanced to meet him.

“Have you cleaned your teeth and said your prayers?”
“Yes, mamma; and cut my nails and washed behind the ears and got a

clean handkerchief.”

Harriet wished she could have said the same of them. They were grubby
and disheveled and she felt unexpectedly obliged to Miss Shaw for having
made an effort in the matter of dress. As for her convoy, from his sleek
yellow head to his pumps she distrusted him; his mood of the morning was
gone, and he was as ready for mischief as a wilderness of monkeys.

“Come along, then, and behave prettily. Have you seen your nephew?”

“I have seen him. My bankruptcy will probably be announced

tomorrow. He asked me to give you his love, no doubt thinking I can still be
lavish in that commodity. It all returned from him to you, though it was
mine before. That color is very becoming to you.”

His tone was pleasantly detached and she hoped he was referring to

her dress; but she was not sure. She was glad to relinquish him to the Dean,
who came forward to claim him and to relieve her of the introductions.
Harriet watched in some amusement. Miss Lydgate, far too unself-
conscious to have any attitude at all, greeted him exactly as she would have
greeted anybody else, and asked eagerly about the situation in Central
Europe; Miss Shaw smiled with a graciousness that emphasized Miss
Stevens’s brusque “How-d’you do” and immediate retreat into animated
discussion of college affairs with Miss Allison; Miss Pyke pounced on him
with an intelligent question about the latest murder; Miss Barton, advancing
with an evident determination to put him right about capital punishment,
was disarmed by the blank amiability of the countenance offered for her
inspection and observed instead that it had been a remarkably fine day.

nothing of him, passed him on to Miss Hillyard.

eyes, “this is delightful. Your paper in the Historical Review on the
diplomatic aspects of the Divorce …”

(Heavens! thought Harriet, I hope he knows his stuff.)
“ … really masterly. Indeed, I felt that, if anything, you had slightly

underestimated the pressure brought to bear upon Clement by …”

“… consulted the unedited dispatches in the possession of …”
“… you might have carried the argument a trifle further. You very

rightly point out that the Emperor …”

(Yes; he had read the article all right.)
“… disfigured by prejudice, but a considerable authority on the Canon

Law …”

mistranscriptions and at least one unscrupulous omission …”

touch with … official channels … personal introduction … raise no
difficulties …”

been given a birthday present.”

information.” (After all, she thought, he is Somebody, though one never
seems able to remember it.)

“ … not so much political as economic.”
“Ah!” said Miss Hillyard, “when it comes to a question of national

finance, Miss de Vine is the real authority.”

She effected the introduction herself, and the discussion continued.
“Well,” said the Dean, “he has made a complete conquest of Miss

Hillyard.”

“And Miss de Vine is making a complete conquest of him.”
“It’s mutual, I fancy. At any rate, her back hair’s coming down, which

is a sure sign of pleasure and excitement.”

appropriation of monastic funds, but she had little doubt that the back of his
mind was full of hairpins.

“Here comes the Warden. We shall have to separate them forcibly.

He’s got to face Dr. Baring and take her in to dinner …All’s well. She has

collared him. That firm assertion of the Royal Prerogative! …Do you want
to sit next him and hold his hand?”

him. Not a suspect, but full of lively information.”

“All right; I’ll go and prattle to him. You’d better sit opposite to us and

kick me if I say anything indiscreet.”

By this arrangement, Harriet found herself placed a little

uncomfortably between Miss Hillyard (in whom she always felt an
antagonism to herself) and Miss Barton (who was obviously still worried
about Wimsey’s detective hobbies), and face to face with the two people
whose glances were most likely to disturb her gravity. On the other side of
the Dean sat Miss Pyke; on the other side of Miss Hillyard was Miss de
Vine, well under Wimsey’s eye. Miss Lydgate, that secure fortress, was
situated at the far end of the table, offering no kind of refuge.

who was thus able to follow, without too much difficulty, the Warden’s
straightforward determination to size up Wimsey and Wimsey’s
diplomatically veiled but equally obstinate determination to size up the
Warden; a contest carried on with unwavering courtesy on either side.

over the College and what he thought of it, adding, with due modesty, that
architecturally, of course, it could scarcely hope to compete with the more
ancient foundations.

my own ancient foundation is mathematically compounded of ambition,
distraction, uglification and derision, that remark sounds like sarcasm.”

of manners, earnestly assured him that she had intended no personal

allusion.

“An occasional reminder is good for us,” said he. “We are mortified in

nineteenth-century Gothic, lest in our over-weening Balliolity we forget
God. We pulled down the good to make way for the bad; you, on the
contrary, have made the world out of nothing—a more divine procedure.”

jest and earnest, found foothold:

“It is quite true that we have had to make what we can out of very little

—and that, you know, is typical of our whole position here.”

“Yes; you are practically without endowments?”
The question was so offered as to include the Dean, who said

cheerfully:

“Quite right. All done by cheeseparing.”
“That being so,” he said, seriously, “even to admire seems to be a kind

of impertinence. This is a very fine hall—who is the architect?”

say:

women’s education.”

“Is it still a question? It ought not to be. I hope you are not going to

ask me whether I approve of women’s doing this and that.”

“Why not?”
“You should not imply that I have any right either to approve or

disapprove.”

“I assure you,” said the Warden, “that even in Oxford we still

encounter a certain number of people who maintain their right to
disapprove.”

“And I had hoped I was returning to civilization.”

took the opportunity to turn her inquiries upon the situation in Europe. Here
the guest was on his own ground. Harriet caught the Dean’s eye and smiled.
But the more formidable challenge was coming. International politics led to
history, and history—in Dr. Baring’s mind-to philosophy. The ominous
name of Plato suddenly emerged from a tangle of words, and Dr. Baring
moved out a philosophical speculation, like a pawn, and planted it
temptingly en prise.

philosophic pawn. There were two ways of taking it: both disastrous. One
was to pretend to knowledge; the other, to profess an insincere eagerness for
instruction. His lordship smiled gently and refused the gambit:

“That is out of my stars. I have not the philosophic mind.”
And how would you define the philosophic mind, Lord Peter?”
“I wouldn’t; definitions are dangerous. But I know that philosophy is a

closed book to me, as music is to the tone-deaf.”

profile, drooping and contemplative over his plate, like a heron brooding by
a pond.

deaf myself.”

“Are you? I thought you might be,” he said, equably.
“That is very interesting. How can you tell?”
“There is something in the quality of the voice.” He offered candid

grey eyes for examination. “But it’s not a very safe conclusion to draw, and,
as you may have noticed, I didn’t draw it. That is the art of the charlatan—
to induce a confession and present it as the result of deduction.”

“I see,” said Dr. Baring. “You expose your technique very frankly.”

one’s self and acquire an unmerited reputation for candor. The great
advantage about telling the truth is that nobody ever believes it—that is at
the bottom of the ψεvôή λέγεiv ώς ôεV”

time, I will start by way of Aristotle.”

She turned to her left-hand neighbor and released him.
“I am sorry,” said the Dean, “we have no strong drink to offer you.”
His face was eloquent of mingled apprehension and mischief.
“The toad beneath the harrow knows where every separate tooth-point

goes. Do you always prove your guests with hard questions?”

with great credit.”

that is the knowledge of one’s own limitations.”

in convulsions through being afraid to say boldly that they did not know.”

“Showing themselves,” said Miss Pyke across the Dean, “less wise

than Socrates, who made the admission fairly frequently.”

start all over again.”

instruction.”

Miss Pyke, “if you will not take it amiss.”

and determined on getting enlightenment. Harriet hoped that Wimsey would
recognize her curiosity for what it was: not skittishness, but the

embarrassing appetite for exact information which characterizes the
scholarly mind.

knowledge. It occurs because the human torso possesses a higher factor of
variability than the ready-made shirt. The explosive sound you mention is
produced when the shirt-front is slightly too long for the wearer. The stiff
edges, being forced slightly apart by the inclination of the body, come back
into contact with a sharp click, similar to that emitted by the elytra of
certain beetles. It is not to be confused, however, with the ticking of the
Death-watch, which is made by tapping with the jaws and is held to be a
love-call. The clicking of the shirt-front has no amatory significance, and is,
indeed, an embarrassment to the insect. It may be obviated by an increased
care in selection or, in extreme cases, by having the garment made to
measure.”

explanation. At this time of day, it is perhaps not improper to adduce the
parallel instance of the old-fashioned corset, which was subject to a similar
inconvenience.”

plate armor, which had to be very well tailored to allow of movement at
all.”

At this point, Miss Barton captured Harriet’s attention with some

remark or other, and she lost track of the conversation on the other side of
the table. When she picked up the threads again, Miss Pyke was giving her
neighbors some curious details about Ancient Minoan civilization, and the
Warden was apparently waiting till she had finished to pounce on Peter
again. Turning to her right, Harriet saw that Miss Hillyard was watching the

group with a curiously concentrated expression. Harriet asked her to pass
the sugar, and she came back to earth with a slight start.

“They seem to be getting on very well over there,” said Harriet.
“Miss Pyke likes an audience,” said Miss Hillyard, with so much

venom that Harriet was quite astonished.

suggested.

dinner proceeded without incident, she said:

collections of historical documents in Florence. Do you suppose he means
what he says?”

“If he says so, you may be sure he can and will.”
“That is a testimonial,” said Miss Hillyard. “I am very glad to hear it.”
Meanwhile, the Warden had effected her capture, and was talking to

Peter in a low tone and with some earnestness. He listened attentively,
while he peeled an apple, the narrow coils of the rind sliding slowly over
his fingers. She concluded with some question; and he shook his head.

“It is very unlikely. I should say there was no hope of it at all.”
Harriet wondered whether the subject of the Poison-Pen had risen at

last to the surface; but presently he said:

“Three hundred years ago it mattered comparatively little. But now

that you have the age of national self-realization, the age of colonial
expansion, the age of the barbarian invasions and the age of the decline and
fall, all jammed cheek by jowl in time and space, all armed alike with
poison-gas and going through the outward motions of an advanced
civilization, principles have become more dangerous than passions. It’s

getting uncommonly easy to kill people in large numbers, and the first thing
a principle does—if it really is a principle—is to kill somebody.”

with good’; that means a problem with no solution.”

“Yes. Afflicting, of course, to the tidy mind. One may either hulloo on

the inevitable, and be called a bloodthirsty progressive; or one may try to
gain time and be called a bloodthirsty reactionary. But when blood is their
argument, all argument is apt to be—merely bloody.”

The Warden passed the adjective at its face value.
“I sometimes wonder whether we gain anything by gaining time.”
“Well—if one leaves letters unanswered long enough, some of them

answer themselves. Nobody can prevent the Fall of Troy, but a dull, careful
person may manage to smuggle out the Lares and Penates—even at the risk
of having the epithet þius tacked to his name.”

“The Universities are always being urged to march in the van of

progress.”

Thermopylae.”

having accomplished nothing but an epic.”

exit. Peter effaced himself politely against the paneling while the dons filed
past him, arriving at the edge of the dais in time to pick up Miss Shaw’s
scarf as it slipped from her shoulders. Harriet found herself descending the
staircase between Miss Martin and Miss de Vine, who remarked:

“You are a courageous woman.”
“Why?” said Harriet lightly. “To bring my friends here and have them

put to the question?”

is still uneaten—in fact, at one point he bit the lion. Was that genuine, by
the way?”

“About tone-deafness? Probably just a little more genuine than he

made out.”

“Will he lay traps all evening for us to walk into?”
Harriet realized for a moment how queer the whole situation was.

Once again, she felt Wimsey as a dangerous alien and herself on the side of
the women, who, with so strange a generosity, were welcoming the
inquisitor among them. She said, however:

manner.”

“After one is inside. That’s very comforting.”
“That,” said Miss de Vine, brushing aside these surface commentaries,

“is a man able to subdue himself to his own ends. I should be sorry for
anyone who came up against his principles—whatever they are, and if he
has any.”

Common Room with a somber face.

what I have always thought about herself.”

“Perhaps she recognizes a kindred spirit.”
“Or a foe worthy of—I ought not to say that.”
Here Peter and his companion caught them up, and the Dean, joining

Miss Shaw, went on in with her. Wimsey smiled at Harriet, an odd,
interrogative smile.

“What’s worrying you?”
“Peter—I feel exactly like Judas.”

afraid. Shall we wash our hands like Pilate and be thoroughly respectable?”

She slid her hand under his arm.
“No; we’re in for it now. We’ll be degraded together.”
“That will be nice. Like the lovers in that Strohheim film, we’ll go and

sit on the sewer.” She could feel his bone and muscle, reassuringly human,
under the fine broadcloth. She thought: “He and I belong to the same world,
and all these others are the aliens.” And then: “Damn it all! this is our
private fight—why should they have to join in?” But that was absurd.

“What do you want me to do, Peter?”
“Chuck the ball back to me if it runs out of the circle. Not obviously.

Just exercise your devastating talent for keeping to the point and speaking
the truth.”

“That sounds easy.”
“It is—for you. That’s what I love you for. Didn’t you know? Well, we

can’t stop to argue about it now; they’ll think we’re conspiring about
something.”

suddenly embarrassed and looking, in consequence, defiant. The coffee was
already on the table, and the S.C.R. were gathered about it, helping
themselves. She saw Miss Barton advance upon Peter, with a courteous
offer of refreshment on her lips but the light of determination in her eye.
Harriet did not for the moment care what happened to Peter. He had given
her a new bone to worry. She provided herself with coffee and a cigarette,
and retired with them and the bone into a corner. She had often wondered,
in a detached kind of way, what it was that Peter valued in her and had
apparently valued from that first day when she had stood in the dock and
spoken for her own life. Now that she knew, she thought that a more

unattractive pair of qualities could seldom have been put forward as an
excuse for devotion.

“But do you really feel comfortable about it, Lord Peter?”
“No—I shouldn’t recommend it as a comfortable occupation. But is

your or my or anybody’s comfort of very great importance?”

ruthless voice that had said, “What does it matter if it hurts …?” Let them
fight it out …Unattractive; but if he meant what he said, it explained a great
many things. Those were qualities that could be recognized under the most
sordid conditions …“Detachment … if you ever find a person who likes
you because of it, that liking is sincere.” That was Miss de Vine; and Miss
de Vine was sitting not very far away, her eyes, behind their thick glasses,
fixed on Peter with a curious, calculating look.

into silence. People were sitting down. The voices of Miss Allison and Miss
Stevens rose into prominence. They were discussing some collegiate
question, and they were doing it intently and desperately. They called upon
Miss Burrows to give an opinion. Miss Shaw turned to Miss Chilperic and
made a remark about the bathing at “Spinsters’ Splash.” Miss Chilperic
replied elaborately—too elaborately; her answer took too long and attracted
attention; she hesitated, became confused, and stopped speaking. Miss
Lydgate, with a troubled face, was listening to an anecdote that Mrs.
Goodwin was telling about her little boy; in the middle of it, Miss Hillyard,
who was within earshot, rose pointedly, stabbed out her cigarette on a
distant ashtray, and moved slowly, and as though despite herself, to a
windowseat close to where Miss Barton was still standing. Harriet could see
her angry, smoldering glance fix itself on Peter’s bent head and then jerk
away across the quad, only to return again. Miss Edwards, close to Harriet

and a little in front of her on a low chair, had her hands set squarely and
rather mannishly on her knees, and was leaning forward; she had the air of
waiting for something. Miss Pyke, on her feet, lighting a cigarette, was
apparently looking for an opportunity to engage Peter’s attention; she
appeared eager and interested, and more at her ease than most of the others.
The Dean, curled on a humpty, was frankly listening to what Peter and Miss
Barton were saying. They were all listening, really, and at the same time
most of them were trying to pretend that he was there as an ordinary guest
—that he was not an enemy—not a spy. They were trying to prevent him
from becoming openly the center of attention as he was already the center
of consciousness.

help. One by one, the spurts of talk failed and died, leaving the one tenor
floating, like a solo instrument executing a cadenza when the orchestra has
fallen silent:

“The execution of the guilty is unpleasant—but not nearly so

disturbing as the slaughter of the innocents. If you are out for my blood,
won’t you allow me to hand you a more serviceable weapon?”

themselves was sitting down silent, made a brief, interrogative pause, which
looked like politeness, but which Harriet mentally classed as “good
theater.”

and said, as she settled herself in the corner of it:

“Do you mean the murderer’s victims?”
“No,” said Peter, “I meant my own victims.”
He sat down between Miss Pyke and Miss Barton, and went on in a

pleasantly conversational tone:

“For example; I happened to find out that a young woman had

murdered an old one for her money. It didn’t matter much: the old woman
was dying in any case, and the girl (though she didn’t know that) would
have inherited the money in any case. As soon as I started to meddle, the
girl set to work again, killed two innocent people to cover her tracks and
murderously attacked three others. Finally she killed herself. If I’d left her
alone, there might have been only one death instead of four.”

large.”

certain people. But who killed those other two innocents—she or society?”

“They were killed,” said Miss Barton, “by her fear of the death

penalty. If the unfortunate woman had been medically treated, they and she
would still be alive today.”

she hadn’t killed those others, we should probably never have caught her,
and so far from being medically treated she would be living in prosperity—
and incidentally corrupting one or two people’s minds, if you think that of
any importance.”

rebelliously grappled with this problem, “that those innocent victims died
for the people; sacrificed to a social principle.”

“At any rate, to your social principles,” said Miss Barton.
“Thank you. I thought you were going to say, to my inquisitiveness.”
“I might have done so,” said Miss Barton, frankly. “But you lay claim

to a principle, so we’ll stick to that.”

no fancy to let Miss Barton get away with it too easily.)

I have any principles. I’m quite capable of getting killed for the fun of the
thing. Who isn’t?”

murders and executions and mind so little about taking risks in motoring
and swimming and climbing mountains and so on. I suppose we do prefer
to die for the fun of the thing.”

should die for our own fun and not other people’s.”

must be prevented and murderers kept from doing further harm. But they
ought not to be punished and they certainly ought not to be killed.”

with other unfit specimens,” said Miss Edwards. “Speaking as a biologist, I
must say I think public money might be better employed. What with the
number of imbeciles and physical wrecks we allow to go about and
propagate their species, we shall end by devitalizing whole nations.”

“Miss Schuster-Slatt would advocate sterilization,” said the Dean.
“They’re trying it in Germany, I believe,” said Miss Edwards.
“Together,” said Miss Hillyard, “with the relegation of woman to her

proper place in the home.”

“But they execute people there quite a lot,” said Wimsey, “so Miss

Barton can’t take over their organization lock, stock and barrel.”

returned to her contention that her social principles were opposed to
violence of every description.

time you disturb the balance of nature you let in violence. And if you leave
nature alone you get violence in any case. I quite agree that murderers
shouldn’t be hanged—it’s wasteful and unkind. But I don’t agree that they
should be comfortably fed and housed while decent people go short.
Economically speaking, they should be used for laboratory experiments.”

“To assist the further preservation of the unfit?” asked Wimsey, drily.
“To assist in establishing scientific facts,” replied Miss Edwards, more

drily still.

stand on. Establish the facts, no matter what comes of it.”

becomes a principle. And a very dangerous one.”

“But the fact that A killed B isn’t necessarily the whole of the truth,”

persisted Miss Barton. “A’s provocation and state of health are facts, too.”

ask the investigator to go beyond his job. If we mayn’t establish any
conclusion for fear somebody should make an injudicious use of it, we are
back in the days of Galileo. There would be an end to discovery.”

poison gas.”

Hillyard; “but is it always expedient to publish them? In the case of Galileo,
the Church—”

“To suppress a fact is to publish a falsehood.”

became general. That it had been deliberately pushed to this point, she
could see; but what Peter wanted to make of it, she had no idea. Yet he was

obviously interested. His eyes, under their half-closed lids, were alert. He
was like a cat waiting at a mousehole. Or was she half-consciously
connecting him with his own blazon? “Sable: three mice courant argent; a
crescent for difference. The crest, a domestick catt …”

think private loyalties should come before loyalty to one’s job …”

for, then. One could almost see the silken fur ripple.

private reasons,” said Miss Lydgate. “But surely, if one takes on personal
responsibilities, one owes a duty in that direction. If one’s job interferes
with them, perhaps one should give up the job.”

“I quite agree,” said Miss Hillyard. “But then, my private

responsibilities are few, and possibly I have no right to speak. What is your
opinion, Mrs. Goodwin?”

There was a most unpleasant pause.
“If you mean that personally,” said the Secretary, getting up and facing

the Tutor, “I am so far of your opinion that I have asked Dr. Baring to
accept my resignation. Not because of any of the monstrous allegations that
have been made about me, but because I realize that under the
circumstances I can’t do my work as well as I ought. But you are all very
much mistaken if you think I am at the bottom of the trouble in this college;
I’m going now, and you can say what you like about me—but may I say
that anybody with a passion for facts will do better to collect them from
unprejudiced sources. Miss Barton at least will admit that mental health is a
fact like another.”

Into the horrified silence that followed, Peter dropped three words like

lumps of ice. “Please don’t go.”

Mrs. Goodwin stopped short with her hand on the door.
“It would be a great pity,” said the Warden, “to take anything

personally that is said in a general discussion. I feel sure Miss Hillyard
meant nothing of that kind. Naturally, some people have better
opportunities than others for seeing both sides of a question. In your own
line of work, Lord Peter, such conflicts of loyalty must frequently occur.”

either my brother or my sister. Fortunately, it came to nothing.”

pinning the argumentum ad hominem with a kind of relish.

“Oh, well—What does the ideal detective do then, Miss Vane?”
“Professional etiquette,” said Harriet, “would suggest an extorted

confession, followed by poison for two in the library.”

“Miss Vane feels no compunction. She wipes me out with a firm hand,
rather than damage my reputation. But the question isn’t always so simple.
How about the artist of genius who has to choose between letting his family
starve and painting pot-boilers to keep them?”

“He’s no business to have a wife and family,” said Miss Hillyard.
“Poor devil! Then he has the further interesting choice between

repressions and immorality. Mrs. Goodwin, I gather, would object to the
repressions and some people might object to the immorality.”

and family. Well—he could stop painting. That, if he really is a genius,
would be a loss to the world. But he mustn’t paint bad pictures—that would
be really immoral.”

“Why?” asked Miss Edwards. “What do a few bad pictures matter,

more or less?”

painting. “A bad picture by a good painter is a betrayal of truth—his own
truth.”

“That’s only a relative kind of truth,” objected Miss Edwards.
The Dean and Miss Burrows fell headlong upon this remark, and

Harriet, seeing the argument in danger of getting out of hand, thought it
time to retrieve the ball and send it back. She knew now what was wanted,
though not why it was wanted.

scientist.”

mean, a popular book isn’t necessarily unscientific.”

“So long,” said Wimsey, “as it doesn’t falsify the facts. But it might be

a different kind of thing. To take a concrete instance—somebody wrote a
novel called The Search—”

“C. P. Snow,” said Miss Burrows. “It’s funny you should mention that.

It was the book that the—”

“I know,” said Peter. “That’s possibly why it was in my mind.”
“I never read the book,” said the Warden.
“Oh, I did,” said the Dean. “It’s about a man who starts out to be a

scientist and gets on very well till, just as he’s going to be appointed to an
important executive post, he finds he’s made a careless error in a scientific
paper. He didn’t check his assistant’s results, or something. Somebody finds
out, and he doesn’t get the job. So he decides he doesn’t really care about
science after all.”

“Obviously not,” said Miss Edwards. “He only cared about the post.”
“But,” said Miss Chilperic, “if it was only a mistake—”

him. He tells him: ‘The only ethical principle which has made science
possible is that the truth shall be told all the time. If we do not penalize false
statements made in error, we open up the way for false statements by
intention. And a false statement of fact, made deliberately, is the most
serious crime a scientist can commit.’ Words to that effect. I may not be
quoting quite correctly.”

falsification.”

“There’s no sense in deliberate falsification, anyhow,” said the Bursar.

“What could anybody gain by it?”

an argument. Or out of ambition.”

one possibly get out of a reputation one knew one didn’t deserve? It would
be horrible.”

Her innocent indignation upset everybody’s gravity.
“How about the Forged Decretals … Chatterton … Ossian … Henry

Ireland … those Nineteenth-Century Pamphlets the other day …?”

why? They must be mad.”

result—later on, I mean—in order to get a job. And the man who made the
original mistake finds it out. But he says nothing, because the other man is
very badly off and has a wife and family to keep.”

“These wives and families!” said Peter.
“Does the author approve?” inquired the Warden.
“Well,” said the Dean, “the book ends there, so I suppose he does.”

the man who could correct it lets it go, out of charitable considerations.
Would anybody here do that? There’s your test case, Miss Barton, with no
personalities attached.”

and fifty children.”

you, Miss Barton, on striking such a fine, un-feminine note. Will nobody
say a word for the women and children?”

(“I knew he was going to be mischievous,” thought Harriet.)
“You’d like to hear it, wouldn’t you?” said Miss Hillyard.
“You’ve got us in a cleft stick,” said the Dean. “If we say it, you can

point out that womanliness unfits us for learning; and if we don’t, you can
point out that learning makes us unwomanly.”

have nothing to gain by not telling the truth.”

the indefensible.”

“It sounds, anyway, like a manufactured case,” said Miss Allison,

briskly. “It could very seldom happen; and if it did—”

me. I don’t mind telling you—without names, of course. When I was at
Flamborough College, examining for the professorial theses in York
University, there was a man who sent in a very interesting paper on a
historical subject. It was a most persuasive piece of argument; only I
happened to know that the whole contention was quite untrue, because a
letter that absolutely contradicted it was actually in existence in a certain
very obscure library in a foreign town. I’d come across it when I was

reading up something else. That wouldn’t have mattered, of course. But the
internal evidence showed that the man must have had access to that library.
So I had to make an inquiry, and I found that he really had been there and
must have seen the letter and deliberately suppressed it.”

Lydgate anxiously. “He might carelessly have overlooked it. That would be
a very different matter.”

him admit as much. He had come upon that letter when his thesis was
nearly complete, and he had no time to rewrite it. And it was a great blow to
him apart from that, because he had grown enamored of his own theory and
couldn’t bear to give it up.”

in a mournful tone, as one speaks of an incurable cancer.

“But here is the curious thing,” went on Miss de Vine. “He was

unscrupulous enough to let the false conclusion stand; but he was too good
a historian to destroy the letter. He kept it.”

sore tooth.”

Vine, “and setting himself right with his conscience. I don’t know, and I
don’t think he knew very well himself.”

“What happened to him?” asked Harriet.
“Well, that was the end of him, of course. He lost the professorship,

naturally, and they took away his M.A. degree as well. A pity, because he
was brilliant in his own way—and very good-looking, if that has anything
to do with it.”

badly.”

off. I don’t know what became of him. That was about six years ago. He
dropped out completely. One was sorry about it, but there it was.”

“You couldn’t possibly have done anything else,” said Miss Edwards.
“Of course not. A man as undependable as that is not only useless, but

dangerous. He might do anything.”

didn’t pay, did it? Say he sacrificed his professional honor for the women
and children we hear so much about—but in the end it left him worse off.”

being found out.”

“It seems to me,” began Miss Chilperic, timidly—and then stopped.
“Yes?” said Peter.
“Well,” said Miss Chilperic, “oughtn’t the women and children to have

a point of view? I mean—suppose the wife knew that her husband had done
a thing like that for her, what would she feel about it?”

“That’s a very important point,” said Harriet. “You’d think she’d feel

too ghastly for words.”

would care a dash.”

“That’s a monstrous thing to say,” cried Miss Hillyard.
“You think a wife might feel sensitive about her husband’s honor—

even if it was sacrificed on her account?” said Miss Stevens. “Well—I don’t
know.”

living on somebody’s immoral earnings?”

“There,” said Peter, “if I may say so, I think you are exaggerating. The

man who does that—if he isn’t too far gone to have any feelings at all—is
hit by other considerations, some of which have nothing whatever to do
with ethics. But it is extremely interesting that you should make the
comparison.” He looked at Miss Chilperic so intently that she blushed.

“Perhaps that was rather a stupid thing to say.”
“No. But if it ever occurs to people to value the honor of the mind

equally with the honor of the body, we shall get a social revolution of a
quite unparalleled sort—and very different from the kind that is being made
at the moment.”

revolution that only the opportune entry of two Common Room scouts to
remove the coffee cups and relieve her of the necessity of replying seemed
to have saved her from sinking through the floor.

anybody did a dishonorable thing and then said he did it for one’s own sake,
it would be the last insult. How could one ever feel the same to him again?”

“Indeed,” said Miss Pyke, “it must surely vitiate the whole

relationship.”

“Oh, nonsense!” cried the Dean. “How many women care two hoots

about anybody’s intellectual integrity? Only over-educated women like us.
So long as the man didn’t forge a check or rob the till or do something
socially degrading, most women would think he was perfectly justified. Ask
Mrs. Bones the Butcher’s Wife or Miss Tape the Tailor’s Daughter how
much they would worry about suppressing a fact in a moldy old historical
thesis.”

man, right or wrong, they’d say. Even if he did rob the till.”

wants. He wouldn’t say thank you for a critic on the hearth.”

is it, Annie? My coffee cup? Here you are …Somebody who will say, ‘The
greater the sin the greater the sacrifice—and consequently the greater
devotion.’ Poor Miss Schuster-Slatt! …I suppose it is comforting to be told
that one is loved whatever one does.”

“Ah, yes,” said Peter, in his reediest woodwind voice:

“And these say: ‘No more now my knight
Or God’s knight any longer’—you,
Being than they so much more white,
So much more pure and good and true,

“Will cling to me for ever—

William Morris had his moments of being a hundred percent manly man.”

“Poor Morris!” said the Dean.
“He was young at the time,” said Peter, indulgently. “It’s odd, when

you come to think of it, that the expressions ‘manly’ and ‘womanly’ should
be almost more offensive than their opposites. One is tempted to believe
that there may be something indelicate about sex after all.”

door shut behind the last of the coffee service. “Here we sit round in a ring,
dissociating ourselves from kind Mrs. Bones and that sweet girl, Miss Tape
—”

masculine Tapes and Boneses—”

“And clacking on in the most unwomanly manner about intellectual

integrity.”

“While I,” said Peter, “sit desolate in the midst, like a lodge in a garden

of cucumbers.”

cold, bitter and indigestible wilderness.”

There was a laugh, and a momentary silence. Harriet could feel a

nervous tension in the room—little threads of anxiety and expectation
strung out, meeting, crossing, quivering. Now, they were all saying to
themselves, now something is going to be said about IT. The ground has
been surveyed, the coffee has been cleared out of the road, the combatants
are stripped for action—now, this amiable gentleman with the well-filed
tongue will come out in his true colors as an inquisitor, and it is all going to
be very uncomfortable.

readjusted it, looked rather severely at the Warden, and lifted up his voice in
emphatic, pained and querulous complaint about the Corporation dump.

The Warden had gone, expressing courteous thanks to Miss Lydgate

for the hospitality of the Senior Common Room, and graciously inviting his
lordship to call upon her in her own house at any convenient time during his
stay in Oxford. Various dons rose up and drifted away, murmuring that they
had essays to look through before they went to bed. The talk had ranged
pleasantly over a variety of topics. Peter had let the reins drop from his
hands and let it go whither it would, and Harriet, realizing this, had scarcely
troubled to follow it. In the end, there remained only herself and Peter, the
Dean, Miss Edwards (who seemed to have taken a strong fancy to Peter’s

conversation), Miss Chilperic, silent and half-hidden in an obscure position
and, rather to Harriet’s surprise, Miss Hillyard.

he had better be getting along. Everybody rose. The Old Quad was dark,
except for the gleam of lighted windows; the sky had clouded, and a rising
wind stirred the boughs of the beech trees.

that paper about blood-groups. I think you’ll find it of interest.”

“I shall, indeed,” said Wimsey. “Thank you very much.”
Miss Edwards strode briskly away.
“Goodnight, Lord Peter.”
“Goodnight, Miss Chilperic. Let me know when the social revolution

is about to begin and I’ll come to die upon the barricades.”

“I think you would,” said Miss Chilperic, astonishingly, and, in

defiance of tradition, gave him her hand.

“Goodnight,” said Miss Hillyard, to the world in general, and whisked

quickly past them with her head high.

Dean said, “Well!” And then, interrogatively, “Well?”

“Pass, and all’s well,” said Peter, placidly.
“There were one or two moments, weren’t there?” said the Dean. “But

on the whole—as well as could be expected.”

back in his voice.

yard.”

“Oh, yes, you would,” said he. “Don’t worry.”

The Dean, too, was gone.

better come and fetch it.”

Also your dossier. I expect they’ve been taken up”

“You didn’t leave the dossier lying about!”
“What do you take me for? It’s wrapped up and sealed.”
They crossed the quad slowly.
“There are a lot of questions I want to ask, Peter.”
“Oh, yes. And there’s one I want to ask you. What is your second

name? The one that begins with a D?”

“Deborah, I’m sorry to say. Why?”
“Deborah? Well, I’m damned. All right. I won’t call you by it. There’s

Miss de Vine, I see, still working.”

they could see her dark, untidy head, bent over a book.

“She interests me very much,” said Peter.
“I like her, you know.”
“So do I.”
“But I’m afraid those are her kind of hairpins.”
“I know they are,” said he. He took his hand from his pocket and held

it out. They were close under Tudor, and the light from an adjacent window
showed a melancholy, spraddle-legged hairpin lying across his palm. “She
shed this on the dais after dinner. You saw me pick it up.”

“I saw you pick up Miss Shaw’s scarf.”
“Always the gentleman. May I come up with you, or is that against the

regulations!”

“You can come up.”

undress, who looked at Peter with more curiosity than annoyance. In
Harriet’s room, they found her gown lying on the table, together with the
dossier. Peter picked up the book, examined the paper and string and the
seals which secured them, each one stamped with the crouching cat and
arrogant Wimsey motto.

“If that’s been opened, I’ll make a meal of hot sealing wax.”
He went to the window and looked out into the quad.
“Not a bad observation post—in its way. Thanks. That’s all I wanted to

look at.”

and followed her downstairs again.

They were halfway across the quad when he said suddenly:
“Harriet. Do you really prize honesty above every other thing?”
“I think I do. I hope so. Why?”
“If you don’t, I am the most blazing fool in Christendom. I am busily

engaged in sawing off my own branch. If I am honest, I shall probably lose
you altogether. If I am not—”

something; not, she thought, bodily pain or passion, but something more
fundamental.

wouldn’t be the same person, should you?”

I’m honest?”

“I know you are. I couldn’t imagine your being anything else.”
“And yet at this moment I’m trying to insure myself against the effects

of my own honesty. ‘I have tried if I could reach that great resolution, to be

honest without a thought of heaven or hell.’ It looks as though I should get
hell either way, though; so I need scarcely bother about the resolution. I
believe you mean what you say—and I hope I should do the same thing if I
didn’t believe a word of it.”

“Peter, I haven’t an idea what you’re talking about.”
“All the better. Don’t worry. I won’t behave like this another time.

‘The Duke drained a dipper of brandy-and-water and became again the
perfect English gentleman.’ Give me your hand.”

then drew her arm through his. They moved on into the New Quad, arm in
arm, in silence. As they passed the archway at the foot of the Hall stairs,
Harriet fancied she heard somebody stir in the darkness and saw the faint
glimmer of a watching face; but it was gone before she could draw Peter’s
attention to it.

Padgett unlocked the gate for them; Wimsey, stepping preoccupied

over the threshold, tossed him a heedless goodnight.

“Goodnight, Major Wimsey, sir!”
“Hullo!” Peter brought back the foot that was already in St. Cross

Road, and looked closely into the porter’s smiling face.

it! Padgett’s the name. Corporal Padgett.”

“Quite right, sir.”
“Well, well, well. I’m damned glad to see you. Looking dashed fit, too.

How are you keeping?”

over Peter’s long fingers. “I says to my wife, when I ’eard you was ’ere,
‘I’ll lay you anything you like,’ I says, ‘the Major won’t have forgotten.’”

carried away on a stretcher.”

“That’s right, sir. I ’ad the pleasure of ’elping to dig you out.”
“I know you did. I’m glad to see you now, but I was a dashed sight

gladder to see you then.”

time. I says to Hackett—remember little Hackett, sir?”

him?”

“Driving a lorry over at Reading, sir, married and three kids. I says to

Hackett, ‘Lor’ lumme!’ I says, ‘there’s old Winderpane gawn’—excuse me,
sir—and he says, “Ell! wot ruddy luck!’ So I says, ‘Don’t stand there
grizzlin’—maybe ’e ain’t gawn after all.’ So we—”

“No,” said Wimsey. “I fancy I was more frightened than hurt.

Unpleasant sensation, being buried alive.”

Boche dug-out with a big beam acrost yer, I says to Hackett, ‘Well,’ I says,
“e’s all ’ere, anyhow.’ And he says, ‘Thank gawd for Jerry!’ ’e says—
meanin’, if it ’adn’t been for that there dug-out—”

Danbury, though.”

“Yes, sir. Bad thing, that was. A nice young gentleman. Ever see

anything of Captain Sidgwick nowadays, sir?”

very fit these days, I’m sorry to say. Got a dose of gas, you know. Lungs
groggy.”

there pig—”

“Hush, Padgett. The less said about that pig, the better.”
“Yes, sir. Nice bit o’ crackling that pig ’ad on ’im. Coo!”
Padgett smacked reminiscent lips. “You ’eard wot ’appened to

Sergeant-Major Toop?”

Best sergeant-major I ever had.”

match all right. Little bit of a thing—no ’igher than that, but, lummy!”

“Go on, Padgett. You don’t say so.”
“Yes, sir. When I was workin’ in the camel ’ouse at the Zoo—”
“Good God, Padgett!”
“Yes, sir—I see them there and we passed the time o’ day. Went round

to look ’em up afterwards. Well, there! She give ’im sergeant-major all
right. Put ’im through the ’oop proper. You know the old song: Naggin’ at a
feller as is six foot three—”

By the bye, I’ll tell you who I ran into the other day—now, this will surprise
you—”

The stream of reminiscence ran remorselessly on, till Wimsey,

suddenly reminded of his manners, apologized to Harriet and plunged
hastily out, with a promise to return for another chat over old times.
Padgett, still beaming, swung the heavy gate to, and locked it.

a lot younger then, o’course—only just gazetted—but he was regular good
officer for all that—and a terror for eye-wash. And shavin’—lummy!”

lodge, appeared lost in the long ago.

gotter face your Maker, fer gawd’s sake, face ’im with a clean chin.’ Ah!
Winderpane, we called ’im, along of the eyeglass, but meanin’ no
disrespect. None on us wouldn’t ’ear a word agin ’im. Now, there was a
chap came to us from another unit—’ulkin’ foul-mouthed fellow, wot
nobody took to much—’Uggins, that was the name, ’Uggins. Well, this
bloke thinks ’e’s goin’ to be funny, see—and ’e starts callin’ the major
Little Percy, and usin’ opprobrious epithets—”

failing, repeated:

afore I got my stripes; I was jest a private then, same as ’Uggins—I says to
’im, ‘Now, that’s quite enough o’ that.’ And ’e says to me—Well, anyway,
the end of it was, we ’ad a lovely scrap, all round the ’ouses.”

“Dear me,” said Harriet.
“Yes, miss. We was in rest at the time, and next morning, when the

sergeant-major falls us in for parade—coo, lummy! we was a pair o’ family
portraits. The sergeant-major—Sergeant-Major Toop, that was, ’im wot got
married like I was sayin’—’e didn’t say nothin’—’e knew. And the
adjutant, ’e knew too, and ’e didn’t say nothin’ neither. And blest if, in the
middle of it all, we don’t see the Major comin’ strollin’ out. So the adjutant
forms us up into line, and I stands there at attention, ’oping as ’Uggins’ face
looked worse nor what mine did. ‘Mornin’,’ says the Major and the adjutant
and Sergeant-Major Toop says, ‘Morning, sir.’ So ’e starts to chat casual-
like to the sergeant-major, and I see ’is eye goin’ up and down the line.
‘Sergeant-major!’ says he, all of a sudden. ‘Sir!’ says the sergeant-major.
‘What’s that man there been doin’ to ’imself?’ says ’e, meanin’ me. ‘Sir?’
says the sergeant-major, starin’ at me like ’e was surprised to see me.

‘Looks as if he’d had a nasty accident,’ says the Major. ‘And what about
that other fellow? Don’t like to see that sort of thing. Not smart. Fall ’em
out.’ So the sergeant-major falls us both out. ‘H’m,’ says the Major, ‘I see.
What’s this man’s name?’ ‘Padgett, sir,’ says the sergeant-major. ‘Oh,’ says
he. ‘Well, Padgett, what have you been doing to get yourself into a mess
like that?’ ‘Fell over a bucket, sir,’ says I, starin’ ’ard over ’is shoulder with
the only eye I could see out of. ‘Bucket?’ says ’e, ‘very awkward things,
buckets. And this other man—I suppose he trod on the mop, eh, sergeant-
major?’ ‘Major wants to know if you trod on the mop,’ says Sergeant-Major
Toop. ‘Yessir,’ says ’Uggins, talkin’ like ’is mouth ’urt ’im. ‘Well,’ says the
Major, ‘when you’ve got this lot dismissed, give these two men a bucket
and a mop apiece and put ’em on fatigue. That’ll learn ’em to ’andle these
dangerous implements.’ ‘Yessir,’ says Sergeant-Major Toop. ‘Carry on,’
says the Major. So we carries on. ’Uggins says to me arterwards, ‘D’you
think ’e knew?’ ‘Knew?’ says I, ’course ’e knew. Ain’t much ’e don’t
know.’ Arter that, ’Uggins kep’ ’is epithets to ’isself.”

Harriet expressed due appreciation of this anecdote, which was

delivered with a great deal of gusto, and took leave of Padgett. For some
reason, this affair of a mop and a bucket seemed to have made Padgett
Peter’s slave for life. Men were very odd.

passed the West end of the Chapel, she thought she saw something dark
pass like a shadow into the Fellows’ Garden. She followed it. Her eyes were
growing accustomed to the dimness of the summer night and she could see
the figure walking swiftly up and down, up and down, and hear the rustle of
its long skirt upon the grass.

There was only one person in College who had worn a trailing frock

Garden for an hour and a half.

CHAPTER XVIII

Go tell that witty fellow, my godson, to get home. It is no season to fool it

here!

QUEEN ELIZABETH

“Lor’!” said the Dean.

She gazed with interest from the Senior Common Room window,

teacup in hand.

“What’s the matter?” inquired Miss Allison.
“Who is that incredibly beautiful young man?”
“Flaxman’s fiancé, I expect, isn’t it?”
“A beautiful young man?” said Miss Pyke. “I should like to see him.”

She moved to the window.

“Don’t be ridiculous,” said the Dean. “I know Flaxman’s Byron by

heart. This is an ash-blond in a House blazer.”

“Oh, dear me!” said Miss Pyke. “Apollo Belvedere in spotless

flannels. He appears to be unattached. Remarkable.”

Harriet put down her cup and rose from the depths of the largest

armchair.

“Perhaps he belongs to that bunch playing tennis,” hazarded Miss

Allison.

“Little Cooke’s scrubby friends? My dear!”
“Why all the excitement, anyway?” asked Miss Hillyard.
“Beautiful young men are always exciting,” said the Dean.
“That,” said Harriet, at length getting a glimpse of the wonder-youth

over Miss Pyke’s shoulder, “is Viscount Saint-George.”

“Another of your aristocratic friends?” asked Miss Barton.
“His nephew,” replied Harriet; not very coherently.
“Oh!” said Miss Barton. “Well, I don’t see why you need all gape at

him like a lot of schoolgirls.”

casually out of the farther window.

corner of the Library Wing, watching a game of tennis being played
between two bare-backed students and two young men whose shirts kept on
escaping from their belts. Growing tired of this, he sauntered past the
windows towards Queen Elizabeth, his eye roving over a group of
Shrewsburians a-sprawl under the beeches, like that of a young Sultan
inspecting a rather unpromising consignment of Circassian slaves.

“Supercilious little beast!” thought Harriet; and wondered if he was

looking for her. If he was, he could wait, or ask properly at the Lodge.

“Oho!” said the Dean. “So that’s how the milk got into the coconut!”
From the door of the Library Wing there issued slowly Miss de Vine,

and behind her, grave and deferential, Lord Peter Wimsey. They skirted the
tennis-court in earnest conversation. Lord Saint-George, viewing them from
afar, advanced to meet them. They joined forces on the path. They stood for
a little time talking. They moved away towards the Lodge.

“Dear me!” said the Dean. “Abduction of Helen de Vine by Paris and

Hector.”

nephew. I do not think he had any uncles.”

Richard III—I thought she was here.”

“She was here,” said Harriet.

postponed.”

Vine took leave of the two men and returned towards Her own room.

portent. Miss Hillyard emerged from the foot of the Hall stair, bore down
upon the uncle and nephew, addressed them, cut Lord Peter neatly off from
his convoy and towed him firmly away towards the New Quad.

your young friend? He’s been deserted again.”

an agreeable diversion for us.”

from women like you.”

“Now, where have I heard that sentiment before?” said the Dean.
“In one of the Poison-letters,” said Harriet.
“If you’re suggesting—” began Miss Barton.
“I’m only suggesting,” said the Dean, “that it’s a bit of a cliché.”
“I meant it for a joke,” retorted Miss Barton, angrily. “Some people

have no sense of humor.”

back and was sitting in the loggia leading up to the Library. He rose politely
as Miss Barton stalked past him on the way to her room, and made some
remark, to which the Fellow replied briefly, but with a smile.

“Insinuating men, these Wimseys,” said the Dean. “Vamping the

S.C.R. right and left.”

Barton she had again seen his uncle look for a moment out of his eyes.

These family resemblances were unnerving. She curled herself into the
window seat and watched for nearly ten minutes. The viscount sat still,
smoking a cigarette, and looking entirely at his ease. Miss Lydgate, Miss
Burrows and Miss Shaw came in and began to pour out tea. The tennis
party finished the set and moved away. Then, from the left, came a quick,
light step along the gravel walk.

“Hullo!” said Harriet to the owner of the step.
“Hullo!” said Peter. “Fancy seeing you here!” He grinned. “Come and

talk to Gerald. He’s in the loggia.”

admired.”

lad?”

“I never was one to interfere. I keep myself to myself.”
“Well, come now.”
Harriet got down from the window seat and joined Wimsey outside.
“I brought him here,” said Peter, “to see if he could make any

identifications. But he doesn’t seem able to.”

Lord Saint-George greeted Harriet enthusiastically.
“There was another female went past me,” he said, turning to Peter.

“Grey hair badly bobbed. Earnest manner. Dressed in sack cloth.
Institutional touch about her. I got speech of her.”

“Miss Barton,” said Harriet.
“Right sort of eyes; wrong sort of voice. I don’t think it’s her. It might

be the one that collared you, Uncle. She had a kind of a lean and hungry
look.”

“H’m!” said Peter. “How about the first one?”
“I’d like to see her without her glasses.”

see very far without them.”

“That’s a point,” said Peter, thoughtfully.
“I’m sorry to be so vague and all that,” said Lord Saint-George. “But

it’s not easy to identify a hoarse whisper and a pair of eyes seen once by
moonlight.”

“No,” said Peter, “it needs a good deal of practice.”
“Practice be blowed,” retorted his nephew. “I’m not going to make a

practice of it.”

“It’s not a bad sport,” said Peter. “You might take it up till you can start

games again.”

“How’s the shoulder getting on?” inquired Harriet.
“Oh, not too bad, thanks. The massage bloke is working wonders with

it. I can lift the old arm shoulder high now. It’s quite serviceable—for some
things.”

shoulders, and kissed her rapidly and expertly before she could dodge him.

you are.”

nephew. Isn’t that right, Aunt Harriet?”

“Not bang underneath the windows of the S.C.R.,” said Harriet.
“Come round the corner, then,” said the viscount, impenitently, “and

I’ll do it again. As Uncle Peter says, these things need a good deal of
practice.”

He was impudently set upon tormenting his uncle, and Harriet felt

extremely angry with him. However, to show annoyance was to play into

his hands. She smiled upon him pityingly and uttered the Brasenose porter’s
classic rebuke:

down tonight.”

said:

“Have you any commissions in Town?”
“Why, are you going back?”
“I’m running up tonight and on to York in the morning. I expect to get

back on Thursday.”

“York?”
“Yes; I want to see a man there—about a dog, and all that.”
“Oh, I see. Well—if it wouldn’t be out of your way to call at my flat,

you might take up a few chapters of manuscript to my secretary. I’d rather
trust you than the post. Could you manage it?”

“With very great pleasure,” said Wimsey, formally.
She ran up to her room to get the papers, and from the window

observed that the Wimsey family was having the matter out with itself.
When she came down with the parcel, she found the nephew waiting at the
door of Tudor, rather red in the face.

“Please, I am to apologize.”
“I should think so,” said Harriet, severely. “I can’t be disgraced like

this in my own quad. Frankly, I can’t afford it.”

me. Honestly, I wasn’t thinking of anything except getting Uncle Peter’s
goat. And if it’s any satisfaction to you,” he added, ruefully, “I got it.”

“Well, be decent to him; he’s very decent to you.”

they proceeded amicably together till Peter rejoined them at the Lodge.

to start up the car.

does it matter? He only wanted to tease you.”

“It’s a pity he can’t find some other way to do it. I seem to be a perfect

millstone tied round your neck, and the sooner I clear out the better.”

“Oh, for goodness’ sake!” said Harriet, irritated. “If you’re going to be

morbid about it, it certainly would be better for you if you did clear out. I’ve
told you so before.”

tiddley-hi-ti, pom, pom” on the horn.

“Damn and blast!” said Peter. He took gate and path at a bound,

pushed his nephew angrily out of the driving seat, jerked the door of the
Daimler to noisily and shot off up the road with a bellowing roar. Harriet,
finding herself unexpectedly possessed of a magnificent fit of bad temper,
went back, determined to extract the last ounce of enjoyment out of it; an
exercise in which she was greatly helped by the discovery that the little
episode on the loggia had greatly intrigued the Senior Common Room, and
by learning from Miss Allison, after Hall, that Miss Hillyard, when she
heard of it, had made some very unpleasant observations, which it was only
right that Miss Vane should know about.

Oh, God! thought Harriet, alone in her room, what have I done, more

than thousands of other people, except have the rotten luck to be tried for
my life and have the whole miserable business dragged out into daylight?
…Anybody would think I’d been punished enough …But nobody can
forget it for a moment …I can’t forget it …Peter can’t forget it …If Peter

wasn’t a fool he’d chuck it …He must see how hopeless it all is …Does he
think I like to see him suffering vicarious agonies? …Does he really
suppose I could ever marry him for the pleasure of seeing him suffer
agonies? …Can’t he see that the only thing for me to do is to keep out of it
all? …What the devil possessed me to bring him to Oxford? .…Yes—and I
thought it would be so nice to retire to Oxford … to have “unpleasant
observations” made about me by Miss Hillyard, who’s half potty if you ask
me …Somebody’s potty, anyhow … that seems to be what happens to one
if one keeps out of the way of love and marriage and all the rest of the
muddle …Well if Peter fancies I’m going to “accept the protection of his
name” and be grateful, he’s damn well mistaken …A nice, miserable
business that’d be for him …It’s a nice, miserable business for him, too, if
he really wants me—if he does—and can’t have what he wants because I
had the rotten luck to be tried for a murder I didn’t do …It looks as if he
was going to get hell either way …Well, let him get hell, it’s his lookout …
It’s a pity he saved me from being hanged—he probably wishes by now
he’d left me alone …I suppose any decently grateful person would give him
what he wants …But it wouldn’t be much gratitude to make him miserable
…We should both be perfectly miserable, because neither of us could ever
forget …I very nearly did forget the other day on the river …And I had
forgotten this afternoon, only he remembered it first …Damn that impudent
little beast! how horribly cruel the young can be to the middle-aged! … I
wasn’t frightfully kind myself …And I did know what I was doing …It’s a
good thing Peter’s gone … but I wish he hadn’t gone and left me in this
ghastly place where people go off their heads and write horrible letters
…“When I am from him I am dead till I be with him.” …No, it won’t do to
feel like that …I won’t get mixed up with that kind of thing again …I’ll
stay out of it …I’ll stay here … where people go queer in their heads …Oh,

God, what have I done, that I should be such a misery to myself and other
people? Nothing more than thousands of women …

Round and round, like a squirrel in a cage, till at last Harriet had to say

firmly to herself: This won’t do, or I shall go potty myself. I’d better keep
my mind on the job. What’s taken Peter to York? Miss de Vine? If I hadn’t
lost my temper I might have found out, instead of wasting time in
quarreling. I wonder if he’s made any notes on the dossier.

and string and sealed all over with the Wimsey crest. “As my Whimsy takes
me”—Peter’s whimsies had taken him into a certain amount of trouble. She
broke the seals impatiently; but the result was disappointing. He had
marked nothing—presumably he had copied out anything he wanted. She
turned the pages, trying to piece some sort of solution together, but too tired
to think coherently. And then—yes; here was his writing, sure enough, but
not on a page of the dossier. This was the unfinished sonnet—and of all the
idiotic things to do, to leave half-finished sonnets mixed up with one’s
detective work for other people to see! A schoolgirl trick, enough to make
anybody blush. Particularly since, from what she remembered of the sonnet,
its sentiments had become remarkably inappropriate to the state of her
feelings.

But here it was: and in the interval it had taken to itself a sestet and

stood, looking a little unbalanced, with her own sprawling hand above and
Peter’s deceptively neat script below, like a large top on a small spindle.

Here then at home, by no more storms distrest,

Folding laborious hands we sit, wings furled;
Here in close perfume lies the rose-leaf curled,

Here the sun stands and knows not east nor west,
Here no tide runs; we have come, last and best,

From the wide zone in dizzying circles hurled
To that still center where the spinning world

Sleeps on its axis, to the heart of rest.

Lay on thy whips, O Love, that we upright,

Poised on the perilous point, in no lax bed

May sleep, as tension at the verberant core

Of music sleeps; for, if thou spare to smite,

Staggering, we stoop, stooping, fall dumb and dead,

And, dying so, sleep our sweet sleep no more.

Having achieved this, the poet appeared to have lost countenance; for

he had added the comment:

“A very conceited, metaphysical conclusion!”

So. So there was the turn she had vainly sought for the sestet! Her

beautiful, big, peaceful humming-top turned to a whip-top, and sleeping, as
it were, upon compulsion. (And, damn him! how dared he pick up her word
“sleep” and use it four times in as many lines, and each time in a different
foot, as though juggling with the accent-shift were child’s play? And drag
out the last halfline with those great, heavy, drugged, drowsy
monosyllables, contradicting the sense so as to deny their own
contradiction? It was not one of the world’s great sestets, but it was
considerably better than her own octave: which was monstrous of it.)

But if she wanted an answer to her questions about Peter, there it was,

quite appallingly plain. He did not want to forget, or to be quiet, or to be
spared things, or to stay put. All he wanted was some kind of central
stability, and he was apparently ready to take anything that came along, so
long as it stimulated him to keep that precarious balance. And of course, if

he really felt like that, everything he had ever said or done, as far as she was
concerned, was perfectly consistent. “Mine is only a balance of opposing
forces.” … “What does it matter if it hurts like hell, so long as it makes a
good book?” … “What is the use of making mistakes if you don’t make use
of them?” … “Feeling like Judas is part of the job.” … “The first thing a
principle does is to kill somebody.” …If that was his attitude, it was clearly
ridiculous to urge him, in kindly tones, to stand aside for fear he might get a
rap over the shins.

for twenty years, and it doesn’t work.” He no longer believed that the
Ethiopian could change his skin to rhinoceros hide. Even in the five years
or so that she had known him, Harriet had seen him strip off his protections,
layer by layer, till there was uncommonly little left but the naked truth.

herself and probably also to him, she had the power to force him outside his
defenses. Perhaps, seeing her struggling in a trap of circumstance, he had
walked out deliberately to her assistance. Or perhaps the sight of her
struggles had warned him what might happen to him, if he remained in a
trap of his own making.

barriers of the mind, provided—yes, he was consistent after all—provided
she would make her own way of escape through her work. He was, in fact,
offering her the choice between himself and Wilfrid. He did recognize that
she had an outlet which he had not.

his own part in the comedy. His own needs were (as he saw the matter)
getting between her and her legitimate way of escape. They involved her in
difficulties which he could not share, because she had consistently refused

him the right to share them. He had nothing of his nephew’s cheerful
readiness to take and have. Careless, selfish little beast, thought Harriet
(meaning the viscount), can’t he leave his uncle alone?

simply and humanly jealous of his nephew—not, of course, of his relations
with Harriet (which would be disgusting and ridiculous), but of the careless
young egotism which made those relations possible.

And, after all, Peter had been right. It was difficult to account for Lord

Saint-George’s impertinence without allowing people to assume that she
was on terms with Peter which would explain that kind of thing. It had
undoubtedly made an awkwardness. It was easy to say, “Oh, yes. I knew
him slightly and went to see him when he was laid up after a motor
accident.” She did not really very much mind if Miss Hillyard supposed that
with a person of her dubious reputation all and any liberties might be taken.
But she did mind the corollary that might be drawn about Peter. That after
five years’ patient friendship he should have acquired only the right to look
on while his nephew romped in public went near to making him look a fool.
But anything else would not be true. She had placed him in exactly that
imbecile position, and she admitted that that was not very pretty conduct.

She went to bed thinking more about another person than about

herself. This goes to prove that even minor poetry may have its practical
uses.

On the following night, a strange and sinister thing happened.
Harriet had gone, by appointment, to dine with her Somerville friend,

and to meet a distinguished writer on the mid-Victorian period, from whom
she expected to gain some useful information about Lefanu. She was sitting
in the friend’s room, where about half a dozen people were gathered to do
honor to the distinguished writer, when the telephone rang.

“Oh, Miss Vane,” said her hostess. “Somebody wants you from

Shrewsbury.”

the small lobby in which the telephone was placed. A voice which she
could not quite recognize answered her “Hullo!”

“Is that Miss Vane?”
“Yes—who’s that speaking?”
“This is Shrewsbury College. Could you please come round quickly.

There’s been another disturbance.”

“Good heavens! What’s happened? Who is speaking, please?”
“I’m speaking for the Warden. Could you please—?”
“Is that Miss Parsons?”
“No, miss. This is Dr. Baring’s maid.”
“But what has happened?”
“I don’t know, miss. The Warden said I was to ask you to come at

once.”

“Very well. I’ll be there in about ten or fifteen minutes. I haven’t got

the car. I’ll be there about eleven.”

“Very good, miss. Thank you.”
The connection was severed. Harriet hurriedly got hold of her friend,

explained that she had been called away suddenly, said her good-byes and
hurried out.

She had crossed the Garden Quad and was just passing between the

Old Hall and the Maitland Buildings, when she was visited with an absurd
recollection. She remembered Peter’s saying to her one day:

voice rings them up and says it is Scotland Yard, they never think of ringing
back to verify the call. Hence the prevalence of kidnapping.”

could get a call from there. She went in; tried it; found that it was through to
the Exchange; dialed the Shrewsbury number, and on getting it asked to be
put through to the Warden’s Lodgings.

before.

“Is that Dr. Baring’s maid?”
“Yes, madam. Who is speaking, please?”
(“Madam”—the Other voice had said “miss.” Harriet knew now why

she had felt vaguely uneasy about the call. She had subconsciously
remembered that the Warden’s maid said “Madam.”)

rang me up just now?”

“No, madam.”
“Somebody rang me up, speaking for the Warden. Was it Cook, or

anybody else in the house?”

“I don’t think anybody has telephoned from here, madam.”
(Some mistake. Perhaps the Warden had sent her message from

somewhere in College and she had misunderstood the speaker or the
speaker her.)

“Could I speak to the Warden?”
“The Warden isn’t in College, madam. She went out to the theater with

Miss Martin. I’m expecting them back any minute.”

“Oh, thank you. Never mind. There must have been some mistake.

Would you please put me back to the Lodge?”

When she heard Padgett’s voice again she asked for Miss Edwards,

and while the connection was being made, she thought fast.

Heaven’s name? What would have happened if she had gone back to
Shrewsbury straight away? Since she had not the car with her, she would
have gone in by the private gate, past the thick bushes by the Fellows’
Garden—the Fellows’ Garden, where people walked by night—

“Miss Edwards isn’t in her room, Miss Vane.”
“Oh! The scouts are all in bed, I suppose.”
“Yes, miss. Shall I ask Mrs. Padgett to see if she can find her?”
“No—see if you can get Miss Lydgate.”
Another pause. Was Miss Lydgate also out of her room? Was every

reliable don in College out, or out of her room? Yes—Miss Lydgate was
out, too; and then it occurred to Harriet that, of course, they were dutifully
patrolling the College before turning in to bed. However, there was Padgett.
She explained matters as well as she could to him.

Mrs. Padgett on the Lodge. I’ll get down to the private gate and have a look
round. Don’t you worry, miss. If there’s anybody a-laying in wait for you,
miss, I’m sorry for ’em, that’s all. No, miss, there ain’t been no disturbance
tonight as I knows on; but if I catches anybody a-laying in wait, miss, then
the disturbance will proceed according to schedule, miss, trust me.”

see if there’s anybody hanging round—but don’t let them see you. If
anybody attacks me when I come in, you can come to the rescue; but if not,
keep out of sight.”

“Very good, miss.”
Harriet hung up again and stepped out of the call box. A center light

burned dimly in the entrance hall. She looked at the clock. Seven minutes to
eleven. She would be late. However, the assailant, if there was one, would

wait for her. She knew where the trap would be—must be. Nobody would
start a riot just outside the Infirmary or the Warden’s Lodgings, where
people might overhear and come out. Nor would anyone hide under or
behind the walls on that side of the path. The only reasonable lurking place
was the bushes in the Fellows’ Garden, near the gate, on the right side of
the path as you went up.

be somewhere at hand; but there would be a nasty moment when one had to
turn one’s back and lock the private gate from the inside. Harriet thought of
the bread knife in the dummy, and shuddered.

people weren’t quite sane—Peter would have something to say about it.
Perhaps it would be only decent to apologize beforehand, in case. She
found somebody’s notebook astray on a window seat, borrowed a sheet of
it, scribbled half a dozen words with the pencil from her bag, folded the
note, addressed it and put it away with the pencil. If anything happened, it
would be found.

the quickest way: by St. Giles’ Church, Blackhall Road, Museum Road,
South Parks Road, Mansfield Road, walking briskly, almost running. When
she turned into Jowett Walk, she slowed down. She wanted her breath and
her wits.

out her key. Her heart was thumping.

car drew up behind her; the Dean deposited the Warden and drove on round
to the tradesmen’s entrance to garage her Austin, and Dr. Baring said
pleasantly:

you have an interesting evening? The Dean and I have been indulging in a
little dissipation. We suddenly made up our minds after dinner …”

about the play she had seen. Harriet left her at her own gate, refusing an
invitation to come in and have coffee and sandwiches. Had she, or had she
not, heard something stir behind the bushes? At any rate, the opportunity
was by now lost. She had offered herself as the cheese, but, owing to the
slight delay in setting the trap, the Warden had innocently sprung it.

looked round. The garden was empty. She suddenly felt a complete fool.
Yet, when all was said and done, there must have been some reason for that
telephone call.

She made her way towards the St. Cross Lodge. In the New Quad she

met Padgett.

His right hand moved at his side and Harriet fancied it held something
suspiciously like a cosh. “Sittin’ on the bench be’ind them laurels near the
gate. I crep’ along careful, like it was a night reconnaissance, miss, and ’id
be’ind them center shrubs. She didn’t tumble to me, miss. But when you an’
Dr. Baring come through the gate a-talking, she was up and orf like a shot.”

“Who was it, Padgett?”
“Well, miss, not to put too fine a point upon it, miss, it was Miss

’Illyard. She come out at the top end of the Garden, miss, and away to her
own rooms. I follered ’er and see ’er go up. Going very quick, she was. I
stepped out o’ the gate, and I see the light go up in her window.”

Fellows’ Garden at night. Perhaps the person who sent the telephone call
saw her there and went away again.”

“Yes, miss. It’s a funny thing about that there telephone call. It didn’t

come through the Lodge, miss.”

“Perhaps one of the other instruments was through to the Exchange.”
“No, they wasn’t, miss. I ’ad a look to see. Afore I goes to bed at 11

o’clock, I puts the Warden, the Dean, and the Infirmary and the public box
through, miss, for the night. But they wasn’t through at 10:40, miss, that I’ll
swear.”

“Then the call must have come from outside.”
“Yes, miss. Miss ’Illyard come in at 10:50, miss, jest afore you rang

up.”

“Did she? Are you sure?”
“I remember quite well, miss, because of Annie passing a remark

about her. There’s no love lost between her and Annie,” added Padgett, with
a chuckle. “Faults o’ both sides, that’s what I say, miss, and a ’asty temper
—”

“What was Annie doing in the Lodge at that hour?”
“Jest come in from her half-day out, miss. She set in the Lodge a bit

with Mrs. Padgett.”

Padgett? She doesn’t like Miss Hillyard, and if you ask me, I think she’s a
mischief maker.”

could ’ave ’eard me on the ’phone, because, after I couldn’t find Miss
Lydgate and Miss Edwards and you begins to tell me, I shuts the door
between me an’ the settin’ room. Then “I jest puts me ’ead in afterwards
and says to Mrs. Padgett, ‘Look after the gate, would you?’ I says, ‘I jest

got to step over and give Mullins a message.’ So this here remains wot I
might call confidential between you an’ me, miss.”

imagining something quite absurd. The ’phone call was certainly a hoax,
but there’s no proof that anybody meant mischief. Did anybody else come
in between 10:40 and 11?”

if you like to step into the Lodge now—”

“Better not. No—give me the list in the morning.”
Harriet went away and found Miss Edwards, of whose discretion and

common sense she had a high opinion, and told her the story of the ’phone
call.

might have been intended to prove an alibi, though I don’t quite see how.
Otherwise, why try to get me back at eleven? I mean, if the disturbance was
due to start then, and I was brought there as a witness, the person might
have wangled something so as to appear to be elsewhere at the time. But
why was it necessary to have me as a witness?”

hadn’t? And why wouldn’t you do as a witness when you had the Warden
with you?”

“Of course,” said Harriet, “the idea might have been to make a

disturbance and bring me on to the scene in time to be suspected of having
done it myself.”

“That would be silly; everybody knows you can’t be the Poltergeist.”
“Well, then, we come back to my first idea. I was to be attacked. But

why couldn’t I be attacked at midnight or any other time? Why bring me
back at eleven?”

alibi was being established?”

from Somerville to Shrewsbury. Unless you are thinking of a bomb or
something that would go off when the gate was opened. But that would
work equally well at any time.”

“But if the alibi was fixed for eleven—”
“Then why didn’t the bomb go off? As a matter of fact, I simply can’t

believe in a bomb at all.”

“Nor can I—not really,” said Miss Edwards. “We’re just being

theoretical. I suppose Padgett saw nothing suspicious?”

“Only Miss Hillyard,” replied Harriet, lightly, “sitting in the Fellows’

Garden.”

“Oh!”
“She does go there sometimes at night; I’ve seen her. Perhaps she

frightened away—whatever it was.”

to have overcome her prejudices in a remarkable manner. I don’t mean the
one who saluted you in the quad—the one who came to dinner.”

Harriet, smiling. “I think it was only a matter of introductions to some man
in Italy who owns a library.”

her own back was turned, a good deal of chaff must have been flying about
the History Tutor’s ears. “Well,” Miss Edwards went on, “I promised him a
paper on blood groups, but he hasn’t started to badger me for it yet. He’s an
interesting man, isn’t he?”

“To the biologist?”

animal. Shockingly overbred, but full of nervous intelligence. But I didn’t
mean that.”

“To the woman, then?”
Miss Edwards turned a candid eye on Harriet.
“To many women, I should imagine.”
Harriet met the eye with a level gaze.
“I have no information on that point.”
“Ah!” said Miss Edwards. “In your novels, you deal more in material

facts than in psychology, don’t you?”

Harriet readily admitted that this was so.
“Well, never mind,” said Miss Edwards; and said goodnight rather

brusquely.

never yet occurred to her to wonder what other women made of Peter, or he
of them. This must argue either very great confidence or very great
indifference on her own part; for, when one came to think of it, eligibility
was his middle name.

destroyed it without rereading it. Even the thought of it made her blush.
Heroics that don’t come off are the very essence of burlesque.

Thursday was chiefly remarkable for a violent, prolonged and wholly

inexplicable row between Miss Hillyard and Miss Chilperic, in the Fellows’
Garden after Hall. How it started or what it was about, nobody could
afterwards remember. Somebody had disarranged a pile of books and
papers on one of the Library tables, with the result that a History Schools
candidate had arrived for a coaching with a tale of a set of notes mislaid or
missing. Miss Hillyard, whose temper had been exceedingly short all day,

was moved to take the matter personally and, after glowering all through
dinner, burst out—as soon as the Warden had gone—into a storm of
indignation against the world in general.

“Why my pupils should always be the ones to suffer from other

people’s carelessness, I don’t know,” said Miss Hill-yard.

else. Miss Hillyard angrily adduced instances extending over the past three
terms of History students whose work had been interfered with by what
looked like deliberate persecution.

the College and certainly not the least important—”

there happened to be more candidates for the English School than any other.

couple more this year—I dare say there may—though why we should need
an extra English tutor to cope with them, when I have to grapple single-
handed—”

It was at that point that the origin of the quarrel became lost in a fog of

personalities, in the course of which Miss Chilperic was accused of
insolence, arrogance, inattention to her work, general incompetence and a
desire to attract notice to herself. The extreme wildness of these charges left
poor Miss Chilperic quite bewildered. Indeed, nobody seemed to be able to
make anything of it, except, perhaps, Miss Edwards, who sat with a grim
smile knitting herself a silk jumper. At length the attack extended itself
from Miss Chilperic to Miss Chilperic’s fiancé, whose scholarship was
submitted to scathing criticism.

Miss Chilperic rose up, trembling.

not mind what you say about me, but I cannot sit here while you insult
Jacob Peppercorn.” She stumbled a little over the syllables of this
unfortunate name, and Miss Hillyard laughed unkindly. “Mr. Peppercorn is
a very fine scholar,” pursued Miss Chilperic, with rising anger as of an
exasperated lamb, “and I insist that—”

should make do with him.”

“I don’t know what you mean,” cried Miss Chilperic.
“Perhaps Miss Vane could tell you,” retorted Miss Hillyard, and

walked away without another word.

is she talking about?”

“I haven’t the least idea,” said Harriet.
“I don’t know, but I can guess,” said Miss Edwards. “If people will

bring dynamite into a powder factory, they must expect explosions.” While
Harriet was rooting about in the back of her mind for some association that
these words called up, Miss Edwards went on:

the next few days, there’ll be murder done. If we’re like this now; what’s
going to happen to us at the end of term? You ought to have had the police
in from the start, and if I’d been here, I’d have said so. I’d like to deal with
a good, stupid sergeant of police for a change.”

stare at one another.

CHAPTER XIX

O well-knit Samson! Strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee in my rapier, as

much as thou didst excel me in carrying gates. I am in love, too.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

Harriet had been only too right about Wilfrid. She had spent portions of
four days in altering and humanizing Wilfrid, and today, after a distressful
morning with him, had reached the dismal conclusion that she would have
to rewrite the whole thing from the beginning. Wilfrid’s tormented
humanity stood out now against the competent vacuity of the other
characters like a wound. Moreover, with the reduction of Wilfrid’s motives
to what was psychologically credible, a large lump of the plot had fallen
out, leaving a gap through which one could catch glimpses of new and
exciting jungles of intrigue. She stood aimlessly staring into the window of
the antique shop. Wilfrid was becoming like one of those coveted ivory
chessmen. You probed into his interior and discovered an intricate and
delicate carved sphere of sensibilities, and, as you turned it in your fingers,
you found another inside that, and within that, another again.

Behind the table where the chessmen stood was a Jacobean dresser in

black oak, and, as she stood at gaze, a set of features limned themselves
pallidly against the dark background, like Pepper’s ghost.

“What is it?” asked Peter over her shoulder; “Toby jugs or pewter pots

or the dubious chest with Brummagem handles?”

“The chessmen,” said Harriet. “I have fallen a victim to them. I don’t

know why. I have no possible use for them. It’s just one of those
bewitchments.”

by our eyes.’ To be possessed is an admirable reason for possessing.”

“What would they want for them, I wonder?”
“If they’re complete and genuine, anything from forty to eighty

pounds.”

“Too much. When did you get back?”
“Just before lunch. I was on my way to see you. Were you going

anywhere in particular?”

“No—just wandering. Have you found out anything useful?”
“I have been scouring England for a man called Arthur Robinson.

Does the name mean anything to you?”

“Nothing whatever.”
“Nor to me. I approached it with a refreshing absence of prejudice.

Have there been any developments in College?”

don’t quite understand it.”

“Will you come for a run and tell me about it? I’ve got the car, and it’s

a fine afternoon.”

Harriet looked round, and saw the Daimler parked by the curb.
“I’d love to.”
“We’ll dawdle along the lanes and have tea somewhere,” he added,

conventionally, as he handed her in.

“How original of you, Peter!”
“Isn’t it?” They moved decorously down the crowded High Street.

“There’s something hypnotic about the word tea. I am asking you to enjoy
the beauties of the English countryside, to tell me your adventures and hear
mine, to plan a campaign involving the comfort and reputation of two
hundred people, to honor me with your sole presence and bestow upon me

the illusion of Paradise—and I speak as though the preeminent object of all
desire were a pot of boiled water and a plateful of synthetic pastries in Ye
Olde Worlde Tudor Tea-Shoppe.”

can get bread-and-cheese and beer in the village pub.”

“Now you have said something.

The crystal springs, whose taste illuminates
Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
Like tried silver, run through Paradise
To entertain divine Zenocrate.”

Harriet could find no adequate reply to this, but sat watching his hands

as they lay lightly on the driving wheel. The car passed on through Long
Marston out to Marston and Elsfield. Presently he turned it into a side road
and thence into a lane and there drew up.

“There comes a moment when one must cease voyaging through

strange seas of thought alone. Will you speak first, or shall I?”

“Who is Arthur Robinson?”
“Arthur Robinson is the gentleman who behaved so strangely in the

matter of a thesis. He was an M.A. of York University, held various
tutorships from time to time in various seats of learning, applied for the
Chair of Modern History at York, and there came up against the formidable
memory and detective ability of your Miss de Vine, who was then Head of
Flamborough College and on the examining body. He was a fair, handsome
man, aged about thirty-five at the time, very agreeable and popular, though
hampered a little in his social career by having in a weak moment married
his landlady’s daughter. After the unfortunate episode of the thesis, he
disappeared from academic circles, and was no more heard of. At the time

of his disappearance he had one female child of two years of age and
another expected. I managed to hunt up a former friend of his, who said that
he had heard nothing of Robinson since the disaster, but fancied that he had
gone abroad and changed his name. He referred me to a man called
Simpson, living in Nottingham. I pursued Simpson, and found that he had,
in the most inconvenient way, died last year. I returned to London and
dispatched sundry members of Miss Climpson’s Bureau in search of other
friends and colleagues of Mr. Arthur Robinson, and also to Somerset House
to hunt through the Marriage and Birth Registers. That is all I have to show
for two days of intensive activity—except that I honorably delivered your
manuscript to your secretary.”

“Thank you very much. Arthur Robinson. Do you think he can

possibly have anything to do with it?”

“Well, it’s rather a far cry. But it’s a fact that until Miss de Vine came

here there were no disturbances, and the only thing she has ever mentioned
that might suggest a personal enmity is the story of Arthur Robinson. It
seemed just worth while following up.”

Arthur Robinson in disguise, because I’ve known her for ten years.”

“Why Miss Hillyard? What’s she been doing?”
“Nothing susceptible of proof.”
“Tell me.”
Harriet told him the story of the telephone call, to which he listened

with a grave face.

“Was I making a mountain out of a mole hill?”
“I think not. I think our friend has realized that you are a danger and is

minded to tackle you first. Unless it is a quite separate feud—which is just
possible. On the whole it’s as well that you thought of ringing back.”

remarks about the thriller-heroine and the bogus message from Scotland
Yard.”

“Hadn’t you? …Harriet, will you let me show you how to meet an

attack if it ever does come?”

know. I think I could cope with most things, except a stab in the back. That
was what I rather expected.”

“I doubt if it will be that,” said he, coolly. “It makes a mess and leaves

a messy weapon to be disposed of. Strangling is cleaner and quicker and
makes no noise to speak of.”

“Yeough!”
“You have a nice throat for it,” pursued his lordship, thoughtfully. “It

has a kind of arum-lily quality that is in itself a temptation to violence. I do
not want to be run in by the local bobby for assault; but if you will kindly
step aside with me into this convenient field, it will give me great pleasure
to strangle you scientifically in several positions.”

“You’re a gruesome companion for a day’s outing:”
“I’m quite serious.” He had got out of the car and was holding the door

open for her. “Come, Harriet. I am very civilly pretending that I don’t care
what dangers you run. You don’t want me to howl at your feet, do you?”

following him nevertheless to the nearest gate. “I don’t like it.”

reasonably free from thistles and cow pats, and there is a high hedge to
screen us from the road.”

“And it is soft to fall on and has a pond to throw the corpse into if you

get carried away by your enthusiasm. Very well. I have said my prayers.”

on your purse, your virtue and your life.”

The next few minutes were rather breathless.
“Don’t thrash about,” said Peter, mildly. “You’ll only exhaust yourself.

Use my weight to upset me with. I’m putting it entirely at your disposal, and
I can’t throw it about in two directions at once. If you let my vaulting
ambition overleap itself, I shall fall on the other side with the beautiful
precision of Newton’s apple.”

“I don’t get that.”
“Try throttling me for a change, and I’ll show you.”
“Did I say this field was soft?” said Harriet, when her feet had been

ignominiously hooked from under her. She rubbed herself resentfully. “Just
let me do it to you, that’s all.”

off his balance, so that he only saved himself from sprawling by a
complicated twist suggestive of an eel on a hook.

removal of the thug who leaps from in front, the thug who dives in from
behind, and the more sophisticated thug who starts operations with a silk
scarf. “You’ll feel tomorrow as if you’d been playing football.”

“I think I shall have a sore throat.”
“I’m sorry. Did I let my animal nature get the better of me? That’s the

worst of these rough sports.”

care to meet you in a narrow lane on a dark night, and I only hope the
Poison-Pen hasn’t been making a study of the subject. Peter, you don’t
seriously think—”

been knocking you about for the fun of it.”

“I believe you. No gentleman could throttle a lady more impersonally.”
“Thank you for the testimonial. Cigarette?”
Harriet took the cigarette, which she felt she had deserved, and sat

with her hands about her knees, mentally turning the incidents of the last
hour into a scene in a book (as is the novelist’s unpleasant habit) and
thinking how, with a little vulgarity on both sides, it could be worked up
into a nice piece of exhibitionism for the male and provocation for the
female concerned. With a little manipulation it might come in for the
chapter where the wart Everard was due to seduce the glamorous but
neglected wife, Sheila. He could lock her to him, knee to knee and breast to
breast in an unbreakable grip and smile challengingly into her flushed face;
and Sheila could go all limp—at which point Everard could either rain
fierce kisses on her mouth, or say, “My God! don’t tempt me!” which
would come to exactly the same thing in the end. “It would suit them very
well,” thought Harriet, “the cheap skates!” and passed an exploring finger
under the angle of her jaw, where the pressure of a relentless thumb had left
its memory.

“Cheer up,” said Peter. “It’ll wear off.”
“Do you propose to give Miss de Vine lessons in self defense?”
“I’m rather bothered about her. She’s got a groggy heart, hasn’t she?”
“She’s supposed to have. She wouldn’t climb Magdalen Tower.”
“And presumably she wouldn’t rush round College and steal fuses or

climb in and out of windows. In which case the hairpins would be a plant.
Which brings us back to the Robinson theory. But it’s easy to pretend your
heart is worse than it is. Ever seen her have a heart attack?”

“Now you mention it, I have not.”

opportunity to tell a story, and she told it. Next day, I went to see her and
asked for the name. She made a good show of reluctance, but she gave it.
It’s easy to throw suspicion on people who owe you a grudge, and that
without telling any lies. If I wanted you to believe that somebody was
having a smack at me, I could give you a list of enemies as long as my
arm.”

“I suppose so. Do they ever try to do you in?”
“Not very often. Occasionally they send silly things by post. Shaving

cream full of nasty bugs and so on. And there was a gentleman with a pill
calculated to cure lassitude and debility. I had a long correspondence with
him, all in plain envelopes. The beauty of his system was that he made you
pay for the pill, which still seems to me a very fine touch. In fact, he took
me in completely; he only made the one trifling miscalculation of supposing
that I wanted the pill—and I can’t really blame him for that, because the list
of symptoms I produced for him would have led anybody to suppose I
needed the whole pharmacopoeia. However, he sent me a week’s supply—
seven pills—at shocking expense; so I virtuously toddled round with them
to my friend at the Home Office who deals with charlatans and immoral
advertisements and so on, and he was inquisitive enough to analyze them.
‘H’m,’ said he, ‘six of ’em would neither make nor mar you; but the other
would cure lassitude all right.’ So I naturally asked what was in it.
‘Strychnine,’ said he. ‘Full lethal dose. If you want to go rolling round the
room like a hoop with your head touching your heels, I’ll guarantee the
result.’ So we went Out to look for the gentleman.”

“Did you find him?”
“Oh, yes. Dear old friend of mine. Had him in the dock before on a

cocaine charge. We put him in jug—and I’m dashed if, when he came out,

he didn’t try to blackmail me on the strength of the pill correspondence. I
never met a scoundrel I liked better …Would you care for a little more
healthy exercise, or shall we take the road again?”

sight of a leather-and-harness shop, and pulled up suddenly.

get you one. The kind with brass knobs.”

“A dog collar? Whatever for? As a badge of ownership?”
“God forbid. To guard against the bites of sharks. Excellent also

against thugs and throat slitters.”

“My dear man!”
“Honestly. It’s too stiff to squeeze and it’ll turn the edge of a blade—

and even if anybody hangs you by it, it won’t choke you as a rope would.”

“I can’t go about in a dog collar.”
“Well, not in the daytime. But it would give confidence when

patrolling at night. And you could sleep in it with a little practice. You
needn’t bother to come in—I’ve had my hands round your neck often
enough to guess the size.”

He vanished into the shop and was seen through the window

conferring with the proprietor. Presently he came out with a parcel and took
the wheel again.

bitch. Extremely plucky animal, but reckless and obstinate fighter.
Personally, he said, he preferred greyhounds. He told me where I could get
my name and address put on the collar, but I said that could wait. Now
we’re out of the town, you can try it on.”

(with, Harriet fancied, a touch of self satisfaction), to buckle the heavy

strap. It was a massive kind of necklace and quite surprisingly
uncomfortable. Harriet fished in her bag for a hand mirror and surveyed the
effect.

shouldn’t set a new fashion.”

“I do,” said Harriet. “Do you mind taking it off again.”
“Will you wear it?”
“Suppose somebody grabs at it from behind.”
“Let go and fall back on them—heavily. You’ll fall soft, and with luck

they’ll crack their skull open.”

take it off now.”

“That’s a promise,” said he, and released her. “That collar,” he added,

wrapping it up again and laying it on her knee, “deserves to be put in a glass
case.”

“Why?”
“It’s the only thing you’ve ever let me give you.”
“Except my life—except my life—except my life.”
“Damn!” said Peter, and stared out angrily over the windscreen. “It

must have been a pretty bitter gift, if you can’t let either of us forget it.”

give me something if you want to.”

“May I? What shall I give you? Roc’s eggs are cheap today.”
For a moment her mind was a blank. Whatever she asked him for, it

must be something adequate. The trivial, the commonplace or the merely
expensive would all be equally insulting. And he would know in a moment
if she was inventing a want to please him …

“Peter—give me the ivory chessmen.”

snubbed with a request for something costing seven-and-sixpence.

“My dear—of course! Would you like them now?”
“This instant! Some miserable undergraduate may be snapping them

up. Every day I go out I expect to find them gone. Be quick,”

mile limit.”

“Oh, God!” said Harriet, as the car started. Fast driving terrified her, as

he very well knew. After five breathtaking miles, he shot a glance sideways
at her, to see how she was standing it, and slacked his foot from the
accelerator.

“That was my triumph song. Was it a bad four minutes?”
“I asked for it,” said Harriet, with set teeth. “Go on.”
“I’m damned if I will. We will go at a reasonable pace and risk the

undergraduate, damn his bones!”

arrived. Peter subjected them to a hard and monocled stare, and said:

“They look all right.”
“They’re lovely. Admit that when I do do a thing, I do it handsomely.

I’ve asked you now for thirty-two presents at once.”

you leave me to fight it out by myself?”

“Of course I’m coming in. Why?—Oh! Am I looking too keen?”
“Much too keen.”
“Well, I don’t care. I’m coming in.”
The shop was dark, and crowded with a strange assortment of first

superlatives that he had to do with an obstinate, experienced and well-
informed customer, settled down with something like enthusiasm to a
prolonged siege of the position. It had not previously occurred to Harriet
that anybody could spend an hour and forty minutes in buying a set of
chessmen. Every separate carved ball in every one of thirty-two pieces had
to be separately and minutely examined with fingertips and the naked eye
and a watchmaker’s lens for signs of damage, repair, substitution or faulty
workmanship; and only after a sharp catechism directed to the
“provenance” of the set, and a long discussion about trade conditions in
China, the state of the antique market generally and the effect of the
American slump on prices, was any figure mentioned at all; and when it
was mentioned, it was instantly challenged, and a further discussion
followed, during which all the pieces were scrutinized again. This ended at
length in Peter’s agreeing to purchase the set at the price named (which was
considerably above his minimum, though within his maximum estimate)
provided the board was included. The unusual size of the pieces made it
necessary that they should have their own board; and the dealer rather
reluctantly agreed, after having it firmly pointed out to him that the board
was sixteenth-century Spanish— clean out of the period—and that it was
therefore almost a condescension on the purchaser’s part to accept it as a
gift.

beamed pleasantly and asked where the parcel should be sent.

than a check—”

The dealer protested that the check would be quite all right but that the

parcel would be a large one and take some time to make up, since the pieces
ought all to be wrapped separately.

conforming to the first rule of good nursery behavior, that presents must
always be taken and never delivered by the shop.

The dealer vanished upstairs to look for a suitable box, and Peter

turned apologetically to Harriet.

no expert, but I’m very much mistaken if that isn’t a very fine and ancient
set, and worth a good bit more than he wants for if. That’s why I haggled so
much. When a thing looks like a bargain, there’s usually a snag about it
somewhere. If one of those dashed pawns wasn’t the original, it would
make the whole lot worthless.”

“I suppose so.” A disquieting thought struck Harriet. “If the set hadn’t

been perfect, should you have bought it?”

“Not at any price.”
“Not if I still wanted it?”
“No. That’s the snag about me. Besides, you wouldn’t want it. You

have the scholarly mind and you’d always feel uncomfortable knowing it
was wrong, even if nobody else knew.”

say, ‘Yes, but one of the pawns is modern’—and that would get so tedious.
Well, I’m glad they’re all right, because I love them with a perfectly idiotic
passion. They have been haunting my slumbers for weeks. And even now I
haven’t said thank you.”

“Yes, you have—and anyway, the pleasure is all mine …I wonder

whether that spinet’s in order.”

He threaded his way through the dark backward and abysm of the

the instrument. “Variations on a musical box,” he said, as he ran his fingers
over the keys, and, disentangling a coffin stool from his surroundings, sat
down and played, first a minuet from a Bach suite and then a gigue, before
striking into the air of Greens Sleeves.

“Alas! my love, you do me wrong
To cast me off discourteously,
And I have loved you so long,
Delighting in your company.”

He shall see that I don’t mind that, thought Harriet, and raised her voice
cheerfully in the refrain:

“For O Greensleeves was all my joy,
And O Greensleeves was my delight—”

He stopped playing instantly.
“Wrong key for you. God meant you for a contralto.” He transposed

the air into E minor, in a tinkling cascade of modulations. “You never told
me you could sing …No, I can hear you’re not trained … chorus singer?
Bach Choir? … of course—I might have guessed it …‘And O Greensleeves
was my heart of gold And who but my Lady Greensleeves’ …Do you know
any of Morley’s Canzonets for Two Voices? …Come on, then, ‘When lo! by
Break of Morning’ …Whichever part you like— they’re exactly the same
…‘My love herself adorning.’ …G natural, my dear, G natural …”

The dealer, descending with his arms full of packing materials, paid no

attention to them. He was well accustomed to the eccentricities of
customers; and, moreover, probably cherished hopes of selling them the
spinet.

a last companionable cadence, “is the body and bones of music. Anybody
can have the harmony, if they will leave us the counterpoint. What next?
…‘Go to Bed, sweet Muse’? Come, come! Is it true? is it kind? is it
necessary? …‘Love is a fancy, love is a frenzy.’ …Very well, I owe you one
for that,” and with a mischievous eye he played the opening bars of “Sweet
Cupid, Ripen Her Desire.”

“No,” said Harriet, reddening.
“No. Not in the best of taste. Try again.”
He hesitated; ran from one tune to another; then settled down to that

best known of all Elizabethan love songs.

“Fain would I change that note
To which fond love hath charmed me …”

Harriet, with her elbows on the lid of the spinet and her chin propped on her
hands, let him sing alone. Two young gentlemen, who had strayed in and
were talking rather loudly in the front part of the shop, abandoned a
halfhearted quest for brass candlesticks and came stumbling through the
gloom to see who was making the noise.

“True house of joy and bliss
Where sweetest pleasure is I do adore thee;
I see thee what thou art, I love thee in my Heart
And fall before thee.”

Tobias Hume’s excellent air rises to a high pitched and triumphant

challenge in the penultimate line, before tumbling with a clatter to the key
note. Too late, Harriet signed to the singer to moderate his voice.

“You’re making a filthy row. Shut up!”

Peter swung round on the stool.
“Sir?” He polished his monocle with exaggerated care, adjusted it and

let his eye travel up the immense tweedy form lowering over him. “I beg
your pardon. Was that obligin’ observation addressed to me?”

Harriet started to speak, but the young man turned to her.
“Who,” he demanded loudly, “is this effeminate bounder?”
“I have been accused of many things,” said Wimsey, interested; “but

the charge of effeminacy is new to me. Do you mind explaining yourself?”

feet, “and I don’t like your voice, and I don’t like your tom-fool eyeglass.”

“Steady on, Reggie,” said his friend.
“You’re annoying this lady,” persisted the young man. “You’re making

her conspicuous. Get out!”

Mr. Jones of Jesus?”

“Who are you calling a bloody Welshman?” snarled the young man,

much exasperated. “My name’s Pomfret.”

“Mine’s Wimsey,” said Peter. “Quite as ancient though less

euphonious. Come on, son, don’t be an ass. You mustn’t behave like this to
senior members and before ladies.”

“Senior member be damned!” cried Mr. Pomfret, to whom this

unfortunate phrase conveyed only too much. “Do you think I’m going to be
sneered at by you? Stand up, blast you! Why can’t you stand up for
yourself?”

“First,” replied Peter, mildly, “because I’m twenty years older than you

because I don’t want to hurt you.”

“Then,” said Mr. Pomfret, “take that, you sitting rabbit!”
He launched an impetuous blow at Peter’s head, and found himself

held by the Wrist in an iron grip.

Here, you, sir. Take your effervescent friend home, can’t you? How the
devil does he come to be drunk at this time of the day?”

subsequent cocktail binge. Peter shook his head.

apologize to the lady and beetle off.”

Mr. Pomfret, much subdued and tending to become lachrymose,

muttered that he was sorry to have made a row. “But why did you make fun
of me with that?” he asked Harriet, reproachfully.

“I didn’t, Mr. Pomfret. You’re quite mistaken.”
“Damn your senior members!” said Mr. Pomfret.
“Now, don’t begin all over again,” urged Peter, kindly. He got up, his

eyes about on a level with Mr. Pomfret’s chin. “If you want to continue the
discussion, you’ll find me at the Mitre in the morning. This way out.”

“Come on, Reggie,” said the friend.
The dealer, who had returned to his packing after assuring himself that

it would not be necessary to send for the police or the proctors, leapt
helpfully to open the door, and said “Good afternoon, gentlemen,” as
though nothing out of the way had happened.

stage a comeback on the doorstep.

Come on! You’ve had quite enough fun for one afternoon.”

The door shut them out.
“Well, well!” said Peter.
“Young gentlemen will be lively,” said the dealer. “I’m afraid it’s a bit

bulky, sir. I’ve put the board up separate.”

“Stick ’em in the car,” said Peter. “They’ll be all right.”
This was done; and the dealer, glad enough to get his shop cleared,

began to put up his shutters, as it was now long past closing time.

“I apologize for my young friend,” said Harriet.
“He seems to have taken it hard. What on earth was there so

infuriating about my being a senior?”

“Oh, poor lamb! He thought I’d been telling you about him and me

and the proctor. I suppose I had better tell you now.”

Peter listened and laughed a little ruefully.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “That kind of thing hurts like hell when you’re his

age. I’d better send him a note and set that right. I say!”

“What?”
“We never had that beer. Come round and have one with me at the

Mitre, and we’ll concoct a salve for wounded feelings.”

his epistle.

The Mitre Hotel,
Oxford

To Reginald Pomfret, Esq.

Sir,

I am given to understand by Miss Vane that in the course of our

conversation this afternoon I unhappily made use of an expression

which might have been misconstrued as a reference to your private
affairs. Permit me to assure you that the words were uttered in
complete ignorance, and that nothing could have been farther from my
intentions than to make any such offensive allusion. While deprecating
very strongly the behavior you thought fit to use, I desire to express
my sincere regret for any pain I may have inadvertently caused you,
and beg to remain,

Your obedient servant,

PETER DEATH BREDON WIMSEY

“Is that pompous enough?”
“Beautiful,” said Harriet. “Scarcely a word under three syllables and

all the names you’ve got. What your nephew calls ‘Uncle Peter at his
stuffiest.’ All it wants is the crest and sealing wax. Why not write the child
a nice, friendly note?”

“He doesn’t want friendliness,” said his lordship, grinning. “He wants

satisfaction.” He rang the bell and sent the waiter for Bunter and the sealing
wax. “You’re right about the beneficial effects of a red seal—he’ll think it’s
a challenge. Bunter, bring me my seal ring. Come to think of it, that’s an
idea. Shall I offer him the choice of swords or pistols on Port Meadow at
daybreak?”

“I think it’s time you grew up,” said Harriet.
“Is it?” said Peter, addressing the envelope. “I’ve never challenged

anybody. It would be fun. I’ve been challenged three times and fought
twice; the third time the police butted in. I’m afraid that was because my
opponent didn’t fancy my choice of weapon …Thanks, Bunter …A bullet,
you see, may go anywhere, but steel’s almost bound to go somewhere.”

“Peter,” said Harriet, looking gravely at him, “I believe you’re

showing off.”

the wax. “Every cock will crow upon his own dung-hill.” His grin was half
petulant, half deprecating. “I hate being loomed over by gigantic
undergraduates and made to feel my age.”

CHAPTER XX

For, to speak in a word, envy is naught else but tristitia de bonis alienis,
sorrow for other men’s good, be it present, past, or to come: and gaudium
de adversis, and joy at their harms …’Tis a common disease, and almost

natural to us, as Tacitus holds, to envy another man’s prosperity.

ROBERT BURTON

It is said that love and a cough cannot be hid. Nor is it easy to hide two-and-
thirty outsize ivory chessmen; unless one is so inhuman as to leave them
swaddled in their mummy-clothes of wadding and entombed within the six
sides of a wooden sarcophagus. What is the use of acquiring one’s heart’s
desire if one cannot handle and gloat over it, show it to one’s friends and
gather an anthology of envy and admiration? Whatever awkward
deductions might be drawn about the giver—and, after all, was that
anybody’s business?—Harriet knew that she must needs display the gift or
burst in solitary ecstasy.

Accordingly, she put a bold face on it, marched her forces openly into

the Senior Common Room after Hall, and deployed them upon the table,
with the eager assistance of the dons.

“But where are you going to keep them?” asked the Dean, when

everybody had sufficiently exclaimed over the fineness of the carving, and
had taken her turn at twisting and examining the nests of concentric globes.
“You can’t just leave them in the box. Look at those fragile little spears and
things and the royal head-dresses. They ought to be put in a glass case.”

“I know,” said Harriet. “It’s just like me to want something completely

impracticable. I shall have to wrap them all up again.”

know, if they were mine, I shouldn’t be able to take my eyes off them for a
moment.”

the Science Lecture-Room.”

bequest? I mean, the glass cases—”

thing for a week or two. We can lump some of those hideous geological
specimens together and have one of the small cases taken up to your room.”

“By all means,” said Miss Edwards. “I’ll see to it.”
“Thank you,” said Harriet; “that will be lovely.”
“Aren’t you simply aching to play with the new toy?” asked Miss

Allison. “Does Lord Peter play chess?”

love with the pieces.”

beautiful, it would be a pity not to use them.”

“But I expect you could play my head off.”
“Oh, do play with them!” cried Miss Shaw, sentimentally. “Think how

they must be longing for a little life and movement after sitting all that time
in a shop-window.”

“I will give you a pawn,” suggested Miss de Vine.
Even with this advantage, Harriet suffered three humiliating defeats in

quick succession: first, because she was but a poor player; secondly,
because she found it difficult to remember which piece was which; thirdly,
because the anguish of parting at one fell swoop with a fully-armed warrior,
a prancing steed and a Complete nest of ivory balls was such that she could

scarcely bear to place so much as a pawn in jeopardy. Miss de Vine,
viewing with perfect equanimity the disappearance even of a robed
counselor with long moustaches or an elephant carrying a castleful of
combatants, soon had Harriet’s king penned helplessly among his own
defenders. Nor was the game made any easier for the weaker party by being
played under the derisive eye of Miss Hillyard, who, pronouncing chess to
be the world’s most wearisome amusement, yet would not go away and get
on with her work, but sat staring at the board as though fascinated and
(what was worse) fiddling with the captured pieces and putting Harriet into
an agony for fear she would drop one.

Moreover, when the games were finished, and Miss Edwards had

announced that a glass case had been dusted and taken up to Harriet’s room
by a scout, Miss Hillyard insisted on helping to carry the pieces over,
grasping for the purpose the white king and queen, whose headgear bore
delicate waving ornaments like antennae, extremely liable to damage. Even
when the Dean had discovered that the pieces could be more safely
transported standing upright in their box, Miss Hillyard attached herself to
the party that escorted them across the quad, and was officious in helping to
set the glass case in a convenient position opposite the bed, “so that,” as she
observed, “you can see them if you wake up in the night.”

The following day happened to be the Dean’s birthday. Harriet, going

shortly after breakfast to purchase a tribute of roses in the Market, and
coming out into the High Street with the intention of making an
appointment at the hairdresser’s, was rewarded by the rather unexpected
sight of two male backs, issuing from the Mitre and proceeding, apparently
in perfect amity, in an easterly direction. The shorter and slighter of the two
she could have singled out from a million backs anywhere; nor was it easy
to mistake the towering bulk and breadth of Mr. Reginald Pomfret. Both

parties were smoking pipes, and she concluded from this that the object of
their excursion could scarcely be swords or pistols on Port Meadow. They
were strolling in a leisurely after-breakfast manner, and she took care not to
catch them up. She hoped that what Lord Saint-George called the “famous
family charm” was being exerted to good purpose; she was too old to enjoy
the sensation of being squabbled over—it made all three of them ridiculous.
Ten years ago, she might have felt flattered; but it seemed that the lust to
power was a thing one grew out of. What one wanted, she thought, standing
amid the stuffy perfumes of the hair-dresser’s establishment, was peace, and
freedom from the pressure of angry and agitated personalities. She booked
an appointment for the afternoon and resumed her way. As she passed
Queen’s, Peter came down the steps alone.

“Hullo!” said he. “Why the floral emblems?”
Harriet explained.
“Good egg!” said his lordship. “I like your Dean.” He relieved her of

the roses. “Let me also be there with a gift.

“Make her a goodly chapilet of azur’d Colombine,
And wreathe about her coronet with sweetest Eglantine,
With roses damask, white, and red, and fairest flower delice,
With Cowslips of Jerusalem, and cloves of Paradice.

Though what Cowslips of Jerusalem may be I do not know, and they are
probably not in season.”

Harriet turned back with him marketwards.
“Your young friend came to see me,” pursued Peter.
“So I observed. Did you ‘fix a vacant stare and slay him with your

noble birth’?”

side? No; he’s a nice lad, and the way to his heart is through the playing-
fields of Eton. He told me all his griefs and I sympathized very kindly,
mentioning that there were better ways of killing care than drowning it in a
butt of malmsey. But, O God, turn back the universe and give me yesterday!
He was beautifully sozzled last night, and had one breakfast before he came
out and another with me at the Mitre. I do not envy the heart of youth, but
only its head and stomach.”

“Have you heard anything fresh about Arthur Robinson?”
“Only that he married a young woman called Charlotte Ann Clarke,

and had by her a daughter, Beatrice Maud. That was easy, because we know
where he was living eight years ago, and could consult the local registers.
But they’re still hunting the registers to find either his death—supposing
him to be dead, which is rather less likely than otherwise—or the birth of
the second child, which—if it ever occurred—might tell us where he went
to after the trouble at York. Unfortunately, Robinsons are as plentiful as
blackberries, and Arthur Robinsons not uncommon. And if he really did
change his name, there may not be any Robinson entries at all. Another of
my searchers has gone to his old lodgings—where, you may remember, he
very imprudently married the landlady’s daughter; but the Clarkes have
moved, and it’s going to be a bit of a job finding them. Another line is to
inquire among the scholastic agencies and the small and inferior private
schools, because it seems probable—You’re not attending.”

you’re looking for him in a private school.” A rich, damp fragrance gushed
out upon them as they turned into the Market, and she was overcome by a
sense of extravagant well-being. “I love this smell—it’s like the cactus-
house in the Botanical Gardens.”

one that will not interfere with fortune, let the name of Robinson die upon
his lips.

“Mandragorae dederunt odorem.”
“What do you say, Peter?”
“Nothing. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.”

He laid his hand gently upon her arm. “Let us interview the merchant with
the sops-in-wine.”

And when both roses and carnations had been dispatched—this time

by a messenger—to their destination, it seemed natural, since the Botanical
Gardens had been mentioned, to go there. For a garden, as Bacon observes,
is the purest of human pleasures and the greatest refreshment to the spirit of
man; and even idle and ignorant people who cannot distinguish Leptosiphon
hybridus from Kaulfussia amelloides and would rather languish away in a
wilderness than break their backs with dibbling and weeding may get a
good deal of pleasant conversation out of it, especially if they know the old-
fashioned names of the commoner sorts of flowers and are both tolerably
well acquainted with the minor Elizabethan lyrists.

sitting idly on the bank of the river that Peter, wrenching his attention back
to the sordid present, remarked suddenly:

how Jukes came to be caught with the stuff on him?”

“I’ve no idea.”
“The police got an anonymous letter.”
“Not—?”
“Yes. One of them there. By the way, did you ever try and find out

what was to have been the last word of that message to you? The one we

found in the Science Lecture-Room?”

“No—she couldn’t have finished it, anyhow. There wasn’t a single

vowel left in the box. Not even a B and a dash!”

“That was an oversight. I thought so. Well, Harriet, it’s easy to put a

name to the person we want, isn’t it? But proof’s a different matter. We’ve
tied the thing up so tight. That lecture-room episode was meant to be the
last of the nocturnal prowls, and it probably will be. And the best bit of
evidence will be at the bottom of the river by this time. It’s too late to seal
the doors and set a watch.”

“On whom?”
“Surely you know by this time? You must know, Harriet, if you’re

giving your mind to the thing at all. Opportunity, means, motive—doesn’t it
stand out a mile? For God’s sake, put your prejudices aside and think it out.
What’s happened to you that you can’t put two and two together?”

“I don’t know.”
“Well,” said he drily, “if you really don’t know, it’s not for me to tell

you. But if you will turn your attention for one moment to the matter in
hand and go through your own dossier of the case carefully—”

“Undeterred by any casual sonnets I may find by the way?”
“Undeterred by any personal consideration whatever,” he burst out,

almost angrily. “No; you’re quite right. That was a stupidity. My talent for
standing in my own light amounts to genius, doesn’t it? But when you have
come to a conclusion about all this, will you remember that it was I who
asked you to take a dispassionate view and I who told you that of all devils
let loose in the world there was no devil like devoted love. …I don’t mean
passion. Passion’s a good, stupid horse that will pull the plough six days a
week if you give him the run of his heels on Sundays. But love’s a nervous,

awkward, over-mastering brute; if you can’t rein him, it’s best to have no
truck with him.”

excitement had already flickered out.

along to Shrewsbury now, do you think the Warden would see me?”

Later in the day, Dr. Baring sent for Harriet.
“Lord Peter Wimsey has been to see me,” she said, “with a rather

curious proposition which, after a little consideration, I refused. He told me
that he was almost certain in his own mind of the identity of the—the
offender, but that he was not in a position at the moment to offer a complete
proof. He also said that the person had, he thought, taken the alarm, and
would be doubly careful from now on to escape detection. The alarm might,
in fact, be sufficient to prevent further outbreaks until the end of the term at
any rate; but as soon as our vigilance was relaxed, the trouble would
probably break out again in a more violent form. I said that that would be
very unsatisfactory, and he agreed. He asked whether he should name the
person to me, in order that a careful watch might be kept upon her
movements. I said I saw two objections to that: first, that the person might
discover that she was being spied upon and merely increase her caution, and
secondly, that if he happened to be mistaken as to the offender’s identity,
the person spied upon would be subjected to the most intolerable
suspicions. Supposing, I said, the persecutions merely ceased, and we were
left suspecting this person—who might be quite innocent—without proof
either way. He replied that those were precisely the objections that had
occurred to him. Do you know the name of the person to whom he alludes,
Miss Vane?”

am beginning to have an idea; but I can’t make it fit. In fact, I simply can’t
believe it.”

“Very well. Lord Peter then made a very remarkable proposition. He

asked whether I would allow him to interrogate this person privately, in the
hope of surprising her into some admission. He said that if this bluff, as he
called it, came off, the culprit could then make her confession to me and be
suffered to depart quietly, or be dealt with medically, as we might decide
was advisable. If, however, it did not come off and the person denied
everything, we might be placed in a very disagreeable position. I replied
that. I quite saw that, and could not possibly consent to have such methods
used upon anybody in this College. To which he replied that that was
exactly what he had expected me to say.

said that all his evidence was circumstantial; that he hoped to have more of
it in the course of the next few days, but that in default of a fresh outbreak
and the capture of the culprit red-handed, he doubted whether any direct
evidence could be produced at this stage. I inquired whether there was any
reason why we should not at least wait for the production of the additional
evidence.”

Dr. Baring paused and looked keenly at Harriet.
“He replied that there was only one reason, and that was that the

culprit, instead of becoming more cautious, might throw caution to the
winds and proceed to direct violence. ‘In which case,’ he said, ‘we should
very likely catch her, but only at the cost of somebody’s death or serious
injury.’ I asked what persons were threatened with death or injury. He said
the most probable victims were—yourself, Miss de Vine and another person
whom he could not name, but whose existence, he said, he deduced. He also

surprised me by saying that an abortive attack had already been made upon
you. Is that true?”

outlined the story of the telephone call. At the name of Miss Hillyard, the
Warden looked up:

Hillyard?”

“If I did,” said Harriet, cautiously, “I shouldn’t be the only person to

do so. But I’m bound to say that she doesn’t seem to fit in at all with the
line of Lord Peter’s inquiries, so far as I am acquainted with them.”

have been made to me which—in default of evidence—I have been very
unwilling to listen to.”

So Dr. Baring had kept abreast of the feeling in the S.G.R. Miss

Allison and Mrs. Goodwin had probably been talking. Well!

thought it would be better to wait for the further evidence. But that decision
must, of course, be subject to the willingness of yourself and Miss de Vine
to face the risks involved. The willingness of the unknown third party
cannot, naturally, be ascertained.”

“I don’t in the least mind what risks I take,” said Harriet. “But Miss de

Vine ought to be warned, I suppose.”

“That is what I said. Lord Peter agreed.”
So, thought Harriet, something has decided him to acquit Miss de

Vine. I’m glad. Unless this is a Machiavellian ruse to throw her off her
guard.

“Have you said anything to Miss de Vine, Warden?”

propose to speak to her then.”

So there was nothing to do but to wait. And in the meantime, Harriet

became aware of a curious change in the atmosphere of the Senior Common
Room. It was as though they had lost sight of their mutual distrust and their
general apprehensions and had drawn together like spectators at the ring-
side to watch another kind of conflict, in which she was one of the
principals. The curious tension thus produced was scarcely relieved by the
Dean’s announcement to a few select spirits that in her opinion, Flaxman’s
young man had given her the chuck and serve her right; to which Miss
Flaxman’s tutor sourly replied that she wished people wouldn’t have these
upheavals in the Summer Term, but that, fortunately, Miss Flaxman didn’t
take her final Schools till next year. This prompted Harriet to ask Miss
Shaw how Miss Newland was getting on. It appeared that Miss Newland
was doing well, having completely got over the shock of her immersion in
the Cherwell, so that her chances for a First looked pretty good.

“Splendid!” said Harriet. “I’ve ear-marked my winnings already. By

the way, Miss Hillyard, how is our young friend Cattermole?”

It seemed to her that the room waited breathlessly for the answer. Miss

Hillyard replied, rather shortly, that Miss Cattermole seemed to have
recovered such form as she had ever possessed, thanks, as she understood
from the young woman herself, to Miss Vane’s good advice. She added that
it was very kind of Harriet, amid her many preoccupations, to interest
herself in the History students. Harriet made some vague reply and the
room, as it seemed to her, breathed again.

Later in the day, Harriet took an outrigger on the river with the Dean,

and, rather to her surprise, observed Miss Cattermole and Mr. Pomfret
sharing a punt. She had received the “penitent letter” from Mr. Pomfret, and

waved a cheerful hand as the boats passed, in token of peace restored. If she
had known that Mr. Pomfret and Miss Cattermole had found a bond of
sympathy in devotion to herself, she might have speculated on what may
happen to rejected lovers who confide their troubles to willing ears; but this
did not occur to her, because she was wondering what, exactly, had
happened that morning at the Mitre; and her thoughts had strayed away into
the Botanical Gardens before the Dean pointed out, rather sharply, that she
was setting a very irregular and leisurely stroke.

It was Miss Shaw who innocently precipitated a flare-up.
“That’s a very handsome scarf,” she said to Miss Hillyard. The dons

were assembling, as usual, for Hall, outside the S.C.R.; but the evening was
dull and chilly and a thick silk scarf was a grateful addition to evening
dress.

“Yes,” said Miss Hillyard. “Unfortunately it isn’t mine. Some careless

person left it in the Fellows’ Garden last night and I rescued it. I brought it
along to be identified—but I’m ready to admit that I can do with it this
evening.”

“I don’t know whose it can be,” said Miss Lydgate. She fingered it

admiringly. “It looks more like a man’s scarf,” she added.

Harriet, who had not been paying much attention, turned round,

conscience-stricken.

“Good lord!” she said, “that’s mine. At least, it’s Peter’s. I couldn’t

think where I’d left it.”

It was, in fact, the very scarf that had been used for a strangling

demonstration on the Friday, and been brought back to Shrewsbury by
accident together with the chessmen and the dog collar. Miss Hillyard
turned brick-red and snatched it off as though it were choking her.

“I beg your pardon, Miss Vane,” she said, holding it out.

“It’s all right. I don’t want it now. But I’m glad to know where it is. I’d

have got into trouble if I’d lost it.”

“Will you kindly take your property,” said Miss Hillyard.
Harriet, who was already wearing a scarf of her own, said:
“Thank you. But are you sure you won’t—”
“I will not,” said Miss Hillyard, dropping the scarf angrily on the steps.
“Dear me!” said the Dean, picking it up. “Nobody seems to want this

nice scarf. I shall borrow it. I call it a nasty, chilly evening, and I don’t
know why we can’t all go inside.”

She twisted the scarf comfortably round her neck and, the Warden

mercifully arriving at that moment, they went in to dinner.

At a quarter to ten, Harriet, after an hour or so spent with Miss Lydgate

on her proofs—now actually nearing the stage when they might really be
sent to the printer—crossed the Old Quad to Tudor Building. On the steps,
just coming out, she met Miss Hillyard.

“Were you looking for me?” asked Harriet, a little aggressively.
“No,” said Miss Hillyard, “I wasn’t. Certainly not.” She spoke

hurriedly, and Harriet fancied that there was something in her eyes both
furtive and malicious; but the evening was dark for the middle of May, and
she could not be sure.

“Oh!” said Harriet. “I thought you might be.”
“Well, I wasn’t,” said Miss Hillyard again. And as Harriet passed her

she turned back and said, almost as though the words were forced out of
her:

“Going to work—under the inspiration of your beautiful chessmen?”
“More or less,” said Harriet, laughing.
“I hope you will have a pleasant evening,” said Miss Hillyard.
Harriet went on upstairs and opened the door of her room.

broken glass and with smashed and trampled fragments of red and white
ivory.

For about five minutes, Harriet was the prey of that kind of speechless rage
which is beyond expression or control. If she had thought of it, she was at
that moment in a mood to sympathize with the Poltergeist and all her works.
If she could have beaten or strangled anybody, she would have done it and
felt the better for it. Happily, after the first devastating fury, she found the
relief of bad language. When she found she could keep her voice steady, she
locked her bedroom door behind her and went down to the telephone.

Even so, she was at first so incoherent that Peter could hardly

understand what she said. When he did understand, he was maddeningly
cool about it, merely asking whether she had touched anything or told
anybody. When assured that she had not, he replied cheerfully that he
would be along in a few minutes.

Harriet went out and raged distractedly about the New-Quad till she

heard him ring—for the gates were just shut—and only a last lingering
vestige of self-restraint prevented her from rushing at him and pouring out
her indignation in the presence of Padgett. But she waited for him in the
middle of the quad.

“Peter—oh, Peter!”
“Well,” said he, “this is rather encouraging. I was afraid we might have

choked off these demonstrations for good and all.”

“But my chessmen! I could kill her for that.”
“My dear, it’s sickening that it should be your chessmen. But don’t

let’s lose all sense of proportion. It might have been you.”

“I wish it had been. I could have hit back.”

“Termagant. Let’s go and look at the damage.”
“It’s horrible, Peter. It’s like a massacre. It’s—it’s rather frightening,

somehow—they’ve been hit so hard.”

When he saw the room, Wimsey looked grave enough.
“Yes,” he said, kneeling amid the wreckage. “Blind, bestial malignity.

Not only broken but ground to powder. There’s been a heel at work here, as
well as the poker; you can see the marks on the carpet. She hates you,
Harriet. I didn’t realize that. I thought she was only afraid of you …Is there
yet any that is left of the house of Saul? …Look! one poor warrior hiding
behind the coal-scuttle—remnant of a mighty army.”

He held up the solitary red pawn, smiling; and then scrambled

hurriedly to his feet.

“My dear girl, don’t cry about it. What the hell does it matter?”
“I loved them,” said Harriet, “and you gave them to me.”
He shook his head.
“It’s a pity it’s that way round. ‘You gave them to me, and I loved

them’ is all right, but ‘I loved them and you gave them to me’ is irreparable.
Fifty thousand rocs’ eggs won’t supply their place. ‘The Virgin’s gone and I
am gone; she’s gone, she’s gone and what shall I do?’ But you needn’t weep
over the chest of drawers while I have a shoulder at your disposal, need
you?”

“I’m sorry. I’m being a perfect idiot.”
“I told you love was the devil and all. Two-and-thirty chessmen, baked

in a pie. ‘And all the powerful kings and all the beautiful queens of this
world were but as a bed of flowers’ …”

“I might have had the decency to take care of them.”
“That’s foolish,” said he, with his mouth muffled in her hair. “Don’t

talk so soft, or I shall get foolish too. Listen. When did all this happen?”

“Between Hall and a quarter to ten.”
“Was anybody absent from Hall? Because this must have made a bit of

a noise. After Hall, there’d be students about, who might hear the glass
smash or notice if anybody unusual was wandering about.”

in their rooms. And—good God!—there was somebody unusual—She said
something about the chessmen, too. And she was queer about them last
night.”

“Who was that?”
“Miss Hillyard.”
“Again!”
While Harriet told her story he fidgeted restlessly about the room,

avoiding the broken glass and ivory on the floor with the automatic
precision of a cat, and stood at length in the window with his back to her.
She had drawn the curtains together when she had brought him up, and his
gaze at them seemed purely preoccupied”.

“Hell!” he said, presently. “That’s a devil of a complication.” He still

had the red pawn in his hand, and he now came back, and set it with great
precision in the center of the mantelpiece. “Yes. Well, I suppose you’ll have
to find out—”

Somebody knocked at the door, and Harriet went to open it.
“Excuse me, madam, but Padgett sent over to the Senior Common

Room to see if Lord Peter Wimsey was there, and seeing he thought you
might know—”

“He’s here, Annie. It’s for you, Peter.”
“Yes?” said Peter, coming to the door.
“If you please, sir, they’ve rung up from the Mitre to say there’s a

once.”

“What? Oh, Lord, that would happen! Very well, thank you, Annie.

Oh, one moment. Was it you who saw the—er—the person who was
playing tricks in the Lecture-Room?”

“Yes, sir. Not to know her again, sir.”
“No; but you did see her, and she may not know you couldn’t

recognize her. I think if I were you I’d be rather careful how you go about
the College after dark. I don’t want to frighten you, but you see what’s
happened to Miss Vane’s chessmen?”

“Yes, I see, sir. What a pity, isn’t it?”
“It would be more than a pity if anything unpleasant happened to you

personally. Now, don’t get the wind up—but if I were you, I’d take
somebody with me when I went out after sunset. And I should give the
same advice to the scout who was with you.”

“To Carrie? Very well, I’ll tell her.”
“It’s only a precaution, you know. Good-night, Annie.”
“Good-night, sir. Thank you.”
“I shall have to make quite an issue of dog-collars,” said Peter. “You

never know whether to warn people or not. Some of them get hysterics, but
she looks fairly level-headed. Look here, my dear, this is all very tiresome.
If it’s another summons to Rome, I shall have to go. (I should lock that
door.) Needs must when duty calls, and all that. If it is Rome, I’ll tell Bunter
to bring round all the notes I’ve got at the Mitre and instruct Miss
Climpson’s sleuths to report direct to you. In any case, I’ll ring you up this
evening as soon as I know what it’s all about. If it isn’t Rome, I’ll come
round again in the morning. And in the meantime, don’t let anybody into
your room. I think I’d lock it up and sleep elsewhere tonight.”

“I thought you didn’t expect any more night disturbances.”

on the staircase to examine the soles of his shoes. “I haven’t carried away
any bits. Do you think you have?”

Harriet stood first on one leg and then another.
“Not this time. And the first time I didn’t walk into the mess at all. I

stood in the doorway and swore.”

“Good girl. The paths in the quad are a bit damp, you know, and

something might have stuck. As a matter of fact, it’s raining a little now.
You’ll get wet.”

“It doesn’t matter. Oh, Peter! I’ve got that white scarf of yours.”
“Keep it till I come again—which will be tomorrow, with luck, and

otherwise, God knows when. Damn it! I knew there was trouble coming.”
He stood still under the beech-trees. “Harriet, don’t choose the moment my
back’s turned to get yourself wiped out or anything—not if you can help it;
I mean, you’re not very good at looking after valuables.”

“I might have the decency to take care? All right, Peter. I’ll do my best

this time. Word of honor.”

She gave him her hand and he kissed it. Once again Harriet thought

she saw somebody move in the darkness, as on the last occasion they had
walked through the shadowy quads. But she dared not delay him and so
again said nothing. Padgett let him out through the gate and Harriet, turning
away, found herself face to face with Miss Hillyard.

“Miss Vane, I should like to speak to you.”
“Certainly,” said Harriet. “I should rather like to speak to you.”
Miss Hillyard, without another word, led the way to her own rooms.

Harriet followed her up the stairs and into the sitting-room. The tutor’s face
was very white as she shut the door after them and said, without asking
Harriet to sit down:

“Miss Vane. What are the relations between that man and you?”
“What do you mean by that?”
“You know perfectly well what I mean. If nobody else will speak to

you about your behavior, I must. You bring the man here, knowing perfectly
well what his reputation is—”

“I know what his reputation as a detective is.”
“I mean his moral reputation. You know as well as I do that he is

notorious all over Europe. He keeps women by the score—”

“All at once or in succession?”
“It’s no use being impertinent. I suppose that to a person with your

past history, that kind of thing is merely amusing. But you must try to
conduct yourself with a little more decency. The way you look at him is a
disgrace. You pretend to be the merest acquaintance of his and call him by
his title in public and his Christian name in private. You take him up to your
room at night—”

“Really, Miss Hillyard, I can’t allow—”
“I’ve seen you. Twice. He was there tonight. You let him kiss your

hands and make love to you—”

“So that was you, spying about under the beeches.”
“How dare you use such a word?”
“How dare you say such a thing?”
“It’s no affair of mine how you behave in Bloomsbury. But if you

bring your lovers here—”

why he came to my room tonight.”

“I can guess.”
“And I know very well why you came there.”
“I came there? I don’t know what you mean.”

room.”

“I never went into your room.”
“You didn’t go into my room and smash up my chessmen?”
Miss Hillyard’s dark eyes flickered.
“Certainly I did not. I told you I hadn’t been anywhere near your room

tonight.”

“Then,” said Harriet, “you told a lie.”
She was too angry to be frightened, though it did cross her mind that if

the furious white-faced woman attacked her, it might be difficult to
summon assistance on this isolated staircase, and she thought of the dog-
collar.

ivory on the carpet under your writing-table and another stuck on the sole of
your right shoe. I saw it, coming upstairs.”

Hillyard staggered a little, sat down suddenly, and said, “Oh, my God!”

“If you had nothing to do with smashing those chessmen,” went on

Harriet, “or with the other pranks that have been played in this College,
you’d better explain those pieces of ivory.”

what would become of the evidence?)

at the sliver of white that clung to the heel, embedded in a little patch of
damp gravel.

“Give it to me,” said Harriet, and took slipper and all.
She had expected an outburst of denial, but Miss Hillyard said, faintly:
“That’s evidence … incontrovertible …”

at least, one did not have to argue about what was or was not evidence.

now. But you weren’t there. And when I saw the mess on the mess on the
floor I thought—I was afraid you’d think—”

“I did think.”
“What did he think?”
“Lord Peter? I don’t know what he thought. But he’ll probably think

something now.”

spirit. “Only that I was in the room. It was done when I got there. I saw it, I
went to look at it. You can tell your lover that I saw it and was glad to see it.
But he’ll tell you that’s no proof that I did it.”

“Look here, Miss Hillyard,” said Harriet, divided between anger,

suspicion and a dreadful kind of pity, “you must understand, once and for
all, that he is not my lover. Do you really imagine that if he were, we should
—” here her sense of the ludicrous overcame her and made it difficult to
control her voice—” we should come and misbehave ourselves in the
greatest possible discomfort at Shrewsbury? Even if I had no respect for the
College—where would be the point of it? With all the world and all the
time there is at our disposal, why on earth should we come and play the fool
down here? It would be silly. And if you really were down there in the quad
just now, you must know that people who are lovers don’t treat each other
like that. At least,” she added rather unkindly, “if you knew anything about
it at all, you’d know that. We’re very old friends, and I owe him a great deal
—”

“Don’t talk nonsense,” said the tutor roughly. “You know you’re in

love with the man.”

is.”

“You’ve no right to say that!” .
“It’s true, all the same,” said Harriet. “Oh, damn! I suppose it’s no

good my saying I’m frightfully sorry.” (Dynamite in a powder factory? Yes,
indeed, Miss Edwards, you saw it before anybody else. Biologically
interesting!) “This kind of thing is the devil and all.” (“That’s the devil of a
complication,” Peter had said. He’d seen it, of course. Must have. Too much
experience not to. Probably happened scores of times—scores of women—
all over Europe. Oh, dear! Oh, dear! And was that a random accusation, or
had Miss Hillyard been delving into the past and digging up Viennese
singers?)

“For Heaven’s sake,” said Miss Hillyard, “go away!”
“I think I’d better,” said Harriet.
She did not know how to deal with the situation at all. She could no

longer feel outraged or angry. She was not alarmed. She was not jealous.
She was only sorry, and quite incapable of expressing any sympathy which
would not be an insult. She realized that she was still clutching Miss
Hillyard’s slipper. Had she better give it back? It was evidence—of
something. But of what? The whole business of the Poltergeist seemed to
have retreated over the horizon, leaving behind it the tormented shell of a
woman staring blindly into vacancy under the cruel harshness of the electric
light. Harriet picked up the other fragment of ivory from under the writing-
table—the little spearhead from a red pawn.

—she remembered that Peter had said he would ring up from the Mitre. She
went downstairs with the slipper in her hand, and in the New Quad ran into
Mrs. Padgett, who was just coming to look for her.

The call was switched through to the box in Queen Elizabeth.
“It’s not so bad after all,” said Peter’s voice. “It’s only the Grand

Panjandrum wanting a conference at his private house. Sort of Pleasant
Sunday Afternoon in Wild Warwickshire. It may mean London or Rome
after that, but we’ll hope not. At any rate, it’ll do if I’m there by half-past
eleven, so I’ll pop round and see you about nine.”

tell you on the ’phone.”

the slipper and the piece of ivory carefully away, went to the Bursar, and
was accommodated with a bed in the Infirmary.

CHAPTER XXI

Thus she there wayted until! eventyde,
Yet living creature none she saw appeare.
And now sad shadows gan the world to hyde
From mortall vew, and wrap in darkenes dreare;
Yet nould she d’off her weary armes, for feare
Of secret daunger, ne let sleepe oppresse
Her heavy eyes with nature’s burdein deare,
But drew her self aside in sickernesse,
And her well-pointed wepons did about her dresse.

EDMUND SPENSER

Harriet left word at the Lodge that she would wait for Lord Peter Wimsey in
the Fellows’ Garden. She had breakfasted early, thus avoiding Miss
Hillyard, who passed through the New Quad like an angry shadow while
she was talking to Padgett.

She had first met Peter at a moment when every physical feeling had

been battered out of her by the brutality of circumstance; by this accident
she had been aware of him from the beginning as a mind and spirit
localized in a body. Never—not even in those later dizzying moments on
the river—had she considered him primarily as a male animal, or calculated
the promise implicit in the veiled eyes, the long, flexible mouth, the
curiously vital hands. Nor, since of her he had always asked and never
demanded, had she felt in him any domination but that of intellect. But now,
as he advanced towards her along the flower-bordered path, she saw him
with new eyes—the eyes of women who had seen him before they knew

him—saw him, as they saw him, dynamically. Miss Hillyard, Miss
Edwards, Miss de Vine, the Dean even, each in her own way had
recognized the same thing: six centuries of possessiveness, fastened under
the yoke of urbanity. She herself, seeing it impudent and uncontrolled in the
nephew, had known it instantly for what it was; it astonished her that in the
older man she should have been blind to it so long and should still retain so
strong a defense against it. And she wondered whether it was only accident
that had sealed her eyes till it was too late for realization to bring disaster.

She sat still where she was till he stood looking down at her.
“Well?” he said, lightly, “how doth my lady? What, sweeting, all

amort? …Yes, something has happened; I see it has. What is it, domina?”

like that grave, academic title. She said, as though she were reciting a
lesson:

asked me to come up to her room because she wanted to speak to me. On
the way up, I saw there was a little piece of white ivory stuck on the heel of
her slipper. She—made some rather unpleasant accusations; she had
misunderstood the position—”

slipper?”

“I’m afraid I did. There was another bit of ivory on the floor. I accused

her of having gone into my room, and she denied it till I showed her the
evidence. Then she admitted it; but she said the damage was already done
when she got there.”

“Did you believe her?”
“I might have done … if … if she hadn’t shown me a motive.”

into a face as bleak as winter, and faltered:

“I brought the slipper away with me. I wish I hadn’t.”
“Are you going to be afraid of the facts?” he said. “And you a

scholar?”

“I don’t think I did it in malice. I hope not. But I was bitterly unkind to

her.”

“Happily,” said he, “a fact is a fact, and your state of mind won’t alter

it by a hair’s breadth. Let’s go now and have the truth at all hazards.”

She led him up to her room, where the morning sun cast a long

rectangle of brilliance across the ruin on the floor. From the chest near the
door she took out the slipper and handed it to him. He lay down flat,
squinting sideways along the carpet in the place where neither he nor she
had trodden the night before. His hand went to his pocket, and he smiled up
sideways into her troubled face.

masters’ thoughts, they could not write as much solid fact as you can hold
in a pair of callipers.” He measured the heel of the slipper in both
directions, and then turned his attention to the pile of the carpet. “She stood
here, heels together, looking.” The callipers twinkled over the sunlit
rectangle. “And here is the heel that stamped and trampled and ground
beauty to dust. One was a French heel and one was a Cuban heel—isn’t that
what the footwear specialists call them?” He sat up and tapped the sole of
the slipper lightly with the callipers. “Who goes there? France—Pass,
France, and all’s well.”

“Oh, I’m glad,” said Harriet, fervently. “I’m glad.”
“Yes. Meanness isn’t one of your accomplishments, is it?” He turned

his eyes to the carpet again, this time to a place near the edge.

wiped her soles before she left. There are very few flies on Cuban Heel.
Well, that saves us a back-breaking search all over the College for the dust
of kings and queens.” He picked the sliver of ivory from the French heel,
put the slipper in his pocket and stood up. “This had better go back to its
owner, furnished with a certificate of innocence.”

“Give it to me. I must take it.”
“No, you will not. If anybody has to face unpleasantness, it shan’t be

you this time.”

“But, Peter—you won’t—”
“No,” he said, “I won’t. Trust me for that.”
Harriet was left staring at the broken chessman. Presently she went out

into the corridor, found a dustpan and brush in a scout’s pantry and returned
with them to sweep up the debris. As she was replacing the brush and pan
in the pantry, she ran into one of the students from the annex.

“By the way, Miss Swift,” said Harriet, “you didn’t happen to hear any

noise in my room like glass being smashed last night, did you? Some time
during or after Hall?”

a moment. Miss Ward came along about half-past nine to do some
Morphology with me and”—the girl’s mouth dimpled into laughter—“she
asked if you were a secret toffee-eater, because it sounded as though you
were smashing up toffee with the poker. Has the College Ghost been
visiting you?”

see Miss Ward.”

little more definitely as “certainly not later than half-past nine.”

restlessness—or perhaps it was with having slept badly in an unfamiliar bed
and with a disturbed mind. The sun had scattered diamonds among the wet
grass of the quadrangle, and the breeze was shaking the rain in a heavy
spatter of drops from the beeches. Students came and went. Somebody had
left a scarlet cushion out all night in the rain; it was sodden and mournful-
looking; its owner came and picked it up, with an air between laughter and
disgust; she threw it on a bench to dry in the sunshine.

Senior Common Room would be still more intolerable. She was penned in
the Old Quad, for she was sensitive to the mere neighborhood of the New
Quad as a person that has been vaccinated is sensitive to everything that lies
on the sore side of his body. Without particular aim or intention, she skirted
the tennis-court and turned in at the Library entrance. She had intended to
go upstairs but, seeing the door of Miss de Vine’s set stand open, she altered
her mind; she could borrow a book from there. The little lobby was empty,
but in the sitting-room a scout was giving the writing-table a Sunday
morning flick with the duster. Harriet remembered that Miss de Vine was in
town, and that she was to be warned when she returned.

“What time does Miss de Vine get back tonight? Do you know,

Nellie?”

“I think she gets in by the 9:39, miss.”
Harriet nodded, took a book from the shelves at random, and went to

sit on the steps of the loggia, where there was a deck chair. The morning,
she told herself, was getting on. If Peter had to get to his destination by
11:30, it was time he went. She vividly remembered waiting in a nursing-
home while a friend underwent an operation; there had been a smell of

ether, and, in the waiting-room, a large black Wedgwood jar, filled with
delphiniums.

approaching footstep into the face of Miss Hillyard.

you this address. He was obliged to leave quickly to keep his appointment.”

Harriet took the paper and said, “Thank you.”
Miss Hillyard went on resolutely: “When I spoke to you last night I

was under a misapprehension. I had not fully realized the difficulty of your
position. I am afraid I have unwittingly made it harder for you, and I
apologize.”

too. I was rather upset last night and said a great deal more than I should.
This wretched business has made everything so uncomfortable.”

all feeling rather overwrought. I wish we could get at the truth of it. I
understand that you now accept my account of my movements last night.”

“Absolutely. It was inexcusable of me not to have verified my data.”
“Appearances can be very misleading,” said Miss Hillyard.
There was a pause.
“Well,” said Harriet at last, “I hope we may forget all this.” She knew

as she spoke that one thing at least had been said which could never be
forgotten: she would have given a great deal to recall it.

inclined to judge harshly of matters outside my experience.”

“It is very kind of you to say that,” said Harriet. “Please believe that I

don’t take a very self-satisfied view of myself either.”

always seem to choose the wrong ones. But it’s no affair of mine. Good
morning.”

her knee and discovered that she was reading The Anatomy of Melancholy.

these Symptoms, shall I laugh with Democritus or weep with Heraclitus?
they are so ridiculous and absurd on the one side, so lamentable and tragical
on the other.”

Harriet got the car out in the afternoon and took Miss Lydgate and the

Dean for a picnic in the neighborhood of Hinksey. When she got back, in
time for supper, she found an urgent message at the Lodge, asking her to
ring up Lord Saint-George at the House as soon as she got back. His voice,
when he answered the call, sounded agitated.

“Oh, look here! I can’t get hold of Uncle Peter—he’s vanished again,

curse him! I say, I saw your ghost this afternoon, and I do think you ought
to be careful.”

“Where did you see her? When?”
“About half-past two—walking over Magdalen Bridge in broad

daylight. I’d been lunching with some chaps out Iffley way, and we were
just pulling over to put one of ’em down at Magdalen, when I spotted her.
She was walking along, muttering to herself, and looking awfully queer.
Sort of clutching with her hands and rolling her eyes about. She spotted me,
too. Couldn’t mistake her. A friend of mine was driving and I tried to catch
his attention, but he was pulling round behind a bus and I couldn’t make
him understand. Anyhow, when we stopped at Magdalen gate, I hopped out
and ran back, but I couldn’t find her anywhere. Seemed to have faded out. I
bet she knew I was on to her and made tracks. I was scared. Thought she

looked up to anything. So I rang up your place and found you were out and
then I rang up the Mitre and that wasn’t any good either, so I’ve been sitting
here all evening in a devil of a stew. First I thought I’d leave a note, and
then I thought I’d better tell you myself. Rather devoted of me, don’t you
think? I cut a supper-party so as not to miss you.”

dressed in?”

“Oh—one of those sort of dark-blue frocks with spriggy bits on it and

a hat with a brim. Sort of thing most of your dons wear in the afternoon.
Neat, not gaudy. Not smart. Just ordinary. It was the eyes I recognized.
Made me feel all gooseflesh. Honest. That woman’s not safe, I’ll swear she
isn’t.”

find out who it could have been. And I’ll take precautions.”

the wind up horribly. Gone clean off his oats. Of course I know he’s a
fidgety old ass and I’ve been doing my best to soothe the troubled beast and
all that, but I’m beginning to think he’s got some excuse. For goodness’
sake, Aunt Harriet, do something about it. I can’t afford to have a valuable
uncle destroyed under my eyes. He’s getting like the Lord of Burleigh, you
know—walking up and pacing down and so on—and the responsibility is
very wearing.”

College tomorrow and see if you can spot the lady. It’s no good this
evening, because so many people don’t turn up to Sunday supper.”

dashed good birthday-present out of Uncle Peter if I solved his problem for
him. So long and take care of yourself.”

piece of news to the Dean; “but I never imagined he’d recognize the woman
like that after only seeing her once.”

encounter had come as a novelty, was inclined to be skeptical. “Personally, I
wouldn’t undertake to identify anybody after one glimpse in the dark—and
I certainly wouldn’t trust a young harum-scarum like that. The only person
here I know of with a navy sprigged foulard is Miss Lydgate, and I
absolutely refuse to believe that! But ask the young man to dinner by all
means. I’m all for excitement, and he’s even more ornamental than the
other one.”

precautions.” A nice fool she would look, going about with a dog-collar
round her neck. Nor would it be any defense against pokers and such things
…The wind must be in the south-west, for the heavy boom of Tom tolling
his hundred-and-one came clearly to her ears as she crossed the Old Quad.

ceased to walk by night, it was still abroad of an evening.

drawer and taking out the heavy strap of brass and leather. There was
something about the description of that woman walking wild-eyed over
Magdalen Bridge and “clutching with her hands” that was very unpleasant
to think of. She could feel Peter’s grip on her throat now like a band of iron,
and could hear him saying serenely, like a textbook:

“That is the dangerous spot. Compression of the big blood vessels

there will cause almost instant unconsciousness. And then, you see, you’re
done for.”

eyes.

the passage-window was open and the wind blowing in. She was getting
ridiculously nervous.

should do this thing?) When she saw herself in the glass, she laughed. “An
arum-lily quality that is in itself an invitation to violence.” Her own face, in
the drowned evening light, surprised her—softened and startled and drained
of color, with eyes that looked unnaturally large under the heavy black
brows, and lips a little parted. It was like the head of someone who had
been guillotined; the dark band cut it off from the body like the stroke of the
headsman’s steel.

unhappy year when she had tried to believe that there was happiness in
surrender. Poor Philip—tormented by his own vanities, never loving her till
he had killed her feeling for him, and yet perilously clutching her as he
went down into the slough of death. It was not to Philip she had submitted,
so much as to a theory of living. The young were always theoretical; only
the middle-aged could realize the deadliness of principles. To subdue one’s
self to one’s own ends might be dangerous, but to subdue one’s self to other
people’s ends was dust and ashes. Yet there were those, still more unhappy,
who envied even the ashy saltiness of those dead sea apples.

was this business of asking questions and analyzing everything that
sterilized and stultified all one’s passions. Experience perhaps had a
formula to get over this difficulty: one kept the bitter, tormenting brain on
one side of the wall and the languorous sweet body on the other, and never

let them meet. So that if you were made that way, you could argue about
loyalties in an Oxford common-room and refresh yourself elsewhere with—
say—Viennese singers, presenting an unruffled surface on both sides of
yourself. Easy for a man, and possible even for a woman, if one avoided
foolish accidents like being tried for murder. But to seek to force
incompatibles into a compromise was madness; one should neither do it nor
be a party to it. If Peter wanted to make the experiment, he must do it
without Harriet’s connivance. Six centuries of possessive blood would not
be dictated to by a bare forty-five years of over-sensitized intellect. Let the
male animal take the female and be content; the busy brain could very well
be “left talking” like the hero of Man and Superman. In a long monologue,
of course; for the female animal could only listen without contributing.
Otherwise one would get the sort of couple one had in Private Lives, who
rolled on the floor and hammered one another when they Weren’t making
love, because they (obviously) had no conversational resources. A vista of
crashing boredom, either way.

The door rattled again, as a reminder that even a little boredom might

be welcome by way of change from alarms. On the mantelpiece, a solitary
red pawn mocked all security …How quietly Annie had taken Peter’s
warning. Did she take it seriously? Was she looking after herself? She had
been her usual refined and self-contained self when she brought in the
Common-room coffee that night—perhaps a little brighter looking than
usual. Of course, she had had her afternoon off with Beatie and Carola …
Curious, thought Harriet, this desire to possess children and dictate their
tastes, as though they were escaping fragments of one’s self, and not
separate individuals. Even if the taste ran to motor-bikes …Annie was all
right. How about Miss de Vine, traveling down from Town in happy
ignorance?—With a start, Harriet saw that it was nearly a quarter to ten.

The train must be in. Had the Warden remembered about warning Miss de
Vine? She ought not to be left to sleep in the ground-floor room without
being fore armed. But the Warden never forgot anything.

whether any lights were on in the Library Wing. She unlocked the door and
stepped out (yes—the passage-window was open; nobody but the wind had
rattled the handle). A few dim figures were still moving at the far end of the
quad as she passed along beside the tennis-court. In the Library Wing, all
the ground-floor windows were dark except for the dim glow of the
passage-light. Miss Barton, at any rate, was not in her room; nor was Miss
de Vine back yet. Or—yes, she must be; for the window-curtains were
drawn in her sitting-room, though no light shone as yet behind them.

open, and the lobby was dark. Miss de Vine’s door was shut. She knocked,
but there was no answer—and it suddenly struck her as odd that the curtains
should be drawn and no light on. She opened the door and pressed down the
wall-switch in the lobby. Nothing happened. With a growing sense of
disquiet, she went on to the sitting-room door and opened that. And then, as
her fingers went out to the switch; the fierce clutch took her by the throat.

not expected the dog-collar. She felt and heard the quick gasp in her face as
the strong, cruel fingers. fumbled on the stiff leather. As they shifted their
hold, she had time to remember what she had been taught—to catch and
jerk the wrists apart. But as her feet felt for the other’s feet, her high heels
slipped on the parquet—and she was falling—they were falling together
and she was undermost; they seemed to take years to fall; and all the time a
stream of hoarse, filthy abuse was running into her ears. Then the world
went black in fire and thunder.

Faces—swimming confusedly through crackling waves of pain—

swelling and diminishing anxiously—then resolving themselves into one—
Miss Hillyard’s face, enormous and close to her own. Then a voice,
agonizingly loud, blaring unintelligibly like a fog-horn. Then, suddenly and
quite clearly, like the lighted stage of a theater, the room, with Miss de
Vine, white as marble, on the couch and the Warden bending over her, and
in between, on the floor, a white bowl filled with scarlet and the Dean
kneeling beside it. Then the fog-horn boomed again, and she heard her own
voice, incredibly far-off and thin: “Tell Peter—” Then nothing.

Somebody had a headache—a quite unbearably awful headache. The

white bright room in the Infirmary would have been very pleasant, if it
hadn’t been for the oppressive neighborhood of the person with the
headache, who was, moreover, groaning very disagreeably. It was an effort
to pull one’s self together and find out what the tiresome person wanted.
With an effort like that of a hippopotamus climbing out of a swamp, Harriet
pulled herself together and discovered that the headache and the groans
were her own, and that the Infirmarian had realized what she was about and
was coming to lend a hand.

“What in the world—?” said Harriet.
“Ah!” said the Infirmarian, “that’s better. No—don’t try to sit up.

You’ve had a nasty knock on the head, and the quieter you keep the better.”

“Oh, I see,” said Harriet. “I’ve got a beast of a headache.” A little

thought located the worst part of the headache somewhere behind the right
ear. She put up an exploratory hand and encountered a bandage. “What
happened?”

“That’s what we’d all like to know,” said the Infirmarian.
“Well, I can’t remember a thing,” said Harriet.
“It doesn’t matter. Drink this.”

room wasn’t really so bright after all; the Venetian shutters were closed. It
was her own eyes that were extraordinarily sensitive to light: Better shut
them.

“Drink this” must have had something helpfully potent about it,

because when she woke up again, the headache was better and she felt
ravenously hungry. Also, she was beginning to remember things—the dog-
collar and the lights that wouldn’t go on—and the hands that had come
clutching out of the darkness. There, memory obstinately stopped short.
How the headache had come into existence she had no idea. Then she saw
again the picture of Miss de Vine stretched on the couch. She asked after
her.

nasty heart-attack, but she’s better now. She would try to do too much, and
of course, finding you like that was a shock to her.”

patient fretting herself into a fever of curiosity, that Harriet got a complete
story of the night’s adventures.

“Now, if you’ll keep quiet,” said the Dean, “I’ll tell you. If not, not.

And your beautiful young man has sent you a young gardenful of flowers
and will call again in the morning. Well, now! Poor Miss de Vine got here
about 10 o’clock—her train was a bit late—and Mullins met her with a
message to go and see the Warden at once. However, she thought she’d
better take her hat off first, so she went along to her rooms—all in a hurry,
so as not to keep Dr. Baring waiting. Well, of course, the first thing was that
the lights wouldn’t go on; and then to her horror she heard you, my dear,
snorting on the floor in the dark. So then she tried the table lamp and that
worked—and there you were, a nasty bluggy sight for a respectable female

don to find in her sitting-room. You’ve got two beautiful stitches in you, by
the way; it was the corner of the bookcase did that …So Miss de Vine
rushed out calling for help, but there wasn’t a soul in the building, and then,
my dear, she ran like fury over to Burleigh and some students tore out to see
what was happening and then somebody fetched the Warden and somebody
else fetched the Infirmarian and somebody else fetched Miss Stevens and
Miss Hillyard and me who were having a quiet cup of tea in my room, and
we rang up the doctor, and Miss de Vine’s groggy heart went back on her,
what with shock and running about, and she went all blue on us—we had a
lovely time.”

who did it?”

it. And then, just as we were settling down, all the fuss started again about
Annie.”

“Annie? What’s happened to her?”
“Oh, didn’t you know? We found her in the coal-hole, my dear, in such

a state, what with coal-dust and hammering her fists on the door; and I
wonder she wasn’t clean off her head, poor thing, locked up there all that
time. And if it hadn’t been for Lord Peter we mightn’t even have begun to
look for her till next morning, what with everything being in such an
uproar.”

get him on the ’phone, or what?”

made up our minds you wouldn’t either of you peg out yet awhile,
somebody brightly remembered that the first thing you said when we picked
you up was ‘Tell Peter.’ So we rang up the Mitre and he wasn’t there; and

then Miss Hillyard said she knew where he was and ’phoned through. That
was after midnight. Fortunately, he hadn’t gone to bed. He said he’d come
over at once, and then he asked what had happened to Annie Wilson. Miss
Hillyard thought the shock had affected his wits, I think. However, he
insisted that she ought to be kept an eye on, so we all started to look for her.
Well, you know what a job it is tracking anybody down in this place, and
we hunted and hunted and nobody had seen anything of her. And then, just
before two, Lord Peter arrived, looking like death, and said we were to turn
the place upside down if we didn’t want a corpse on our hands. Nice and
reassuring that was!”

was an awful ass to let myself be knocked out like that.”

“He didn’t say so,” said the Dean, drily. “He came in to see you, but of

course you were well under the weather. And of course he explained about
the dog-collar, which had puzzled us all dreadfully.”

“Yes. She went for my throat. I do remember that. I suppose she really

meant to get Miss de Vine.”

“Obviously. And with her weak heart—and no dog-collar—she

wouldn’t have had much chance, or so the doctor said. It was very lucky for
her you happened to go in there. Or did you know?”

“I think,” said Harriet, her memory still rather confused, “I went to tell

her about Peter’s warning and—oh, yes! there was something funny about
the window-curtains. And the lights were all off.”

“The bulbs had been taken out. Well, anyway, somewhere about four

o’clock, Padgett found Annie. She was locked up in the coal-cellar under
the Hall Building, at the far end of the boiler-house. The key’d been taken
away and Padgett had to break in the door. She was pounding and shouting
—but of course, if we hadn’t been searching for her she might have yelled

till Doomsday, especially as the radiators are off, and we’re not using the
furnace. She was in what they call a state of collapse and couldn’t give us a
coherent story for ever so long. But there’s nothing really the matter with
her except shock and bruises where she was flung down on the coal-heap.
And of course her hands and arms were pretty well skinned with battering
on the door and trying to climb out of the ventilator.”

“What did she say happened?”
“Why, she was putting away the deck-chairs in the loggia about half-

past nine, when somebody seized her round the neck from behind and
frog’s-marched her off to the cellar. She said it was a woman, and very
strong—”

And a most unfeminine vocabulary.”

that was round her face had a dark sleeve on. Annie’s own impression was
that it was Miss Hillyard; but she was with the Bursar and me. But a good
many of our strongest specimens haven’t got alibis—particularly Miss
Pyke, who says she was in her room, and Miss Barton, who claims to have
been in the Fiction Library, looking for a ‘nice book to read.’ And Mrs.
Goodwin, and Miss Burrows aren’t very well accounted for, either.
According to their own story, they were each seized at the same moment
with an unaccountable desire to wander. Miss Burrows went to commune
with Nature in the Fellows’ Garden and Mrs. Goodwin to commune with a
higher Authority in the Chapel. We are looking rather askance at one
another to day.”

She pondered a moment. “I wonder why she didn’t stay to finish me off.”

have thought you were dead, or been alarmed by the blood and finding
she’d got the wrong person. When you went limp, she’d probably feel about
and she’d know you were not Miss de Vine—short hair and no spectacles,
you see—and she’d hurry off to get rid of any bloodstains before somebody
came along. At least, that was his theory. He looked pretty queer about it.”

“Is he here now?”
“No; he had to go back …Something about getting an early ’plane

from Croydon. He rang up and made a great to-do, but apparently it was all
settled and he had to go. If any of his prayers are heard, I shouldn’t think
anybody in the Government would have a whole place in his body this
morning. So I comforted him with hot coffee and he went off, leaving
orders that neither you nor Miss de Vine nor Annie was to be left alone for
a single moment. And he’s rung up once from London and three times from
Paris.”

“Poor old Peter!” said Harriet. “He never seems to get a night’s rest.”
“Meanwhile, the Warden is valiantly issuing an unconvincing

statement to the effect that somebody played a foolish practical joke on
Annie, that you accidentally slipped and cut your head and that Miss de
Vine was upset by the sight of blood. And the College gates are shut to all
comers, for fear they should be reporters in disguise. But you can’t keep the
scouts quiet—goodness knows what reports are going out by the
tradesmen’s entrance. However, the great thing is that nobody’s killed. And
now I must be off, or the Infirmarian will have my blood and there really
will be an inquest.”

The next day brought Lord Saint-George. “My turn to visit the sick,”

he said. “You’re a nice, restful aunt for a fellow to adopt, I don’t think. Do
you realize that you’ve done me out of a dinner?”

might be able to identify—”

go up. You leave it to Uncle. He says he’ll be back tomorrow, by the way,
and the evidence is rolling in nicely and you’re to keep quiet and not worry,
Honor bright. Had him on the ’phone this morning. He’s all of a doodah.
Says anybody could have done his business in Paris, only they’ve got it into
their heads he’s the only person who can get on the right side of some
tedious old mule or other who has to be placated or conciliated or
something. As far as I can make out, some obscure journalist has been
assassinated and somebody’s trying to make an international incident of it.
Hence the pyramids. I told you Uncle Peter had a strong sense of public
duty; now you see it in action.”

“Well, he’s quite right.”
“What an unnatural woman you are! He ought to be here, weeping into

the sheets and letting the international situation blow itself to blazes.” Lord
Saint-George chuckled. “I wish I’d been on the road with him on Monday
morning. He collected five summonses in the round trip between
Warwickshire and Oxford and London. My mother will be delighted. How’s
your head?”

“Doing fine. It was more the cut than the bump, I think.”
“Scalp-wounds do bleed, don’t they? Completely piglike. Still, it’s as

well you’re not a ‘corpse in the case with a sad, swelled face.’ You’ll be all
right when they get the stitches out. Only a bit convict-like that side of the
head. You’ll have to be cropped all round to even matters up and Uncle
Peter can wear your discarded tresses next his heart.”

“Come, come,” said Harriet. “He doesn’t date back to the seventies.”

now. With beautiful, golden side whiskers. I really think you ought to
rescue him before his bones start to creak and the spiders spin webs over his
eyes.”

“You and your uncle,” said Harriet, “should be set to turn phrases for a

living.”

CHAPTER XXII

O no, there is no end: the end is death and madness! As I am never better

than when I am mad: then methinks I am a brave fellow; then I do wonders:
but reason abuseth me, and there’s the torment, there’s the hell. At the last,

sir, bring me to one of the murderers: were he as strong as Hector, thus

would I tear and drag him up and down.

BEN JONSON

Thursday. A heavy, gloomy and depressing Thursday, pouring down
uninteresting rain from a sky like a grey box lid. The Warden had called a
meeting of the Senior Common Room for half-past two—an unconsoling
hour. All three invalids were up and about again. Harriet had exchanged her
bandages for some very unbecoming and unromantic strappings, and had
not exactly a headache, but the sensation that a headache might begin at any
moment. Miss de Vine looked like a ghost. Annie, though she had suffered
less than the others physically, seemed to be still haunted by nervous
terrors, and crept unhappily about her duties with the other Common Room
maid always closely in attendance.

It was understood that Lord Peter Wimsey would attend the S.C.R.

meeting in order to lay certain information before the staff. Harriet had
received from him a brief and characteristic note, which said:

“Congratulations on not being dead yet. I have taken your collar away

to have my name put on.”

She had already missed the collar. And she had had, from Miss

Hillyard, a strangely vivid little picture of Peter, standing at her bedside

between night and dawn, quite silent, and twisting the thick strap over and
over in his hands.

last moment, so that their meeting took place in the Common Room, under
the eyes of all the dons. He had driven straight from Town without changing
his suit, and above the dark cloth his head had the bleached look of a faint
water-color. He paid his respects politely to the Warden and the Senior dons
before coming over and taking her hand.

“Well, and how are you?”
“Not too bad, considering.”
“That’s good.”
He smiled and went to sit by the Warden. Harriet, at the opposite side

of the table, slipped into a place beside the Dean. Everything that was alive
in him lay in the palm of her hand, like a ripe apple. Dr. Baring was asking
him to begin, and he was doing so, in the flat voice of a secretary reading
the minutes of a company meeting. He had a sheaf of papers before him,
including (Harriet noticed) her dossier, which he must have taken away on
the Monday morning. But he went on without referring to so much as a
note, addressing himself to a bowl filled with marigolds that stood on the
table before him.

“I need not take up your time by going over all the details of this rather

confusing case. I will first set out the salient points as they presented
themselves to me when I came to Oxford last Sunday week, so as to show
you the basis upon which I founded my working theory. I will then
formulate that theory, and adduce the supporting evidence which I hope and
think you will consider conclusive. I may say that practically all the data
necessary to the formation of the theory are contained in the very valuable

digest of the events prepared for me by Miss Vane and handed to me on my
arrival. The rest of the proof was merely what the police call routine work.”

vengeance. She looked round. The Common Room had the hushed air of a
congregation settling down to a sermon, but she could feel the nervous
tension everywhere. They did not know what they might be going to hear.)

“The first point to strike an outsider,” went on Peter, “is the fact that

these demonstrations began at the Gaudy. I may say that that was the first
bad mistake the perpetrator made. By the way, it will save time and trouble
if I refer to the perpetrator in the time-honored way as X. If X had waited
till term began, we should have had a much wider field for suspicion. I
therefore asked myself what it was that so greatly excited X at the Gaudy
that she could not wait for a more suitable time to begin.

roused X’s animosity, because the demonstrations continued in the
following term. But they did not continue during the Long Vacation. So my
attention was immediately directed to any person who entered the College
for the first time at Gaudy and was in residence the following term. Only
one person answered these requirements, and that was Miss de Vine.”

cornfield.

of them, which amounted to an accusation of murder, was slipped into the
sleeve of her gown and might, by a misleading coincidence, have been held
to apply to her. But Miss Martin may remember that she placed Miss Vane’s
gown in the Senior Common Room side by side with that of Miss de Vine. I
believe that X, misreading ‘H. D. Vane’ as ‘H. de Vine’ put the note in the
wrong gown. This belief is, of course, not susceptible of proof; but the

possibility is suggestive. The error, if it was one, distracted attention at the
start from the central object of the campaign.”

only to cast it in the next breath into oblivion, but the hand that had held
hers tightened for a moment and relaxed. She found herself watching the
hand as it moved now among the sheaf of papers.

the quad, was destroyed like the other; but from the description I gather that
it was a drawing similar to this.” He slipped out a paper from under the clip
and passed it to the Warden. “It represents a punishment inflicted by a
naked, female figure upon another, which is clothed in academical dress and
epicene. This appears to be the symbolical key to the situation. In the
Michaelmas Term, other drawings of a similar kind appear, together with
the motif of the hanging of some academical character—a motif which is
repeated in the incident of the dummy found later on suspended in the
Chapel. There were also communications of a vaguely obscene and
threatening sort which need not be particularly considered. The most
interesting and important one, perhaps, is the message addressed to (I think)
Miss Hillyard. ‘No man is safe from women like you’; and the other, sent to
Miss Flaxman, demanding that she should leave another student’s fiancé
alone. These suggested that the basis of X’s grievance was sexual jealousy
of the ordinary kind—a suggestion which, again, I believe to be entirely
erroneous and to have obscured the issue in a quite fantastic manner.

the quad) to the more serious matter of Miss Lydgate’s manuscript. I do not
think it is a coincidence that the portions most heavily disfigured and
obliterated were those in which Miss Lydgate attacked the conclusions of
other scholars, and those scholars, men. If I am right, we see that X is a

person capable of reading, and to some extent understanding, a work of
scholarship. Together with this outrage we may take the mutilation of the
novel called The Search at the exact point where the author upholds, or
appears for the moment to uphold, the doctrine that loyalty to the abstract
truth must override all personal considerations; and also the burning of Miss
Barton’s book in which she attacks the Nazi doctrine that woman’s place in
the State should be confined to the ‘womanly’ occupations of Kinder,
Kirche, Küche.

affair of the bonfire and the sporadic outbursts of obscenity upon the walls.
When we come to the disfigurement of the Library, we get the generalized
attack in a more spectacular form. The object of the campaign begins to
show itself more clearly. The grievance felt by X, starting from a single
person, has extended itself to the entire College, and the intention is to
provoke a public scandal, which may bring the whole body into disrepute.”

marigolds, let it travel slowly round the table, and brought it to rest upon
the Warden’s intent face.

“Will you let me say, here and now, that the one thing which frustrated

the whole attack from first to last was the remarkable solidarity and public
spirit displayed by your college as a body. I think that was the last obstacle
that X expected to encounter in a community of women. Nothing but the
very great loyalty of the Senior Common Room to the College and the
respect of the students for the Senior Common Room stood between you
and a most unpleasant publicity. It is the merest presumption in me to tell
you what you already know far better than I do; but I say it, not only for my
own satisfaction, but because this particular kind of loyalty forms at once

the psychological excuse for the attack and the only possible defense
against it.”

know how to appreciate that.”

“We come next,” resumed Wimsey, his eyes once more on the

marigolds, “to the incident of the dummy in the Chapel. This merely repeats
the theme of the early drawings, but with a greater eye to dramatic effect.
Its evidential importance lies in the ‘Harpy’ quotation pinned to the
dummy; the mysterious appearance of a black figured frock which nobody
could identify; the subsequent conviction of the ex-porter Jukes for theft;
and the finding of the mutilated newspaper in Miss de Vine’s room, which
closed that sequence of events. I will take up those points later.

nephew Saint-George, and he mentioned to her that, under circumstances
into which we need not, perhaps, inquire, he had met a mysterious woman
one night in your Fellows’ Garden, and that she had told him two things.
One: that Shrewsbury College was a place where they murdered beautiful
boys like him and ate their hearts out; secondly: that ‘the other had fair hair,
too.’”

This piece of information was new to most of the Senior Common

Room, and caused a mild sensation.

the victim. He is a man, fair, handsome and comparatively young. My
nephew then said he would not undertake to recognize the woman again;
but on a subsequent occasion he saw and did recognize her.”

Once again the tremor passed round the table.
“The next important disturbance was the affair of the missing fuses.”
Here the Dean could contain herself no longer and burst out:

“What a lovely title for a thriller!”
The veiled eyes lifted instantly, and the laughter-lines gathered at the

corners.

“Perfect. And that was all it was. X retired, having accomplished

nothing but a thriller with good publicity value.”

found in my room.”

“Yes,” said Wimsey; “mine was a rational, not a chronological,

grouping …That brings us to the end of the Hilary Term. The Vacation
passed without incident. In the Summer Term, we are faced with the
cumulative effect of long and insidious persecution upon a scholar of
sensitive temperament. That was the most dangerous phase of X’s activities.
We know that other students besides Miss Newland had received letters
wishing them bad luck in their Schools; happily, Miss Layton and the rest
were of tougher fiber. But I should like particularly to draw your attention
to the fact that, with a few unimportant exceptions, the animus was all
directed against dons and scholars.”

broke in:

building. Do you mind, Warden, if I send out and stop it?”

suggested to Padgett that a search in the coal cellar might be profitable.”

“Then,” pronounced the Warden, “I fear we must put up with it,

Bursar.” She inclined her head towards Wimsey, who went on:

“That is a brief summary of the events as presented to me by Miss

Vane, when, with your consent, Warden, she laid the case before me. I
rather gathered”—here the right hand became restless and began to beat out

a silent tattoo upon the tabletop—“that she and some others among you
were inclined to look upon the outrages as the outcome of repressions
sometimes accompanying the celibate life and issuing in an obscene and
unreasoning malice directed partly against the conditions of that life and
partly against persons who enjoyed or had enjoyed or might be supposed to
enjoy a wider experience. There is no doubt that malice of that kind exists.
But the history of the case seemed to me to offer a psychological picture of
an entirely different kind. One member of this Common Room has been
married, and another is engaged to be married; and neither of these, who
ought to have been the first victims, were (so far as I know) persecuted at
all. The dominance of the naked female figure in the early drawing is also
highly significant. So is the destruction of Miss Barton’s book. Also, the
bias displayed by X seemed to be strongly antischolastic, and to have a
more or less rational motive, based on some injury amounting in X’s mind
to murder, inflicted upon a male person by a female scholar. The grievance
seemed, to my mind, to be felt principally against Miss de Vine, and to be
extended, from her, to the whole College and possibly to educated women
in general. I therefore felt we should look for a woman either married or
with sexual experience, of limited education but some acquaintance with
scholars and scholarship, whose past was in some way linked with that of
Miss de Vine, and (though this was an assumption) who had probably come
into residence later than last December.”

its soft drumming and now lay flat on the table, to estimate the effect of this
on his hearers. Miss de Vine was frowning as though her mind, running
back over the years, were dispassionately considering her claim to have
done murder; Miss Chilperic’s face wore a troubled blush, and Mrs.
Goodwin’s an air of protest; in Miss Hillyard’s eyes was an extraordinary

mixture of triumph and embarrassment; Miss Barton was nodding quiet
assent, Miss Allison smiling, Miss Shaw faintly affronted; Miss Edwards
was looking at Peter with eyes that said frankly, “You are the sort of person
I can deal with.” The Warden’s grave countenance was expressionless. The
Dean’s profile gave no clue to her feelings, but she uttered a little, quick
sigh that sounded like relief.

“I will now come,” said Peter, “to the material clues. First, the printed

messages. It seemed to me extremely unlikely that these could have been
produced, in such quantity, within the College walls, without leaving some
trace of their origin. I was inclined to look for an outside source. Similarly
with the figured dress found on the dummy; it seemed very strange that
nobody should ever have set eyes on it before, though it was several
seasons old. Thirdly, there was the odd circumstance that the letters which
came by post were always received either on a Monday or a Thursday, as
though Sunday and Wednesday were the only days on which letters could
conveniently be posted from a distant post-office or box. These three
considerations might have suggested someone living at a distance, who
visited Oxford only twice a week. But the nightly disturbances made it plain
that the person actually lived within the walls, with fixed days for going
outside them and a place somewhere outside, where clothes could be kept
and letters prepared. The person who would fulfill these conditions best
would be one of the scouts.”

Miss Stevens and Miss Barton both stirred.
“The majority of the scouts, however, seemed to be ruled out. Those

who were not confined within the Scouts’ Wing at night were trusted
women of long service here—most unlikely to fulfill any of the other
conditions. Most of those in the Scouts’ Wing slept two in a room, and
therefore (unless two of them were in collusion) could not possibly escape

into the College night after night without being suspected. This left only
those who had separate bedrooms: Carrie, the head Scout; Annie, the scout
attached first to Miss Lydgate’s staircase and subsequently to the Senior
Common Room, and a third scout, Ethel, an elderly and highly reputable
woman. Of these three, Annie corresponded most closely to the
psychological picture of X; for she had been married and had the afternoon
of Sunday and the afternoon and evening of Wednesday free; she also had
her children domiciled in the town and therefore a place where she could
keep clothes and prepare letters.”

“But—” began the Bursar, indignantly.
“This is only the case as I saw it last Sunday week,” said Wimsey.

“Certain powerful objections at once presented themselves. The Scouts’
Wing was shut off by locked doors and gates. But it was made clear at the
time of the Library episode that the buttery hatch was occasionally left open
for the convenience of students wishing to obtain supplies late at night.
Miss Hudson had, in fact, expected to find it open that very night. When
Miss Vane tried it, it was, in fact, locked. But that was after X had left the
Library, and you will remember that X was shown to have been trapped in
the Hall Building by Miss Vane and Miss Hudson at one end and Miss
Barton at the other. The assumption made at the time was that she had been
hiding in the Hall.

“After that episode, greater care was taken to see that the buttery hatch

was kept locked, and I learn that the key, which was previously left on the
inner side of the hatch, was removed and placed on Carrie’s key-ring. But a
key can very readily be cut in a single day. Actually, it was a week before
the next nocturnal episode occurred, which carries us over the following
Wednesday, when a key abstracted from Carrie’s bunch might readily have
been copied and returned. (I know for a fact that such a key was cut on that

Wednesday by an ironmonger in the lower part of the town, though I have
not been able to identify the purchaser. But that is merely a routine detail.)
There was one consideration which inclined Miss Vane to exonerate all the
scouts, and that was, that no woman in that position would be likely to
express her resentment in the Latin quotation from the Aeneid found
attached to the dummy.

the only message that was not in English, and it was one to which any
school child might easily have access. On the other hand, the fact that it was
unique among the other scripts made me sure that it had some particular
significance. I mean, it wasn’t that X’s feelings habitually expressed
themselves in Latin hexameters. There must be something special about that
passage besides its general applicability to unnatural females who snatch
the meat from men’s mouths. Nec saevior ulla pestis.”

“When I first heard of that,” broke in Miss Hillyard, “I felt sure that a

man was behind all this.”

“That was probably a sound instinct,” said Wimsey. “I feel sure that a

man did write that …Well, I need not take up time with pointing out how
easy it was for anybody to wander about the College at night and play tricks
on people. In a community of two hundred people, some of whom scarcely
know one another by sight, it is harder to find a person than to lose her. But
the intrusion of Jukes upon the situation at that moment was rather
awkward for X. Miss Vane showed, and announced, a disposition to inquire
rather too closely into Jukes’s home-life. As a result somebody who knew a
good deal about Jukes’ little habits laid an information and Jukes was
removed to goal. Mrs. Jukes took refuge with her relations and Annie’s
children were sent away to Headington. And in order that we should feel

quite sure that the Jukes household had nothing to do with the matter, a
mutilated newspaper appeared shortly afterwards in Miss de Vine’s room.”

Harriet looked up.
“I did work that out—eventually. But what happened last week seemed

to make it quite impossible.”

for saying so—with an unprejudiced mind and undivided attention.
Something got between you and the facts.”

“Miss Vane has been helping me so generously with my books,”

murmured Miss Lydgate, contritely; “and she has had her own work to do
as well. We really ought not to have asked her to spare any time for our
problems.”

“I had plenty of time,” said Harriet. “I was only stupid.”
“At any rate,” said Wimsey, “Miss Vane did enough to make X feel she

was dangerous. At the beginning of this term, we find X becoming more
desperate and more deadly in intention. With the lighter evenings, it
becomes more difficult to play tricks at night. There is the psychological
attempt on Miss Newland’s life and reason and, when that fails, an effort is
made to create a stink in the University by sending letters to the Vice-
Chancellor. However, the University proved to be as solid as the College;
having let the women in, it was not prepared to let them down. This was no
doubt exasperating to the feelings of X. Dr. Threep acted as intermediary
between the Vice-Chancellor and yourselves, and the matter was
presumably dealt with.”

being taken.”

I had very little doubt from the start as to the identity of X; but suspicion is

not proof, and I was anxious not to cast any suspicion that could not be
justified. My first task was obviously to find out whether Miss de Vine had
actually ever murdered or injured anybody. In the course of a very
interesting after-dinner conversation in this room, she informed me that, six
years ago, she had been instrumental in depriving a man of his reputation
and livelihood—and we decided, if you remember, that this was an action
which any manly man or womanly woman might be disposed to resent.”

intended merely to bring out that story?”

“I offered an opportunity for the story’s appearance, certainly; but if it

hadn’t come out then, I should have asked for it. Incidentally, I established
for a certainty, what I was sure of in my own mind from the start, that there
was not a woman in this Common Room, married or single, who would be
ready to place personal loyalties above professional honor. That was a point
which it seemed necessary to make clear—not so much to me, as to
yourselves.”

The Warden looked from Miss Hillyard to Mrs. Goodwin and back at

Peter.

“Yes,” she said, “I think it was wise to establish that.”
“The next day,” said Peter, “I asked Miss de Vine for the name of the

man in question, whom we already knew to be handsome and married. The
name was Arthur Robinson; and with this information I set out to find what
had become of him. My working theory was that X was either the wife or
some relation of Robinson: that she had come here when Miss de Vine’s
appointment was announced, with the intention of revenging his
misfortunes upon Miss de Vine, the College and academic women in
general; and that in all probability X was a person who stood in some close
relation to the Jukes family. This theory was strengthened by the discovery

that information was laid against Jukes by an anonymous letter similar to
those circulated here.

of X in the Science Lecture Room. The idea that X was courting discovery
by preparing letters in that public and dangerous manner was patently
absurd. The whole thing was a clear fake, intended to mislead, and probably
to establish an alibi. The communications had been prepared elsewhere and
deliberately planted—in fact, there were not enough letters left in the box to
finish the message that had been begun to Miss Vane. The room chosen was
in full view of the Scouts’ Wing, and the big ceiling light was
conspicuously turned on, though there was a reading-lamp in the room, in
good working order; it was Annie who drew Carrie’s attention to the light in
the window; Annie was the only person who claimed to have actually seen
X; and while the alibi was established for both scouts, Annie was the one
who most closely corresponded to the conditions required to X.”

“But Carrie heard X in the room,” said the Dean.
“Oh, yes,” said Wimsey, smiling. “And Carrie was sent to fetch you

while Annie removed the strings that had switched out the light and
overturned the blackboard from the other side of the door. I pointed out to
you, you know, that the top of the door had been thoroughly dusted, so that
the mark of the string shouldn’t show.”

“But the marks on the dark-room window-sill—” said the Dean.
“Quite genuine. She got out there the first time, leaving the doors

locked on the inside and strewing a few of Miss de Vine’s hairpins about to
produce conviction. Then she let herself into the Scouts’ Wing through the
Buttery, called up Carrie and brought her along to see the fun …I think, by
the way, that someone of the scouts must have had her suspicions. Perhaps
she had found Annie’s bedroom door mysteriously locked on various

occasions, or had met her in the passage at inconvenient times. Anyhow, the
time had obviously arrived for establishing an alibi. I hazarded the
suggestion that nocturnal ramblings would cease from that time on; and so
they did. And I don’t suppose we shall ever find that extra key to the
Buttery.”

“All very well,” said Miss Edwards. “But you still have no proof.”
“No. I went away to get it. In the meantime, X—if you don’t like my

identification—decided that Miss Vane was dangerous, and laid a trap to
catch her. This didn’t come off, because Miss Vane very sensibly
telephoned back to College to confirm the mysterious message she had
received at Somerville. The message was sent from an outside call-box on
the Wednesday night at 10:40. Just before eleven, Annie came in from her
day off and heard Padgett speak to Miss Vane on the ’phone. She didn’t
hear the conversation, but she probably heard the name.

be made, either on Miss Vane, Miss de Vine or the suspicious scout—or on
all three. I issued a warning to that effect. The next thing that happened was
that Miss Vane’s chessmen were destroyed. That was rather unexpected. It
looked less like alarm than personal hatred. Up till that time, Miss Vane had
been treated with almost as much tenderness as though she had been a
womanly woman. Can you think of anything that can have given X that
impression, Miss Vane?”

“I don’t know,” said Harriet, confused. “I asked kindly after the

children and spoke to Beatie—good heavens, yes, Beatie!—when I met
them. And I remember once agreeing politely with Annie that marriage
might be a good thing if one could find the right person.”

“That was politic if unprincipled. And how about the attentive Mr.

hide them in the Chapel—”

“Good gracious!” exclaimed Miss Pyke.
“—you must be expected to be thought a womanly woman. However;

that is of no great importance. I fear the illusion was destroyed when you
publicly informed me that personal attachments must come second to public
duties.”

“But,” said Miss Edwards, impatiently, “what happened to Arthur

Robinson?”

been his landlady’s daughter. His first child, born eight years ago, was
called Beatrice. After the trouble at York, he changed his name to Wilson
and took a post as junior master in a small preparatory school, where they
didn’t mind taking a man who had been deprived of his M.A., so long as he
was cheap. His second daughter, born shortly afterwards, was named
Carola. I’m afraid the Wilsons didn’t find life too easy. He lost his first job
—drink was the reason, I’m afraid—took another—got into trouble again
and three years ago blew his brains out. There were photographs in the local
paper. Here they are, you see. A fair, handsome man of about thirty-eight—
irresolute, attractive, something of my nephew’s type. And here is the
photograph of the widow.”

“You are right,” said the Warden. “That is Annie Wilson.”
“Yes. If you read the report of the inquest, you will see that he left a

letter, saying that he had been hounded to death—rather a rambling letter,
containing a Latin quotation, which the coroner obligingly translated.”

“Good gracious!” said Miss Pyke. “Tristius haud illis monstrum—?”
“Ita. A man wrote that after all, you see; so Miss Hillyard was so far

right. Annie Wilson, being obliged to do something to support her children
and herself, went into service.”

“I had very good references with her,” said the Bursar.
“No doubt; why not? She must somehow have kept track of Miss de

Vine’s movements; and when the appointment was announced last
Christmas, she applied for a job here. She probably knew that, as an
unfortunate widow with two small children, she would receive kindly
consideration—”

ridiculous sentimentality about married women would be the ruin of all
discipline in this College. Their minds are not, and cannot be, on their
work.”

“Oh, dear!” said Miss Lydgate. “Poor soul! Brooding over that

grievance in this really unbalanced way! If only we had known, we could
surely have done something to make her see the thing in a more rational
light. Did it never occur to you, Miss de Vine, to inquire what happened to
this unhappy man Robinson?”

“I am afraid it did not.”
“Why should you?” demanded Miss Hillyard.
The noise in the coal-cellar had ceased within the last few minutes. As

though the silence had roused a train of association in her mind, Miss
Chilperic turned to Peter and said, hesitatingly:

“If poor Annie really did all these dreadful things, how did she get shut

up in the coal-hole?”

theory; especially as I didn’t get the report from my research-staff till
yesterday. But when you come to think of it, what else could she do? She
laid a plot to attack Miss de Vine on her return from Town—the scouts
probably knew which train she was coming by.”

“Nellie knew,” said Harriet.

fortune, the attack was delivered—not against Miss de Vine, who would
have been taken unawares and whose heart is not strong, but against a
younger and stronger woman, who was, up to the certain point, prepared to
meet it. Even so, it was serious enough, and might easily have proved fatal.
I find it difficult to forgive myself for not having spoken earlier—with or
without proof—and put the suspect under observation.”

chucked the whole thing for the rest of the term, and we should still not
know anything definite. I wasn’t much hurt.”

the risk; but I had no right to expose Miss de Vine.”

properly mine.”

have telephoned the warning to you before you left Town.”

“Whosever fault it was,” said Peter, “it was Miss Vane who was

attacked. Instead of a nice, quiet throttling, there was a nasty fall and a lot
of blood, some of which, no doubt, got on to the assailant’s hands and dress.
She was in an awkward position. She had got the wrong person, she was
bloodstained and disheveled, and Miss de Vine or somebody else might
arrive at any moment. Even if she ran quickly back to her own room, she
might be seen—her uniform was stained—and when the body was found
(alive or dead) she would be a marked woman. Her only possible chance
was to stage an attack on herself. She went out through the back of the
Loggia, threw herself into the coal-cellar, locked the door on herself and
proceeded to cover up Miss Vane’s bloodstains with her own. By the way,

Miss Vane, if you remembered anything of your lesson, you must have
marked her wrists for her.”

“I’ll swear I did,” said Harriet.
“But any amount of bruising may be caused by trying to scramble

through a ventilator. Well. The evidence, you see, is still circumstantial—
even though my nephew is prepared to identify the woman he saw crossing
Magdalen Bridge on Wednesday with the woman he met in the garden. One
can catch a Headington bus from the other side of Magdalen Bridge.
Meanwhile, you heard this fellow in the cellarage? If I am not mistaken,
somebody is arriving with something like direct proof.”

Padgett followed the knock almost before he was told to come in. His
clothes bore traces of coal-dust, though some hasty washing had evidently
been done to his hands and face.

“Excuse me, madam Warden, miss,” said Padgett. “Here you are,

Major. Right down at the bottom of the ’eap. ’Ad to shift the whole lot, I
had.”

He laid a large key on the table.
“Have you tried it in the cellar-door?”
“Yes, sir. But there wasn’t no need. ’Ere’s my label on it. ‘Coal-

cellar’—see?”

“Easy to lock yourself in and hide the key. Thank you, Padgett.”
“One moment, Padgett,” said the Warden. “I want to see Annie

Wilson. Will you please find her and bring her here.”

“Better not,” said Wimsey, in a low tone.
“I certainly shall,” said the Warden, sharply. “You have made a public

accusation against this unfortunate woman, and it is only right that she

should be given an opportunity to answer it. Bring her here at once,
Padgett.”

went out.

“I think it is very necessary,” said the Bursar, “that this matter should

be cleared up completely and at once.”

“Do you really think it wise, Warden?” asked the Dean.
“Nobody shall be accused in this College,” said the Warden, “without

a hearing. Your arguments, Lord Peter, appear to be most convincing; but
the evidence may bear some other interpretation. Annie Wilson is, no doubt,
Charlotte Ann Robinson; but it does not follow that she is the author of the
disturbances. I admit that appearances are against her, but there may be
falsification or coincidence. The key, for example, may have been put into
the coal-cellar at any time within the last three days.”

Annie interrupted him. Neat and subdued as usual, she approached the
Warden:

newspaper spread out upon the table, and she drew in her breath with a
long, sharp hiss, while her eyes went round the room like the eyes of a
hunted animal.

“Mrs. Robinson,” said Peter, quickly and quietly. “We can quite

understand how you came to feel a grievance—perhaps a justifiable
grievance—against the persons responsible for the sad death of your
husband. But how could you bring yourself to let your children help you to
prepare those horrible messages? Didn’t you realize that if anything had
happened they might have been called upon to bear witness in court?”

They only helped to cut out the letters. Do you think I’d let them suffer? …
My God! You can’t do that …I say you can’t do it …You beasts, I’d kill
myself first.”

responsible for all these abominable disturbances? I sent for you in order
that you might clear yourself of certain suspicions which—”

“Clear myself! I wouldn’t trouble to clear myself. You smug

hypocrites—I’d like to see you bring me into court. I’d laugh in your faces.
How would you look, sitting there while I told the judge how that woman
there killed my husband?”

this. I knew nothing of it till just now. But indeed I had no choice in the
matter. I could not foresee the consequences—and even if I had—”

you murdered him. What had he done to you? What harm had he done to
anybody? He only wanted to live and be happy. You took the bread out of
his mouth and flung his children and me out to starve. What did it matter to
you? You had no children. You hadn’t a man to care about. I know all about
you. You had a man once and you threw him over because it was too much
bother to look after him. But couldn’t you leave my man alone? He told a
lie about somebody else who was dead and dust hundreds of years ago.
Nobody was the worse for that. Was a dirty bit of paper more important
than all our lives and happiness? You broke him and killed him—all for
nothing. Do you think that’s a woman’s job?”

“Most unhappily,” said Miss de Vine, “it was my job.”
“What business had you with a job like that? A woman’s job is to look

after a husband and children. I wish I had killed you. I wish I could kill you

all. I wish I could burn down this place and all the places like it—where
you teach women to take men’s jobs and rob them first and kill them
afterwards.”

She turned to the Warden.
“Don’t you know what you’re doing? I’ve heard you sit round

sniveling about unemployment—but it’s you, it’s women like you who take
the work away from the men and break their hearts and lives. No wonder
you can’t get men for yourselves and hate the women who can. God keep
the men out of your hands, that’s what I say. You’d destroy your own
husbands, if you had any, for an old book or bit of writing …I loved my
husband and you broke his heart. If he’d been a thief or a murderer, I’d have
loved him and stuck to him. He didn’t mean to steal that old bit of paper—
he only put it away. It made no difference to anybody. It wouldn’t have
helped a single man or woman or child in the world—it wouldn’t have kept
a cat alive; but you killed him for it.”

her wrist. She shook her head. Immovable, implacable, thought Harriet; this
won’t make her pulse miss a single beat. The rest of the Common Room
looked merely stunned.

None of them feel anything. You brazen devils—you all stand together.
You’re only frightened for your skins and your miserable reputations. I
scared you all, didn’t I? God! How I laughed to see you all look at one
another! You didn’t even trust each other. You can’t agree about anything
except hating decent women and their men. I wish I’d torn the throats out of
the lot of you. It would have been too good for you, though. I wanted to see
you thrown out to starve, like us. I wanted to see you all dragged into the
gutter. I wanted to see you—you—sneered at and trampled on and degraded

and despised as we were. It would do you good to learn to scrub floors for a
living as I’ve done, and use your hands for something, and say ‘madam’ to
a lot of scum …But I made you shake in your shoes, anyhow. You couldn’t
even find out who was doing it—that’s all your wonderful brains come to.
There’s nothing in your books about life and marriage and children, is
there? Nothing about desperate people—or love—or hate or anything
human. You’re ignorant and stupid and helpless. You’re a lot of fools. You
can’t do anything for yourselves. Even you, you silly old hags—you had to
get a man to do your work for you.

as though she would have fallen on her and torn her to pieces. “And you’re
the dirtiest hypocrite of the lot. I know who you are. You had a lover once,
and he died. You chucked him out because you were too proud to marry
him. You were his mistress and you sucked him dry, and you didn’t value
him enough to let him make an honest woman of you. He died because you
weren’t there to look after him. I suppose you’d say you loved him. You
don’t know what love means. It means sticking to your man through thick
and thin and putting up with everything. But you take men and use them
and throw them away when you’ve finished with them. They come after
you like wasps round a jam-jar, and then they fall in and die. What are you
going to do with that one there? You send for him when you need him to do
your dirty work, and when you’ve finished with him you’ll get rid of him.
You don’t want to cook his meals and mend his clothes and bear his
children like a decent woman. You’ll use him, like any other tool, to break
me. You’d like to see me in prison and my children in a home, because you
haven’t the guts to do your proper job in the world. The whole bunch of you
together haven’t flesh and blood enough to make you fit for a man. As for
you—”

hands. She went over and shook him furiously by the shoulder, and as he
looked up, spat in his face. “You! You dirty traitor! You rotten little white-
faced rat! It’s men like you that make women like this. You don’t know how
to do anything but talk. What do you know about life, with your title and
your money and your clothes and motor-cars? You’ve never done a hand’s
turn of honest work! You can buy all the women you want. Wives and
mothers may rot and die for all you care, while you chatter about duty and
honor. Nobody would sacrifice anything for you—why should they? That
woman’s making a fool of you and you can’t see it. If she marries you for
your money she’ll make a worse fool of you, and you’ll deserve it. You’re
fit for nothing but to keep your hands white and father other men’s children.
…What are you going to do now, all of you? Run away and squeal to the
magistrate because I made fools of you all? You daren’t. You’re afraid to
come out into the light. You’re afraid for your precious college and your
precious selves. I’m not afraid. I did nothing but stand up for my own flesh
and blood. Damn you! I can laugh at you all! You daren’t touch me. You’re
afraid of me. I had a husband and I loved him—and you were jealous of me
and you killed him. Oh, God! You killed him among you, and we never had
a happy moment again.”

her cap crooked and her hands twisting her apron into a knot.

stopped?”

Here Miss Barton got up.
“Come, Annie,” she said, briskly. “We are all very sorry for you, but

you mustn’t behave in this foolish and hysterical way. What would the
children think if they saw you now? You had better come and lie down

quietly and take some aspirin. Bursar! Will you please help me out with
her?”

three went out together. The Warden turned to Peter, who stood
mechanically wiping his face with his handkerchief and looking at nobody.

known better. You were perfectly right.”

an engine. “He’s always right. He said it was dangerous to care for
anybody. He said love was a brute and a devil. You’re honest, Peter, aren’t
you? Damned honest—Oh, God! let me get out of here. I’m going to be
sick.”

he had to steer her with a firm hand to the cloakroom door. When he came
back, the Warden had risen, and the dons with her. They looked stupefied
with the shock of seeing so many feelings stripped naked in public.

“Of course, Miss de Vine,” the Warden was saying, “no sane person

could possibly think of blaming you.”

“Thank you, Warden,” said Miss de Vine. “Nobody, perhaps, but

myself.”

feeling more ourselves, I think we should all like to say—”

“Please don’t,” said he. “It doesn’t matter at all.”
The Warden went out, and the rest followed her like mutes at a funeral,

leaving only Miss de Vine, sitting solitary beneath the window. Peter shut
the door after them and came up to her. He was still passing his
handkerchief across his mouth. Becoming aware of this, he tossed the linen
into the wastepaper basket.

“Most bitterly. Not for my original action, which was unavoidable, but for
the sequel. Nothing you can say to me could make me feel more responsible
than I do already.”

this Common Room, I admit the principle and the consequences must
follow.”

thought for other people. Miss Lydgate would have done what I did in the
first place; but she would have made it her business to see what became of
that unhappy man and his wife.”

prevent other people from suffering for her principles. That seems to be
what principles are for, somehow …I don’t claim, you know,” he added,
with something of his familiar diffidence, “to be a Christian or anything of
that kind. But there’s one thing in the Bible that seems to me to be a mere
statement of brutal fact—I mean, about bringing not peace but a sword.”

Miss de Vine looked up at him curiously.
“How much are you going to suffer for this?”
“God knows,” he said. “That’s my lookout. Perhaps not at all. In any

case, you know, I’m with you—every time.”

When Harriet emerged from the cloak-room, she found Miss de Vine

alone.

“Thank Heaven, they’ve gone,” said Harriet. “I’m afraid I made an

exhibition of myself. It was rather—shattering, wasn’t it? What’s happened
to Peter?”

“He’s gone,” said Miss de Vine.
She hesitated, and then said:

me if I am saying too much. But we have talked a good deal about facing
the facts. Isn’t it time you faced the facts about that man?”

with unseeing eyes into the quad, “and that is, that if I once gave way to
Peter, I should go up like straw.”

has he used that weapon against you?”

used it. “Never.”

“Then what are you afraid of? Yourself?”
“Isn’t this afternoon warning enough?”
“Perhaps. You have had the luck to come up against a very unselfish

and a very honest man. He has done what you asked him without caring
what it cost him and without shirking the issue. He hasn’t tried to disguise
the facts or bias your judgment. You admit that, at any rate.”

“I suppose he realized how I should feel about it?”
“Realized it?” said Miss de Vine, with a touch of irritation. “My dear

girl, give him the credit for the brains he’s got. They are very good ones. He
is painfully sensitive and far more intelligent than is good for him. But I
really don’t think you can go on like this. You won’t break his patience or
his control or his spirit; but you may break his health. He looks like a
person pushed to the last verge of endurance.”

“He’s been rushing about and working very hard,” said Harriet,

defensively. “I shouldn’t be at all a comfortable person for him to live with.
I’ve got a devilish temper.”

courage.”

“I should only make his life a misery.”
“Very well. If you are determined that you’re not fit to black his boots,

tell him so and send him away.”

“I’ve been trying to send Peter away for five years. It doesn’t have that

effect on him.”

…Forgive me. I don’t suppose you’ve had a very easy time with yourself.
But it can’t have been easy for him, either—looking on at it, and quite
powerless to interfere.”

intelligent. It would be quite a relief to be ridden over rough-shod for a
change.”

mind for you. You’ll have to make your own decisions. You needn’t be
afraid of losing your independence; he will always force it back on you. If
you ever find any kind of repose with him, it can only be the repose of very
delicate balance.”

a man like that?”

consideration. A marriage of two independent and equally irritable
intelligences seems to me reckless to the point of insanity. You can hurt one
another so dreadfully.”

“I know. And I don’t think I can stand being hurt any more.”
“Then,” said Miss de Vine, “I suggest that you stop hurting other

people. Face the facts and state a conclusion. Bring a scholar’s mind to the
problem and have done with it.”

me. Miss Lydgate’s History of Prosody was marked PRESS with her own
hand this morning. I fled with it and seized on a student to take it down to
the printers. I’m almost positive I heard a faint voice crying from the
window about a footnote on page 97—but I pretended not to hear.”

scholarship has achieved a result at last!”

CHAPTER XXIII

The last refuge and surest remedy, to be put in practice in the utmost place,
when no other means will take effect, is, to let them go together and enjoy

one another; potissima cura est ut heros amasia sua potiatur, saith

Guianerius …Aesculapius himself, to this malady, cannot invent a better

remedy, quam ut amanti cedat amatum … than that a Lover have his desire.

ROBERT BURTON

There was no word from Peter in the morning. The Warden issued a brief
and discreet announcement to the College that the offender had been traced
and the trouble ended. The Senior Common Room, recovering a little from
its shock, went quietly about the business of the term. They were all normal
again. They had never been anything else. Now that the distorting-glass of
suspicion was removed, they were kindly, intelligent human beings—not
seeing, perhaps, very much farther beyond their own interests than the
ordinary man beyond his job or the ordinary woman beyond her own
household—but as understandable and pleasant as daily bread.

Harriet, having got Miss Lydgate’s proofs off her mind, and feeling

that she could not brace herself to deal with Wilfrid, took her notes on
Lefanu, and went down to put in a little solid work at the Camera.

Shortly before noon, a hand touched her shoulder.
“They told me you were here,” said Peter. “Can you spare a moment?

We can go up on to the roof.”

Harriet put down her pen and followed him across the circular

chamber with its desks full of silent readers.

winding staircase, “that the problem is being medically dealt with.”

which may take a little time—it copes with great thoroughness and
efficiency. Nothing will be overlooked.”

They climbed in silence, and came out at length through the little turret

upon the gallery of the Camera. The previous day’s rain had passed and left
the sun shining upon a shining city. Stepping cautiously over the slatted
flooring towards the south-east segment of the circle, they were a little
surprised to come upon Miss Cattermole and Mr. Pomfret, who were seated
side by side upon a stone projection and rose as they approached, in a
flutter, like daws disturbed from a belfry.

“Don’t move,” said Wimsey, graciously. “Plenty of room for all of us.”
“It’s quite all right, sir,” said Mr. Pomfret. “We were just going. Really.

I’ve got a lecture at twelve.”

“Dear me!” said Harriet, watching them disappear into the turret. But

Peter had already lost interest in Mr. Pomfret and his affairs. He was
leaning with his elbows on the parapet, looking down into Cat Street.
Harriet joined him.

Souls, fantastic, unreal as a house of cards, clear-cut in the sunshine, the
drenched oval in the quad beneath brilliant as an emerald in the bezel of a
ring. Behind them, black and grey, New College frowning like a fortress,
with dark wings wheeling about her belfry louvres; and Queen’s with her
dome of green copper; and, as the eye turned southward, Magdalen, yellow
and slender, the tall lily of towers; the Schools and the battlemented front of
University; Merton, square-pinnacled, half-hidden behind the shadowed
North side and mounting spire of St. Mary’s. Westward again, Christ

Church, vast between Cathedral spire and Tom Tower; Brasenose close at
hand; St. Aldate’s and Carfax beyond; spire and tower and quadrangle, all
Oxford springing underfoot in living leaf and enduring stone, ringed far off
by her bulwark of blue hills.

Towery City, and branchy between towers,
Cuckoo-echoing, bell-swarmed, lark-charmed,

rook-racked, river-rounded,

The dapple-eared lily below.

“Harriet,” said Peter; “I want to ask your forgiveness for these last five

years.”

“I think,” said Harriet, “it ought to be the other way round.”
“I think not. When I remember how we first met—”
“Peter, don’t think about that ghastly time. I was sick of myself, body

and soul. I didn’t know what I was doing.”

“And I chose that time, when I should have thought only of you, to

thrust myself upon you, to make demands of you, like a damned arrogant
fool—as though I had only to ask and have. Harriet, I ask you to believe
that, whatever it looked like, my blundering was nothing worse than vanity
and a blind, childish impatience to get my own way.”

She shook her head, finding no words.
“I had found you,” he went on, a little more quietly, “beyond all hope

or expectation, at a time when I thought no woman could ever mean
anything to me beyond a little easy sale and exchange of pleasure. And I
was so terrified of losing you before I could grasp you that I babbled out all
my greed and fear as though, God help me, you had nothing to think of but
me and my windy self-importance. As though it mattered. As though the

very word of love had not been the most crashing insolence a man could
offer you.”

“No, Peter. Never that.”
“My dear—you showed me what you thought of me when you said

you would live with me but not marry me.”

“Don’t. I am ashamed of that.”
“Not so bitterly ashamed as I have been. If you knew how I have tried

to forget it. I told myself that you were only afraid of the social
consequences of marriage. I comforted myself with pretending that it
showed you liked me a little. I bolstered up my conceit for months, before I
would admit the humiliating truth that I ought to have known from the
beginning—that you were so sick of my pestering that you would have
thrown yourself to me as one throws a bone to a dog, to stop the brute from
yelping”

you base coin for a marriage-portion?”

“At least I had the decency to know that I couldn’t take it in settlement

of a debt. But I have never dared to tell you what that rebuke meant to me,
when at last I saw it for what it was …Harriet; I have nothing much in the
way of religion, or even morality, but I do recognize a code of behavior of
sorts. I do know that the worst sin—perhaps the only sin—passion can
commit, is to be joyless. It must lie down with laughter or make its bed in
hell—there is no middle way …Don’t misunderstand me. I have bought it,
often—but never by forced sale or at ‘stupendous sacrifice.’ …Don’t, for
God’s sake, ever think you owe me anything. If I can’t have the real thing, I
can make do with the imitation. But I will not have surrenders or
crucifixions …If you have come to feel any kindness for me at all, tell me
that you would never make me that offer again.”

only that I have found a value for myself. But when I made you the offer, it
meant nothing to me—now it would mean something.”

“If you have found your own value,” he said, “that is immeasurably

the greatest thing …It has taken me a long time to learn my lesson, Harriet.
I have had to pull down, brick by brick, the barriers I had built up by my
own selfishness and folly. If, in all these years, I have managed to get back
to the point at which I ought to have started, will you tell me so and give me
leave to begin again? Once or twice in the last few days I have fancied that
you might feel as though this unhappy interval might be wiped out and
forgotten.”

“No; not that. But as though I could be glad to remember it.”
“Thank you. That is far more than I expected or deserved.”
“Peter—it’s not fair to let you talk like this. It’s I who ought to

apologize. If I owe you nothing else, I owe you my self respect. And I owe
you my life—”

“Ah!” said he, smiling. “But I have given you that back by letting you

risk it. That was the last kick that sent my vanity out of doors.”

“Peter, I did manage to appreciate that. Mayn’t I be grateful for that?”
“I don’t want gratitude—”
“But won’t you take it, now that I want to give it you?”
“If you feel like that about it, then I have no right to refuse. Let that

clear all scores, Harriet. You have given me already far more than you
know. You are free now and forever, so far as I am concerned. You saw
yesterday what personal claims might lead to—though I didn’t intend you
to see it in quite that brutal way. But if circumstances made me a little more
honest than I meant to be, still, I did mean to be honest up to a point.”

support a thesis.”

you imagine a lie? I set out in a lordly manner to offer you heaven and
earth. I find that all I have to give you is Oxford—which was yours already.
Look! Go round about her and tell the towers thereof. It has been my
humble privilege to clean and polish your property and present her for your
inspection upon a silver salver. Enter into your heritage and do not, as is
said in another connection, be afraid with any amazement.”

leaning back against the balustrade, and looking at him. “Oh, damn!”

though it was Rome again for me next week. But I shan’t leave Oxford till
Monday. On Sunday there’s a Balliol Concert. Will you come to it? We’ll
have one other gaudy night, and comfort our souls with the Bach Concerto
for two violins. If you will bear with me so far. After that, I shall be clearing
off and leaving you to—”

“To Wilfrid and Co.,” said Harriet, in a kind of exasperation.
“Wilfrid?” said Peter, momentarily at a loss, with his mind scampering

after rabbits.

“Yes, I’m re-writing Wilfrid.”
“Good God, yes. The chap with the morbid scruples. How’s he getting

on?”

to you, I think. ‘To Peter, who made Wilfrid what he is’—that sort of thing
…Don’t laugh like that. I’m really working at Wilfrid.”

done.

your work and your life …Here! I think I’d better remove myself before I
do anything foolish …I shall be honored to go down to posterity in the turn-
up of Wilfrid’s trouser …You will come on Sunday? I am dining with the
Master, but I will meet you at the foot of the stairs …Till then.”

survey the kingdom of the mind, glittering from Merton to Bodley, from
Carfax to Magdalen Tower. But her eyes were on one slight figure that
crossed the cobbled Square, walking lightly under the shadow of St. Mary’s
into the High. All the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them.

Masters, undergraduates, visitors; they sat huddled closely together on

the backless oak benches, their elbows on the long tables, their eyes shaded
with their fingers, or turned intelligently towards the platform where two
famous violinists twisted together the fine, strong strands of the Concerto in
D Minor. The Hall was very full; Harriet’s gowned shoulder touched her
companion’s, and the crescent of his long sleeve lay over her knee. He was
wrapped in the motionless austerity with which all genuine musicians listen
to genuine music. Harriet was musician enough to respect this aloofness;
she knew well enough that the ecstatic rapture on the face of the man
opposite meant only that he was hoping to be thought musical, and that the
elderly lady over the way, waving her fingers to the beat, was a musical
moron. She knew enough, herself, to read the sounds a little with her brains,
laboriously unwinding the twined chains of melody link by link. Peter, she
felt sure, could hear the whole intricate pattern, every part separately and
simultaneously, each independent and equal, separate but inseparable,
moving over and under and through, ravishing heart and mind together.

She waited till the last movement had ended and the packed hall was

relaxing its attention in applause.

the harmony if they would leave us the counterpoint?”

you think I meant anything else, you know what I meant.”

fiddler. It needs a musician.”

“In this case, two fiddlers—both musicians.”
“I’m not much of a musician, Peter.”
“As they used to say in my youth: ‘All girls should learn a little music

—enough to play a simple accompaniment.’ I admit that Bach isn’t a matter
of an autocratic virtuoso and a meek accompanist. But do you want to be
either? Here’s a gentleman coming to sing a group of ballads. Pray silence
for the soloist. But let him be soon over, that we may hear the great striding
fugue again.”

The final Chorale was sung, and the audience made their way out.

Harriet’s way lay through the Broad Street gate; Peter followed her through
the quad.

“It’s a beautiful night—far too good to waste. Don’t go back yet. Come

down to Magdalen Bridge and send your love to London River.”

They turned along the Broad in silence, the light wind fluttering their

gowns as they walked.

“There’s something about this place,” said Peter presently, “that alters

all one’s values.” He paused, and added a little abruptly: “I have said a good
deal to you one way and another, lately; but you may have noticed that
since we came to Oxford I have not asked you to marry me.”

“Yes,” said Harriet, her eyes fixed upon the severe and delicate

silhouette of the Bodleian roof, just emerging between the Sheldonian and
the Clarendon Building. “I had noticed it.”

anything you said to me here, there could be no going back …But I will ask
you now, and if you say No, I promise you that this time I will accept your
answer. Harriet; you know that I love you: will you marry me?”

Street was crossed and the shadows of New College walls had swallowed
them up before she spoke:

say No?”

word like that. I can only tell you that if you will marry me it will give me
very great happiness.”

once more.

“Peter!”
She stood still; and he stopped perforce and turned towards her. She

laid both hands upon the fronts of his gown, looking into his face while she
searched for the word that should carry her over the last difficult breach.

It was he who found it for her. With a gesture of submission he bared

his head and stood gravely, the square cap dangling in his hand.

“Placetne, magistra?”
“Placet.”

The Proctor, stumping grimly past with averted eyes, reflected that

Oxford was losing all sense of dignity. But what could he do? If Senior
Members of the University chose to stand—in their gowns, too!—closely
and passionately embracing in New College Lane right under the Warden’s
windows, he was powerless to prevent it. He primly settled his white bands
and went upon his walk unheeded; and no hand plucked his velvet sleeve.

A Biography of Dorothy L. Sayers

Dorothy L. Sayers (1893–1957) was a playwright, scholar, and acclaimed
author of mysteries, best known for her books starring the gentleman sleuth
Lord Peter Wimsey. The Los Angeles Times hailed Sayers as “one of the
greatest mystery story writers of [the twentieth] century.”

Born in Oxford, England, she was the only child of Reverend Henry

Sayers, headmaster of Christ Church Cathedral School and then rector of
Bluntisham village. Sayers grew up in the Bluntisham rectory, then won a
scholarship to Oxford University, where she studied modern languages and
worked at the publishing house Blackwell’s, which in 1916 published Op.
1, Sayers’ first book of poetry.

In 1922 Sayers took a job as a copywriter for London advertising firm

S. H. Benson, forerunner to the famous Ogilvy & Mather. There she created
several popular slogans and campaigns, including the iconic, animal-theme
Guinness advertisements that are still used today.

While working as a copywriter, Sayers began work on Whose Body?

(1923), a mystery novel featuring dapper detective Lord Peter Wimsey.
Over the next two decades, Sayers published ten more Wimsey novels and
several short stories, crafting a character whose complexity was unusual for
the mystery novels of the time. Handsome, brave, and charming, Wimsey
has a few defining flaws, including his tendency to prattle, fear of
responsibility, and perpetual nervousness caused by shell shock inflicted
during World War I. Sayers once described him as a cross between Fred
Astaire and Bertie Wooster. Her writing was praised by fellow mystery
writers Ruth Rendell and P. D. James; James said that Sayers “brought to
the detective novel originality, intelligence, energy and wit.”

typical manor-house mysteries. Sayers used her knowledge of various
topics—including advertising, women’s education, and veterans’ health—to
give her books realistic details. In 1936, she brought Wimsey to the stage in
Busman’s Honeymoon, a story which Sayers would publish as a novel the
following year. The play was so successful that she gave up mystery writing
to focus on the stage, producing a series of religious works culminating in
The Man Born to Be King (1941), a radio drama about the life of Jesus.

after World War II. In 1949, she published the first volume of a translation
of Dante’s Divine Comedy. She was halfway through the third volume when
she died of a heart attack in 1957. Although she considered this translation
to be her best work, it is for her elegantly constructed detective fiction that
Sayers remains best remembered.

Sayers in the garden of her Oxford home, around 1897. She holds her two toy

monkeys, Jocko and Jacko.

An 1899 studio portrait of Sayers, around six years old. (Photo courtesy of I. Palmer

Clarke/Cambridge.)

The Sayers family circa 1905. Dorothy (about age twelve) posed with her family
outside their home at the Bluntisham rectory. First row,  left to right: Gertrude

Sayers (aunt), Dorothy. Second row, left to right: Anna Breakey Sayers

(grandmother), Mabel Leigh (aunt). Back row, left to right: Reverend Henry Sayers

(father), Ivy Shrimpton (cousin), Helen Mary Leigh Sayers (mother).

Seventeen-year-old Sayers wearing a pageant costume in 1908.

Sayers with friends, posing as shipping magnate Sir Hugh Allen, in 1915.

A studio portrait of Sayers taken in 1926.

Sayers’s husband, “Mac” Fleming, at home in 1930 behind overflowing boxes of
Sayers’s fan mail. A family friend sits to the right. (Photo courtesy of the Tropical

Press Agency.)

Sayers’s husband, “Mac” Fleming, standing in doorway.

Sayers in 1950, at the unveiling of a plaque at the S. H. Benson advertising agency,
where she once worked as a copywriter. The plaque was placed at the foot of a spiral
staircase in the agency, a tribute to a character in Murder Must Advertise who plunges

down a similar staircase.

All images used by permission of the Marion E. Wade Center, Wheaton
College, Wheaton, Illinois.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the
text of this ebook onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the
author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,
businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

copyright © 1936 by Dorothy Leigh Sayers Fleming

copyright renewed © 1964 by Anthony Fleming

cover design by Katrina Damkoehler

978-1-4532-5895-8

This edition published in 2012 by Open Road Integrated Media
180 Varick Street
New York, NY 10014
www.openroadmedia.com

EBOOKS BY DOROTHY L.

SAYERS

FROM OPEN ROAD MEDIA

Available wherever ebooks are sold

Open Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia
content company. Open Road creates connections between authors

and their audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new

proprietary online platform, which uses premium video content and

social media.

Videos, Archival Documents, and New

Releases

Sign up for the Open Road Media newsletter and

get news delivered straight to your inbox.

Sign up now at

www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters

FIND OUT MORE AT

WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM

FOLLOW US:

@openroadmedia and

Facebook.com/OpenRoadMedia

