MACMILLAN READERS

INTERMEDIATE LEVEL

IAN FLEMING

Goldfinger

Retold by Anne Collins

MACMILLAN

MACMILLAN READERS

INTERMEDIATE LEVEL

Founding Editor: John Milne

The Macmillan Readers provide a choice of enjoyable reading
materials for learners of English. The series is published at six
levels – Starter, Beginner, Elementary, Pre-intermediate,
Intermediate and Upper.

Level control
Information, structure and vocabulary are controlled to suit the
students’ ability at each level.

The number of words at each level:

Vocabulary
Some difficult words and phrases in this book are important for
understanding the story. Some of these words are explained in the
story and some are shown in the pictures. From Pre-intermediate
level upwards, words are marked with a number like this: …3. These
words are explained in the Glossary at the end of the book.

Answer keys
Answer keys for the Points for Understanding and the Exercises
sections can be found at www.macmillanenglish.com

Starter
about 300 basic words

Beginner
about 600 basic words

Elementary
about 1100 basic words

Pre-intermediate
about 1400 basic words

Intermediate
about 1600 basic words
Upper
about 2200 basic words

Contents

A Note About The Author
4
A Note About This Story
6
The People in This Story
8

PART ONE: CHANCE
1 A Meeting in Miami
11

2 Mr Goldfinger
17
3 The Richest Man in Britain
26

PART TWO: COINCIDENCE
4 A Trip to Sandwich
31

5 Playing to Win
36

6 Dinner with Mr Goldfinger
42

7 The Chase Begins
51

8 Death by Gold
59

PART THREE: ENEMY ACTION
9 Project Grand Slam
65

10 The Meeting of the Gangsters
72

11 The Richest Man in the World
80

12 Goldfinger’s Last Flight
87

Points for Understanding
97
Glossary
101
Exercises
112

A Note About The Author

Ian Lancaster Fleming was born on the 28th of May 1908 in
Canterbury, England. He was a newspaper journalist and a
writer and he created one of the most famous characters in
twentieth-century fiction – James Bond.
Ian Fleming was educated at Eton – a famous school for
boys. He then trained to be a soldier at Sandhurst Military
Academy, but he left after a short time and went to Europe.
He studied languages at Munich and Geneva universities.
Fleming’s first job was as a journalist in the Soviet Union.
From 1929 to 1933, he worked in Moscow for the news
agency, Reuters. While he was employed by this organization,
he heard how Soviet spies sold government secrets to other
countries. Fleming sent reports about these spies and their
special investigations to Reuters in London. When he
returned to London in 1933, he worked first as a banker and
then as a broker – an agent who buys and sells goods for
other people.
During the Second World War (1939–1945), Fleming
was an officer in the British Navy. He worked in the
Department of Naval Intelligence, at the headquarters of
the British Navy. He became the assistant to the highest
official who employed spies for Britain. Ian Fleming learnt a
lot about spying and how to collect secret information –
intelligence. He travelled to many countries and organized
secret operations1 against Britain’s enemies. After the war, he
worked for the Sunday Times newspaper.
Fleming decided to become a writer during the war. He
wrote about spies and dangerous gangs of criminals. In 1952,
he completed his first novel. In the same year, he married
Anne Rothermere. Fleming was then almost 44 years old.

Fleming’s first novel – Casino Royale – was about a
handsome British secret agent called James Bond. Bond was
a spy who loved danger, women, fast cars, gambling2, and
good food and drink. He was well-paid for the dangerous
work he had to do. James Bond also had a ‘Licence to Kill’
which meant that sometimes he was told to kill his enemies.

Casino Royale was very successful and the adventures of
James Bond, agent number 007, became very popular. By
the time of Fleming’s death on the 12th of August 1964,
more than 40 million copies of the James Bond books had
been sold. The books are: Casino Royale (1953), Live and Let
Die (1954), Moonraker (1955), Diamonds Are Forever (1956),
From Russia With Love (1957), Doctor No (1958), Goldfinger
(1959), For Your Eyes Only (1960), Thunderball (1961), The
Spy Who Loved Me (1962), On Her Majesty’s Secret Service
(1963), You Only Live Twice (1964), The Man With the Golden
Gun (1965) and Octopussy and The Living Daylights (1966).
The story of Dr No was made into a film in 1962. The film
starred the actor Sean Connery, and the Bond films continue
to be huge international successes. Bond was a young man in
Fleming’s first story, but he is still a British secret agent in the
twenty-first century. He never grows old! By 2003, five actors
had starred as James Bond. Millions of people all over the
world have seen and loved the films.

A Note About This Story

The story of Goldfinger takes place in the late 1950s. Since
Fleming wrote the story, the names of some countries and
their kinds of governments have changed.

In October 1917, there was a revolution in Russia and a
communist government came into power. The communists
believed that everyone in their country had to share
everything – money, power and land. Russia joined together
with the other countries which it controlled, to form the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (the USSR), and
Moscow became it’s capital.
From 1928, Joseph Stalin was the leader of the Soviet
Union. He had complete power over the Russian people for
more than 25 years. In 1954, he gave an order for a special
government department to be created. This department was
a secret police force called the KGB. Officers of the KGB
collected intelligence about enemies of the USSR. The KGB
also made sure that the country and its people were safe.
Sometimes members of the KGB would secretly investigate
the people of the USSR. They made sure that no one broke
the laws, or spoke out against them. SMERSH was part of the
KGB. The letters S-M-E-R-S-H are from the Russian words
‘Smyert Shpionam’ which mean, ‘Death to Spies’. People
were so afraid of SMERSH that no one spoke its name.
During the Second World War, France, Britain, the
United States and the Soviet Union fought together – they
were allies. When the fighting in Europe ended in May 1945,
these countries looked after the nation of Germany. But it
was not long before the Soviet Union was arguing with the
other three countries. Soon, nations around the world who

believed that democracy was the right kind of government
became friends with the United States and western Europe.
And nations who believed in communism became allies with
the Soviet Union.
In August 1945, the United States dropped an atomic
bomb3 on Japan and the Second World War came to an end.
After the Second World War, the US and the USSR both
began to build huge numbers of powerful weapons, including
atomic bombs. For 40 years each country watched the other.
They did not fight each other, but each side looked for ways
to make life difficult for their enemies. This period – 1945 to
1989 – was called the Cold War.
During the Cold War, many countries had secret
intelligence services that sent men and women into their
enemies’ countries. These spies tried to find out their enemies’
secrets. They also tried to find out who their enemies’ own
spies were. And sometimes they tried to kill them.
In 1991, the communists lost power in the USSR. In a few
years, the governments in all the regions of the country had
changed, and the Soviet Union broke up. By the end of
1993, the independent republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan were all
members of the CIS. (The Commonwealth of Independent
States.) Russia’s neighbours around the Baltic Sea –
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia – were independent countries.

Ian Fleming’s James Bond stories are set during the Cold
War. It was a dangerous time and many people were
frightened that the next war might be an atomic war. So
they loved to read Ian Fleming’s exciting adventures about a
spy who fought powerful enemies and liked fast cars, beautiful
women and good food.

The People in This Story

James Bond
Junius Du Pont Auric Goldfinger

M
Jill Masterton 
Tilly Masterton

Oddjob
Helmut Springer
Jed Midnight

Billy Ring 
Mr Solo
Pussy Galore

PART ONE: CHANCE

‘Mr Bond,’ said Auric Goldfinger. ‘The gangsters4 in Chicago say
this: “If you meet someone for the first time, it’s by chance5. The
second time you meet them, it’s by coincidence6. But if you meet
them for a third time, it’s time for enemy action7.”’

A Meeting in Miami

J
ames Bond, British Secret Intelligence agent, number 007,
was sitting in the international transit lounge8 at Miami
Airport. He was drinking bourbon whisky. Bond had arrived
in Miami earlier that day after completing a dangerous mission9 in
Mexico. Now it was evening, and he was waiting to catch the
next plane to New York. Suddenly, an announcement came
from the airport’s loudspeaker system:

‘Transamerica Airlines regrets to announce that there is a
delay on Flight TR618 to New York. This is because there is a
technical problem on the aircraft. The new departure time will be
at 8 a.m. Please will all passengers for Flight TR618 go to the
Transamerica ticket counter. Arrangements will be made for them
to stay in a hotel tonight. Thank you.’

Bond finished his whisky. What should he do? Should he
try and get a seat on another flight? Or should he stay the
night in Miami? He looked out of the window. It was getting
late. Beneath the dark purple evening sky, tiny lights were
sparkling10 on the airport’s runways. 
Bond heard footsteps approaching. They stopped at his
side. He glanced11 up and saw a well-dressed, middle-aged
man who looked a little embarrassed.
‘Excuse me, but are you Mr Bond . . . Mr – er – James Bond?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I’m surprised to meet you here!’ The man held out
his hand and Bond stood up slowly and shook it. ‘My name is
Junius Du Pont,’ said the middle-aged man, smiling. ‘You
probably don’t remember me, but we’ve met before. May I sit
down?’

‘Excuse me, but are you Mr Bond ... Mr – er – James Bond?’

Bond looked more closely at Mr Du Pont. The man was
about fifty years old, with a smooth, pink face. He was dressed
in an expensive suit – the kind of suit that American
millionaires wear. Yes, Bond had met him before. But where
and when?
‘We met in France, in 1951, in the Casino at Royale les
Eaux,’ said Mr Du Pont. ‘You were playing in an important
game of cards12. My wife and I were sitting next to you.’
Of course! Bond had been playing cards against a famous
French gambler, and he’d beaten him and won a huge
amount of money.
‘Yes, of course I remember,’ he said, smiling.
‘I’m pleased that we’ve met here by chance. We must
have a drink together,’ said Mr Du Pont. ‘What will you
have?’
‘Bourbon with ice, please.’
Mr Du Pont called a waitress and ordered drinks. ‘I was
sure that I recognized you,’ he continued. ‘I was flying on the
Transamerica flight to New York tonight too. When they
announced the delay, I saw the look of disappointment on
your face. I went to the ticket counter and checked the
names on the passenger list. And there was your name –
James Bond.’
The waitress brought the drinks. Suddenly, Mr Du Pont
leant forward in his seat and looked around the room.
Although the tables near them were empty, he talked quietly
so that only Bond could hear.
‘Mr Bond, after that card game, I heard some things about
you. I heard that you weren’t only an excellent card player,
but that you were also a kind of – er – private investigator. Er
– a secret agent.’
Bond looked at Mr Du Pont and spoke carefully.
‘Well, I did a little of that kind of work after the war,’ he
said. His cool, grey-blue eyes did not show his feelings. ‘But

A Meeting in Miami

now I work for a company called Universal Export.’
Universal Export was not a real company. But Bond
couldn’t tell people the truth. So he pretended that he was
employed by Universal. In fact, he worked for the British
government. He was a member of the British Secret
Intelligence Service.
James Bond was one of the best secret agents in the SIS.
Only the very best agents had worknames which began with
double-O. A secret agent whose workname began with two
zeros was always sent on the most difficult and dangerous
missions. And sometimes he was ordered to kill enemies of
his country. He also had permission to kill people who
attacked him. James Bond – agent 007 – had a licence to kill.
Bond glanced at his watch. Mr Du Pont looked quickly at
his own watch too.
‘Seven o’clock already!’ he said. ‘Listen, Mr Bond, I have
a problem and I’d like your advice. I own a hotel here in
Miami and I’d like to invite you to stay there tonight. You
can have the best suite13 in the hotel. What do you say?’
Bond didn’t have anything to do in Miami until he caught
a plane to New York. ‘What kind of rich man’s problem does
Mr Du Pont have?’ he asked himself. ‘Does he have trouble
with women, or gangsters? Or is he being blackmailed14?
Whatever it is, it might be interesting.’ So Bond decided to
accept the invitation.
‘All right, Mr Du Pont. I’ll stay in your hotel and I’ll help
you,’ he said.
‘Thank you, Mr Bond. But first, let’s go and have dinner.
Do you like crabs15?’
‘Very much,’ said Bond.
‘Well, I’ll take you to a restaurant called “Bill’s on the
Beach” which has wonderful crabs. I often eat there.’
The two men went downstairs to the front of the airport.
Mr Du Pont’s car, a shiny Chrysler Imperial, was waiting

A Meeting in Miami

outside. Immediately, his driver ran forward and opened the
doors. Bond stepped inside the luxurious16 car.
‘Bill’s on the Beach’ was a very expensive restaurant and
it was clear that Mr Du Pont was a regular customer. The
manager immediately welcomed Mr Du Pont and took him
and Bond to a table which was in the best position. Bond
drank a vodka martini – his favourite cocktail17 – while Mr
Du Pont ordered crabs cooked in butter, and bottles of pink
champagne. When the food came, it was one of the most
delicious meals that Bond had ever eaten.
‘Have you ever played the card game, canasta, Mr Bond?’
asked Mr Du Pont, as they sat drinking coffee.
‘Yes, it’s a good game. I like it.’
‘I like it too. I’ve been playing canasta for many years
and I’m a very experienced player. But this week, I’ve lost
$25,000 playing canasta. What do you think about that?’
‘Well,’ said Bond, ‘if you’ve been playing with the same
man, he’s been cheating18 you.’
‘That’s what I think too,’ said Mr Du Pont. ‘But I’ve
watched him carefully and I can’t find out how he’s cheating.
There aren’t any special marks on the cards. He never tries to
look at the cards in my hand. But he just keeps winning and
winning.’
Bond was interested in everything about cards and
gambling. ‘Twenty-five thousand dollars is a lot of money,’ he
said. ‘Haven’t you won at all?’
‘No. As soon as a game starts going well for me, the man
puts down19 exactly the right cards and beats me. It’s as if he
knows which cards I have in my hand.’
‘Are there any mirrors in the room where you play?’ asked
Bond. ‘Perhaps he can see your cards reflected20 in a mirror?’
‘No, he can’t see a reflection of my cards in a mirror,’
replied Mr Du Pont. ‘We never play in a room, we always
play outside. He says that he wants to stay in the sun and get

A Meeting in Miami

a suntan. So he only wants to play cards in the mornings and
afternoons. We never play in the evenings.’
‘What’s this man’s name?’ asked Bond.
‘Goldfinger.’
‘What’s his first name?’
‘Auric. That means “golden”, doesn’t it?’ said Junius Du
Pont. ‘He certainly looks golden. He’s got hair as red as fire.’
‘What’s his nationality?’
‘British,’ Du Pont replied. ‘He’s not married, he’s forty-
two, and he works as a broker. I found out this information by
looking at Goldfinger’s passport. I own the Floridiana Hotel,
where he’s staying. So I asked our hotel detective to show the
passport to me.’
‘What does Goldfinger buy and sell?’
‘I asked him,’ replied Du Pont, ‘but he just said, “Oh,
anything”. He doesn’t like answering questions.’
‘Has he got a lot of money?’
‘He’s extremely rich! He’s one of the richest millionaires
in the world. I asked my bank to investigate him. He keeps
all his money in the form of gold bars21 and moves them
around to different countries.’
Junius Du Pont stared at Bond for a few moments. ‘I’ve
never forgotten meeting you in the Casino at Royale les
Eaux,’ he said. ‘I remember how you took risks22 as you
gambled. And I remember that you stayed so cool as you
played. You never looked nervous or worried. Mr Bond, I’ll
pay you $10,000 to stay in my hotel. I want you to find out
how this man, Goldfinger, is cheating me.’
‘That’s a very good offer,’ said Bond. He thought for a
few minutes. ‘But I have to fly to New York tomorrow night.
If you play your usual card games tomorrow morning and
tomorrow afternoon, I should have enough time to find out
the answer. Is that OK?’
‘That’s fine,’ said Mr Du Pont.

A Meeting in Miami

Chapter 2. Mr. Goldfinger 

Next morning, Bond woke early. He got out of bed and walked over 

to the huge window of his luxurious suite in the Floridiana Hotel. He 

pulled back the curtains and stepped out onto the balcony and into 

the bright sunshine. 

Twelve floors below Bond was the Cabana Club, which was also 

part of the hotel. This building had a flat roof where guests could 

lie in the sun and sunbathe. There were chairs and tables and 

brightly-colored umbrellas on the roof. At the far end of the roof, 

there was a huge swimming pool with sparkling water. Hotel staff 

wearing white jackets were busy getting everything ready for the 

day. Around the hotel there was a garden full of beautiful plants 

and trees. A lawn of green grass led down to a beach of golden 

sand, and beyond this was the bright blue sea. The hotel was in the 

best position on the coast of Florida. 

'Mr. Du Pont's hotel must have some extremely rich guests,' 

thought Bond and he smiled. 

He went back into the bedroom, picked up the phone, and ordered 

a delicious and expensive breakfast. By the time that he'd shaved, 

had taken a cold shower and got dressed, it was eight o'clock. 

Bond ate his breakfast slowly and thought about Mr. Du Pont and 

Mr. Goldfinger. Bond was sure that Goldfinger was cheating Mr. Du 

Pont. But Goldfinger was already a very rich man. He didn't need to 

make money by cheating people at card games. So he probably 

cheated people in bigger ways too. Bond was very interested in the 

activities of big criminals. He very much wanted to meet Goldfin-

there. He wanted to find out how Goldfinger was cheating Du Pont. 

At ten o'clock, Bond and Mr. Du Pont met in the garden of the hotel 

and Du Pont handed Bond a passkey. Then they walked over to the 

to pretend that he was a friend of Mr. Du Pont's. Mr. Du Pont was 

going to introduce Bond to Goldfinger. He was going to say that 

Bond had come to Miami from New York on business. 

Bond got a surprise when he first saw Goldfinger. At the far corner 

of the roof, a man was lying on a sunbed. He was wearing a very 

small, yellow satin swimsuit and sunglasses. His skin was burned a 

red-brown colour by the sun. 

'Hi, there!' Mr. Du Pont called out loudly. 

Goldfinger didn't move. 

'He can't hear much - he's deaf,' Du Pont explained to Bond. They 

walked up to Goldfinger's sunbed. 'Hi, there!' said Mr. Du Pont 

again. 

Goldfinger sat up and took off his sunglasses. 

'I'd like you to meet Mr. Bond - James Bond,' said Du Pont. 'He's a 

friend of mine from New York. He's here on business.' 

'Pleased to meet you, Mr. Bomb.' Goldfinger held out his hand and 

Bond shook it. Goldfinger's hand was hard and dry. He opened his 

eyes wide and stared at Bond for a moment. The millionaire's eyes 

were a strange, pale blue colour. 

said Junius Du Pont. 'Do you want to play a game?' 

'I'll go and change my clothes,' Goldfinger said. 'I was going to play 

golf this afternoon, but I'd like to play cards instead. Do you play 

golf, Mr. Bomb?' 

'Sometimes, when I'm in Britain,' replied Bond. 

'I've recently joined the Royal St Marks Golf Club at Sandwich,' said 

Goldfinger. 'One of my businesses is near Sandwich. Do you know 

the golf course there?' 

'Yes, I've played at Royal St Marks,' said Bond. 

'We must have a game there one day,' said Goldfinger. Then he 

turned and spoke to Mr. Du Pont. 'I'll be back in a few minutes,' he 

said and he walked slowly towards the steps. 

Mr. Du Pont asked the hotel staff to bring a table for cards while 

Bond thought about Goldfinger. 

Auric Goldfinger was an extraordinary-looking man. When he'd 

stood up, Bond had seen that Goldfinger's sunburned body was 

very thick and short. His head was huge and round, like a football. 

His hair was bright flame-red, and he had pale yellow eyelashes 

around his pale blue eyes. 

When Goldfinger returned, he was wearing a dark blue suit and a 

white shirt. Bond noticed a skin-coloured hearing aid in his left ear. 

Du Pont and Goldfinger sat down at the card table. Du Pont sat 

with his back to the hotel and Goldfinger sat opposite him. Bond 

took a seat close to Du Pont and began to watch carefully. 

good luck. He always knew which cards to play and how to beat Du 

Pont's cards. Bond became more and more sure that Goldfinger 

was cheating, but he couldn't see how. 

'How long are you staying in Miami, Mr. Bomb?' asked Goldfinger. 

Bond smiled politely. 'My name is Bond - B-O-N-D. I have to go 

back to New York tonight.' 

'How sad,' said Goldfinger, looking down at his cards. He won that 

round, and the next and the next, and then he won the whole 

game. So Mr. Du Pont had lost $1500. Goldfinger began to deal the 

cards for a new game. 

'Don't you ever sit in a different seat?' asked Bond. 

'Unfortunately, Mr. Bond, that's not possible,' said Goldfinger. 'I 

have an illness called agoraphobia - a fear of open spaces. I can't 

look at open places, it makes me ill. So I have to sit and face the 

hotel.' 

'Oh, I'm so sorry,' said Bond. 'How did your agoraphobia start?' 

'I've no idea,' said Goldfinger, picking up his cards. 

Bond stood up. 'I think that I'll go and have a look at the swim-

ming-pool,' he said. 

'OK, James,' said Du Pont. 'I'll see you at lunch.' 

Bond walked over to the pool, then looked back at the two men 

playing cards. So Goldfinger liked to face the hotel. Or was the 

truth that he liked Junius Du Pont to have his back to the hotel? 

And why? 

was 200. Bond's suite was number 1200 and it was on the top 

floor. So Goldfinger's suite would be ten floors directly below 

Bond's. Room 200 was on the second floor, about twenty yards 

above the card table. 

Bond looked up at the balcony of Goldfinger's suite. It was empty. 

An open door led to the room inside. Bond stared at the doorway. 

Suddenly Bond had an idea about how Goldfinger was cheating Du 

Pont. Yes, that must be it! Clever Mr. Goldfinger! 

While they ate their lunch, Du Pont told Bond that he'd lost another 

$10,000 to Goldfinger. 

'Tell me something,' said Bond. 'Does Goldfinger have a secretary?' 

'Yes,' replied Du Pont. 'But I've never seen her. I think that she 

stays in his suite all the time.' 

'I think that I know how Goldfinger is cheating you,' said Bond 

slowly. 'But I have to be sure. Tell him that I won't be watching the 

game this afternoon. Tell him that I got bored and that I went into 

town.' 

Bond went up to his suite on the top floor. He opened his suitcase 

and took out an M3 Leica camera with a powerful flash. Then he 

took out his gun, a .32 Walther PPK. 

At 3.15, Bond went out onto his balcony and looked down. Far be-

low, he could see Goldfinger and Du Pont playing cards on the roof 

of the Cabana Club. 

suite. 

Bond heard a low and attractive voice - the voice of an English girl. 

getting rid of the four. He's holding a king, a nine and a seven in 

his hand.' 

Bond walked silently towards the sound of the voice. 

A girl was sitting on a table just inside the open door of the bal-

cony. It was very hot in the suite and she was wearing only black 

silk underwear. She was swinging her legs backwards and forwards 

and painting nailpolish on her fingernails. Just in front of her eyes, 

there was a pair of very powerful binoculars on a tripod. Below the 

binoculars, there were wires leading to a microphone. As Bond 

watched, the girl switched the microphone off. 

So that was how Goldfinger was cheating Du Pont! The girl could 

see Du Pont's cards through the binoculars. Then she spoke into 

the microphone and told Goldfinger what the cards were. Her voice 

came through to Goldfinger on his hearing aid. In this way, Gold-

finger knew exactly which cards Du Pont was holding. It was a very 

clever trick. 

Bond stepped very softly onto a chair behind the girl and looked 

through his camera. Yes, he could take a good picture from here. 

The photograph would show the girl's head, the binoculars, the mi-

crophone, and the two men playing at the card table far below. He 

pressed the button on the camera and there was a powerful flash 

when she saw Bond. 

'Good afternoon,' said Bond, 

'Who are you? What do you want?' 

'Don't worry. I've got a photo of everything. I know how Goldfinger 

has been cheating. And my name is Bond – James Bond.' 

The girl was very beautiful, with pale blonde hair and dark blue 

eyes. Her skin was suntanned a light golden-brown colour. 

'What are you going to do?' she asked. 

'I'm not going to do anything to you. But I might have some fun 

with Mr. Goldfinger. Move over and let me have a look.' 

Bond took the girl's place and looked through the binoculars. The 

game was going on normally. Goldfinger's expression hadn't 

changed. His face wasn't showing that anything was wrong. 

'Why does Goldfinger take risks, cheating people like this?' asked 

Bond. 'He doesn't need the money.' 

'He doesn't care if people find out that he's a cheat,' said the girl. 

'He just gives them gold. He knows that everybody wants gold, so 

he always takes a million dollars' worth of gold with him wherever 

he goes.' 

'Are you Goldfinger's girlfriend?' Bond asked. 

'No, I am not!' the girl said quickly. 

'His secretary?' 

down through the binoculars again. He saw that Du Pont was be-

ginning to win. 

Goldfinger was sitting calmly. He was waiting for the girl's voice to 

come through his hearing aid again. He put his hand up to his 

Goldfinger's big face carefully. Then he switched on the microphone 

and spoke softly into it. 

'Now listen to me, Goldfinger. This is James Bond speaking. I know 

that you've been cheating. I've taken a photo which shows every-

thing — the blonde, the binoculars, the microphone, and you and 

your hearing aid. But I won't send it to the FBI and Scotland Yard if 

you do exactly what I say. Nod your head if you understand.' 

Goldfinger moved his big head slowly up and down. 

'Put your cards down on the table,' said Bond. 'Now take out your 

cheque book and write a cheque for $50,000. That's $35,000 for 

Mr. Du Pont, $10,000 for me, and an extra $5000 for wasting so 

much of Mr. Du Pont's valuable time.' 

Goldfinger took his cheque book out of his pocket and started to 

write a cheque. 

'Good,' said Bond. 'Now listen to these instructions. Book a ticket 

for me on a train to New York tonight. The ticket must be for a pri-

vate compartment. I want a bottle of the best champagne to be 

ready in the compartment, and lots of caviar sandwiches. 

'Now,' said Bond. 'Give the cheque to Mr. Du Pont and say, "I 

apologize. I've been cheating you." ' 

and speak to him. 

'What's your name?' Bond asked the girl. 

'Jill Masterton.' 

Goldfinger had stood up and was turning away from the card  ta-

ble. 'Stop!' said Bond sharply. 'I haven't finished with you yet, 

Goldfinger. There's one more thing. I'll be taking Miss Masterton 

with me to New York. Make sure that she's at the train. That's all!' 

Chapter 3. The Richest Man in Britain 

It was a week later and Bond was back in the headquarters of the 

British Secret Intelligence Service in London. He was thinking about 

Jill Masterton. 

It had been a wonderful trip in the train to New York. Bond and the 

girl had eaten the sandwiches and drunk the champagne. Then 

they had made love in the narrow bed of their private compart-

ment. 

Bond had asked Jill about Goldfinger. He'd wanted to know if Gold-

finger had been angry after the card game. Jill told Bond how Gold-

finger had behaved. Goldfinger hadn't shown his feelings at all. In 

fact, the millionaire had given Jill a message for Bond. He'd said 

that he would be returning to Britain in a week's time and he 

wanted to play a game of golf with Bond at the Royal St Marks Golf 

Club. 

When they arrived in New York, Jill had told Bond that she was re-

turning to Goldfinger. Bond had tried to stop her. He was worried 

that Goldfinger might hurt her. 

But Jill wasn't frightened of Goldfinger. And she didn't want to lose 

her job. Goldfinger paid her well. 

Bond had given Jill the $10,000 that he'd got as his payment from 

Mr. Du Pont. Then he'd kissed her once, hard on the lips, and had 

walked away. They hadn't been in love with each other, but they 

had had a wonderful time together. 

A red phone on the desk in front of Bond rang. This was the phone 

that Bond's boss, M, used to call him. Bond picked it up. 

'Come up to my office, 007,' M's voice said. 'Yes, sir.' Bond went up 

to the top floor of the building. He knocked on the door of M's office 

and went in. M was sitting at his desk, reading some papers. 

'Sit down, 007,' M said. 'Last night, I had dinner with the Governor 

of the Bank of England. He told me that the Bank has a serious 

problem with gold smuggling. The people at the Bank are sure that 

someone is taking large amounts of gold out of Britain illegally. Do 

you know anything about gold?' 

'Not much, sir.' 

'Do you know who are the richest men in this country?'  

'Well,' said Bond, 'there are some very rich businessmen. Some 

bankers are very rich too, and so are some members of the Royal 

Family.' 

'Yes,' said M. 'But there's one man who is richer than anybody else. 

He's called Goldfinger - Auric Goldfinger.'  

Bond started to laugh. 'What's so funny?' 

'Sorry, sir. But I met him last week.' Bond replied. And he told M 

the whole story of his meeting with Goldfinger. 

the Bank of England suspect that Goldfinger is a gold smuggler, 

and they want to catch him.' 

He stopped speaking for a few seconds, then continued. 'I've ar-

ranged for you to meet a man called Colonel Smithers at four 

o'clock this afternoon. He's the head of the Bank of England's re-

search department. He'll tell you more about the Bank's problem 

with Goldfinger. 'Colonel Smithers was a quiet, serious-looking man 

who wore glasses. But when he started to talk about gold, he be-

came very interesting. He lived, thought and dreamt about gold. He 

told Bond about the history of gold and its value. He said that each 

country has its own supply of gold. He also told Bond that there is 

yellow gold, red gold and white gold. 

'My job, Mr. Bond, is to check if gold is being smuggled out of Brit-

ain. When I find out that someone is smuggling, I inform the CID 

Gold Squad. We try to get the gold back and arrest the smugglers. 

But gold attracts the biggest, cleverest criminals and it's difficult to 

catch them.' 

'Can you give me an example of how gold is smuggled?' asked 

Bond. 

'Yes. Imagine that you have a small bar of gold in your pocket. In 

this country, the price of gold bullion is controlled by the Bank of 

England. It's illegal to sell gold for a higher price. But if you smug-

gle your gold bar out of Britain to a country like India and sell it 

there, you can get a lot more money for it.' 

'Why is gold worth more in India?' asked Bond. 

doesn't have enough gold of its own.' 

'So what is the Bank of England's particular problem?' said Bond. 

'Our problem is a man called Auric Goldfinger,' said Colonel Smith-

ers. 'He came to Britain from Riga, in the Soviet Union, in 1937. He 

shops here in Britain and gave them his name, "Goldfinger". Then 

he started selling cheap jewellery and buying old gold. 

'Goldfinger became very rich,' the colonel went on. 'After the war, 

he bought a house at Reculver, near the River Thames, and built a 

small factory there. He employed German and Korean workers in 

this factory. Then he bought a large cargo ship and an old Rolls-

Royce Silver Ghost car. He also has a factory in Switzerland. 

'Every year, Goldfinger made one trip to India in his cargo ship and 

a few trips in his car to Switzerland,' said Colonel Smithers. 'But 

one year, there was a terrible storm and his ship was wrecked. The 

ship was destroyed on some rocks. The company which collected 

the pieces of the wrecked ship found a strange kind of powder in-

side parts of the ship. When scientists examined the powder, they 

found out that it was gold. 

'We were sure that Goldfinger had been smuggling gold out of Brit-

ain to India in his ship,' Colonel Smithers continued. 'But we could-

n't prove anything. Goldfinger does everything legally. He has 

plenty of money in his bank account and he always pays his taxes 

to the Government. 

'I've been investigating Mr. Goldfinger for five years and I've dis-

covered that he's the richest man in Britain. All his wealth is in the 

in the vaults of banks in Zurich, Nassau, Panama and New York. 

'I went to Nassau and examined some of his gold bars in the bank 

there,' said the colonel. 'And I discovered something very interest-

ing. Goldfinger's gold bars have no official marks on them. The bars 

were not produced by the Royal Mint.' 

'So where have the bars come from?' asked Bond. 

'Goldfinger has produced his gold bars himself,' Colonel Smithers 

replied. 'He has melted down50 old gold from his shops, smuggled 

it out of Britain, and made it into new gold bars. Each of his bars 

has the mark of a tiny letter "Z" on the metal. 

'But the gold in his bars doesn't belong to Goldfinger,' said Colonel 

Smithers. It belongs to the Bank of England. And Britain needs that 

gold back as soon as possible. We need your help, Mr. Bond. We 

want you to catch Goldfinger.' 

M had told Bond to report back to him at six o'clock. After Bond 

had told his boss about his meeting with Colonel Smithers, M 

thought for a few minutes. 

'Do you have any ideas about how we can get close to Goldfinger?' 

he asked. 

'Well, I got a message that he'd like to play golf with me,' replied 

Bond. 'I could talk to him during the game. I could make up a 

story. I could pretend that I'm bored working for Universal Export. 

Perhaps he'll offer me a job.' 

'All right,' said M. 'Now listen, 007. There's something else that 

Colonel Smithers didn't tell you. I also know what Goldfinger's own 

gold bars look like. I saw a bar today. It was found in the office of 

one of SMERSH's agents in Tangiers. The bar had Goldfinger's let-

ter "Z" on it. 

'The Secret Intelligence Service has found nineteen of these gold 

bars,' M went on. 'Each bar had been kept by a SMERSH agent. I 

Soviet Union, and now he works for them. I believe that he's a 

banker for SMERSH - he looks after their money and increases their 

wealth. If I'm correct, then Goldfinger is one of SMERSH's best 

men.' 

PART TWO: COINCIDENCE 1 

Chapter 4. Trip to Sandwich 

Bond decided to drive to Sandwich and play a game of golf with 

Goldfinger. 

Goldfinger had told Bond that he was a member of the Royal St 

Marks Golf Club. Bond had often played on this course in the south-

east of England when he was a teenager. So he knew it well. 

Bond drove from London to Sandwich in a grey Aston Martin DB3. 

This car belonged to his employers, the SIS, and it was very fast 

and powerful. The car also had some special features. There was a 

gun hidden in a secret compartment under the driver's seat, and a 

radio that could pick up signals from a transmitting device51 called 

the Homer. 

Bond was a fast driver and easily passed most of the other cars on 

the road. As he drove, he thought about M's last words. Bond 

thought that M was probably right about Goldfinger. The headquar-

ters of SMERSH were in Moscow but it had many centres around 

the world. The organization needed a clever banker who was work-

ing outside the Soviet Union. Goldfinger was a perfect choice for 

SMERSH. 

Bond had booked a room in a hotel in Ramsgate - a small town 

near Sandwich. A few miles from Ramsgate, he passed a signpost 

to Reculver, where Goldfinger's house and factory were. Bond saw 

a tall factory chimney behind some trees, and then he passed a 

gate with a sign which said: THANET ALLOYS - No entry except on 

business. Bond reached the hotel at twelve o'clock. He went to his 

he drove to the Royal St Marks golf course at Sandwich. 

A man called Alfred Blacking worked for the Royal St Marks Golf 

Club. Bond had known Alfred Blacking for many years. Alfred's job 

equipment in the shop at the Club. When members of the Club had 

no one else to play with, they could book a game of golf with Al-

fred. 

When Bond arrived, Alfred was repairing a broken golf club in the 

workshop area of the shop. He was surprised and pleased to see 

Bond. 

'Hello, Mr. Bond. It must be more than fifteen years since you 

played golf at St Marks. Are you going to play today?' 

'Yes. I'm looking for someone to play golf with, Alfred. Have you 

got time for a game this afternoon?' 

'I'm sorry, sir,' replied Alfred, 'but a member of the Club -Mr. Gold-

finger - has already booked a game with me.' 

'Goldfinger?' said Bond, pretending to be surprised. 'I met a man 

called Goldfinger the other day, in America.' 

'Oh,' said Alfred. 'Well, if you know him, would you like to have a 

game with him this afternoon instead of me?' 

'All right,' said Bond. 'But perhaps he won't want to play with me.' 

'We'll find out now,' said Alfred, looking through the window. 

'There's his car.' 

Bond saw a very unusual car coming towards the shop. It was a 

beautiful old Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost. It was bright yellow except 

the radiator at the front of the car. The two great headlights on the 

radiator looked like two huge eyes, staring at Bond. 

Goldfinger was sitting in the driver's seat. Beside him was a shorter 

man dressed in a tight black suit, with a bowler hat placed firmly 

they were looking directly into Alfred's shop. Bond stepped back-

wards into the workshop area. A few minutes later, he heard Gold-

finger come into the shop. 

'Good afternoon,' said Goldfinger to Alfred. 'I saw a car outside. Is 

someone looking for a partner to play a game?' 

'The car belongs to Mr. Bond,' replied Alfred. 'He's been a member 

here for many years.' 

'Bond?' said Goldfinger. 'I met someone called Bond the other day. 

What's his first name?' 

'James, sir. He's in the workshop now.' 

Bond heard Goldfinger come to the door of the workshop. He pre-

tended to be busy cleaning his golf club. 

'I think that we've met before,' said Goldfinger. 

Bond looked up with a surprised expression on his face. 

'Oh, it's Gold, Goldman ... er ... Goldfinger. What are you doing 

here?' 

'I told you that I played here. Didn't Miss Masterton give you my 

message? I told her that I wanted to play a game of golf with you. 

I was going to play with Blacking this afternoon, but now I'll play 

with you instead.' 

Bond pretended that he wasn't very interested. 

'But I haven't got anyone to be my caddie,' he said. 

'Blacking, can you find a caddie for Mr. Bond?' Goldfinger asked Al-

fred. 

'Yes, sir.' 

'Then it's all arranged,' said Goldfinger. 

'Well, OK,' said Bond in a disinterested voice. 'But it's boring play-

ing just for fun. I like playing for money.' 

'AH right,' said Goldfinger. 'I have a suggestion. You took $10,000 

from me in Miami. If you win this game, I'll give you another 

$10,000. If you lose, you must give me my $10,000 back. ''I 

agree,' said Bond. He looked cool and calm, but inside he felt very 

excited. This game was going to be a perfect opportunity to learn 

more about Auric Goldfinger. 'I'll go and change my clothes,' he 

said. 

Bond went to his car to get his bag. The man with the bowler hat 

was polishing Goldfinger's Rolls-Royce with a cloth. He stopped pol-

ishing the car and watched Bond suspiciously. The man had a 

square face and dark fierce eyes. 

'He must be one of Goldfinger's Korean staff,' thought Bond. 

Bond took off his shoes and his jacket and put on a pair of special 

golf shoes and an old, comfortable jacket. Then he went back into 

the shop. Alfred had found a caddie for him - a man called Hawker. 

Bond remembered Hawker. He'd first met the caddie at St Marks 

when Bond was a teenager. 

'Good afternoon, Hawker,' said Bond. 

'Good afternoon, sir,' replied Hawker, smiling. 

Goldfinger approached with his caddie - a man called Foulks. Foulks 

was carrying Goldfinger's new golf clubs in an expensive, black 

leather bag. 

Goldfinger took out a club and a new golf ball. The name of the ball 

was printed on it in clear black letters and numbers. 

'I always use the same kind of ball,' he said. 'A Dunlop 65, Number 

1. What ball do you play with?' 

'A Penfold Hearts,' replied Bond. 

Goldfinger and his caddie walked out on to the course and Goldfin-

ger placed his ball on the first tee. He made one or two practice 

swings with the club, then he hit the ball. It was an excellent shot 

which went about 200 yards down the fairway towards the first 

hole. 

Now it was Bond's turn. He placed his ball on the tee and swung his 

club. But he hit the ball too hard. It went past Goldfinger's ball and 

landed in the long grass on the edge ofa rough. Bond's second shot 

was even worse. He hit the ball into a bunker of sand. But Goldfin-

ger was playing well. When he hit his ball again, it rolled easily 

along the ground to the first hole. 

'I've got to do better than this,' said Bond to Hawker. 

'Don't worry, sir,' replied Hawker. 'It's still early in the game.' 

But Bond was worried. He knew that it was never too early to start 

losing. And he mustn't lose this game against Goldfinger. He had to 

win! 

Chapter 5. Playing to Win 

The golf course at Royal St Marks is very difficult. There are many 

areas of long, rough grass and bunkers full of sand. 

At the third hole of the course, Goldfinger hit his ball into the 

rough. The ball stopped beside a large tuft of grass. It was going to 

be very difficult for him to hit the ball because the tuft was in the 

way. Goldfinger looked at the ball for a moment. Then he stepped 

heavily on the tuft and made it flat. Now it was easy to hit the ball 

towards the hole. 

Bond frowned angrily. He'd seen how Goldfinger had flattened the 

tuft of grass. Goldfinger had cheated! But Bond also knew that he 

couldn't accuse Goldfinger of cheating. Goldfinger would deny it 

and then he would accuse Bond of telling lies. 

As they approached the fifth hole, Bond was preparing for a difficult 

shot. He swung his club high in the air and thought about hitting 

the ball well. But suddenly Goldfinger made a sharp noise, and 

Bond swung his club in the wrong way. He hit the ball badly. He 

turned towards Goldfinger. His eyes were cold with anger. 

'I'm sorry,' said Goldfinger carelessly. 'I dropped my club.' 

'Don't do it again,' said Bond. He handed his own club to Hawker, 

and walked to the next hole without speaking. 

'What company do you work for?' asked Goldfinger suddenly. 

Bond tried to control his anger. He had to remember why he was 

playing golf with Goldfinger. Bond's mission was to find out more 

about Goldfinger. 

'Universal Export,' he replied. 

'And where are their headquarters?' asked Goldfinger. 

'London. Regent's Park.' 

'What do they export?' 

'Oh, all kinds of machines, as well as military weapons,' said Bond. 

'But the work isn't very interesting. I'm thinking about leaving the 

job.' 

'Oh, really?' said Goldfinger. 

Bond waited for more questions. But Goldfinger didn't say anything 

more. At the sixth hole, Goldfinger cheated again. He made a bad 

shot and his ball went into a bunker. It landed in a deep, soft part 

of the sand. But then, Goldfinger didn't walk down into the bunker, 

he jumped down and the sand beside the ball became flat. He'd 

made the ground level. So when he hit the ball again, it came out 

of the bunker easily. 

Bond was too far away to see what Goldfinger had done, out 

Bond's caddie, Hawker, had seen how Goldfinger had cheated and 

he was angry. Bond was losing the game because Goldfinger wasn't 

playing fairly. So Hawker made a decision. He would help Bond to 

win the game. 

Goldfinger and Bond were walking towards the tenth hole.'What 

happened to that nice girl, Miss Masterton?' asked Bond. 

Goldfinger stared straight in front of him. For a few minutes he 

didn't speak. Then he said carelessly, 'She left my employment.' 

'Oh, really? Where did she go?' 

'I don't know,' said Goldfinger, walking away. 

played some excellent shots. At last, there were only two more 

holes to play - the seventeenth and the eighteenth - before the end 

of the game. 

grass and lost it. Goldfinger and Foulks started searching for the 

ball. Bond and Hawker searched too. 

Suddenly Bond trod on something. He bent down and looked in the 

long grass. Under his foot was a golf ball - a Dunlop 65. 

'Here you are!' he called to Goldfinger. Then he looked at the ball 

again. 'Oh. You play with a Number 1, don't you?' 

'Yes,' called Goldfinger. 

'Well, this is a Number 7.' Bond picked up the ball and showed it to 

Goldfinger. 

'That isn't my ball,' said Goldfinger. 

The ball was almost new - the words and numbers on it were clear. 

Bond put it in his pocket and went on searching for Goldfinger's 

ball. 

Suddenly, Foulks called out, 'Here you are, sir! I've found your ball. 

A Number 1 Dunlop.' 

Bond and Goldfinger walked over to where Foulks was standing and 

pointing down at a ball. Bond looked at it closely. Yes, it was an 

almost new, Dunlop Number 1. But it was lying in a very good posi-

tion. Goldfinger could easily hit the ball into the hole from this posi-

tion. 

How had the ball got there? 

the ball out of the rough. It was one of his best shots in the game. 

Bond smiled at Hawker and said, 'Goldfinger was very lucky to find 

his ball in that rough.' 

'It wasn't his own ball, sir,' replied Hawker calmly. 

'What do you mean?' asked Bond. 

'I saw him give money to Foulks, sir,' said Hawker. 'Foulks had a 

new ball in his pocket. He dropped the ball down the leg of his 

trousers. Then he pretended that he'd found Goldfinger's lost ball' 

'How can you be sure about that, Hawker?' said Bond. 

Hawker smiled. 

'Because I put your bag of golf clubs on top of his lost ball,' he 

said. Bond looked surprised and shocked. 'I'm sorry, sir,' Hawker 

went on. 'But I saw how he was cheating you. I had to do some-

thing to stop him.' 

Bond laughed. 

'Thank you, Hawker,' he said. 'I know that Goldfinger has been 

cheating. But there's only one way that I can win now. I shall have 

to cheat too. And I'll have to cheat better than him! But how?' 

Suddenly Bond had an idea. The Dunlop Number 7 golf ball which 

he'd picked up was in his pocket. 

'Here,' said Bond quietly to Hawker. 'Take this.' He put the Dunlop 

Number 7 into Hawker's hand. 'After Goldfinger and I have hit our 

balls into the seventeenth hole, pick them up. Then give Goldfinger 

this Number 7 Dunlop, instead of his Number 1 Dunlop. He mustn't 

see that you have changed the balls. The two balls look almost ex-

means he'll be breaking the rules of the game.' 

'That's a very clever trick, sir!' said Hawker. 

At the seventeenth hole, Hawker did as Bond asked. Hechanged 

Goldfinger's Dunlop Number 1 ball for the Dunlop Humber 7 ball. 

Then he gave the Dunlop Number 7 to Goldfinger. 

Goldfinger was very pleased. He thought that he was winning. 

There was only the last hole to play - the eighteenth. Goldfinger 

placed his ball on the tee and Bond watched him nervously. Surely 

Goldfinger would see that he was playing with a different ball! But 

Goldfinger didn't notice that anything was wrong. He swung his 

club and hit the ball well. It landed in a good position on the fair-

way. 

'Good shot!' said Bond in a pleased voice. Now he would win the 

game because Goldfinger had hit the wrong ball. Goldfinger had 

cheated Bond, but Bond had tricked him. And Goldfinger didn't 

know! 

Goldfinger hit his ball easily into the eighteenth hole. Bond didn't 

try to win. He hit his ball badly so that it went past the hole. He 

had to make more shots than Goldfinger, so that he was the loser. 

He picked up his own ball and Goldfinger's ball out of the hole. 

Goldfinger's face was shining with triumph. He thought that he'd 

beaten Bond. 

'It's clear that I'm a better player than you,' he said. 

in his hand. 'Wait a moment!' he said in a surprised voice. 'You play 

with a Dunlop Number 1, don't you?' 

'Yes, of course. Why?' 

'I'm sorry, but you've been playing with the wrong ball,' said Bond. 

Goldfinger and Goldfinger stared at it. His face went pale as he 

looked from the ball to Bond, and then back to the ball. 

'I'm sorry. That means you've lost the game,' said Bond softly. 

'But - but —' began Goldfinger angrily. 

Bond stood and waited, saying nothing. 'It was your caddie who 

gave me this ball at the seventeenth hole,' said Goldfinger. 'He 

gave me the wrong ball' 

'I'm sure that's not true,' said Bond. 'Hawker, you didn't give Mr. 

Goldfinger the wrong ball by mistake, did you?' 

'No, sir,' said Hawker. 'But perhaps the mistake happened when 

Mr. Goldfinger lost his ball in the long grass. Perhaps he picked up 

a Dunlop Number 7 instead of a Number 1.' 

'That's impossible!' said Goldfinger angrily. 'You saw that my caddie 

found a Number 1, not a Number 7.' 

'I'm afraid that I didn't look closely,' replied Bond. 'Thanks for the 

game. We must play again one day.' And he started to walk away. 

Goldfinger followed Bond slowly, his eyes staring coldly at Bond's 

back. 

Chapter 6. Dinner with Mr. Goldfinger 

Bond went back to his hotel room and had a shower. While he was 

drying himself, a member of the hotel staff knocked at the door. 

'There's a phone message from Mr. Goldfinger, sir,' he said. 'He 

would like to invite you to dinner at his house tonight. He lives at 

The Grange, in Reculver. Can you arrive at six'thirty?' 

'Please tell Mr. Goldfinger that I'll be delighted to have dinner with 

him,' replied Bond. He felt very pleased. He'd beaten Goldfinger 

twice and now Goldfinger was interested in him. Goldfinger wanted 

to find out more about Bond. He wanted to find a way to fight him 

and win. 

Just after six o'clock, Bond drove to Reculver. He turned off the 

main road and followed the path leading up to Goldfinger's house. 

The Grange was a dark and ugly house. To the right of it there 

were tall trees, and a tall factory chimney was behind them. 

Bond rang the front door bell. The same Korean who had come to 

Royal St Marks with Goldfinger that afternoon opened the door. He 

was still wearing his bowler hat. 

He led Bond into a large gloomy living room. A small fire was burn-

ing in the fireplace. Two armchairs were in front of the fire and 

there was a tray of drinks on a table between them. There were 

stairs leading from the living room to the floor above. All the deco-

rations and furniture in the room were dark and ugly. 

The Korean pointed silently to the drinks tray, then went out 

through a door at one side of the room. 

was the sound of a voice and footsteps coming down a passage. A 

door under the wooden staircase opened and Goldfinger appeared. 

He was wearing a purple dinner jacket. 

'It was very kind of you to come, Mr. Bond,' he said. 'But I'm afraid 

that I have to leave you for a short time. I've just had a phone call. 

One of my Korean staff is in trouble with the police. I have to go 

and talk to them and find out what the problem is. My servant will 

drive me there. Please have a drink. I won't be more than half an 

hour.' 

'That's fine,' said Bond. 

'This room is very dark,' said Goldfinger. 'I'll put the lights on.' He 

turned on a switch and suddenly lights shone all round the room. 

Now it was as bright as a film studio. 

A few minutes later, Bond heard the sound of a car going away 

down the drive. He looked round the hall. Why had Goldfinger left 

him alone? Was it a trap? Bond looked at his watch. Five minutes 

had passed since Goldfinger had left. Bond decided to take a risk. 

Even if Goldfinger had prepared a trap, this was a good opportunity 

to look round the house while Goldfinger was away. The factory 

would be a good place to start. 

Bond opened the door that Goldfinger's servant had gone through 

and found himself in a passage. He walked along the passage and 

out through a door at the end. He was now standing in a courtyard. 

The long wall of the factory was on the other side of the courtyard. 

Bond crossed the courtyard and looked through a window into the 

factory. 

Inside Goldfinger's factory there were two blast furnaces for melt-

ing metal. The whole building was lit with very bright lights. Under 

the powerful lights, Bond saw four Koreans working on Goldfinger's 

Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost. They had taken the door off the right side 

of the car and they were fitting a new panel of metal into it. 'Noth-

ing interesting there,' thought Bond. He went back to the living 

room and looked at his watch. He had ten minutes before Goldfin-

ger returned! He decided to check the rooms upstairs. Bond 

climbed the stairs and walked along the passage. He opened doors 

and looked inside the rooms. But none of them had furniture in 

them. 

Suddenly, a large, ginger-red cat appeared. It rubbed its body 

against Bond's trouser legs and followed him. 

Bond opened a door at the end of the passage and found that he 

was in Goldfinger's bedroom. All the lights in the room were on. 

Bond looked around quickly but he couldn't see anything unusual. 

The room was comfortable, with large cupboards and a small shelf 

of books beside the bed. 

Bond glanced at his watch again. There were only five minutes be-

fore Goldfinger came back! It was time to go. He took a last look 

round the room and moved to the door. Suddenly he stopped and 

listened carefully. There was a soft sound coming from one of the 

cupboards. It was the sound of a machine with an electric motor. 

Bond carefully opened the cupboard door. The noise of the motor 

was coming from behind some coats. He pushed them out of the 

way and saw three separate strips of film. They were moving down 

deep container. 

So this was the trap! Three cine-cameras had been filming Bond 

from the time that Goldfinger had left the house. The cameras 

must be hidden somewhere in the living room, the courtyard out-

side the factory, and Goldfinger's bedroom. When Goldfinger had 

switched on the lights, he'd also switched on the cameras. 

Now Goldfinger would know that Bond had been looking round his 

house. What could Bond do? He heard a soft cry from beside the 

bedroom door. The cat! It had followed him into the room. 

Suddenly Bond had an idea. He'd thought of a way to destroy the 

film. And Goldfinger would think that the cat had done it. 

Bond picked up the cat. Holding the animal in his arms, he leant 

over the container and began to pick up the long strips of film. The 

bright light coming through the open cupboard door exposed the 

film - it destroyed the pictures on it. Now Goldfinger would have no 

pictures of Bond searching the house. 

When Bond was sure that all the film was exposed, he put the 

strips back into the container. Then he dropped the cat down on 

top of the strips of film. The cat couldn't get out of the deep con-

tainer. It lay down on top of the strips and went to sleep. 'Goldfin-

ger will think that the cat pushed open the door of the cupboard,' 

Bond said to himself. 'Then it wanted to play with the moving strips 

of film, so it jumped into the container. He'll believe that the bright 

light in the room exposed the film.' 

Bond ran back along the passage and down the stairs to the living 

room. He poured himself a drink, picked up a magazine, and sat 

the room. 

'Hello,' Bond said, turning round. 'Is everything OK?' 

'Oh, yes,' said Goldfinger. 'It was a misunderstanding. I talked to 

I'm sorry about that. I hope that you weren't bored. I'll just go up-

stairs and wash. Then we'll have dinner.' 

Goldfinger walked up the stairs and along the passage. There was 

silence. Bond had another drink and read more of the magazine. 

Then he heard Goldfinger coming back down the stairs. He looked 

up. Goldfinger was standing in front of him with the ginger cat in 

his arms. 

'Goldfinger found the cat in the cupboard!' Bond said to himself. 

'He must have seen the exposed film too.' 

Goldfinger rang a bell beside the fireplace. 

'Do you like cats?' he asked Bond. 

'They're OK,' Bond replied. 

The door opened and Goldfinger's Korean servant came into the 

room. He was wearing his bowler hat and a pair of shiny black 

gloves. 

'This is Oddjob,' said Goldfinger, turning to Bond. 'I call him Oddjob 

because he does all kinds of work for me. He can't speak. Oddjob, 

show Mr. Bond your hands.' 

Oddjob pulled off his gloves and held out his hands. They were 

huge and strong, and all the fingers were the same length. Oddjob 

turned his hands over and Bond saw that the servant had no fin-

thick, shiny skin. 

Goldfinger pointed to the thick wooden banister that went up be-

side the stairs. He nodded to Oddjob and the Korean servant 

walked over to the banister. He lifted his right hand high above his 

head and brought it down across the banister. The edge of his hand 

struck the banister like an axe. The powerful blow broke the banis-

ter and pieces of wood fell down onto the floor. 

'His feet are as powerful as his hands,' said Goldfinger. 'Oddjob, 

the mantelpiece.' He pointed to the heavy shelf of wood above the 

fireplace. It was about six inches higher than the top of Oddjob's 

bowler hat. 

Goldfinger nodded and Oddjob leapt high in the air. His right foot 

struck the mantelpiece and Bond heard a terrible noise as the man-

telpiece broke. 

Bond stared at Oddjob in astonishment. He'd never met anyone 

like him before. Oddjob was tremendously strong. He was like a 

machine. 

'Good, Oddjob,' said Goldfinger. 'Here.' He threw the cat to Oddjob, 

who caught it quickly. 'I'm tired of this animal. You may have it for 

dinner.' Oddjob smiled a cruel smile. 

Bond felt disgusted but he was careful not to show his feelings. 

Goldfinger suspected that Bond, not the cat, had found the film and 

destroyed it. Goldfinger was giving Bond a warning by showing 

Oddjob's strength and cruelty. And Bond understood this. 

looking at the servant. 

'Oddjob!' called Goldfinger as the servant was leaving the room. 

'The hat!' He pointed at a wooden panel on the wall near the fire-

place. 

hand, took the hat off his head and threw it at thepanel. There was 

a ringing sound. The edge of the bowler hat stuck deep in the 

panel. 

Goldfinger smiled at Bond. 

'Oddjob's hat is made of a light but strong metal,' he said. 'It's a 

very useful weapon. That blow would have smashed a man's head 

or cut his neck.' 

'Yes, indeed,' said Bond politely. Oddjob pulled his hat out of the 

panel and went out. 'Time for dinner,' said Goldfinger. He led the 

way through into a dining room. In the centre of the room, a round 

table was prepared for a meal. The table had lighted candles, silver 

cutlery and sparkling glasses on it. Bond and Goldfinger were 

served an excellent dinner by Goldfinger's Korean staff. 

'Your Rolls-Royce is a beautiful car,' said Bond. 'Was it made in 

about 1925?' 

'Yes,' said Goldfinger. 'I've had to make some changes to it. For 

example, I had to increase the power of the brakes. The body of 

the car is armour-plated so it's very heavy.' 

'What happens when you take the car to Europe?' asked Bond. 'Is-

n't it too heavy for a plane?' 

the Silver City company. Their planes fly from Ferryfield Airport. I 

go to Europe twice a year on golfing holidays, so they know me 

well. In fact, I'm going to Europe tomorrow.' 

They talked about money and Bond's work at Universal Export. 

Bond told Goldfinger that he wanted to leave the company. Bond 

was still hoping that Goldfinger would offer him a job. But Goldfin-

ger didn't seem very interested. 

After dinner, Goldfinger got up from the table and went towards 

the front door. Bond followed and held out his hand. 'Well, many 

thanks for the excellent dinner,' he said. 'Perhaps we'll meet again 

one day.' 

Goldfinger looked closely at Bond and shook his hand slowly. 'I'm 

sure that we will meet again,' he said. 

All the way back to his hotel, Bond thought about what Goldfinger 

had said. What did he mean? Was he going to make contact with 

Bond again? 

Bond decided that he would follow Goldfinger to Europe. But he 

would have to be careful — very careful. 

Chapter 7. The Chase Begins 

A nine o'clock the next morning, Bond phoned the headquarters of 

the Secret Intelligence Service in London. 

'Goldfinger is leaving Britain today,' he told them. 'He's going to 

Europe. He's flying from Ferryfield Airport, but I don't know when. 

He's taking his Rolls-Royce. I want to follow him and put a Homer 

transmitting device in his car.' 

was booked on a flight to Le Touquet in France. The flight was leav-

ing at midday. 

Bond paid his hotel bill and left Ramsgate. He drove to Ferryfield 

Airport and got there at about eleven o'clock. The SIS had already 

phoned the Customs officers at the airport. They had asked the 

Customs officers to help Bond. Bond parked his car where Goldfin-

ger would not see it, and waited. 

At quarter to twelve, Goldfinger and Oddjob arrived in the Rolls-

Royce Silver Ghost. They got onto the plane and the Customs offi-

cers took Goldfinger's car into the Customs area. There was only 

one other car there - a small, pale grey Triumph sports car. Bond 

took the Homer transmitting device out of his pocket and fixed it 

into the compartment of Goldfinger's car where tools are kept. 

Then the Customsofficers drove the Rolls-Royce onto the plane. 

Bond's Aston Martin had a special receiver which would pick up sig-

nals from the Homer. It could pick up signals from a distance of up 

to 100 miles. Bond would be able to follow Goldfinger without Gold-

finger seeing him. 

Bond took the 2 p.m. flight to Le Touquet. As soon as he left the 

airport at Le Touquet, he switched on the receiver in his car. It 

picked up the signal from the Homer in Goldfinger's car and started 

to make a low humming sound. Bond followed the sound made by 

the Homer. Goldfinger was moving through France in a south-

easterly direction. 

Goldfinger drove all afternoon and Bond followed. As it became 

dark, they reached the old town of Orleans. Suddenly Bond saw 

slowed down. He didn't want Goldfinger to know that he was being 

followed. 

That night, Goldfinger stayed at a very expensive hotel, while Bond 

stayed in a small hotel near the railway station. 

At six o'clock the next morning, Bond was ready and waiting in his 

car outside Goldfinger's hotel. At half-past eight, Goldfinger and 

Oddjob came out of the hotel and got into the Rolls-Royce. They 

drove off and Bond followed. 

Bond was enjoying himself. He was driving along by the River 

Loire. It was early summer and the French countryside was very 

beautiful. 

Suddenly, a small Triumph sports car drove past. It was the same 

car that he'd passed the evening before, in Orleans. He could see 

the driver - a pretty girl wearing a pink scarf over her dark hair. 

Bond looked at the girl with interest. He loved pretty girls, and it 

was a perfect day for romance. He wished that he could drive after 

her and catch up with70 her. But this was no time for love. He was 

on a mission. His job was to follow Goldfinger. 

Then Bond realized that he'd seen that Triumph before. It had been 

at Ferryfield Airport, and also in Orleans. Was this a coincidence? 

Or was the girl following Goldfinger too? Bond would have to get rid 

of her. The job of following Goldfinger was already difficult. And 

Bond didn't want this girl to make things more difficult. 

Bond drove on, following the strong clear signal from the Homer. 

Suddenly, as he drove over the top of a hill, Bond saw that the 

half a mile ahead of him. Bond stopped too and took a small pair of 

binoculars out of a compartment in the Aston Martin. He saw Gold-

finger sitting beside a small bridge that crossed a river. He was 

eating a sandwich. 

Goldfinger finished eating and got up. Bond saw him place some-

thing carefully on the ground, close to the stone wall of the bridge. 

Then Goldfinger got back into the Rolls-Royce and drove off. Bond 

drove quickly down to the bridge and searched the ground beside 

it. 

Next to the stone wall of the bridge, hidden under some grass, 

there was something hard and heavy. Bond pulled a gold bar out of 

the grass. Had Goldfinger put the bar there for one of the SMERSH 

agents to collect? Well, Bond would make sure that they wouldn't 

find it. He carried the bar back to the Aston Martin and put it in the 

secret compartment under the passenger seat. 

Bond drove off quickly and caught up with the Rolls-Royce before it 

reached the next town, Macon. The road divided at Macon. The 

right turning led to Lyons in France. The left turning led to Geneva 

in Switzerland. Which way was Goldfinger going? 

The Rolls-Royce took the left turning. Goldfinger was Suddenly, 

Bond looked in his driving mirror and saw the little grey Triumph 

immediately behind him. He'd been so busy following the Rolls-

Royce that he'd forgotten the girl. Bond was angry. Now he must 

make sure that she couldn't follow any further. This was a perfect 

opportunity to get her car off the road. Bond pressed down hard on 

his brakes and his car stopped at once. The Triumph crashed 

straight into the back of the Aston Martin. Bond's car wasn't dam-

aged but the radiator of the Triumph was badly smashed. 

The girl got out of her car. She was extremely angry. 

'You stupid idiot! Why did you do that?' she shouted. 'I can't drive 

my car now.' 

'I'm terribly sorry,' said Bond politely. 'I'll pay for the damage. And 

I'll pay for your hotel this evening. I'm sure that your car can be 

repaired by tomorrow morning.' 

'No,' said the girl in a cool, angry voice. 'I can't stay here in Macon. 

I've got an important meeting in Geneva. I have to get there this 

evening. Will you take me in your car, please?' 

Bond looked at the girl. She was very beautiful, with dark blue eyes 

and black hair. Why was she chasing Goldfinger? 

'All right,' he said. 'I'll be happy to take you to Geneva. Go and get 

your things.' 

The girl went to her car and took out a small suitcase and a bag of 

golf clubs. 

'What's your name?' Bond asked. 'And which hotel are you staying 

at?' 

'The Hotel des Bergues. And my name is Soames - Miss Tilly So-

ames.' 

A few minutes later, they were on their way to Geneva. Bond could 

still hear the signal from the Homer, but the low humming sound 

wasn't loud. 

'The Rolls-Royce must be about fifty miles ahead,' he thought. The 

Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost was standing in the middle of the court-

yard. As Bond watched, the door of the house opened and Goldfin-

take parts off the car. They took the doors off the car and they re-

moved the armour-plating from inside the door panels. 

Suddenly, Oddjob appeared in the doorway of the house. He made 

Bond to leave. He looked around for the last time, then went back 

quietly through the trees to his car. 

Bond took the gold bar that he'd found under the bridge to the Brit-

ish SIS agent in Geneva. He asked the agent to send the bar to M 

in London. 

'Do you know anything about Enterprises Auric at Coppet?' Bond 

asked the agent. 

'Enterprises Auric makes metal furniture,' replied the agent. 'It's 

very good quality. The company makes seats for the planes of a big 

Indian airline — Mecca Airlines.' 

Suddenly Bond understood everything about Goldfinger's business. 

The smuggling operation had been like a puzzle with a piece miss-

ing. But now Bond had got the missing piece of information. Now 

he knew how the gold was being smuggled out of Britain and sold 

in India. Goldfinger was using his Rolls-Royce to smuggle it. 

Goldfinger had bought the Rolls-Royce because it was special. It 

had been made with heavy armour-plating in its doors. 

Bond remembered what he'd seen at Reculver. He'd seen the metal 

plates being fixed on the car at Goldfinger's factory. Then he'd seen 

the armour-plating taken off again, at Goldfinger's factory at Cop-

ordinary metal. It was gold -white gold! 

He glanced at the girl in the passenger seat. 'How long are you go-

ing to stay in Geneva, 7' he asked. 

'I don't know. I'm playing in the Swiss Open Golf Championship for 

Women.' 

Bond was sure that the girl wasn't telling him all of the truth. And 

she didn't talk very much to him for the rest of the journey. 

They drove over the mountains and crossed the border from France 

into Switzerland. When they reached Geneva, Bond stopped at the 

Hotel des Bergues. He gave the girl some money and he apologized 

again for the damage to her car. 

She got out of the Aston Martin, thanked him coldly and walked 

into the hotel. 

Now Bond had to catch up with Goldfinger again. The sound from 

the Homer had got much louder. He drove fast through Geneva and 

saw the yellow Rolls-Royce just before they arrived at a small vil-

lage called Coppet. The car was turning in through big iron gates in 

a high wall. A sign on the wall said: ENTERPRISES AURIC. 

Bond drove past the gates and took the next turning off the road. A 

narrow lane led up into some woods. Bond stopped the Aston Mar-

tin and turned off the engine. He took the binoculars, got out of the 

car, and walked silently through the trees. When he came to a very 

large tree, he hid behind it and looked through his binoculars. From 

this position, Bond could see down to the buildings of Enterprises 

Auric. 

courtyard there was an old house and some workshops. At the cor-

square piece of metal on the top. The piece of metal was turning 

round and round. It looked like a kind of radar scanner. Goldfinger 

drove his car to Switzerland twice a year. Before he left Britain, his 

workmen at his factory in Reculver took the armour-plating out of 

the car's doors. They replaced the ordinary metal panels with pan-

els of white gold. The white gold was the same colour as the ar-

mour-plating. So Customs officials at the airport never suspected 

that the car's doors were really made of white gold. 

Then Goldfinger drove the Rolls-Royce to his factory in Switzerland. 

At his factory at Coppet, workmen removed the white gold panels 

from Goldfinger's car and replaced them with ordinary armour-

plating again. The panels of white gold were melted in the blast 

furnaces at Coppet and made into seats for Mecca Airlines' planes. 

Then the Mecca planes were flown to India. In India, the seats 

were taken out of the planes and replaced with ordinary metal 

seats. In this way, the gold was smuggled into India where it was 

sold. Goldfinger was making a lot of money for SMERSH. It was a 

very clever operation! 

Chapter 8. Death by Gold 

After he left the SIS agent in Geneva, Bond drove to the Hotel des 

Bergues and booked a room. He asked the receptionist if Miss Tilly 

Soames was in her room. But the receptionist said that no one of 

that name was staying at the hotel. 

Bond wasn't surprised. He'd suspected that the girl hadn't told him 

her real name. 

Bond had a shower, dressed, and put on a pair of shoes with a 

small knife hidden in one of the heels. Then he drove to a small 

restaurant by Lake Geneva for dinner. While he ate, he thought 

about Goldfinger's smuggling operation. 

Bond decided to go back to Goldfinger's factory at Coppet and look 

for some white gold dust. He would send some of the dust to the 

headquarters of the SIS in London. The dust would prove that 

Goldfinger was smuggling gold out of Britain. Then the Secret Ser-

vice would inform the police and Goldfinger would be arrested. 

A little after eight o'clock, Bond paid his restaurant bill and got into 

the Aston Martin. He drove to the narrow lane in the woods above 

Goldfinger's factory. Then he got out of the car and walked quietly 

through the trees. The moon was shining brightly and there was no 

wind. After walking for a few minutes, Bond saw the outline of the 

factory buildings below him. He could just hear the thump-thump-

thump sound of a powerful engine. 

Bond stepped slowly and quietly through the trees, moving small 

branches carefully out of his way. When he came to the large tree, 

him. 

The body moved a little. By the light of the moon, Bond saw some-

hair, a black sweater and narrow black trousers. 

she was holding a rifle. Bond breathed slowly. He studied the dis-

tance between him and the girl. Tilly hadn't heard him approach. 

Suddenly he leapt onto her back and pressed his left hand over her 

mouth. At the same time, he grabbed the rifle with his right hand 

and threw it onto the ground a few feet away. Then he held her 

hands behind her back. 

The girl tried to fight Bond, but he was stronger and heavier than 

she was. She couldn't push Bond off her back, so she tried to bite 

his hand. Bond put his mouth close to her ear and whispered 

quickly. 

'Tilly! Lie quietly! This is me, Bond. I'm a friend. Will you lie quietly 

and listen?' 

At last, the girl nodded her head. Bond slid off her and lay beside 

her. But he still held her hands behind her back. 

'Were you following Goldfinger?' he asked. 

'Yes. I was going to kill him,' the girl whispered fiercely. Then her 

whole body began to shake and she started to cry softly. 

Bond let go of Tilly's hands and touched her hair gently. He looked 

down through the trees at the factory buildings. Something was 

different there. It was the radar scanner on top of the tall chimney. 

and it was pointing in their direction. 

'Don't cry,' Bond whispered. 'I'm chasing Goldfinger too. I've been 

to you?' 

'He killed my sister,' replied Tilly. 'You knew her – Jill Masterton'. 

'What happened?' asked Bond. He was shocked. 

'Jill called me from a hospital in Miami. She was dying. I went to 

her at once. She told me what Goldfinger had done to her. She 

died the same night.' 

'What had he done?' asked Bond. 

'Goldfinger was angry because Jill went to New York with you. 

When she returned to Miami he gave an order for Jill to be killed. 

He ordered his Korean servant to paint all of her body with paint - 

gold paint. If you cover someone completely in paint, your skin 

can't breathe and you die. Jill told me about you. She liked you.' 

Bond closed his eyes. He remembered how beautiful Jill had been, 

and the wonderful time that they had spent together. He felt sad 

and very angry. He'd asked Goldfinger about Jill two days before. 

Goldfinger had replied, 'She left my employment.' But Jill hadn't 

left her job with Goldfinger. She'd been murdered by him. 

Suddenly there was a sharp noise by Bond's head. A metal arrow 

flew through the air and struck the large tree in front of Bond. Im-

mediately, Bond turned his head. He saw the dark figure of a man 

standing ten yards away. The person was wearing a bowler hat. It 

was Oddjob. He was getting ready to fire a second arrow from a 

long metal bow. 

'Don't move,' whispered Bond to the girl. 'Hello, Oddjob,' he said 

more loudly. He stood up in front of Tilly, trying to protect her with 

his own body. 

Oddjob held the bow so that the arrow was pointing at Bond's 

stomach. Then Oddjob quickly moved his head sideways and 

downwards towards the house. He didn't speak. 

'You want us to go down there/' said Bond. 'All right.' Bond knew 

that he couldn't win in a fight against Oddjob. Oddjob was like a 

fighting machine. They would have to do what Oddjob wanted. 

'Come on,' Bond said to the girl, and he led her away from the rifle 

on the ground so that Oddjob wouldn't see it. 

They walked slowly down the hill with Oddjob just behind them. 

Bond talked softly to the girl. 

'We'll tell Goldfinger that you're my girlfriend,' he said quietly. 

'We'll say that I brought you here. Don't try to do anything.' He 

nodded his head back towards Oddjob. 'This man is a killer.' 

Then Bond noticed something. The radar scanner on the tall chim-

ney had started turning round again. The machine must have de-

tected their movements when they were in the woods. 

So Goldfinger had known that there were strangers near his factory 

and he'd sent Oddjob to get them!Bond, Tilly and Oddjob reached 

the courtyard of the house. The back door opened and two of Gold-

finger's Korean servants ran out, carrying long sticks. 

Then Oddjob pushed Bond and the girl through the door and along 

a passage. The Korean servant stopped and knocked on a door 

leading off the passage. 

'Yes?' said a voice inside the room. 

Oddjob opened the door and pushed Bond and Tilly through the 

doorway. 

Goldfinger sat at a big desk covered with papers. He was wearing a 

purple velvet jacket over a white silk shirt. He looked at Bond with 

his cruel, pale eyes. He didn't look at the girl. 

'Goldfinger,' said Bond in an angry voice. 'What's the problem? This 

is my girlfriend, Miss Soames. Oddjob almost killed us in the 

woods. If you don't answer me and apologize, Goldfinger, I'll call 

the police.' 

Goldfinger continued to stare at Bond. At last he spoke. 

'Mr. Bond,' he said. 'The gangsters in Chicago say this: "If you 

meet someone for the first time, it's by chance. The second time 

you meet them, it's by coincidence. But if you meet them for a 

third time, it's time for enemy action." We met in Miami, Sandwich, 

and now here. I'm going to get the truth out of you, Mr. Bond. 

Oddjob, take them into the factory.' 

Bond leapt across the desk and attacked Goldfinger. The top of 

Bond's head crashed into Goldfinger's body and knocked him off his 

chair. The two men fell to the floor together and Bond's fingers 

went around Goldfinger's throat. Then something heavy hit Bond's 

head, and he slid off Goldfinger's body onto the floor and lay still. 

He was unconscious. 

PART THREE: ENEMY ACTION 

Chapter 9. Project Grand Slam 

When Bond became conscious again and opened his eyes, a power-

ful bright light was shining above him. He tried to move but he 

couldn't. He was lying on a metal table and his hands and feet were 

tied to it. 

'Now we can begin,' he heard Goldfinger's voice say. 

Bond turned his head to the left and saw Goldfinger sitting in a 

chair. There was a control panel on a small table beside him. Tilly 

was sitting on the other side of the table. Her hands and feet were 

tied to a chair. There was a shocked expression on her pale, beau-

tiful face. 

Bond turned his head to the right. Oddjob was standing a few feet 

away. The Korean was wearing his bowler hat but he'd taken off his 

jacket and shirt. The light shone on the powerful muscles of his 

arms and chest. 

Bond lifted his head and looked round the room. They were in one 

of the factory rooms. Then he looked down at the table where he 

was lying. It had a long, narrow slot down the centre, and at the 

end, he saw the sharp teeth of a large circular saw. 

'Mr. Bond,' said Goldfinger. 'I know that you and this girl are my 

enemies. I've given the girl drugs to make her talk. She has told 

me that she came here to kill me. Perhaps you came here to kill 

me too. Now tell me the truth. Talk!' 

Goldfinger pressed a button on the control panel and a high, whis-

tling sound came from the circular saw. The sharp blade was spin-

slowly by cutting his body into two pieces. 

'Now, Mr. Bond,' said Goldfinger. 'Tell me everything that you know 

about my business, and you'll die quickly. The girl will die quickly 

also. If you talk, I'll give each of you a drug and there will be no 

pain. If you don't talk, you'll die slowly and in great pain, and the 

girl will watch. Then I'll give her to Oddjob. So what do you want to 

do?' 

'Don't be a fool, Goldfinger,' said Bond. 'I told my employers at 

Universal Export where I was going and why. Universal is very 

powerful and they'll send the police here to find us.' 

'I'm afraid that you don't understand, Mr. Bond,' said Goldfinger, 

smiling. 'If the police come here, none of my staff will talk to them. 

Now tell me the truth. Who are you? Who sent you here? What do 

you know? The saw is now moving towards your body at about one 

inch every minute.' 

Bond was silent. 

'Oddjob,' Goldfinger said to his servant, 'Mr. Bond needs some help 

to make him talk. Persuade him to talk.' 

The servant stepped towards the table. The high whistling sound of 

the saw was getting louder as it got nearer to Bond's body. Then 

Oddjob's powerful fingers began to press and strike Bond's body 

again and again and again. The pain was terrible. 

Bond wanted to die - die quickly. After many minutes, Oddjob 

stopped hitting him. 

'Goldfinger,' said Bond slowly, in a weak voice. 'I'll make a bargain 

with you. The girl and I will work for you. OK?' 

'And I must wait for you to kill me one day?' said Goldfinger. 'No, 

thank you, Mr. Bond.' 

Bond decided that it was time to stop talking. He could feel the 

movement of the spinning saw between his legs. He closed his eyes 

and tried to scream, but he couldn't. Then he tried to stop breath-

ing. 

'Die!' he told himself angrily. 'Die!' 

Bond dreamt that he was flying through darkness. 

'I must have died and I'm on my way to heaven,' he thought. Then 

he heard a voice say: 

'This is your captain speaking. We will be landing soon. Please fas-

ten your seatbelts. Thank you.' 

If Bond was on a plane, where was it going? He couldn't under-

stand what had happened. He tried to think but he was extremely 

tired. He couldn't move. Then he fell unconscious again. 

When he woke up, he was lying on a bed in a bright, white room. It 

looked like the health department of an airport. Tilly was lying next 

to him on another bed. 

A door opened and two men entered the room. The first man was a 

doctor. He was dressed in a white coat and he was carrying a 

medical bag. The other man was ... Goldfinger! The two men 

stopped between Bond and Tilly's beds. 

'Doctor, they're looking much better,' said Goldfinger, in a gentle 

voice. 'They're both members of my staff and they've been working 

too hard. They've both had nervous breakdowns. Their minds and 

them to the best private hospital in America.' 

'Doctor,' said Bond, 'there's nothing wrong with me or this girl. Nei-

ther of us has ever worked for Goldfinger. He tied us up, tor-

tured76 us and gave us drugs. Please believe me.' Bond's voice 

was slow and weak. He couldn't lift his head from the bed. The doc-

tor looked worried and turned to Goldfinger. Goldfinger shook his 

head slowly. 

'I'm very sad to see a man so sick in his mind,' he said. 'You'll be 

all right, James,' he said kindly, smiling at Bond. 

'Don't worry. We'll look after you. The doctor will give you a drug to 

help you to sleep.' 

Goldfinger turned towards the doctor and spoke gently, 'Please 

help him, doctor.' 

'Yes, of course,' said the doctor and he took a needle on a syringe 

out of his bag. A moment later, Bond felt the sharp needle go into 

his arm. He opened his mouth and tried to scream. Then he fell un-

conscious again. 

The next time that Bond woke up, he was lying on a bed in a grey 

room with no windows. He was feeling very hungry and thirsty. 

When had he last eaten any food? Two - three days ago? Bond sat 

up slowly. He was dressed in his underwear but where were the 

rest of his clothes? He put his feet down on the floor and tried to 

stand. 

The only furniture in the room was a bed, a table and a chair. 

Bond's clothes were lying under the bed. His shoes were there too. 

still hidden in its secret compartment. 

There were two doors in the room. One was locked and the other 

door. He opened it and saw Tilly Masterton lying on a bed in an-

other room. She was sleeping peacefully. 

Bond went into the bathroom. He shaved and had a shower. Then 

he went back into his room and put on his clothes and shoes. Sud-

denly, the locked door opened and Oddjob came in. 

'Oddjob, I'm hungry,' said Bond at once. 'Bring me something to 

eat. And tell Goldfinger that I want to talk to him.' 

Oddjob looked at Bond angrily. Then he left the room and locked 

the door. A few minutes later, another Korean servant arrived with 

a tray of food. Bond ate hungrily. It was an excellent meal.The 

door opened again and Goldfinger came in. He was holding a small 

gun and it was pointed at Bond. 

'Mr. Bond, don't try to attack me,' said Goldfinger. 'If you do, I'll 

shoot you. I was going to kill you in Switzerland. But you said 

something that saved your life. You wanted to make a bargain with 

me. You said that you and Miss Masterton would work for me, if I 

let you live. By coincidence, I'm just about to start a big project 

and I need more staff. So I didn't kill you. I drugged both of you 

and I collected your things from the Hotel des Bergues. Then I 

brought you here to New York.' 

'What work do you want us to do?' asked Bond. 

'Mr. Bond, I love gold,' said Goldfinger, his eyes shining with pleas-

ure. 'I love the colour, the smell and the feel of gold. I own about 

twenty million pounds' worth of gold. It's all here in New York. And 

I'll do anything to get more gold. Now I'm about to start the big-

gest project of my life. It's a robbery - a huge robbery. The project 

will need a lot of preparation and paperwork. You and Miss Master-

ton will work for me. You'll be my secretaries. When the project is 

finished, I will pay you both with gold.' 

'What are you going to do?' asked Bond. 

'I am going to steal fifteen billion dollars' worth of gold bullion. 

That's approximately half the supply of gold in the world. Our pro-

ject, Mr. Bond, will be to rob the Bullion Depository at Fort Knox.' 

'Fort Knox!' said Bond. 'But that's impossible. It has more guards 

than any other place in the United States. How can two men and a 

girl rob it?' 

'I'll have help from one hundred other people - men and women 

from the six most powerful gangs in America. I've invited the six 

bosses of these gangsters to a meeting here at half-past two this 

afternoon. I'll answer all your questions then.' 

Goldfinger went out and shut the door. Bond walked through into 

Tilly's room. Tilly had woken up and was putting her shoes on. She 

didn't look very pleased to see Bond. He told her about Goldfinger's 

plan to rob Fort Knox, and that Goldfinger wanted them to be his 

secretaries. Then he knocked on the door for Oddjob and ordered 

some breakfast for Tilly. When Oddjob came back with the food, he 

was carrying a typewriter, some paper and a page of instructions. 

The instructions were to Bond from Goldfinger. 

Prepare ten copies of this agenda. 

AGENDA for a meeting with 

HELMUT M. SPRINGER: The Purple Gang, Detroit 

JED MlDMGHT: The Shadow Syndicate, Miami and Havana 

BlLLY RlNG: The Machine, Chicago 

JACK STRAP: The Spangled Mob, Las Vegas 

MR. SOLO: Unione Siciliano 

Miss PUSSY GALORE: The Cement Mixers, Harlem and New 

York City 

Chairman of the meeting: MR. GOLD 

Mr. Gold's secretaries: J.BOND AND TlLLY MASTERTON 

for a project to be called GRAND SLAM. 

Bond sat down at the typewriter and made ten copies of the 

agenda. He finished typing them by two o'clock and at twenty-past 

two, Oddjob came to fetch Bond and Tilly. They followed him along 

a passage and into the meeting room. 

Goldfinger sat with his back to the window. A large round table was 

in front of him. There were nine comfortable chairs round the table, 

and in front of six of the chairs were pens, notepads and small 

white parcels. On one of the walls of the room there was a large 

blackboard. Below this, there was a long table with bottles of 

champagne and dishes of caviar on it. Goldfinger told Tilly to sit in 

the chair on his left, and he told Bond to sit in the chair on his 

right. Bond handed him the copies of the agenda. 

'Miss Masterton, you will take notes at this meeting,' ordered Gold-

finger. 'Mr. Bond, you will watch the people at the meeting very 

carefully. If you think that any of these people won't work with me, 

you must mark a cross against his or her name on the agenda.' 

'Who is Miss Pussy Galore?' asked Bond. 

'She's the only woman who runs a gang in America. She's the 

leader of a gang of women. I shall need some women for my pro-

ject.' 

A bell rang softly under the table. The door at the end of the room 

opened and five men came in. They walked to the table and sat 

down silently. 

Chapter 10. The Meeting of the Gangsters 

Goldfinger spoke quietly. 'Welcome, gentlemen,' he said. 'My name 

is Mr. Gold. In each of the parcels on the table in front of you, you 

will find a gold bar. Each bar is worth $15,000. Please accept these 

as gifts from me. While we are waiting for Miss Pussy Galore, let 

me introduce you to my secretaries, Mr. Bond and Miss Masterton. 

Mr. Bond, on your right is Mr. Jed Midnight.' 

Mr. Midnight was a heavy man with a red face and large, intelligent 

eyes. He was wearing a light blue suit, a white silk shirt with pic-

tures of green palm trees on it, and a large gold watch. 

'Next to Mr. Midnight is Mr. Billy Ring from Chicago,' said Goldfin-

ger. 

Billy Ring was about forty years old and had a face that was both 

ugly and evil. Someone had cut off his lower lip so that his mouth 

always had a wide, horrible smile. 

'Beside Mr. Ring is Mr. Helmut Springer from Detroit,' Goldfinger 

said. 

didn't seem very interested in Bond. 

Goldfinger turned towards a big strong man with dark hair and a 

big nose. 'Welcome, Mr. Solo of the Unione Siciliano,' he said, nod-

Solo - the head of the Mafia in America. Mr. Solo was wearing large 

glasses and cleaning his fingernails with a knife. 

'And Mr. Jack Strap from Las Vegas,' said Goldfinger, looking at the 

fifth man. 

Jack Strap was about fifty years old and had frightening, cruel 

eyes. He was wearing a suit of shiny material and he was smoking 

a large cigar. 

The door opened and a tall slim woman in a black suit came in. 

This was Miss Pussy Galore. Bond liked the look of her. She was 

about thirty and was very good-looking, with pale skin and short 

dark hair. Her beautiful eyes were a very unusual dark violet col-

our. She walked slowly down the room to the table and sat down 

beside Mr. Strap. 

'Good afternoon, Miss Galore,' said Goldfinger. 'The agenda is in 

front of you, together with a fifteen-thousand-dollar gold bar.' 

Miss Galore opened her parcel. 

'Is this real gold?' she asked suspiciously. She had a low, attractive 

voice. 

'It's real,' replied Goldfinger. 'And now,' he continued, 'I’ll tell you 

why I've invited you all here this afternoon. I’ve made a great 

amount of money - about sixty million dollars — in the last twenty 

work with me on the most valuable project I've ever organized — 

Project Grand Slam. For one week's work, you will each get one bil-

lion dollars.' 

Everybody round the table was silent. 

'That's a lot of money,' said Jed Midnight at last. 'How much will 

you get?' 

'Five billion dollars,' replied Goldfinger. 

'Eleven billion dollars in total,' said Helmut Springer. 'There are 

only three depositories in the United States where such large 

amounts of money are kept. Are we going to rob one of these de-

positories? And if so, which one?' 

'Fort Knox in Kentucky,' replied Goldfinger. 

'That's impossible!' said Jed Midnight. 

'No,' said Goldfinger. 'Fort Knox is just like a huge bank. It's bigger 

and it has better protection than other banks. But it's not impossi-

ble to break into it. You just need a good plan.' 

'But there are a lot of troops guarding Fort Knox,' said Billy Ring. 

'And these soldiers have a large number of weapons. How can we 

get past them?' 

'You're right, Mr. Ring,' said Goldfinger. 'About 60,000 people live 

in Fort Knox, including approximately 20,000 armed troops. Now 

listen to my plan.' 

Knox that was fixed above it. He pointed to the left hand corner of 

the map — to the Bullion Depository. 

'As you see,' he said, pointing to the map, 'this is wherethe bullion 

is kept. There is a railway line running through Fort Knox. The track 

comes from Louisville, 35 miles to the north. Near the Bullion De-

pository, there are some railway sidings. The bullion from the capi-

tal - Washington - is sent to Fort Knox. Sometimes the gold goes 

by rail, and sometimes it is taken by trucks along this main road - 

the Dixie Highway. Any questions?' 

There were none. Goldfinger turned back to the blackboard and 

pulled down a second map. This was a plan of the Gold Vault. 

'Inside this vault,' said Goldfinger, 'about fifteen billion dollars' 

worth of gold bars are kept. Now I'll tell you how we can break into 

the vault and steal them.' Everybody was silent, listening. 

'Each of you will have to arrange how you are going to get your 

share of the gold away from Fort Knox,' continued Goldfinger. 'Each 

of you will have to use your own trucks and drivers. I'll be taking 

my share away by train. 

'Now,' Goldfinger went on, 'how do we get into Fort Knox? My plan 

is to put a drug in the town's water supply. This will make everyone 

in the area — soldiers and civilians -fall asleep for three days. 

While they are asleep, we'll steal the gold from the vault.' 

'But how do we put the drug in the water supply?' asked Jed Mid-

night. 

'Two of my staff have been invited to visit Fort Knox. They'll meet 

the Chief Engineer who controls the water supply,' Goldfinger re-

looking, they'll put it into Fort Knox's water supply.' 

'That's very clever,' said Mr. Jack Strap, looking at Goldfinger and 

smiling. 'How do we get into the town?' 

'We'll travel on a special train from New York,' replied Goldfinger. 

'There will be about one hundred of us. We'll be dressed as workers 

in an emergency team which has come to help the people of the 

town. The ladies in Miss Pussy Galore's gang will be dressed as 

nurses. 

'When the train reaches Louisville, 35 miles from the Depository,' 

Goldfinger went on, 'my assistant and I will enter the train driver's 

compartment. We'll get rid of the train driver and I'll drive the train 

through Fort Knox to the sidings near the Bullion Depository. By 

this time, your trucks should be arriving too. Bodies of the sleeping 

people will be everywhere, but we'll take no notice of them. We'll 

place the trucks round the vault and go inside.' 

'But how do we get inside the vault?' asked Mr. Solo. 'The door to 

the Gold Vault is extremely strong and it weighs 20 tons.' 

Goldfinger bent down and took a large heavy box from beneath the 

table. He carried it carefully and placed it on the table in front of 

the gangsters. 

'There is only one weapon that is powerful enough to open the Gold 

Vault,' he said. 'I got this from a military base in Germany. It's an 

atomic bomb.' 

care about the lives of anyone. 

'Don't worry,' said Goldfinger. 'The bomb is safe at the moment. It 

won't explode here. It's not activated yet.' 

'What about - er - fallout, when the bomb explodes at the vault?' 

asked Billy Ring nervously. 

'There will be very little fallout,' said Goldfinger carelessly. 'After 

the bomb explodes, we will give protection suits to the men who 

enter the building. These suits will protect them from any fallout.' 

'What about the sleeping people?' asked Mr. Solo. 'We'll move as 

many people as possible to a safe place before the bomb explodes,' 

said Goldfinger. 

Bond didn't believe that Goldfinger would move the sleeping peo-

ple. Bond suspected that the drug in the water supply would kill the 

people, not make them fall asleep. Goldfinger was only interested 

in stealing the gold. He wasn't interested in saving people's lives. 

'Now if there are no more questions,' said Goldfinger, 'I want to 

know if you'll work with me on this project. Mr. Midnight? Yes? Or 

no?' 

'Mr. Gold,' said Jed Midnight, 'you're the greatest criminal that I've 

ever met. I'll be delighted to work with you.' 

'Thank you, Mr. Midnight. And you, Mr. Ring?' 

'A billion dollars is a lot of money,' said Billy Ring. 'Yes, my gang 

and I will work with you.' 

'Good,' said Goldfinger. 'Mr. Solo?' 

'Yes,' replied Mr. Solo. 'I'm with you.' 

Goldfinger looked at Jack Strap. 'Are you with us, Mr. Strap?' he 

asked. 

'Yes, me and my men will work with you,' replied the gangster from 

Las Vegas. 

'Thank you,' said Goldfinger. 'And you, Miss Galore?' 'Yes,' said 

Pussy Galore. 'My girls and I need the money. 

We'll work with you.' 

'Excellent,' said Goldfinger. 'And what about you, Mr. Springer?' 

Mr. Springer stood up slowly and looked round the table. 

'Mr. Gold,' he said, 'I'm afraid that the Purple Gang of Detroit won't 

work on this project. Good afternoon, gentlemen and madam.' 

As Springer turned and walked towards the door, Bond saw Gold-

finger's hand move under the table. He pressed the bell. Bond 

guessed that Goldfinger was signalling to Oddjob. 

'How about a drink?' said Mr. Midnight. 

Everybody got up and walked over to the table where the drink and 

food were prepared. Bond poured champagne into glasses for him-

self, Pussy Galore and Tilly Masterton. 

'Goldfinger has been very clever in this meeting,' thought Bond. 

'He's persuaded almost all of the gang leaders to join his project.' 

Suddenly, the door opened and one of Goldfinger's Korean staff 

walked in. He went up to Goldfinger and whispered something to 

him. Goldfinger looked serious. 

'Gentlemen and madam,' he said sadly. 'I have received some ter-

the stairs as he was leaving the building. He died at once.' 

Everybody in the room stared at Goldfinger. 

Goldfinger had signalled to Oddjob because the boss of the Purple 

Gang would not work on Project Grand Slam. Goldfinger had given 

Oddjob a secret order to kill Mr. Springer. Bond was sure of this. 

Goldfinger was a murderer and he would kill anyone who didn't 

agree with him. And soon he was going to murder 60,000 people in 

Fort Knox too. 

After the gang leaders left, Bond spoke to Goldfinger. 

'Goldfinger, you'll never succeed with this crazy plan. You'll never 

be able to get the gold out of Fort Knox. So 60,000 people will die 

for nothing.' 

'Mr. Bond,' said Goldfinger, 'I have planned everything very care-

fully. I need these gang leaders and their people for the robbery, 

but I don't care what happens to them after that. A Soviet ship will 

be waiting for me. I'll take my gold to the ship by train. I'll take the 

gold out of America to the Soviet Union.' 

'So Goldfinger is planning a huge robbery with these gang leaders,' 

thought Bond. 'But the gangsters don't realize thathe's working for 

an enemy like SMERSH. They think that he's just an ordinary crimi-

nal like themselves.' 

Perhaps some of the gangsters would be caught or killed. Bond and 

Tilly would probably die too. But Goldfinger would not care. Gold-

finger's Korean and German staff would sail to the USSR in the ship 

with their boss. 

could stop Goldfinger. That man was Agent 007 -James Bond. But 

how could Bond stop him? 

Chapter 11. The Richest Man in the World 

The next day, Goldfinger gave Bond and Tilly a lot of work to do. 

They had to prepare maps, timetables and lists. As they worked, 

Oddjob guarded them carefully. 

At the end of the day, Bond received a note from Goldfinger. It 

said: 

At 11 a.m. tomorrow, the five gang leaders and myself will 

take a plane trip. We're going to fly over Fort Knox to study 

the positions of the buildings and roads. The plane will be 

flown by my pilots. You will come with us. Miss Masterton will 

stay here. G. 

Bond sat and thought. Finally, he took a sheet of paper and typed 

out the details of the robbery of Fort Knox. He rolled the paper into 

a tiny cylinder. Then he took another sheet of paper and typed this 

message: 

URGENT. THERE WILL BE A REWARD OF $5000 FOR THE 

PERSON WHO DELIVERS THIS MESSAGE TO FELIX LEITER 

AT PINKERTON'S DETECTIVE AGENCY, 154 NASSAU 

STREET, NEW YORK. 

Bond rolled the message around the cylinder of paper and wrote 

tape around the message on the cylinder. He stuck the paper cylin-

der to his leg with more sticky tape. 

The next day, Bond went in the plane with Goldfinger, Oddjob, and 

the five gang leaders. They flew over Fort Knox to study the plan of 

the town. As the plane was flying back to New York, Bond went into 

the toilet. He knew that this was his only opportunity to try and 

stop Goldfinger. 

Bond knew that after the plane landed, cleaners would come and 

clean the toilet. So he took the paper cylinder off his leg and stuck 

it under the seat of the toilet. The words $5000 REWARD were very 

clear, and a cleaner would see it immediately. 

Oddjob was waiting outside the toilet. When Bond came out, Odd-

job pushed past him and looked suspiciously around inside the 

small room. But he didn't lift the toilet seat. He came out again and 

shut the door. 

When Bond walked past her, Pussy Galore looked at him thought-

fully. 

During the next three days, Bond felt very nervous. He kept think-

ing again and again about the message under the toilet seat. Had 

anyone found it? Would they believe the message? Or perhaps the 

plane hadn't been cleaned yet. 

Bond thought about what would happen if the message was deliv-

ered to Felix Leiter. Felix would fly to Washington and contact the 

FBI and the Army. Perhaps he would even talk to the President of 

happened. 

Then, in the afternoon of the day before the robbery, Bond re-

ceived another note from Goldfinger. It said: 

The first part of Project Grand Slam has been successful. 

Get on the train at midnight. Bring copies of all the 

maps, timetables and lists. G. 

That evening, Goldfinger, Bond, Tilly and the gangsters met at 

Pennsylvania Station. Ring, Midnight, Strap, Solo and their men 

were dressed as medical workers. Pussy Galore and her girls were 

dressed as nurses. Goldfinger, Tilly and Bond were dressed as doc-

tors. 

The Superintendent of the station approached Goldfinger. 

'Dr Gold?' he said. 'I'm afraid that there's bad news from Fort 

Knox. All trains are being stopped at Louisville. But don't worry. 

We'll get you and your Emergency Team there. What's happened to 

the people at Fort Knox? What illness do they have?' 

'We don't know yet. That's what we have to find out,' said Goldfin-

ger in a gentle voice. 'But we believe that it's very dangerous.' 

'Well, good luck, Doctor,' said the Superintendent. 'Everyone is 

very proud of you and your Emergency Team.' 

'Thank you, Superintendent,' said Goldfinger. He moved away and 

gave orders for the gangs to board the train. Bond was put in a 

train compartment with Tilly. They were guarded by Goldfinger's 

Korean and German staff. 

Her dark violet eyes stared into his grey-blue eyes. 

'Mr. Bond,' she whispered. 'If anything goes wrong with this plan, 

I'm sure that you'll know why.' Then she walked on. 

It was a long and difficult journey. Some of the employees of the 

railway were still on the train. So the gangsters couldn't drink 

whisky, or smoke cigarettes, or start fights. They had to behave 

well and pretend to be medical staff until they reached Fort Knox. 

Bond thought again and again about the drug in the water ply. Had 

the people of Fort Knox drunk the water? Were 60 000 people al-

ready dead? Or had Felix Leiter got Bond's message? 

Bond knew what he must do. He must get close to Goldfinger and 

kill him. 

At six o'clock the next morning, the train reached Louisville. Gold-

finger said that there were not enough protection suits for every-

one. So all the railway's employees left the train, except for the 

driver. 

A few minutes later, Bond felt the train almost stop, then start 

again. He knew that Goldfinger had killed the driver. Goldfinger 

was now driving the train himself. 

Then Mr. Strap came hurrying through Bond's compartment. 'We 

arrive in ten minutes!' he ordered. 'Put on your protective equip-

ment!' 

trousers. 

Fort Knox. Bodies were lying everywhere on the ground. No one 

was moving. The people didn't look as if they were asleep. They 

looked as if they were dead. 

'Those poor people,' said Mr. Billy Ring, and laughed. The train con-

tinued on slowly and Bond saw more and more bodies of men, 

women and children. He looked carefully to see if any of them were 

moving, but they weren't. There was no sound at all. 

At last, the train stopped at the sidings near the Bullion Depository. 

All the leaders of the gangs and their people were wearing their 

protective equipment. The doors of the train opened and different 

groups of men and women got down on to the platform85. One 

group of men - the Assault Group - was carrying the atomic 

bomb.The five gang leaders were in the Command Group with 

Goldfinger, Oddjob, Bond and Tilly. Goldfinger ordered them to 

climb onto the roof of the first train carriage. From this position, 

they could watch the Assault Group running towards the Bullion 

Depository. 

'They've gone through the gates,' said Mr. Jack Strap excitedly. 

Bond looked and saw an extraordinary sight. In the middle of a 

large field was the huge building of the Gold Vault. 

Hundreds of bodies were lying on the ground around the vault. The 

soldiers were still holding their weapons. 

bodies on the ground. Were any of the soldiers alive? None of them 

moved. 

Goldfinger looked at Bond, his pale blue eyes were shining with tri-

umph. 

'I was right and you were wrong, Mr. Bond. Soon I will be the rich-

est man in the world. And then we will say goodbye. Thank you for 

the help which you and Miss Masterton have given me.' 

Bond knew that he and Tilly were not important to Goldfinger any 

more. Very soon, Goldfinger was going to give an order and Bond 

and Tilly would be killed. But Bond had decided that, whatever 

happened to him, he would kill Goldfinger first. 

Suddenly, Bond saw something moving high in the sky above 

them. It was a helicopter and it was flying fast towards the Deposi-

tory. Then everything happened at once. 

The 'dead' soldiers suddenly jumped up from the ground and 

pointed their weapons at the Assault Group. Now troops were 

guarding the door of the vault again! 

A loud voice came from a loudspeaker in the helicopter. It gave the 

order, 'Stand where you are! Drop your weapons!' But then the 

shooting started. 

Bond grabbed Tilly's hand and jumped down from the roof of the 

train carriage onto the platform. He heard Goldfinger shouting to 

Oddjob. 

'Get Bond and the girl! Kill them!' 

Oddjob started running down the platform. 

'Run, Tilly! Run!' shouted Bond. He began pulling Tilly along the 

platform. But she let go of his hand and tried to climb into one of 

the carriages of the train. Bond stopped, took the knife out of his 

trouser belt, and turned towards Oddjob. 

Oddjob stopped running, pulled off his bowler hat and threw it at 

Tilly. It struck her on the neck. Without a sound, she fell backwards 

onto the platform in front of him. 

Oddjob leapt towards Bond, and tried to kick him. But Tilly was in 

his way and he missed Bond. Bond swung his knife at Oddjob but 

the Korean knocked it out of his hand. 

Oddjob leapt at Bond again. His feet struck Bond's shoulder and 

Bond fell to the ground. The powerful kick had sent a terrible pain 

through Bond's body. For a few seconds, Bond closed his eyes and 

waited for Oddjob's next kick. But nothing happened. Suddenly, 

Bond heard the sound of three long, loud blasts from the train's 

horn and he looked up. To his surprise, he saw Oddjob running 

away from him. He was running along the platform, towards the 

train. The train had begun to move. Oddjob caught up with it, 

jumped up into a carriage, and disappeared inside. 

Bond stood up, holding his painful shoulder. Suddenly, he heard a 

shout behind him. He turned and saw Felix Leiter running towards 

him. The FBI agent was wearing a military uniform. Bond walked 

along the platform. He was very happy to see his good friend 

again. 

'So you got my message about Goldfinger's plan,' said 

Bond.'Yes,' said Felix, smiling. 'We arrested the members of Gold-

But we wanted to trap Goldfinger too. We had found out about his 

plan. But we didn't want him to suspect anything. So we pretended 

that everyone in Fort Knox had drunk the water and died.' 

'But Goldfinger has escaped,' said Bond. 'He's driving the train. 

Oddjob and the gang leaders are with him.' 

'One of our planes is above the train now,' replied Felix. 'It'll follow 

the train. We'll catch Goldfinger.' 

'Thank you for saving my life,' said Bond. 'But I'm afraid that it's 

too late to save Tilly Masterton.' 

He walked with Felix to where Tilly was lying on the ground. 

The girl's neck was broken and she was dead. 

Bond stood and looked down at her. He felt sad as he remembered 

the proud, pretty girl in her Triumph sports car. 

Chapter 12. Goldfinger's Last Flight 

Two days later, Felix Leiter was driving Bond to Idlewild Airport in 

New York. M had told Bond to return to the Secret Service's head-

quarters, so Bond was catching the next plane to London. 

'What's happened to Goldfinger?' asked Bond. 'We don't know,' said 

Felix. 'My men caught up with the train but there was no one on it. 

Goldfinger and Oddjob had got off somewhere. So had the gang 

leaders. We don't know where they went. 'Bond wasn't happy 

about the way that the mission had ended. The robbery of Fort 

Knox had been stopped. But Bond hadn't caught Goldfinger and he 

had also escaped. Two English girls - Jill and Tilly Masterton - had 

been murdered, and Goldfinger was still free. 

When they got to Idlewild, Bond said goodbye to Felix and went in-

side the airport. He had some time before his flight departed, so he 

planned to have a drink and do some shopping. 

Suddenly he heard an announcement from the loudspeaker sys-

tem: 

'Will Mr. James Bond, a passenger on BOAC Flight num-

ber 510 to London, please come to the BOAC ticket 

counter.' 

Bond walked across to the ticket counter. 

'Please can I see your health certificate?' said the official behind the 

desk. Bond took out his certificate from his passport and handed it 

to the official. 

'I'm very sorry, sir,' said the man, 'but your flight is going via Gan-

der in Canada. Your plane has to land there to get fuel. We've been 

told that there's a case of typhoid87 at Gander. The authorities 

have given an order. All passengers travelling via Gander must 

have protection from typhoid. You must have an injection.' 

Bond hated injections. He looked around the area near the BOAC 

departure gate. It was empty. This was strange. 

'Where are the other passengers?' he asked. 

'They're having their injections now,' said the official, pointing be-

hind the desk. 'Please follow me, sir. It will only take a minute.' 

'All right.' Bond stepped behind the ticket counter and followed the 

was dressed in a white coat and he was holding a needle and sy-

ringe. 

'Please take off your jacket and pull up the sleeve of your shirt,' he 

said to Bond. A minute later, Bond felt the sharp needle go into his 

arm as the doctor gave him the injection. 

'Thanks,' Bond said. He pulled down his sleeve and tried to pick up 

his jacket. But he couldn't reach it. His hand went down, down to-

wards the floor and his body followed. Down, down, down . . . 

When Bond woke up, he was in a plane with lots of empty seats. All 

the lights were on inside the plane. Outside, the sky was dark. 

Bond looked down at his arms. His hands were tied to his seat. 

What had happened? 

Bond glanced to his right and got a terrible shock. Oddjob was sit-

ting there, and he was dressed in a BOAC airline uniform! 

When Oddjob saw that Bond was awake, he rang a bell. A minute 

later, Pussy Galore appeared. She was also wearing a BOAC airline 

uniform. 

'Hi, Handsome,' she said. 

'What's going on?' asked Bond in astonishment. 

'Don't get excited,' she said, smiling. She walked slowly past him 

and disappeared into the cockpit88. A few minutes later, Goldfinger 

came out of the cockpit and walked towards Bond. He was wearing 

a BOAC airline pilot's uniform. 

'Well, Mr. Bond,' he said, 'I made a big mistake about you. I should 

have a lot of questions to ask you.' 

'I'll answer your questions, Goldfinger,' said Bond. 'But first, untie 

my hands and bring me some bourbon whisky.' 

'All right,' said Goldfinger. 'Oddjob, untie Mr. Bond's hands. Ring 

the bell to call Miss Galore, then get into the seat in front of Mr. 

Bond. You must not let him get past you to the cockpit of the 

plane. 'A few minutes later, Pussy Galore brought Bond a glass of 

whisky. Goldfinger sat in the seat opposite Bond and waited for him 

to speak. 

Bond picked up his glass. Suddenly he saw a small piece of paper 

stuck to the bottom of the glass. Quickly, he drank all the whisky 

and read the words through the bottom of the glass: 

I want to work with you. Love, P. 

'Now, then, Goldfinger,' said Bond, turning to look at the red-haired 

master criminal. 'What happened? And where are we going?' 

'I left the train at a siding where three of my trucks were waiting,' 

said Goldfinger. 'One truck was carrying all my gold bullion which I 

had taken out of the bank in New York. 'I shot all the gang leaders, 

except Miss Galore,' Goldfinger continued. 'Then I called Moscow 

and spoke to my friends in SMERSH. I believe that you know them. 

I told them what had happened. They recognized your name, Mr. 

Bond. They told me that you are Agent 007 - a member of the Brit-

ish Secret Service. Then I understood everything very clearly. 

'So I decided to bring you to the Soviet Union. My German employ-

ees are pilots. They tied up the BOAC staff at Idlewild Airport and 

we changed clothes with them. It was easy to trick you and give 

you an injection. Then we stole the BOAC plane, loaded all the gold 

bullion into it, and took off. Now we're on our way to Moscow.' 

Goldfinger smiled but his eyes were cold and cruel. 

'Mr. Bond, we have made a bargain,' he said sharply. 'Now you 

must tell me everything. Who ordered you to follow me? And how 

were you able to destroy my plans?' 

Bond told Goldfinger some of the truth. But he didn't tell him eve-

rything. 

'So you see, Goldfinger, you only just escaped,' he said at last. 'If 

Tilly Masterton hadn't gone to Geneva, my mission would have suc-

ceeded. The police would have caught you and you would be in 

prison now.' 

Goldfinger went back into the cockpit and the plane flew on over 

the dark land. 

Pussy Galore brought Bond a plate of sandwiches. He was hungry 

and ate them quickly. She'd put a white napkin under the sand-

wiches. Inside the napkin, Bond found a pen. Pussy was working 

with him! 

Most of the lights inside the plane had now been turned off. Bond 

sat and thought as fast as he could. 

'Goldfinger must not escape again,' he said to himself. 'The plane 

mustn't reach Moscow. It must make an emergency landing. But 

fire.' 

Then suddenly, Bond had a plan. It was a mad, frightening, terrible 

chance. 

He wrote a message on the white napkin. When Pussy Galore 

walked past his seat, he dropped the napkin onto the floor. Pussy 

picked it up and read the message: 

I've thought of apian. Go and sit down. Fasten your 

seatbelt. Love, J. 

'Good luck, Handsome,' said Pussy softly, and she kissed him. Then 

she walked to her seat near the cockpit. 

Oddjob was sitting in the seat in front of Bond. Bond could see the 

Korean's face reflected in the window next to the seat. Oddjob 

wasn't asleep. He was staring straight ahead and his powerful 

hands were on his knees. 

Bond was waiting for Oddjob to become tired and sleep. But Odd-

job didn't move. 

One hour passed, then two. Bond pretended to fall asleep himself. 

He made a soft noise through his nose. Then at last,Oddjob turned 

his head and moved in his seat so that he was more comfortable. 

This was the opportunity that Bond had been waiting for. Quietly, 

he took the small knife out from the heel of his shoe. Then very, 

very slowly, he moved his hand towards the window next to Odd-

job. Holding his seatbelt tightly with one hand and the knife in the 

other, Bond pointed the knife at the centre of the window. Sud-

denly, he struck the centre of the window with the knife. 

Immediately, there was a bang and a loud whistling noise. The air 

in the plane began to rush out through the hole in the window. 

Suddenly, Oddjob's body was pulled violently towards the hole. The 

air was rushing out of the broken window with a terrible force, and 

it was taking Oddjob's body with it. 

There was a crash as Oddjob's head went through the window and 

his shoulders hit the window frame. Then Oddjob's whole body was 

pulled slowly out of the plane. His chest went through, then his 

stomach and his legs. Bond held on to his seatbelt with all his 

strength. 

The huge plane went into a steep dive and began to fall. Bond 

heard the scream of the engines as the plane went down, faster 

and faster. Plates, glasses, papers and pillows disappeared out 

through the broken window. Now there wasn't enough oxygen in-

side the plane and Bond couldn't breathe. In a few seconds, he be-

came unconscious. 

Bond woke up when someone kicked him hard. He cried out in pain 

and he tasted blood in his mouth. The person's foot struck Bond's 

chest and then his stomach. 

Bond opened his eyes. All the lights were on in the plane and it was 

very cold. Goldfinger was standing over Bond. His face was angry 

and cruel. He was pointing a small gun at Bond.'As soon as the 

plane hits the water,' Bond told the five men in the cockpit, 'I'll 

open the doors so that you can get out. But if you try to leave the 

cockpit before then, I'll shoot you.' 

both put on life-jackets and he told her to kneel down on the floor, 

with her head on the seat. Then Bond got down on his knees too 

and held her body tightly against his own. 

As it hit the water, it broke in two pieces. 

Bond and Pussy were thrown out of the plane and into the ice-cold 

sea. The weight of the heavy gold bullion on board the plane 

quickly pulled it down to the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. 

Pussy and Bond were the only people to escape from the plane. 

They floated in the cold water until men from the weathership 

came to rescue them. The five German men in the cockpit were 

carrying bags of gold and the weight of the bullion pulled them 

down to the bottom of the ocean. 

Bond and Pussy were given a wonderful welcome on the weather-

ship. But before they were taken to their cabins to rest, Bond had 

answered a lot of questions. He'd also spoken to M on the ship's 

radio. After he'd spoken to his boss, Bond had walked slowly to his 

cabin. He'd taken a hot shower and put on dry clothes. Now he was 

feeling very tired. He was lying on the bed in his cabin, drinking 

whisky. 

Suddenly the door opened and Pussy came in. She was wearing 

only a large, grey, woollen jersey. 

She no longer looked like a tough gangster, she looked like a 

young girl. Bond looked at her pale, beautiful face and her violet 

eyes, and smiled. 

Goldfinger and closed his fingers around Goldfinger's throat. At the 

same time, Goldfinger closed his own fingers around Bond's throat. 

would die first, Goldfinger or him? 

Goldfinger's large face was becoming red and a terrible noise was 

coming out of his mouth. At last, his hands around Bond's throat 

became weaker. Then he made a final, terrible noise and lay still. 

He'd stopped breathing. He was dead. 

Bond stood up slowly. Goldfinger's small gun was lying on the floor. 

Bond picked it up and walked towards the cockpit. Pussy Galore 

was fastened in her seat by her seatbelt, but she was unconscious. 

Bond got down onto his knees beside her. He blew air into Pussy's 

mouth until she was conscious and breathing normally again. Then 

he opened the door of the cockpit. Inside the cockpit, there were 

five men. They were all members of Goldfinger's German staff. 

Bond pointed the gun at the frightened men. 

'Goldfinger is dead,' said Bond loudly. 'If anyone moves or disobeys 

an order, I'll kill him. Pilot, what's our position?' 

The pilot told Bond that they were flying over the Atlantic Ocean, 

towards the coast of Canada. But he also said that they didn't have 

enough fuel to reach an airport in Canada. Bond knew that they 

were all in terrible danger. The plane would have to land in the sea. 

He sent out a call on the radio. The message said that the plane 

would be making an emergency landing into the sea. 

could guide the plane down to the position of the weathership. 'You 

need some TLC,' he said. 'What's TLC?' 'Tender Loving Care.' 'I'd 

like that,' said Pussy. 

She pushed Bond's black hair off his face and looked into his grey-

blue eyes. 'When is it going to start?' 

'Now,' said Bond, and kissed her hard on the mouth. 

