Also by Arthur C. Clarke

published by Ballantine Books:

EARTHLIGHT

EXPEDITION

TO EARTH

PRELUDE T©

SPACE

REACH FOR

TOMORROW

RENDEZVOUS WITH RAMA

TALES FROM THE "WHITE HART"

CHILDHOOD'S END

IMPERIAL

EARTH

I

'L

Arthur

C.

Clarke

A Del Rey Book

BALLANTINE BOOKS · NEW YORK

A Del Rey Book

tklblished by Ballantine Books

Copyight © 1976 by Arthur C. Clarke

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  publication  may  be  reproduced  or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy,  recording,  or  any  information  storage  and  retrieval  system,
without  permission  in  writing  from  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich,  Inc.
Published  in  the  United  States  by  Ballantine  Books,  a  division  of  Random
House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of
Canada, Limited, Toronto, Canada.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 7530595

ISBN 0345289153

This edition published by arrangement with

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, inc.

Manufactured in the United States of America

First Ballantine Books Edition: November 1976

Seventh Printing: November 1982

First Canadian Printing: December 1976

Cover art by Stanislaw Fernandes

For a Jost frlend

"Remember them as they were;

write them

--Ernest Heming

CONTENTS

I T TAN

h

A SHRIEK IN THE NIGHT

2.

DYNASTY

3.

INVi1'ATION TO

A CENTENNIAL

4.

THE RED MOON

5.

THE POLITIC:S OF TIME AND SPACE

6.

BY THE BONNY, BONNY BANKS

OF

LOCH HELLBREW

7.

A CROSS OF TITANITE

8.

CHILDREN OF THE CORRIDORS

9.

THE FATAL GIFT

10.

WORLD'S END

Il TRANSIT

I I. SiRiUS

12. LAST WORDS

13. THE LONGEST VOYAGE

14. SONGS OF EMPIRE

i$. AT THE NODE

16. PORT VAN ALLEN

!11 TERRA

17.

WASHINGTON, D.C.

18.

EMBASSY

MOUNT VERNON

20.

THE TASTE OF HONEY

HISTORY LESSON

22,

BUDGET

23.

DAUGHTERS O THE REVOLUTIONS

II

I00

24. GALINDY

25.

MYSTERY TOUR

26.

PRIMEVAL FOREST

27.

THE GHOST FROM THE GRAND

BANKS

28.

AKHENATON AND

CLEOPATRA

29.

PARTY GAMES

30.

THE RIVALS

:3 I.

THE ISLAND OF

DR.

MOHAMMED

32.

GOLDEN

REEF

33.

SLEUTH

34.

STAR DAY

35.

A MESSAGE FROM TITAN

36.

THE EYE OF ALLAH

37.

MEETING AT CYCLOPS

38.

THE LISTENERS

39.

BUSINESS AND DESIRE

40.

ARGUS PANOPTES

41.

INDEPENDENCE DAY

42. THE MIRROR OF THE SEA

Tn'

43. HOMECOMING

Acknowledgments and Nofes

Additional Nofe

For every man has business and desire.

--HAMLET, Act I, Scene r

Part I.

-L

'an

A

SHRIEK IN THE NIGHT

Duncan Makenzie was ten years old when

he  found  the  magic  number.  It  was  pure  chance;  he  had  intended  to  call
Grandma Ellen, but he had been careless and his fingers must have touched
the  wrong  keys.  He  knew  at  once  that  he  had  made  a  mistake,  because
Grandma's viddy had a two-second delay,

even on Auto/Record. This circuit was live immediately.

Yet  there  was  no  tinging  tone,  and  no  picture.  The  screen  was  completely
blank, with not even a speckling of interference. Duncan guessed that he had
been switched into an audio-only channel, or had reached a station where the
camera  was  disconnected.  In  any  case,  this  certainly  wasn't  Grandma's
number, and he reached out to break the circuit.

Then he noticed the sound. At first, he thought that someone was breathing
quietly into the microphone at the far end, but he quickly realized his mistake.
There was a random, inhuman quality about this gentle susurration; it lacked
any regular rhythm, and there were

long intervals of complete silence.

As he listened, Duncan felt a growing sense of awe.

Here was something completely outside his normal, everyday experience, yet
he recognized it almost at once. In his ten years of life, the impressions of
many worlds had been inprinted on his mind, and no one who had heard this
most evocative of sounds could ever forget it. He was listening to the voice of
the wind as it sighed and whispered across the lifeless landscape a hundred
meters above his head.

Duncan forgot all about Grandma, and turned the

volume up to its highest level. He lay back on the couch, closed his eyes, and
tried to project himself into 2

the  unknown,  hostile  world  from  which  he  was  protected  by  all  the  safety
devices that three hundred

years of space technology could contrive. Someday, when he had passed his
survival tests, he would go up into that world and see with his own eyes the
lakes and chasms and low-lying orange clouds, lit by the thin, cold rays of the
distant sun. He had looked forward to that day with calm anticipation rather
than

excitement--the Makenzies were noted for their lack of excitement but now he
suddenly realized what

he was missing. So might a child of Earth, on some dusty desert far from the
ocean, have pressed a shell against his ear and listened with sick longing to
the music of the unattainable sea.

There was no mystery about the sound, but how

was  it  reaching  him?  It  could  be  coming  from  any  of  the  hundred  million
square  kilometers  lying  above  his  head.  Somewhere--perhaps  in  an
abandoned  construction  project  or  experimental  station--a  live  microphone
had been left in circuit, exposed to the

freezing,  poisonous  winds  of  the  world  above.  It  was  not  likely  to  remain
undetected for long; sooner or later it would be discovered and disconnected.
He. had better capture this message from the outside while it was still there;
even if he knew the number he had accidentally called, he doubted if he could
ever establish the circuit again.

The amount of audio-visual material that Duncan

had stored under MISC was remarkable, even for an inquisitive ten-year-old.
It was not that he lacked organizing ability--that was the most celebrated of
all

the Makenzie talents-but he was interested in More things than he knew how
to index. He had now begun to discover, the hard way, that information not
properly classified can be irretrievably lost.

He thought intently for a minute, while the lonely wind sobbed and moaned
and brought the chill of

space into his warm little cubicle. Then he tapped out APHA INDEX* WIND
SOUNDS* PERM

STORE .

From the moment he touched the # or EXECUTE

key, he had begun to capture that voice from the world above. If all went well,
he could call it forth again at any time by using the index heading WIND
SOUNDS.

Even if he had made a mistake, and the console's search program failed to
locate  the  recording,  it  would  be  somewhere  in  the  machine's  permanent,
noneras-able memory. There was always the hope that he

might one day find it again by chance, as was happening all the time with
information he had filed under MISC, He decided to let the recording run for
another few minutes before completing the interrupted call to Grandma. As
luck would have it, the wind must have slackened at about the time he keyed
£x£cux,  because  there  was  a  long,  frustrating  silence.  Then,  out  of  that
silence, came something new.

It was faint and distant, yet conveyed the impression of overwhelming power.
First there was a thin

scream that mounted second by second in intensity, but somehow never came
any closer. The scream rose swiftly to a demonic shriek, with undertones of
thunder-then dwindled away as quickly as it had appeared.

From beginning to end it lasted less than hall

a  minute.  Then  there  was  only  the  sighing  of  the  wind,  even  lonelier  than
before.

For  a  long,  delicious  moment,  Duncan  savored  the  unique  pleasure  of  fear
without  danger;  then  he  reacted  as  he  always  did  when  he  encountered
something

new or exciting. He tapped out Karl Helmer's

number, and said: "Listen to this."

Three kilometers away, at the northern end of Oasis City, Karl waited until the
thin scream died into silence.

As always, his face gave no hint of his thoughts.

Presently he said : "Let's hear it again."

Duncan  repeated  the  playback,  confident  that  the  mystery  would  soon  be
solved. For Karl was fifteen, and therefore knew everything.

Those dazzling blue eyes, apparently so candid yet already so full of secrets,
looked straight at. Duncan.

Karl's surprise and sincerity were totally convincing as he exclaimed: "You
didn't recognize it?"

Duncan hesitated. He had thought of several obvious possibilities--but if he
guessed wrongly, Karl

would make fun of him. Better to be on the safe

side...

"No," he answered. "Did you?"

"Of  course,"  said  Karl,  in  his  most  superior  tone  of  voice.  He  paused  for
effect, then leaned toward the camera so that his face loomed enormous on the

screen.

"It's a Hydrosaurus on the rampage."

For  a  fraction  of  a  second,  Duncan  took  him  seriously-which  was  exactly
what Karl had intended.

He quickly recovered, and laughed back at his friend.

"You're crazy. So you don't know what it is."

For the methane-breathing monster Hydrosaurus

rex was their private joke--the product of youthful imaginations, inflamed by
pictures of ancient Earth and the wonders it had brought forth near the dawn
of creation. Duncan knew perfectly well that nothing lived now, or had ever
lived, on the world that he called home; only Man had walked upon its frozen
surface. Yet if Hydrosaurus could have existed, that awesome sound might
indeed have been its battle cry, as it leaped upon the gentle Carbotherium,
wallowing in some ammonia lake...

"Oh.  I  know  what  made  that  noise,"  said  Karl  smugly.  "Didn't  you  guess?
That was a ram-tanker making a scoop. If you call Traffic Control, they'll tell
you where it was heading."

Karl had had his fun, and the explanation was undoubtedly correct. Duncan
had already thought of it,

I he had hoped for something More romantic.

ough it was perhaps too much to expect methane

monsters,  an  everyday  spaceship  was  a  disappointing  anticlimax.  He  felt  a
sense  of  letdown,  and  was  sorry  that  he  had  given  Karl  another  chance  to
deflate his dreams. Karl was rather good at that.

But like all healthy ten-year-olds, Duncan was resilient.

The magic had not been destroyed. Though

the first ship had lifted from Earth three centuries before he was born, the
wonder of space had not yet

been exhausted. There was romance enough in that shriek from the edge of
the  atmosphere,  as  the  orbiting  tanker  collected  hydrogen  to  power  the
commerce

of the Solar System.

In a few hours, that precious cargo would be falling sunward, past Saturn's
other moons, past giant Jupiter, to make its rendezvous with one of the fueling

stations that circled the inner planets. It would take months--even years--to
get there, but there was no hurry. As long as cheap hydrogen flowed through
the  invisible  pipeline  across  the  Solar  System,  the  fusion  rockets  could  fly
from world to world, as once the ocean liners had plied the seas of Earth.

Duncan  understood  this  better  than  most  boys  of  his  age;  the  hydrogen
economy was also the story of his family, and would dominate his own future
when he was old enough to play a part in the affairs of Titan.

It  was  now  almost  a  century  since  Grandfather  Malcolm  had  realized  that
Titan was the key to all the

planets, and had shrewdly used this knowledge for the benefit of mankind--
and u pounds himself.

So Duncan continued to listen to the recording after Karl had switched off.
Over and over again he played back that triumphant cry of power, trying to
detect the precise moment when it was finally swallowed up in the gulfs of
space.  For  years  it  would  haunt  his  dreams;  he  would  wake  in  the  night,
convinced that he had heard it again through the roof of rock that protected
Oasis from the hostile wilderness above.

And when at last he fell back into sleep, he would always dream of Earth.

DYNASTY

Malcolm Makenzie had been the right man,

at the right time. Others before him had looked covetously at Titan, but he
was the first to work out all

the engineering details and to conceive the total system of orbiting scoops,
compressors,  and  cheap,  expendable  tanks  that  could  hold  their  liquid
hydrogen

with minimum loss as they dropped leisurely sunward.

Back in the 2180's, Malcolm had been a promising young aerospace designer
at Port Lowell, trying to 6

make  aircraft  that  could  carry  useful  payloads  in  the  tenuous  Martian
atmosphere. In those days he had been Malcolm Mackenzie, for the computer
mishap

that had irrevocably changed the amily name did not occur until he emigrated
to Titan. After wasting five years in futile attempts at correction, Malcolm had
finally co-operated with the inevitable. It was one of the few battles in which
the Makenzies had ever admitted defeat, but now they were quite proud of
their

unique name.

When he had finished his calculations and stolen enough drafting-computer
time to prepare a beautiful set of drawings, young Malcolm had approached
the Planning Office of the Martian Department of Transportation.

He did not anticipate serious criticism, because he knew that his facts and his
logic were

impeccable.

A large fusion-powered spaceliner could use ten

thousand tons of hydrogen on a single flight, merely as inert working fluid.
Ninety-nine percent of it took no part in the nuclear reaction, but was hurled
from  the  jets  unchanged,  at  scores  of  kilometers  a  second,  imparting
momentum to the ships it drove between the planets.

There walePlenty of hydrogen on Earth, easily

available  in  oceans;  but  the  cost  of  lifting  megatons  a  year  into  space  was
horrendous. And the other inhabited worlds--Mars, Mercury, Ganymede, and
the

Moon-could not help. They had no surplus hydrogen at all.

Of course, Jupiter and the other Gas Giants possessed unlimited quantities of
the vital element, but

their  gravitational  fields  guarded  it  More  effectively  than  any  unsleeping
dragon, coiled round some myth4

ical treasure of the Gods. In all the Solar System, Titan was the only place
where Nature had contrived the paradox of low gravity and an atmosphere
remarkably rich in hydrogen and its compounds.

Malcolm was right in guessing that no one would

challenge his figures, or deny the feasibility of'the scheme, but a kindhearted
senior administrator took it upon himself to lecture young Makenzie on the
political and economic facts of life. He learned, with

remarkable  speed,  about  growth  curves  and  forward  discounting  and
interplanetary debts and rates of depreciation and technological obsolescence,
and understood

for  the  first  time  why  the  solar  was  backed,  not  by  gold,  but  by  kilowatt-
hours.

"It's an old problem," his mentor had explained patiently. "In fact, it goes back
to the very beginnings of astronautics, in the twentieth century. We couldn't
have  commercial  space  flight  until  there  were  flourishing  extraterrestrial
colonies--and we couldn't have

colonies until there was commercial space transportation.

In this sort of bootstrap situation, you have a

very slow growth rate until you reach the takeoff point.

Then,  quite  suddenly,  the  curves  start  shooting  upward,  and  you're  in
business.

"It could be the same with your Titan refueling scheme--but have you any
idea of the initial investment required? Only the World Bank could possibly

underwrite it .... "

"What about the Bank of Selene? Isn't it supposed to be More adventurous?" '

"Don't  believe  all  you've  read  about  the  Gnomes  of  Aristarchus;  they're  as
careful  as  anyone  else.  They  have  to  be.  Bankers  on  Earth  can  still  go  on

breathing if they make a bad investment "

But

it was the Bank of Selene, three years later, that put up the five megasols for
the initial feasibility study.

Then Mercury became interested--and finally Mars.

By this time, of course, Malcolm was no longer an aerospace engineer. He
had become, not necessarily in this order, a financial expert, a public-relations
adviser, a media manipulator, and a shrewd politician. In the incredibly short
time of twenty years, the first hydrogen shipments were falling sunward from
Titan.

Malcolm's achievement

had been an extraordinary one, now

well documented in dozens of scholarly studies, all respectful, though some of
them far from ttat-tering. What made it so remarkabIe--even unique--was the
way in

which  he  had  converted  his  hard-won  expertise  from  technology  to
administration. The process had been so

imperceptible that no one realized what was happening. Malcolm was not the
first engineer to become a

head of state; but he was the first,

his critics pointed out sourly, to establish a dynasty.

And he had done so against odds that would have

daunted lesser men.

,  In  2195,  at  the  age  of  forty-four,  he  had  married  Ellen  Killner,  recently
emigrated from Earth. Their daughter, Anitra, was the first child to be born in
the little frontier community of Oasis, then the only permanent base on Titan,

and it was several years before

the doted parents realized the cruel jest that Nature had played upon them.

Even as a baby, Anitra was beautiful, and it was confidently predicted that
when she grew up she

would  be  completely  spoiled.  Needless  to  say,  there  were  as  yet  no  child
psychologists on Titan; so no one noticed that the little girl was too docile, too
well be-haved-and too silent. Not until she was almost four

years  old  did  Malcolm  and  Ellen  finally  accept  the  fact  that  Anitra  'would
never be able to speak, and that there was really no one at home in the lovely
shell their bodies had fashioned.

The fault lay in Malcolm's genes, not Ellen's. Sometime during his shuttling
back and forth between

Earth and Mars, a stray photon that had been cruising through space since the
cosmic  dawn  had  blasted  his  hopes  for  the  future.  The  damage  was
irreparable,  as  Malcolm  discovered  when  he  consulted  the  best  genetic
surgeons of four worlds. It was a chilling thought that he had actually been
lucky with Anitra; the results could have been far, far worse ....

To the mingled sorrow and relief of an entire

world,  Anitra  had  died  before  she  was  six  years  old,  and  the  Makenzie
marriage  died  with  her  in  a  flurry  of  grief  and  recrimination.  Ellen  threw
herself into her work, and Malcolm departed on what was to be his last visit
to  Earth.  He  was  gone  for  almost  two  years,  and  in  that  time  he  achieved
much.

He  consolidated  his  political  position  and  set  the  pattern  of  economic
development on Titan for the next half-century. And he acquired the son he
had now set his heart upon.

Human cloning--the creation of exact replicas of another individual from any
cell in the body except 9

the sex cells--had been achieved early in the twenty-first century. Even when
the technology had been perfected, it had never become widespread, partly

because there were few circumstances that could ever justify it.

Malcolm was not a rich manmthere had been no

large personal fortunes for a hundred years--but he was certainly not poor. He
used a skillful combination of money, flattery, and More subtle pressures to
attain his goal. When he returned to Titan, he brought

with him the baby who was his identical twin--Ir,ut half a century younger.

When Colin grew up, there was no way in which

he could be distinguished from his clone father at the same age. Physically, he
was  an  exact  duplicate  in  every  respect.  But  Malcolm  was  no  Narcissus,
interested in creating a mere carbon copy of himself; he

wanted  a  partner  as  well  as  a  successor.  So  Colin's  educational  program
concentrated  on  the  weak  points  of  Malcolm's.  Though  he  had  a  good
grounding in

science, he specialized in history, law, and economics.

Whereas Malcolm was an engineer-administrator,

Colin was an administrator-engineer. While still in his twenties, he was acting
as  his  father's  deputy  wherever  it  was  legally  admissible,  and  sometimes
where  it  was  not.  Together,  the  two  Makenzies  formed  an  unbeatable
combination,  and  trying  to  draw  subtle  distinctions  between  their
psychologies was a favorite

Titanian pastime.

Perhaps because he had never been compelled to

fight for any great objective, and had had all his goals formulated before his
birth,  Colin  was  More  gentle  and  easygoing  than  Malcolm--and  therefore
More

popular. No one outside the Makenzie family ever called the older man by his
first name; few call'ed Colin anything else. He had no real enemies, and there
was only one person on Titan who disliked him. At least, it was assumed that
Malcolm's estranged wife, Ellen, did so, for she refused to acknowledge his

existence.

Perhaps she regarded Colin as a usurper, an unacceptable substitute for the
son who could never be

born to her. If so, it was indeed strange that she was so fond of Duncan.

But Duncan had been cloned from Colin almost

forty years later and by that time Ellen had passed through a second tragedy---
one that had nothing to do with the Makenzies. To Duncan, she was always
Grandma Ellen, but he was now old enough to realize

that in his heart she combined two generations, and filled a void that earlier
ages would have found it impossible to imagine or believe.

If  Grandma  had  any  real  genetic  relationship  with  him,  all  trace  .of  it  had
been lost centuries ago on another world. And yet, by some strange quirk of
chance

and personality, she had become for him the phantom mother who had never
even existed.

INVITATION TO A GENTENNIAL

i land who the hell is George Washing-

ton?" asked Malcolm Makenzie.

"Middle-aged Virginia farmer, runs a place called Mount Vernon--"

"You're joking."

·

"I'm not. No relation, of course--old George was childless--but that's his real
name, and he's perfectly genuine."

"I suppose you've checked with the embassy."

"Of course, and got a fifty-line print-out of his fam ily tree. Most impressive--

half the American aristo cracy for the last hundred years. Lots of Cabots and
Du Ponts and Kennedys and Kissingers. And before that, a couple of African
kings."

"It may impress you, Colin," interjected Duncan,

"but now that I've glanced at the program, it all seems a little childish. Grown
men pretending to be historical 11

figures. Are they really going to throw tea into Boston Harbor?"

Before Colin could answer, Grandfather Malcolm

stepped in. A discussion among the three Makenzies

--which  was  something  seldom  overheard  by  outsiders-was  More  in  the
nature  of  a  monologue  than  an  argument.  Because  their  three  personas
differed  only  through  the  accidents  of  background  and  education,  genuine
disagreements among them were virtually

unknown. When difficult decisions had to be made, Duncan and Colin would
take opposing viewpoints

and debate them before Malcolm--who would listen without saying a word,
though  his  eyebrows  could  be  very  eloquent.  He  seldom  had  to  give  a
judgment, because the two advocates usually reached a synthesis

without much difficulty; but when he did, that was the end of the matter. It
was quite a good way to run a family--or a world.

"I don't know about the tea, which would certakly be a waste at fifty solars a
kilo, but you're being too hard on Mr. Washington and his friends. When we
have  five  hundred  years  behind  us,  we'll  be  justified  in  a  little  pomp  and
ceremony. And never forget--the Declaration of Independence was one of the
most

important historical events of .the last three thousand years. We wouldn't be
here without it. After all, the Treaty of Phobos opens with the words: When in
the course of human events, it becomes necessary or one people..."

"Quite inappropriate in that context. On the whole, Earth was heartily glad to
get rid of us."

"Perfectly true, but don't ever let the Terrans hear

"I'm still confused," said Duncan rather plaintively.

"Just what does the good general want from us? How can we raw colonials
contribute to the proceedings?"

"He's only a professor, not a general," replied Colin. "They're extinct, even on
Earth. As I see it, a few nicely composed speeches, drawing whatever

parallels you can find between our historical situations.

A certain exotic charm--you know; a whiff of

the frontier, where men still live dangerously. The usual barbarian virility, so
irresistible to decadent 12

Terrans of all sexes. And, not least, a low-keyed yet genuine eratitude for the
unexpected gift of an open Earth-Ti[an return ticket with all expenses for a
two-month  stay.  That  solves  several  of  our  problems,  and  we  should
appreciate it."

,,

. "Duncan replied thoughtfully, "even

Very true,

,,

· wrecks our plans for the next five years.

though I

--

d Colin "It advances

"It doesn't wreck mere,

.

them.

Time

gained is time created. And success m politics---"

"--depends

upon

the masterful administration of

n

as ou are so fond of saying. Well,

the

unforesee ,. Y ·

--

"11 try to

this invitation s certainly untoreseen, anu·

master it. Have we sent an official thank you?"

"Only  a  routine  acknowledgment.  I  suggest  that  you  el[low  it  up,  Duncan,
with a personal note to Presi hr--er--Professor Washington."

"They're both right" said Malcolm, rereading the formal invitation. "It says
here: 'Chairman of the Ouincentermial Celebration Committee, and President
of the Historical Association of Virginia.' So you can take your choice."

"We've got to be very careful about this, or someone will bring it up in the
Assembly. Was the invitation official, or personal?"

"It's not government  to government  I'm happy to say, since  the Committee
sponsored it. And the fax was addressed to the Honorable Malcolm Makenzie,
not to the President." The Honorable Malcolm Makenzie, also President of
Titan, was dearly

pleased at this subtle distinction.

"I'm sure the idea never occurred to him."

"I thought as much. Well, even if we are on firm legal grounds, that won't stop
the objections. There will be the usual cries of privilege, and we'll be accused
once again of running Titan for our personal

benefit."

"I'd like to know who started the word 'fiefdom'

circulating. I had to look it up?'

Colin ignored the older man"S interruption. As Chief Admirfistrator, he had
to face the day-to-day 13

problems of running the world, and could not afford the slight irresponsibility
that Malcolm was beginning to show in his old age. It was not senilitym

Grandfather was still only a hundred and twenty-four

---but,  rather,  the  carefree,  Olympian  attitude  of  one  who  had  seen  and
experienced everything, and had achieved all his ambitions.

"There are two points in our favor," Colin continued.

"No  official  funds  are  involved,  so  we  can't  be  criticized  for  using
government money. And let's'

have no false modesty--Earth will expect a Makenzie.

It might even be regarded as an insult if one of us didn't go. And as Duncan is
the only possibility, that settles the matter."

"You're perfectly correct, of course. But not everyone will see it that way. All
the families will want to send their younger sons and daughters."

"There's nothing to stop them," Duncan interjected.

"How many could afford it? We couldn't."

"We  could  if  we  didn't  have  some  expensive  extras  in  mind.  So  can  the
Tanaka-Smiths, the Mohadeens, the Schwartzes, the Deweys..."

"But not, I believe, the Helmers."

Colin spoke lightly, but without humor, and there was a long silence while all
three Makenzies shared a single thought. Then Malcolm said slowly: "Don't
underrate Karl. We have only power and brains. But he has genius, and that's
always unpredictable."

"But  he's  crazy,"  protested  Duncan.  "The  last  time  we  met,  he  tried  to
convince me that there's intelligent life on Saturn."

"Did he succeed?"

"Almost."

"If he's crazy--which I doubt, despite that famous breakdown--then he's even
More dangerous. Especially to you, Duncan."

Duncan made no attempt to answer. His wiser

and older twins understood his feelings, even if they could never fully share
them.

"There is one other point," said Malcolm thoughtfully,

"and  it  may  be  the  most  important  of  all.  We  may  have  only  ten  years  in
which to change the

whole basis of our economy. If you can find an an14

swer to this problem on your trip--even a hint of an answer.t--you'll be a hero
when  you  come  home.  No  one  will  criticize  any  of  your  other  activities,
public or private."

"That's a tall order. I'm not a magician."

"Then perhaps you'd better start taking lessons. If the Asymptotic Drive isn't
pure magic, I don't know what it is."

"Just a minute? said Colin. "Isn't the first A-Drive ship going to be here in a

few weeks?"

"The  second.  There  was  that  freighter,  Fornalhaut.  I  went  aboard,  but  they
wouldn't let me see anything.

Sirius is the first passenger liner--she enters parking orbit--oh--in about thirty
days."

"Could you be ready by then, Duncang.''

"I very much doubt it."

Of course you can.

I mean phystologtcally. Even on a crash program, it takes months to prepare
for Earth gravity."

"Urn. But this is far too good an opportunity to misseverything is failing into
place beautifully.

After all, you were born on Earth."

"So were you. And how long did you take to get ready when you went back?"

Colin sighed.

"It seemed like ages, but by now they must have improved the techniques.
Don't they have neuroprogramming while you sleep?"

"It's supposed to give you horrible dreams, and I'll need all the sleep I can get.
Still, what's good for Titan...'

He had no need to complete the quotation, which

had been coined by some unknown cynic half a century ago. In thirty years,
Duncan had never really

doubted this old clich6----once intended to wound, now virtuatly adopted as a
family motto.

What was good for the Makenzies was indeed good

for Titan.

THE RED MOON

Of the eighty-five known natural satellites,

only Ganymede, lord of the Jovian system, exceeds Titan in size---and that by
a narrow margin. But in another respect Titan has no rivals; no other moon of
any planet has More than a trace of atmosphere.

Titan's is so dense that if it were made of oxygen, it would be easy for a man
to breathe.

When this fact was discovered, late in the twentieth century, it presented the
astronomers with a first-class mystery. Why should a world not much larger
than the Earth's totally airless Moon be able to hold on to any atmosphere---
particularly  one  rich  in  hydrogen,  lightest  of  all  gases?  It  should  long  ago
have leaked away into space.

Nor was that the only enigma. Like the Moon,

almost all other satellites are virtually colorless, covered with rock and dust
shattered by ages of meteoric bombardment. But Titan is red--as red as Mars,
whose baleful glare reminded men in ancient times of bloodshed and of war.

The first robot probes solved some of Titan's mysteries, but, as is always the
case, raised a host of new problems. The red color came from a layer of low,
thick  clouds,  made  from  much  the  same  bewildering  mixture  of  organic
compounds  as  the  Great  Red  Spot  of  Jupiter.  Beneath  those  clouds  was  a
world More than a hundred degrees hotter than it had any right to be; indeed,
there were regions of Titan where a man needed little More than an oxygen
mask and a simtle thermofoil suit to move around in the open.

To  everyone's  reat  surprise,  Titan  had  turned  out  to  be  the  most  hosritable
place in the Solar System, next to Earth itself.

Ptart of this unexpected warmth came from the

greenhouse effect, as the hydrogenous atmosphere trapped the feeble rays of
the  distant  sun.  But  a  good  deal  More  was  due  to  internal  sources;  the
equatorial region of Titan abounded in what, for want of a

better  phrase,  might  be  called  cold  volcanoes.  On  rare  occasions,  indeed,
some of them actually erupted liquid water.

This activity, triggered by radioactive heat generated deep in the core of Titan,
spewed megatons of

hydrogen compounds into the atmosphere, and so

continually  made  up  for  the  leakage  into  space.  One  day,  of  course,  the
bruised reserves like the lost oil fields of Earth--would all be gone, but the
geologists had calculated that Titan could hold the vacuum of space at bay for
at least two billion years. Man's most vigorous atmospheric mining activities
would have only a negligible influence on this figure.

Like the Earth, Titan has distinct seasons-though it is difficult to apply the
word "summer" where the temperature at high noon seldom climbs to fifty
below. And as Saturn takes almost thirty years to circle the sun, each of the
Titanian seasons is More than seven Terran years in length.

The tiny sun, taking eight days to cross the sky, is seldom visible through the
cloud cover, and there is very little temperature difference between day and
night---or, for that matter, between Poles and Equator.

Titan  thus  lacks  climate;  but  it  can,  on  occasion,  produce  its  own  quite
spectacular brand of weather.

The most impressive meteorological phenomenon

is  the  so-called  Methane  Monsoon,  which  often--though  not  invariably--
occurs with the onset of

spring  in  the  northern  hemisphere.  During  the  long  winter,  some  of  the
methane in the atmosphere condenses in local cold spots and forms shallow
lakes, up

to a thousand kilometers square but seldom More

than a few meters deep, and often covered with fanq tastically shaped bergs

and floes of ammonia ice.

However, it requires the exceedingly low temperature of minus a hundred and
sixty to keep methane liqueq fled, and no part of Titan is ever that cold for
very long.

A "warm" wind, or a break in the clouds--and the methane lakes will flash
suddenly into vapor. It is as if, on Earth, one of the oceans were to evaporate,
abruptly increasing its volume hundreds of times and so completely changing
the state of the atmosphere.

The result would be catastrophic, and on Titan

it  is  sometimes  scarcely  less  so.  Wind  speeds  of  up.  to  five  hundred
kilometers an hour have been recorded

----or to be accurate, estimated from their aftereffects.

They last only for a few minutes; but that is quite long enough. Several of the
early expeditions were annihilated by the monsoon, before it became possible
to predict its onset.

Before the first landings on Titan, at the beginning of the twenty-first century,
some optimistic exobiologists had hoped to find life around the relatively

warm oases that were known to exist. This hope was slow to fade, and for a
while it was revived by the discovery of the strange wax formations of the
famous Crystal Caves. But by the end of the century,

it was quite certain that no indigenous life forms had ever existed on Titan.

There had never been any expectation of finding

life on the other moons, where conditions were far More hostile. Only Iapetus
and Rhea, less than half the size of Titan, had even a trace of atmosphere.

The  remaining  satellites  were  barren  aggregates  of  rock,  overgrown
snowballs, or mixtures of both. By the mid-2200's, More than forty had been
discovered, the majority of them less than a hundred kilometers in diameter.
The  outer  ones--twenty  million  kilometers  from  Saturn--all  moved  in

retrograde orbits and

were  clearly  temporary  visitors  from  the  asteriod  belt;  there  was  much
argument as to whether they should be counted as genuine satellites at  all.
Though some had been explored by geologists, many had

never been examined, except by robot space probes, but there was no reason
to suppose that they held any great surprises.

Perhaps one day, when Titan was prosperous and

getting a little dull, future generations would take up the challenge of these
tiny worlds. Some optimists had talked of turning the carbon-rich snowballs
into or18

bital zoos, basking beneath the warmth of their own fusion suns and teeming
with strange life forms.

Others had dreamed of private pleasure domes and low-gravity resorts, and
islands  in  space  for  experiments  in  super-technology  life  styles.  But  these
were

fantasies of a Utopian future; Titan needed all its energies now to solve its
coming crisis, in this demimillennial year of 2276.

THE

POLITICS OF TIME AND SPACE

then only two Makenzies were talking

together, their conversation was even More terse and telegraphic than when
all  three  were  present.  Intuition,  parallel  thought  processes,  and  shared
experience filled in gaps that would have made much of

their discourse wholly unintelligible to outsiders.

"Handle?" asked Malcolm.

"We?l" retorted Colin.

"Thirty-one? Boy!"

Which might be translated into plain English as:

"Do you think he can handle the job?"

"Have you any doubts that we could?"

"At thirty-one? I'm not so sure. He's only a boy."

"Anyway,  we've  no  choice.  This  is  a  God-sen:--or  Washington-sent----
opportunity that we can't afford to miss. He'll have to get a crash briefing on
Terran affairs, learn all that's ecessary about the United States..."

"That reminds me--what is the United States these days? I've lost count."

"Now  there  are  forty-five  states--Texas,  New  Mexico,  Alaska,  and  Hawaii
have rejoined the Union, at

least for the Centennial year."

"Just what does that mean, legally?"

"Not very much. They pretend to be autonomous, 19

but pay their regional and global taxes like everyone else. It's a typical Terran
compromise."

Malcolm, remembering his origins, sometimes found it necessary to defend
his native world against such cynical remarks.

"I often wish we had a little More Terran compromise here. It would be nice
to inject some into

Cousin Armand."

Armand Helmer, Controller of Resources, was not

in fact a cousin of Malcolm's, but a nephew of his ex-wife, Ellen. However, in
the closed little world of Titan everyone except recent immigrants was related
to everybody else, and the designations "uncle,"

"aunt," "nephew," "cousin" were tossed around with cheerful inaccuracy.

"Cousin Armand," said Colin with some satisfaction,

"is going to be very upset when he learns that Duncan is on his way to Earth."

"And what will he do about it?" Malcolm asked softly.

It was a good question, and for a moment both

Makenzies brooded over the deepening rivalry between their family and the
Helmers. In some ways,

it was commonplace enough; both Armand and his

son,  Karl,  were  Terran-born,  and  had  brought  with  them  across  a  billion
kilometers that maddening aura of superiority th. at was so often the hallmark
of  the  mother  world.  Some  immigrants  eventually  managed  to  eradicate  it,
though the process was difficult. Malcolm Makenzie had succeeded only after
three

planets  and  a  hundred  years,  but  the  Helmers  had  never  even  tried.  And
although Karl had been only five years old when he left Earth, he seemed to
have  spent  the  subsequent  thirty  trying  to  become  More  Terran  than  the
Terrans. Nor could it have been a coincidence that all his wives had been from
Earth.

Yet this had been a matter of amusement, rather

than annoyance, until only a dozen years ago. As boys, Duncan and Karl had
been inseparable, and

there had been no cause for conflict between the families until Armand's swift
rise through the technological hierarchy of Titan had brought him into a

position of power. Now the Controller did not bother 20

to  conceal  his  belief  that  three  generations  of  Makenzies  were  enough.
Whether or not he had actually

coined the famous "What's good for the Makenzies

. . ." phrase, he certainly quoted it with relish.

To do Armand justice, his ambitions seemed More

concentrated on his only son than on himself. That alone would have been
sufficient to put some strains on the friendship between Karl and Duncan, but
it would probably have survived paternal pressures

from either direction. What had caused the final rift was still something of a
mystery, and was associated with a psychological breakdown that Karl had
experienced fifteen years ago.

He had emerged from it with all his abilities intact, but with a marked change
of personality. After graduating with honors at the University of Titan, he had

become involved in a whole range of research activities, from measurements
of galactic radio waves to

studies of the magnetic fields around Saturn. All this work had some practical
relevance, and Karl had also played a valuable role in the establishment and
maintenance of the communications network upon which

Titanian  life  depended.  It  would  be  true  to  say,  however,  that  his  interests
were theoretical rather than

practical,  and  he  sometimes  tried  to  exploit  this  whenever  the  old  "Two
Cultures" debate raised its hoary head.

Despite  a  couple  of  centuries  of  invective  from  both  sides,  no  one  really
believed that Scientists, with a capital S, were More cultured (whatever that
meant)  than  Engineers.  The  purity  of  theoretical  knowledge  was  a
philosophical aberration which would have been laughed out of court by those
Greek thinkers who bad had it foisted on them More than a thousand years
earlier. The fact that the greatest sculptor on Earth had begun his career as a
bridge designer, and the best violinist on Mars was still doing original work in
the theory of numbers, proved exactly nothing one way or the other. But the
Helmers liked to

argue  that  it  was  time  for  a  change;the  engineers  had  run  Titan  for  long
enough, and they had the perfect replacement, who would bring intellectual
distinction to his world.

but pay their reg/onal and gIobal taxes like everyone else. It's a typical Terran
compromise."

Malcolm, remembering his origins, sometimes found it necessary to defend
his native world against such cynical remarks.

"I often wish we had a little More Terran compromise here. It would be nice
to inject some into

Cousin Armand."

Armand Helmer, Controller of Resources, was not

in fact a cousin of Malcolm's, but a nephew of his ex-wife, Ellen. However, in
the closed little world of Titan everyone except recent immigrants was related
to everybody else, and the designations "uncle,"

"aunt," "nephew," "cousin" were tossed around with cheerful inaccuracy.

"Cousin Armand," said Colin with some satisfaction,

"is going to be very upset when he learns that Duncan is on his way to Earth."

"And what will he do about it?" Malcolm asked softly.

It was a good question, and for a moment both

Makenzies brooded over the deepening rivalry between their family and the
Helmers. In some ways,

it was commonplace enough; both Armand and his

son,  Karl,  were  Terran-born,  and  had  brought  with  them  across  a  billion
kilometers that maddening aura of superiority th. at was so often the hallmark
of  the  mother  world.  Some  immigrants  eventually  managed  to  eradicate  it,
though the process was difficult. Malcolm Makenzie had succeeded only after
three

planets  and  a  hundred  years,  but  the  Helmers  had  never  even  tried.  And
although Karl had been only five years old when he left Earth, he seemed to
have  spent  the  subsequent  thirty  trying  to  become  More  Terran  than  the
Terrans. Nor could it have been a coincidence that all his wives had been from
Earth.

Yet this had been a matter of amusement, rather

there had been no cause for conflict between the families until Armand's swift
rise through the technological hierarchy of Titan had brought him into a

position of power. Now the Controller did not bother 20

to  conceal  his  belief  that  three  generations  of  Makenzies  were  enough.
Whether or not he had actually

coined the famous "What's good for the Makenzies

. . ." phrase, he certainly quoted it with relish.

To do Annand justice, his ambitions seemed More concentrated on his only
son  than  on  himself.  That  alone  would  have  been  sufficient  to  put  some
strains  on  the  friendship  between  Karl  and  Duncan,  but  it  would  probably
have survived paternal pressures

from either direction. What had caused the final rift was still something of .a
mystery, and was associated with a psychological breakdown that Karl had
experienced fifteen years ago.

He had emerged from it with all his abilities intact, but with a marked change
of personality. After graduating with honors at the University of Titan, he had

become involved in a whole range of research activities, from measurements
of galactic radio waves to

studies of the magnetic fields around Saturn. All this work had some practical
relevance, and Karl had also played a valuable role in the establishment and
maintenance of the communications network upon which

Titanian  life  depended.  It  would  be  true  to  say,  however,  that  his  interests
were theoretical rather than

practical,  and  he  sometimes  tried  to  exploit  this  whenever  the  old  "Two
Cultures" debate raised its hoary head.

Despite  a  couple  of  centuries  of  invective  from  both  sides,  no  one  really
believed that Scientists, with a capital S, were More cultured (whatever that

meant)  than  Engineers.  The  purity  of  theoretical  knowledge  was  a
philosophical aberration which would have

been laughed out of court by those Greek thinkers who had had it foisted on
them More than a thousand years earlier. The fact that the greatest sculptor on
Earth had begun his career as a bridge designer, and the best violinist on Mars
was still doing original work in the theory of numbers, proved exactly nothing
one way or the other. But the Helmers liked to

argue  that  it  was  time  for  a  change;  the  engineers  had  run  Titan  for  long
enough, and they had the perfect replacement, who would bring intellectual
distinction to his world.

At thirty-six, Karl still possessed the charm that had captivated all his peers,
but it seemed to many--and certainly to Duncan--that this was now underlined
by something hard, calculating, and faintly repellent.

He could still be loved, but he had lost the ability to love; and it was strange
that none of his spectacular marriages had produced any offspring.

If Armand hoped to challenge the Makenzie re

gime, Karl's lack of an heir was not his only problem.

Whatever the Seven Worlds might say about their

independence, the center of power was still on Earth.

As, two thousand years ago, men had once gone to Rome in search of justice,
or  prestige,  or  knowledge,  so  in  this  age  the  Imperial  planet  called  to  its
scattered children. No man could be taken seriously in

the arena of Solar politics unless he was personally acquainted with the key
figures of Terran affairs, rand had traced his way at least once through the
labyrinth of the terrestrial bureaucracy.

And to do this, one had to go to Earth; as in the days of the Caesars, there was
no alternative. Those who believed otherwiseor pretended to--risked

being tagged with the dreaded word "colonial."

It might have been different if the velocity of light were infinite; but i.t was a
mere b;Alion kilometers an hour--and therefore, real-time conversation would
be  forever  impossible  between  Earth  and  anyone  beyond  the  orbit  of  the
Moon. The global electronic village which had existed for centuries on the
mother

world  could  never  be  extended  into  space;  the  political  and  psychological
effects of this were enormous, and still not fully understood.

For generations, earth-dwellers had been accustomed to being in each other's
presence at the touch

of  a  button.  The  communications  satellites  had  made  possible,  and  then
inevitable, the creation of the World State in all but name. And despite many
earlier fears, it was a state still controlled by men, not by machines.

There were perhaps a thousand key individuals,

and ten thousand important ones--and they talked to each other incessantly
from Pole to Pole. The decisions needed to run a world sometimes had to be

made  in  minutes,  and  for  this  the  instantaneous  feedback  of  face-to-face
conversation was essential.

Across a reaction of a light-second, that was easy to arrange, and for three
hundred years men had taken it for granted that distance could no longer bar
them from each other.

But with the establishment of the first Mars Base, this intimacy had ended.
Earth  could  talk  to  Mars--but  its  words  would  always  take  at  least  three
minutes to get there, and the reply would take just as long.

Conversation was thus impossible, and all business had to be done by Telex
or its equivalent.

In theory, this should have been good enough, and usually it was. But there
were  disastrous  exceptions--costly  and  sometimes  fatal  interplanetary
misunderstandings resulting from the fact that the two men at

the opposite ends of the circuit did not really know each other, or comprehend

each other's ways of

thought, because they had never been in .personal contact.

And personal contact was essential at the highest levels of statesmanship and
administration.  Diplomats  had  known  this  for  several  thousand  years,  with
their apparatus of missions and envoys and official visits.

Only  after  that  contact,  with  its  inevitable  character  evaluation,  had  been
made,  and  the  subtle  links  of  mutual  understanding  and  common  interest
established, could one do business by long-distance communications with any
degree of confidence.

Malcolm Makenzie could never have achieved his

own  rise  on  Titan  without  the  friendships  made  when  he  had  returned  to
Earth. Once he had thought it strange that a personal tragedy should have led
him to power and responsibility beyond all the dreams of his youth; but unlike
Ellen, he had buried his dead past and it had ceased to haunt him long ago.

When Colin had repeated the pattern, forty years later, and had returned to
Titan with the infant Duncan, the position of the clan had been immensely

strengthened.  To  most  of  the  human  race,  Saturn's  largest  moon  was  now
virtually identified with the Makenzies. No one could hope to challenge them
if he could not match the network of personal contacts 23

they had established not only on Earth, but everywhere else that mattered. It
was through this network, rather than official channels, that the Makenzies, as
even their opponents grudgingly admitted, Got Things Done.

And now a fourth generation was being prepared

to consolidate the dynasty. Everyone knew that this would happen eventually,
but no one had expected it SO soon.

Not even the Makcnzies. And especially not the

Helmets.

BY THE BONNY, BONNY BANKS

OF LOCH HELLBREW'

In the past, Duncan had always cycled to

Grandmother  Ellen's  home,  or  taken  an  electric  cart  whenever  he  had  to
deliver some household necessity.

This  time,  however,  he  walked  the  two-kilometer  tunnel  from  the  city,
carrying fifty kilos of carefully distributed mass--which, however, only gave
him ten

kilos of extra weight. Had he known that such characters had once existed, he
might have felt a strong

affinity with old~time smugglers, wearing a stylish waistcoat of gold bars.

Colin had presented him with the complex harness of webbing and pouches,
with a heartfelt "Thank God I'll never have to use it again! I knew I had it
around somewhere, but it took a couple of days to find. It's only too true that
the Makenzies never throw anything away."

Duncan found that it needed both hands to lift the harness off the table; when
he  unzipped  one  of  the  many  small  pouches,  he  found  that  it  contained  a
pencil-sized rod of dull metal, astonishingly massive.

"What is it?" he asked. "It feels heavier than gold."

"It is. Tungsten superaltoy, if I remember. The 24

total mass is seventy kilos, but don't start wearing it all at once. I began at
forty, and added a couple of kilos a day. The important thing is to keep the
distribution uniform, and to avoid chafing."

Duncan was doing some mental arithmetic, and

finding the results very depressing. Earth gravity was five times Titan's--yet
this diabolical device would merely double his local weight.

"It's impossible," he said gloomily. "I'll never be able to walk on Earth."

"Well, I did--though it wasn't easy at first. Do erything that the doctors tell
you,  even  if  it  sounds  silly.  Spend  all  the  time  you  can  in  baths,  or  lying

down. Don't be ashamed to use wheelchairs or prosthetic devices, at least for
the first couple of weeks.

And never try to run."

"Run?'

"Sooner or later you'll forget you're on Earth, and then you'll break a leg. Like
to bet on it?"

Betting  was  one  of  the  useful  Makenzie  vices.  The  money  stayed  in  the
family, and the loser always learned some valuable lesson. Though Duncan
found it impossible to imagine five gravities, it could not be denied that Colin
had spent a year on Earth and had survived to tell the tale. So this was not a
bet that promised favorable odds.

Now he was beginning to believe Colin's prediction, and he scarcely noticed
the extra mass--at least when he was moving in a straight line. It was only
when  he  tried  to  change  direction  that  he  felt  himself  in  the  grip  of  some
irresistible force. Not counting visitors from Earth, he was probably now the
strongest man on Titan. It was not that his body was

developing new strength; rather, it was recovering latent powers which had
been slumbering, waiting for the moment when they would be called forth. In
a few More years, what he was now attempting would be too late.

The four-meter-wide tunnel had been lasered,

years  ago,  through  the  tim  of  the  small  crater  which  surrounded  Oasis.
Originally, it had been a pipeline for the ammoniated petrochemicals of the
aptly

named Loch Hellbrew, one of the region's chief nat-25

ural resources. Most of the lake had gone to feed the industries of Titan; later,
the  tapping  of  the  moon's  internal  heat,  as  part  of  the  local  planetary
engineering project, had caused the remainder to evaporate.

There had been a certain amount of quiet grumbling when Ellen Makenzie
had made her intentions

clear, but the Department of Resources had pumped the remaining hydrogen-

methane fog out of the tunnel, and now carried its oxygen, to the annual

annoyance of the auditors, on inventory as part of the city's air reserve. There
were  two  manually  operated  bulkheads,  as  well  as  the  city's  own  backup
seals.

Anyone  went  beyond  the  second  bulkhead  at  his  own  risk,  but  that  was
negligible. The tunnel was through solid rock, and since the pressure inside
was  higher  than  ambient,  there  was  no  danger  of  Titanian  poisons  leaking
inward.

Half  a  dozen  side  tunnels,  all  of  them  now  blocked,  led  out  of  the  main
passageway. When he had first come here as a small boy, Duncan had filled
those  sealed-off  shafts  with  wonder  and  magic.  Now  he  knew  that  they
merely led to long-abandoned surge chambers.

Yet though all the mystery was gone, it still

seemed to him that these corridors were haunted by two ghosts. One was a
little girl who had been known and loved by only a handful of pioneers; the
other was a giant who had been mourned by millions.

There had been endless jokes about Robert

Kleinman's name, for he was almost two meters tail.

and porportioned accordingly. And his talents had matched his physique; he
had been a master pilot at the age of thirty, despite the difficulty of fitting him
into standard space equipment. Duncan had never considered him particularly
good-looking, but in this

matter  he  was  outvoted  by  a  small  army  of  women--including  Ellen
Makenzie.

Grandma had met Captain Kleinman only a year

after  the  final  parting  with  Malcolm;  she  may  have  been  on  an  emotional
rebound, but he certainly was not. Yet thereafter the Captain had never looked
at  another  woman,  and  it  had  become  one  of  those  love  affairs  famous  on
many worlds. It had lasted throughout the planning and preparations for the
first expe-26

dition to Saturn and the fitting-out of the Challenger in orbit off Titan. And as
far as Ellen Makenzie was concerned it had never died; it was frozen forever
at the moment when the ship met its mysterious and still inexplicable doom,
deep in the jet streams of the South Temperate Zone.

Moving rattier More slowly than when he had

started his waldo, Duncan came to the final bulkhead.

On Grandma's hundredth birthday, the younger

members of the family had painted it in brilliant fluorescent colors, Which
had faded not at all in the last

dozen years. Since Ellen had never referred to it, and never heard questions
which  she  did  not  wish  to  answer,  there  was  no  way  of  discovering  if  she
appreciated the gift.

"I'm here, Grandma," Duncan called into the antique intercom which had been
presented to her by some anonymous admirer long ago. (It was still

clearly  marked  "Made  in  Hong  Kong,"  and  had  been  dated  circa  1995.
Shameful to relate, there had been one attempt to steal it, though since theft
was virtually unknown on Titan, this was probably only a childish prank or an
anti-Makenzie gesture.)

There  was,  as  usual,  no  reply,  but  the  door  unlatched  at  once  and  Duncan
walked through into the

tiny foyer. Grandma's electrocycle occupied the place from which it had not
moved for years. Duncan

checked  the  battery  and  kicked  the  tires,  as  he  always  did  with  great
conscientiousness. No need for any pumping or charging this time; if the old
lady suddenly felt the impulse to descend upon the city, there was nothing to
prevent her.

The  kitchen,  which  was  a  unit  lifted  intact  from  a  small  orbital  passenger
shuttle, was a little tidier than usual. Presumably one of the voluntary helpers
had just made her weekly visit. Nevertheless, the usual sickly sour smell of
slow culinary disintegration and inadequate recycling was heavy in the air,
and Duncan

held his breath as he hurried through into the living room. He never accepted
More than a cup of coffee from Grandma, and feared accidental poisoning if
he ever sampled the products of her robot reconstituter.

But Ellen seemed to thrive on it; over the years she 27

must have established some kind of symbiosis with her kitchen. It still lived
up to the manufacturer's "fail-safe"

guarantee, even though it did produce the most

peculiar odors. Doubtless Grandma never noticed

them. Duncan wondered what she would do when the final disaster occurred.

The main living room was as crowded as ever.

Against  one  wall  were  the  shelves  of  carefully  labeled  rocks--a  complete
mineralogy  of  Titan  and  the  other  examined  moons  of  Saturn,  as  well  as
samples from each of the rings. As long as Duncan could remember, there had
been just one section empty, as if, even now, Grandma was still waiting for
Kleinman to return.

The  opposite  wall  was  More  sparsely  occupied  with  communications  and
information equipment, and

racks of micromodules which, if completely saturated, could have held More
knowledge than all the

libraries of Earth up to the twenty-first century. The rest of the room was a
compact  little  workshop,  most  of  the  floor  space  being  occupied  by  the
machines that had fascinated Duncan throughout his childhood, and that he
would associate with Grandma Ellen as long as he lived.

There were petrological microscopes, polishing and cutting tools, ultrasonic
cleaners,  laser  knives,  and  all  the  shining  paraphernalia  of  gemologist  and
jeweler.

Duncan had learned to use most of them, over the years, though he had never
acquired More than a

fraction  of  his  grandmother's  skill  and  almost  wholly  lacked  her  artistic

talents. What he did share, to a much greater extent, were her mathematical
interests,  exemplified  by  the  small  computer  and  associated  holographic
display.

The computer, like the kitchen, was long overdue for retirement. But it was
completely autonomous, so Grandma did not have to rely in any way upon the
immensely larger storage facilities in the city. Although her computer had a
memory scarcely larger

than that of a human brain, it was sufficient for her rather modest purposes.
Her  interest  in  minerals  had  led  her,  inevitably,  to  crystallography,  then  to
group theory, and then to the harmless obsession that had 28

dominated so much of her lonely existence. Twenty years ago, in this same
room, she had infected Duncan with it. In his case, the disease was no longer
virulent, having run its course in a few months; but he

knew,  with  amused  tolerance,  that  he  would  suffer  occasional  relapses
throughout his life. How incredible that five perfectly identical squares could
create a universe that neither man nor computer would ever be able to explore
fully ....

Nothing in the familiar room had changed since his ast visit, three weeks ago.
He could even imagine that Grandma had not moved; she was still sitting at
her worktable, sorting rocks and crystals, while behind her the read-out screen
intermittently flashed solutions of some problem the computer was analyzing.

She was, as usual, wearing a long gown that made her look like a Roman
matron,  though  Duncan  was  quite  sure  that  no  Roman  matron's  dress  ever
appeared

quite  so  disheveled  or,  'to  be  perfectly  frank,  so  overdue  for  the  laundry.
While Duncan had known her,

Ellen's care of her equipment had never extended to her personal appearance.

She did not rise, but tilted her head slightly so that he could deliver his usual
affectionate kiss. As he did so, he noticed that the external world, at least, had
been touched by change,

The view from Grandma's picture window was

famous--but by reputation only, since few indeed had been privileged to see it
with  their  own  eyes.  Her  home  was  partly  countersunk  into  a  ledge
overlooking the dried-up bed of Loch Hellbrew and the canyon that led into
it, so it presented her with a 180-degree panorama of Titan's most picturesque
landscape. Sometimes, when storms raged through the mountains,

the view disappeared for hours behind clouds of ammonia crystals. But today
the weather was clear and

Duncan could see for at least twenty kilometers.

"What's happening over there?" he asked.

At first, he had thought it was one of the fire fountains that sometimes erupted
in unstable areas; but

in that case the city would have been in danger, and he would have heard of it
long  ago.  Then  he  realized  that  the  brilliant  yet  smoky  column  of  light
burning 29

steadily  on  the  hill  crest  three  or  four  kilometers  away  could  only  be
manmade.

"There's a fusor running over at Huygens. I don't know what they're doing,
but that's the oxygen buru-off."

"Oh, one of Armand's projects. Doesn't it annoy you?"

"NoI think it's beautiful. Besides, we need the water. Look at those rain clouds
. . . real rain. And I think there's something growing over there. I've noticed a
change in color on the rocks since that flame

started burning."

"That's quite possible--the bioengineering people will know all about it. One
day you may have a forest to look at, instead of all this bare rock."

He was joking, of course, and she knew it. Except in very restricted areas, no
vegetation  could  grow  here  in  the  open.  But  experiments  like  this  were  a
beginning, and one day...

Over there in the mountain, a hydrogen fusion

plant was at work, melting down the crust of Titan to release all the elements
needed for the industries of the little world. And as half that crust consisted of
oxygen,  now  needed  only  in  very  small  quantities  in  the  closed-cycle
economies of the cities, it was simply allowed to burn off.

"Do you realize, Duncan," said Grandma suddenly,

"how neatly that flame symbolizes the difference between Titan and Earth?"

"Well, they don't have to melt rocks there to get everything they need."

"I was thinking of something much More fundamental.

If a Terran wants a fire, he ignites a jet of

hydrocarbons and lets it burn. We do exactly the opposite. We set fire to a jet
of oxygen, and let it burn in our hydromethane atmosphere."

This was such an elementary fact of life--indeed an ecological platitude--that
Duncan felt disappointed; he had hoped for some More startling revelation.
His face must have reflected his thoughts, for Grandma gave him no chance
to comment.

"What I'm trying to tell you," she said, "is that it may not be as easy for you to
adjust to Earth as 30

you imagine. You may know---or think you know--what conditions are like
there, but that knowledge

isn't based on experience. When you need it in a hurry, it won't be there. Your
Titan instincts may give the wrong answers. So act slowly, and always think
twice before you move."

"I've no choice about acting slowly--my Titan muscles will see to that."

"How long will you be gone?"

"About  a  year.  My  official  invitation  is  for  two  months,  but  now  the  trip's
being paid for, I'll have funds for a much longer stay. And it seems a pity to
waste the opportunity, since it's my only one."

He  tried  to  keep  his  voice  as  cheerfully  optimistic  as  he  could,  though  he

knew perfectly well the

thoughts that must be passing through Grandma's

mind.  They  were  both  aware  that  this  might  be  their  last  meeting.  One
hundred fourteen was not an excessive age for a woman--but, truly, what did
Grandma

have to live for? The hope of seeing him again, when he returned from Earth?
He liked to think so ....

And  there  was  another  matter,  never  to  be  referred  to,  yet  hovering  in  the
background. Grandma knew perfectly well the main purpose of his visit to
Earth, and the knowledge must, even after all these years, be like a dagger in
her heart. She had never forgiven MaIcolm; she had never accepted Colin;
would she continue to accept him when he returned with little Malcolm?

Now she was hunting around, with a clumsiness

quite unlike her normal preoise movements, in one of the cubbyholes of her
work desk.

"Here's a souvenir to take with you."

"What--oh, it's beautiful?' He was not being excessively polite; sheer surprise
had forced the reaction

from him. The flat, crystaMidded box he was now

holding  in  his  hands  was,  indeed,  one  of  the  most  exquisite  works  of
geometrical art he had ever seen.

And Grandma could not have chosen any single object More evocative of his
youth and of the world that,

though he was now about to leave it, must always be his home.

As he stared at the mosaic of colored stones that 31

exactly filled the little box, greeting each of the familiar shapes like an old
friend, his eyes misted and the years seemed to roll away. Grandma had not

changed; but he was only ten ....

A

CROSS OF TITANITE

I

I 'ou're old enough now, Duncan, to understand

this game.., though it's very much More than a game."

Whatever it is, thought Duncan, it doesn't look

very exciting. What can you do with five identical squares of white plastic, a
couple of centimeters on a side?

"Now  the first problem," continued Grandma, "is to see how many dierent
patterns you can make, by putting all these squares together."

"While they lie flat on the table?'"

"Yes, with the edges matching exact/y--overlap-ping isn't allowed."

Duncan started to shuffle the squares.

"Well," he began, "I can put them all in a straight llne like this . . . then I can
switch the end one to make an L... and the one at the other end to make a U
.... "

He  quickly  produced  half  a  dozen  different  assemblies  of  the  five  squares,
then found that he was repeating himself.

"I think that's aH--oh, stupid of me."

He  had  missed  the  most  obvious  figure  of  all--the  cross,  or  X,  formed  by
putting one square in the middle and the other four surrounding it.

"Most people," said Grandma, "find that one first.

I don't know what this proves about your mental

processes. Do you think you've found them all?"

Duncan continued to slide the squares around, and 32

eventually discovered three More figures. Then he gave up.

"That's the lot," he ar.nounced confidently.

"Then  what  about  this  one?"  said  Grandma,  moving  the  squares  swiftly  to
make a figure that looked like a humpbacked IF.

"Oh!"

"And this..."

Duncan began to feel very foolish, and was much

relieved  when  Grandma  continued:  "You  did  fairly  well--you  only  missed
these two. Altogether, there are exactly twelve of these patterns--no More and
no less. Here they are. You could hunt forever--you won't find another one."

She brushed aside the five little squares, and laid on the table a dozen brightly
colored pieces of plastic.

Each  was  different  in  shape,  and  together  they  formed  the  complete  set  of
twelve figures that, Duncan was dow quite prepared to admit, were all that
could be made from five equal squares.

But surely there must be More to it than this. The game couldn't have finished
already. No, Grandma still had something up her sleeve.

"Now  listen  carefully,  Duncan.  Each  of  these  fig-ures--they're  called
pentominoes, by the way--is

obviously the same size, since they're all made from five identical squares.
And there are twelve of them, so the total area is sixty squares. Right?"

"Urn... yes."

"Now sixty is a nice round number, which you can split up in lots of ways.
Let's start with ten multiplied by six, the easiest one. That's the area of this
little box--ten units by six units. So the twelve pieces should fit exactly into it,

like a simple jigsaw puzzle."

Duncan looked for traps--Grandma had a fondness

for verbal and mathematical paradoxes, not all

of them comprehensible to a ten-year-old victim--but he could find none. If
the box was indeed the size Grandma said, then the twelve pieces should just
fit

-nto it. After all, both were sixty units in area.

Wait a minute . . . the area might be the same, but the shape could be wrong.
There might be no way of 33

making the twelve pieces fit this rectangular box, even though it was the right
size.

I'll leave you to it," said Grandma, after he had shuffled pieces around for a
few minutes. "But I promise you this--it can be done."

Ten minutes later, Duncan was beginning to doubt it. It was easy enough to fit
ten of the pieces into the frame--and once he had managed eleven. Unfortu

nately, the hole then left in the jigsaw was not the same shape as the piece that
remained in his hand

--even though, of course, it was of exactly the same area. The hole was an X,
the piece was a Z ....

Thirty minutes later, he was fairly bursting with frustration. Grandma had left
him completely alone, while she conducted an earnest dialogue with her com
puter; but from time to time she gave him an amused glance, as if to say "See-
-it isn't as easy as you thought

"

Duncan

was stubborn for his age. Most boys of ten

would have given up long ago. (It never occurred to him, until years later, that

Grandma  was  also  doing  a  neat  job  of  psychological  testing.)  He  did  not
appeal for help for almost forty minutes ....

Grandma's

fingers flickered over the mosaic. The U

and X and L slid around inside their restraining frame--and suddenly the little
box was exactly full. The

twelve pieces had been perfectly fitted into the jigsaw.

"Well,

you knew the answer!" said Duncan, rather lamely.

"The  answer?"  retorted  Grandma.  "Would  you  care  to  guess  how  many
dilTerent ways those pieces can be fitted into their box?"

There

was a catch here--Duncan was sure of it. He

hadn't found a single solution in almost an hour of effort--and he must have
tried at least a hundred arrangements.

But it was possible that there might be--oh--a

dozen different answers.

"I'd

guess there might be twenty ways of putting those pieces into the box," he
replied, determined to be on

the safe side.

"Try

again."

That

was a danger sienal. Obviously, there was

much More to this business than met the eye, and it would be safer not to
commit himself.

Duncan shook his head.

"I can't imagine."

"Sensible -boy. Intuition is a dangerous guide--though sometimes it's the only
one we have. Nobody could ever guess the right answer. There are More than
we thousand distinct ways of putting these twelve

pieces back into their box. To be precise, 2,339° What do you think of that?"

It  was  not  likely  that  Grandma  was  lying  to  him,  yet  Duncan  felt  so
humiliated by his total failure to find even one solution that he blurted out: "I
don't believe it!"

Grandma seldom showed annoyance, though she

could  become  cold  and  withdrawn  when  he  had  offended  her.  This  time,
however, she merely laughed

and punched out some instructions to the computer.

"Look at that," she said.

A pattern of bright lines had appeared on the

screen, showing the set of all twelve pentominoes fitted iato the six-by-ten
frame. It held for a few seconds,

then was replaced by another obviously different, though Duncan could not
possibly  remember  the  arrangement  briefly  presented  to  him.  Then  came
another . . and another, until Grandma canceled the program.

"Even at this fast rate," she said, "it takes five hours to run through them all.
And take my word

for  it--though  no  human  being  has  ever  checked  each  one,  or  ever  could-

they're all.different."

For a long time, Duncan stared at the collection of twelve deceptively simple
figures. As he slowly assimilated what Grandma had told him, he had the

first  genuine  mathematical  revelation  of  his  life.  What  had  at  first  seemed
merely a childish game had opened endless vistas and horizons--though even
the brightest of ten-year-olds could not begin to guess the full extent of the
universe now opening up before him.

This moment of dawning wonder and awe was

purely passive; a far More intense explosion of intellectual delight occurred
when he found his first very

own solution to the problem. For weeks he carried 35

around with him the set of twelve pentominoes in their plastic box, playing
with them at every odd moment.

He got to know each of the dozen shapes as

personal  friends,  calling  them  by  the  letters  which  they  most  resembled,
though  in  some  cases  with  a  good  deal  of  imaginative  distortion:  the  odd
group, IF , I, L, P, N and the ultimate alphabetical sequence T, U, V, W, X, Y,
Z.

And once in a sort of geometrical trance or ecstasy which he was never able
to  repeat,  he  discovered  five  solutions  in  less  than  an  hour.  Newton  and
Einstein  and  Chen-tsu  could  have  felt  no  greater  kinship  with  the  gods  of
mathematics in their own moments of

truth ....

It did not take him long to realize, without any prompting from Grandma, that
it might also he possible to arrange the pieces in other shapes besides the six-
by-ten rectangle. In theory, at least, the twelve pentominoes could exactnly
cover rectangles with sides of five-by-twelve units, four-by-fifteen units, and
even the narrow strip only three units wide and twenty long.

Without too much effort, he found several examples of the five-by-twelve and
four-by-fifteen rectangles.

Then  he  spent  a  frustrating  week,  trying  to  align-the  dozen  pieces  into  a
perfect three-by-twenty strip.

Again and again he produced shorter rectangles, but always there were a few
pieces left over, and at last he decided that this shape was impossible.

Defeated, he went back to Grandma--and received

another surprise.

"I'm  glad  you  made  the  effort,"  she  said.  "General-izing--exploring  every
possibility--is what mathematics

is all about. But you're wrong. It can be done.

There are just two solutions; and if you find one, you'll also have the other."

Encouraged,  Duncan  continued  the  hunt  with  renewed  vigor.  After  another
week, he began to realize

the magnitude of the problem. The number of distinct ways in which a mere
twelve objects could be laid out essentially in a straight line, when one also
al-loxved for the fact that most of them could assume at

least four different orientations, was staggering.

Once again, he appealed to Grandma, pointing out the unfairness of the odds.
If there were only two solutions, how long would it take to find them?

"I'll tell you," she said. "If you were a brainless computer, and put down the
pieces  at  the  rate  of  one  a  second  in  every  possible  way,  you  could  run
through  the  whole  set  in"--she  paused  for  effect--"rather  More  than  six
million, million years."

Earth years or Titan years? thought the appalled Duncan. Not that it really
mattered...

"But you aren't a brainless computer," continued Grandma. "You can see at a
glance whole categories that won't fit into the pattern, so you don't have to
bother about them. Try again

"

Duncan

obeyed, though without much enthusiasm or

success. And then he had a brilliant idea.

Karl

was interested, and accepted the challenge at once.

He took the set of pentominoes, and that was the last Duncan heard of him for
several hours.

Then

he called back, looking a little flustered. "Are you sure it can be done?" he
demanded. "Absolutely.

In fact, there are two solutions. Haven't

you found even one? I thought you were good

in mathematics."

"So

I am. That's why I know how tough the job is. There are over a quadrillion
possible arrangements to be checked."

"How

do you work that out?" asked Duncan, delighted to discover something that
had baffled his friend.

Karl

looked at a piece of paper covered with sketches and numbers.

"Well, excluding

forbidden positions, and allowing for symmetry

and rotation, it comes to factorial twelve times two to the twenty-first--you
wouldn't understand why!

That's quite a number; here it is."

He held

up a sheet on which he had written, in large figures, the imposing array of
digits:

I

160 000 000

Duncan looked

at the number with satisfaction; he did not

doubt Karl's arithmetic.

"So you've given up."

"NO.t  I'm  just  telling  you  how  hard  it  is."  And  Karl,  looking  grimly
determined, switched off.

The next day, Duncan had one of the biggest surprises of his young lie. A
bleary-eyed Karl, who had

peared°bVi°uslYon hisn°tscreen.Slept since their last conversation, ap

"Here it is," he said, exhaustion and triumph competing in his voice.

Duncan could hardly believe his eyes; he had been convinced that the odds
against success were impossibly great. But there was the narrow rectangular

strip, only three squares wide and twenty long,

formed from the complete set of twelve pieces ....

With  fingers  that  trembled  slightly  from  fatigue,  Karl  took  the  two  end
sections and switched them around, leaving the center portion of the puzzle
untouched.

"And here's the second solution," he said. "Now I'm going to bed. Good night-
-or good morning, if that's what it is."

For a long time, a very chastened Duncan sat staring at the blank screen. He
did not yet understand

what had happened. He only knew that Karl had won against all reasonable
expectations.

It was not that Duncan really minded; he loved

Karl too much to resent his little victory, and indeed was capable of rejoicing
in his friend's triumphs even when they were at his own expense. But there
was something strange here, something almost magical.

It  was  Duncan's  first  glimpse  of  the  power  of  intuition,  and  the  mind's
mysterious ability to go beyond

the available facts and to short-circuit the

process of logic. In a few hours, Karl had completed a search that should have
required trillions of operations, and would have tied up the fastest computer in

existence for an appreciable number of seconds.

One day, Duncan would realize that all men had

such powers, but might use them only once in a

lifetime. In Karl, the gift was exceptionally well developed; from that moment
onward, Duncan had

learned to take seriously even his most outrageous speculations.

That was twenty years ago; whatever had happened to that little set of plastic

figures? He could not remember when he had last seen it.

But here it was again, reincarnated in colored

minerals--the peculiar rose-tinted granite from the Galileo Hills, the obsidian
of the Huygens Plateau, the pseudomarble of the Herschel Escarpment. And
thereit was unbelievable, but doubt was impossible in such a matter--was the
rarest and most mysterious of all the gemstones found on this world. The

X of the puzzle was made of Titanite itself; no one could ever mistake that
blue-black sheen with its fugitive flecks of gold. It was the largest piece that
Duncan had ever seen, and he could not even guess at its value.

"I  don't  know  what  to  say,"  he  stammered.  "It's  beautiful---I've  never  seen
anything like it."

He put his arms around Grandma's thin shoulders

--and found, to his distress, that they were quivering uncontrollably. He held
her gently until the shaking stopped, knowing that there were no words for
such moments, and realizing as never before that he was the last love of her
empty life, and he was leaving her to her memories.

CHILDREN OF THE CORRIDORS

There was a sense of sadness and finality

about almost everything that he did in these last days.

Sometimes  it  puzzled  Duncan;  he  should  be  excited,  anticipating  the  great
adventure  that  only  a  handful  of  men  on  his  world  could  ever  share.  And
though he had never before been out of touch with his friends and family for
More  than  a  few  hours,  he  was  certain  that  a  year's  absence  would  pass
swiftly enough, among the wonders and distractions of Earth.

So why this meiancholy? If he was saying farewell to the things of his youth,
it was only for a little while, and he would appreciate them all the More when
he returned ....

When he returned. That, of course, was the heart of the problem. In a real
sense, the Duncan Makenzie who was now leaving Titan would never return;

indeed, that was the purpose of the exercise. Like Colin thirty years ago, and
Malcolm forty years before that, he was heading sunward in search of

knowledge, of power, o maturity--and, above all, of the successor which his
own world could never give him. For, of course, being Malcolm's duplicate,
he too carried in his loins the fatal Makenzie gene.

Sooner than he had expected, he had to prepare

his  family  for  the  new  addition.  After  the  usual  number  of  earlier
experiments, he had settled down with Marissa four years ago, and he loved
her children as much, he was certain, as if they had been

his own flesh and blood. Clyde was now six years old, Caroline three. They in
their turn appeared to be as fond of Duncan as of their real fathers, who were
now regarded as honorary members of the Clan

Makenzie. Much the same thing had happened in

Colin's  generation--he  had  acquired  or  adopted  three  families--and  in
Malcolm's. Grandfather had never gone to the trouble of marrying again after
Ellen  had  left  him,  but  he  had  never  lacked  company  for  long.  Only  a
computer could keep track of the comings and goings on the periphery of the
clan; it often seemed that most of Titan was related to it in some way or other.
One of Duncan's major problems now was deciding who would be mortally
offended if

he failed to say goodbye.

Quite  apart  from  the  time  factor,  he  had  other  reasons  for  making  as  few
farewells as possible. Every one of his friends and relatives--as well as almost
complete strangers--seemed to have some request for

him, some mission they wanted him to carry out as soon as he reached Earth.
Or, worse still, there was some essential item ("It won't be any trouble") they
wanted him to bring back. Duncan calculated that he 40

would  have  to  charter  a  special  freighter  if  he  acquiesced  to  all  these
demands.

Every job now had to be divided into one of two

categories. There were the things that must be done before he left Titan, and
those that could be postponed until he was aboard ship. The latter included

his  studies  of  current  terrestrial  affairs,  which  kept  slipping  despite  Colin's
increasingly frantic attempts to update him.

Extricating himself from his official duties was also no easy task, and Duncan
realized that in a few More years it would be well-nigh impossible. He was
getting involved in too many things, though that was a

matter of deliberate family policy. More than once he had complained that his
title of Special Assistant to the Chief Administrator gave him responsibility
without power. To this, Chief Administrator Colin had retorted:

"Do you know what power means in our

society? Giving orders to people who carry them out--only i/and when they
feel like it."

This  was,  of  course,  a  gross  libel  on  the  Titanian  bureaucracy,  which
functioned surprisingly well and with a mia/mum of red tape. Because all the
key individuals knew each other, an immense amount of business got done
through direct personal contact.

Everyone who had come to Titan had been carefully selected for intelligence
and ability, and knew that survival depended upon co-operation. Those who
felt like abandoning their social responsibilities first had to practice breathing
methane at a hundred below.

One possible embarrassment he had at least been

spared.  He  could  hardly  leave  Titan  without  saying  good-bye  to  his  once
closest friend--but, very fortunately, Karl was off-world. Several months ago
he

had left on one of the shuttles to join a Terran survey ship working its way
through  the  outer  moons.  Ironically  enough,  Duncan  had  envied  Karl  his
chance of

seeing some unknown worlds; now it was Karl who

would be envious of him.

He could well imagine Karl's frustration when

he heard that Duncan was on his way to Earth. The thought gave him More
sadness than pleasure; the Makenzies, whatever their faults, were not vindic-
41

tive. Yet Duncan could not help wondering how often Karl's reveries would
now turn sunward, and to the moment long ago when their emotions had been
irrevocably linked with the mother world.

Duncan was just sixteen, and Karl twenty-one,

when  the  cruise  liner  Mentor  had  made  her  first,  and  it  was  widely  hoped
only, rendezvous with Titan. She was a converted fusion-drive freighter--slow
but economical, provided adequate supplies of hydrogen could be picked up
at strategic points.

Mentor had stopped at Titan for her final refuel-lng, on the last leg of a grand
tour that had taken her to Mars, Ganymede, Europa, Pallas, and Iapetus,

and had included fly-bys of Mercury and Eros. As soon as she had loaded
some fifteen thousand tons of hydrogen, her exhausted crew planned to head
back  to  Earth  on  the  fastest  orbit  they  could  compute,  if  possible  after
marooning all the passengers.

The cruise must have seemed a good idea when a

consortium of Terran universities had planned it several years earlier. And so
indeed it had turned out,

in the long run, for Mentor graduates had since

proved their worth throughout the Solar System. But when the ship staggered
into her parking orbit, under the command of a prematurely gray captain, the

whole enterprise looked like a first-magnitude disaster.

The problems of keeping five hundred young adults entertained and out of
mischief on a six-months'

cruise  aboard  even  the  largest  spaceliner  had  not  been  given  sufficient
thought;  the  law  professor  who  had  signed  on  as  master-at-arms  was  later
heard  to  complain  bitterly  about  the  complete  absence  from  the  ship's
inventory of hypodermic guns and knockout gas. On the other hand, there had
been no

deaths or serious injuries, only one pregnancy, and everyone had learned a
great  deal,  though  not  necessarily  in  the  areas  that  the  organizers  had
intended.

The first few weeks, for example, were mostly occupied by experiments in
zero-gravity sex, despite

warnings that this was an expensive addiction for those compelled to spend
most of their lives on planetary surfaces.

Other shipboard activities, it was widely believed, were not quite so harmless.
There  were  reports  of  tobacco-smoking--not  actually  illegal,  of  course,  but
hardly sensible behaviour when there were so many safe alternatives. Even
More  alarming  were  persistent  rumors  that  someone  had  smuggled  an
Emotion Amplifier on board Mentor. The so-called joy machines

were banned on all planets, except under strict medical control; but there 'ould
always be people to

whom reality was not good enough, and who would

want to try something better.

Notwithstanding  the  horror  stories  radioed  ahead  from  other  ports  of  call,
Titan had looked forward to welcoming its young visitors. It was felt that they
would  add  color  to  the  social  scene,  and  help  establish  some  enjoyable
contacts with Mother Earth. And

anyway, it would be for only a week ....

Luckily,  no  one  dreamed  that  it  would  be  for  two  months.  This  was  not
Mentor's fault; Titan had only itself to blame.

When Mentor fell into her parking orbit, Earth and Titan were involved inone

of  their  periodical  wrangles  over  the  price  of  hydrogen,  F.O.B.  Zero
Gravitational Potential (Solar Reference). The proposed 15

percent rise, screamed the Terrans, would cause the collapse of interplanetary
commerce. Anything under 10 percent, swore the Titanians, would result in
their instant bankruptcy and would make it impossible for them to import any
of the expensive items Earth was always trying to sell. To any historian of
economics, the whole debate was boringly familiar.

Unable to get a firm quotation, Mentor was

stranded  in  orbit  with  empty  fuel  tanks.  At  first,  her  captain  was  not  too
unhappy; he and the crew could do with the rest, now that the passengers had
shuttled down to Titan and had fanned out all over the face of the hapless
satellite. But one week stretched into two, then three, then a month. By that
time, Titan was ready to settle on almost any terms; unforttmately, Mentor
had now missed her optimum trajectories, and it would be another four weeks
before

the next launch window opened. Meanwhile, the

five hundred guests were enjoying themselves, usually much More than their
hosts.

But  to  the  younger  Titanians,  it  was  an  exciting  time  which  they  would
remember all their lives. On a small world where everyone knew everybody
else, half a thousand fascinating strangers had arrived, full of tales, many of
them  quite  true,  about  the  wonders  of  Earth.  Here  were  men  and  women,
barely

into  their  twenties,  who  had  seen  forests  and  prairies  and  oceans  of  liquid
water, who had strolled unprotected under an open sky beneath a sun whose
heat

could actually be felt ....

This very contrast in backgrounds, however, was a possible source of danger.
The  Terrans  could  not  be  allowed  to  go  wandering  around  by  themselves,
even  inside  the  habitats.  They  had  to  have  escorts,  preferably  responsible
people not too far from their own

age group, to see that they did not inadvertently kill either themselves or their
hosts.

Naturally,  there  were  times  when  they  resented  this  well-intentioned
supervision, and even tried to escape from it. One group succeeded; it was
very lucky, and suffered no More than a few searing whiffs of ammonia.

Damage was so slight that the foolish adventurers required only routine lung
transplants, but after this- exploit there was no More serious trouble.

There were plenty of other problems. The sheer

mechanics  of  absorbing  five  hundred  visitors  was  a  challenge  to  a  society
where  living  .standards  were  still  somewhat  Spartan,  and  accommodation
limited. At

first, all the unexpected guests were housed in the complex of corridors left
by an abandoned mining operation, hastily converted into dormitories. Then,
as quickly as arrangements could be made, they were frmed out--like refugees
from some bombed city

in an ancient war--to any households that were able to cope with them. At this
stage, there were still many willing volunteers, among them Colin and Sheela

Makenzie.

The apartment was lonely, now that Duncan's

pseudosibling  Glynn  had  left  home  to  work  on  the  other  side  of  Titan;
Sheela's other child, Yufi, had been gone for a decade. Though Number 402,
Sec44

and Level, Meridian Park was hardly spacious by

Terran standards, Assistant Administrator Colin

Makenzie,  as  he  was  then,  had  selected  one  of  the  homeless  waifs  for
temporary adoption.

And so Calindy had come into Duncan's life--and

into Karl's.

THE FATAL GIFT

Catherine Linden Ellerman had celebrated

her twenty-first birthday just before Mentor reached Saturn. By all accounts,
it had been a memorable party, giving the final silvery gloss to the captain's
remaining hairs. Calindy would have sailed through

untouched; next to her beauty, that was her most outstanding characteristic. In
the midst of chaos--even chaos that she herself had generated--she was

the calm center of the storm. With a self-possession far beyond her years, she
seemed  to  young  Duncan  the  very  embodiment  of  Terran  culture  and
sophistication.

He could smile wryly, one and a half decades

later, at his boyish navet; but it was not wholly unfounded.

By any standards, Calindy was a remarkable

phenomenon.

Duncan knew, of course, that all Terrans were rich.

(How could it be otherwise, when each was the heir to a hundred thousand
generations?) But he was

overawed by Calindy's display of jewels and silks, never realizing that she
had  a  limited  wardrobe  which  she  varied  with  consummate  skill.  Most
impressive of all was a stunningly beautiful coat of golden fur--the only one
ever seen on Titan--made from the skins of an animal called a mink. That was
typical  of  Calindy;  no  one  else  would  have  dreamed  of  taking  a  fur  coat
aboard a spaceship. And she had not done soas

malicious rttmor pretended--because she had heard 45

it was cold out around Saturn. She was much too intelligent for that kind of
stupidity, and knew exactly

what  she  was  doing;  she  had  brought  her  mink  simply  because  it  yeas
beautiful.

Perhaps because he could see her only through a

mist  of  adoration,  Duncan  could  never  visualize  her,  in  later  years,  as  an
actual person. When he thought of Calindy, and tried to conjure up her image,
he did not see the real girl, but always his only replica of her, in one of the
bubble stereos that had become popular in the '50's.

How many thousands of times he had taken that

apparently solid, yet almost weightless sphere in his hands, shaken it gently,
and  thus  activated  the  five-second  loop!  Through  the  subtle  magic  of
organized

gas  molecules,  each  releasing  its  programmed  quantum  of  light,  Calindy's
face  would  appear  out  of  the  swirling  mists--tiny,  yet  perfect  in  form  and
color. At first she would be in profile; then she would turn and suddenly--
Duncan could never be sure of the moment when it arrived--there would be
the faint smile

that only Leonardo could have captured in an earlier age. She did not seem to
be smiling at him, but

at someone over his shoulder. The impression was so strong that More than
once Duncan had looked back, startled, to see who was standing behind him.

Then the image would fade, the bubble would become opaque, and he would
have to wait five minutes

before the system recharged itself. It did not matter; he had only to close his
eyes and he could still see the perfect oval face, the delicate ivory skin, the
lustrous black hair gathered up into a toque and held in

place  by  a  silver  comb  that  had  belonged  to  a  Spanish  princess,  when
Columbus was a child. Calindy liked playing roles, though she took none of
them too seriously, and Carmen was one of her favorites.

When  she  entered  the  Makenzie  household,  however,  she  was  the  exiled
aristocrat,  graciously  accepting  the  hospitality  of  kindly  provincials,  with
what few family heirlooms she had been able to save from the Revolution. As

this  impressed  no  one  except  Duncan,  she  quickly  became  the  studious
anthropologist,

taking notes for her thesis on the quaint habits of 46

primitive sociees. This role was at least partly genuine, for Calindy was really
interested in differing life styles; and by some definitions, Titan could indeed
be classed as primitive---or, at least, undeveloped.

Thus the supposedly unshockable Terrans were

genuinely  horrified  at  encountering  families  with  three--and  even  four!-
children  on  Titan.  The  twentieth  century's  millions  of  skeleton  babies  still
haunted  the  conscience  of  the  world,  and  such  tragic  but  understandable
excesses as the. "Breeder Lynching"

campaign, not to mention the burning of the Vatican, had left permanent scars
on  the  human  psyche.  Duncan  could  still  remember  Calindy's  expression
when

she encountered her first family of six: outrage contended with curiosity, until
both were moderated by

Terran  good  manners.  He  had  patiently  explained  the  facts  of  life  to  her,
pointing out that there was nothing eternally sacred about the dogma of Zero
Growth,  and  that  Titan  really  needed  to  double  its  population  every  fifty
years. Eventually she appreciated this logically, but she had never been able
to accept it emotionally.

And it was emotion that provided the driving

force of Calindy's life; her will and beauty and intelligence were merely its
servants.

For a young Terran, she was not promiscuous. She once told Duncan--and he
believed her--that she

never had More than two lovers at a time. On Titan, to Duncan's considerable
distress, she had only one.

Even if the Helmers and Makenzies had not been

related  through  Grandma  Ellen,  it  was  inevitable  that  she  would  have  met
Karl,  at  one  of  the  countless  concerts  and  parties  and  dances  arranged  for
Mentor's  castaways.  So  Duncan  could  not  really  blame  himself  for
introducing them; it would have made no difference in the end. Yet even so,
he would always wonder

....

Karl was then almost twenty-twoa year older

than  Calindy,  though  far  less  experienced.  He  still  possessed  the  slightly
overmuscled build of the native-born Terran, but had adapted so well to the
lower

gravity that he moved More gracefully than most men who had spent their
entire  lives  on  Titan.  He  seemed  to  possess  the  secret  of  power  without
clumsiness.

And in a quite literal sense, he was the Golden

Boy of his generation. Though he pretended to hate the phrase, Dtmcan knew
that he was secretly proud of the title someone had given him in his teens:
"The boy with hair like the sun." The description could only have been coined
by a visitor from Earth. No Titanian would have thought of it but everyone

agreed that it was completely appropriate. For Karl Helmer was one of those
men upon whom, for their own amusement, the Gods had bestowed the fatal

gift of beauty.

Only years later, and partly thanks to Colin, did Duncan begin to understand
all  the  nuances  of  the  affair.  Soon  after  his  twenty-third  birthday,  the
Makenzies received the last Star Day card that

Calindy ever sent them. ,

"I still don't know if I made a mistake," Colin said ruefully as he fingered the
bright rectangle of paper that had carded its conventional greetings halfway
across the Solar System. "But it seemed a good idea at the time."

"Well, I don't think it did any harm, in the long ran."

Colin looked at him strangely.

"I wonder. Anyway, it certainly didn't turn out as I expected."

"And what did you expect?"

It was sometimes a great advantage, and sometimes downright embarrassing,
to have a father who was also your thirty-year-older identical twin. He knew
all the mistakes you were going to make, because he had made them already.
It  was  impossible  to  conceal  any  secrets  from  him,  because  his  thought
processes  were  virtually  the  same.  In  such  a  situation,  the  only  policy  that
made any sense was complete honesty, as far as that could be achieved by
human beings.

"I'm not quite sure. But the moment I saw Calindy, shining like a nova amid
all that gloom and chaos down in the old mine workings, I wanted to learn
More about her . . . wanted to make her part of my life. You know what I
mean."

Duncan could only nod his head in silent agreement.

"Sheela didn't mind--after all, I'm not a baby-snatcher!

And we both hoped that Calindy would give

you someone to think about besides Karl."

"I was already getting over that, anyway. It was much too frustrating."

Colin chuckled, not unsympathetically.

"So I can imagine. Karl was spreading himself pretty thin. Half of Titan was
in love with him in those days--still is, for that matter. Which is why we must
keep him out of politics. Remind me to tell you about Alcibiades someday."

"Who?"

"Ancient Greek general--too clever and charming for,,hliS own good. Or for

anyone else's?'

appreciate your concern," said Duncan, with only a slight trace of sarcasm.
"But that increased my problems a hundred percent. As she made quite clear,
I was much too young for Calindy, and of course Karl was now interested
only in her. And to make matters worse, they didn't even mind me sharing
their bed--

as long as I didn't get in the way. In fact--"

"Yes?"

Duncan's face darkened. How strange that he had

never thought of this before, yet how obvious it was!

"Didn't mind, hell! They enjoyed having me there, just to tease me! At least
Karl did."

It should have been a shattering revelation, yet somehow it did not hurt as
much  as  he  would  have  expected.  He  must  have  realized  for  a  long  time,
without admitting it to himself, that there was a very definite streak of cruelty
in Karl. Certainly his lovemaking often lacked tenderness and consideration;
there were even times when he had scared Duncan into

something approaching impotence. And to do that to a virile sixteen-year-old
was no mean feat.

"I'm glad you've realized that," said Colin somberly.

"You had to find it out for yourself--you

wouldn't  have  believed  us.  But  whatever  Karl  did,  he  certainly  paid  for  it.
That breakdown was serious.

And, frankly, I don't believe his recovery is as complete as the doctors claim."

This was also a new thought to Duncan, and ho

turned it over in his mind. Karl's breakdown was still a considerable mystery,

which the Helmer family had never discussed with outsiders. The romantics
had  a  simple  explanation:  he  was  heartbroken  over  the  loss  of  Calindy.
Duncan had always found this too hard to accept. Karl was too tough to pine
away like some character in an oldtime melodrama---especially when there
were  at  least  a  thousand  volunteers  waiting  to  console  him.  Yet  it  was
undeniable that the

breakdown had occurred only a few weeks after Mentor had, to everyone's
relief, blasted Earthward.

After that, there had been a complete change in

his  personality;  whenever  Duncan  met  him  in  these  last  few  years,  he  had
seemed almost a stranger.

Physically, he was as beautiful as ever--perhaps even More so, thanks to his
greater  maturity.  And  he  could  still  be  friendly,  though  there  were  sudden
silences when he seemed to retreat into himself fcr no

apparent  reason.  But  real  communication  was  missing;  maybe  it  had  never
been there ....

No, that was unfair and untrue. They had known

many shared moments before Calindy entered  their lives. And one, though
only one, after she had left.

That was still the deepest pain that Duncan had

ever known. He had been inarticulate with grief when they had made their
farewells in the shuttle terminus of Meridian, surrounded by scores of other
parting guests. To its great surprise, Titan had suddenly discovered that it was
going to miss its young visitors;

nearly every one of them was surrounded by a tearful group of local residents.

Duncan's grief was also, to no small extent, compounded with jealousy. He
never discovered how Karl --or Calindy--had managed it, but they flew up in
the  shuttle  together,  and  made  their  final  farewells  on  the  ship.  So  when
Duncan glimpsed Calindy for the last time, when she waved back at him from
the quarantine barrier, Karl was still with her. In that desolating moment, he
did not suppose that he would ever see her again.

When Karl returned on the last shuttle flight, five hours later, he was drawn
and pale, and had lost all 50

his usual vivacity. Without a word, he had handed Duncan a small package,
wrapped in brightly colored paper, and beating the inscription LOVE F}tOM

CALINDY.

Duncan had opened it with trembling fingers; a

bubble stereo was inside. It was a long time before he was able to see, through
the mist of tears, the image it contained.

Much later that same day, as they clung together in mutual misery, an obvious
question had suddenly

occurred to Duncan.

"What did she give you, Karl?" he had asked.

There was a sudden pause in the other's breathing, and he felt Karl's body
tense  slightly  and  draw  away  from  him.  It  was  an  almost  imperceptible
gesture; probably Karl was not even aware of it.

When he answered, his voice was strained and curiously defensive.

"It's---it's a secret. Nothing important; perhaps one day I'll tell you."

Even then, Duncan knew that he never would; and

somehow  he  already  realized  that  this  was  the  last  night  they  would  ever
spend together.

WORLD'S END

Ground Effect Vehicles were very attractive

in a low-gravity, dense-atmosphere environment,

but  they  did  tend  to  rearrange  the  landscape,  especially  when  it  consisted
largely of fluffy snow. That

was  only  a  problem,  however,  to  anyone  following  in  the  rear.  When  it
reached  its  normal  cruising  speed  of  two  hundred  kilometers  an  hour,  the
hoversled left its private blizzard behind it, and the view ahead was excellent.

But it was not cruising at two hundred ldicks; it 51

was flat out at three, and Duncan was beginning to wish he had stayed home.
It would be very stupid if he broke his neck, on a mission where his presence
was quite unnecessary, only two days before he was due to leave for Earth.

Yet there was no real danger. They were moving

over  smooth,  flat  ammonia  snow,  on  a  terrain  known  to  be  free  from
crevasses. Top speed was safe, and it was fully justified. This was too good an
opportunity  to  miss,  and  he  had  waited  for  it  for  years.  No  one  had  ever
observed  a  waxworm  in  the  active  phase,  and  this  one  was  only  eighty
kilometers from Oasis.

The  seismographs  had  spotted  its  characteristic  signature,  and  the
environment computer had given the

alert. The hoversled had been through the airlock within ten minutes. ,

Now  it  was  approaching  the  lower  slopes  of  Mount  Shackelton,  the  well-
behaved little volcano which, after much careful thought, the original settlers
had  decided  to  accept  as  a  neighbor.  Waxworms  were  almost  always
associated with volcanoes, and some were

festooned with them--"like an explosion in a spaghetti factory," as one early
explorer  had  put  it.  No  wonder  that  their  discovery  had  caused  much
excitement; from the air they looked very much like the

protective tunnels built by termites and other social insects on Earth.

To the bitter disappointment of the exobiologists, they had turned out to be a
purely natural phenomenon-the equivalent, at a much lower temperature,

of terrestrial lava tubes. The head of a waxworm moved, judging from the
seismic  records,  at  up  to  fifty  kilometers  an  hour,  preferring  slopes  of  not
More  than  ten  degrees.  They  had  even  been  known  to  go  uphill  for  short
distances, when the driving pressure was sufficiently high. Once the core of
hot  petrochemicals  had  passed  along,  what  remained  was  a  hollow  tube  as

much as five meters in diameter. Waxworms were among Titan's More benign
manifestations;  not  only  were  they  a  valuable  source  of  raw  materials,  but
they could be readily adapted for storage space and even temporary surface
housing--if one could get used to the rich orchestration of alliphatic smells.

The  hoversled  had  another  reason  for  speed;  it  was  the  season  of  eclipses.
Twice  every  Saturnian  year,  around  the  equinoxes,  the  sun  would  vanish
behind the invisible bulk of the planet for up to six hours at a time. There
would be no slow waning of light, as on Earth; with shocking abruptness, the
monstrous

shadow of Saturn would sweep across Titan, bringing sudden and unexpected
night to any traveler who had been foolish enough not to check his calendar.

Today's  eclipse  was  due  in  just  over  an  hour,  which,  unless  they  ran  into
obstacles, would give ample time to reach the waxworm. The sled was now
driving  down  a  narrow  valley  flanked  by  beautiful  ammonia  cliffs,  tinted
every possible shade of blue from the palest sapphire to deep indigo. Titan
had been called the most colorful world in the Solar System--not excluding
Earth; if the sunlight had been More powerful, it would have been positively
'garish. Although reds and oranges predominated, every part of the spectrum
was  available  somewhere,  though  seldom  for  long  in  the  same  place.  The
methane storms and ammonia rains were continually sculpting the landscape.

"Hello, Sled Three," said Oasis Control suddenly.

"You'll be out in the open again in five kilometers--less than two minutes at
your present speed. Then

there's  a  ten-kilometer  slope  up  to  the  Amundsen  Glacier.  From  there,  you
should be able to see the worm. But I think you're too late-it's almost reached
World's End."

"Damn,"  said  the  geologist  who  had  been  handling  the  sled  with  such
effortless kill. "I was afraid of that.

Something tells me I'm never going to catch a worm on the run."

He cut the speed abruptly as a flurry of snow reduced visibility almost to zero,
and for a few minutes they were navigating on radar alone through a shining

white  mist.  A  film  of  sticky  hydrocarbon  slush  started  to  build  up  on  the
forward windows, and would soon have covered them completely if the driver
had not taken remedial action. A high-pitched whine filled the cabin as the
sheets of tough plastic started to oscillate at near ultrasonic frequencies, and a
fascinating pat53

tern of standing waves appeared before the obscuring layer was flicked away.

Then  they  were  through  the  little  storm,  and  the  jet-black  wall  of  the
Amundsen Glacier was visible on the horizon. In a few centuries that creeping
mountain would reach Oasis, and it would be necessary to do sometting about
it. During the years of summer, the viscosity of the carbon-impregnated oils
and waxes became low enough for the glacier to advance at the breath-taking
speed  of  several  centimeters  an  hour,  but  during  the  long  winter  it  was  as
motionless as rock.

Ages  ago,  local  heating  had  melted  part  of  the  gla  cier  and  formed  Lake
Tuonela, almost as Stygian black as its parent but decorated by great whorls
and loops where lighter material had been caught in patterns of

.'i

turbulence, now frozen for eternity. Everyone who saw the phenomenon from
the air for the first time thought he was being original when he exclaimed:

"Why,  it  looks  exactly  like  a  cup  of  coffee,  just  after  you've  stirred  in  the
cream!"

As the sled raced over the lake, the pattern flick ered past in a few minutes,
too close for its swirls to be properly observed. Then there was another long
slope,  dotted  with  large  boulders  which  could  be  avoided  only  by  the  full
thrust of the underjets. This cut speed to less than a hundred klicks, and the
sled  labored  up  toward  the  crest  in  zigs  and  zags,  the  driver  cursing  and
looking ever}, few seconds at his watch.

"There it is!" Duncan shouted.

Only a few kilometers away, coming out of the mist that always enveloped
the flanks of Mount Shackelton, was a thin white line, like a piece of rope laid
across the landscape. It stretched away downhill until it dis appeared over the
horizon, and the driver swung the sled around to follow its track. But Duncan

ah'eady  knew  that  they  were  too  late  to  achieve  their  main  objective;  they
were much too close to World's End.

Minutes  later,  they  were  there,  and  the  sled  came  to  a  stop  at  a  respectful
distance.

"That's as close as I'm getting," said the driver. "I wouldn't like a gust to catch
us when we're skirting the edge. Who wants to go out? We still have thirty
minutes of light."

"What's the temperature?" someone asked.

"Warm. Only fifty below. Single-layer suits will do."

It was the first time that Duncan had been out in the open for months, but
there were some skills that nobody who lived on Titan ever allowed himsel{
to forget. He checked the oxygen pressure, the reserve tank, the radio, the fit
of the neck seal--all those little details upon which his hopes of a peaceful old
age depended.

The fact that he would be within a hundred

meters of safety, and surrounded by other men who could come to his aid in a
moment, did not affect his thoroughness in the least.

Real  spacers  sometimes  underestimated  Titan,  with  disastrous  results.  It
seemed altogether too easy to move around on a world where a pressure suit
was  unnecessary  and  the  whole  body  could  be  exposed  to  the  surrounding
atmosphere.  Nor  was  there  any  need  to  worry  .about  freezing,  even  in  the
Titanian night. As long as the thermosuit retained its integrity, the body's own
hundred  and  fifty  watts  of  heat  could  maintain  a  comfortable  temperature
indefinitely.

These facts could induce a sense of false security.

A torn suit--which would be immediately noticed and repaired in a vacuum
environment--might be ignored here as a minor discomfort until it was too
late,  and  toes  and  fingers  were  quietly  dropping  off  through  frostbite.  And
although it seemed incredible that anyone could ignore an oxygen warning, or
be careless

enough  to  go  beyond  his  point  of  no  return,,  it  had  happened.  Ammonia
poisoning is not the nicest way to die. :

Duncan did not let these facts oppress him, but they were always there at the
back of his mind. As he walked toward the worm, his feet crunching through
a thin crust like congealed candle grease, he kept automatically checking the
positions of his nearest companions, in case they needed him--or he needed
them.

The  cylindrical  wall  of  the  worm  now  loomed  above  him,  ghostly  white,
textured  with  little  scales  or  platelets  whichwere  slowly  peeling  off  and
falling to the

ground. Duncan removed a mitten and laid his bare hand on the tube. It was
slightly warm and there was a gentle vibration; the core of hot liquid was still
puls- 55

ing within, like blood through a giant artery. But the worm itself, controlled
by  the  interacting  forces  of  surface  tension  and  gravity,  had  committed
suicide.

While the others busied themselves with their

measurements, photographs, and samples, Duncan

walked to World's End. It was not his first visit to that famous and spectacular
view, but the impact had not diminished.

Almost a.t his feet, the ground fell away vertically for More than a thousand
meters. Down the face of the cliff, the decapitated worm was slowly dripping
stalactites of wax. From time to time an oily globule would break off and fall
slowly toward the cloud layer far below. Duncan knew that the ground itself
was another kilometer beneath that, but the sea of clouds

that  stretched  out  to  the  horizon  had  never  broken  since  men  had  first
observed it.

Yet overhead, the weather was remarkably clear.

Apart from a little ethylene cirrus, nothing obscur.d the sky, and the sun was
as  sharp  and  bright  as  Duncan  had  ever  seen  it.  He  could  even  make  out,
thirty kilometers to the north, the unmistakable cone of Mount Shackelton,

with its perpetual streamer of smoke.

A million kilometers away, the invisible bulk of Saturn was edging toward the
brilliant  star  that  flooded  this  strange  landscape  with  a  light  ten  thousand
times brighter than Earth's full Moon. Duncan stepped back a few paces from
the brink, but not so far that he could no longer watch the clouds below; he
hoped'  he  would  be  able  to  observe  the  shadow  of  the  eclipse  as  it  came
racing toward him.

The light was going--going--gone. He never saw

the onrushing shadow; it seemed that night fell instantly upon all the world.

He looked up toward the vanished sun, hoping to

catch a glimpse of the fabled corona. But there was only a shrinking glow,
revealing  for  a  few  seconds  the  curved  edge  of  Saturn  as  the  giant  world
swept inexorably across the sky. Beyond that was a faint and

distant star, which in another moment would also be engulfed.

"Eclipse will last twelve minutes," said the hover-sled driver. "If any of you
want to stay outside, keep away from the edge. You can easily get disoriented
in the darkness."

Duncan scarcely heard him. Something had caught

at his throat, almost as if a whiff of the surrounding ammonia had invaded his
suit.

He could not take his gaze off that faint little star, during the seconds before
Saturn wiped it from the sky. He continued to stare long after it was gone,
with all its promise of warmth and wonder, and the storieql centuries of its
civilization.

For the first time in his life, Duncan Makenzie had seen the planet Earth with
his own unaided eyes.

Part I1

I

SIRIUS

After three hundred years of spaceships

that were mostly fuel tanks, Sirius was not quite be-lievabie.

She seemed to have far too many windows,

and there were entrance hatches in most improbable places, some of them still
gaping open as cargo was loaded. At least she was taking on some hydrogen,
thought Duncan sourly; it would be adding insult to economic injury if she
made the round trip on a single fueling. She was capable of doing this, it was
minored, though at the cost of doubling her transit time.

It was also hard to believe that this stubby cylinder, with the smooth mirror-
bright  ring  of  the  radiation  baffle  surrounding  the  drive  unit  like  a  huge
sunshade, was one of the fastest objects ever built by man. Only the nterstellar
probes,  now  far  out  into  the  abyss  on  their  centuries-long  journeys,  could
exceed her theoretical maximum--almost one percent of the velocity

of light. She would never achieve even half this speed, because she had to
carry enough propellent to slow down and rendezvous with her destination.
Nevertheless, she could make the voyage from Saturn to Earth

in  twenty  days,  despite  a  minor  detour  to  avoid  the  hazards--largely
psychological--of the asteroid belt.

The forty-minute flight from surface to parking orbit was not Duncan's first
experience of space; he had made several brief trips to neighboring moons,
aboard  this  same  shuttle.  The  Titanian  passenger  fleet  consisted  of  exactly
five vessels, and as none possessed

the  expensive  luxury  of  centrifugal  gravity,  all  safety  belts  were  secured
throughout the voyage. Any passenger who wished to sample the joys and
hazards of

weightlessness  would  have  just  under  two  hours  to  experience  it  aboard

Sirius, before the drive started to

operate. Although Duncan had always felt completely at ease in free falt he
let  the  stewards  float  him,  an  inert  and  unresisting  package,  through  the
airlock and nto the ship.

It had been rather too much to expect the Centennial Committee to provide a
single cabin--there

were only four on the ship--and Duncan knew that he would have to share a
double. L.3 was a minute cell with two folding bunks, a couple of lockers,
two seats--also folding--and a mirror-vision screen.

There  was  no  window  looking  out  into  space;  this,  the  Welcome  Aboard!
brochure  carefully  explained,  would  create  unacceptable  structural  hazards.
Duncan  did  not  believe  this  for  a  moment,  and  wondered  if  the  designers
feared an attempt by claustrophobic passengers to claw a way out.

And  there  were  no  toilet  facilities--these  were  all  in  an  adjacent  cubicle,
which serviced the four cabins around it. Well, it was only going to be for a
few weeks ....

Duncan's spirits rose somewhat after he had gained enough confidence to start
exploring his little world.

He quickly learned to visualize his location by following the advice printed
on the shipboard maps; it was convenient to think of Sirius as a cylindrical
tower with ten floors. The fifty cabins were divided between the sixth and
seventh  floors.  Immediately  below,  on  the  fifth  level,  was  the  lounge,
recreation and dining area.

The territory above these three floors was forbid'

den  to  passengers.  Going  Upward  the  remaining  levels  were  Life  Support,
Crew Quarters, andforming

a  kind  of  penthouse  with  all-round  visibility--the  Bridge.  In  the  other
direction, the four levels were Galley, Hold, Fuel, and Propulsion. It was a
logical arrangement, but it would take Duncan some time to discover that the
Purser's  Office  was  on  the  kitchen  level,  the  surgery  next  to  the  freight

compartment,  the  gym  in  Life  Support,  and  the  library  tucked  away  in  an
emergency airlock overlapping levels Six and

Seven ....

During the circumnavigation of his new home,

Duncan encountered a dozen other passengers on a 61

similar  voyage  of  exploration,  and  exchanged  the  guarded  greetings
appropriate among strangers who will soon get to know each other perhaps all
too well.

He had already been through the passenger list to see if there was anyone on
board he knew and had found a few familiar Titanian names, but no close
acquaintances.

Sharing cabin L.3, he had discovered, was a

Dr. Louise Chung; but the parting with Marissa still hurt too much for the
"Louise" to arouse More than the faintest flicker of interest.

In any event, as he found when he returned to L.3, Dr. Chung was a bright
little old lady, undoubtedly on the far side of a hundred, who greeted him with
an  absent-minded  courtesy  which,  even  by  the  end  of  the  voyage,  never
seemed to extend to a complete recognition of his existence. She was, he soon
discovered, one of the Solar System's leading mathematical

physicists, and the authority on resonance

phenomena among the satellites of the outer planets.

For half a century she had been trying to explain why the gaps in Saturn's
rings were not exactly where all the best theories demanded.

The  two  hours  ticked  slowly  away,  finally  seeming  to  move  with  a  rush
toward the expected announcement:

"This is Captain Ivanov speaking at minus five minutes. All crew members
should  be  on  station  or  standby,  all  passengers  should  have  safety  straps
secured.

Initial  acceleration  will  be  one  hundredth  grav-ity-ten  centimeters  second
squared. I repeat, one

hundredth  gravity.  This  will  be  maintained  for  ten  minutes  while  the
propulsion system undergoes routine checks."

And suppose it doesn't pass those checks? Duncan asked himself. Do even the
mathematicians know

what would happen if the Asymptotic Drive started to malfunction? This line
of thought was not very profitable, and he hastily abandoned it.

"Minus four minutes. Stewards check all passengers secured."

Now that instruction could not possibly be obeyed.

There were three hundred twenty-five passengers, half of them in their cabins
and  the  other  half  in  the  two  lounges,  and  there  was  no  way  in  which  the
dozen 62

harassed stewards could see that all their charges were behaving. They had
made  one  round  of  the  ship  at  minus  thirty  and  minus  ten  minutes,  and
passengers who had cut loose since then had only themselves to blame. And
anyone who could be hurt by a hundredth of a gee, thought Duncan, certainly
deserved it.

Impacts at that acceleration had about the punch of a large wet sponge.

"Minus three minutes. All systems normal. Passengers in Lounge B will see
Saturn rising."

Duncan permitted himself a slight glow of self-satisfaction.

This was precisely why, after checking

with one of the stewards, he was now in Lounge B.

As Titan always kept the same face turned toward its primary, the spectacle of
the great globe climbing above the horizon was one that could never be seen
from the surface, even if the almost perpetual overcast of hydrocarbon clouds
had permitted.

That blanket of clouds now lay a thousand kilometers below, hiding the world
that it protected from

the chill of space. And then suddenly--unexpectedly, even though he had been
waiting for it--Saturn was rising like a golden ghost.

In all the known universe, there was nothing to

compare with the wonder he was seeing now. A hundred times the size of the
puny Moon that floated in

the skies of Earth, the flattened yellow globe looked like an object lesson in
planetary  meteorology.  Its  knotted  bands  of  cloud  could  change  their
appearance  almost  every  hour,  while  thousands  of  kilometers  down  in  the
hydrogen-methine  atmosphere,  eruptions  whose  cause  was  still  unknown
would lift bubbles larger than terrestrial continents up from the hidden core.
They would expand and burst as they reached the limits of the atmosphere,
and in minutes Saturn's furious ten-hour spin would have smeared them out
into long colored ribbons, stretching halfway round the planet.

Somewhere down there in that inferno, Duncan reminded himself with awe,
Captain Kleinman had died

seventy years ago, and so had part of Grandma Ellen.

In all that time, no one had attempted to return. Saturn still represented one of
the largest pieces of un63

finished business in the Solar System--next, perhaps, to the smoldering hell of
Venus.

The rings themselves were still so inconspicuous that it was easy to overlook
them. By a cosmic irony, all the inner satellites lay in almost the same plane
as the delicate, wafer-thin structure that made Saturn unique. Edge on, as they
were now, the rings were visible only as hairlines of light jutting out on either
side of the planet, yet they threw a broad, dusky band of shadow along the
equator.

In a few hours, as Sirius rose above the orbital plane of Titan, the rings would
open up in their full glory.

And that alone, thought Duncan, would be enough to justify this voyage. -

"Minus

one minute..."

He had never even heard the two-minute mark; the great world rising out of
the  horizon  clouds  must  have  held  him  hypnotized.  In  sixty  seconds,  the
automatic  sequencer  in  the  heart  of  the  drive  unit  would  initiate  its  final
mysteries.  Forces  which  only  a  handful  of  living  men  could  envisage,  and
none could truly understand, would awaken in their fury, tear Sirius from the
grip of Saturn, and hurl her sunward toward the distant goal of Earth.

"... ten seconds.., five seconds.., ignition!"

How strange that a word that had been technologically obsolete for at least
two hundred years should

have  survived  in  the  jargon  of  astronautics!  Duncan  barely  had  time  to
formulate this thought when he felt the onset of thrust. From exactly zero his
weight leaped up to less than a kilogram. It was barely enough to dent the
cushion above which he had been floating, and was detectable chiefly by the
slackening tension of his waist belt.

Other effects were scarcely More dramatic. There was a distinct change in the
timbre  of  the  indefinable  noises  which  never  cease  on  board  a  spacecraft
while its mechanical hearts are operating; and it seemed to Duncan that, far
away, he could hear a faint hissing.

But he was not even sure of that.

And  then,  a  thousand  kilometers  below,  he  saw  the  unmistakable  evidence
that  Sirius  was  indeed  beak-ing  away  from  her  orbit.  The  ship  had  been
driving

into night on its final circuit of Titan, and the wan sunlight had been swiftly
fading on the sea of clouds far below. But now a second dawn had come in a

wide swathe ac[oss the face of the world he was soon to leave. For a hundred
kilometers behind the accelerating ship, a column of incandescent plasma was

splashing  untold  quintillions  of  candlepower  out  into  space  and  across  the

carmine cloudscape of Titan. Sirius was falling sunward in greater glory than
the sun itself.

"Ten minutes after ignition. All drive checks complete.

We will now be increasing thrust to our cruise

level of point two gravities-two hundred centimeters second squared."

And  now,  for  the  first  time,  Sirius  was  showing  what  she  could  do.  In  a
smooth  surge  of  power,  thrust  and  weight  climbed  twenty-fold  and  held
steady. The light on the clouds below was now so strong that it hurt the eye.
Duncan even glanced at the still-rising disc of Saturn to see if it too showed
any sign of this fierce new sun. He could now hear, faint but unmistakable,
the steady whistling roar that would be the

background  to  all  life  aboard  the  slip  until  the  voyage  ended.  It  must,  he
thought, be pure coincidence

that the awesome voice of the Asymptotic Drive

sounded so much like that of the old chemical rockets that first gave men the
freedom of space. The plasma hurtling from the ship's reactor was moving a
thousand times More swiftly than the exhaust gases of

any rocket, even a nuclear one; and how it created that apparently familiar
noise  was  a  puzzle  that  would  not  be  solved  by  any  naive  mechanical
intuition.

"We  are  now  on  cruise  mode  at  one-fifth  gee.  Passengers  may  unstrap
themselves and move about

freely--but please use caution until you are completely adapted."

That won't take me very long, thought Duncan as

he  unbuckled  himself;  the  ship's  acceleration  gave  him  his  normal,  Titan
weight. Any residents of the Moon would also feel completely at home here,
while Martians and Terrans would have a delightful sense of buoyancy.

The lights in the lounge, which had been dimmed

almost  to  extinction  for  better  viewing  of  the  spectacle  outside,  slowly
brightened  to  normal.  The  few  first-magnitude  stars  that  had  been  visible
disappeared at

once, and the gibbous globe of Saturn became

bleached  and  pale,  losing  all  its  colors.  Duncan  could  restore  the  scene  by
drawing the black curtains

around  the  observation  alcove,  but  his  eyes  would  take  several  minutes  to
readapt. He was wondering whether to make the effort when the decision was
made for him.

There was a musical "Ding-dong-ding," and a new voice, which sounded as if
it came from a social stratum several degrees above the Captain's, announced

languidly: "This is the Chief Steward. Will passengers kindly note that First
Seating for lunch is at twelve hundred, Second Seating at thirteen hundred,
Last Seating at fourteen hundred. Please do not attempt to make any changes
without  consulting  me.  Thank  you."  A  less  peremptory  "Dong-ding-dong"
signaled end of message.

Looking at the marvels of the universe made you

hungry, Duncan instantly discovered. It was already 1150, and he was glad
that he was in the First Seating.

He wondered how many starving passengers

were now converging upon the Chief Steward, in

search of an earlier time slot.

Enjoying the sensation of man-made weight which, barring accidents, would
remain  constant  until  the  moment  of  mid-voyage,  Duncan  went  to  join  the
rapidly lengthening line at the cafeteria.

Already,  his  first  thirty  years  of  life  on  Titan  seemed  to  belong  to  another
existence.

LAST WORDS

or one moment More, the achingly familial

image  remained  frozen  on  the  screen.  Behind  Marissa  and  the  children,
Duncan could see the two armchairs of the living room, the photograph of
Grandfather  (as  usual,  slightly  askew),  the  cover  of  the  food&istribution
hatch, the door to the main bedroom, the

bookcase with the few but priceless treasures that had survived two centuries
of interplanetary wandering

.... This was his universe. It held everything he loved, nd now he was leaving
it. Already, it lay in his past.

It lay only three seconds away, yet that was

enough. He had traveled a mere million kilometers in less than half a day; but
the sense of separation was already almost complete. It was intolerable to wait
six seconds for every reaction and every answer.

By  the  time  a  reply  came,  he  had  forgotten  the.  original  question  and  had
started to say something else.

And so the attempted conversation had quickly degenerated into a series of
stops and starts, while he

and Marissa had stared at each other in dumb misery, each waiting for the
other to speak

He

was glad

that

the ordeal was over.

The

experience brought home to him, as nothing else

had yet done, the sheer immensity of space. The Solar System, he began to
suspect, was not designed for the convenience of Man, and that presumptuous
creature's attempts to use it for his own advantage would

often be foiled by laws beyond his control. All his life, Duncan had assumed
without question that he could speak to friends or family instantly, wherever
he might be. Yet now before he had even passed

Saturn's outer moons!--that power had been

taken from him. For the next twenty days, he would share a lonely, isolated
bubble of humanity, able to interact with his fellow passengers, but cut off
from all real contact with the rest of mankind.

His self-pity lasted only a few moments. There was also an exhilaration--even
a freedom--in this sense of isolation, and in the knowledge that he was setting
forth on one of the longest and swiftest voyages that any man could make.
Travel to the outer planets

was  routine  and  uneventful--but  it  was  also  rare,  and  only  a  very  small
fraction of the human race would ever experience it. Duncan remembered a
favorite Terran phrase of Malcolm's, usually employed in a different context,
but sound advice for every occasion:

"When it's inevitable, relax and enjoy it." He would do his best to enjoy this
voyage.

Yet Duncan was exhausted when he finally clirnbed into his bunk at the end
of his first day in space. The strain of innumerable farewells, not only to his
family but to countless friends, had left him emotionally drained. On top of
this, there were all the nagging worries of departure: What had he forgotten to
do?

What vital necessities had he failed to pack? Had all his baggage been safely
loaded and stowed? What

essential good-byes had he overlooked? It was useless worrying about these
matters now that he was speeding away from home at a velocity increasing by

twenty-five thousand kilometers an hour, every hour, yet he could not help
doing so. Tired though he was, his hyperactive brain would not let him sleep.

It takes real genius to make a bed that can be

uncomfortable at a fifth of a gravity, and luckily the designers of Sirius had
not accepted this challenging assignment. After thirty minutes or so, Duncan
began to relax and to get his racing thoughts in order.

He prided himself on being able to sleep without artificial aids, and it looked
as if he would be able to

dispense with electronarcosis after all. That was, of course, supposed to be
completely harmless, but he never felt prorerly awake the next day.

You're falling asleep, he told himself. You won't know anything More until it's
time for breakfast. All your dreams are going to be happy ones ....

A sound like a small volcano clearing its throat undid the good work of the
last ten minutes. He

was instantly wide awake, wondering what disaster had befallen Sirius. Not
until several anxious seconds had passed did he realize that some antisocial
shipmate had found it necessary to visit the adjacent toilet.

Cursing, he tried to recapture the broken mood and to return to the threshold
of sleep. But it was useless; the myriad voices of the ship had started to

clamor  for  his  attention.  He  seemed  to  have  lost  control  of  the  analytical
portion  of  his  brain,  and  it  was  busy  classifying  all  the  noises  from  the
surrounding universe.

It had been hours since he had really noticed the far-off, ghostly whistling of
the drive. Every second Sirius was ejecting a hundred grams of hydrogen at a
third  of  the  velocity  of  light--a  trifling  loss  of  mass,  yet  it  represented
meaningless millions of gigawatts.

During the first few centuries of the Industrial Revolution, all the factories of
Earth could not have

matched the power that was now driving him sunward.

That incongruously faint and feeble scream was

not  really  disturbing,  but  it  was  overlaid  with  all  sorts  of  other  peculiar
sounds. What could possibly cause the "Buzz... click, click.., buzz," the soft
"thump

·  .  .  thump..  ·  thump,"  the  "gurgle,  hissssss,"  and  the  intermittent  "whee-
wheee-whee" which was the most maddening of all?

Duncan  rolled  over  and  tried  to  bury  his  head  in  the  pillows.  It  made  no
difference, except that the higher-pitched sounds got filtered out and the lower
frequencies were enhanced. He also became More

aware of the steady pulsation of the bed itself, at just about the ten cycles per
second nicely calculated to produce epileptic fits.

Hello, that was something new. It was a kind of

dispirited "ker-plunk, ker-plunk, ker-plunk" that might have been produced by
an ancient internal

combustion engine in the last stages of decrepitude.

Somehow, Duncan seriously doubted that i.c. engines, old or new, were to be
found aboard Sirius.

He rolled over on the other side--and then became conscious of the slightly
cold airstream from the ventilator hitting him on his left cheek. Perhaps if he
ignored  it,  the  sensation  would  sink  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness.
However, the very effort of pretending it wasn't there focused attention upon
the

annoyance.

On  the  other  side  of  the  thin  partition,  the  ship's  plumbing  once  again
advertised its presence with a series of soft thumps. There was an air bubble
somewhere in the system, and Duncan knew, with a

deadly certainty, that all the engineering skills aboard Sirius would be unable
to exorcise it before the end of the voyage.

And what was that? It was a rasping, whistling

sound,  so  irregular  that  no  wellradjusted  mechanism  could  possibly  have
produced it. As Duncan lay in the darkness, racking his brains to think of an
explanation, his annoyance slowly grew to alarm. Should he call the steward
and report that something had gone wrong?

He was still trying to make up his mind when a

sudden explosive change in pitch and intensity left him in no doubt as to the
sound's origin. Groaning and cursing his luck, Duncan resigned himself to a
sleepless night.

Dr. Chung snored ....

Someone was gently shaking him. He mumbled

"Go away," then swam groggily upward from qbe depths of slumber.

"If you don't hurry," said Dr. Chung, "you're going to miss breakfast."

TH!: LONGEST VOYAGE

I

I|his'I' is the Captain speaking. We will be

performing  a  final  out-of-ecliptic  velocity  trim  dur-ng  the  next  fifteen
minutes. This will be your last opportunity for a good view of Saturn, and we
are  orientating  the  ship  so  that  it  will  be  visible  through  the  B  Lounge
windows. Thank you."

Thank  you,  thought  Duncan,  though  he  was  a  little  less  grateful  when  he
reached B Lounge. This time, too many other passengers had been tipped off
by the stewards. Nevertheless, he managed to obtain a good vantage point,
even though he had to stand.

Though the journey had scarcely begun, Saturn already seemed far away. The
planet had dwindled to

a quarter of its accustomed size; it was now only twice as large as the Moon
would appear from Earth.

Yet though it had shrunk in size, it had gained in impressiveness. Sirius bad
risen several degrees out of the planet's equatorial plane, and now at last he
could  see  the  rings  in  all  their  glory.  Thin,  concentric  silver  haloes,  they
looked so artificial that it was almost impossible to believe that they were not
the

work of some cosmic craftsman whose raw materials were worlds. Although
at rst sight they appeared to be solid, when he looked More carefully Duncan

could  see  the  planet  glimmering  through  them,  its  yellow  light  contrasting
strangely  witlx  their  immaculate,  snowy  whiteness.  A  hundred  thousand
kilometers

below, the shadow of the rings lay in a dusky band along the equator; it could
easily have been taken for an unusually dark cloud belt, rather than something
whose cause lay far out in space.

The two main divisions of the rings were apparent at the most casual glance,
but  a  More  careful  inspection  revealed  at  least  a  dozen  fainter  boundaries
where there were abrupt changes in brightness between ad71

jacent  sections.  Ever  since  the  rings  had  been  discovered,  back  in  the
seventeenth century, mathematicians

like Dr. Chung had been trying to account for their structure. It had long been
known that the attractions of Saturn's many moons segregated the billions

of orbiting particles into separate bands, but the details of the process were
still unclear.

There  was  also  a  certain  amount  of  variation  within  the  individual  bands
themselves. The outermost

ring, for example, showed a distinct mottling or headiness, and a tiny clot of
light  was  clearly  visible  near  its  eastern  extremity.  Was  this,  Duncan
wondered, a moon about to be born---or the last remnants

of one that had been destroyed?

Rather diffidently, he put the question to Dr.

Chung.

"Both possibilities have been considered," she said.

"My studies indicate the former. That condensation may, with luck, become
another satellite in a few thousand years."

"I can't agree, Doctor," interjected another passenger.

"It's  merely  a  statistical  fluctuation  in  the  particle  density.  They're  quite
common, and seldom last More than a few years."

"The smaller ones--yes. But this is too intense, and too near the edge of the
Bring."

"But Vanderplas' analysis of the Janus problem..."

At that moment, it became rather like the shoot\.

out in an oldtime Western movie. The two sciemsts reached simultaneously
for their hip computers and then retreated, muttering equations, to the back of
the lounge. Thereafter, they completely ignored the real Saturn they had come
so far to study--and which, in all probability, they would never see again.

"Captain speaking. We have concluded our velocity trim and are reorientating
the ship into the plane of the ecliptic. I hope you had a good view--Saturn will
be a long way off next time you see it."

There was no perceptible sense of motion, but the great ringed globe began to
creep stowly down the observation window. The tassengers in front craned 72

forward to follow it, and there was a chorus of disappointed

"Ohs" as it finally sank from view below the wide skirting that surrounded the
lower part of the ship. That band of metal had one purpose only--to block any
radiation from the jet that might stray forward.

Even a momentary glimpse of that intolerable

glare, bright as a supernova at the moment of detonation, could cause total
blindness; a few seconds' exposure would be lethal.

Sirius was now aimed almost directly at the sun, as she accelerated toward the
inner planets. While the drive was on, there could be no rear-viewing. Duncan
knew that when he next saw Saturn with his unaided eyes, it would be merely
a not-very-distinguished star.

A  day  later,  moving  at  three  hundred  kilometers  a  second,  the  ship  passed
another milestone. She had, of course, ecaped from the planet's gravitational
field  hours  earlier;  neither  Saturn--nor,  for  that  matter,  the  Sun--could  ever
recapture her. T,le frontier that Sirius was crossing now was a purely arbitrary
one: the orbit of the outermost moon.

Mnemosyne, only fifteen kilometers in diameter,

could  claim  two  modest  records.  It  had  the  longest  period  of  any  satellite,
taking no fewer than 1,139

days to orbit Saturn, at an average distance of

twenty-one million kilometers. And it also had the longest day of any body in
the  Solar  System,  its  period  of  rotation  being  an  amazing  1,143  days.
Although it seemed obvious:that these two facts must

be connected, no one had been able to arrive at any plausible explanation of
Mnemosyne's sluggish behavior.

Purely by chance, Sirius passed within fewer than a million kilometers of the
tiny  world.  At  first,  even  under  the  highest  power  Of  the  ship's  telescope,
Mnemosyne was only a minute crescent showing no visible

features at all, but as it swiftly grew to a

half-moon,  patches  of  light  and  shade  merged  which  eventually  resolved
themselves  into  craters.  It  was  typical  of  all  the  denser,  Mercury-type
satellites--as opposed to the inner snowballs like Mimas, Enceladus, 73

and Tethys--but to Duncan it now held a special interest.

It was More to him than the last landmark on

the road to Earth.

Karl  was  there,  and  had  been  for  many  weeks,  with  the  joint  Titan-Terran
Outer Satellite Survey. Indeed, that survey had been in progress as long as
Duncan  could  remember--the  surface  area  of  all  the  moons  added  up  to  a
surprising  number  of  million  square  kilometers--and  the  TTOSS  team  was
doing a thorough job. There had been complaints about the cost,

and the critics had subsided only when promised

that the survey would be so thorough that it would never be necessary to go
back to the outer moons again. Somehow, Duncan doubted that the promise

would be kept.

He watched the pale crescent of Mnemosyne wax

to  full,  simultaneously  dwindling  astern  as  the  ship  dropped  sunward,  and
wondered fleetingly if he

should  send  Karl  a  farewell  greeting.  But  if  he  did,  it  would  only  be
interpreted as a taunt.

It  took  Duncan  several  days  to  adjust  to  the  complicated  schedule  of
shipboard life--a schedule dominated by the fact that the dining room (as the
lounge

adjacent to the cafeteria was grandly called) could seat only one third of the
passengers at a time. There were consequently three sittings for each of the
three main meals--so for nine hours of every day, at least a hundred people
were eating, while two hundred were either thinking about the next meal or
rumbling

about  the  last.  This  made  it  very  difficult  for  the  Purser,  who  doabled  as
Entertainment Officer, to organize any shipboard activities. The fact that most

of the passengers had no wish to be organized did not help him.

Nevertheless, the day was loosely structured by a series of events, at which a
good attendance was guaranteed by sheer boredom. There would be a thirty-
minute newscast from Earth at 0800, with a repeat

at 1000, and updates in the evening at 1900 and

2100. At the beginning of the voyage, the Earth news would be at least an
hour and a half late, but

it would become More and More timely as Sirius apher destination. When she
reached her final

proached

parking orbit, a thousand kilometers above the

Equator, the delay would be effectively zero, and watches could at last be set
by the radio time signals.

Those passengers who did not realize this were liable to get into a hopeless
state of confusion and, even worse, to miss meal sittings.

All types of visual display, including the contents of several million volumes
of fiction and nonfiction, as well as most of the musical treasures of mankind,
were  available  in  the  tiny  library;  at  a  squeeze,  it  could  hold  ten  people.
However, there were two movie screenings every evening in the main lounge,
selection being made--if the Purser could be believed

--in the approved democratic manner by public ballot.

Almost all the great film classics were available, right back to the beginning
of the twentieth century.

For the first time in his life, Duncan saw Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times,
much of the Disney canon, Olivier's Hamlet, Ray's Pather Panchali, Kubrick's
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  Zymanowski's  Moby  Dick,  and  many  other  old
masterpieces that had not even been names to him. But by far the greatest
popular success was 1[ This Is Tuesday, This Must Be Mars--a selection from
the countless space-travel movies made in the days before space flight was
actually achieved. This invariably reduced the audience to helpless hysterics,
and it was hard to believe that it had once been banned for in-flight screening
because  some  unimaginative  bureaucrat  feared  that  its  disasters--such  as
accidentally arriving at the wrong planetJ

might alarm nervous passengers. In fact, it had just the opposite effect; they
laughed too much to worry.

The big event of the day, however, was the lottery on the ship's run, a simple
but ingenious device for redistributing wealth among the passengers. All that
one had to do was to guess how far Sirius had traveled along her heliocentric
trajectory during the previous twenty-four hours; any number of guesses was

permitted, at the cost of one solar each.

At noon, the Captain announced the correct result.

The suspense was terrific, as he read out the fioxres very slowly: "Today's run
has been two--two---seven

--five--nine--zero-- six-- four--point mthree kilometers."

(Cheers and moans.) Since everyone knew

the  ship's  position  and  acceleration,  it  required  very  little  mathematics  to
calculate  the  first  four  or  five  figures,  but  beyond  that  the  digits  were
completely  arbitrary,  so  winning  was  a  matter  of  luck.  Although  it  was
rumored that navigating officers had been bribed to trim the last few decimal
places by minute adjustments to the thrust, no one had ever been ablo to prove
it.

Another  wealth-distributor  was  a  noisy  entertainment  called  "Bingo,"
apparently  the  main  surviving  relic  of  a  once  flourishing  religious  order.
Duncan  attended  one  session,  then  decided  that  there  were  better  ways  of
wasting  time.  Yet  a  surprising  percentage  of  his  very  talented  and
intellectually superior companions seemed to enjoy this rather mindless ritual,

jumping up and down and shrieking like small children when their numbers
were called ....

They could not be criticized for this; they needed some such relaxation. For
they were the loneliest people in the Solar System; hundreds of millions of
kilometers separated them from the rest of mankind.

Everybody knew this, but no one ever mentioned it.

Yet it would not have taken an astute psychologist to detect countless slightly
unusual reactions--even minor symptoms of stress--in the behavior of Sirius'
passengers and crew.

There was, for example, a tendency to laugh at the feeblest of jokes, and to go
into  positive  convulsions  over  catch  phrases  such  as  "This  is  the  Captain
speaking" or "Dining room closes in fifteen minutes."

Most popular, of all--at least among the men--was

"Any More for Cabin 44." Why the two middle-aged and rather quiet lady
geologists  who  occupied  this  cabin  had  acquired  a  reputation  for  ravening
insatiability was a mystery that Duncan never solved.

Nor was he particularly interested; his heart still.

ached  for  Marissa  and  he  would  not  seek  any  other  consolation  until  he
reached Earth. Moreover, with 76

the somewhat excessive conscientiousness that was typical of the Makenzies,
he was already hard at work by the second day of the voyage.

He had three major projects--one physical and

two intellectual. The first, carried out under the hard, cold eye of the ship's
doctor, was to get himself fit for life at one gravity. The second was to learn
all that he could about Iris new home, so that he would not appear too much
of a country cousin when he

arrived. And the third was to prepare his speech of thanks, or at least to write
a  fairly  detailed  outline,  which  could  be  revised  as  necessary  during  the
course of his stay.

The toughening-up process involved a fifteen-minute session, twice a day, in
the ship's centrifuge or on the "race track." Nobody enjoyed the centrifuge;
not  even  the  best  background  music  could  alleviate  the  boredom  of  being
whirled around in a tiny cabin until legs and arms appeared to be made of
lead. But

the race track was so much fun that it operated right around the clock, and
some enthusiasts even tried to get extra time on it.

Part of its appeal was undoubtedly due to sheer

novelty; who would have expected to find bicycles in space? The track was .9
narrow tunnel, with steeply banked floor, completely encircling the ship, and
rather  like  an  old-time  particle  accelerator---except  that  in  this  case  the
particles themselves provided the acceleration.

Every evening, just before going to bed, Duncan

would enter the tunnel, climb onto one of the four bicycles, and start pedaling
slowly  around  the  sixty  meters  of  track.  His  first  revolution  would  take  a
leisurely half minute; then he would gradually work up to full speed. As he
did so, he would rise higher and higher up the banked wall, until at maximum

speed he was almost at right angles to the floor. At the same time, he would
feel  his  weight  steadily  increase;  the  bicycle's  speedometer  had  been
calibrated

to read in fractions of a gee, so he could tell exactly how well he was doing.
Forty  kilometers  an  hour--ten  times  around  Sirius  every  minute---was  the
equiv-77

The suspense was terrific, as he read out the figures very slowly: "Today's run
has been two--two---seven

--five--nine--zero--six-- four-- point --three kilometers."

(Cheers and moans.) Since everyone knew

the  ship's  position  and  acceleration,  it  required  very  little  mathematics  to
calculate  the  first  four  or  five  figures,  but  beyond  that  the  digits  were
completely  arbitrary,  so  winning  was  a  matter  of  luck.  Although  it  was
rumored that navigating officers had been bribed to trim the last few decimal
places by minute adjustments to the thrust, no one had ever been abl0

to prove it.

Another  wealth-distributor  was  a  noisy  entertainment  called  "Bingo,"
apparently  the  main  surviving  relic  of  a  once  flourishing  religious  order.
Duncan  attended  one  session,  then  decided  that  there  were  better  ways  of
wasting  time.  Yet  a  surprising  percentage  of  his  very  talented  and
intellectually superior companions seemed to enjoy this rather mindless ritual,

jumping up and down and shrieking like small children when their numbers
were called ....

They could not be criticized for this; they needed some such relaxation. For
they were the loneliest people in the Solar System; hundreds of millions of
kilometers separated them from the rest of mankind.

Everybody knew this, but no one ever mentioned it.

Yet it would not have taken an astute psychologist to detect countless slightly
unusual reactions--even minor symptoms of stress--in the behavior of Sirius'
passengers and crew.

There was, for example, a tendency to laugh at the feeblest of jokes, and to go
into  positive  convulsions  over  catch  phrases  such  as  "This  is  the  Captain
speaking" or "Dining room closes in fifteen minutes."

Most popular, of all--at least among the men--was

"Any More for Cabin 44." Why the two middle-aged and rather quiet lady
geologists  who  occupied  this  cabin  had  acquired  a  reputation  for  ravening
insatiability was a mystery that Duncan never solved.

Nor was he particularly interested; his heart still.

ached  for  Marissa  and  he  would  not  seek  any  other  consolation  until  he
reached Earth. Moreover, with 76

the somewhat excessive conscientiousness that v

typical of the Makenzies, he was already hard

work by the second day of the voyage.

He had three major projects--one physical a

two  intellectual.  The  first,  carried  out  under  the  ha  cold  eye  of  the  ship's
doctor, was to get himself for life at one gravity. The second was to learn that
he could about his new home, so that he wol not appear too much of a country
cousin when

arrived. And the third was to prepare his speech thanks, or at least to write a

fairly detailed outli which could be revised as necessary during the cou of his
stay.

The toughening-up process involved a fifteen-min session, twice a day, in the
ship's centrifuge or the "race track." Nobody enjoyed the centrifuge; even the
best background music could alleviate

boredom of being whirled around in a tiny cabin

til legs and arms appeared to be made of lead.

the race track was so much fun that it operated ri around the clock, and some
enthusiasts even tried get extra time on it.

Part of its appeal was undoubtedly due to sh

novelty; who would have expected to find bicycle space? The track was a-
narrow tunnel, with stee banked floor, completely encircling the ship,

rather like an old-time particle accelerator--exc that in this case the particles
themselves provided acceleration.

Every evening, just bef.ore going to bed, Dun

would enter the tunnel, climb onto one of the if bicycles, and start pedaling
slowly around the s meters of track. His first revolution would tak

leisurely half minute; then he would gradually w up to full speed. As he did
so, he would rise hig and higher up the banked wall, until at maxim

speed he was almost at right angles to the floor.

the  same  time,  he  would  feel  his  weight  steadily  crease;  the  bicycle's
speedometer had been calibr to read in fractions of a gee, so he could tell exa.

how well he was doing. Forty kilometers an hou

ten times around Sirius every minute--was the eq 77

alent of one Earth gravity. After several days of practice Duncan was able to
maintain  this  for  ten  minutes  without  too  much  effort.  By  the  end  of  the
voyage,  he  could  tolerate  it  indefinitely--as  he  would  have  to,  when  he

reached Earth.

The race track was at its most exciting when it

contained two or More riders--especially when they were moving at different
speeds.  Though  overtaking  was  strictly  forbidden,  it  was  an  irresistible
challenge, and on this voyage there were no serious casualties.

One of Duncan's most vivid and incongruous

memories of Sirius would be the tinkle of bicycle bells, echoing round and
round a brightly lit circular tunnel whose blurred walls flashed by only a few
centimeters away..: . And the race track also provided

him with a More material souvenir, a pseudomedieval scroll which announced
to  all  who  were  interested  that  I,  DtmCAMAKENZIE,  OF  OASIS  CITY,
TITAN, AM

HEREBY CERTIFIED TO HAVE BICYCLED FROM SATURN

TO EARTH, AT AN AVERAGE VBLOCITY OF 2,176,420 KILOMETERS
AN HOUR.

Duncan's  mental  preparation  for  life  on  Earth  occupied  considerably  More
time, but was not quite so

exhausting. He already had a good knowledge of

Terran  history,  geography,  and  current  affairs,  but  until  now  it  had  been
mostly  theoretical,  because  it  had  little  direct  application  to  him.  Both
astronomically and psychologically, Earth had been a long way

off. Now it was coming closer by millions of kilometers a day.

Even More to the point, he was now surrounded

by  Terrans;  there  were  only  seven  passengers  from  Titan  aboard  Sirius,  so
they were outnumbered fifty to one. Whether he liked it or not, Duncan was
being rapidly brainwashed and molded by another culture.

He found himself using Terran figures of speech, adopting the slightly sing-
song  intonation  now  universal  on  Earth,  and  employing  More  and  More

words

of Chinese origin. All this was to be expected; what he found disturbing was
the  fact  that  his  own  swiftly  receding  world  was  becoming  steadily  More
unreal.

Before the voyage was finished, he suspected th

would have become haifTerran.

He spent much of his time viewing Earth sc

listening  to  famous  political  debates,  and  tryin  understand  what  was
happening in culture anc

arts, so that he would not appear to be a con]

barbarian from the outer darkness. When he wa

sitting at the viddy, he was likely to be fii,

through the pages of a small, dense booklet opl tically entitled Earth in Ten
Days. He was fon trying out bits of new-found information on his

low passengers, to study their reactions and to c on his own understanding.
Sometimes the res[

was a blank stare, sometimes a slightly condes

ing smile. But everyone was very polite to him; a!

while, Duncan realized that there was some tru

the old clich6 that Terrans were never unintentir rude.

Of course, it was absurd to apply a single

to half a billion people---or even to the three hu and fifty on the ship. Yet
Duncan was surpris

find  how  often  his  preconceived  ideas---even  his  udices--were  perfectly

accurate. Most Terrans

have a quite unconscious air of superiority. At

Duncan found it annoying; then he realized thai

eral thousand years of history and culture justif certain pride.

It was still too early for him to answer the

tion, so long debated on all the other worlds

Earth becoming decadent?'' The individuals he

met  aboard  Sirius  showed  no  trace  of  that  effete  sensibility  with  which
Terrans were frequ

charged--but, of course, they were not a fair sa: Anyone who had occasion to
visit the outer reach the Solar System must possess exceptional abili

resources,

He would have to wait until he reached earth I:

he could measure its decadence More precisely.

project might be an interesting one--if his budge his timetable could stand the
strain.

SONGS OF EMPIRE

In a hundred years, thought Duncan, he

could never have managed to arrange this deliberately.

Masterful administration of the unforeseen,

indeed! Colin wo,uld be proud of him ....

It  had  all  begun  quite  accidentally.  When  he  discovered  that  the  Chief
Engineer  bore  the  scarcely  uncommon  name  of  Mackenzie,  it  had  been
natural

enough  to  introduce  himselt[  and  to  compare  family  trees.  A  glance  was
sufficient  to  show  that  any  relationship  was  remote:  Warren  Mackenzie,
Doctor of

Astrotechnology (Propulsion) was a freckled redhead.

It made no difference, for he was pleased to meet Duncan and happy to chat
with hiha. A genuine

friendship had developed, long before Duncan decided to take advantage of it.

"I sometimes feel," Warren lamented, not very seriously,

"that I'm a living clich6. Did you know that there was a time when all ship's
engineers were Scots, and called Macsomethingor-other?"

"I didn't know it. Why not Germans or Russians?

They started the whole thing."

"You're on the wrong wavelength. I'm talking about ships that float on water.
The first powered ones were driven by steam--piston engines, working paddle
wheels--around the beginning of the nineteenth

century.  Now,  the  Industrial  Revolution  started  in  Britain,  and  the  first
practical  steam  engine  was  made  by  a  Scot.  So  when  steamships  began  to
operate  all  over  the  world,  the  Macs  went  with  them.  No  one  else  could
understand such complicated pieces of machinery.''

"Steam engines? Complicated? You must ing ."

"Have you ever looked at one? More to it ttI might think, though it doesn't
take long to

out .... Anyway, while the steamships laste

was only about a hundred years--the Scots ra

I've made a hobby of the period; it has some su

parallels with our time."

"Go on--surprise me."

"Well, those old ships were incredibly slo

aging only about ten klicks, at least for freigh really long journeys, even on
Earth, could tak

Just like space travel."

"I see. In those days, the countries on Eat almost as far apart as the planets."

"Well, some of them. The most perfect an

the old British Commonwealth, the first and la

empire. For almost a hundred years, countl

Canada, India, and Australia relied entirely

ships to link them to Britain; the one-way

could easily take a month or More, and was

once-in-a-lifetime affair. Only the wealthy, o

on  official  business,  could  afford  it.  And--just  day--people  in  the  colonies
couldn I even

the mother country. The psychological isolat

almost complete."

"They had telephones, didn't they?"

"Only for local use, and only a few even tl talking about the beginning of the
twentieth remember. Universal global communication d!

rive until the end of it."

"I feel that the analogy is a little forced," p Duncan. He was intrigued but
unconvinced, a]

willing to listen to Mackenzie's arguments--with no ulterior motive.

"I can give you some More evidence that

better case. Have you heard of Rudyard Kipling

"Yes, though I've never read anything of

was a writer, wasn't he? AngloAmerican-time

between Melville and Hemingway. Engli

almost unknown territory to me. Life's too shot

"True, alas. But I have read Kipling. He

first poet of the machine age, and some peop

he was also the finest short-story write.r of his century.

I couldn't judge that, of course, but he exactly described the period I'm talking
about. 'McAndrew's

Hymn,' for examplean old engineer musing about

the pistons and boilers and crankshafts that drive his ship round the world. Its
technology--not to mention its theology!--has been extinct for three hundred
years; but the spirit behind it is still as valid as ever.

"And he wrote poems and stories about the far places of the empire which
make  them  seem  quite  as  remote  as  the  planets  are  today--and  somegimes
even More exotic! There's a favorite of mine called

'The

Song of the Cities.' I don't understand half the allusions, but the tributes to

Bombay, Singapore, Rangoon,

Sydney, Auckland . . . make me think of Luna,

Mercury, Mars, Titan..."

Mackenzie paused and looked just a little embarrassed.

"I've tried to do something of the same' kind my-self--but don't worry, I won't
inflict my verses on

you."

Duncan made the encouraging noises he knew were

expected. He was quite sure that before the end of the voyage he would be
asked for his criticism--translation, praise---of Mackenzie's literary efforts.

It was a timely reminder of his own responsibilities.

While the voyage was still beginning, he had better start work.

Exactly  ten  minutes,  George  Washlngton  had  di-rected-not  a  second  More.
Even the President MI1

be allowed only fifteen, and all the planets must have equal time. The whole
affair is scheduled to last two and a half hours, from the moment we enter the
Capitol until we leave for the reception at the White

House ....

It still seemed faintly absurd to travel three billion kilometers to make a ten-
minute  Speech,  even  for  an  occasion  as  unique  as  a  five-hundredth
anniversary.

Duncan was not going to waste More than the bare minimum of it on polite
formalities; anyway, as Malcolm had pointed out, the sincerity of a speech of

thanks is often inversely proportional to its length.

For his amusement--and, More important, because

it would help to fix the other participants in his mind

--Duncan had tried to compose a formal opening,

based on the list of guests that Professor Washington had provided. It started
off: "Madame President, Mr.

Vice  President,  Honorable  Chief  Justice,  Honorable  Leader  of  the  Senate,
Honorable  Leader  of  the  House,  Your  Excellencies  the  Ambassadors  for
Luna, Mars, Mercury, Ganymede, and Titan"--at this point he would incline
his  head  slightly  toward  Ambassador  Farrell,  if  he  could  see  him  in  the
crowded gallery--

"distinguished  representatives  from  Albania,  Aus  trand,  Cyprus,  Bohemia,
France, Khmer Palestine, Kalinga, Zimbawe, Eire

"He

calculated that if he

acknowledged

all  the  fifty  or  sixty  regions  that  still  insisted  on  some  form  of  individual
recognition,  a  quarter  of  his  time  would  be  expended  before  he  had  even
begun. This; obviously, was absurd, and he hoped that all the other speakers
would agree. Regardless of protocol, Duncan had decided to opt for dignified
brevity.

"People

of Earth" would cover a lot of ground--to be precise, five times the area of
Ttam an

impressive statistic which Duncan knew by heart. But that would leave out
the  visitors;  what  about  "Friends  from  other  worlds"?  No,  that  was  too
pretentious, since most of them would be complete strangers. Perhaps:

"Madame President, distinguished guests, known and unknown friends from
many worlds . . ." That was better, yet somehow it still didn't seem right.

There was More to thisbusiness, Duncan realized, than met the eye, or the ear.
Plenty of people would be willing to give him advice, but he was determined,

in the good old Makenzie tradition, to see what he could do himself before
calling for help. He had read somewhere that the best way to learn to swim is
by being thrown into deep water. Duncan could not swim

-that  skill  being  singularly  useless  on  Titan-but  he  could  appreciate  the
analogy. His career in Solar politics would start with a spectacular splash, and
before the eyes of millions.

It was not that he was nervous; after all, he had addressed his whole world as
an expert witness during 83

technical  debates  in  the  Assembly.  He  had  acquitted  himself  well  when  he
weighed the complex arguments for and against mining the ammonia glaciers
of Mount Nansen. Even Armand Helmer had congratulated

him,  despite  the  fact  that  they  had  reached  opposing  conclusions.  In  those
debates, affecting the future of Titan, he had had real responsibility, and his
career might have come to an abrupt end if he had made a fool of himself.

His Terran audience might be a thousand times

larger, but it would be very much less critical. Indeed, his listeners would be
friendly unless he committed the unpardonable sin of boring them.

This, however, he-could not yet guarantee, for he still had no idea how he was
going to use the most important ten minutes of lis fife. 15

AT THE NODE

On the seas of Earth, they had called it

"Crossing  the  Line."  Whenever  a  ship  had  passed  from  one  hemisphere  to
another,  there  had  been  lighthearted  ceremonies  and  rituals,  during  which
those

who had never traversed the Equator before were

subjected to ingenious indignities by Father Neptune and his Court.

During the first centuries of space flight, the equivalent transition involved no
physical  changes;  only  the  navigational  computer  knew  when  a  ship  had
ceased to fall toward one planet and was beginning to fall toward another. But

now, with the advent of constant-acceleration  drives, which could maintain
thrust for

the entire duration of a voyage, Midpoint, or "Turnaround,"

had a real physical meaning, and a correspondingly enhanced psychological
impact. After living

and moving for days in an apparent gravitational field, 84

Sirius' passengers would lose all weight for several hours, and could at least
feel that they were really in space.

They could watch the slow rotation of the stars as the ship was swung through
one hundred eighty degrees, and the drive was aimed precisely against its

previous line of thrust, to slowly whittle away the enormous velocity built up
over the preceding ten days.

They  could  savor  the  thought  that  they  were  now  moving  faster  than  any
human beings in historymand

could also contemplate the exciting prospect that if the drive failed to restart,
Sirius  would  ultimately  reach  the  nearest  stars,  in  not  much  More  than  a
thousand years ....

All  these  things  they  could  do;  however,  human  nature  having  certain
invariants, a majority of Sirius' passengers had other possibilities in mind.

It was the only chance most of them would ever

have of experiencing weightlessness long enough to enjoy it. What a crime to
waste  the  opportunity!  No  wonder  that  the  most  popular  item  in  the  ship's
library these last few days had been the Nasa Sutra, an old book and an old
joke, explained so often that it was no longer funny.

Captain Ivanov denied, with a reasonably convino-lng show of indignation,
that the ship's schedule had been designed to pander to the passenger's lower
instincts.

When  the  subject  had  been  raised  at  the  Cap-rain's  table,  the  day  before
Turnaround, he had put

up quite a plausible defense.

"It's the only logical time to shut down the ,Drive,"

he had explained. "Between zero zero and zero four, all the passengers will be
in their cabins, er, sleeping.

So there will be the minimum of disturbance. We couldn't close down during
the day--remember, the  kitchens and the toilets will be out of action while
we're weightless. Don't forget that! We'll remind everyone in the late evening,
but some idiot always gets

overconfident, or drinks too much, and doesn't have enough sense to read the
instructions on those little plastic bags you'll find in your cabins--no thanks,
Steward, I don't feel like soup."

Duncan had been tempted; Marissa was beginning

to fade, and there was no lack of opportunity. He had received unmistakable
signals from several directions, and for groups with all values of n from one
to five. It would not have been easy to make a choice, but Fate had saved him
the trouble.

It was a full week, and Turnaround was only thre days ahead, before he had
felt  confident  enough  of  his  increasing  intimacy  with  Chief  Engineer
Mackenzie to drop some gentle hints. They had not been rejected out of hand,
but Warren obviously wanted time to weigh the possibilities. He gave Duncan
his decision only twelve hours in advance.

"I  won't  pretend  this  might  cost  me  my  job,"  he  said,  "but  it  could  be
embarrassing, to say the least, if it got around. But you are a Makenzie, and a
Special Assistant to the Administrator, and all that. If the worst comes to the
worst, which I hope it won't, we can say your request's official."

"Of  course.  I  understand  completely,  and  I  really  appreciate  what  you're
doing. I won't let you down."

"Now there's the question of timing. If everything checks out smoothly--and
I've  no  reason  to  expect  otherwise--I'll  be  through  in  two  hours  and  can
dismiss my assistants. They'll leave like meteors--they'll all have something

lined up, you can be sure of that --so we'll have the place to ourselves. I'll give
you a call at zero two, or as soon after as possible."

"I hope I'm not interrupting any--ah--personal plans you've made."

"As it happens, no. The novelty's worn off. What are you smiling at?"

"It's just occurred to me," Duncan answered, "that if anyone does meet the
pair of us at two o'clock on the morning of Turnaround, we'll have a perfect
alibi

"

Nevertheless,

he felt a mild sense of guilt as he

drifted

along the corridors behind Warren Mackenzie. The weightless---but far from
sleeping--ship might have been deserted, for there was no occasion now for
anyone to descend below the freight deck on Level Three.

It was not even necessary to pretend that they were heading for an innocent
assignation.

Yet

the guilt was there, and he knew why. He was 86

taking advantage of a friendship for secret purposes of his own, by suggesting
that his interest in the Asymptotic Drive was no More than would be expected

from anyone with a scientific or engineering background.

But perhaps Warren was not as naive as he

seemed; he could hardly be unaware that the Drive posed a threat to the entire
economy of Duncan's society.

He might even be trying to help, in a tactful way.

"You may be disappointed," said Warren as they passed through the bulkhead

floor separating levels Three and Two. "There's not much to see. But what
there  is  is  enough  to  give  some  people  nightmares--which  is  why  we
discourage visitors."

Not the most important reason, thought Duncan.

The Drive was not exactly a secret; there was an immense literature on the
subject, from the most esoteric mathematical papers down to popularizations
so  elementary  that  they  amounted  to  little  More  than:  "You  pull  on  your
bootstraps, and away you go." But it would be fair to say that Earth's Space
Transportation  Authority  was  curiously  evasive  when  it  came  down  to  the
practical details, and only its own personnel were allowed on the minor planet
where the Drive was assembled.

The few photos of Asteroid 4587 were

blurred  telescopic  shots  showing  two  cylindrical  structures,  More  than  a
thousand kilometers long, stretching

out into space on either side of the tiny world, which was an almost invisible
speck between them. It was known that these were the accelerators that

smashed matter together at such velocities that it fused to form the node or
singularity at the heart of the Drive; and this was all that anyone did know,
outside the STA.

Duncan was now floating, a few meters behind his guide, along a corridor
lined with pipes and cable ducts--all the anonymous plumbing any vehicle of
sea, air, or space for the last three hundred years. Only the remarkable number
of handholds, and the profusion of thick padding, revealed that this was the
interior of a ship designed to be independent of gravity.

"D'you see that pipe?" said the engineer. "The little red one?"

"Yes--what about it?"

Duncan  would  certainly  never  have  given  it  a  second  glance;  it  was  only
about as thick as a lead pencil.

"That's the main hydrogen feed, believe it or not.

All of a hundred grams a second. Say eight tons a day, under full thrust."

tried to visualize the monstrous pipes and pumps af the Saturns that had first
taken  men  to  the  Moon;  what  was  their  rate  of  fuel  consumption?  He  was
certain that they burned More in every second than Sirius consumed in a day.
That was a good measure of how far

technology had progressed, in three centuries. And in another three... ?

"Mind your head--those are the deflection coils.

We don't trust room-temperature perconductors.

These are still good old cryogenics."

"Deflection coils? What for?"

"Ever stopped to think what would happen if that jet accidentally touched part
of the ship? These coils keep it centered, and also give all the vector control
we need."

They  were  now  hovering  beside  a  massive--yet  still  surprisingly  small--
cylinder that might have been the barrel of a twentieth-century naval gun. So
this was the reaction chamber of the Drive. It was hard not to feel a sense of
almost  superstitious  awe  at  the  knowledge  of  what  lay  within  a  few
centimeters of him. Duncan could easily have encircled the metal tube with

his arms; how strange to think of putting your arms around a singularity, and
thus, if some of the theories were correct, embracing an entire universe ....

Near the middle of the fiv.e-meter-long tube a small section of the casing had
been removed, like the door of some miniature bank vault, and replaced by a
crystal  window.  Through  this  obviously  temporary  opening  a  microscope,
mounted on a swinging arm so that it could be moved away after use, was
aimed into the interior of the drive unit.

The engineer clipped himself into position by the buckles conveniently fixed
to  the  casing,  stared  through  the  eyepiece,  and  made  some  delicate
micrometer adjustments.

"Take a look," he sid, when he was finally satisfied.

Duncan floated to the eyepiece and fastened himself rather clumsily in place.
He did not know what

he had expected to see, and he remembered that the eye had to be educated
before  it  could  pass  intelligible  impressions  to  the  brain.  Anything  utterly
unfamiliar could be, quite literally, invisible, so he was

not too disappointed at his first view.

What he saw was, indeed, perfectly ordinary--merely a grid of fine hairlines,
crossing  at  right  angles  to  form  a  reticule  of  the  kind  commonly  used  for
optical measurements. Though he searched the brightly

lit field of view, he could find nothing else; he might have been exploring a
piece of blank graph paper.

"Look at the crossover at the exact center," said his guide, "and turn the knob
on the left--very slowly.

Half a rev will do--either direction."

Duncan  obeyed,  yet  for  a  few  seconds  he  could  still  see  nothing.  Then  he
realized that a tiny bulge was creeping along the hairline as he tracked the
microscope.

It was as if he was looking at the reticule

through a sheet of glass with one minute bubble or imperfection in it.

"Do you see it?"

"Yes--just. Like a pinhead-sized lens. Without the grid, you'd never notice it."

"Pinhead-sized!  That's  an  exaggeration,  if  ever  I  heard  one.  The  node's
smaller than an atomic nucleus.

You're not actually seeing it, of course--only

the distortion it produces."

"And yet there are thousands of tons of matter in there."

"Well,  one  or  two  thousand,"  answered  the  engineer,  rather  evasively.  "It's
made a dozen trips and is getting near saturation, so we'll soon have to install
a new one. Of course it would go on absorbing hydrogen as long as we fed it,
but we can't drag too

much unnecessary mass around, or we'll pay for it in performance. Like the
old seagoing ships--they used to get covered with barnacles, and slowed down
if they weren't scraped clean every so often."

"What do they do with old nodes when they're too 89

Duncan  would  certainly  never  have  given  it  a  second  glance;  it  was  only
about as thick as a lead pencil.

"That's the main hydrogen feed, believe it or not.

All of a hundred grams a second. Say eight tons a day, under full thrust."

Duncan wondered what the old-time rocket engineers would have thought of
this tiny fuel line. He

tried to visualize the monstrous pipes and pumps of the Saturns that had first
taken  men  to  the  Moon;  what  was  their  rate  of  fuel  consumption?  He  was
certain that they burned More in every second than Sirius consumed in a day.
That'was a good measure of how far

technology had progressed, in three centuries. And in another three... ?

"Mind your head--those are the deflection coils.

We don't trust room-temperature superconductors.

These are still good old cryogenics."

"Deflection coils? What for?"

"Ever stopped to think what would happen if that jet accidentally touched part
of the ship? These coils keep it centered, and also give all the vector control
we need."

They  were  now  hovering  beside  a  massive--yet  still  surprisingly  small--
cylinder that might have been the barrel of a twentieth-century naval gun. So
this was the reaction chamber of the Drive. It was hard not to feel a sense of
almost  superstitious  awe  at  the  knowledge  of  what  lay  within  a  few
centimeters of him. Duncan could easily have encircled the metal tube with

his arms; how strange to think of putting your arms around a singularity, and
thus, if some of the theories were correct, embracing an entire universe ....

Near the middle of the five-meter-long tube a small section of the casing had
been removed, like the door of some miniature bank vault, and replaced by a
crystal  window.  Through  this  obviously  temporat7  opening  a  microscope,
mounted on a swinging arm so that it could be moved away after use, was
aimed into the interior of the drive unit.

The engineer clipped himself into position by the buckles conveniently fixed
to  the  casing,  stared  through  the  eyepiece,  and  made  some  delicate
micrometer adjustments.

"Take a look," he said, when he was finally satisfied.

Duncan floated to the eyepiece and fastened himself rather clumsily in place.
He did not know what

he had expected to see, lnd he remembered that the eye had to be educated
before  it  could  pass  intelligible  impressions  to  the  brain.  Anything  utterly
unfamiliar could be, quite literally, invisible, so he was

not too disappointed at his first view.

What he saw was, indeed, perfectly ordinary--merely a grid of fine hairlines,
crossing  at  right  angles  to  form  a  reticule  of  the  kind  commonly  used  for
optical measurements. Though he searched the brightly

lit field of view, he could find nothing else; he might have been exploring a
piece of blank graph paper.

"Look at the crossover at the exact center," said his guide, "and turn the knob
on the left--very slowly.

Half a rev will do--either direction."

Duncan  obeyed,  yet  for  a  few  seconds  he  could  still  see  nothing.  Then  he
realized that a tiny bulge was creeping along the hairline as he tracked the
microscope.

It was as if he was looking at the reticule

through a sheet of glass with one minute bubble or imperfection in it.

"Do you see it?"

"Yes--iust. Like a pinhead-sized lens. Without the grid, you'd never notice it."

"Pinhead-sized!  That's  an  exaggeration,  if  ever  I  heard  one.  The  node's
smaller than an atomic nucleus.

You're not actually seeing it, of course--only

the distortion it produces."

"And yet there are thousands of tons of matter in there."

"Well,  one  or  two  thousand,"  answered  the  engineer,  rather  evasively.  "It's
made a dozen trips and is getting near saturation, so we'll soon have to install
a new one. Of course it would go on absorbing hydrogen as long as we fed it,
but we can't drag too

much unnecessary mass around, or we'll pay for it in performance. Like the
old seagoing ships--they used to get covered with barnacles, and slowed down

they weren't scraped clean every so often."

"What do they do with old nodes when they're too 89

massive to use? Is it true that they're dropped into the sun?"

"What good would that do? A node would sail right through the sun and out
the other side. Frankly, I don't know what they do with the old ones. Perhaps
they  lump  them  all  together  into  a  big  granddaddy  node,  smaller  than  a
neutron but weighing a few

million tons."

There were a dozen other questions that Duncan

was  longing  to  ask.  How  were  these  tiny  yet  immensely  massive  objects
handled?  Now  that  Sirius  was  in  free  fall,  the  node  would  remain  floating
where it was--but what kept it from shooting out of the drive tube as soon as
acceleration started? He assumed that some combination of powerful electric

and magnetic fields held it in place, and transmitted its thrust to the ship.

"What would happen," Duncan asked, "if I tried to touch it?"

"You know, absolutely everyone asks that question.''

"I'm not surprised. What's the answer?"

"Well,  you'd  have  to  open  the  vacuum  seal,  and  then  all  hell  would  break
loose as the air rushed in."

"Then I don't do it that way. I wear a spacesuit, and I crawl up the drive tunnel
and reach out a finger...'

"How clever of you to hit exactly the right spot!

But  if  you  did,  when  your  finger  tip  got  within--oh  msomething  like  a
millimeter, I'd guess--the gravitational tidal forces would star to tear away at
it. As

soon as the first few atoms fell into the field, they'd give up all their mass-
energy--and  you'd  think  that  a  small  hydrogen  bomb  had  gone  off  in  your
face.

The explosion would probably blow you out of the tube at a fair fraction of
the speed of light."

Duncan gave an uncomfortable little laugh.

"It would certainly take a clever man to steal one of your babies. Doesn't it
ever give you nightmares?"

"No. It's the tool I'm trained to use, and I understand its little ways. I can't
imagine handling power

lasers---they scare the hell out of me. You know, old 90

Kipling  had  it'  all  summed  up,  as  usual.  You  remember  me  talking  about
him?"

"Yes."

"He wrote a poem called 'The Secret of the Machines,'

and it has some lines I often say to myself

when I'm down here:

"But remember, please, the Law by which we

live,

We are not built to comprehend a lie,

We can neither love nor pity nor [orgive. .

If you make a slip in handing us you diel

"And that's true of all tnachines--all the natural forces we've ever learned to
handle.  There's  no  real  difference  between  the  first  caveman's  fire  and  the
node in the heart of the Asymptotic Drive."

An hour later, Duncan lay sleepless in his bunk, waiting for the Drive to go on
and  for  Sirius  to  begin  the  ten  days  of  deceleration  that  would  lead  to  her
rendezvous  with  Earth.  He  could  still  see  that  tiny  flaw  in  the  structure  of
space, hanging there in the field of the microscope, and knew that its image
would  haunt  him  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  And  he  realized  now  that  Warren
Mackenzie had betrayed nothing

of his trust; all that he had learned had been

published a thousand times. But no words or photos could ever convey the
emotional impact he had.

experienced.

Tiny  fingers  began  to  tug  at  him;  weight  was  returning  to  Sirius.  From  an
infinite distance came the

thin wail of the Drive; Duncan told himself that he was listening to the death
cry of matter as it left the known universe, bequeathing to the ship all the
energy of its mass in the final moment of dissolution.

Every minute, several kilograms of hydrogen were falling into that tiny but
insatiable vortex--the hole that could never be filled.

Duncan slept poorly for the rest of the night. He had dreams that he too was
falling, falling into a spinning whirlpool, indefinitely deep. As he fell, he was
being crushed to molecular, to atomic, and finally to subnuclear dimensions.
In a moment, it would all be 91

over, and he would disappear in a single flash of radiation

....

But that moment never came, because as Space

contracted, Time stretched endlessly, the passing seconds becoming longer . .
. and longer.., and longer

--until he was trapped forever in a changeless Eternity.

PORT VAN ALLEN

When Duncan had gone t°bed for the

last time aboard Sirius, Earth was still five million kilometers away. Now it
seemed  to  fill  the  sky--and  it  was  exactly  like  the  photographs.  He  had
laughed when More seasoned travelers told him he would be surprised at this;
now he was ruefully surprised at his surprise.

Because the ship had cut fight across the Earth's orbit, they were approaching
from sunward, and' the hemisphere below was almost fully illuminated. White
continents of cloud covered most of the day side, and there were only rare
glimpses of land, impossible to

identify without a map. The dazzling glare of the Antarctic icecap was the
most prominent surface feature; it looked very cold down there, yet Duncan
reminded himself that it was tropical in comparison

with much of his world.

Earth was a beautiful planet; that was beyond dispute.

But it was also alien, and its cool whites and

blues did nothing to warm his heart. It was indeed a paradox that Titan, with
its cheerful orange clouds, looked so much More hospitable from space.

Duncan stayed in Lounge B, watching the approaching Earth and making his
farewells to many

temporary friends, until Port Van Allen was a daz-92

zling star against the blackness of space, then a glitteri.

ng ring, then a huge, slowly turning wheel.

Weight gradually ebbed away as the drive that had taken them halfway across
the Solar System decreased its thrust to zero; then there were only occasional
nudges as low-powered thrustors trimmed the

attitude of the ship.

The space station continued to expand. Its size was incredible, even when one
realized that it had been steadily growing for almost three centuries. Now it
completely eclipsed the planet whose commerce it directed and controlled; a
moment later a barely perceptible vibration, instantly damped out, informed

everyone  that  the  ship  had  docked.  A  few  seconds  later,  the  Captain
confirmed it.

"Welcome to Port Van Alien--Gateway to Earth.

It's  been  nice  having  you  with  us,  and  I  hope  you  enjoy  your  stay.  Please
follow the stewards, and check that you've left nothing in your cabins. And
I'm  sorry  to  mention  this,  but  three  passengers  still  haven't  settled  their
accounts. The Purser will be waiting for them at the exit .... "

A  few  derisive  groans  and  cheers  greeted  this  announcement,  but  were
quickly lost in the noisy bustle

of disembarkation. Although everything was supposed to have been carefully
planned, chaos was rampant.

The  wrong  passengers  went  to  the  wrong  checkpoints,  while  the  public-
address system called plaintively for individuals with improbable names. It
took Duncan More than an hour to get into the spaceport, and he did not see
all of his baggage again until his second day on Earth.

But at last the confusion abated as people squeezed through the bottleneck of
the docking hub and sorted

themselves out in the appropriate levels of the station.

Duncan followed instructions conscientiously, and eventually found himself,
with the rest of his alphabetical group, lined up outside the Quarantine Office.
All other formalities had been completed hours ago, by radio circuit; but this
was something that could not be done by electronics. Occasionally, travelers
had been turned back at this point, on the very door93

step of Earth, and it was not without qualms that Duncan confronted this last
hurdle.

"We  don't  get  many  visitors  from  Titan,"  said  the  medical  officer  who
checked his record. "You come in the Lunar classification less than a quarter
gee.

It may be tough down there for the first week, but you're young enough to
adapt. It helps if both your parents were born..."

The doctor's voice trailed off into silence; he had come to the entry marked
MOTHER. Duncan was

used to the reaction, and it had long ago ceased to bother him. Indeed, he now
derived a certain amusement from the surprise that discovery of his status

usually  produced.  At  least  the  M.O.  would  not  ask  the  silly  question  that
laymen so often asked, and to which he had long ago formulated an automatic
reply:

"Of course I've got a navel the best that

money can buy." The other common myth that

male clones must be abnormally virile "because they had one father twice"--
he had wisely left unchallenged.

It had been useful to him on several occasions.

Perhaps because there were six other people

waiting  in  line,  the  doctor  suppressed  any  scientific  curiosity  he  may  have
felt, and sent Duncan "upstairs"

to the Earth-gravity section of the spaceport. It seemed a long time before the
elevator, moving out along one of the spokes of the slowly spinning wheel,
finally reached the rim; and all the while, Duncan felt his weight increasing
remorselessly.

When the doors opened at last, he walked stiff-legged out of the cage. Though
he was still a thousand

kilometers above the Earth, and his newfound

weight was entirely artificial, he felt that he was ready in the cruel grip of the
planet below. If he could not pass the test, he would be shipped back to Titan
in disgrace.

It was true that those who just failed to make the grade could take a high-
speed toughening-up course, primarily intended for returning Lunar residents.

This, however, was safe only for those who had spent most of their infancy on
Earth, and Duncan could not possibly qualify.

lie forgot all these fears when he entered the

lounge and saw the cresent Earth, filling half the sky and slowly sliding along
the huge observation win-dows-themselves a famous tour de [orce of space

engineering.  Duncan  had  no  intention  of  calculating  how  many  tons  of  air
pressure they were resisting; as he walked up to the nearest, it was easy to
imagine that there was nothing protecting him from the vacuum of space. The
sensation was both exhilarating

and disturbing.

He had intended to go 'through the check list that the doctor had given him,

but that awesome view

made  it  impossible.  He  stood  rooted  to  the  spot,  only  shifting  his
unaccustomed weight from one foot to the other as hitherto unknown muscles
registered their complaints.

Port Van Allen circled the globe every two hours, and also rotated on its own
axis three times a minute.

After a while, Duncan found that he could ignore the station's own spin; his
mind was able to

cancel it out, like an irrelevant background noise or a persistent but neutral
odor. Once he had

achieved this mental attitude, he could imagine that he was alone in space, a
human satellite racing along the Equator from night into day. For the Earth
was  waxing  visibly  even  as  he  watched,  the  curved  line  of  dawn  moving
steadily away from him as he hurried into the east.

As  usual,  there  was  little  land  visible,  and  what  could  be  seen  through  or
between the clouds seemed to have no relationship to any maps. And from
this altitude there was not the slightest sign of life--still less of intelligence. It
was very hard to believe that most of human history had taken place beneath
that blanket of brilliant white, and that, until a mere three hundred years ago,
no man had ever risen above it.

He was still searching for signs of life when the disc started to contrast to a
crescent once More, and the public-address system called on all passengers
for Earth to report to the shuttle embarkation area, Elevators Two and Three.

He just had time to stop at the "Last Chance" toilet-almost as famous as the
lounge windows--and

then he was down by elevator again, back into the weightless world of the
station's hub, where the Earth-to-orbit shuttle was being readied for its return
journey.

There were no windows here, but each passenger

had his own vision screen, on the back of the seat in front of him, and could
switch  to  forward,  rear,  or  downward  as  preferred.  The  choice  was  not
completely free, though this fact was not widely advertised.

Images  that  were  likely  to  be  too  disturbing--like  the  final  moments  of
docking or touchdown--were

thoughtfully censored by the ship's computer.

It was pleasant to be weightless again--if only during the fifty minutes needed
for the fall down to the edge of the atmosphere--and to watch the Earth

slowly changing from a planet to a world. The curve of the horizon became
flatter and flatter; there were fleeting glimpses of islands and the spiral nebula
of  a  great  storm,  raging  in  silence  far  below.  Then  at  last  a  feature  that
Duncan could recognize--the

characteristic  narrow  isthmus  of  the  California  coastline,  as  the  shuttle
dropped  out  of  the  Pacific  skies  for  its  final  landfall,  still  the  width  of  a
continent away.

He  felt  himself  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  superbly  padded  seat,
which spread the load so

evenly over his body that there was the minimum of discomfort. But it was
hard  to  breathe,  until  he  remembered  the  "Advice  to  Passengers"  he  had
finally managed to read. Don't try to  inhale deeply, it had said; take short,
sharp  pants,  to  reduce  the  strain  on  the  chest  muscles.  He  tried  it,  and  it
worked.

Now there was a gentle buffeting and a distant

roar,  and  the  vision  screen  flashed  into  momentary  flame,  then  switched
automatically from the fires of reentry to the view astern. The canyons and
deserts dwindled behind, to be replaced by a group of lakes

----obviously artificial, with the tiny white flecks of sailboats clearly visible.
He caught a glimpse of the huge V-shaped wake, kilometers long, of some
vessel  going  at  great  speed  over  the  water,  although  from  this  altitude  it
seemed completely motionless.

Then the scene changed with an abruptness that

took him by surprise. He might have been flying over 96

the ocean once More, so uniform was the view below.

Still so high that he could trot see the individual trees, he was passing over the
endless forests of the Amer ican Midwest.

Here indeed was proof of Life, on a scale such as he had never imagined. On
all of Titan, there were fewer than a hundred trees, cherished and protected
with loving care. Spread out beneath him now were incomputable millions.

Somewhere, Duncan had encountered the phrase

"primeval forest," and now it flashed again into his mind. So must the Earth
have looked in the ancient days, before Man had set to work upon it with fire
and axe. Now, with the ending of the brief Agricul tural Age, much of the
planet was reverting to some thing like its original state.

Though the fact was very hard to believe, Duncan knew perfectly well that
the "primeval forest" lyihg endlessly beneath him was not much older than

Grandfather. Only two centuries ago, this had all been farmland, divided into
enormous checkerboards and covered in the autumn with golden grain. (That
concept of seasons was another local reality he found extremely difficult to
grasp

)

There were still

plenty

of  farms  in  the  world,  run  by  eccentric  hobbyists  or  biological  research
organizations, but the disasters of the twentieth century had taught men never
again to rely on a technology that, at its very best, had an efficiency of barely
one percent.

The

sun was sinking, driven down into the west with

unnatural  speed  by  the  shuttle's  velocity.  It  clung  to  the  horizon  for  a  few

seconds, then winked out.

For  perhaps  a  minute  longer  the  forest  was  still  visible;  then  it  faded  into
obscurity.

But

not into darkness. As if by magic, faint lines of light had appeared on the land
below--spiders'  webs  of  luminosity,  stretching  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see.
Sometimes three or four lines would meet at a single glowing knot.

There were also isolated islands of phosphorescence, apparently unconnected
with the main network.

Here was further proof of Man's existence; that

great forest was a much busier place than it

appeared to be by daylight. Yet Duncan could 97

not help comparing this modest display with pictures he had seen from the
early Atomic Age, when millions of square kilometers blazed at night with
such

brilliance that men could no longer see the stars.

He  suddenly  became  aware  of  a  compact  constellation  of  flashing  lights,
moving independently of the

glimmering  landscape  far  below.  For  a  moment,  he  was  baffled;  then  he
realized  that  he  was  watching  some  great  airship,  cruising  not  much  faster
than a cloud with its cargo of freight or passengers. This was one experience
Titan could not provide. He determined to enjoy it as soon as the opportunity
arose.

And there was a city--quite a big one, at least a hundred thousand people. The
shuttle was now so

low that he could make out blocks of buildings, roads, parks, and a stadium
blazing with light, presumably the scene of some sporting event. The city fell
astern,  and  a  few  minutes  later  everything  was  lost  in  a  gray  mist,  lit  by
occasional flashes of lightning, not very impressive by the standards of Titan.

Inside the cabin, Duncan could hear nothing of the storm

through  which  they  were  now  flying,  but  the  vibration  of  the  engines  had
taken  a  new  note  and  he  could  sense  that  the  ship  was  dropping  rapidly.
Nevertheless, he was taken completely by surprise when there

was a sudden surge of weight, the slightest of jolts--and there on the screen
was a sea of wet concrete, a confusion of lights, and half a dozen buses and
service vehicles scurrying around in the driving rain.

After thirty years, Duncan Makenzie had returned to the world where he was
born, but which he had never seen ....

Part-ill

:LL-

IL-, Terra

WASHINGTON, D.G.

I

I,orry' about the weather," said George

Washington. "We used to have local climate control, but gave it up after an
Independence Day parade was blocked by snow."

Duncan laughed dutifully, though he was not quite sure if he was supposed to
believe this.

"I don't mind," he said. "It's all new to me. I've never seen rain before."

That was not the literal truth, but it was near

enough. He had often driven through ammonia gales and could still remember
the poisonous cascades

streaming down the windows only a few centimeters before his eyes. But this
was harmless--no, beneficent-water, the source of life both on Earth and on
Titan. If he opened the door now he would merely get wet; he would not die
horribly. But the instincts of a lifetime were hard to overcome, and he.knew
that  it  would  require  a  real  effort  of  will  to  leave  the  protection  of  the
limousine.

And it was a genuine limousine---another first for Duncan. Never before had
he traveled in such sybaritic comfort, with a communications console on one

side and a well-stocked bar on the other. Washington saw his admiring gaze
and commented: "Impressive, isn't it? They don't make them any More. This
was President Bernstein's favorite car."

Duncan was not too good on American presidents

--after  all,  there  had  been  'by  now  ninety'-five  of  them--but  he  had  an
approximate  idea  of  Bern-stein's  date.  He  performed  a  quick  calculation,
didn't believe the result, and repeated it.

"That means--it's More than a hundred and fifty years old!"

"And  it'?  probably  good  for  another  hundred  and  fifty.  Of  course,  the
upholstery--real leather, notice

--is replaced every twenty years or so. If these seats could talk, they could tell
some secrets. As a matter of fact, they often did but you have my personal
assurance that it's now been thoroughly debugged."

"Debugged? Oh, I know what you mean. Anyway, I don't have any secrets."

"Then we'll soon provide you with some; that's our chief local industry."

As the beautiful old car cruised in almost perfect silence under the guidance
of its automatic controls, Duncan tried to see something of the terrain through
which he was passing. The spaceport was fifty kilometers from the city--no
one had yet invented a

noiseless  rocket--and  the  four-lane  highway  bore  a  surprising  amount  of
traffic. Duncan could count at least twenty vehicles of various types, and even
though  they  were  all  moving  in  the  same  direction,  the  spectacle  was
somewhat alarming.

"I hope all those other cars are on automatic," he said anxiously.

Washington looked a little shocked. "Of course,"

he said. "It's been a criminal offense for---oh--at least a hundred years to drive
manually on a public highway. Though we still have occasional psychopaths
who kill themselves and other people."

That was an interesting admission; Earth had not solved all its problems. One
of  the  greatest  dangers  to  the  Technological  Society  was  the  unpredictable
madman  who  tried  to  express  his  frustrations--consciously  or  otherwise  by

sabotage. There had

twenty-first century was perhaps the best-known example.

Since Titan was even More vulnerable than

Earth in this respect, Duncan would have liked to discuss the matter further;
but to do so within an hour of his arrival would hardly be tactful.

He was quite sure that if he did commit such a faux 101

pas, his host would neatly divert the conversation without causing him the
slightest embarrassment.

During the short time that they had been acquainted, Duncan had decided that
George Washington was a

very polished diplomat, with the self-assurance that comes only with a family
tree whose roots are several hundred years deep. Yet it would have been hard
to  imagine  anyone  less  like  his  distinguished  namesake,  for  this  George
Washington was a short, bald, and rather plump brown man, very elegantly
dressed and bejeweled. The baldness and plumpness were both

rather surprising, since they could be so easily corrected.

On the other hand, they did provide a mark

of distinction, and perhaps that was the idea. But this was another sensitive
subject that Duncan would be well advised to avoid--at least until he knew his
host much better. And perhaps not even then.

The car was now passing over a slender bridge

spanning  a  wide  and  rather  dirty  river.  The  spectacle  of  so  much  genuine
water was impressive, but it

looked very cold and dismal on this dreary night.

"The Potomac," said Washington. "But wait until you see it on a sunny day,

after that silt's gone downstream.

Then it's blue and sparkling, and you'd never

guess it took two hundred years of hard work to get it that way. And that's
Watergatenot  the  original,  of  course:  that  was  pulled  down  around  2000
though

the Democrats wanted to make it a national monument.

And the Kennedy Center--that is the original, More or less. Every fifty years
some architect tries to salvage it, but now it's been given up as a bad job."

So this was Washington, still basking (though not very effectively, on a night
like this) in its former glories. Duncan had read that the physical appearance
of the city had changed very little in three hundred years, and he could welt
believe it. Most of the old overnment and public buildings had been carefully
preserved. The result, sad the critics, was the

lar.zest inhabited museum in the world.

A little lter, the car turned into a driveway which led through beautihlly kept
lawns. There was a gentle beeping from the control pnel, and a sign flashed
102

beneath the steering handle: SWITCH TO MANUAL.

George Washington took over, and proceeded at a

cautious twenty klicks between flower beds and sculptured bushes, coming to
a halt under the portico of an obviously very old building. It seemed much too
large for a private house, but rather too small for a hotel, despite the fact that
it bore the sign, in lettering so elaborate that it was almost impossible to read:
CeNTENNIAL

HOTEL.

Professor Washington seemed to have an extraordinary knack of anticipating
questions before they

could be asked.

"It was built by a railroad baron, in the late nineteenth century. He wanted to
have somewhere to

entertain Congress, and the investment paid him

several thousand percent. We've taken it over for the occasion, and most of
the official guests will be staying here."

To Duncan's astonishment--and embarrassment,

since personal service was unknown on Titan-his

scanty baggage was seized by two black gentlemen wearing gorgeous liveries.
One of them addressed him in a soft, musical language of which he could not
comprehend a single word.

"You're overdoing it, Henry," George Washington remonstrated mildly. "That
may  be  genuine  slave  patter,  but  what's  the  point  if  only  you  linguistic
historians can understand it? And where did you get

that make-up? I may need some myself."

Despite this appeal, Duncan still found the reply unintelligible. On their way
up in a gilded birdcage of a tiny elevator, Washington commented: "I'm afraid
Professor Murchison is entering too thoroughly into the Spirit of '76. Still, it
shows we've made some progress.

A couple of centuries ago, if you'd suggested to him that he play one of his
humbler ancestors, even in a pageant, he'd have knocked your head off. Now
he's having a perfectly wonderful time, and we may not be able to get him
back to his classes at Georgetown."

Washington looked at his plump, brown hand and

sighed.

"It's getting More and More difficult to find a genuine black skin. I'm no race
snob," he added hastily,

"but it will be a pity when we're all the same shade of off white. Meanwhile, I

suppose you do have a

slightly unfair advantage."

Duncan looked at him for a moment with puzzled

incomprehension. He had never given any More

thought  to  his  skin  color  than  to  that  of  his  hair;  indeed,  if  suddenly
challenged, he would have been hard pressed to describe either. Certainly he
had  never  thought  of  himself  as  black;  but  now  he  realized,  with
understandable satisfaction, that he was

several shades darker than George Washington, descendant of African kings.

When the door of the hotel suite closed behind

him,  and  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  keep  up  appearances,  Duncan
collapsed thankfully into one of

the heavily padded chairs. It tilted backward so voluptuously that he guessed
it had been especially designed for visitors from low-gravity worlds. George
Washington was certainly an admirable host and

seemed  to  have  thought  of  everything.  Nevertheless,  Duncan  knew  that  it
would be a long time before he felt really at ease.

Quite apart from the drag of gravity, there were dozens of subtler reminders
that he was not on his home world. One was the very size of the room; by
Titanian standards, it was enormous. And it was

furnished  in  such  luxury  as  he  had  never  seen  in  real  life,  but  only  in
historical plays. Yet that, of course, was completely appropriate; he was living
in the middle of history. This mansion had been built before the first man had
ventured beyond the atmosphere, and he guessed that most of its fittings were
contemporary.

The  cabinets  full  of  delicate  glassware,  the  oil  paintings,  the  quaint  old
photographs  of  stiffly  posed  and  long-forgotten  eminences  (perhaps  the
original  Washington--no,  cameras  hadn't  been  invented  then),  the  heavy
drapes--none of these could have been

matched  on  Titan,  and  Duncan  doubted  if  their  holographic  patterns  were
even stored in the Central Library.

The very communications console looked as if it

dated back to the last century. Although all the elements were familiar--the
blank gray screen, the

alphanumeric keyboard, the camera lens and speaker grille--something about
the design gave it an old-fashioned appearance. When he felt that he could

again  walk  a  few  yards  without  danger  of  collapse,  Duncan  made  his  way
cautiously to the console and parked himself heavily on the chair in front of it.

The type and serial numbers were in the usual

place, tucked away at the side of the screen. Yes, there was the date---2183. It
was almost a hundred years old.

Yet apart from a slight fuzziness of the "e" and "a"

on the contact pads, there was practically no sign of wear. And why should
there be, in a piece of equipment that did not contain a single moving part?

This was another sharp reminder that Earth was

an old world, and had learned to conserve the past.

Novelty for its own sake was an unlamented relic of the centuries of waste. If
a  piece  of  equipment  functioned  satisfactorily,  it  was  not  replaced  merely
because  of  changes  in  style,  but  only  if  it  broke  down,  or  there  was  some
fundamental improvement in performance.

The home communications console---or

Comsole---had  reached  its  technological  plateau  in  the  early  twenty-first
century, and Duncan was prepared to bet that there were units on Earth that
had

given continuous service for over two hundred years.

And that was not even one tenth of the history of this world. For the first time
in his life, Duncan felt an almost overwhelming sense of inferiority. He had
not really believed that the Terrans would regard him as a barbarian from the
outer darkness; but now he was llOt $0 sure.

EMBASSY

Duncan's Minisec had been a parting gift

from Colin, and he was not completely familiar with its controls. There had
been nothing really wrong with his old unit, and he had left it behind with
some regret; but the casing had become stained and battle-scarred, and he had
to agree that it was not elegant

enough for Earth.

The 'Sec was the standard size of all such units, determined by what could fit
comfortably in the normal human hand. At a quick glance, it did not differ
greatly from one of the small electronic calculators that had started coming
into general use in the late twentieth century. It was, however, infinitely More
versatile, and Duncan could not imagine how life would be possible without
it.

Because of the finite size of clumsy human fingers, it had no More controls
than its ancestors of three centuries earlier. There were fifty neat little studs;
each, however, had a virtually unlimited number of functions, according to
the  mode  of  operation--for  the  character  visible  on  each  stud  changed
according to the mode. Thus on ALPHANUMERIC, twenty-six of the studs
bore the letters of the alphabet, while ten showed the digits zero to nine. On
MATH, the letters disappeared from the alphabetical studs and were replaced
by X, -Jr-, +, --, :, and all the standard mathematical functions.

Another mode was DICTIONARY. The 'Sec stored

over a hundred thousand words, whose three-line

definitions could be displayed on the bright little screen, steadily roiling over
page by page if desired.

CLOCK and CALENDAR also used the screen for display, 106

but for dealing with vast amounts of information it was desirable to link the
'Sec  to  the  much  larger  screen  of  a  standard  Comsole.  This  could  be  done
through  the  unit's  optical  interface--a  tiny  Transmit-Receive  bull's-eye
operating in the near ultraviolet

As  long  as  this  lens  was  in  visual  range  of  the  corresponding  sensor  on  a
Comsole, the two units could

happily exchange information at the rate of megabits per second. Thus when
the 'Sec's own internal memory was saturated, its contents could be dumped
into a larger store for permanent keeping; or, conversely, it could be loaded up
through the optical link with any special data required for a particular job.

Duncan  was  now  employing  it  for  its  simplest  possible  use---merely  as  a
speech recorder, which was

almost an insult to a machine of such power. But first there was an important
matter to settlethe question of security.

An easily remembered word, preferably one that

would never be employed in this context, would be the simplest key. Better
still, a word that did not even exist--then it could never accidentally trigger
the

'Sec's memory.

Suddenly, he had it. There was one name he would never forget; and if he
deliberately misspelled it ....

He carefully pecked out ILim)¥, followed by the

sequence of instructions that would set up the memory.

Then he unplugged the tiny radiomike, pinned it

on his shirt, spoke a test message, and checked that the machine would play it
back only after it had been given the correct order.

Duncan had never kept a diary, but he had

decided to do so as soon as he arrived on Earth. In a few weeks he would
meet More people and visit More places than in the whole of his preceding
life, and would certainly have experiences that could never be repeated when
he returned to Titan. He was determined to miss nothing that could be helped,
for the

memories  he  was  storing  now  would  be  of  inestimable  value  in  the  years
ahead.  How  many  times  in  his  old  age,  he  wondered,  would  he  play  back
these words of his youth... ?

"2276 June 12. I'm still adapting to Earth gravity, and don't think I'll ever get
really used to it. But I can stand for an hour at a time now, without developing
too many aches and pains. Yesterday I saw a man

actually jumping. I could hardly believe my eyes ....

"George, who thinks of everything, has arranged a masseur for me. I don't
know if that's helped at all, but it's certainly an interesting experience."

Duncan stopped recording and contemplated this

slight understatement. Such luxuries were rare on Ti tan, and he had never
before had a massage in his life. Bernie Patras, the amiable and uninhibited
young man who had visited him, had shown a remarkable

(indeed, startling) knowledge of physiology, and had also given Duncan much
useful advice. He was a

specialist in treating off-worlders, and recommended one sovereign cure for
gravitational complaints.

"Spend an hour a day floating in a bath--at least for the first month. Don't let
your schedule squeeze this out, no matter how busy you are. If you have to,
you can do a lot of work in a tub--reading, dictating, and so forth. Why, the
Lunar Ambassador used to

hold briefings with just his nose and mouth above water. Said he could think
better that way

"

That

would certainly be an undiplomatic spectacle, Duncan told himself--unique
even in this city, which had probably seen everything.

"I've

been here three days now, and this is the first time I've had the energy--and
the inclination--and the opportunity--to put my thoughts in order. But from
now on, I swear, I'll do this every day ....

"The

first  morning  after  my  arrival,  General  George--that's  what  everyone  calls
him--took me to the

Embassy, which is only a' few hundred meters from the hotel. Ambassador
Robert Farrell apologized because he couldn't come to the spaceport. He said,
'I

knew  you'd  be  in  good  hands  with  George---he's  the  world's  greatest
organizer.' Then the General left us, and we had a long private talk.

"I

met Bob Farrell on his last visit to Titan, three years ago, and he remembers
me  well--at  least,  he  gave  that  impression,  which  I  suppose  is  an  art  all
diplomats have to acquire. He was very helpful and 108

friendly, but I got the feeling that he was sounding me out, and not telling me
everything  he  knew.  I  realize  that  he's  in  an  ambiguous  position,  being  a
Terran  yet  having  to  represent  our  interests.  One  day  this  may  cause
difficulties, but I don't know what we can do about it, since no native-boru
Titanian can ever live on Earth ....

"Luckily, there are no urgent problems, as the Hydrogen Agreement isn't due
for renegotiation until '80.

But there were dozens of little items on my shopping list, and I left him with
plenty  to  think  about.  Such  as:  why  can't  we  get  quicker  deliveries  of
equipment, can anything be done to improve shipping schedules, what went
wrong  with  the  new  student  exchange?--and  similar  Galaxy-shaking

questions. He promised

to set up appointments for me with all the people who could straighten these
things  out,  but  I  tried  to  hint  that  I  wanted  to  spend  some  time  looking  at
Earth.

And after all, he's not only our man in Washington but also our representative
on Terra ....

"He seemed quite surprised when I told him that I expected to stay on Earth
for almost a year, but at this stage I thought it best not to give him the main
reason. I'm sure he'll guess it quickly enough. When he tactfully asked about
my budget, I explained that the Centennial Committee had been a great help,
and there was still some Makenzie money in the World Bank which I was
determined to use. "I understand,'

he said, 'Old Malcolm's over a hundred and twenty now, isn't he? Even on
Earth,  leaving  as  little  as  possible  for  the  Community  Ftlnd  to  grab  is  a
popular

pastime.' Then he added, not very hopefully, that any personal balances could
be legally bequeathed to the Embassy for its running expenses. I said that was
a very interesting point and I'd bear it in mind ....

"He volunteered to give me any assistance on my speech, which was kind of
him.  When  I  said  I  was  still  working  on  it,  he  reminded  me  that  it  was
essential  to  have  a  final  draft  by  the  end  of  June  so  that  all  the  important
commentators could study it in advance.

Othemise, it would be drowned in the flood of

verbiage on July Fourth. That was a very good point, which I hadn't thought
of; but then I said, 'Won't 109

the other speakers do exactly the same?' And he answered,

'Of course, but I've got good friends in all

the media, and there's a great interest in Titan. You're still intrepid pioneers at
the edge of the Solar System, carving out a new civilization in the wilderness.
There may not be many volunteer carvers around here, but we like to hear
about such things.' By that time I felt we'd got to understand each other, and

so I risked teasing him: 'You mean it's true--Earth is getting decadent?' And he
looked at me with a grin and answered quickly: 'Oh no--we aren't decadent.'
Then

he paused, and added: 'But the next generation will be.' I wonder how far he
was joking ....

"Then we talked for ten minutes about mutual friends like the Helmers and
the Wongs and the Morgans and the Leesh, he seems to know everyone

important on Titan. And finally he asked about

Grandma Ellen, and I told him that she was just the same as ever, which he
understood perfectly. And then George came back and took me to his farm. It
was the first chance I had of seeing the open countryside, in full daylight. I'm
still trying to get over it .... "

MOUNT VERNON

I IDon,t take this program too seriously,"

said General George Washington. "It's still being changed every day. But your
main appointments--I've marked them--aren't going to be altered. Especially
on July Fourth."

Duncan leafed through the small brochure that the other had handed to him
when  they  entered  President  Bernstein's  limousine.  It  was  a  daunting
document--stuffed full of Addresses and Receptions and Bails

and Processions and Concerts. Nobody in the capital was going to get much
sleep during the first few 110

days in July, and Duncan felt sorry for poor President Claire Hansen.

As a gesture of courtesy, in this Centennial year she was President not only of
the United States, but also of Earth. And, of course, she had not asked for
either job; if she had done so--or even if she had been suspected of such a
faux pas--she would have been automatically eliminated. For the last century,
almost  all  top  political  appointments  on  Terra  had  been  made  by  random
computer selection from the

pool of individuals who had the necessary qualifications.

It had taken the human race several thousand

years to realize that there were some jobs that should never be given to the
people  who  volunteered  for  them,  especially  if  they  showed  too  much
enthusiasm. As on shrewd political commentator had remarked: "We want a
President who has to be carried screaming and kicking into the White House--
but will then do the best job he possibly can, so that he'll get time off for good
behavior."

Duncan put the program away; there would be

plenty of opportunity to study it later. Now he had eyes only for his first real
look at Planet Earth, on a bright sunny day.

And that was the first problem. Never before in his life had he been exposed
to such a glare. Though he had been warned, he was still taken aback by the
sheer blazing ferocity of a sun almost one hundred times brighter than the star
that  shone  gently  on  his  own  world.  As  the  car  whispered  automatically
through the outskirts of Washington, he kept readjusting the transmission of
his dark glasses to find a

comfortable level. It was appalling to think that there were places on Earth
where the sun was even More brilliant than this, and he remembered another
warning that had now suddenly become very real. Where

the light fell directly on his exposed skin, he could actually feel the heat. On
Titan, the very concept of

"sunburn" was ludicrous; now, it was all too easy to imagine, especially for
skin as dark as his.

He was like a newborn child, seeing the world

for  the  first  time.  Almost  every  single  obje,  ct  in  his  field  of  vision  was
unfamiliar, or recognizable only 111

from the recordings he had studied. Impressions

flowed  in  upon  him  at  such  a  rate  that  he  felt  utterly  confused,  until  he
decided that the only thing to do was to concentrate on a single category of

objects and to ignore all the rest--even though they were clamoring for his
attention.

Trees, for example. There were millions of them--but he had expected that.
What he had not anticipated was the enormous variety of their shape, size,
and color. And he had no words for any of them. Indeed, as he realized with
shame, he could not have identified the few trees in his own Meridian Park.
Here  .was  a  whole  complex  universe,  part  of  everyday  life  for  most  of
mankind  since  the  beginning  of  history;  and  he  could  not  utter  one
meaningful sentence about it, for lack of a vocabulary. When he searched his
mind, he could think of only four words that had anything to do with trees--
"leaf," "branch," "root," and

"stem." And all these he had learned in a totally different context.

Then there were flowers. At first, Duncan had been puzzled by the random
patches of color that he

glimpsed from time to time. Flowers were not uncommon on Titan--usually as
highly prized, isolated

specimens, though there were some small groups of a few dozen in the Park.
Here they were as countless as the trees, and even More varied. 'And once
again, he had no names for any of them. This world was full of beauties of
which  he  could  not  speak.  Living  on  Earth  was  going  to  have  some
unanticipated frustrations

....

"What was that?' he suddenly cried. Washington swung around in his seat to
get a fix on the tiny object that had just shot across the roadway.

"A  squirrel,  I  think.  Lots  of  them  in  these  woods  mand  of  course  they're
always getting run over.

That's one problem no one has ever been able to

solve."  He  paused,  then  added  gently:  "I  suppose  you've  never  seen  one
before?"

Duncan laughed, without much humor.

"I've never seen any animal before--except Man."

"You don't even have a zoo on Titan?"

"No. We've been arguing about it for years, but the 112

problems are too great. And, to be perfectly frank, I think most people are
scared of something going

wrong--remember the plague of rats in that Lunar colony. What we're really
frightened of, though, are insects. If anyone ever discovered that a fly had
slipped through quarantine, there'd be worldwide hysteria. We've got a nice,
sterile environment, and we want to keep it that way."

"Hm,' said Washington. "You're not going to find it easy to adjust to our dirty,
infested world. Yet a lot of people here have been complaining for the last
century or so that it's too clean and tidy. They're talking nonsense, of course;
there's More wilderness now than there has been for a thousand years."

The car had come to the crest of a low hill, and for the first time Duncan had
an extensive view of the surrounding countryside. He could see for at least
twenty kilometers, and the effect of all this open space was overwhelming. It
was true that he had

gazed  at  much  larger--and  far  More  dramatic--vistas  on  Titan;  but  the
landscapes of his own world were implacably lethal, and when he traveled on
its open surface he had to be insulated from the hostile environment by all the
resources of modern technology.

It was almost impossible to believe that there

was  nowhere  here,  from  horizon  to  horizon,  where  he  could  not  stand
unprotected in the open, breathing freely in an atmosphere which would not
instantly  shrivel  his  lungs.  The  knowledge  did  not  give  him  a  sense  of
freedom, but rather of vertigo.

It was even worse when h looked up at the sky,

so  utterly  different  from  the  low,  crimson  overcast  of  Titan.  He  had  flown
halfway  across  the  Solar  System,  yet  never  had  he  received  such  an
impression of space and distance as he did now, when he stared at the solid-
looking  white  clouds,  sailing  through  a  blue  abyss  that  seemed  to  go  on

forever. It was useless to tell himself that they were only ten kilometers away-
-the distance a spaceship could travel in a fraction of a second. Not even the
starfields of the Milky Way had yielded such glimpses of infinity.

For the very first time, as he looked at the fields and forests spread out around
him under the open 113

sky, Duncan realized the immensity of Planet Earth by the only measure that
counted---the scale of the individual human being. And now he understood
that cryptic remark Robert Kleinman had made before

he left for Saturn: "Space is small; only the planets are big."

"If you were here three hundred years ago," said his host, with considerable
satisfaction,  "about  eighty  percent  of  this  would  have  been  houses  and
highways. Now the figure's down to ten percent--and this is one of the most
heavily  built-up  areas  on  the  continent.  It's  taken  a  long  time,  but  we've
finally cleaned up the mess the twentieth century left.

Most of it, anyway. We've kept some as a reminder.

There are a couple of steel towns still intact in Pennsylvania; visiting them is
an educational experience

you won't forget, but won't want to repeat."

"You said this was a ten-percent built-up area. I find it hard to believe even
that. Where is everyone?"

Duncan queried.

"There are many More people around than you imagine. I'd hate to think of
the mental activity that's going on within two hundred meters of us, at this
very moment. But because this parkway is so well landscaped, you probably
haven't noticed the surface exits and feeder roads."

"Of  course--I  still  have  the  ofd-fashioned  picture  of  Terrans  as  surface
dwellers."

"Oh,  we  are,  essentially.  I  don't  think  we'll  ever  develop  the--ah--'corridor
culture' you have on the Moon and planets."

quite sure if Duncan approved of it. Nor, for that matter, was Duncan himself;
but he had to admit

that despite all the debates that had raged about it, the phrase was an accurate
description of Titan's social life.

"One of the chief problems of entertaining off-worlders like yourself," said
Washington somewhat

ruefully, "is that I find myself explaining at great length things that they know
perfectly well, but are too polite to admit. A couple of years ago I took a 114

statistician from Tranquillity along this road, and gave him a brilliant lecture
on the population changes here in the Washington-Virginia region over the
last three hundred years. I thought he'd be interested, and he was. If I'd done
my  homework  properly--which  I  usually  do,  but  for  some  reason  had
neglected in this

case--I'd have found that he'd written the standard work on the subject. After
he'd left, he sent me a copy, with a we nice inscription."

Duncan  wondered  how  much  "homework"  George  had  done  on  him;
doubtless a good deal.

"You can assume my total ignorance in these matters.

Still,  I  should  have  realized  that  fusor  technology  would  be  almost  as
important on Earth as off

it."

"It's not my field, but you're probably right. When it was cheaper and simpler
to melt a home underground than to build it above--and to fit it with

viewscreens  that  were  better  than  any  conceivable  win,  dow--it's  not
surprising that the surface lost many of its attractions. Not all, though." He
gestured toward the left-hand side of the parkway.

They  were  approaching  a  small  access  road,  which  merged  gently  into  the

main traffic lane. It led into a wood about a kilometer away, and through the
trees Duncan could glimpse at least a dozen houses. They were all of different
design, yet had common features so that they formed a harmonious group.
Every one had steeply gabled red roofs, large windows, gray stone walls--and
even chimneys. These were certainly not functional, but many of them served
to support complicated structures of metal rods.

"Fake antique," said Washington with some disapproval.

"Mid-twentieth-century TV antennas. ,Oh

well, there's no accounting for tastes."

The road was plunging downhill now, and was

about  to  pass  under  a  graceful  bridge  carting  a  road  much  wider  than  the
parkway. It was also carrying considerably More traffic, moving at a leisurely
twenty or thirty kilometers an hour.

"Enjoying the good weather," said Washington.

"You only see a few madmen there in the winter. And you may not believe
this, but there was a time when 115

the motorways were the wide roads. They had to be when there was a hundred
times  as  much  traffic--  and  no  automatic  steering."  He  shuddered  at  the
thought. "More people were killed on these roads than ever died in warfare--
did you know that? And of

course they still get killed, up there on the bikeways.

No one's ever discovered a way to stop cyclists from wobbling; that's another
reason why the road's so wide."

As they dived under the bridge, a colorful group of young riders waved down
at them, and Washington

replied with a cheerful salute.

"When I was thirty years younger," he said wistfully,

"a  gang  of  us  set  off  for  California  on  the  Transcontinental  Bikeway.  No

electrocycles allowed, either.

Well, we were unlucky--ran into terrible weather in Kansas. Some of us made
it, but I wasn't one of them.

I've still got a twelve-speed Diamond Special--all carbon fiber and beryllium;
you can lift it with one finger.

Even now, I could do a hundred klicks on it, if I were fool enough to try."

The  big  car  was  slowing  down,  its  computer  brain  sensing  an  exit  ahead.
Presently  it  peeled  off  from  the  parkway,  then  speeded  up  again  along  a
narrow road whose surface rapidly disintegrated into a barely visible grass-
covered  track.  Washington  took  the  steering  lever  just  a  second  before  the
END AUTO warning light started to flash on the control panel.

"I'm taking you to the farm for several reasons,"

he  said.  "Life  will  soon  get  hectic  for  both  of  us,  as  More  visitors  start
arriving. This may be the last opportunity

we have to go through your program in

peace and quiet. Also, out-worlders can learn a lot about Earth very quickly in
a place like this. But to be honest--the truth is that I'm proud of the place, and
like showing it off."

They  were  now  approaching  a  high  stone  wail,  running  for  hundreds  of
meters  in  both  directions.  Duncan  tried  to  calculate  how  much  labor  it
represented,  if  all  those  oddly  shaped  blocks  were  assembled  by  hand--as
surely  they  must  have  been.  The  figure  was  so  incredible  that  he  couldn't
believe it.

And that huge gate was made of--genuine wood,

for it wa7 unpainted and he could see the grain. As it swung automatically,
open, Duncan read the nameplate, and turned to the Professor in surprise.

"But I thought--" he began.

George Washington looked slightly embarrassed.

"That's  my  private  joke,"  he  admitted.  "The  real  Mount  Vernon  is  fifty
kilometers southeast of here.

You mustn't miss it."

That last phrase, Duncan guessed, was going to become all too familiar in the
months ahead--right up to the day when he reembarked for Titan.

Inside the walls, the road-now firm-packed gravel

--ran in a straight line through a checkerboard of small fields. Some of the
fields were plowed, and there was a tractor working in one of them--under
direct human control, for a man was sitting on the open driving seat. Duncan
felt that he had indeed traveled back in time.

"I suppose there's no need to explain," said the Professor, "that all this doesn't
belong to me. It's owned by the Smithsonian. Some people complain

that everything within a hundred kilometers of the Capitol is owned by the
Srnithsonian, but that's a slight exaggeration. I'm just the administrator; you
might say it's a kind of full-time hobby. Every year I have to submit a report,
and as long as I do a good job, and don't have a fight with the Regents, this is
my home.

Needless to say, I am careful to keep on excellent terms with at least fifty-one
percent of the Regents.

By the way, do you recognize any of these crops?"

"I'm afraid not---though that's grass, isn't it?"

"Well, technically, almost everything here is. Grass includes all the cereals--
barley, rice, maize, wheat, oats .... We grow them all except rice."

"But why--I mean, except for scientific and archaeological interest?"

"Isn't that sufficient? But I think you'll find there's More to it than that, when
you've had a look around."

At  the  risk  of  being  impolite,  Duncan  persisted.  He  was  not  trying  to  be

stubborn, but was genuinely interested.

"What about efficiency? Doesn't it take a square kilometer to feed one man,
with this systemT"

"Out around Saturn, perhaps; I'm afraid you've dropped a few zeros. If it had
to, this little farm could support fifty people in fair comfort, though their diet
would be rather monotonous."

"I'd no idea--my God, what's that?"

"You're joking--you don't recognize it?"

"Oh, I know it's a horse. But it's enormous. I thought..."

"Well, I can't blame you, though wait until you see an elephant. Charlemagne
is probably the largest horse alive today. He's a Percheron, and weighs over a
ton. His ancestors used to carry knights in full armor.

Like to meet him?"

Duncan wanted to say "Not really," but it was too late. Washington brought
the car to a halt, and the gigantic creature ambled toward them.

Until this moment, the limousine had been closed and they had been traveling
in air-conditioned comfort.

Now the windows slid down--and Primeval

Earth hit Duncan full in the nostrils.

"What's the matter?" asked Washington anxiously.

"Are you all right?"

Duncan gulped, and took a cautious sniff.

"I think so," he said, without much conviction. "It's just that--the air is rather--
" He struggled for words as well as breath, and had almost selected "ripe"
when he gratefully switched to "rich" in the nick of time.

"I'm so sorry," apologized Washington, genuinely contrite. "I'd quite forgotten
how strange this must be to you. Let me close the window. Go away, Charlie

--sorry, some other time."

The monster now completely dwarfed the car, and

a  huge  head,  half  as  big  as  a  man,  was  trying  to  insert  itself  through  the
partially open window on Duncan's side. The air became even thicker, and
redolent  of  More  animal  secretions  than  he  cared  to  identify.  Two  huge,
slobbering lips drew back, to disclose a perfectly terrifying set of teeth ....

"Oh, very well," said Professor Washington in a resigned voice. He leaned
across his cowering guest, holding out an open palm on which two lumps of
sugar had magically appeared. Gently as any maiden's kiss, the lips nuzzled
Washineton's hand, and the gift 118

vanished asif inhaled. A mild, gentle eye, which from this distance seemed
about as large as a fist, looked straight at Duncan, who started to laugh a little
hysterically as the apparition withdrew.

"What's so funny?" asked Washington.

"Look at it from my point of view. I've just met my first Monster from Outer
Space. Thank God it was friendly."

2O

THE TASTE OF HONEY

I

!I! do hope you slept well," said George

Washington, as they walked out into the bright summer morning.

"Quite well, thank you," Duncan answered, stifling a yawn. He only wished
that the statement were true.

It had been almost as bad as his first night aboard Sirius. Then, the noises had
all been mechanical. This time, they were made by--things.

Leaving the window open had been a big mistake,

but  who  could  have  guessed?  "We  don't  need  air  conditioning  this  time  of
year," George had explained.

"Which is just as well, because we haven't got it. The Regents weren't too
happy even about electric light in a four-hundred-year-old house. If you do
get too cold, here are some extra blankets. Primitive, but very effective.''

Duncan  did  not  get  too  cold;  the  night  was  pleasantly  mild.  It  was  also
extremely busy.

There had been distant thumpings which, he eventually decided, must have
been Charlie moving his

thousand  kilos  of  muscle  around  the  fields.  There  had  been  strange
squeakings and rustlings apparently just outside his window, and one high-
pitched squeal, suddenly terminated, which could only have been caused

by some unfortunate small beast meeting an untimely end.

But  at  last  he  dozed  off--only  to  be  wakened,  quite  suddenly,  by  the  most
horrible of all the sensations that can be experienced by a man in the utter
darkness of an unfamiliar bedchamber. Something was

moving around the room.

It was moving almost silently, yet with amazing

speed.  There  was  a  kind  of  whispering  rush  and,  occasionally,  a  ghostly
squeaking so high-pitched that at

first  Duncan  wondered  if  he  was  imagining  the  entire  phenomenon.  After
some minutes he decided, reluctantly, that it was real enough. Whatever the
thing

might be, it was obviously airborne. But what could possibly move at such
speed, in total darkness, without colliding with the fittings and furniture of the
bedroom?

While he considered this problem, Duncan did what any sensible man would
do. He burrowed under the bedclothes, and presently, to his vast relief, the
whispering phantom, with a few More shrill gibberings,

swooped  out  into  the  night.  When  his  nerves  had  fully  recovered,  Duncan
hopped  out  of  bed  and  closed  the  window;  but  it  seemed  hours  before  his
nervous system settled down again.

In the bright light of morning, his fears seemed as foolish as they doubtless
were,  and  he  decided  not  to  ask  George  any  questions  about  his  nocturnal
visitor; presumably it was some night bird or large insect. Everyone knew that
there were no dangerous animals

left on Earth, except in well-guarded reservations ....

Yet the creatures that George now seemed bent on introducing to him looked
distinctly menacing. Unlike Charlemagne, they had built-in weapons.

"I suppose," said George, only half doubtfully,

"that you recognize these?"

"Of course--I do know some Terran zoology. If it has a leg at each corner, and
horns, it's not a horse, but a cow."

I'll only give you half marks. Not all cows have horns. And for that matter,
there used to be horned horses. But they became extinct when there were no
More virgins to bridle them."

Duncan was still trying to decide if this was a joke, and if so what was the
point of it, when he had a slight mishap.

"Sorry!" exclaimed George, "I should have  warned you to mind your step.
Just rub it off on that tuft of grass."

"Well,  at  least  it  doesn't  smell  quite  as  bad  as  it  looks,"  said  Duncan
resignedly, determined to make the best of a bad job.

"That's because cows are herbivores. Though they're not very bright, they're
sweet, clean animals.

No  wonder  they  used  to  worship  them  in  India.  Hello,  Daisy--morning,
Rubynow, Clemence, that was

naughty--"

It seemed to Duncan that these bovine endearments were rather one-sided, for
their recipients gave no detectable reaction. Then his attention was suddenly
diverted; something quite incredible was flying toward

them.

It was small--its wingspan could not have been More than ten centimeters--
and it traced wavering, zigzag patterns through the air, often seeming about to
land  on  a  low  bush  or  patch  of  grass,  then  changing  its  mind  at  the  last
moment. Like a living jewel, it blazed with all the colors of the rainbow; its
beauty struck Duncan like a sudden revelation. Yet at the same time he found
himself asking what purpose such exuberant--no, arrogant--loveliness could
possibly serve.

"What is it?" he whispered to his companion, as the creature swept aimlessly,
back and forth a couple of meters 'above the grass.

"Sorry," said George. "I can't identify it. I don't think it's indigenous, though I
may be wrong. We get a lot of m/grants nowadays, and sometimes they

escape from collectors-breeding them's been a popular hobby for years." Then
he stopped. He had

suddenly understood the real thrust of Duncan's question.

There was something close to pity in his eyes

when he continued, in quite a different tone of voice:

"I should, have explained--it's a butterfly."

But Duncan scarcely heard him. That iridescent

creature, drifting so effortlessly through the air, made 121

him forget the ferocious gravitational field of which he was now a captive. He
started to run toward it--with the inevitable result.

Luckily, he landed on a clean patch of grass.

Half an hour later, feeling quite comfortable but rather foolish, Duncan was
sitting in the centuries-old farmhouse with his bandaged ankle stretched out

on a footstool, while Mrs. Washington and her two young daughters prepared
lunch. He had been carried back like a wounded warrior from the battlefield
by a couple of tough farm workers who handled his

weight with contemptuous ease, and also, he could not help noticing, radiated
a distinct aroma of Charlemagne

....

It must be strange, he thought, to live in what was virtually a museum, even
as  a  kind  of  part-time  hobby;  he  would  have  been  continually  afraid  of
damaging  some  priceless  artifact--such  as  the  spinning  wheel  that  Mrs.
Washington had demonstrated to him. At the same time, he could appreciate
that all this activity made a good deal of sense. There was no other way in
which you could really get to understand the past, and there were still many
people on earth who found this an attractive way of life. The twenty or so
farm  workers,  for  example,  were  here  permanently,  summer  and  winter.
Indeed, he found it rather hard to

imagine some of them  in any other environment--even after they had been
thoroughly scrubbed ....

But the kitchen was spotless, and a most attractive smell was floating from it.
Duncan  could  recognize  very  few  of  its  ingredients,  but  one  was
unmistakable, even though he had met it today for the first time in his life. It
was the mouth-watering fragrance of newly baked bread.

It would be all right, he assured his still slightly queasy stomach. He had to
ignore the undeniable fact that everything on the table was grown from dirt
and  dung,  and  not  synthesized  from  nice,  clean  chemicals  in  a  spotless
factory. This was how the human race had lived for almost the whole of its
history; only in .

the last few seconds of time had there been any alternative.

For one gut-wrenching moment, until Washington

had  reassured  him,  he  had  feared  that  he  might  be  served  real  meat.
Apparently  it  was  still  available,  and  there  was  no  actual  law  against  it,
though many attempts had been made to pass one. Those who

opposed  Prohibition  pointed  out  that  attempts  to  enforce  morality  by
legislation were always counterproductive; if meat were banned, everybody
would want

it, even if it made them sick. And anyway, this was a perversion which did
harm to nobody .... Not so, retorted the Prohibitionists; it would do irreparable
harm  to  countless  innocent  animals,  and  revive  the  revolting  trade  of  the
butcher. The debate continued, with no end in sight.

Confident that lunch would present mysteries but no terrors, Duncan did his
best  to  enjoy  himself.  On  the  whole  he  succeeded.  He  bravely  tackled
everything set before him, rejecting about a third after one nibble, tolerating
another  third,  and  thoroughly  appreciating  the  remainder.  As  it  turned  out,
there was

nothing that he actively disliked, but several items had flavors that were too
strange and complicated to appeal to him at first taste. Cheese, for example--
that was a complete novelty. There were about six

different  kinds,  and  he  nibbled  at  them  all.  He  felt  that  he  could  get  quite
enthusiastic about at 'least two varieties, if he worked on it. But that might not
be  a  good  idea,  for  it  was  notoriously  difficult  to  persuade  the  Titan  food
chemists to introduce new patterns into their synthesizers.

Some products were quite familiar. Potatoes and

tomatoes, it seemed, tasted much the same all over the Solar System. He had
already encountered them, as luxury products of the hydroponic farms, but
had always found it difficult to get enthusiastic about either, at several solars a
kilogram.

The  main  dish  was--well,  interesting.  It  was  something  called  steak  and
kidney pie, and perhaps the

unfortunate name turned him off. He knew perfectly well that the contents
were based on high-protein soya; Washington had confessed that this was the

only item not actually produced on the farm, because the 123

technology  needed  was  too  elaborate.  Nevertheless,  he  could  not  manage
More  than  a  few  bites.  It  was  too  bad  that  every  time  he  tried  to  take  a
mouthful, he kept thinking of the phrase "kidney function" and its unhappy
associations. But the crust of the pie was delicious, and he polished off More
than half of it.

Dessert was no problem. It consisted of a large

variety  of  fruits,  most  of  them  unfamiliar  to  Duncan  even  by  name.  Some
were insipid, others very pleasant, but he felt that all were perfectly safe. The

strawberries  he  thought  especially  good,  though  he  turned  down  the  cream
that  was  offered  with  them  when  he  discovered,  by  tactful  questioning,
exactly how it was made.

He was comfortably replete when Mrs. Washington

produced a final surprise--a small wooden box

containing a wax honeycomb. As long as he could

remember,  Duncan  had  been  familiar  with  that  term  for  lightweight
structures; it required a mental volte-face to realize that this was the genuine,
original item constructed by Terran insects.

"We've  just  started  keeping  bees,"  explained  the  Professor.  "Fascinating
creatures, but we're still not sure if they're worth the trouble. I think you'll like
this honey--try it on this crust of new bread."

His  hosts  watched  him  anxiously  as  he  spread  the  golden  fluid,  which  he
thought looked exactly like lubricating oil. He hoped that it would taste better,
but he was now prepared for almost anything.

There was a long silence. Then he took another

bite--and another.

"Well?" asked George at last.

"It's--delicious--one of the best things I've ever tasted."

"I'm so pleased," said Mrs. Washington. "George, be sure to send some to the
hotel for Mr. Makenzie."

Mr. Makenzie continued to sample the bread and

honey, very slowly. There was a remote and abstracted expression on his face,
which his delighted

hosts attributed to sheer gastronomical pleasure.

They could not possibly have guessed at the real reason.

Duncan had never been particularly interested in 124

food,  and  had  made  no  effort  to  try  the  occasional  novelties  that  were
imported into Titan. The few times that any had been pressed upon him, he
had not enjoyed them; he still grimaced at the memory of a reputed delicacy
called caviar. He was therefore absolutely certain that never before in his life
had he tasted honey.

Yet he recognized it at once; and that was only

half the mystery. Like a name that is on the tip of the tongue, yet eludes all
attempts to grasp it, the memory of that earlier encounter lay just below the
level  of  consciousness.  It  had  happened  a  long  time  ago--but  when,  and
where? For a fleeting moment

he almost took seriously the idea of reincarnation.

You, Duncan Makenzie, were a beekeeper in some

earlier life on Earth ....

Perhaps he was mistaken in thinking that he knew the taste. The association
could have been triggered by some random leakage between mental circuits.

And anyway, it could not possibly be of the slightest importance ....

He knew better. Somehow, it was very important

indeed.

HISTORY LESSON

Of all the old cities, it was generally

agreed  that  Paris  and  Washington  offered  the  best  combination  of  beauty,
culture, history--and convenience.

Unlike such largely random aggregations

as London and Rome, which had defied millennia of planning, they had been
adapted fairly easily to automatic transportation. Could he have risen from

his tomb in Arlington, the luckless Pierre Charles L'Enfant would have been
proud indeed to have dis-125

covered  how well he  had laid the ground for a technology centuries in his
future.

Though an official car was available whenever he wished, Duncan preferred
to  be  as  independent  as  possible.  Coming  from  an  aggressively  egalitarian
society, he never felt quite happy when he was afforded special privileges---
except, of course, those he had earned himself. Now that his sprained ankle

was no longer paining him he had no excuse for using personal transport, and
one could never know a

city until one had explored it on foot.

Like  any  ordinary  tourist--and  Washington  expected  the  incredible  total  of
five million before the

end  of  July--Duncan  rode  the  glideways  and  auto-jitneys,  gaping  at  the
famous buildings and remembering

the great men who had lived and worked here

for  half  a  thousand  years.  In  the  five-kilometer-long  rectangle  from  the
Lincoln Memorial to the Capitol, and from the Washington Monument to the

White House, no changes had been permitted for More than a century. To ride
the shuttle down Constitution

Avenue and back along Independence, on

the south side of the Mall, was to take a journey through time.

And time was the problem, for Duncan could spar0

only an hour or two a day for sightseeing. His

planned schedule had already been wrecked by a

factor  that  he  had  refused  to  take  seriously,  despite  numerous  warnings.
Instead of his usual six,

needed no fewer than ten hours of sleep every day.

This  was  yet  another  side  effect  of  the  increased  gravity,  and  there  was
nothing he could do about it; his body stubbornly insisted on the additional
time,  to  overcome  the  extra  wear  and  tear.  Eventually,  he  knew,  he  would
make a partial adaptation, but he could hardly hope to manage with less than
eight hours. It was maddening to have come all this way, to one of the most
fascinating places on  Earth,  and to be compelled to waste More than forty
percent of his life in unconsciousness.

As with most off-worlders, his first target had been the National Museum of
Astronautics on the Mall, because it was here that his own history had begun,
126

that day in July 1969. He had walked past the

flimsy and improbable hardware of the early Space Age, and had taken his
seat with several hundred other visitors in the Apollo Rotunda just before the
beginning of the half-hourly show.

There was nothing that he had not seen many

times before, yet the old drama still gripped him.

Here  were  the  faces  of  the  first  men  to  ride  these  crazy  contraptions  into
space,  and  the  sound  of  their  actual  voices--sometimes  emotionless,
sometimes  full  of  excitement--as  they  spoke  to  their  colleagues  on  the
receding Earth. Now the air shook with the crackling roar of a Saturn launch,
magically re-created exactly as it had taken place on that bright Florida

morning, three hundred and seven years ago--and

still, in many ways, the most impressive spectacle ever staged by man.

The Moon drew closer--not the busy world that

Duncan knew, but the virgin Moon of the twentieth century, Hard to imagine
what it must have meant to people of that time, to whom the Earth was not
only the center of the Universe, but--even to the most sophisticated--still the
whole of creation ....

Now Man's first contact with another world was

barely minutes ahead. It seemed to Duncan that he was floating in space, only
meters away from the spidery Lunar Module, bristling with antennas and

wrapped in multicolored metal foil. The simulation was so perfect that he had
an  involuntary  urge  to  hold  his  breath,  and  found  himself  clutching  the
handrail, seeking reassurance that he was still on Earth.

"Two minutes, twenty seconds, everything looking good. We show altitude
about 47,000 feet . . ." said Houston to the waiting world of 1969, and to the
centuries  to  come.  And  then,  cutting  across  the  voice  of  Mission  Control,
making a montage of conflicting accents, was a speaker whom for a moment
Duncan

could not identify, though he knew the voice ....

"I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before
this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to

the Earth."

Even back in 1969, that was already a voice from the grave; the President
who had launched Apollo in that speech to Congress had never lived to see
the achievement of his dream.

"We're now in the approach phase, everything looking good. Altitude 5,200
feet."

And once again that voice, silenced six years earlier in Dallas:

"We set sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to be gained, and
new rights to be won, and they must be won and used for the progress of all
people .... "

"Roger. Go for landing, 3,000 feet. We're go. Hang tight. We're go. 2,000 feet.
2,000 feet..."

"And why, some say, the Moon? Why choose this as our goal . . . ? Why,
thirty-five  years  ago,  fly  the  Atlantic?  WE  CHOOSE  TO  GO  TO  THE
MOON!"

"200 feet, 4½ downl 5½ down, 160, 6/ down,

5½ down, 9 forward, 120 feet, 100 feet, 3/5 down, 9 forward, 75 feet, things
still looking good..."

"We choose to go to the Moon in this decade be cause that challenge is one
that we're willing to ac cept, one that we are unwilling to postpone, and one
that we intend to win!"

"Forward,  forward  40  feet,  down  2½,  kicking  up  some  dust,  30  feet,  2½
down, faint shadow, 4 for ward, 4 forward, drifting to the right a little ....

Contact light. O.K. engine stopped, descent engine command overide off . . .
Houston, Tranquillity Base here. The Eagle has landed."

The music rose to a crescendo. There before his

eyes, on the dusty Lunar plain, history had lived again. And presently he saw
the clumsy, spacesuited figure climb down the ladder, cautiously test the alien
soil, and utter the famous words:

"That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind."

As always, Duncan listened for that missing "a"

before the word "man," and as always, he was un able to detect it. A whole
book had been written about that odd slip of the tongue, using as its starting
point  Nell  Armstrong's  slightly  exasperated  "That's  what  I  intended  to  say,
and that's what I thought I said."

All of this, of course, was simulation--utterly

convincing,  and  apparently  life-sized  by  the  magic  of  holography--but
actually contrived in some studio by patient technicians, two centuries after
the events themselves. There was Eagle, glittering in the fierce sunlight, with
the Stars and Stripes frozen motionless beside it, just as it must have appeared
early in the Lunar morning of that first day. Then the music became quiet,
mysterious . . . something was about to

happen. Even though he knew what to expect, Duncan felt his skin crawling
in the ancient, involuntary reflex which Man had inherited from his hirsute
ancestors.

The imag faded, dissolved into another--similar, yet different. In a fraction of
a second, three centuries had dropped away.

They were still on the Moon, viewing the Sea of

Tranquillity  from  exactly  the  same  vantage  point.  But  the  direction  of  the
light had changed, for the sun was now low and the long shadows threw into
relief all the myriads of footprints on the trampled ground.

And there stood all that was left of Eagle--the slightly peeled and blistered
descent  stage,  standing  on  its  four  outstretched  legs  like  some  abandoned
robot.

He was seeing Tranquillity Base as it was at this instant--or, to be precise, a
second and a quarter ago, when the video signals left the Moon. Again, the
illusion  was  perfect;  Duncan  felt  that  he  could  walk  out  into  that  shining
silence and feel the warm metal beneath his hands. Or he could reach down

into the dust and lift up the flag, to end the old debate that had reerupted in
this Centennial Year.

Should the Stars and Stripes be left where the blast of the takeoff had thrown
it, or should it be erected again? Don't tamper with history, said some. We're
only restoring it, said others ....

Something was happening just beyond the fenced-off area, at the very limits
of the 3-D scanners. It was shockingly incongruous to see any movement at

all at such a spot; then Duncan remembered that

the Sea had lost its tranquillity at least two centuries ago. A busful of tourists
was slowly circling the land129

ing site, its occupants in full view through the curving glass of the observation
windows. And though

they could not see him, they waved across at the scanners, correctly guessing
that someone on Earth was watching at this very moment.

The  interruption  should  have  destroyed  the  magic,  yet  it  did  not.  Nothing
could detract from the skill and courage of the pioneers; and they would have
been happy to know that, where they had first ventured, thousands could now
travel in safety and in

comfort.

That, in the long run, was what History was all

about.

BUDGET

I iloday'l" I walked at least three kilometers, and was on my feet for over two
hours. I'm beginning to feel that life is possible on Earth ....

"But  I  must  be  careful  not  to  overdo  it,  and  I'm  still  using  glideways  and
transporters most of the time.

This means that I've not visited the White House or the Capitol, which can
only be entered on foot. But I've been to the Museum of Technology and the

National Gallery of Art. They have transport cubicles that you can program
yourself, so there's no need to waste time on exhibits that don't interest you.
Of course, I could stay in the hotel and take a holovision tour anywhere, but
that would be ridiculous. I could do that any time, back at home ....

"I  must  remember  that  I'll  be  replaying  these  words  twenty,  fifty,  maybe  a
hundred years from now, when this visit to Earth is a dim memory. So it may

be a good idea to describe a typical day--if there is such a thing!--here at the
Centennial Hotel.

"I wake up at six-thirtv and listen to the radio 130

news summary while I'm having my bath. Then I dial the Comsole for any
messages that have arrived during the night--usually there are half a dozen.
Not

many people know I'm here yet, but I've had quite a few offers of. hospitality
and have been asked to speak to a number of social and cultural groups. I
suspect Ambassador Farrell is behind most of these.

"Then I set the news abstractor to print out anything that's happened in my
area of interest, and

scan  the  result.  That  doesn't  take  long,  since  I  give  TITAN  as  the  main
heading, and we're never in the news. It I want to know what's happening at
home, I call the Embassy and get the daily dispatch. Usually that makes me
rather homesick, especially when

my friends and family are being reported. Which is most days...

"At seven-fifteen I go down to breakfast. As there are only a dozen guests--
the place won't get crowded until later in June--I have a table to myself. We
nod  politely  at  each  other,  but  no  one  is  very  sociable  at  this  time  in  the
morning.

"The food and service are excellent, and I'm going to miss both when I get
home. Terrans know how to live comfortably--they've had enough time to

tice-but  it  was  several  days  before  I  realized  that  the  hotel  was  unusual,
maybe  unique.  It's  been  set  up  purely  for  the  duration  of  the  festivities,
regardless of expense, ust for us VIP guests. Staff has been

brought  from  all  over  thee  world--some  protessional,  some  voluntary,  like
those academic clowns who met us when we arrived. (I stillsee them from
time to time, and still can't understand a word they say. Because I'm darker
than they are, I think they enjoy

making a fool of me.)

"For breakfast---in fact, for all my meals--I try to have something new every
day, and this has

caused problems. I won't forget my first eggs ....

"I  asked  for  them  boiled--because  that  was  the  first  listing--and  the  waiter
said, 'How many minutes, sir?' (I don't think I'll ever get used to being called

'sir' by people who are not trying to insult me.) Of course, I had no idea what
to answer, so I said 'Medium rare,' which was a phrase I'd picked up at din131

her the night before. The waiter looked at me rather oddly, I thought.

"He came back five minutes later with two eggs sitting in silver cups, and
placed them in front of me.

I just sat there looking at them; never having seen eggs before, I'd no idea
what to do next. And incidentally, they were larger than I'd imagined.

"I'm afraid I might have gone hungry if another guest a couple of tables away
hadn't ordered the same thing. I watched him carefully, and discovered that
you start by cutting off the top of the shell with a knife. I made a horrible
mess of the first egg, but got it right the second time. Laler, I found that they'll
do this in the kitchen, which saves a lot of trouble. I'll never ask for eggs this
way again, but I'm glad I did it once.

"The taste--though not the texture--was perfectly normal. Our chemists have
done a good job here, and I'd never have known that it wasn't synthetic. I've
since discovered that very few Terrans have ever tasted a real egg, and there
are  only  two  or  three  farms  that  still  produce  them.  Hens  are  not  very
interesting animals it appears.

"I should have mentioned the Menu--it's a most elaborate affair, beautifully
printed, and changes every day. I'm keeping a set as a souvenir, though I don't
recognize  half  the  items--or  understand  many  of  the  instructions.  I  suspect
that some are jokes.

What does 'No Tipping' mean? And 'Gentlemen are

requested to use the cuspidors provided'? What is a cuspidor? And why only
gentlemen and not ladies?

I must ask George.

"After breakfast I go back to my room and deal with the overnight messages.
Usually I spend the next two or three hours at the Comsole, talking to people,
recording data, transferring items from the main memory to my Minisec, or
vice versa.

"Most of this is dull but important; I'm working through a list of contacts that
every head of department on Titan has given me. I'm trying to be as tactful as
possible, but I'm afraid I'm not going to be

very popular by the time I've delivered all these complaints and apologies.

"And  I've  run  into  something  that  complicates  business  on  Earth  to  an
incredible extent. I knew about it, but hadn't realized its full implications. It's
the problem of Time Zones ....

"There  are  some  advantages  in  belonging  to  a  corridor  culture.  We're  not
slaves of the sun, and can

set all our clocks to the same time, all over Titan.

But on Earth!

"There are four time zones--America, Africa, Asia, Oceania--six hours apart.
So when you want to

speak to anyone, or make an appointment, you have to know what zone he's
in. And when you move from one zone to motter, you have to put your watch

ahead--or back--six hours.

"It's very awkward and confusing, but it was even worse a couple of centuries
ago; then there were twenty-[our zones, one for every hour of the day! The
development of global telecommunications made that situation impossible--
not that it's very satisfactory even now. There's talk of going over to a single
World  Time--probably  Absolute  Ephemeris  Time--and  ig-ignoring  the  day-
night cycle, just as we do But the

arguments on both sides are nicely balanced, and no one expects a decision in

a hurry. After all, it took several hundred years to get the World Calendar

adopted, and that was because the Martian and Lunar administrations simply
wouldn't put up with

Earth's ridiculous months alny longer ....

"Where was I? Oh, the morning's business. By noon, I usually feel that I need
a break, and I spend half an hour in the swimming pool. At first I did this
merely to get away from gravity, but now I enjoy it for its own sake. I've even
learned to swim, and feel quite confident in the water. When I get home, I'll
be a regular visitor to the Oasis pool.

"After that, I go for a quick walk in the hotel grounds. There are More flowers
and trees here than I ever imagined, all beautifully kept. It reminds me a little
of George's farm, though on a smaller scale.

But Earth is a dangerous place, and there are things 133

I'd not been warned about. Who would have guessed that there were plants
with thorns on them--sharp enough to draw blood? I'm going to make very
sure  they  never  take  me  to  any  really  wild  places  on  this  complicated  old
planet.

"And  even  here  in  Washington,  not  everything  is  under  control.  Yesterday,
just as I was going for a walk, it started to rain. Rain.t In no time, the streets
were wet and glistening; they looked so slippery I should have been afraid to
walk on them, but from my window I could see people moving about as if

nothing had happened. Some of them weren't even

wearing protective clothing ....

"After watching for a while, I went down to the lobby and stood under the
portico. I had to fight off the bellboys--they tried to get me a car, and couldn't
believe  I  merely  wanted  to  watch  the  falling  water  from  a  safe  place.
Eventually I managed to make myself believe that it wasn't liquid ammonia,
and stepped outside for a few seconds, all in the cause of science.

Needless to say, I got wet very quickly, and I can't say I really enjoyed it.

"Around thirteen hundred I go to lunch, usually with someone who wants to

talk business or politics, or both. There are some wonderful restaurants here,
and the great problem is not to eat too much. I've put on a couple of kilos
since I arrived .... One of the favorite dining places--I've been there several
times--is called the Sans Souci, which means "without a care" in Greek or
Latin, I'm not sure which.

Apparently President Washington himself used to

eat there, though I find that hard to believe. One would have thought they'd
have had photographs to prove it---stupid!--I keep forgetting--

"I met my first congressmen in the Sans Souci--Representative Matsukawa of
Hawaii, Senator Gromeyko

of Alaska. It was a purely social get-together;

we had no business to discuss. But they were interested in Titan because they
both felt that it had some points in common with their states, now temporarily
back in the Union. They're quite right--Engineer Warren Mackenzie made the
same point, aboard Sirius. 134

To  the  people  who  explored  the  Pacific  in  canoes,  the  ocean  must  have
seemed about as large as the Solar System. And the development of Alaska,
in its time, must have been as tough a job as getting a foothold on Titan.

"After lunch I do a little sightseeing, then get back to the hotel and carry on
with the day's business, until dinnertime. By then, I'm too exhausted to think
of anything but bed; the very latest I've been awake is twenty-one thirty. It's
going  to  be  quite  embarrassing  if  I  don't  adapt  soon  to  the  local  life  style.
Already I've had to turn down several party invitations

because  I  couldn't  afford  to  miss  the  sleep.  That  sort  of  thing  isn't  easy  to
explain, and I hope I've not offended any of the hostesses this city's famous
for.

"I  have  accepted  one  late  engagement,  because  George  stressed  its
importance. This is to speak--in person, not holovision--to a group called the

Daughters of the Revolutions. They're mostly elderly ladies ("Queen dragons-
-but dears when you get to know them," George said) and they're all over the
place  this  Centennial  year.  Originally  they  were  only  concerned  with  the
American Revolution, but later they became less exclusive. I'm told I'll meet

direct descendants of Lenin and Mao and Balunga. What a pity Washington
never had any children. . . I wonder why.

"Because I've given priority to my official mission

--I'm still working on that damn speech--I've had almost no time for personal
or family business.

About the only thing I've been able to do in this direction is to contact the
bank and establish my credentials, so that I can use Malcolm's accumulated

funds. Even if everything works out according to plan and our estimates are
correct, the budget will be tight. My big fear is running out of money and
having  to  go  to  Finance  for  More  of  our  precious  Terran  solars.  If  that
happens, the family will be under attack from all quarters, and it won't be easy
to think of a good defense.

"This is one reason why I've done no shopping4

that, and the time factor. I won't know how much money I'll have until I'm
almost  ready  to  leave!  But  I  have  run  some  of  the  catalogs  through  the
Comsole, and they're fascinating. You could spend a lifetime

--and  a  million  solars  a  day--sampling  the  luxuries  of  Earth.  Every
conceivable  artifact  has  its  tape  stored  somewhere,  waiting  to  go  into  a
replicator.

Since manufacturing costs are essentially zero, I don't understand why some
items are so expensive. ,The capital costs of the replicators must have been
written off decades ago, one would have thought. Despite Colin's efforts, I
don't really understand Terran economy.

"But  I'm  learning  many  things,  fast.  For  example,  there  are  some  smart
operators around, on the lookout for innocents from space. Yesterday I was
going

through a display of Persian carpets--antique, not replicated--wondering if I
could  possibly  afford  to  take  a  small  one  back  to  Marissa.  (I  can't.)  This
morning  there  was  a  message--addressed  to  me  personally,  correct  room
number--from a dealer in Teh-ran,

offering his wares at very special rates. He's

probably  quite  legitimate,  and  may  have  some  bar-  gains--but  how  did  he
know?  I  thought  Comsole  circuits  were  totally  private.  But  perhaps  this
doesn't apply to some commercial services. Anyway, I didn't answer.

"Nor have I acknowledged some even More personal messages from various
Sex Clubs. They were

very  explicit,  and  I've  stored  them  as  mementos  for  my  old  age.  After  the
carpet episode, I was wondering if any would be tailored to my psych profile,

which must be on record somewhere--that would have made me mad. But it
was very broadband stuff, and the artwork was beautiful. Perhaps when I'm
not so busy..."

Duncan stopped talking; he was not quite sure

why--and then he began to laugh at his hesitation.

Could it be that, despite fairly heroic efforts, the Makenzies were puritanical
after all? For he had just recalled that, only a kilometer or so from this very
136

spot, a President of the United States had got into perfectly terrible trouble
with a tape recorder.

But whether it had been a Roosevelt or a Kennedy, he was not quite sure.

DAUGHTERS OF THE REVOLUTIONS

George Washington had been right; they did look like dragons. Formidable,
tight-lipped  ladies,  few  of  them  were-under  seventy,  and  they  sported  the
most astonishing array of hats, in More shapes and sizes than Duncan would
have  believed  possible.  On  Titan,  hats  were  as  rare  as  wigs,  and  even  less
useful.

Not that there was any question of utility with

most of this headgear; it was obviously designed to impress or intimidate. It

certainly intimidated Dun-carl.

So did the introductions, though he quickly lost track of all the names being
thrown at him. Every one of these ladies, it appeared, boasted ancestors who
had  played  some  role  in  the  great  revolutions  that  had  shaped  the  modern
world. As he shook

hands, and listened to the chairperson's brief comments, he felt that he was
being presented with snapshots of history. Most of the audience, of course,

traced its involvement back to the birth of the United States, and he had heard
vaguely  of  such  places  as  Yorktown  and  Valley  Forge.  But  he  could  only
smile  with  feigned  comprehension  when  hearing  of  revered  ancestors  who
had fought in the hills with Castro, or accompanied Mao on the Long March,
or shared the sealed train with Lenin, or fallen in the final assault on Cape
Town ....

At  last  all  the  introductions--including  his  own--were  completed.  Feeling
none too sure of himself, Dun137

can perched on the high chair overlooking his expectant audience.

"Perhaps I should apologize," he began, "for addressing you from a seated
position. But as you

know, I've spent all my life on a world with only a fraction of Earth's gravity.
Believe  me,  having  five  times  normal  weight  isn't  exactly  enjoyable!  How
would  you  like  it  if  you  woke  up  one  morning  and  found  your  scales
registered----oh--three hundred and fifty kilograms?"

There was a moment of shocked surprise as the

audience confronted this startling vision, then a titter ran around the room.
Fine, Duncan told himself

--I've  broken  the  ice.  Then  he  realized  that  there  was  an  undertone  of
something besides good-natured

amusement in the sound, as if the listeners were laughing not with him, but at
him.

He glanced frantically around the audience; then, to his horror, saw that there

was a perfectly enormous woman halfway back on the far left. She was the
fattest person Duncan had ever seen--and the entire

audience seemed to be carefully not looking in her direction.

Well, thought Duncan, I've got nothing More to

lose. It can only go uphill from here. He plunged into his prepared speech.

"The history of my world goes back little More than halfway to the event we
are all celebrating next month. The first manned ship touched down on Titan
in  2015--but  the  first  permanent  base  wasn't  established  there  until
considerably later--2046. Even

then, it was only a scientific observation post, with the crews rotating back to
Earth every few years.

There was no thought, in those days, of a self-contained colony that might
eventually develop its

own culture, just as happened on this continent. In any case, the twenty-first
century was too busy dealing with Mars and the Moon to have the energy, or

the resources, for activities farther afield."

Could  that  have  been  a  yawn  he  spotted  there,  near  the  back  of  the  hall?
Surely not so soon! He was being morbidly sensitive; that sea of hats was
getting 138

him down. Most of the faces beneath them seemed to be reasonably attentive
....

But how to make these sleek and elegant matrons

--not  one  of  whom,  probably,  had  ever  been  farther  than  the  Moon--
understand the harsh realities of his distant world? It was a challenge, and that
was something that no Makenzie could ever resist.

"You may wonder why anyone would want to settle down in a place where
the  temperature  never  rises  above  a  hundred  below  zero,  where  the
atmosphere is poisoned by methane and ammonia, and the sun's so feeble that
you can't detect it heat when it shines full on 3,our face. Well, I won't pretend

that Titan is an atractive tourist resort--though we have some tourists, believe
it or not. But it does have certain unique advantages, which is why it's become
important in human affairs.

"First  of  all,  it's  the  only  place,  outside  the  Earth,  where  a  man  can  move
around on the surface without a full spacesuit. That may surprise you, after
what  I've  just  said  about  the  conditions  there!  I  don't  deny  that  we  need
protection, but it's much less than required on the Moon, or even on Mars.
The atmosphere

is so dense it allows us to breathe with simple

oxygen masks, though we have to be extremely careful to avoid any leaks. If
you've .ever smelled ammonia, you'll know why. And lightweight thermosuits

can cope with the temperature, except in very bad weather.

"Having an atmosphere---even a poisonous one!

--makes life easier in doz6ns of ways. It means that we can use aircraft for
long-distance transportation.

It protects us from meteorites--not that there are many out there--and from the
temperature extremes that a completely airless world would have. And, most
important of all--we've got an atmosphere we can burn, and use as a source of
energy.

"It's just the opposite of the way things are on Earth. Here, you burn hydrogen
compounds, and the atmosphere supplies the oxygen. On Titan, we have to
provide the oxygen, and we burn that in the hydrogen atmosphere. But the
final result is the same heat 139

and energy, to warm ourselves and drive our vehicles

"That hydrogen-rich atmosphere is Titan's greatest asset, and the reason men
settled there in the first place. For without hydrogen, our spaceships cannot
operate.  Our  chemical  rockets  burn  it,  and  our  fusion  rockets--er  fuse  it.
Hydrogen is the key to the Solar System..

"And there are only two places where it's easily obtainable. One is right here--
in the oceans of Earth.

But it's expensive, lifting it out into space against the huge gravity field of
your world--the one that's keeping me pinned to this chair right now."

Duncan paused hopefully, and got a few encouraging smiles.

"The other place is Titan. It's a filling station, if you like, halfway to the stars.
And because of its low gravity, we can export tlydrogen cheaply, to anywhere
in  the  Solar  System,  using  robot  tankers  carrying  up  to  ten  thousand  tons.
Without us, space travel would be at least four times as expensive as it is now,
and interplanetary commerce would be crippled.

"And how we get that hydrogen is interesting.

We've  been  called  'sky  miners'  because  of  the  way  we  take  it  out  of  the
atmosphere.  Specialized  aircraft--'ramscoops'-fly  at  high  altitude  and  ever-
increasing

velocity, collecting hydrogen and liquefying it, then jumping up to orbit when
they have a full load. There they rendezvous with the space tankers, deliver
the goods, and go back into the atmosphere for More.

They stay up for weeks on end, and land only when it's time for servicing, or
a change of crew."

Better not overdo the technicalities, Duncan told himself. It was a pity, but
he'd be wise to Omit the most dramatic part of the whole operation--the fall
down to Saturn after the robot tanker had escaped from Titan, and the hairpin
loop  around  the  giant  planet  taking  advantage  of  its  gravitational  field  to
launch  the  precious  payload  to  the  customer  who  was  waiting  one  or  two
years  in  the  future.  And  he  certainly  couldn't  do  justice  to  the  most
spectacular trip in the Solar System--the Saturn sleighride, as it had been aptly
christened by one of the few men who had 140

raced across the thousands of kilometers of spinning ice that formed the rings.

Duncan bravely resisted these temptations. He had best stick to history and
politics--even  though,  in  this  case,  both  were  largely  by-product  of
technology.

"One could make a very interesting comparison,"

he  continued,  "between  the  settlement  of  Titan  and  the  opening  up  of  this

continent, three or four hundred years earlier. I'm sure it took the same kind of
pioneering spirit, and in our case we're lucky because

we have films and tapes and cassettes of the whole period. More than that--
some of our pioneers are still around, ready to reminisce at the drop of a hat.

In fact, quicker than that, because hats drop slowly on Titan .... "

That  was  rather  neat,  Duncan  told  himself,  though  it  was  undoubtedly
inspired  by  the  view  in  front  of  him.  Why  did  they  wear  the  damn  things
indoors?  Obviously,  they  were  trying  to  outdo  each  other.  Most  of  these
creations were not merely useless; they looked as if they would take off in the
slightest wind.

A flicker of movement caught Duncan's eye. I don't believe it, he thought.
Then he stole another quick glance, hoping his interest would be unobserved.

Either  he  had  taken  leave  of  his  senses,  which  was  an  acceptable  working
hypothesis, or there was a live fish swimming around in the third row. It was
orbiting in a tiny crystal globe, surrounded by a tasteful display of corals and
seashells, on the head of an intense, middle-aged lady who, unhickily, was
staring straight at him with popeyed concentration.

Duncan gulped, gave a sickly smile, and stumbled on. He tried to push to the
back of his mind the baffling problem of the fish's life-support system. If he
stopped to worry about that, he would be tripping over his tongue in no time
at all. Where was he? Oh, back with the pioneers, difficult though it was to
focus on them in this lavishly decorated and slightly overheated room.

"I'm sure many of you have read Professor Prescott's famous book With Axe
and Laser: A Study o! 141

Two Frontiers. Though he draws his parallels between America and Mercury,
everything that he says is also applicable to Titan.

"As  I  recall,  Prescott  argues  that  Man's  conquest  of  the  wilderness  on  this
planet was based on three things: the axe, the plow, and fire. He uses these
symbolically rather than literally; the axe stands for all

tools, the plow for agriculture, and fire for all forms of power generation.

"The  axe  cut  down  the  forests,  shaped  homes  and  furniture.  More  refined

tools manufactured all the other necessities of civilized living, from cups and
saucers to aircraft and computers.

"The axe wasn't much use on the Moon, or Mercury

--or Titan. What took its place was the power laser.

That was the tool that carved out our homes and, later, cities. And it opened
up the mineral resources, buried kilometers down in the rocks.

"Of course, we were luckier than the old pioneers, because we did not have to
spend endless man-hours making every single object that we needed. All the
artifacts of civilization were already stored in the memories of our replicators.
As long as we fed in the raw materials, anything we needed--no matter how
complex--would be produced automatically in a matter of seconds, and in any
quantity we needed. I know we take the replicator for granted, but it would
have seemed like magic to our ancestors.

"As  for  the  plow,  that  too  had  no  place  on  our  world.  But  by  the  twenty-
second century, it had no place on yours either; we simply took your food
technology to the planets. And on Titan, it was easy, much

easier than anywhere else in the Solar System. We have enormous deposits of
hydrocarbons--waxes,

oils, and so forth. Who knows--perhaps one day we may be feeding Earth!

"Finally,  the  third  item--fire.  Occasionally,  we  still  use  it,  though,  as  I
explained, we have to provide the oxygen. But, again as on Earth, we get all
the power we need from nuclear fusion. We're already heating large areas of
Titan  and  are  thinking  about  major  changes  to  its  climate.  But  as  some  of
these may be be irreversible, we're proceeding very cautiously. We 142

don't want to repeat the mistakes that have been made--elsewhere."

Duncan nearly said "on Earth," but tactfully changed gear just in time. He did
a swift scan of the audience, carefully avoiding the fish in the third row.

The ladies still seemed to be with him, though one or two hats were nodding
suspiciously.

"Yet  despite  their  sophisticated  tools,  the  first  generation  of  our  pioneers

probably had as tough a time

as your Pilgrim Fathers. What they lacked in hostile Indians was More than
made up for by a hostile environment.

Deaths by accident were common; anyone

who was careless did not live long on Titan in the early days ....

"But, slowly and painfully, we managed to convert our first primitive bases,
which  had  no  More  than  the  bare  necessities  for  survival,  into  fairly
comfortable towns, then cities . . . like Meridian, Carbonville, Oasis.

True, the largest has a population of only fifty thousand--there are still fewer
than a quarter of a million of us on Titan---but, as we all know, quality is
More important than quantity."

There were a few smiles at this strikingly original remark, and Duncan felt
encouraged to continue, but then he saw something that almost stopped him
dead in his tracks.

The smallest member of his audience was showing

obvious signs of distress. Back there in the third row, that infernal fish was
swimming round and round at an acute angle to the rest of the world. Since
Duncan had noticed no alteration in the force of gravity, he could only assume
that something had happened to its sense of balance. Even as he watched, it
flipped over on its side ....

Very close at hand, somebody was talking, using

Duncan's voice. Whether the words mnde any sense, he could not even euess.
He was elsewhere, struggling with a problem of life and death.

Should he stop talking, and warn Miss Fishbowl of the impendine tragedy of
which she was obviously unaware? Perhaps there was still time for her to rush
to be nearest animal hospital. That creature might be the last of its species--
the only one in the 143

world, doomed to extinction owing to his negligence

....

Alas, it was too late. With a final convulsive wriggle, the fish turned belly up
and floated motionless in its crystal globe. Duncan had never received a More
obvious hint. As quickly as possible he brought his peroration to a close. To
his astonishment the applause seemed perfectly genuine.

He hoped he was not mistaken, but in any event

he was quite sure of one thing. After this ordeal, speaking to the Congress of
the United States would be child's play.

CALINDY

Te package had been delivered to Duncan's

room while he was lecturing. It was a small, neatly wrapped cylinder, about
fifteen  centimeters  high  and  ten  across,  and  he  could  not  imagine  what  it
contained.

He hefted it in his hand a few times; it was fairly heavy, but not heavy enough
to be metal. When he tapped it, there was merely a dull, unreverberant thud.

He abandoned futile speculation and to.re open the envelope taped around the
cylinder.

Mt. Vernon Farm

Dear Duncan,

Sorry about the delay, but we had a little accident.

Charlemagne managed to walk into the

hives one night. Luckily--or not, depending on

the  point  of  view--our  bees  don't  sting.  However,  production  was  badly
affected.

Remembering your reaction last time, Clara

and I thought you might like this souvenir of

your visit.

Best,

George

How kind of them, Duncan told himself. When he

got through the wrappings, he found a transparent plastic jar, full of golden
liquid.  The  locking  mechanism  on  the  screw-top  lid  baffled  him  for  a
moment--it had to be pushed down and tightened before it could be opened--
but after a few frustrating minutes he had it off.

The  smell  was  delicious,  and  once  again  there  was  that  haunting  sense  of
familiarity.  Like  a  small  boy,  he  could  not  resist  dipping  in  a  finger,  then
savoring the tip with his tongue.

Some delayed-action circuit was operating: deep in the recesses of memory,
the  most  primitive--and  po-tent--of  all  senses  was  opening  doors  that  had
been

locked for years.

His body remembered before his mind. As he relaxed contentedly in a warm
glow of sheer animal lust, everything came back to him.

Honey tasted like Calindy ....

Sooner or later, of course, he would have contacted her. But he wanted time to
adjust, and to feel as much at home on Earth as he could ever be. So he had
told himself; but that was not the only reason.

The logical part of his mind had no wish for him to be sucked back into the
whirlpool that had engulfed him as a boy. But in matters of the heart, logic
was always defeated. In the long run, it could do no More than say: "I told
you so "And

by then it was too

late.

He

had known Calindy'stbody, but he had been too

young to know her love. Now he was a man--and there was nothing that Karl
could do to stop him.

The

first task was to locate Calindy. He felt some disappointment that she had not
already contacted him,

for the news of his arrival had been well publicized.

Was she indifferent--even embarrassed? He would

take that chance.

Duncan

walked to the Comsole, and the screen became

alive as his fingers brushed the ON pad. Now it was a miracle beyond the
dreams of any poet, a charmed magic casement, opening on all seas, all lands.

Through this window could flow everything that 145

Man had ever learned about his universe, and every work of art he had saved
from the dominion of Time.

All the libraries and museums that had ever existed could be funneled through
this screen and the millions like it scattered over the face of Earth. Even the
least sensitive of men could be overwhelmed by the thought that one could
operate  a  Comsole  for  a  thousand  life-times--and  barely  sample  the
knowledge stored within

the memory banks that lay triplicated in their widely separated caverns, More
securely guarded than any gold. There was an appropriate irony in the fact
that two of these buried complexes had once been control centers for nuclear
missiles.

But now Duncan was not concerned with the heritage of mankind; he had a

More modest objective in

view.  His  fingers  tapped  out  the  word  INFO,  and  the  screen  instantly
displayed:

PLEASE SPECIFY CATEGORY

01. General

02. Science

03. History

04. Arts

05. Recreati6n

06. Geography

07. Earth Directory

08. Moon Dir. ectory

09. Planet Directory

and so on for More than thirty subject headings.

As his fingers tapped out 07, Duncan could not help recalling his very first
confrontation with the Terran Comsole system. The categories were almost
the  same  as  on  Titan,  but  ^CTIV^TE  was  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the
keyboard,  and  the  unfamiliar  position  had  made  him  forget  to  press  it.  So
nothing had happened for a good five seconds; then a really beautiful girl had
appeared on the screen and said sweetly, in a voice to

which  Duncan  could  have  listened  forever:  "You  seem  to  be  having  some
difficulty. Have you remembered to press ACTIVATE.9''

He had stared at her until she faded out, leaving a dazzling smile that, like the
Cheshire Cat, lingered ia 146

his memory. Though he had promptly repeated the

same mistake five times in a row, she never came back. It was a different girl

each time. Oh well, he told himself, they had probably all been dead for years
....

When EARTH DIRECTORY came up, he was requested

to give Family Name, Given Names, Personal

Number, and Last Known Address-Region, Country,

Province,  Postal  Code.  But  that  was  the  problem--he  had  not  heard  from
Calindy for five years, and had never known her personal number. It had even
been hard to recall her family name; if it had been Smith or Long or Lee the
task would have been hopeless.

He typed out ELLERMAN, CATHERINE LINDEN, and

a  string  of  DON'T  KNOWS.  The  Comsole  shot  back:  WHAT
INFORMATION DO YOU WANT.9

Duncan answered: ADrmESS AND VIDDY NUMBER: ACTIVATE

Suppose Calindy had changed her name? Unlikely;

she was not the sort of woman who would let herself be dominated by any
man, even if she established a long-term relationship with one. Duncan could
imagine the man changing his name, rather than the other way around ....

He  had  barely  completed  this  thought  when,  to  his  surprise,  the  screen
announced:

ELLERMAN, CATHERINE LINDEN

North Arian

New York

New York

Personal: 373:496:000:000

Viddy: 99: 373:496:000:000

The speed with which the system had located

Calindy was so amazing that it was several seconds before two even More
surprising facts registered in Duncan's mind.

The first was that Calindy had managed to secure a--quite literally--one-in-a-
million personal identification.

The second was that she had been able to get

it  incorporated  in  her  viddy  number.  Duncan  would  not  have  believed  it
possible; Karl had once tried to do the same thing, and even he had failed.
Cahndy's 147

powers of persuasion had always been remarkable, but he realized that he had
underestimated them.

So here she was, not only on this planet, but on this continent--a mere five
hundred kilometers away. He had only to tap out that number, and he could
look once More into the eyes that had so often smiled at him from the bubble
stereo.

He knew that he was going to do it; of that there was never any question. Yet
still  he  hesitated,  partly  savoring  the  moment  of  anticipation,  partly
wondering just what he was going to say. He had still not decided this when,
almost impulsively, he tapped out the fourteen digits that opened up the road
to the past.

Duncan would never have recognized her had they

met in the street; he had forgotten what years of Earth

.gravity could do. For long seconds he stared at the image, unable to speak.
Finally she broke the silence, with a slightly impatient: "Yes? What is it?"

Before he could answer, Duncan found it necessary to start breathing again.

"Calindy," he said, "don't you remember me?"

The expression in those lustrous eyes changed imperceptibly.

Then there was the trace of a smile,

though a wary one. Be reasonable, Duncan told himself; she can't possibly

recognize you, after fifteen

years. How many thousands of people has she met in that time, on this busy,
crowded world? (And how many lovers, since Karl?)

But she surprised him, as usual.

"Of course, Duncan--how lovely to see you. I knew you were on Earth, and
had been wondering

when you'd call."

He felt a little embarrassed, as perhaps he was intended to do.

"I'm sorry," he said. "I was incredibly busy. The Centennial celebrations, you
know."

As he stared into the screen, the remembered features slowly emerged from
the stranger looking back

at him. The impact of the years was not as great as he had supposed; much of
the unfamiliarity was purely artificial. She had changed the color of her hair
so that it was no longer black, but brown, shot with flecks of gold. The oval of
the face was the same, the ivory 148

skin still flawless. When he forgot that image in the bubble stereo, he could
see that she was still Calindy

--More mature, and even More desirable.

He  could  also  see  that  she  was  sitting  in  a  crowded  office,  with  shadowy
figures coming and going all around her, and occasionally handing her sheafs
of documents. Somehow, he had never imagined Calindy as a busy executive,
but he was quite sure that if she had set her heart on the role, she would be a
great  success.  It  was  obvious,  however,  that  this  was  no  time  for  tender
endearments.  The  best  that  he  could  hope  for  was  to  arrange  a  meeting  as
soon as possible.

He had come all the way from Saturn; it should not be difficult to span the
extra distance between Washington and New York. But, it seemed, there were

problems. He even got the impression that there was some hesitation, even

reluctance, on Calindy's part.

She  consulted  a  very  complicated  diary,  threw  several  dates  at  him,  and
appeared slightly relieved when Duncan found that they clashed with his own
appointments.

He was becoming quite disheartened when she

suddenly  exclaimed:  "Wait  a  minute---are  you  free  next  Thursday--and
Friday?"

"I think so--yes, I could manage." It was almost a week ahead; he would have
to be patient. But two days--that sounded promising.

"Wonderful."  A  slow,  mischievous  smile  spread  over  her  face,  and  for  a
moment the old Calindy

looked back at him.

"And it's perfect--so very appropriate I

couldn't

have arranged it better if I'd tried."

"Arranged what?" asked Duncan.

"Contact

the van Hyatts at this number they're just

outside  Washington--and  do  exactly  what  they  tell  you.  Say  that  Enigma's
asked them to bring you along as my personal guest. They're nice people and
you'll  like  them.  Now  I  really  must  -break  off--see  you  next  week."  She
paused for a moment, then said carefully:

"I'd better warn you that I'll be so busy we won't have much time, even then.
But I promise you --you'll really enjoy the experience."

Duncan

looked at her doubtfully. Notwithstanding

that assurance, he felt disappointed; he also hated to be involved in something
over which he had no control.

Makenzies organized other people---for Their

own good, of course, even if the victim did not always agree. This reversal of
standard procedure made him uncomfortable.

"I'll come," he said, taking the plunge. "But at least tell me what this is all
about."

Calindy gave that stubborn little moue which he

remembered so well.

"No," she replied firmly. "I'd be violating the motto of my own organization,
and even the executive vice-president can't do that."

"What organization?"

"Really?" she said, with a smile of pure delight. "I thought Enigma was rather
well known, but this

makes it even better. Anyone on Earth will tell you our slogan . . ." She broke
off for a second to collect some documents from another harried assistant.

"Good-bye, Duncan--I have to rush. See you

soon."

"Your slogan!" he almost yelled at her.

She blew him a dainty kiss.

"Ask the van Hyatts. Lots of love."

The screen was blank.

Duncan did not immediately contact the van

Hyatts; he waited for a few minutes, until he had emotionally decompressed,

then called his host and general

adviser.

"George," he said, "have you heard of Enigma Associates?"

"Yes, of course. What about them?"

"Do you know their slogan?"

"We astonish."

"Eh?"

Washington repeated the phrase, slowly and carefully.

"Well, I'm astonished. What does it mean?'

"You  might  say  they're  very  sophisticated  entertainers,  or  impresarios,
working on a highly individual

basis. You go to them when you're bored, and

want novelty. They analyze your psych profile, run it through their computer
banks, and come up with a 150

program  to  fit  the  time  and  money  you're  prepared  to  invest.  They  may
arrange for you to live at the North Pole, or take up a new profession, or have
an exotic love affair, or write a play, or learn three-dimensional chess .... And
they  rely  a  great  deal  on  the  element  of  surprise---you  never  know  what
they've planned for you until you're already involved .... "

"Suppose you don't like their program, and want to pull out?"

"Apparently, that very seldom happens. They know their job--and, moreover,
you don't get your money back. But how did you hear about them? I hope you
aren't bored?

Duncan laughed.

"I haven't had time for that luxury. But I've just contacted an old friend who's
apparently vice-president of the organization, and she's invited me to join a
group for a couple of days. Would you advise it?"

"Frankly, that's very difficult to say. How well does she know you?"

"We've not met for fifteen years, since she visited Titan."

"Then  whatever  program  she's  invited  you  to  join  will  be  fairly  bland  and
innocuous, especially if it lasts only two days. Your chances of survival are
excellent.''

"Thank you," said Duncan. "That's all I wanted to know."

The van Hyatts, when he introduced himself to

them a little later, were able to fill in a few More details.

They were a friendly but rather highly strung

couple in late middle age, which was itself some reassurance.

Calindy would hardly dump them in the

heart  of  a  desert  with  one  canteen  of  water,  or  set  them  climbing  Mount
Everest. Duncan felt reasonably confident that he could handle whatever was
in

store for them.

"We've been instructed," said Bill van Hyatt, "to wear old clothes and sturdy
boots, and to carry' raincoats.

It also says here, 'Hard hats will be provided

when necessary.' What on Earth is a hard hat?"

The van Hyatts, Duncan decided, had led somewhat sheltered lives.

"A hard hat," he explained, "is a protective helmet of metal or plastic. Miners
and construction workers have to wear them."

"That sounds dangerous," said Millie van Hyatt, with obvious relish.

"It sounds like cave-exploring to me. I hate caves."

"Then Enigma won't send you into them. They have your profile, don't they?"

"Yes, but sometimes they decide that what you don't like may be good for
you. Shock treatment. Remember what happened to the Mulligans."

Duncan never did discover what happened to the

Mulligans,  as  he  thought  it  best  not  to  intervene  in  what  looked  to  be
escalating  into  a  family  quarrel.  He  made  hasty  arrangements  for  a
rendezvous at Washington airport next Thursday, signed off, and then sat

wondering if he had done the right thing.

It was quite some time before he was suddenly

struck by a curious omission on Calindy's part---one that both surprised and
saddened him.

She had never asked about Karl.

2S

MYSTERY TOUR

Only an expert on the history of aeronautics

could have dated the vehicle that stood glistening in the late-afternoon light.
Like sailing ships, though in Iess than a tenth of the time, aircraft had reached
their  technological  plateau.  Improvements  in  detail  would  continue
indefinitely, but the era of revolutionary change was long past. J

Bill van Hyatt was convinced that this flying machine was at least a hundred
years old. "It's powered by rubber bands," he insisted. "When we get inside,
152

there'll be a big windlass and we'll all have to walk round and round, winding
it up."

"Thank you, Mr. van Hyatt," said the Enigma representative, who had met
them at Washington airport.

"That's a very interesting idea. We'll bear it in mind."

There were twenty clients in the party, and they all seemed a little tense and
expectant. The only person who was in complete control--in More ways than
one

--was the man from Enigma. He was a tough, self-assured character ("Just call
me Boss--you may

think of something eIse later"); Duncan would have guessed his age at about
fifty. They never discovered his real name, but he had that indefinable air of
authority that comes only from years of command; van

Hyatt advanced the plausible theory that he was a spaceship captain grounded
for some technical misdemeanor.

However, he showed no signs of concealing

any secret disgrace.

Boss's  first  order  to  his  customers  was  completely  unexpected,  but  set  the
tone of the whole enterprise.

"I  must  ask  you,"  he  said,  "to  hand  over  all  watches,  radios,  and
communication devices. You

won't need them until you get home."

He held up an admonitory hand at the chorus of

protests.

"There's  a  good  reason  for  this--and  for  any  other  peculiar  requests  I  may
make. Remember, this whole program has been worked out for your benefit.
If you won't cooperate, you're ,only cheating yourselves.

Cameras and recorders--yes, of course. Use them as much as you like."

There was a general sigh of relief at this. Duncan had noticed that most of his
companions were festooned with equipment designed to capture every

aspect of their experience. A couple were obviously

"tapeworms," those peculiar addicts who went through life accompanied by

voice-actuated recorders, so that nothing they said--or heard--was

ever  lost.  Unless  they  could  do  this,  Duncan  had  been  told,  they  did  not
believe that they had really and truly lived ....

Such a backward-looking obsession was typically

Terran. Duncan could not imagine anyone on his world trying to encapsulate
his whole life so that whenever he wished he could recall any moment of the
past. On Titan, it was the future that mattered.

As he walked to the aircraft, carrying his scanty baggage (toilet necessities, a
change of underwear, raincoat), Duncan decided that van Hyatt's guess at its
age was not too far out. An obvious vertical~lift fusion jet, it probably dated
from the turn of the century, and looked as if it had been built to last forever.

He guessed that it was designed to operate in the five-thousandklick range,
which meant that it could reach

anywhere on Earth in three or four hours. Now he began to understand why
all  watches  had  been  confiscated;  if  the  flight  lasted  any  length  of  time,  it
would be almost impossible to estimate how far they had traveled.

Though the jet was a small one, the score of passengers barely half filled it,
and quickly segregated

themselves  into  little  groups.  Duncan,  with  some  skillful  seatmanship,
managed to get away from the van Hyatts. He was beginning to suspect that
he

would  see--or  certainly  hear--more  than  he  wanted  of  them  before  the
adventure was over.

He snuggled down into the luxurious, though

slightly worn, upholstery and tried his luck with the video screen. As he had
expected,  there  was  no  external  view,  just  continuous  loops  of  canned
scenery.

And the global viddy channels w. ere all blank. There would be no clues here

....

There was, however, a bulky package of literature thoughtfully provided by
Enigma, and he settled

down  to  read  this.  It  described,  in  tantalizingly  vague  detail,  the  types  of
service provided by the organization.

As far as Duncan could judge, Enigma seemed

to combine many of the functions of travel agency, psychiatrist, nursemaid,
procurer, baby-sitter, father confessor, educator, and theatrical, impresario. He
could understand how Calindy had been attracted to such an enterprise, and
was sure that she was very good at her job.

There was a brief announcement from Boss, who

had disappeared into the crc:,., quarters.

'Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Please prepare for take-off. Our flight
time will be between one hour and One day, and we shall not be going beyond
the orbit of the Moon. Refreshments will be available shortly for those who
need them. Thank you."

There was scarcely any change of sound level in

the  cabin  as  the  jet  lifted  and  began  to  climb  like  an  elevator.  Presently
Duncan felt a stirge of forward acceleration, but by this time he had already
lost all sense of direction, despite a deliberate attempt to monitor his inertial-
guidance system. There was no way of telling whether they were flying north,
south, east, or west.

He continued to browse through the Enigma literature, glancing from time to
time at the fare provided

by  the  video  screen.  If  this  was  to  be  believed,  they  were  flying  in  rapid
succession  over  a  desert,  over  the  open  sea,  over  a  range  of  magnificent
mountains, over an ice field, over clouds, over the Moon (or Mercury), and
over an apparently endless stretch of flat,

cultivated fields, laid out in huge squares. This last display was 'particularly
interesting, for Duncan was quite sure that nothing like it had existed for a
couple of hundred years. However, he reluctantly dismissed the theory that
Enigma Associates had managed to invent a tfme machine.

Presently, coffee and light snacks were brought

around by the inevitable and unchanging stewardesses.

Perhaps an hour later--it was amazing how

soon one lost the ability to estimate the passage of time when mechanical aids
were no longer available

--they came around again with a second serving.

Almost immediately after this, the aircraft started to descend.

"We'll be on the ground for about fifteen minutes,"

Boss announced. "If you want to stretch your legs, you're free to do so. But
don't get too far away; we're not going to wait for stragglers."

He had scarcely finished when there was a barely perceptible bump, and the
whisper of the jets faded away into silence. Almost at once there was a rush to
the doors.

The anticlimax was considerable. Wherever they

were, it was already night, and all that could be seen was a large shed, lit by
flickering oil lamps--oil lamps!--beneath which about twenty people were

standing expectantly. The night was so dark and so completely overcast that it
was impossible to see beyond the limited range of the lights. The shed was

apparently standing in a large field or clearing; Duncan thought he could just
see some trees at the limits of vision. There was no sign of any other form

of transportation--either of land or air.

"Any guesses?" said the ubiquitous van Hyatt.

"I haven't the faintest idea. Remember--every-where on Earth is new to me."

"We're somewhere in the tropics."

"What makes you think that? It doesn't seem particularly warm."

"It's so dark. Remember, this is early summer in Washington--twilight lasts all
night, and it never gets really dark."

Duncan was aware of this, somewhere at the back

of his mind; but it was theoretical knowledge, which he would never have
thought of applying to a practical situation. It was very hard for a resident of
Titan to understand all the implications of Earth's seasons.

"So where do you think we are?" he asked.

"Well, we were airborne about two hours . . ."

"As long as that? I would have said not much More than one."

"At least two. So we could be anywhere in Africa, or South America. That is,
if  we  were  traveling  at  full  speed.  Perhaps  the  newcomers  will  have  some
ideas."

They turned out to be equally ignorant, having left Los Angeles about two
hours  earlier  in  another  jet,  which  had  dumped  them  and  taken  off  again.
When

he learned this, van Hyatt walked away muttering,

"Well, it could still be Africa... what a pity we can't see the stars.

There were few empty seats when the aircraft took off again, and soon after
they  were  airborne  Boss  announced:  "As  this  will  be  a  long  hop,  we'll  be
dim~

ming the lights shortly so that you can get some sleep."

This was obviously nonqense, and merely intended 156

to further confuse the now thoroughly disorientated passengers. Nevertheless,
Duncan thought it not a bad idea to acc6pt the suggestion. He might need all

his physical resources to face whatever ordeals

Enigma had in store for him.

He got to sleep More easily than during his first night aboard Sirius. But it
was a far from dreamless sleep, and after many improbable adventures on a
world that seemed neither Earth nor Titan, he found himself trying to reach
Calindy, beckoning to him from a mountaintop. Unfortunately, judging by the
gravity, he must have been on the surface of a neutron star.

"Wake up," said Boss, "we're there .... "

"Out of luck again," grumbled van Hyatt. "If only I could see a few stars..."

There was no chance of that; the sky was still overcast.

Yet  it did not seem quite as dark as at  the last stop, even though that was
several hours earlier.

Van Hyatt agreed, when Duncan pointed this out.

"Either  we're  overtaking  the  sun,  or  we've  flown  all  the  way  back  toward
tomorrow morning. Let's see--that would put us somewhere in the Far East."

"Come along, you sluggards!" shouted

Boss.

"We've got a couple of tons of gear to unload!"

A human chain was quickly formed, and equipment

and packages were rapidly shuttled out of the

cargo hold. This all had to be carried a hundred meters to avoid the jet blast at
takeoff, and his very modest exertions as a porte[ gave Duncan a chance

to examine the landing site.

It was a small, grassy clearing, surrounded by a high wall of trees. For the
first time, Duncan began to have serious qualms. He remembered his night at

Mount Vernon; he could laugh at his fears, now that he realized how tame and

harmless everything had been down on the farm. But this appeared primeval
jungle,  and  there  were  still  dangerous  wild  animals  on  Earth.  Did  Enigma
really know what it was doing?

Well, it was too late to back out now. With a deep-throated roar, the jet heaved
itself off the grass and

started to climb into the sky. Duncan turned his back to the blast, and for a
minute was whipped by flying 157

debris. The diapason of power faded away into

clouds. They were alone in the forest.

For the next hour, however, no one had time to

brood over the precariousness of the situation. There were tents to be erected,
a small mobile kitchen to be activated, lights to be strung from poles, portable
toilets to be set up .... All this was done under the supervision of Boss, with
the expert help of four assistants and the enthusiastic but far from expert help

of  a  dozen  volunteers.  Duncan  was  not  one  of  these;  camping  was  not  a
recreation  that  could  be  practiced  on  Titan,  and  he  could  best  serve  by
keeping out of the way.

However, he found it fascinating to watch the deployment of all this strange
technology. The inflatable

beds looked extremely inviting, and the collapsible seats, though liable to live
up  to  their  name  if  carelessly  handled,  turned  out  to  be  surprisingly
comfortable.

Life in the jungle need not be too rigorous

--but Duncan was still worried about wild animals.

His  imagination  was  full  of  confused  images  of  carnivorous  beasts--lions,
tigers, bears, wolves--against

whom the flimsy fabric of the tents appeared very inadequate protection.

He felt much happier when the bonfire was lit. Its cheerful glow seemed far

More  effective  than  electricity  in  dispelling  the  dangers  of  the  night.  To
Duncan, being able to feel, smell, and throw logs onto a large open fire was a
unique experience, and another rare memory to store for the future. For the
first  time,  he  could  understand  what  fire  mtFst  have  meant  to  early  man.
Looking around at his companions, he

could see that many of them were also discovering their lost past. He was not
the only stranger here--wherever

"here" might be.

Needless to say, Bill van Hyatt had come up with a theory.

"We're not too far from the Equator," he assured Duncan, passing on his way
to the fire with an armful of wood. "Probably a couple of thousand meters
above sea level, or it would be even warmer. Judging by the distance we must
have flown, this could be somewhere in Indonesia."

"But wouldn't it be daylight there?" asked Duncan, somewhat uncertainly. He
did  not  want  to  reveal  his  ignorance  of  geographical  details,  but  he  had  a
vague idea that Indonesia was almost as far from Washington as one could
get. And the one fact of which

they were sure was that they had left late in the afternoon.

"Look at the sky," said Bill confidently. "It soon will be sunrise. Very quick in
the tropics--you know, where the dawn comes up like thunder."

An hour later, however, there was not the slightest sign of the dawn, but no
one except Bill van Hyatt seemed to worry in the least. A loud and happy
campfire party was in progress, consuming food and drink

in  amazing  quantities.  Almost  equally  amazing  was  the  speed  with  which
forty perfect strangers could become intimate friends. Duncan would never
have recognized this uninhibited and noisy group as Terrans.

Though he still felt a little apart from the scene, he enjoyed watching it and
wandering round the circle listening to the discussions in progress. He was
also surprised to discover how much he could eat; something seemed to have
happened to his appetite. And

there  were  some  splendid  wines--all  new  to  him,  of  course,  so  it  was
necessary to do a great deal of search to discover which he liked best.

Presently, singing started, led by an Enigma staff member whose voice---and
repertoire---were so professional that he had obviously been selected for this

role. In a very short timex he had the whole group rocking and stomping, and
joining in choruses describing events most of which were wholly unfamiliar

to Duncan. Some seemed to be tragic, though he

judged this by the musical treatment rather than the words. He was not quite
sure  what  fate  had  befallen  Darling  Clementine,  but  that  song  was  crystal
clear  compared  with  one  recounting  the  exploits  of  Waltzing  Matilda.  He
listened for a few minutes in utter

bafflement,  then  drifted  away  from  the  circle  of  firelight  into  the
semidarkness.

"It's perfectly safe to go as far as the trees," Boss had said. "But if you go into
them, we can accept no 159

responsibility  whatsoever,  and  the  indemnity  clause  of  our  contract  comes
into force."

Duncan would probably not have traveled even

as  far  as  this  without  the  encouragement  of  the  wine  but  presently  he  was
standing about fifty meters from the edge of the forest, and a considerably
greater distance from the songsters. The illumination was

roughly that of a cloudy night on Titan, when Saturn was in its crescent phase.
Thus he could see general outlines, but no fine detail.

The trees were large and impressive, and he

guessed that they were very old. Somehow, he had expected to see the slender
palms  which  were  the  universal  symbol  of  Earth's  tropics---but  to  his
disappointment, there was not a palm in sight. The trees

were not very different from those at Mount Vernon; then he remembered van
Hyatt's suggestion that

they might be well above sea level, where the climate was mild.

Duncan's chemical courage was beginning to desert him; the thrill of standing
at the edge of the unknown was rapidly losing its novelty. He turned back

toward the now dwindling glow of the bonfire, from which stragglers were
slowly departing as they headed to the tents, but had taken no More than a
dozen paces when the sound from the forest rooted him to the spot.

Never in his life had he heard anything remotely resembling it. Only a soul in
the lowest circle of hell could have produced the wail of anguish that burst
from the trees and instantly quenched the festivities at the campsite. It rose
and fell, rose and fell, then ululated away into silence. But even in that first
moment of sheer terror, when Duncan felt the strength

ebb from his limbs, he found himself feeling thankful that at least no human
throat could have produced that awful sound.

Then the paralysis left him, and he was already

halfway back to the camp before he remembered that he was unable to run.
Deliberately slowing down

was  one  of  the  bravest  things  he  had  ever  done--especially  when  that
nightmare howl echoed once More from the forest.

When he reached the tents, Boss was still trying to restore morale.

"Just some wild animal," he explained soothingly.

"After  the  noise  we've  been  making,  I'm  surprised  everything  has  been  so
quiet until now."

"What kind of animal, for heaven's sake? someone expostulated.

"Ask Mr. van Hyatt he seems to have all the answers."

Bill van Hyatt was completely unabashed, and

ready as ever to accept the challenge.

"It sounded like a hyena to me," he replied. "I've never actually heard one, but
it fits the descriptions I've read."

"I don't see how anyone could describe that," somebody muttered.

"Hyenas  live  in  Africa,  don't  they?"  said  another  voice.  "Anyway,  they're
quite harmless."

"Personally, I don't consider death from heart failure harmless."

"All right, all right," Boss interjected. "We've a busy day ahead of us. It's time
to go to bed."

Everyone  glanced  at  absent  wrist  watches,  but  no  confirmation  of  this  fact
was really needed. The camp slowly settled down for the night.

Despite maneuverings that had barely stopped

short, of actual rudeness, Duncan had been unable to avoid sharing a tent with
the van Hyatts. Just before he dozed off, he heard Bill remark sleepily to his
wife:  "I've  just  remembered--the  program  said  that  hard  hats  would  be
provided. I wonder why?"

"Because, Bill,'said another voice from the darkness,

"tomorrow  we  explore  the  caves  of  the  man-eating  vampire  bats  of  Bongo
Bongo. Now for

heaven's sake shut up and go to sleep."

PRIMEVAL FOREST

To Duncan's surprise, it was already full

daylight  when  he  awoke.  He  decided  that  the  wine  must  have  been
responsible, and even wondered if it had been drugged, for all his companions
were still sleeping stertorously.

He rolled off the air mattress, and treading carefully over unconscious bodies,

opened the flap of the

tent.  The  glare  drove  him  back  for  his  dark  glasses,  for  the  sun  was  now
shining  from  a  blue,  cloudless  sky.  As  be  walked  to  the  portable  shower,
carrying towel and toothbrush, he scanned the circle of trees.

In  broad  daylight,  they  seemed  much  less  ominous;  but  with  that  infernal
howl  still  echoing  in  his  memory,  nothing  would  have  induced  Duncan  to
venture

there alone. For that matter, he was not quite sure how many companions he
would need to give him

any sense of security in the forest--but unless the jet returned for them, that
was precisely where they would have to go. At one point he could see what
looked like the beginning of a jungle trail, though from this distance it was
impossible to tell whether it was made by men or animals. Nothing else was
visible;  the  trees  were  so  high,  and  so  thick,  that  there  could  have  been  a
range of mountains a few kilometers away, completely hidden from view.

Duncan ran into Boss on the way back from his

toilet.  The  fearless  leader  looked  as  if  he  could  use  some  extra  sleep,  but
otherwise still seemed in full charge of the situation.

"Did  you  put  something  in  that  wine?"  Duncan  asked,  after  they  had
exchanged greetings. "Usually I dream--but last night..."

Boss grinned.

"Don't expect me to reveal all Enigma's little secrets.

But in thfs case, we've nothing to hide. You

can  thank  the  natural,  open-air  life  for  your  good  night's  sleep--though  the
wine probably helped. Now let's wake up the others."

This took some time, but eventually all the troops were on parade, though in a
slightly disheveled condition, with not a few still yawning mightily. Groans

of protest greeted Boss's first order.

"We're going for a little safari before breakfast.

Coffee  will  be  along  in  a  minute,  but  that's  all  you're  having  now.  Your
appetites will be all the better when we get back."

"And when will that be?" cried half a dozen voices simultaneously.

"It depends how fast you march. Bob--you'll need better footwear than those
sandals.- Miss Lee--sorry, but in the jungle it's advisable to wear something
above  the  waist.  And  even  More  advisable  below  it,  Miss  Perry.  Right,
everybody--back here in

five minutes, then we start. No breakfast for stragglers.''

There were no stragglers, though it must have been More than ten minutes
before Boss had everyone lined up in double file. Then he disappeared into
his private tent, only-to emerge again at once,

heavily laden.

Instantly, the babble of conversation stopped.

There were sudden gasps of indrawn breath, and

Duncan  found  himself  staring  at  Enigma's  latest  surprise  with  a  curious
mixture of fascination and disgust.

The fascination was undoubtedly there, despite

the conditioning of a lifetime. He was ashamed of it

--yet, somehow, not as ashamed as he might have

been. Duncan had never concealed his impulses

from himself; now he recognized the almost irresistible urge to reach out and
take one of those monstrous instruments in his hand, to feel its power and

weight--and to use it for the only purpose for which it was designed.

It was the first time he had ever seen a gun, and Boss was carrying two, as

well as a pair of cartridge 163

belts.  He  handed  one  gun  and  belt  over  to  an  assistant,  who  took  up  his
position at the end of the

file.

"O.K.,"  said  Boss,  just  as  nonchalantly  as  if  he  were  unaware  of  the
impression he had created.

"Let's go!"

As  he.  walked  toward  the  edge  of  the  clearing,  he  threw  the  gun  over  his
shoulder and buckled on the belt of ammunition. It was perfectly obvious that
fie knew how to handle his armament, but Duncan did

not find this in the least reassuring. And judging by the glum silence, neither
did anyone else.

The track through the jungle turned out to be surprisingly well kept; when
someone commented on

this, Boss called back over his shoulder: "We have an arrangement with the
local tribes--they're friendly

--you'll meet them later."

"That's  a  giveaway!"  whispered  Bill  van  Hyatt  in  Duncan's  ear.  "The  only
primitive tribes left are in the Far East. I knew it was Borneo."

They had now walked perhaps a kilometer through

the closely packed trees and were already beginning to feel the effects of the
day's increasing heat.

There was a chorus of relief when Boss abruptly

called back: "We're nearly there--close up!"

He stepped to the side of the trail, and let the file walk on past him. Duncan
was near the head of the line, and saw that they were approaching a mass of
bare rocks which formed a small hillock. Now at last, he told himself, we'll be

able to get a good view of the land around us:

Those ahead of him were already scrambling up

the  rocks,  eager  to  see  what  lay  ahead.  Suddenly,  there  were  cries  of
astonishment, inarticulate shouts.

Millie van Hyatt, who had reached the top long before her husband, suddenly
collapsed in hysterics.

"Borneo!" she screamed. "He said Borneo!"

Duncan  hurried  to  join  her  as  swiftly  as  he  could,  in  this  unaccustomed
gravity. A moment later, he reached the top of the little hill, and the vista to
the south lay open before him.

En,ima  had  certainly  fulfilled  its  promise.  Not  More  than  five  kilometers
away. gleaming in the morning 164

light, was the most famous structure in the world.

And now that all its upstart rivals had long since been demolished, it was once
again the tallest.

Even a visitor from Titan could have no difficulty in recognizing the Empire
State Building.

"Very clever," said Bill van Hyatt in grudging admiration.

"They must have flown us straight back

over the same course, when they picked up the second load of passengers. But
there are still some

questions. That hideous noise last night--"

"Oh, eat your breakfast, Bill. Don't always try to get ahead of the game."

Boss, who was clearly relaxed now that his deception had been successfully
carried off, called back

from the end of the table: "Surely you've guessed that one, Bill?"

"Probably the sound track of an old Tarzan

movie."

Boss chuckled and glanced at his watch. All timepieces and communicato-s
had been returned to their

owners, and Duncan no longer felt so naked. He had never been able to stop
himself looking at his absent watch, and he realized how cleverly Enigma had

managed to disorient him in all four dimensions.

"In about five minutes, Bill, you'll know better."

"In that case, I'd appreciate it if you'd bring up the artillery again."

"No use. The guns were real, but the bullets weren't."

"I see--iust another part or,the act. Tell me--have you ever used one of those
things?"

"Yes."

"On what? Anything big?"

"Fairly."

"Was it dangerous?"

One had to admire Bill's persistence, almost as

much as his resilience. It was obvious that Boss was getting tired of this line
of questioning, but was too polite to shut it off.

"Quite dangerous."

"Could it have killed you?"

"Easily," said Boss, and now his voice had slid-165

denly become bleak and impersonal. "You see, it wa carrying a gun too."

In  the  ensuing  uncomfortable  silence,  Duncan  came  to  several  quick

conclusions. Boss was speaking the cold truth; it was no concern of theirs;
and they would never learn any More.

Conversation was just getting under way again

after this derailment when there was another interruption.

"Hey!" somebody shouted. "Look over there!"

A man was walking out of the "jungle," and he was not alone. Trotting beside
him  were  two  enormous  animals,  attached  to  leashes  which  seemed  highly
inadequate. They were undoubtedly dogs of some

kind,  though  Duncan  had  not  realized  that  any  grew  to  such  a  size.  There
were,  he  knew,  thousands  of  different  breeds,  but  there  seemed  something
strange about these; they did not fit any of the visual records he had ever seen.

"Of course!" someone exclaimed. "That's Fido and Susie."

There were murmurs of assent, but Duncan was

none the wiser. He also thought that he could have chosen More appropriate
names.

He was even More certain of this by the time that the monsters had reached
the  camp.  They  stood  half  as  high  as  a  man,  and  must  have  weighed  two
hundred kilos.

"What are they?" he asked. "Wolves?"

"Yes and no," Boss answered. "They're dire wolves. They've been extinct for
about ten thousand years."

Now Duncan remembered. He had heard vaguely of

the experiments on genetic reversal that had been taking place on Earth. There
had  been  much  excitement  a  few  years  ago  about  something  called  a
passenger pigeon, which had now become such a pest that efforts were being
made to control it. And there was

even talk of restoring dinosaurs when the technique was perfected.

"Hello,  Professor,"  said  Boss.  "Your  hounds  really  shook  some  of  us  last
night. By the way, folks,

this is Cliff Evans, head of the department of animal 166

genetics at the Central Park Zoo---have I got that right? And as some of you
have guessed, this is the famous Fido and Susie. Is it safe to feed them a few
scraps, Cliff?"

The professor shook his head.

"Not  on  your  life;  I'm  afraid  they're  not  terribly  bright.  We  go  to  a  lot  of
trouble balancing their diet.

I should hate to get human protein mixed up in it."

"Very considerate of you. Now, how's the transport going to work out?"

"I can let you have ten well-behaved horses and five ditto ponies."

"That's only enough for fifteen. We need at least twenty-five."

"No problem. You can also have six miniphants.

They can each take two riders, and they're safer than horses .... "

While this discussion was in progress, Duncan

examined  the  professor  and  his  pets.  The  survey  did  not  inspire  much
confidence; in particular, he did not care for the way in which the scientist
was  covered  from  head  to  heels  in  smooth  leather,  with  massive
reinforcements around the throat and from elbow to heavily gloved hands. It
could not have been very comfortable on a hot June morning, and presumably
he was not wearing this armor for fun.

However, Fido and Susie seemed sleek, well fed, and even somnolent. From
time to time they yawned and licked their chops, with a disturbing display of
dentition, but they showed no interest in after-breakfast

snacks.  In  fact,  they  showed:  very  little  interest  in  anything,  and  Duncan
could see the truth of the professor's remarks about their intelligence. Their
narrow

skulls obviously contained much smaller brains than those of modern wolves;
it  was  no  wonder  that  they  had  become  extinct.  Duncan--himself  an
experiment in controlled genetics--felt rather sorry for the big, clumsy beasts.

"Attention, everyone!" Boss called. "We're breaking camp in thirty minutes,
and then we have a short trip to make--only about six kilometers. You know
the  restrictions  on  transport  in  New  York  City,  so  we  have  the  following
choices--foot, horse, or

miniphant. On a beautiful morning like this, I'm go-lng to walk. But it's up to
you--who wants to ride

horseback? One, two, three--was your hand up, Bill? ·.. four.., eleven, twelve,
thirteen.., that's unlucky bany More? No? O.K., thirteen it is."

"What about bicycles?" somebody shouted.

"Not allowed in the park," said Professor Evans.

"Only last year a mad cyclist killed one of my ponies.

Unfortunately, he survived. If you want a bike,

you can go across to Fifth Avenue and hire one. For that matter, you can walk
to the 96th Street station and catch the subway. It runs every ten minutes in
the tourist season."

There were no takers, but all the miniphants were snapped up. Duncan opted
for this mode, on Boss's advice. The rest of the party elected to walk.

Half  an  hour  later,  the  string  of  animals  arrived  at  the  camping  site.  To
Duncan's  astonishment,  they  were  unaccompanied  by  humans.  One  large
miniphant led the procession, and the other five kept the horses from straying.
The two species seemed to be on excellent terms with each other.

"I suppose it's the first time you've seen a miniphant?" said Boss, noticing
Duncan's interest.

"Yes--I'd heard about them, of course. Why are they so popular?"

"They have the advantage of the elephant without the handicap of its size. As
you  see,  they're  not  much  bigger  than  horses.  But  they're  much  More
intelligent, understand several hundred words, and can carry

out quite complicated orders without supervision.

And with that trunk they can open doors, pick up parcels, work switches--
would you believe that they can operate viddies?"

"Frankly, no."

"You're wrong; some of them can, though not reliably yet. They get the right
number about eight times out of ten."

The leader ambled up to Boss and raised his trunk in salutation.

"Hello, Rajah--nice to see you again."

Rajah  brought  down  his  trunk  and  wound  it  affectionately  around  Boss's
wrist. Then he bent his legs

and knelt ponderously on the ground, so that his riders could climb easily into
the pair of seats arranged sidesaddle on his back. The other five

miniphants performed the same act with the timing of a well-trained corps de
ballet.

Did  a  boat  feel  like  this?  Duncan  asked  himself,  as  he  swayed  gently  and
comfortably out of the park.

This was certainly the way to travel if the weather was fine, you didn't have
far to go, and you wanted to enjoy the view. As all three criteria were now
satisfied, he was blissfully content.

The file of animals and humans made its way out

of the clearing, through the belt of trees, and past the pile of rocks from which
the morning's revelation had been vouchsafed. They skirted the little hill, and
presently came to a lake on which dozens of small boats were being languidly
paddled back and forth.

was doing nothing. Only a few couples took enough notice of the procession
wending  past  to  wave  greetings;  presumably  New  Yorkers  were  too
accustomed

to miniphants to give them More than a passing

glance.

After the lake, there came a beautiful expanse of grass, smooth and flat as a
billiard table. Though there were no warning signs, not a single person was
walking on it, and all the animals avoided it with scrupulous care. Duncan's
fellow passenger twisted around in his seat and called over his shoulder:

"They say the New Yorkers are getting More tolerant.

Last man to walk on that wasn't lynched on the spot

--they gave him a choice between gas and electrocution.''

Duncan presumed he was joking, but didn't

pursue the matter; this back-to-back seating was not good for conversation.

From time to time Bill van Hyatt, who was riding

--quite expertly--a beautiful cream-colored pony, came up to him to deliver
snippets of information.

Most of these were welcome, even though not always necessary. Of all Man's
cities, New York was still the most famous---the only one where all exiles,
every169

where in the Solar System, would feel at home. Now that they were clear of
the taller trees, it was possible to see many of the midtown landmarks--not
only  the  dominating  finger  of  the  Empire  State  Building,  but  the  slowly
orbiting Grand Central Mobile, the shining slab of the old United Nations, the
great terraced pyramid of Mount Rockefeller spanning half the island from
Fifth Avenue to the Hudson River ....

Duncan had no difficulty recognizing and naming

these, but the More distant structures to the east and west were 'strange to
him. That big golden dome over in--was it New Jersey?--was most peculiar,
but  Duncan  had  grown  a  little  tired  of  exposing  his  ignorance  and  was
determined to ask no More nonessential

questions. He could always look up the guidebooks later.

They  reached  Columbus  Circle  and  started  climb-lng  the  ramp  up  to  the
bridge over the Grand Canal

that now bisected Manhattan. On the level below, bikes, trikes, and passenger
capsules were racing silently back and forth; and on the level below them, the
famous  Checker  Gondolas  were  shuttling  between  the  East  River  and  the
Hudson. Duncan was sur-prised-to see such heavy traffic so far north of the
city

area, but guessed it was almost all recreational or tourist.

There was a brief pause at an Eighth Avenue comfort station for the benefit of
the horses and mini-phants--which, like all herbivores, had low-efficiency,

rapid-turnover  conversion  systems.  Some  of  the  passengers  also  took
advantage of the stop, even though

the  facilities  were  not  intended  for  them.  Remembering  his  contretemps  at
Mount Vernon, Duncan tried

to imagine what the New York streets must have been like in the days when
horses provided the only transportation, but failed and thankfully abandoned
the

attempt.

Now they were skirting the northern flank of

Mount Rockefeller, which towered two hundred and fifty meters above them-
challenging the Empire State Building in altitude and completely eclipsing it
in bulk. With the exception of a few dams and the Great 170

Wall of China-hardly a fair comparison--it was

the largest single structure on Earth. Here had gone all the rubble and debris,
all the bricks and concrete, the steel girders and ceramic tiles and bathtubs
and  TV  sets  and  refrigerators  and  air  conditioners  and  abandoned
automobiles, when the decayed uptown

area was finally bulldozed flat in the early twenty-second century. The clean-
up had, perhaps, been a

little  too  comprehensive;  now  the  industrial  archaeologists  were  happily
mining the mountain for the lost

treasures of the past.

The  straggling  line  of  men  and  animals  continued  south  along  the  wide,
grassy  sward  of  Eighth  Avenue,  skirting  the  western  face  of  the  huge
pyramid.  Unlike  the  southern  facade,  which  was  entirely  covered  by  the
celebrated  Hanging  Gardens  of  Manhattan,  this  side  was  a  montage  of
frescoes, murals, and mosaics.

It would never be completed. As fast as one work of art was finished, another
would be demolished, not always with the consent of the artist. The west side
of Mount Rockfeller was an aesthetic battlefield; it had even been bombed---
th cans of red paint. The terraces and stairways of the man-made hill were
crowded with sightseers, and on many of the vertical surfaces craftsmen were
at work in swinging chairs suspended by cables. Morbidly conscious as he
was of terrestrial gravity, Duncan could only look on these courageous artists
with awe-struck admiration.

Nearer  ground  le)el,  there  were  hundreds  of  More  informal  attempts  at
expression. One section of wall, four meters high and fifty 16ng, had been set
aside for graffiti, and the public had taken full advantage of the opportunity
with crayons, chalk, and spray

guns. There was a good deal of cheerful obscenity, but most of the messages
were totally meaningless to Duncan. Why, he wondered, should he SUPPORT
THE MIMIMALIST MANIFESTO.9 Was it true that KILROY

WAS HERE and if so, why? Did the announcement

that COUNCILMAN WILBUR ERICKSON IS A YENTOR convey praise or
censure? He brooded over these and

similar world-shattering problems all the way south to 44th Street.

Here, in a small plaza between Tenth and Eleventh 171

avenues, they said good-bye to the horses and

miniphants. Duncan's mount gently collapsed in

slow motion, so that its riders could step off onto terra firma; then, with equal
solemnity, it rose to its feet, gravely saluted them with upraised trunk, and
headed back toward its home in the Central Park Zoo.

The ride had been an enjoyable experience, and Duncan could imagine few
nicer ways of sightseeing, in

perfect weather such as this. Nevertheless, he was glad to be back on his own
feet again. That gentle swaying had been growing a little monotonous. And
although  he  had  been  in  no  real  danger,  he  now  knew  what  the  first
intimations of seasickness must be like.

They were now only a few hundred meters from

the elevated ribbon of the West Side Highway and the impressive expanse of
the Hudson River, blue and flat in the morning sunlight. Never before had
Duncan seen so large a body of water at such close quarters.

Though it looked calm and peaceful, he found it

· slightly ominous--even menacing. He was More

familiar with the ocean of space than the realm of water, with all its mysteries
and monsters; and because of that ignorance, he felt fear.

There were numerous small villas and caf6s and

shops  along  the  riverfront,  as  well  as  dozens  of  little  docks  containing
pleasure boats. Although marine transport had been virtually extinct for 'More
than two centuries, water still had an irresistible fascination for a large part of
the human race. Even now, a

garishly  painted  paddleboat,  loaded  with  sightseers,  was  skirting  the  New
Jersey  shore.  Duncan  wondered  if  it  was  a  genuine  antique,  or  a  modern

reconstruction.

The three-masted man-of-war with the gilded figurehead could not possibly
be the real thing--it was

much too new and had obviously never gone to sea.

But  moored  at  a  dock  close  to  it  was  the  scarred  yet  still  beautifully
streamlined hull of a sailing ship which, Duncan guessed, might have been
launched in the early twentieth century. He looked at it with awe, savoring the
knowledge that it had already finished 172

its career before the first ships of space lifted from Earth.

Boss did not give them an opportunity to linger

over  these  relics;  he  was  heading  toward  an  enormous,  translucent  half-
cylinder lying along More than

three  hundred  meters  of  the  shoreline.  It  appeared  to  be  a  makeshift,
temporary structure, quite out of keeping--in scale and appearance--with the
careful good taste of everything around it.

And now, as they approached this peculiar build~

ing, Duncan became aware of a sudden change in

the  behavior  of  his  companions.  All  the  way  from  the  park  they  had  been
chattering and laughing, completely relaxed and enjoying themselves on this
beautiful summer day. QUite abruptly, it seemed as if a

cloud  had  passed  across  the  face  of  the  sun;  all  laughter,  and  almost  all
talking, had suddenly ceased.

Very obviously, they knew something that he did not, yet he was reluctant to
disturb this mood of solemn silence by asking naive questions.

They entered a small auxiliary building, so much like an airlock that it was
easy  to  imagine  that  they  were  going  into  space.  Indeed,  it  was  a  kind  of
airlock, holding rows of protective clothing: oilskins,

rubber  boots,  and--at  last!--the  hard  hats  that  had  been  exercising  Bill  van

Hyatt's  imagination.  Still  in  that  curious  expectant  hush,  with  only  a  few
fleeting smiles at each other's transformed appearance, they passed through
the inner airlock.

Duncan had expected to: see a shiP. In this, at

least, he was not surprised. But he was completely taken aback by its sheer
size;  it  almost  filled  the  huge  structure  that  surrounded  it.  He  knew  that,
toward  the  end,  oil  tankers  had  become  gigantic--but  he  had  no  idea  that
passenger liners had ever grown so huge.

And it was obvious from its many portholes and

decks that this ship had been built to transport people, not bulk cargo.

The viewing platform on whicl/ they stood was

level with the main deck and just ahead of the bridge.

To his right, Duncan could see one huge but truncated mast and a businesslike
maze of cranes,

winches, ventilators, and hatches, all the way up to 173

the prow. Stretching away on the left, toward the ship's hidden stern, was an
apparently  endless  wall  of  steel,  punctuated  by  hundreds  of  portholes.
Looming high above everything were three huge funnels,

almost touching the curved roof of the enclosure.

From their spacing, it was obvious that a fourth one was now missing.

There were many other signs of damage. Windows

were shattered, parts of the decking had been torn up, and when he looked
down toward the keel, Duncan

could see an enormous metal patch, at least a hundred meters long, running
just below the waterline.

Only then did all the pieces of the puzzle fall into place. Now he understood
the awed sile;ce of his companions, and was able to share their emotions of

wonder and of pity.

On that day, he had been a boy on a distant

world; but he could still remember when, after her three-hundred-and-fifty-
year maiden voyage, the Titanic had at last reached New York.

THE GHOST FROM THE

GRAND BANKS

I

!ley'T' never built another one like her; she

marked the end of an age--an age of wealth and elegance which was swept
away, only two years later, by

the  first  of  the  World  Wars.  Oh,  ihey  built  faster  and  bigger,  in  the  half
century  before  air  travel  closed  that  chapter  for  all  time.  But  no  ship  ever
again matched the luxury you see around you now. It broke too many hearts
when she was lost."

Duncan could not believe it; he was still in a

dream. The magnificent Grand Saloon, with its vast mirrors, gilded columns,
and ankle-deep carpet, was opulent beyond anything he had ever imagined,
and 174

the  sofa  into  which  he  was  sinking  made  him  almost  forget  the  gravity  of
Earth.  Yet  the  most  incredible  fact  of  all  was  that  everything  he  saw  and
touched  had  been  lying  for  three  and  a  half  centuries  on  the  bed  of  the
Atlantic.

He had not realized that the deep sea was almost as timeles..as space. "All the
damage," the speaker had explained, "was done on that first morning.

When she sank, two and a half hours after the spur of ice ripped open the
starboard hull, she went down bow first, almost vertically. Everything loose
tumbled forward until it was either stopped by the bulkheads, or else smashed

through them. By miraculous

good luck--and this tells you how superbly she was built--all three engines
remained  in  place.  If  they  had  gone,  the  hull  would  have  been  so  badly
damaged that we could never have salvaged her ....

"But once she reached the bottom, three kilometers down, she was safe for
centuries.  The  water  there  is  only  two  degrees  above  freezing  point;  the
combination of cold and pressure quenches all decay, inhibits all rust. We've
found meat in the refrigerators as fresh as when it left Southampton on April
10,  1912,  and  everything  that  was  canned  or  bottled  is  still  in  perfect
condition.

"When we'd patched her up--a straightforward JOB , though it took a year to
plug all the holes and reinforce the weak spots--we blasted out the water with
the  zero-thrust  cold  rockets  the  deep  sea  salvage  people  have  developed.
Naturally, weather conditions were critical; by good luck, there was an ideal
forecast for April 15, 2262, so she broke surface three

hundred  and  fifty  years  to  the  very  dag  after  she  sank.  Conditions  were
identical--dead calm, freezing temperature---and you won't believe this, but
we had to avoid an iceberg when we started towing!

"So we brought her to New York, pumped her full of nitrogen to stop rusting,
and slowly dried her out.

No problems here---the underwater  archaeologists have preserved ships ten
times older than Titanic. It's the sheer scale of the job that's taken us fourteen
years, and will take us at least ten More. Thousands 175

of pieces of smashed furniture to be sorted out, hundreds of tons of coal to be
moved--almost every

lump by hand.

"And the dead . . . 158 so far. Only a few people were trapped in the ship.
Those in sealed compartments looked as if they had been drowned yesterday.

In the sections the fish could reach, there

were only bones. We were able to identify several, from the cabin numbers
and the White Star Line's records. And that story you've heard is quite true:

we found one couple still in each other's arms. ,They were married--but each
to someone else. And the

two other partners survived; I wonder if they ever guessed? After three and a
half centuries, it doesn't much matter ....

"Sometimes we're asked--why are you doing this, devoting years of time and
millions of solars to salvaging the past? Well, I can give you some down-to-
earth, practical reasons. This ship is part of our history.

We can better understand ourselves, and our

civilization, when we study her. Someone once said that a sunken ship is a
time capsule, because it preserves all the artifacts of everyday life, exactly as

they were at their last instant of use. And the Titanic was a cross-section of an
entire society, at the unique

moment before it started to dissolve.

"We  have  the  stateroom  of  John  Jacob  Astor,  with  all  the  valuables  and
personal effects that the richest man of his age was taking to New York. He
could

have bought the Titanic--a dozen times over. And we have the tool kit that Pat
O'Connor carried when he came aboard at Queenstown, hoping to find a

better living in a land he was never to see. We even have the five sovereigns
he  had  managed  to  save,  after  More  years  of  hardship  than  we  can  ever
imagine.

"These  are  the  two  extremes;  between  them  we  have  every  walk  of  life--a
priceless  treasure  trove  for  the  historian,  the  economist,  the  artist,  the
engineer.

But beyond that there's a magic about this ship

which has kept its name fresh through all the centuries.

The story of the Titanic's first and last voyage 176

is  one  that  has  to  be  told  anew  in  every  generation,  lest  men  forget  the

workings of fate and chance.

movies  about  the  Titanic--and  the  most  ambitious  will  start  production
shortly, using the actual location for the first time. But the extracts we want to
show you now are from a film made three hundred and

twenty years ago. Of course it will look old-fashioned, and it's in black and
white, but it was the

last  film  to  be  made  while  survivors  were  still  alive  and  could  check  its
details. For this reason, it remains the most authentic treatment; I think you
will

discover that A Night to Remember lives up to its name."

The lights in the Grand Saloon dimmed, as they

had dimmed at two-eighteen on the morning of April 15, 1912. Time rolled
back  three  and  a  half  centuries  as  the  grainy,  flickering  real-life  footage
merged  into  the  impeccable  studio  reconstruction.  Titanic  sailed  again,  to
make her appointment with destiny, off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland.

Duncan did not cry easily, but presently he was

weeping.

When the lights came on again, he understood why men had spent so much of
toil and treasure to win back what the sea had stolen from them long ago.

His eyes were still so misty, and his vision so uncertain, that for a moment he
did not recognize the

woman who had just enter6d the Grand Saloon and

was standing by one of the ornate doors.

Even carrying a hard hat, and with shapeless plastic waterproof covering her
from neck to knees,

Calindy still looked poised and elegant. Duncan rose to his feet and walked
toward her, ignoring the stares of companions. Silently, he put out his arms,
embraced her, and kissed her full on the lips. She was

not as tall as he had remembered---or he had grown

--because he had to stoop.

"Well!"  she  exclaimed,  when  she  had  disentangled  herself.  "After  fifteen
years!"

"You haven't changed in the least."

"Liar. I hope I have. At twenty-one I was an irresponsible brat."

"At twenty-one you should be. It's the last chance you'll have."

This scintillating conversation then ground to a halt, while they looked at each
other  and  everyone  in  the  Grand  Saloon  looked  at  them.  I'm  quite  sure,
Duncan told himself wryly, that they think we're old lovers; would that it were
true ....

"Duncan, darhling--sorry--I always start talking early twentieth century when
I'm in here: Mr. D.

Makenzie,  please  excuse  me  for  a  few  minutes  while  I  speak  to  my  other
guests--then we'll tour the ship together."

He watched her dart purposefully from one group

to another, the very embodiment of the efficient administrator, confirming that
everything was going as

planned. Was he playing another of her roles, or was this the real Calindy, if
such a creature existed?

She  came  back  to  him  five  minutes  later,  with  all  her  associates  trotting
dutifully behind.

"Duncan--I don't think you've met Commander Innes---he knows More about

this ship than the people who built her. He'll be showing us around."

As they shook hands, Duncan said: "I enjoyed your presentation very much.
It's always stimulating to meet a real enthusiast."

His  words  were  not  idle  flattery.  While  he  had  been  listening  to  that  talk,
Duncan had recognized some-thine that he had not met before on Earth.

Cmmander Innes was slightly larger than life, and seemed to be inclined at a
small  angle  to  his  fellow  Terrans.  A  world  which  had  put  a  premium  on
tolerance  and  security  and  safe,  well-organized  excitements  like  those
provided by Enigma had no place

for zealots. Though enthusiasm was not actually illegal, it was in somewhat
bad taste; one should not

take one's hobbies and recreations too seriously.

Commander Innes, Duncan suspected, lived and

dreamed Titanic. In an ealier age, he might have been a missionary, spreading
the doctrines of Mohammed

or Jesus with fire and sword. Today he was

a harmless and indeed refreshing anomaly, and perhaps just a trifle mad.

For  the  next  hour,  they  explored  the  bowels  of  the  ship---and  Duncan  was
thankful  for  his  protective  clothing.  There  was  still  mud  and  oil  sloshing
around on G deck, and several times be banged his head

against  unexpected  ladders  and  ventilating  ducts.  But  the  effort  and
discomfort  were  well  worth  it,  for  only  in  this  manner  could  he  really
appreciate all the skill and genius that had gone into this floating city. Most
moving of all was to touch the inward-curling petals of steel far below the
starboard bow, and to imagine the icy waters that had poured through them on

that tragic night.

The  boilers  were  shapeless,  crumpled  masses,  but  the  engines  themselves

were in surprisingly good condition.

Duncan looked with awe at the giant connecting

rods and crankshafts, the huge reduction

gears. (But why on earth did the designers use piston engines and turbines?)
Then his admiration was

abruptly tempered when Commander Innes gave him

some statistics: this mountain of metal developed a ludicrous forty thousand
kilowatts!  He  remembered  the  figure  that  Chief  Engineer  Mackenzie  had
given for Sirius' main drive; a trillion kilowatts. Mankind had indeed gone a
long way, in every sense of the phrase, during the last three centuries.

He was exhausted when he had climbed back up

the  alphabet  from  G  to  A  deck  (one  day,  Commander  Innes  promised,  the
elevators would be running

again) and was More than thankful when they settled down for lunch in the
First Class Smoking Room.

Then he looked at the Menu, and blinked:

R.M.S. "TITANIC" April 14, 1912

LUNCHEON

Consomm Fermier Cockie Leekie

Fillets of Brill

Egg A. l'Argenteuil

Chicken A la Maryland

Corned Beef, Vegetables, Dumplings

FROM THE GRILL

Grilled Mutton Chops

Mashed, Fried, and Baked Jacket Potatoes

Custard Pudding

.Apple Meringue Pastry

BUFFET

Salmon Mayonnaise

Potted Shrimps

lgorwegian Anchovies

Soused Herrings

Plain & Smoked Sardines

Roast Beef

Round of Spiced Beef

Veal & Ham Pie

Virginia & Cumberland Ham

Bologna Sausage Brawn

Galatine of Chicken

Corned Ox Tongue

Lettuce Beetroot Tomatoes

CHEESE

Cheshire, Stilton, Gorgonzola, Edam,

Camembert, Roquefort, St. Ivel,

Cheddar

Iced draught Munch Lager Beer 3d. & 6d. a Tankard

"I'm sorry to disappoint you," said Calindy. "We've done our best, within the
limits of the synthesizers, but we don't even know what half these items were.

The secret of Cockle Leekie went down with the

ship, and perhaps it's just as well. But we do have a substitute for the Munich
Beer."

Duncan  would  never  have  given  this  ordinary,  unlabeled  bottle  a  second
thought had he not noticed

the extreme care with which it was carried. He

looked questioningly at his hostess.

"Vintage '05, according to the wine steward's records--1905, that is. Tell me
what you think of it."

With one bottle to forty guests, there was just

enough to get a good taste. It was port, and to Duncan seemed just like any
other port; but he was too

polite to say so. He made vague mumblings of appreciation, saw that Calindy
was laughing at him, and

added, "I'm afraid we don't have much chance of studying wines on Titan."

"Titan," said Commander Innes thoughtfully. "How very appropriate."

"But hardly a coincidence. You can thank Cal--

Miss Ellerman."

"You've no seas on Titan, have you?"

"Only small temporary ones. Of liquid ammonia."

"I couldn't live on a world like that. I can't bear to be away from the sea More

than a few weeks. You must go to the Caribbean and dive on one of our

reefs. If you've never seen a coral reef, you can't imagine it."

Duncan had no intention of following the Com

mander's  advice.  He  could  understand  the  fascination  of  the  sea,  but  it
terrified him. Nothing, he was sure, would ever induce him to enter that alien
universe of strange beasts, full of known dangers that were bad enough, and
unknown ones that must be even worse.

(As if one could possibly imagine anything worse than the man-eating shark
or the giant squid

)

People

like Commander lanes must indeed be mad. They

made life interesting, but there was no need to follow their example.

And

at the moment, Duncan was too busy trying to

follow  Calindy--without  much  success.  He  could  appreciate  the  fact  that,
having some fifty people to deal

with, she could give him only two percent of her time; but when he tried to
pin her down to a meeting

under less hectic circumstances, she was curiously evasive.

It was not that she was unfriendly, for she

seemed genuinely pleased to see him. But something was worrying her--she
was holding him at arm's length. It was almost as if she had been warned that
he was bringing deadly Titanian germs to Earth. All that he could extract from
her before they parted was a vague promise that she would contact him "just
as soon as the season is over"--whatever that might mean.

Enigma Associates had not disappointed him, but

their vice-president had left him puzzled and

saddened. Duncan worried at the problem throughout the thirty-minute ride in
the vacuum subway back to 181

Washington. (Thank God 'the van Hyatts were staying in New York he would
not appreciate their

company in his present mood.)

He realized that there was nothing he could do; if, like some lovesick suitor,
he persisted in bothering Calindy, it would merely make matters worse. Some
problems could be solved only by time, if indeed they could be solved at all.

He had plenty to do. He would forget about

Calindy ....

With any luck, for as much as an hour at a time.

AKHENATON AND CLEOPATRA

Sir Mortimer Keynes sat in his armchair in

Harley Street and looked with clinical interest at Duncan Makenzie, on the
other side of the Atlantic.

"So you're the latest of the famous Makenzies.

And you want to make sure you're not the last."

This was a statement, not a question. Duncan made no attempt to answer, but
continued to study the man who, in an almost literal sense, was his creator.

Mortimer Keynes was well into his eighties, and

looked like a rather shaggy and decrepit lion. There was an air of authority
about him--but also of resignation and detachment. After half a century as

Earth's  leading  genetic  surgeon,  he  no  longer  expected  life  to  provide  him
with any surprises; but he

had not yet lost all interest in the human comedy.

"Tell me," he continued, "why did you come yourself, all the way from Titan?
Why not just send the necessary biotype samples?"

"I  have  business  here,"  Duncan  answered.  "As  well  as  an  invitation  to  the
Centennial. It was too good an opportunity to miss."

"You could still have sent the sample on ahead.

Now you'll have to wait nine months---that is, if you want to take your son
back with you."

"This visit was arranged very unexpectedly, at short notice. Anyway, I can use
the time. This is my only chance to see Earth; in another ten years, I won't be
able to face its gravity."

"Why is it so important to produce another guaranteed one-hundred-percent
Makenzie?"

Presumably Colin had gone through all this with

Keynes---but,  of  course,  that  was  thirty  years  ago,  and  heaven  knows  how
many thousands of clonings

the surgeon had performed since then. He could not possibly remember; on
the other hand, he would certainly have detailed records, and was probably

checking them at this very moment on that display panel in his desk.

"To answer that question," Duncan began slowly,

"I'd have to give you the history of Titan for the last seventy years."

"I  don't  think  that  will  be  necessary,"  interrupted  the  surgeon,  his  eyes
scanning his hidden display.

"It's an old story; only the details vary from age to age. Have you ever heard
of Akhenaton?"

"Who?"

"Cleopatra?"

"Oh yes--she was an Egyptian queen, wasn't she?"

"Queen of Egypt, but not Egyptian. Mistress of Anthony and Caesar. The last
and greatest of the Ptolemies."

What on Earth, Duncan thought in bemusement,

has this to do with me? Not for the first time, and certainly not for the last, he
felt overwhelmed by the sheer detail and complexity of terrestrial history.

Colin, with his interest in the past, would probably know what Keynes was
driving at, but Duncan was

completely lost.

"I'm  referring  to  the  problem  of  succession.  How  do  you  make  sure  your
dynasty continues after your death, on the lines you want? There's no way of

guaranteeing it, of course, but you can improve the odds if you can leave a
carbon copy of yourself ....

"The Egyptian Pharaohs made a heroic attempt at this---the best that could be
done without modern 183

science. Because they claimed to be gods, they could not marry mortals, so
they mated brother and sister.

The result was sometimes genius, but also deformity

--in the case of Akhenaton, both. Yet they continued the tradition for More
than a thousand years, until it ended with Cleopatra.

"If the Pharaohs had been able to clone themselves, they would certainly have
done so. It would

have  been  the  perfect  answer,  avoiding  the  problem  of  inbreeding.  But  it
introduces other problems. Because genes are no longer shuffled, it stops the
evolutionary clock. It means the end of all biological

progress."

What's he driving at? Duncan asked himself impatiently.

The interview was not going at all in the

way  he  had  planned.  It  had  seemed  a  simple  enough  matter  to  set  up  the
arrangements, just as Colin and Malcolm had done, three and seven decades
ago, respectively.

Now it appeared that the man who had

made More clonings than anyone on Earth was trying to talk him out of it. He
felt confused and disoriented, and also a little angry.

"I've no objection," the surgeon continued, "to cloning i! it's combined with
genetic  repair--which  is  not  possible  in  your  case,  as  you  certainly  know.
When you were cloned from Colin, that was merely an attempt to perpetuate
the dynasty. Healing was not in-volved--only politics and personal vanity. Oh,
I'm

sure that both your precursors are convinced that it was all for the good of
Titan,  and  they  may  well  be  absolutely  right.  But  I'm  afraid  I've  given  up
playing God. I'm sorry, Mr. Makenzie. Now, if you will excuse me--I hope
you have an enjoyable visit. Goodbye

to you."

Duncan was left staring, slack-jawed, at a blank screen. He did not even have
time  to  return  the  fare-well--still  less  give  Colin's  greetings,  as  he  had
intended, to the man who had created both of them.

He was surprised, disappointed--and hurt. No

doubt he could make other arrangements, but it had never occurred to him to
go anywhere than to his own point of origin. He felt like a son who had just
been repudiated by his own father.

There was a mystery here; and suddenly, in a flash of insight, Duncan thought
he had guessed the solution.

Sir Mortimer had cloned himself---and it had turned out badly.

The theory was ingenious, and not without a certain poetic truth. It merely
happened to be wrong.

PARTY GAMES

Jt was well for Duncan that he was now becoming

less awed by conspicuous displays of culture.

Impressed, by all means; overwhelmed, no. Too strong a colonial inferiority
complex would certainly have spoiled his enjoyment of this reception.

He had been to other parties since his arrival, but this was by far the largest. It
was sponsored by the National Geographic Society--no, that was tomorrow
ruby the Congressional Foundation, whatever that might be, and there were at
least a thousand guests circulating through the marble halls.

"If the roof fell in on us now," he overheard someone remark, rather smugly,
"Earth would start running around like a headless chicken."

There seemed no reasonto fear such a disaster;

the National Gallery of Art had stood for almost four hundred years. Many of
its treasures, of course, were far older: no one could possibly put a value on
the  paintings  and  sculpture  displayed  in  its  halls.  Leonardo's  Ginevra  de'
Benci, Michelangelo's miraculously recovered bronze David, Picasso's Willie

Maugham, Esq., Levinski's Martian Dawn, were

merely the most famous of the wonders it had gathered through the centuries.
Every one of them, Duncan knew, he could study through holograms in closer
detail than he was doing now but it was not the same thing. Though the copies
might be technically perfect, 185

these were the originals, forever unique; the ghosts of the long-dead artists
still lingered here. When he returned to Titan, he would be able to boast to his

friends: "Yes--I've stood within a meter of a genuine Ceonardo.'

It also amused Duncan to realize that never on his own world could he move

in such a crowd---and be completely unrecognized. He doubted if there were
ten people here who knew him by sight; most of them would be ladies he had
addressed on that memorable evening with the Daughters of the Revolutions.
He was, as George Washington had neatly put it, still one of Earth's leading
unknown celebrities. Barring untoward events, his status would remain that
way until

he spoke to the world on July Fourth. And perhaps even after that...

However, his identity could be discovered easily enough, except by the most
short-sighted  individuals;  he  was  wearing  a  badge  that  bore  in  prominent
letters the words DUNCAN MACKENZIE, TITAN. He had

thought it impolite to make a fuss about the spelling.

Like Malcolm, he had given up that argument years ago.

On  Titan,  such  labels  would  have  been  completely  unnecessary;  here  they
were essential. The advance of microelectronics had relegated to history two
problems that, until the late twentieth century, had been virtually insoluble: At
a really big party, how do you find whops there--and how do you locate any
given person? When Duncan checked in at the foyer, he

found himself confronting a large board bearing hundreds of names. That at
once established the guestlist, or, to be More accurate, the list of guests who
wished to make their presence known. He spent several minutes studying it,
and picked out half a dozen possible targets. George, of course, was there; and
so was Ambassador Farrell. No point in hunting up them; he

saw them every day.

Against each name was a button, and a tiny lamp.

When the button was pressed, the guest's badge would emit a buzz just loud
enough for him to hear, and his light would start flashing. He then had two
alternatives.

He could apologize to the group he was with,

and start drifting toward a central rendezvous area.

By the time he arrived--which could be anything from a minute to half an
hour  after  the  signal,  according  to  the  number  of  encounters  en  route--the
caller might still be there; or he might have gotten fed up and moved away.

The other alternative was to press a button on the badge itself, which would
cut off the signal. The light on the board would then shine with a steady glow,
informing the world that the callee did not wish to be

disturbed. Only the most persistent or bad-mannered inquirer would ignore
this hint.

Although some hostesses thought the system too

coldly  mechanical,  and  refused  to  use  it  at  any  price,  it  was  in  fact
deliberately imperfect. Anyone who wished to opt out could neglect to pick
up  his  badge,  and  it  would  then  be  assumed  that  he  had  not  put  in  an
appearance.  To  aid  this  deception,  an  ample  supply  of  false  badges  was
available, and the protocol

that went with them was well understood. If you saw a familiar face above an
innocuous jolts DOE or MARY

SMITH, yOU investigated no further. But a JESUS

CHRIST or a JULIUS CAESAR was fair game.

Duncan saw no need for anonymity. He was quite

happy to meet anyone who wished to meet him, so

he left his badge in the operating mode while he raided the lavish buffet, then
beat a retreat to one of the smaller tables. Although he could now function in
Earth's gravity better than he would once have believed possible, he still took
every opportunity of sitting down. And in this case it was essential even for
Ter-rans,  except  those  skillful  'enough  to  manipulate  three  plates  and  one
glass with two hands.

He had been one of the early arrivals--this was a folly he never succeeded in
curing  during  his  whole  stay  on  Earth--and  by  the  time  he  had  finished
nibbling at unknown delicacies, the hall was comfortably

full.  He  decided  to  start  circulating  among  the  other  guests,  lest  he  be

identified for what he was--a lost and lonely outsider.

He  did  not  deliberately  eavesdrop;  but  Makenzies  had  unusually  good
hearing, and Terrans--at least party-going Terrans--seemed anxious to spread
infor-187

marion as widely as possible. Like a free electron.

wandering  through  a  semiconductor,  Duncan  drifted  from  one  group  to
another, occasionally exchanging a few words of greeting, but never getting
involved for More than a couple of minutes. He was quite content to be a
passive observer, and ninety percent of

the conversations he overheard were meaningless or boring. But not all...

I loathe parties like this, don't you?

It's supposed to be the only set of genuine antique inflatable furniture in the
world. Of course, they won't let you sit on it.

I'm so sorry. But it will wash out easily.

--buying at one fifty and selling at one eighty.

Would you believe that grown men once spent their entire lives doing that sort
of thing?

--no music worth listening to since the late twentieth century .... Make it early
twenty-first.

Sorry--/ don't know who's throwing this party,

either.

Did E1 Greco come before Modigliani? I just can't believe it.

Bill's ambition is to be shot dead at the age of two hundred by a jealous wife.

How's the Revolution going? If you need any More money from the Ways and
Means Committee, let

me know.

Food should come in pills, the way God intended

....

Anyone in the room she's not slept with?

Well, maybe that statue of Zeus.

French is not a dead language. At/east five million people still speak it--or at
least read it.

I'm getting up a petition to save the Lunar wilderness areas.

I thought it was the Van Allen Belt.

Oh, that was last year.

At that point, Duncan's badge started to hum gently.

For a moment he was taken by surprise; he had

quite forgotten that it was part of a paging system. He looked around for the
rendezvous  point,  a  discreet  little  banner  bearing  the  notice  L-S  HERE,
PLEASE.

Needless to say it was on the far side of the room, and it took him a good five
minutes to plow through the crowd.

Half a dozen complete strangers were waiting

hopefully under the banner. He scanned their faces in vain, looking for some
sign of recognition. But when he got within name-reading range, one of the
group broke away and approached him with outstretched

hands.

"Mr. Makenziemhow good of you to come! I'll take only a few minutes of
your time."

From bitter experience, Duncan had /earned that

this  was  one  of  Terra's  great  understatements.  He  looked  cautiously  at  the
speaker to sum him up and to guess his business. What he saw was reasonably
reassuring: a very neat, goateed little man wearing a

traditional Chinese/Indian shervani, tightly buttoned up at the neck. He did
not,look like a bore or a fanatic; but they seldom did.

"That's all right, Mr.--er--Mandel'stahm. What can I do for you?"

"I'd intended to contfict you--it was pure luck, seeing your name on the list--I
knew there could be only one Makenzie---what does the D stand formDonald,
Douglas, David--"

"Duncan."

"Ah, yes. Let's move over to that seat--it'll be quieter--besides, I love Winslow
Homer's Fair Wind, even though the technique is so crude--you can almost
smell the fish sliding around in the boat--why,

what  a  coincidence---it's  exactly  [our  hundred  years  old!  Don't  you  think
coincidences are fascinating? I've been collecting them all my life."

"I've  never  thought  about  it,"  replied  Duncan,  already  feeling  a  little
breathless. He was afraid that if he listened much longer to Mr. Mandel'stahm,
he too would start to talk in jerks. What did the man want?

For that matter, was there any way of discovering the intentions of a person
whose flow of speech seemed to be triggered by random impulses?

Luckily, as soon as they were seated, Mr. Man-del'stahm became much More
coherent. He gave a

conspirational  glance  to  check  that  there  was  nobody  in  earshot  except
Winslow Homer's fisherboys, then resumed his conversation in a completely
different tone of voice.

"I promised I'd take only a few minutes. Here's my card--you can use it to key
my number. Yes, I call myself an antique dealer, but that covers a multitude of
sins. My main interest is gems--I have one

of  the  largest  private  collections  in  the  world.  So  you've  probably  guessed
why I was anxious to meet you."

"Go on."

"Titanite,  Mr.  Makenzie.  There  are  not  More  than  a  dozen  fragments  on
Earth--five of them in museums.

Even the Smithsonian doesn't have a specimen, and its curator of gems--that
tall man over there---is most unhappy. I suppose you know that titanite is one
of the few materials that can't be replicated?"

"So I believe," answered Duncan, now very cautious.

Mr.  Mandel'stahm  had  certainly  made  his  interests  clear,  though  not  his
intentions.

"You'll understand, therefore, that if a swarthy, cornute gentleman suddenly
appeared in a puff of smoke with a contract for several grams of titanite in
exchange for my signature in blood, I wouldn't bother to read the small print."

Duncan  was  not  quite  sure  what  "cornute"  meant,  but  he  got  the  general
picture quickly enough, and gave a noncommittal nod.

"Well, something like this has been happening over the last three months--not
quite so dramatically, of 190

course. I've been approached, in great confidence, by a dealer who claims to
have titanite for sale, in lots of up to ten grams. What would you say to that?"

"I'd be extremely suspicious. It's probably fake."

"You can't fake titanite."

"Well---synthetic?"

"I'd  thought  of  that  tooit's  an  interesting  idea,  but  it  would  mean  so  many
scientific breakthroughs somewhere that it couldn't possibly be hushed up. It
certainly

wouldn't be a simple job, like diamond

manufacture. No one has any idea how titanite is produced.

There are at least four theories proving that

it can't exist."

"Have you ever seen it?"

"Of course--the fragment in the American Mu*

seum  of  Natural  History,  and  the  very  fine  specimen  in  the  Geological
Museum, South Kensington."

Duncan refrained from adding that there was an

even finer specimen in the Centennial Hotel, not ten kilometers from here.
Until  this  mystery  was  cleared  up,  and  he  knew  More  about  Mr.
Mandel'stahm, this information was best kept to himself. He did not believe
that  burglarious  visitors  were  likely,  but  it  was  foolish  to  take  unnecessary
chances.

"I don't quite see how I can help you. If you're sure that the titanite is genuine,
and hasn't been acquired illegally, what's your problem?"

"Simply this. Not everything rare is valuable-but everything valuable is rare.
If someone's discovered a few kilograms of titanite, it would be just another
common gemstone, like opal or sapphire or ruby. Naturally, I don't want to
make  a  big  investment  if  there's  any  danger  that  the  price  might  suddenly
nosedive."

He saw Duncan's quizzical expression and added

hastily,  "Of  course,  now  that  the  profit  motive's  extinct,  I  do  this  for
amusement. I'm More concerned with my reputation."

"I understand. But if there had been such a find, I'm sure I would have heard
of it. It would have been reported to my government."

Mr. Mandel'stahm's eyebrows gained altitude perceptibly.

"Perhaps. But perhaps not. Especially if it were 191

found--off-planet. I'm referring, of course, to the theories suggesting that it's
not indigenous to Titan."

You're certainly well informed, Duncan told himself

--in fact, I'm sure you know far More about titanite than I do ....

"I suppose you mean the theory that there may be bigger lodes on the other
moons?"

"Yes. In fact, traces have been detected on Iapetus."

"That's news to me, but I wouldn't have heard unless there had been a major
find. Which, I gather, is what you suspect."

"Among other things."

For a few seconds, Duncan processed this information in silence. If it was true
and he could

think of no reason why Mandel'stahm should be lying

--it was his duty as an officer of the Titanian administration to look into it.
But the very last thing he

wanted  now  was  extra  work,  especially  if  it  was  likely  to  lead  to  messy
complicatons.  If  some  clever  operator  was  actually  smuggling  titanite,
Duncan would prefer to remain in blissful ignorance. He had More important
things to worry about.

Perhaps Mandel'stahm understood the reason for

his hesitation, for he added quietly: "The sum involved may be quite large.
I'm not interested in that,

of course but most governments are rather grateful to anyone who detects a
loss of revenue. If I can help you earn that gratitude, I should be delighted."

I  understand  you  perfectly,  said  Duncan  to  himself,  and  this  makes  the
proposition much More attractive.

He did not know the Titan law on these matters,

and  even  if  a  reward  was  involved,  it  would  be  tactless  for  the  Special
Assistant to the Chief Administrator to claim it. But his task would certainly
not be much easier if---as he gloomily expected---he were compelled to apply
for More Ten'an solars before the end of his stay.

I'll tell you what I'll do," he said to Mandel'stahm.

"Tomorrow,  I'll  send  a  message  to  Titan,  and  initiate  inquiries--very
discreetly, of course. If I learn something, I'll let you know. But don't expect
too much--or,

for that matter, anything at all."

Mandel'stahm seemed quite happy with this arrangement, and departed with
rather fulsome protestations

of gratitude. Duncan decided that it was also

high time that he left the party. He had been on his feet for over two kours,
and all his vertebrae were now starting to protest in unison. As he made his
way toward the exit, he kept a lookout for George Washington, and managed
to find him--despite his short

stature--without failing back on the paging system.

"Everything going well?" asked George.

"Yes--I've had a very interesting time. And I've run into a curious character--
he calls himself a gem expert--"

"Ivor Mandel'stahm. What did the old fox want from you?"

"Oh--information. I was polite, but not very helpful.

Should I take him seriously, and can he be

trusted?"

"Ivor is merely the world's greatest expert on gems.

And in that business, one can't afford even the hint of a suspicion. You can

trust him absolutely."

"Thanks--that's all I wanted to know."

Half an hour later, back at the hotel, Duncan unlocked his case and laid out
the set of pentominoes

that Grandma had given him; he had not even

touched it since arriving on Earth. Carefully, he lifted out the titanite cross
and held it up to the light ....

The first time he had ever seen the gem was at

Grandma  Ellen's  and  he  could  date  the  event  very  accurately.  Calindy  had
been  with  him,  so  he  must  have  been  sixteen  years  old.  He  could  not
remember  how  it  had  been  arranged.  In  view  of  Grandma's  dislike  of
strangers (and even of relatives) the visit

must have been a major diplomatic feat. He did recall that Calindy had been
very anxious to meet the famous old lady, and had wanted to bring along her

friends; that, however, had been firmly vetoed.

It was one of those days when Ellen Makenzie's

co-ordinate  system  coincided  with  the  external  world's,  and  she  treated
Calindy as if she were actually there.

Doubtless the fact that she had a fascinating new novelty to display had much
to do with her unusual friendliness.

This was not the first specimen of titanite that had bee discovered, but the
second or third--and the largest up to that time, with a mass of almost fifteen
grams. It was irregularly shaped, and Duncan realized that the cross he was
now holding must have

been cut from it. In those days, no one thought of titanite as having any great
value; it was merely a curiosity.

Grandma had polished a section a few millimeters on a side, and the specimen
now lay on the stage of a binocular microscope, with a beam of pseudowhite
light from a trichromatic laser shining into it. Most of the room illumination
had  been  switched  off,  but  refracted  and  reflected  spots,  many  of  them
completely dispersed into their three component colors, glowed steadily from
unexpected places on walls and ceiling.

The room might have been some magician's or alchemist's cell--as, indeed, in
a way it was. In earlier

ages, Ellen Makenzie would probably have been regarded as a witch.

Calindy stared through the microscope for a long time, while Duncan waited
More or less patiently.

Then, with a whispered "It's beautiful--I've never seen anything like it!" she
had reluctantly stepped aside ....

·  .  .  A  hexagonal  corridor  of  light,  dwindling  away  to  infinity,  outlined  by
millions  of  sparkling  points  in  a  geometrically  perfect  array.  By  changing
focus, Duncan could hurtle down that corridor, without

ever coming to an end. How incredible that such a universe lay inside a piece
of rock only a millimeter thick!

The  slightest  change  of  position,  and  the  glittering  hexagon  vanished;  it
depended critically on the angle of illumination, as well as the orientation of
the crystal.

Once it was lost, even Grandma's skilled hands

took minutes to find it again.

"Quite unique," she had said happily (Duncan had never seen her so cheerful),
"and I've no explanations-merely half a dozen theories. I'm not even sure

if we're seeing a real structure--or some kind of moir6

pattern in three dimensions, if that's possible .... "

That had been fifteen years ago--and in that time, 194

hundreds of theories had been proposed and demolished.

It was widely agreed, however, that titanite's

extraordinarily  perfect  lattice  structure  must  have  been  produced  by  a
combination of extremely low temperatures and total absence of gravity. If
this theory was correct, it could not have originated on any planet, or much
nearer to the Sun than the orbit of Neptune.

Some  scientists  had  even  built  a  whole  elaborate  theory  of  "interstellar
crystallography" on this assumption.

There had been even wilder suggestions. Something as odd as titanite had,
naturally, appealed to Karl's speculative urges.

"I don't believe it's natural," he had once told Duncan.

"A material lik that couldn't happen. It's an artifact of a superior civilization--
like--oh---one of our crystal memories."

Duncan had been impressed. It was one of those

theories  that  sounded  just  crazy  enough  to  be  true,  and  every  few  years
someone  "rediscovered"  it.  But  as  the  debate  raged  on  inconclusively,  the
public  soon  lost  interest;  only  the  geologists  and  gemologists  still  found
titanite  a  source  of  endless  fascination--as  Mandel'stahm  had  now
demonstrated.

Makenzies  always  kept  their  promises,  even  in  the  most  trifling  matters.
Duncan  would  send  a  message  off  to  Colin  the  first  thing  in  the  morning.
There was no hurry; and that, he expected and half hoped, would be the last
he would hear of it.

Very gently, he replaced the titanite cross in its setting between the IF, N, U,
and V pentominoes. One

day, he really must make :a sketch of the configuration.

If the pieces ever fell out of the box, it might take him hours to get them back
again ....

3O

THE RIVALS

After the encounter with Mortimer Keynes,

Duncan licked his wounds in silence for several days.

He did not feel like discussing the matter with his usual confidants, General
Gegrge and Ambassador

Farrell. And though he did not doubt that Calindy would have all the answers-
or could find them

quickly--he also hesitated to call her. Instinct, rather than logic, told him that
it might not be a good idea.

When he looked into his heart, Duncan had to admit ruefully that though he
certainly desired Calindy, and perhaps even loved her, he did not trust her.

The Classified Section of the Comsole was not

much use. When he asked for information on cloning services, he got several
dozen names, none of

which  meant  anything  to  him.  He  was  not  surprised  to  see  that  the  list  no
longer  included  Keynes;  when  he  checked  the  surgeon's  personal  entry,  it
printed out

"Retired."  He  might  have  saved  himself  some  embarrassment  if  he  had
discovered this earlier, but who

could have guessed?

Like many such problems, this one solved itself

unexpectedly. He was groaning beneath Bernie Patras'

ministrations when he suddenly realized that the person who could help was
right here, pulverizing him

with merciless skill.

Whether or not a man has any secrets from his

valet,  he  certainly  has  none  from  his  masseur.  With  Bernie,  Duncan  had
established  a  cheerful,  bantering  relationship,  without  detracting  from  the
serious  professionalism  of  the  other's  therapy--thanks  to  which  he  was  not
merely mobile, but still steadily gaining strength.

Bernie was an inveterate gossip, full of scandalous 196

stories,  but  Duncan  had  noticed  that  he  never  revealed  names  and  was  as
careful to protect his sources as any media reporter. For all his chattering, he
could  be  trusted;  and  he  also  had  any  entr6e  he  wished  to  the  medical
profession. He was just the man for the job.

"Bernie, there's somethg I'd like you to do for me."

"Delighted. Just tell me whether it's boys or girls, and how many of each, with
approximate shapes and sizes. I'll fill in the details."

"This is serious. You know I'm a clone, don't you?"

"Yes."

Duncan had assumed as mucl; it was not one of

the Solar System's best-kept secrets.

"Ouchwhave you ever heard of Mortimer Keynes?"

"The genetic surgeon? Of course."

"Good. He was the man who cloned me. Well, the other day I called him, just
to--ah--say  hello.  And  he  behaved  in  a  very  strange  way.  In  fact,  he  was
almost rude."

"You didn't cal him 'Doctor'? Surgeons often hate that."

"No--at least, I don't think so. It wasn't really anything on a personal level, He
just tried to tell me that cloning was a bad idea, and he was against it. I felt I
should apologize for existing."

"I can understand your feelings. What do you want me to do? My rates for

assassination are quite high, but easy terms can be arranged."

like  to  discover  why  Sir  Mortimer  changed  his  mind  mthat  is,  if  anyone
knows the reason."

I'll  find  out,  don't  worry--though  it  may  take  a  few  days."  Bernie  was
obviously delighted at the challenge; he was also unduly pessimistic in his
estimate, for he called Duncan the very next morning.

"No  problem,"  he  said  triumphantly.  "Everyone  knows  the  storywI  should
have remembered it myself.

Are you ready to record? A few kilobits of the Worm Times coming over..."

The  tragicomedy  had  reverberated  around  the  Ter-ran  news  services  for
several months, More than fifteen years ago, and echoes of it were still heard
from time to time. It was an old tale---as old as human history, in some form
or other. Duncan had read

only a few paragraphs before he was able to imagine the rest.

There had been the brilliant but aging surgeon and his equally brilliant young
assistant, who in the natural course of events would have been his successor.

They had known triumphs and disasters together,

and had been so closely linked that the world had thought of them almost as
one person.

Then there had been a quarrel, over a new technique which the younger man
had developed. There was no need, he claimed, to wait for the immemorial
nine months between conception and birth, now that the entire process was
under control. If certain precautions were taken to safeguard the health of the
human

foster  mother  who  carried  the  fertilized  egg,  there  was  no  reason  why
pregnancy should last More than two or three months.

Needless to say, this claim excited wide attention.

There was even facetious talk of "instant clones."

Mortimer Keynes had not disputed his colleague's techniques, but he deplored
any attempt to put them into practice. With a conservatism that some thought
curiously inappropriate, he argued that Nature had chosen that nine months
for very good reasons, and that the human race should stick to it.

Considering  the  violence  that  cloning  did  to  the  normal  process  of
reproduction, this seemed a rather strange attitude, as many critics hastened to
point  out.  This  only  made  Sir  Mortimer  even  More  stubborn,  and  reading
between  the  lines  Duncan  felt  fairly  certain  that  the  surgeon's  expressed
objections  were  not  the  real  ones.  For  some  unknown  and  probably
unknowable reason, he had experienced a crisis of conscience; what he was
now opposing was not

merely the shortening of the gestation period, but the entire process of cloning
itself.

The younger man, of course, disagreed completely.

The debate had become More and More bitter--also More and More public, as
it was inflamed by sensation-seeking hangers-on who wanted to see a good
fight. After one abortive attempt at reconciliation, the partnership split up, and
the two men had

never spoken to each other again. A major problem at medical congresses for
the last decade had been to ensure that they were not present simultaneously
at any .meeting.

That had been the end of Mortimer Keynes's active career. The famous clinic
he had established was closed down, though he still kept his Harley Street
office and did a little consultation. His ex-partner, who had a remarkable gift
for acquiring public and private funds, promptly established a new base and
continued his experiments.

As Duncan read on, with increasing curiosity and excitement, he realized that
here was the man he needed. Whether he would take advantage of the high-
speed cloning technique he could decide later; it was

certainly interesting to know that the option existed, and that if he wished, he
could return to Titan months in advance of his original schedule.

Now to locate Sir Mortimer's ex-colleague and successor.

It was lucky that the search did not have to

rely on the name alone, for it was one that occurred in some form or other half
a  million  times  in  the  Earth  Directory.  But  he  had  only  to  consult  the
Classified Section--often referred to, for some mvsterious

reason lost in the depths of time, by the utterly meaningless phrase "Yellow
Pages.'*

And so, on a small island off the east coast of

Africa, Duncan discovered E1 Hadj Yehudi ben Mohammed.

He  had  scarcely  made  arrangements  to  fly  to  Zanzibar  when  a  small
bombshell arrived from Titan.

It bore Colin's identification number, but he was unable to make sense of it
until he realized that it was both in cipher and the Makenzie private code.
Even  after  two  processing  trips  through  his  Minisec,  it  was  still  somewhat
cryptic:

PRIORITY AAA SECURITY AAA

NO RECORD OF ANY SHIPMENT TITANITE REGISTERED

BUREAU OF RESOURCES LAST TWO YEARS.

POSSIBLE INFRINGEMENT FINANCE REGULATIONS

IF PRIVATE SALE FOR

CONVERTIBLE SOLARS NOT

APPROVED BY BANK OF

TITAN. PERSISTENT RUMOR

MAJOR DISCOVERY ON

OUTER MOON. ASKING HEL-

MER TO INVESTIGATE. WILL REPORT SOONEST.

COLIN.

Duncan  read  the  message  several  times  without  any  immediate  reaction.
Then,  slowly,  the  pieces  of  the  puzzle  began  to  drift  around  into  new
configurations, and a pattern started to emerge. It was one that Duncan did not
like at all.

Naturally,  Colin  would  have  gone  to  Armand  Helmer,  Controller  of
Resources;  the  export  of  minerals  came  under  his  jurisdiction.  Moreover,
Armand

was a geologist--in fact, he had made one small titanite find himself, of which
he was inordinately proud.

Was it conceivable that Armand himself might be

involved? The thought flashed through Duncan's

mind, but he dismissed it instantly. He had known Armand all his life and
despite their many political and personal differences, he did not for a moment
believe that the Controller would get involved in any illegality--especially one
that concerned his own Bureau.

And for what purpose? Merely to accumulate

a few thousand solars in some terrestrial bank?

Armand was now too old, and too gravity-conditioned, ever to return to Earth,
and  he  was  not  the  kind  of  man  who  would  break  the  law  for  so  trivial  a
purpose  as  importing  Terran  luxuries.  Especially  as  such  chicanery  was
always discovered, sooner or later; smugglers could never resist displaying
their treasures.

And  then  there  would  be  another  acquisition  for  the  impecunious  Titan
Museum, while the criminal would be barred from all the best places for at
least a month.

No, Armand could be excluded; but what of his

son? The More Duncan considered this possibility, the More likely it seemed.
He had no proo/ whatso-2OO

ever--only an array of facts all pointing in one direction.

Consider: Kaxl had always been daring and

adventurous,  willing  to  run  risks  for  what  he  believed  suflficiently  good
reasons. As a boy, he had

taken a positive delight in circumventing regulations

---except,  of  course,  those  basic  safety  rules  that  no  sane  resident  of  Titan
would ever challenge.

If titanite had been discovered on one of the other satellites, Karl would be in
an excellent position to take advantage of it. In the last three years, he had
been on half a dozen Titan-Terran surveys. To

Duncan's  certain  knowledge,  he  was  one  of  the  few  men  who  had  been  to
Enceladus, Tethys, Dione,

Rhea, Hyperion, Iapetus, Phoebe, Chronus, Prometheus.

And now he was on'remote Mnemosyne ....

Already Duncan could draw up a seductively plausible scenario. Karl might

even have made the find

himself. Certainly he would have seen all the specimens coming aboard the
survey ship, and his well-known charm would have done the rest. Indeed, tho

actual discoverer might never have known what he had found. Few people
had seen raw titanite, and it was not easy to identify until it had been polished.

Then it would have been a simple matter of sending a small package to Earth,
perhaps on one of the

resupply ships which did not even call at Titan.

(What  would  be  the  legal  situation  then?  That  could  be  tricky.  Titan  had
jurisdiction over the other permanent satellities, but its claim to the obvious
temporary ones like Phoebe & (2o. was still in dispute. It was possible that no
laws had been broken at

all

)

But

this was sheer speculation. He had not the

slightest

hard evidence. Why, indeed, had he thought of

Karl at all in this context?

He

reread  the  message,  still  glowing  on  the  Comsole  monitor:  MAJOR
DISCOVERY ON OUTER MOON.

ASKING HELMER . . . That was what had triggered

this line of thought. Guilt by association, perhaps; the juxtaposition might be
pure  coincidence.  But  the  Makenzies  could  read  each  other's  minds,  and
Duncan knew that the phraseology was deliber-201

ate. There was no need for Colin to have mentioned Helmer; he was sending
out an early warning signal.

It was ridiculous to pile speculation upon speculation, but Duncan could not
resist the next step. Assuming that Karl was involved--why?

Karl  might  take  risks,  might  even  get  involved  in  petty  illegalities,  but  it
would be for some good purpose.

If--and it was still an enormous "if"--he was trying to accumulate funds on
Earth, he must have a long-range objective in mind. The most obvious was
the establishment of a power base--precisely as Duncan was doing.

He must also have an agent here, someone he

could trust implicitly. That would not be difficult; Karl had met hundreds of
Terrans

"Oh, my God," Duncan breathed. "That explains everything .... "

He wondered if he should cancel his trip to Zanzibar; no, that took priority
over all else, except

the speech he had come a billion kilometers to deliver.

In any case, he did not see what More he

could do here in Washington until he had further news from home.

He  was  still  operating  on  pure  guesswork,  without  one  atom  of  proof.  But
there was a cold, dead feeling in the general region of his heart; and suddenly,
for  no  good  reason  at  all,  Duncan  thought  of  that  solitary  iceberg,  gliding
southward on the hidden current toward its irrevocable destiny.

THE

ISLAND OF DR. MOHAMMED

E1 Hadj's deputy, Dr. Todd, was one of

those  medical  men  who  seem,  not  always  justifiably,  to  radiate  an  aura  of

confidence. This despite his relative youth and informality; for reasons which
Duncan

never discovered, all his colleagues used his

nickname, Sweeney.

"I'm sorry you won't meet E1 Hadj this time," he said apologetically. "He had
to rush to Hawaii, for an emergency operation."

"I'm surprised that's necessary, in this age."

"Normally,  it's  not.  But  Hawaii's  almost  exactly  on  the  other  side  of  the
world--which means you have to work through two comsats in series. During
tele-surgery, that extra time delay can be critical."

So even on Earth, thought Duncan, the slowness

of  radio  waves  can  be  a  problem.  A  half-second  lag  would  not  matter  in
conversation; but between a surgeon's hand and eye, it might be fatal.

"Until twenty years ago," Dr. Todd explained,

"this was a famous marine biology lab. So it had most of the facilities we
need---including isolation."

"Why is that necessary?" asked Duncan. He had wondered why the clinic was
in such an inconven

iently out-of-the-way spot.

"There's a good deal of emotional interest in our work, and we have to control
visitors.  Despite  air  transportation,  you  can  still  do  that  much  easier  on  an
island than anywhere else. And above all, we

have  to  protect  our  Mothers.  They  may  not  be  very  intelligent,  but  they're
sensitive, and don't like be,ing stared at."

"I've not seen any yet."

"Do you really want to?"

That was a difficult question to answer, for Duncan felt his emotions tugging
in opposite directions.

Thirty-one  years  ago,  he  must  have  been  born  in  a  place  not  unlike  this,
though probably not as spectacularly beautiful. If he had gone full term--and
in

those days, he assumed, all clones did so--some unknown woman had carried
him in her body for at

least eight months after implantation. Was she still alive? Did any record of
her name still exist, or was she merely a number in a computer file? Perhaps
not  even  that,  for  the  identity  of  a  foster  mother  was  not  of  the  slightest
biological importance. A purely mechanical womb could have served as well,
but there

had  never  been  any  real  need  to  perfect  so  complex  a  device.  In  a  world
where reproduction was strictly 203

limited, there would always be plenty of volunteers; the only problem was
selecting them.

Duncan had no memory whatsoever of his unknown

foster mother or of the months he must have

spent on Earth as a baby. Every attempt to penetrate the fog that lay at the
very beginning of his childhood was a failure. He could not be certain if this
was normal, or whether the earliest part of his life was hidden by deliberately
induced amnesia. He suspected

the latter, since he felt a distinct reluctance ever to investigate the subject in
any detail.

When he formed the concept "Mother" in his mind, he instantly saw Colin's
wife, Sheela. Her face was his earliest memory, her affection his first love,
later shared with Grandma Ellen. Colin had chosen carefully and had learned
from Malcolm's mistakes.

Sheela had treated Duncan exactly like her own

children, and he had never thought of Yuri and

Glynn as anything except his older brother and sister.

He could not remember when he had first realized that Colin was not their
father, and that they

bore  no  genetic  relationship  to  him  whatsoever.  Somehow  it  had  never
seemed to matter.

He appreciated, now, the unobtrusive skills that had gone into the creation of
so well adjusted a

"family";  it  would  not  have  been  possible  in  an  earlier  age  of  exclusive
marriage and sexual possessiveness.

Even today, it was no easy task. He hoped that

he  and  Marissa  would  be  equally  successful,  and  that  Clyde  and  Carline
would accept little Malcolm as their brother, just as wholeheartedly as Yuri
and Glynn had once accepted him ....

"I'm sorry," said Duncan. "I was daydreaming."

"Can't say I blame you; this place is too damned beautiful. I sometimes have
to draw the curtains when I want to do any work."

That  was  easy  to  believe--yet  beauty  was  not  the  first  impression  to  strike
Duncan when he landed on the island. Even now, his dominant feeling was
one of awe, mixed with More than a trace of fear.

Starting a dozen meters away, and filling his field of vision right out to the
sharp blue line of the horizon, was More watei: than he had ever imagined. It

2O4

was true that he had seen Earth's oceans from space, but from that Olympian
vantage  point  it  had  been  impossible  to  envisage,  their  true  size.  Even  the
greatest of seas was diminished, when one could flash across it in ten minutes.

This world was indeed misnamed. It should have

been called Ocean, not Earth. Duncan performed a rough mental calculation--
-one  of  the  skills  the  Makenzies  had  carefully  retained,  despite  the

omnipresent computer. Radius six thousand--and his eye

was about six meters above sea level--that made it simple--six root two, or
near enough eight kilometers.

Only eight! It was incredible; he could easily

have  believed  that  the  horizon  was  a  hundred  kilometers  away.  His  vision
could not span even one

percent of the distance to the other shore ....

And what he could see now was only the two-dimensional skin of an alien
universe, teeming with

strange life forms seeking whom they might devour.

To  Duncan,  that  expanse  of  peaceful  blue  concealed  a  word  much  More
hostile, and More terrifying, than Space. Even Titan, with its known dangers,
seemed benign in comparison.

And yet there were children out there, splashing around in the shallows, and
disappearing underwater for quite te-rifying lengths of time. One of

them, Duncan was certain, had been gone for well over a minute.

"Isn't that dangerous?" he asked anxiously, gesturing toward the lagoon.

"We don't let them go near the water until they're well trained. And if you
must drown yourself, this is the place for it with some of the best medical
cilities in the world. We've had only one permanent death in the last fifteen
years. Revival would

have been possible even then, but after an hour underwater, brain damage is
irreversible."

"But what about sharks and all the other big fish?"

"We've never had an attack inside the reef, and only one outside it. That's a
small  price  to  pay  for  admission  to  Fairyland.  We're  taking  out  the  big
trimaran tomorrow--why don't you come along?"

"I'll think about it," Duncan answered evasively.

"Oh--I suppose you've never been underwater before."

"I've never been on it-except in a swimming pool."

"Well, you've nothing to lose. Though we won't complete the tests for another
forty-eight  hours,  I'm  sure  we'll  be  able  to  clone  successfully  from  the
genotypes you've given. So your immortality insurance

is taken care of."

"Thank you very much," said Duncan dryly. "That makes all the difference."

He remembered Commander Innes' invitation to

the  Caribbean  reefs,  and  his  instant  though  unexpressed  refusal.  But  those
mere children were obviously

enjoying themselves, and their confidence was

a reproach to his manhood. The pride of the

Makenzies was at stake; he looked glumly at that appalling mass of water, and
realized that he would have to do something about it before he left the island.

He had never felt less enthusiastic about any

project in his life.

The night was beautiful, blazing with More stars than any man could ever see
from the surface of

Titan, however long he lived. Though it was only nineteen hundred hours--too
early for dinner, let alone sleep--the sun might never have existed, so total
was the darkness away from the illumination of the main buildings, and of the
little lights strung along the paths of crushed coral.

From somewhere in that darkness came the sound

of  music--a  rhythmical  throbbing  of  drums,  played  with  More  enthusiasm

than skill. Rising above this steady beat were occasional bursts of song, and

started to walk along the narrow path in the general direction of the revelry.

After  wandering  down  several  blind  alleys--ending  up  once  in  a  charming
sunken  garden,  which  he  left  with  profuse  apologies  to  the  couple  busily
occupying it he came to the clearing where the party was in 206

progress.  At  its  center,  a  large  bonfire  was  lofting  a  column  of  smoke  and
flames toward the stars, and a score of figures was dancing around it, like the
priestesses of some primitive religion.

They were not dancing with much grace or vigor;

in fact, it would be More truthful to say that most of them were circulating in
a  dignified  waddle.  But  despite  their  obvious  advanced  state  of  pregnancy,
they  were  clearly  enjoying  themselves,,  and  were  being  as  active  as  was
advisable in the circumstances.

It  was  a  grotesque  yet  strangely  moving  spectacle,  arousing  in  Duncan  a
mixture of pity and tenderness

--even  an  impersonal  and  wholly  unerotic  love.  The  tenderness  was  that
which all men feel in the imminent presence of birth and the wonder of their

own existence; the pity had a different cause.

Ugliness and deformity were rare on Titan--and

rarer still on Earth, since both could almost always be corrected. Almost but
not always. Here was

proof of that.

Most of these women were extremely plain; some

were ugly; a few were frankly hideous. And though Duncan noticed two or
three who might even pass as beautiful, it needed only a glance to show that
they were mentally subnormal. Had his long-dead "sister"

Anitra survived into adult life, she would have been at home in this strange
assembly.

If the dancers--and those others merely sitting

around,  banging  away  at  drums  and  sawing  on  fiddles--had  not  been  so
obviously happy it would have

been a disturbing, perhaps even a sickening spectacle.

It did not upset Duncan. Though he was

startled, he was prepared for it.

He knew how the foster mothers were chosen.

The first requirement, of course, was that they

should have no gynecological defects. That demand was easy to satisfy. It was
not so simple to cope with the psychological factors, and it might have been a
virtually  impossible  task  in  the  days  before  the  world's  population  was
computer-profiled.

There would always be women who desperately

yearned to bear children, but who for one reason or another could not fulfill
their destiny. In earlier ages, 2O7

most of them would have been doomed to spinsterly frustration; indeed, even
in this world of 2276, many of them still were. There were More would-be
mothers  than  the  controlled  birth  rate  could  satisfy,  but  those  who  were
especially disadvantaged could find some compensation here. The losers in
the  lottery  of  Fate  could  yet  win  a  consolation  prize,  and  know  for  a  few
months the happiness that would otherwise be denied them.

And so the World Computer had been programmed

as an instrument of compassion. This act of humanity had done More than
anything else to silence those who objected to cloning.

Of course, there were still problems. All these

Mothers  must  know,  however  dimly,  that  soon  after  birth  they  would  be
separated forever from the child they were to bring into the world. That was
not a sorrow that any man could understand; but women

were stronger than men, and they would get over it

--More often than not by taking part again in the creation of another life.

Duncan remained in the shadows, not wishing to

be seen and certainly not wishing to get involved.

Some of those incipient Mothers could crush him to a pulp if they grabbed
him and whirled him into the dance. He had now noticed that a handful of
men

--presumably  medical  orderlies  or  staff  from  the  clinic--were  circulating
liglxt-heartedly with the Mothers and entering into the spirit of the festivities.

He could not help wondering if there had also

been some deliberate psychological selection here.

Several of the men looked very effeminate, and were treating their partners
with what could only be

called sisterly affection. They were obviously dear friends; and that was all
they would ever be.

No  one  could  have  seen,  in  the  darkness,  Duncan's  smile  of  amused
recollection. He had just remembered-for the first time in years--a boy who
had

fallen in love with him in his late teens. It is hard to reject anyone who is
devoted to you, but although Duncan had good-naturedly succumbed a few
times

to  Nikki's  blandishments,  he  had  eventually  managed  to  discourage  his
admirer, despite torrents of tears.

Pity  is  not  a  good  basis  for  any  relationship,  and  Duncan  could  never  feel
quite  happy  with  someone  whose  affections  were  exclusively  polarized
toward one sex. What a contrast to the aggressive normality of Karl, who did
not give a damn whether he had More affairs with boys or girls, or vice versa.
At least, until the Calindy episode...

These memories, so unexpectedly dredged up from

the past, made Duncan aware of the complicated emotional crosscurrents that
must be sweeping through

this place. And he suddenly recalled that disturbing conversation--or, rather,
monologue--with Sir Morti-timer Keynes ....

That  he  would  follow  in  the  steps  of  Colin,  and  of  Malcolm  before,  was
something that Duncan had

always taken for granted, without any discussion.

But  now  he  realized,  rather  late  in  the  day,  that  there  was  a  price  for
everything, and that it should be considered very carefully before the contract
was finally signed.

Cloning was neither good nor bad; only its purpose was important. And that
purpose should not be

one that was trivial or selfish.

GOLDEN REEF

The vivid green band of palms and the brilliant

white crescent of the perfect beach were now More than a kilometer away, or
the far side of the barrier reef. Even through the dark glasses which he dared
not remove for a moment, the scene was almost

painfully bright; when he looked in the direction of the sun, and caught its
sparkle off the ocean swell, Duncan was completely blinded. Though this was
a  trifling  matter,  it  enhanced  his  feeling  of  separation  from  all  his
companions. True, most of them also 209

wore dark glasses---but in their case it was a convenience, not a necessity.
Despite his wholly terrestrial

genes, it seemed that he had adapted irrevocably to the light of a world ten
times farther from the sun.

Beneath the smoothly sliding flanks of the triple hull, the water was so clear
that it added to Duncan's feeling of insecurity. The boat seemed to be hanging
in midair, with no apparent means of support, over a dappled sea bed five or
ten meters below. It seemed strange that this should worry him, when he had

looked  down  on  Earth  from  orbit,  hundreds  of  kilometers  above  the
atmosphere.

He  was  startled  by  a  sudden,  distant  crash,  altogether  out  of  place  on  this
idyllically peaceful morning.

It came from somewhere out at sea, and Duncan

spun around just in time to see a column of spray slowly falling back into the
water. Surely no one would be allowed to set off submarine explosions in this
area ....

Now there was a jet of vapor, which rose slanting from the sea, hung for a
moment in the bright sunlight, and gradually dispersed.

For a full minute, nothing else happened. And

then--

Duncan was paralyzed with astonishment. With

unbelievable  slowness,  but  with  the  inevitability  of  some  continent  rising
from  the  primordial  depths,  a  vast  gray  shape  was  soaring  out  of  the  sea.
There was a flash of white, as monstrous flukes slammed against the waves
and created another cloud of spray.

And still that incredible bulk continued to climb, as if defying gravity, until it
was completely clear of the water, and hung poised for a moment above the
blue ledge of the horizon. Then, still in slow motion, as if reluctant to leave an
alien element, it fell back into the ocean and vanished beneath a final geyser
of spray. The booming crash seemed to come ages later.

Duncan had never imagined such a spectacle, but

he had no need of any explanation. Moby Dick was one of the thousands of
Terran  classics  he  knew  only  through  repute,  but  now  he  understood  how
Herman  Melville  must  have  felt  when,  for  the  first  time,  he  saw  the  sea
furrowed by a glistening, back as large 210

as  an  overturned  ship,  and  conceived  in  the  image  of  the  white  whale  a
symbol of the forces that lie behind the universe.

He waited for many minutes, but the giant did not leap again, though from
time  to  time  there  were  brief  spouts  of  vapor,  becoming  More  and  More
distant

until they vanished from sight.

"Why  did  it  do  that?"  he  asked  Dr.  Todd,  his  voice  still  hushed  by  the
lingering aura of departed majesty.

"Nobody really knows. It may be pure ]oie de vivre. It may be to impress a
lady  friend.  Or  it  may  be  merely  to  get  rid  of  parasites--whales  are  badly
infested with barnacles and lampreys."

How utterly incongruous, thought Duncan. It

seemed almost an outrage that a god should be afflicted with lice.

Now the trimaran was slowing down, and the sheer strangeness and beauty of
the underwater scene captured his attention so completely that Duncan forgot

his remoteness from land. The fantastic shapes of the corals, and the colors of
the  fish  that  sported  or  sauntered  among  them,  were  a  revelation.  He  had-
already been astounded by the variety of life on land;

now he saw that it was far exceeded by the reckless profusion of the sea.

Something like an antique jet plne went flapping slowly past, with graceful
undulations of its spotted wings. None of the other fish took any notice. To
Duncan's  surprise,  there  was  no  sign  of  the  carnage  he  had  expected  to
witness, tin this realm where everything fed on everything else. In fact, it was
hard to

imagine  a  More  peaceful  scene;  the  few  fish  that  had  been  chasing  others
were obviously doing so merely to protect their territory. The impression he
had gathered from books and films had been almost wholly

misleading. Co-operation, not competition, seemed to rule the reef.

The trimaran came to a halt, the anchor was

thrown out--and was followed almost instantly by three rubber dinghies, four
doctors, five nurses, and a mass of diving equipment. The scene appeared to

Duncan to be one of utter confusion; actually, it was 211

much better planned and disciplined than he realized.

The swimmers promptly divided into groups of three, and each trio went off
with one of the dinghies, heading in a purposeful manner toward spots that
had

obviously been chosen in advance.

"If  it's  so  safe,"  remarked  Duncan  after  the  last  splashings  had  died  away,
"why are they all carrying knives, aand those vicious-looking little spears?"

The trimaran was now almost deserted, its only

other occupants besides Duncan being the skipper--who had promptly fallen
asleep in front of the wheel

--the engineer, who had disappeared below deck, and Dr. Todd.

"Those aren't weapons. They're gardening tools."

"You must have rather ferocious weeds. I wouldn'l care to meet them."

"Oh," said Todd, "some of them put up a good fight. Why don't you go and
have a look? You'll be sorry if you miss the chance."

That was perfectly true, yet Duncan still hesitated.

The water in which the trimaran was gently rocking was very shallow; indeed,
it appeared no deeper

than the swimming pool at the Centennial Hotel.

I'll go in with you. You can stand on the diving ladder, until you get the hang
of the face mask--and snorkel-breathing should be easy to anyone who's used
to a spacesuit."

Duncan did not volunteer the information that he had never worn a genuine
spacesuit;  nevertheless,  a  Titan  surface  life-support  system  should  be  good
training. And anyway, what could go wrong in a

couple of meters of water? Why, there were places here where he could stand
with his head above the surface.

Sweeney Todd was right; he would never forgive himself if he turned down
this opportunity of a lifetime.

Ten minutes later, he was splashing inexpertly but steadily along the surface.
Although it had seemed astonishing--and even indecent--to put on clothing
when one entered the water, Todd had insisted that he dress from head to foot
in a light, one-piece overall of some closely knit fabric. It scarcely affected
his movements, but he wished he could do without it.

"Some of these corals sting," the doctor had ex212

plained. "It could spoil your day if you backed into one--and you might have
an allergic reaction."

"Anything else you can think of 2"

"No,  that's  about  it.  Just  watch  me,  and  hang  on  to  the  rubber  dinghy
whenever you want a rest."

He was now rapidly gaining confidence and begin*

ning to enjoy himself thoroughly. There was obviously no danger whatsoever
while he drifted along

behind the dinghy, never letting go of the rope clan gling in the water. And
Dr. Todd, he was reassured to observe, always kept within arm's length; he
was being almost ridiculously overcautious. ]Even if a shark came. shooting
up out of the depths, Duncan believed he could be aboard the dinghy in two
seconds flat notwithstanding Earth's gravSty.

Now that he had mastered the use of the snorkel

tube,  he  kept  his  head  under  water  all  the  time,  and  even  essayed  shallow
dives  which  involved  holding  his  breath  for  considerable  periods.  The
panorama beneath was so fascinating that Duncan even occasionally forgot
the need for air, and emerged sputtering

foolishly.

The  first  signboard  was  at  a  depth  of  five  meters  and  said,  in  fluorescent
yellow letters: No UNAUTHORIZED VISITORS BEYOND THIS POINT.

The second

warning was a flashing holographic display in mid-water, which must have
been very perplexing to the

fish. It announced ominously: THIs REF S MONITORitO.

Duncan could see no trace of the projectors;

they had been very cunningly concealed.

Todd was pointing ahed, to the line of divers

working along the edge of the reef. So he had not been joking. They really
were going through the unmistak4

able motions of gardeners digging up noxious weeds.

And each one was surrounded by a small cloud of

brilliantly colored fish, clearly benefiting from all this activity.

The coral formations seemed to be changing shape.

Even to Duncan's untrained eye, they looked strange

--even abnormal. He had grown accustomed to the

branching antlers of the stag-horns, the convoluted labyrinths that looked like
giant brains, the delicate 213

mushrooms  sometimes  meters  in  diameter.  They  were  still  here,  but  now
subtly distorted.

Then he saw the first metallic glint--then another, and another. As he came
closer,  and  the  blue  haze  of  distance  no  longer  softened  the  details  of  the
underwater  world,  Duncan  realized  why  this  reef  was  cherished  and
protected.

Everywhere he looked, it glittered and sparkled with gold.

Two  hundred  years  earlier,  it  had  been  one  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of
biological engineering, bringing world fame to its creators. Ironically, success
had come when it was no longer required; what had been intended to fulfill a
vital need had turned out to be no More than a technological cul-de-sac.

It  had  been  known  for  centuries  that  some  marine  organisms  were  able  to
extract, for the benefit of their own internal economies, elements present in
seawater in unbelievably small proportions. If sponges and oysters and similar
lowly creatures could perform such feats of chemical engineering with iodine
or vanadium, the biologists of the 2100's had argued,

why  could  they  not  be  taught  to  do  the  same  trick  with  More  valuable
elements?

And  so,  by  heroic  feats  of  gene-manipulation,  several  species  of  coral  had
been persuaded to become

gold miners. The most successful were able to replace almost ten percent of
their limestone skeletons with the precious metal. That success, however, was
measured only in human terms. Since gold normally plays

no  part  in  biochemical  reactions,  the  consequences  to  the  corals  were
disastrous; the auriferous reefs were never healthy, and had to be carefully
protected from predators and disease.

Only  a  few  hundred  tons  of  gold  were  extracted  by  this  technique  before
large-scale  transmutation  made  it  uneconomic;  the  nuclear  furnaces  could
manufacture  gold  as  chea¢ly  as  any  other  metal.  For  a  while,  the  More
accessible reefs were maintained as tourist attractions, but souvenir hunters
soon  demolished  them.  Now  only  one  was  left,  and  Dr.  Mohammed's  staff
was determined to preserve it.

So, at regular intervals, the doctors and nurses took time off from their usual
duties, and enjoyed an arduous working holiday on the reef. They dumped
carefully selected fertilizers and antibiotics to improve the health of the living
corals, and waged war

against its enemies--particularly the spectacular crown of thorns starfish and
its smaller relative the spiny sea urchi, n. Duncan floated, perfectly relaxed, in
the tepid water, lazily flippering from time to time so that he remained in the
shadow of the dinghy.

Now he understood the purpose of those sinister

knives and spikes; the adversaries they had to deal with were well protected
indeed.

Only a couple of meters beneath him, one of the

divers was jabbing at a colony of small black

spheres, each at the center of a formidable array of needle-sharp spines. From
time to time one of the spheres would be split open, and fish would dart in to
grab the pieces of white meat that came floating out. It was a delicacy they
could scarcely ever have enjoyed without human intervention; Duncan could
not imagine that these spiky beasts had any natural enemies.

The diver--one of the nurses--noticed the two

spectators  hovering  overhead,  and  beckoned  Duncan  to  join  her.  He  had
become so fascinated that he now obeyed automatically, without a second's
thought.

Taking several deep breaths, and partly exhaling on the last one, he hauled
himself slowly down the line anchoring the dinghy to its small grapnel.

The distance was greater, than he had imaginedm More like three meters than
two, for he had forgotten the refractive effect of the water. Midway, his left
ear gave a disconcerting "click," but Dr. Todd had warned him about this, and
he did not check his descent.

When he reached the anchor, and grabbed its

shank, he felt a tremendous sense of achievement. He was a deep-sea diver--
he had plumbed the fabulous depth of three meters! Well, at least two point
five...

The glitter of gold was all around him. There was \

never More than a tiny speck, smaller than a grain of sand, at any one spot--
but it was everywhere; the entire reef was impregnated with it. Duncan felt
that 215

he was floating beside the chef-d'oeuvre of some mad jeweler, determined to
create a baroque masterpiece regardless of expense. Yet these pinnacles and
plates  and  twisted  spires  were  the  work  of  mindless  polyps,  not--except
indirectly--the products of human intelligence.

Reluctantly, he shot. up to the surface for air. This was easy; he felt ashamed
of his previous fears. Now he understood how visitors often reacted to Titan.

Next time, when someone politely declined an invitation to take a pleasant
iaunt outside, he would be a

little More tolerant.

"What are those black things?" he asked Dr.

Todd, who was still hovering watchfully above him.

"Long-spined sea urchin, Diaderna something-or-other.

When you see so many, it's a sign of pollution

or  an  unbalanced  ecology.  They  don't  really  damage  the  reef--unlike
Acanthaster--  but  they're  ugly,  and  a  nuisance.  If  you  back  into  one,  the
needles may take a month to work their way out. Are you going down again?"

"Yes."

"Good. Don't overdo it. A-nd watch out for those spines!"

Duncan hauled himself down the anchor line once More , and the diver waved
him a greeting as he approached.

Then she offered him her deadly-looking

knife, and pointed toward a small group of sea urchins.

Duncan nodded, took the tapering metal blade

by the proffered handle, and started iabbing away inexpertly, being careful to
avoid those ominous black needles.

Not  until  then  did  he  realize,  to  his  considerable  surprise,  that  these  lowly
animals were aware of his presence, and were not relying merely on a static
defense.

The long spines were swinging toward him,

orienting themselves in the direction of maximum danger.

Presumably it was only a simple autamatic reflex, but it made him pause for a
moment.  There  was  More  here  than  met  the  eye--perhaps  the  first  faint
intimations of dawning consciousness.

I4is knife was longer than the sea urchin's spines, and he jabbed vigorously
again and again. The cara-216

pace was surprisingly tough, but presently it gave way, and the waiting fish
raced in to grab at the creamy white flesh that was suddenly exposed.

And then, with growing discomfort, Duncan realized that his victim was not
dying in silence. For

some time he had been aware of faint sounds in the water around him--the
hammering  of  the  other  divers  on  the  reef,  the  occasional  "clang"  of  the
anchor against the rocks. But this noise came from much closer at hand, and
was most peculiar--even disturbing.

It was a crackling, grinding sound; though the

analogy was-patently ridiculous, it could only be compared to the crunching
of thousands of tiny teeth, clashing in rage and agony. Moreover, there was no
doubt that it came from the eviscerated sea urchin.

That faint, inhuman death rattle was so unexpected that Duncan checked his

onslaught  and  remained  how-ering  motionless  in  the  water.  He  had
completely forgotten the necessity for air, and the conscious part of his mind
had  dismissed  the  mountin,  g  symptoms  of  suffocation  as  irrelevant--to  be
dealt with later. But finally he could ignore them no longer, and shot gasping
to the surface.

With a profound sense of shock--even of shame--Duncan realized that he had
just destroyed a living

creature.  He  could  never  have  imagined,  before  he  left  Titan,  that  such  an
experience would ever come his way.

One  could  hardly  feel  much  guilt  over  the  murder  of  a  sea  urchin.
Nevertheless, for the first time in his life, Duncan Makenzie was a. killer.

SLEUTH

When Duncan returned to Washington, the

second time bomb from Colin was ticking away in

the Centennial Hotel. Once again, it was so cryptic that it would have been
almost unintelligible, even to an outsider who had succeeded in decoding it.

CONFIRM YOUR OLD FRIEND HAS UNAUTHORIZED

ACCOUNT 65842 GENEVA BRANCH FIRST BANK OF

ARISTARCHUS. BALANCE SEVERAL TENS OF THOUSANDS

SOLARS. THIS INFORMATION NOT TO BE DISCLOSED

ANY CIRCUMSTANCES. PRESUME FROM

SALE OF TITANITE. MAKING INQUIRIES MNEMOSYNE.

MEANWHILE SUGGEST YOU KEEP ALERT.

REGARDS COLIN.

Duncan  understood  perfectly  well  why  this  information  was  "not  to  be
dsclosed'; the Lunar banks

guarded  their  secrets  well,  and  heaven  alone  kvew  by  what  prodigies  of
persuasion  or  genteel  blackmail  Colin  had  managed  to  get  hold  of  Karl's
account number.

Even  so,  he  had  been  unable  to  obtain  a  figure  for  the  balancebut  it  was
obviously considerable. Ten thousand solars was far More than anyone would
need for

the purchase of a few Terran luxuries. And several times that was More than
the Makenzies held in their own, perfectly legal accounts. Such an amount of
money was More than a cause for envy; it was disturbing, especially if it was
intended for some clandestine use.

Duncan allowed himself a few moments of wistful

daydreaming,  imagining  what  he  could  do  with  wenty  or  thirty  thousand
solars. Then he put the seductive vision firmly aside and concentrated all his
mind upon 218

the problem. While Karl's involvement had been only a vague suspicion, he
had been reluctant to waste time on a detailed analysis of how, when, and--
above all mwhy. But now that speculation had congealed into certainty, he
could no longer evade the issue.

What a pity that the obvious line of approach was out of the question! He
could hardly call up the First Bank of Aristarchus and ask for a print-out of
Account 65842. Not even the World Government could do that, unless fraud
or crime had already been proved beyond a shadow of a doubt. Even the most
discreet  inquiry  would  trigger  an  explosion;  someone  would  certainly  be
fh"ed, and Colin might be faced with most embarrassing questions.

The only real problem in life, an ancient philosopher had once said, is what to
do next. There was still no link with Calindy---or anyone else. Duncan did not
relish playing a role in some sleazy, old-time spy or detective melodrama, and
was not even sure how one got started on such an enterprise. Colin would
have been much better at it; of the three Makenzies, he was the only one with
any flair for subterfuge, indirection, and secrecy. He was probably enjoying
him-self---especially since he had never liked Karl, being

one of the few people on Titan immune to his charms.

But Colin, though he was doing a remarkable job, was More than a billion
kilometers away, at the end of an expensive three-hour time-lag. There was no
one on Earth in whom Duncan could confide. This

was a private Titanian matter, and might yet turn out to be a storm in a teacup.
However, if it was serious, the fewer people whcgknew about it, the better.

Duncan considered, and dismissed, the idea of talking to Ambassador Farrell.
He might have to enter the picture later, but not now. Duncan had not been too
impressed  with  Bob  Farrell's  discretion--and,  of  course,  he  was  a  Terran.
Moreover, if the Embassy discovered that there was a large amount of master-
less money floating around Earth, that would undoubtedly precipitate a tug-
of-war.  It  was  true  that  the  rent  on  Wyoming  Avenue  had  to  be  paid,  but
Titan's demands were even More urgent.

And yet perhaps there was one Terran he could

trust--the  man  who  h'ad  raised  the  matter  in  the  first  place,  and  who  was
equally interested in finding the answer. Duncan tapped out the name on his
Comsole, wondering if it would accept that ridiculous apostrophe.

(He had managed to misplace the dealer's card,

which would have placed the call automatically.)

"Mr. Mandel'stahm?" he said, when the screen lit up. "Duncan Makenzie. I
have some news for you.

Where can we meet for a private conversation?"

"Are you absolutely certain," said Duncan anxiously,

"that no one can overhear us?"

"You've been seeing too many historical films, Mr.

Makenzie,' Ivor Mandel'stahm replied. "This isn't the twentieth century, and it
would  take  a  singularly  determined  police  state  to  bug  every  autojitney  in

Washington.

I always do my confidential business cruising

round and round the Mall. There's absolutely nothing to worry about."

"Very well. It's imperative that this doesn't go any further. I am fairly sure that
I know the source of the titanite. What's More, I have a very good idea of the
Terran agent--who has apparently already made

some substantial sales."

"I've discovered that," said Mandel'stahm, a little glumly. "Do you know how
substantial?"

"Several tens of thousands of solars."

To Duncan's surprise, Mandel'stahm brightened

appreciably.

"Oh, is that all?" he exclaimed. "I'm quite relieved.

And can you give me the name of the prime agent?

I've been operating through a very close-mouthed intermediary.''

Duncan  hesitated.  "I  believe  you  implied  that  no  Terran  laws  were  being
broken."

"Correct. There's no import duty on extraterrestrial gems. Everything at this
end is perfectly legal--un-less, of course, the titanite is stolen, and the Terran
agent is an accomplice."

"I'm sure that isn't the case. You see--and it's not really as big a coincidence as
you might think--the agent is a friend of mine."

A knowing smile crease/J Mandel'stahm's face.

"I appreciate your problem."

No  you  don't,  Duncan  told  himself.  It  was  an  excruciatingly  complicated
situation. He was quite sure

now why Calindy had been avoiding him. Karl would have warned her that he
was coming to Earth and

would have advised her to keep out of his way. Yes, Karl must have bee. very
worried,  up  there  on  little  Mnemosyne,  lest  Duncan  stumble  upon  his
activities.

It was essential to keep completely out of the pie-ture; Calindy must never
guess that he knew. There

was no way in which she could possibly link him with Mandel'stahm, with
whom she was already dealing

through her own exceedingly discreet intermediary.

Yet still Dancan hesitated, like a chess master over a crucial move. He was
analyzing  his  own  motives,  and  his  own  conscience,  for.  his  personal  and
official interests were now almost inextricably entangled.

He was anxious to find out what Karl was doing,

and if necessary frustrate him. He wanted to make Calindy ashamed of her
deceit, and possibly turn her embarrassment to his emotional advantage. (This
was a rather forlorn hope; Calindy did not embarrass easily, if at all .... ) And
he wanted to help Titan, and thereby the Makenzies. All these obiectives were
not likely to be compatible. Duncan began to wish that titanite had never been
discovered. Yet, undoubtedly, there was a brilliant opportunity here, if only he
had the wit to make his moves correctly.

Their  autoiitney  was  now  gliding,  at  the  breathless  speed  of  some  twenty
klicks, between the Capitol and the Library of Congress. The sight reminded
Duncan of his other responsibility; already it was the last week in June, yet
his  speech  still  consisted  of  no  More  than  a  few  sheets  of  notes.
Overpreparation was one of the Makenzie failings; the "all right on the night"
attitude was wholly alien to their natures. But even allowing for this often
valuable fault, of which he was well aware, Duncan was beginning to feel a
mild sense of panic.

The  problem  was  a  very  simple  one,  yet  its  diagnosis  had  not  suggested  a

remedy. Try as he could, Duncan had still been unable to decide on a basic
theme, 221

trust---the  man  who  had  raised  the  matter  in  the  first  place,  and  who  was
equally interested in finding the answer. Duncan tapped out the name on his
Comsole, wondering if it would accept that ridiculous apostrophe.

(He had managed to misplace the dealer's card,

which would have placed the call automatically.)

"Mr. Mandel'stahm?" he said, when the screen lit up. "Duncan Makenzie. I
have some news for you.

Where can we meet for a private conversation?"

"Are you absolutely certain," said Duncan anxiously,

"that no one can overhear us?"

"You've been seeing too many historical films, Mr.

Makenzie," Ivor Mandel'stahm replied. "This isn't the twentieth century, and it
would  take  a  singularly  determined  police  state  to  bug  every  autojitney  in
Washington.

I always do my confidential business cruising

round and round the Mall. There's absolutely nothing to worry about."

"Very well. It's imperative that this doesn't go any further. I am fairly sure that
I know the source of the titanite. What's More, I have a very good idea of the
Terran agent--who has apparently already made

some substantial sales."

"I've discovered that," said Mandel'stahm, a little glumly. "Do you know how
substantial?"

"Several tens of thousands of solars.'

To Duncan's surprise, Mandel'stahm brightened

appreciably.

"Oh, is that all?" he exclaimed. "I'm quite relieved.

And can you give me the name of the prime agent?

I've been operating through a very close-mouthed intermediary.''

Duncan  hesitated.  "I  believe  you  implied  that  no  Terran  laws  were  being
broken."

"Correct. There's no import duty on extraterrestrial gems. Everything at this
end is perfectly legal--un-less, of course, te titanite is stolen, and the Terran
agent is an accomplice."

"I'm sure that isn't the case. You see--and it's not really as big a coincidence as
you might think---the agent is a friend of mine."

A knowing smile crease/:l Mandel'stahm's face.

"I appreciate your problem."

No  you  don't,  Duncan  told  himself.  It  was  an  excruciatingly  complicated
situdtion. He was quite sure

now why Calindy had been avoiding him. Karl would have warned her that he
was coming to Earth and

would have advised her to keep out of his way. Yes, Karl must have bee very
worried,  up  there  on  little  Mnemosyne,  lest  Duncan  stumble  upon  his
activities.

It  was  essential  to  keep  completely  out  of  the  picture;  Calindy  must  never
guess that he knew. There was no way in which she could possibly link him
with Mandel'stahm, with whom she was already dealing

through her own exceedingly discreet intermediary.

Yet still Duncan hesitated, like a chess master over a crucial move. He was
analyzing  his  own  motives,  and  his  own  conscience,  for  his  personal  and

official interests were now almost inextricably entangled.

He was anxious to find out what Karl was doing,

and if necessary frustrate him. He wanted to make Calindy ashamed of her
deceit, and possibly turn her embarrassment to his emotional advantage. (This
was a rather forlorn hope; Calindy did not embarrass easily, if at all .... ) And
he wanted to help Titan, and thereby the Makenzies. All these objectives were
not likely to be compatible. Duncan began to wish that titanite had never been
discovered. Yet, undoubtedly, there was a brilliant opportunity here, if only he
had the wit to make his moves correctly.

Their  autojitney  was  now  gliding,  at  the  breathless  speed  of  some  twenty
klicks, between the Capitol and the Library of Congress. Th sight reminded
Duncan of his other responsibility; already it was the last week in June, yet
his  speech  still  consisted  of  no  More  than  a  few  sheets  of  notes.
Overpreparation was one of the Makenzie failings; the "all right on the night"
attitude was wholly alien to their natures. But  even allowing for this often
valuable fault, of which he was well aware, Duncan was beginning to feel a
mild sense of panic.

The  problem  was  a  very  simple  one,  yet  its  diagnosis  had  not  suggested  a
remedy. Try as he could, Duncan had still been unable to decide on a basic
theme, 221

or any message from Titan More inspiring than the usual zero-content official
greetings.

Mandel'stahm  was  still  waiting  patiently  when  they  passed  the  Rayburn
Building--now  encrusted  with  a  vast  banyan  tree  brought  all  the  way  from
Angkor Wat; it was hoped that within the next fifty years, this would do the
job  of  demolition  at  virtually  no  public  expense.  There  were  times  when
aesthetics took precedence over history, and it was generally agreed that

--unlike  the  old  Smithsonian--the  Rayburn  Building  was  not  quite  hideous
enough to be worth preservation.

(But what would that vegetable octopus do next,

the professional alarmists had worried, when it had finished this task? Would
the  monster  cram  across  Independence  Avenue  and  attack  the  hallowed

dome?)

Now the jitney was cruising past the prone hundred mete/:s of the Saturn V
replica lying on what had once been the site of NASA Headquarters. They
could

not  spend  all  day  .orbiting  central  Washington;  very  well,  Duncan  told
himself with a sigh...

"I  have  your  promise  that  my  name  won't  come  out,  under  any
circumstances?"

"Yes."

"And there's no risk that---my friend--may get into trouble?"

"I can't guarantee that he won't lose any money.

But there will be no legal problems--at any rate, under Terran jurisdiction."

"It's not a 'he.' I leave the details to you, but you might make some tactful
inquiries  about  the  vice-president  of  Enigma  Associates,  Catherine  Linden
E1lerman."

STAR DAY

Though

he tried to convince himself that he

had  done  the  right  thing--even  the  only  thing--Dun-can  was  still  slightly
ashamed. Deep in his heart, he felt that he had been guilty of betraying an old
friendship.

He was glad that some impulse had kept him

from  mentioning  Karl,  and  with  part  of  his  mind  he  still  hoped  that
Mandel'stahm--and Colin--would

run into blank walls, so that the whole investigation would collapse.

Meanwhile, there was so much to be done, and so

much to see, that for long periods of time Duncan could forget his twinges of
conscience. It seemed ridiculous

to have come all the way to Earth--and then

to sit for hours of every day (in beautiful weather!) in a hotel room talking
into a Comsole.

But every time Duncan thought he had completed

one of the innumerable chores they had given him before he left home, there
would be a back-up message

reopening the subject, or adding fresh complications.

His official duties were time-consuming enough; what made matters worse
were  all  the  private  requests  from  relatives,  friends,  and  even  complete
strangers,  who  assumed  that  he  had  nothing  else  to  do  except  contact  lost
acquaintances, obtain photos of ancestral homes, hunt for rare books, research
Terran genealogies, locate obscure works of art, act as agent for

hopeful Titanian authors and artists, conjure up scholarships and free passages
to Earth--and say "Thank

you" for Star Day cards received ten years ago and never acknowledged.

Which reminded Duncan that he had not sent off

his own cards for this quadrennial occasion. Since '76

was a leap year, Star Day was therefore looming up 223

in the near future--to be precise, between lune 30

and  July  I.  Duncan  was  glad  of  the  extra  day,  but  it  also  meant  that  there
would shortly be three days in five where no business could be done. For July
I, being at the beginning of a new quarter, was of course a Sunday; and the
Sunday before that was only June 28. It was bad enough, in an ordinary year,

to have two Sundays at the end of every 91-day quarter, with only a Monday
and Tuesday between them---but now to have another holiday as well made it
even worse.

There  was  still  time  to  mail  cards  to  all  his  Terran  friends--Ambassador
Farrell, the Washingtons,

Calindy, Bernie Patras, and half a dozen others. As for Titan, there was really
no  hurry.  Even  if  they  took  six  months  to  get  there,  the  cards,  with  their
beautiful  gold-leaf  Centennial  stamps  (five  solars  each,  for  heaven's  sake,
even by second-class space mail!), would still be appreciated.

Despite thse problems, Duncan had found some

opportunities to relax. He had been on personal tele-tours of London, Rome,
and Athens, which was the

next best thing to being there in the flesh. Seated in a tiny, darkened cubicle
with 360 degrees of high-quality

sound and vision, he could easily believe that

he was actually walking through the streets of the ancient cities. He could ask
questions of the invisible guide who was his alter ego, talk to any passersby,
change  the  route  to  look  More  closely  at  something  that  took  his  interest.
Only the senses of smell and touch remained immobile--and even these could
be tele-extended for anyone willing to foot the bill. Duncan

could not afford such a marginal luxury, and did not really miss it.

He also attended several concerts, two ballets, and one play--all arranged for
the benefit of visitors in this Centennial year, and all unavoidable without the
exercise of More diplomatic illness, or sheer bad manners, than Duncan felt
able  to  muster.  The  music,  though  doubtless  magnificent,  bored  him;  his
tastes were old-fashioned, and he enjoyed little written after the twenty-first
century. The ballet was-also a disappointment; to anyone who had spent all
his life at a

fifth of a gravity, the most remarkable of Terran 224

grands jet, was unimpressive--and also nerve-racking, for Duncan could never
quite get over the

fear that the dancers would injure themselves. He watched them with envy,
but he had no wish to imitate them. It was enough that he could now walk and
stand  without  conscious  effort.  This  achievement  was  a  matter  of  modest
pride, for there had been a time when

he would not have believed it possible.

But the play delighted him. He had heard vaguely of George Bernard Shaw,
now undergoing one of his periodic revivals, and The Devil's Disciple was
perfect for the occasion. Though George Washington

muttered  from  time  to  time  in  Duncan's  ear  such  comments  as  "General
Burgoyne wasn't the least like

that," he felt that he at last understood  the American Revolution in human
terms.  It  was  no  longer  a  shadowy  affair  of  two-dimensional  puppets,  five
hundred

years in the past, but a life-and-death struggle involving real people, whose
hopes and fears and loves he

could share.

Though  love,  with  a  capital  L,  was  not  a  complication  that  Duncan  would
welcome during his stay on

Earth. He could not imagine anyone ever replacing Marissa, and to have a
really  serious  affair  with  a  Ter-ran  would  be  the  stuff  of  tragedy,  since
separation

would be inevitable when he returned to Titan. He wanted no part of that; he
had been through it once before, with Calindy.

Or  so  it  had  seemed"at  the  time.  Now  he  realized  that  the  calf  love  of  a
sixteen-year-old boy, though it had once dominated all his :waking hour, r,
was indeed shallow and transient. Yet its aftereffects still lingered, shaping all
his  later  passions  and  desires.  Although  he  was  annoyed  and  disappointed
with Calindy, that was unchanged; her deliberate avoidance had, if anything,
added fuel to his emotions and contributed to some notably fevered dreams.

Bernie  Patras,  of  course,  was  happy  to  relieve  his  symptoms,  and  had
arranged several enjoyable encounters.

One cuddlesome and talented young lady,

he swore, was his own girl friend, "who only does this with people she really
wants  to  meet."  She  did,  indeed,  show  a  genuine  interest  in  Titan  and  its
problems; but 225

when Bernie, as an interested party, wanted to join in the festivities, Duncan
selfishly threw him out.

That was shortly before Ivor Mandel'stahm--this

time in the Penn-Mass autojitney--totally demolished his peace of mind. They
had just left the Dupont Circle Interchange when he told Duncan: "I've some
interesting news for you, but I don't know what it means. You may be able to
explain it."

'I'll do my best."

"I think I can claim, without much exaggeration or conceit, that I can get to
anyone on Earth in one jump. But sometimes discretion suggests doing it in
two, and that's how I proceeded with Miss Ellerman.

I've  never  had  any  dealings  with  her  personally--or  so  I  thought,  until  you
advised me otherwise--but we have mutual friends. So I got one, whom I can
trust without question, to give her a call

Tell

me, have

you

tried to contact her recently?"

"Not

for--oh, at least a week. I thought it better to keep out of the way." Duncan did
not add, to this perfectly good excuse, the fact that he had felt ashamed

to face Calindy.

"She

answered  my  friend's  call,  but  there's  something  very  odd.  She  wouldn't
switch on her viddy."

That

certainly  was  peculiar;  as  a  matter  of  common  good  manners,  one  never
overrode the vision circuit unless there was a very good excuse indeed. Of
course, this could sometimes cause acute embarrassment-a

fact  exploited  to  the  utmost  in  countless  comedies.  But  whatever  the  real
reason, social protocol demanded some explanation. To say that the viddy was
out of order was to invite total disbelief, even on those rare occasions when it
was true.

"What was her excuse?" asked Duncan.

"A plausible one. She explained that she'd had a bad fall, and apologized for
not showing her face."

"I hope she wasn't badly hurt."

"Apparently not, though she sounded rather unhappy.

Anyway, my friend had a brief conversation

with her and raised the subject of Titan--quite legitimately, and in a way that
couldn't possibly arouse suspicion.

He knew that she'd been there, and asked if

she could put him in touch with any Titanians she 226

happened to kno on Earth. Actually, he said he had an export order in mind."

"Not a very good story. All business is handled through the Embassy Trade
Division, and he could have contacted them."

"If I may say so, Mr. Makenzie, you still have a lot to learn. I can think of half
a dozen reasons for not going to the Embassy--at least for the first approach.

My friend knows that, and you can be sure that Miss Ellerman does."

"If you say soI don't doubt that you're right.

What was her reaction?"

"I'm afraid you're going to be disappointed. She said that she did have a good
Titanian  friend  who  might  be  able  to  help,  that  he'd  just  arrived  for  the
celebrations, and he was in Washington .... "

Duncan began to laugh; the anticlimax was so ridiculous

....

"So your friend wasted his time. We're right back where we started."

"Along this line, yes. I thought you'd be amused.

But there's rather More to come."

"Go 
on," 
said 
Duncan, 
his 
confidence 
in 
Man-del'stahm 
now

somewhatdiminished by this debacle.

"I  tried  several  other  lines  of  inquiry,  but  they  all  came  to  nothing.  I  even
thought of calling Miss

Ellerman myself and saying outright that I knew she was the principal behind
the titanite negotiationsm without accusing her of anything, of course."

"I'm glad you didn't."

"Oh, it would have been a perfectly reasonable thing to do--she wouldn't be
surprised if I found out sooner or later. But as it happened, I had a better idea-
-one I should have tried in the first place. I checked on her visitors for the last
month."

"How," Duncan asked in astonishment, "could you do that?"

"It's the oldest trick in the world. Have you never seen one of those twentieth-
century  French  detective  films?  No.  I  suppose  not.  I  simply  asked  the
concierge.''

"The what?"

"You don't have them on Titan?"

"I don't even know what they are."

"Perhaps  you're  lucky.  On  Earth,  they're  an  indispensable  nuisance.  Miss
Ellerman, as I assume you

know, lives in a very luxurious Deep Ten just south of Mount Rockefeller. In
fact, she has the basement penthouse--a hankering I've never understood; the
farther down I go, the More claustrophobic I get.

Well, any large complex has a doorkeeper at the

entrance  to  tell  visitors  who's  in  and  who's  out,  take  messages,  accept
deliveries--and authorize the right people to go to the right apartments. That's
the concierge.''

"And you were able to get at its memory bank?"

Mandel'stahm had the grace to look slightly embarrassed.

"It's  surprising  what  can  be  done  if  you  know  the  fight  people.  Oh,  don't
misunderstand. There was nothing illegal; but I prefer to omit details."

"On Titan, we're very particular about invasion of privacy."

"So are we on Earth. Anyone who really wants to do so can easily by-pass the
concierge. Which, in fact, suggests to me that Miss Ellerman does not have a
guilty conscience, or anything to hide. But tell me, Mr. Makenzie--didn't you
know that she had a

Titanian guest staying with her?"

Duncan stared at him open-mouthed, but quickly

recovered himself. Of course--Karl might well have prevailed on some trusted
friend to act as a courier.

That must have been a good many months ago; there had been no passenger
ship for six weeks before Sirius. Who could possibly... ?

That could wait. There was another little matter to clear up first.

"You said staying with her?"

"Yes. That is, until only two days ago."

That explained everything--almost. No wonder

Calindy  had  avoided  him!  In  equal  measure,  Duncan  felt  jealousy,
disappointment--and relief that his maneuverings had, after all, been justified
by events.

"Who is this Titanian?" he asked glumly. "I wonder if I know him."

"That's what I'll be interested to hear. His name is Karl Helmer."

A

MESSAGE FROM TITAN

II !hat,s'!' utterly impossible," said Duncan, when he had recovered from the
initial shock. "I left Helmer at Saturn--and I came here on the fastest ship in
the Solar Sy.stem."

Mandel'stahm gave an expressive shrug.

"Then perhaps someone else is using that name, for reasons best known to
himself. Miss Ellerman's concierge is not very bright--they seldom are--and
incidentally, we were lucky to get at it just before the regular end-of-month
memory update. I got hold of the visual recognition coding, and here's the
reconstruction.''

He handed over the crude but perfectly adequate

synthesis. Duncan could identify it as quickly as any robot pattern-detecting
circuit.

Without question, it was Karl.

"So you know him," said Mandel'stahm.

"Very well," Duncan replied faintly. His mind was still in a whirl; even now,
he could not fully believe the evidence of his eyes. It would take a long time
for him to work out all the implications of this stunning development.

"You said he was no longer at Cai---Miss

Ellerman's. Do you know where he is now?"

"No. I was hoping you might have some ideas. But now that we know the
name, I'll be able to trace him

--though it may take some time."

And doubtless expense, thought Duncan.

"Tell me, Mr. Mandel'stahm, why are you taking all this trouble? Frankly, I
don't see what you hope to get out of it."

"Don't you? Well, it's a good question. I certainly began this out of a pure and
honest lust for titanite, and I hope that in due course my efforts will win their
just reward. But now it's gone beyond that. The only thing More valuable than
gems or works of art is entertainment. And this little caper, Mr. Makenzie, is
More interesting than anything I've seen on the viddy for weeks."

Despite his gloomy preoccupations, Duncan could

not help smiling. He had been cautious in his

approach  to  Mandel'stahm,  but  now  he  was  definitely  beginning  to  feel
genuine warmth toward the

dealer. He was shrewd and perhaps even crafty, and Duncan did not doubt that
he would drive a very

hard bargain. But he was now quite convinced that George Washington was
right: Ivor Mandel'stahm

could be trusted implicitly, in all the things that really mattered.

"May I make a modest proposal?"

"Of course," Duncan answered.

"Can you think of any reason at all, now that we've reached this stage, why
you should not call Miss Ellerman, say that you've just heard from Titan that

your mutual friend Mr. Helmer is on Earth--and

does she know where he is?"

Duncan thought it over; the suggestion was so

blatantly  obvious  that,  in  his  somewhat  dazed  state,  he  had  completely
overlooked it. Even now, he was not sure that he could give it an accurate
evaluation.

But the affair was no longer a matter of impersonal tactics and policy, to be
worked  out  like  the  closing  move  of  some  chess  game.  For  his  own  self-
respect and peace of mind, it was time for a confrontation with Calindy.

"You're right," he said. "There's no reason at all why i shouldn't call her. I'll do
so, just as soon as I can get back to the hotel. Let's stop off at Union Station
and take the express .... "

When Duncan reached the hotel twenty minutes

later (the "express" was somewhat misnamed) he had the second surprise of
the day, though by now it was something of an anticlimax. The longest fax
that Colin had ever sent him was waiting in the Comsole.

After  the  initial  quick  reading,  Duncan's  first  reaction  was,  "This  time,  at
least, I'm one jump ahead."

But even that, he realized, was not quite true. When one allowed for the fact
that Colin's message had left Titan two hours ago, it was virtually a photo
finish.

SECURITY AAA PRIORITY AAA

INQUIRIES MNEMOSYNE DISCLOSE KARL LEFT

MID MARCH ON NONSKED EARTH FLIGHT AND ARRIVED

APPROXIMATELY TWO WEEKS BEFORE YOU.

ARMAND PROFESSES SURPRISE AND TOTAL IGNORANCE.

MAY BE TELLING TRUTH. IMPERATIVE YOU

LOCATE KARL FIND WHAT HE IS DOING AND IF NECESSARY

WARN HIM OF CONSEQUENCES. PROCEED

WITH EXTREME CAUTION AS ANXIOUS AVOID PUBLICITY

OR INTERPLANETARY COMPLICATIONS. YOU

APPRECIATE THE SITUATION MAY BE TO OUR ADVANTAGE

BUT DISCRETION ESSENTIAL. SUGGEST

CALINDY MAY KNOW WHERE HE IS. COLIN AND

MALCOLM.

Duncan reread the message More slowly, absorb-Lng its nuances. It contained
nothing that he did not now know, or had not already guessed; however, he
did  not  relish  its  uncompromising  tone.  Being  signed  by  both  Colin  and
Malcolm,  it  had  the  authority  of  a  direct  order--something  rare  indeed  in
Makenzie

affairs. Though Duncan admitted that it made good sense, he could also detect
an underlying note of satisfaction.

For a moment he had an unflattering image

of his older twins moving in like a pair of vultures, scenting a kill ....

At  the  same  time,  he  was  wryly  amused  to  see  that  Colin  had  drafted  the
Telex  in  a  great  hurry;  it  contained  half  a  dozen  superfluous  words,  most
offensive

to  the  economical  maxims  of  the  clan.  Why,  there  were  even  "and's"  and
"the's"...

Perhaps, after all, he was not suited for politics.

He felt a growing disenchantment with these machinations.

There were, despite genetics, subtle differences between the Makenzies, and it
might well be

that he was not as tough--or as ambitious--as his precursors.

In  any  event,  his  first  step  was  obvious,  especially  as  all  his  advisers  had
suggested it. The second move could be decided later.

It  was  no  surprise  when  Calindy  failed  to  appear  on  the  screen  of  his
Comsole,  and  he  soon  had  proof  that  the  social  convention  was  justified.
Unless there was some excellent reason, it was indeed bad manners to switch
off one's viddy circuit. Duncan felt

both frustrated and at a serious disadvantage, knowing that Calindy could see
him  but  that  he  could  not  see  her.  The  voice  alone  did  not  convey  all  the
shades of emotion. There was so many times when the expression of the eyes
could contradict the spoken

· word.

"Why, what's the matter, Calindy?" said Duncan in feigned astonishment. He
would  feel  genuine  sympathy  if  she  were  indeed  hurt;  but  he  intended  to
reserve judgment.

Her voice was--could it be imagination on his

part?--not  quite  under  control.  She  appeared  surprised  to  see  him,  perhaps
disconcerted.

"I'm terribly sorry, Duncan--I'd rather not show my face at the moment. I fell
and hurt my eye--it looks ghastly. But there's nothing to worry about--it will
be all right in a few days."

"I'm sorry to hear that. I won't bother you if you feel unwell."

He waited, hoping that Calindy could read the

concern that he had carefully imprinted on his face.

"Oh, that's no problem. Otherwise it's business as usual-I've just cut out my
weekly trip to the office, and now do everything by Comsole."

"Well, that's a relief. Now I've got a piece of news for you. Karl is on Earth."

There was a long silence before Calindy replied.

When she finally answered, Duncan realized, with amused mortification, that
he was not really in her 232

league. He could not hope to outwit her for very long.

"Duncan," she said, in a resigned tone of voice,

"you really didn't know that he was staying with me?"

Duncan did his best to exhibit incredulity, shock, and umbrage--in that order.

"Why didn't you tell me?" he cried.

"Because he asked me not to. That put me in a difficult position, but what was
I to do? He said you were no longer on good terms . . . and his business was
highly confidential."

Duncan guessed that Calindy was telling the simple truth, if indeed the truth
was simple. Some, but not all, of his pique evaporated.

"Well, I'm upset and disappointed. I should have thought you'd have trusted
me.  Anyway,  there's  no  further  need  for--subterfuge--now  that  I  know  he's
here. I've an urgent-message for him--where can I locate him?"

There was another long pause; then Calindy answered:

"I don't know where he is. He left suddenly, and never told me where he was
going. He might

even have returned to Titan."

"Without  saying  good-bye?  Hardly!  And  there  are  no  ships  to  Titan  for  a
month."

"Then  I  suppose  he's  still  on  Earth,  or  no  farther  away  than  the  Moon.  I
simply don't know."

Oddly enough, Duncan believed her. Her voice

still had the ring of truth, though he did not delude himself about her power to
deceive him if she wished.

"In that case, I'll have to trace him in some other way. It's imperative that we
meet."

"I wouldn't advise that, Duncan."

"Why ever not?"

"He's--very angry with you."

"I  can't  imagine  the  reason,"  retorted  Duncan,  swiftly  imagining  several.
Calindy's  voice  somded  such  a  genuine  note  of  alarm  that  he  felt  himself
responding strongly to her concern.

However, it seemed that this avenue was closed, at least for the time being.
He knew better than to argue with Calindy. With a mixture of emotions, he
expressed hopes for her continued improvement, and

broke the circuit. He hoped that she would interpret his attitude as one of both
sorrow and anger, and feel correspondingly contrite.

A minute later, he was looking--with some relief

--at  a  screen  that  was  no  longer  empty,  and  could  reveal  the  other  party's
reactions.

"Did you know," he asked Ambassador Farrell,

"that Karl Helmer is on Earth?"

His Excellency blinked.

"I certainly did not. He never contacted me--I'll see if the Chancery knows
anything."

He punched a few buttons, and it was obvious that nothing happened. The
ambassador glanced at Duncan with annoyance.

"I wish we could afford a new intercom system,"

he  said  accusingly.  "They  cost  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  Titan  Gross
National Product."

Duncan thought it wise to let this pass, and luckily on the second attempt the
ambassador got through.

He muttered a few inaudible questions, waited for a minute, then looked at
Duncan and shook his head.

"No  trace  of  him--not  even  a  Terran  forwarding  address  for  any  messages
from home. Most odd."

"Wouldn't you say--unprecedented?"

"Urn--yes. I've never heard of anyone failing to contact the Embassy as soon
as they. reach Earth.

Usually, of course, we know that they're coming, weeks in advance. There's
no law compelling them to get in touch--but it's a matter of courtesy. Not to
mention convenience."

"That's what I thought. Well, if you hear anything of him, would you let me
know?"

The ambassador stared back at him in silence for a moment, with the most
enigmatic of smiles on his face. Then he said: "What do Malcolm and Colin
think he's doing? Plotting a coup d'tat with smuggled guns?"

After a moment's shock, Duncan laughed at the

joke.

"Not even Karl is that crazy. Frankly, I'm completely baffled by the whole
thing--but I'm determined

to locate him. Though there may be half a

billion people on Earth, he's not exactly inconspicuous.

Pleas6 keep in touch. Good-bye for the present."

Two down, thought Duncan, and one to go. It was

back  to  Ivor  Mandel'stahm,  in  his  self-appointed,  and  by  no  means
unsuccessful, role of private eye.

But Ivor's Comsole answered: "Please do not disturb.

Kindly record any message."

Duncan was arm, oyed; he was bursting to pass on his news, but was crtainly
not going to leave it stored in a Comsole. He would have to wait until

Mandel'stahm called back.

That took two hours, and meanwhile it was not

easy to concentrate on other work. When the dealer finally returned the call,
he apologized profusely.

"I was trying a long shot," he explained. "I wondered if he'd bought anything
in New York on a

credit card. There aren't all that number of aitches, and the  Central Billing
computer zipped through

them in an hour .... Alas--he must be using cash.

Not a federal crime, of course. But a nuisance to us honest investigators."

Duncan laughed.

"It was a good idea. I've done slightly better--at least I've eliminated some
possibilities."

He  gave  Mandel'stahm  a  brief  rsum  of  his  discussions  with  Calindy  and
Ambassador Farrell, then

added: "Where do we go from here?"

"I'm not sure. But don't worry--I'll think of something."

Duncan believed him. He now had an almost unreasoning confidence in the
dealer's ingenuity, not

to mention .his influence and his knowledge of the ways of Earth. If anyone
could locate Karl--short of going to tl- p'olice, or inserting a personal appeal
in the World Times--it would be"Mandel'stahm.

In fact, it took him only thirty-six hours.

THE EYE OF ALLAH

I

I've found him," said Mandel'stahm. He

looked tired but victorious.

"I knew you would," Duncan replied with unfeigned admiration. "Where is
he?"

"Don't be so impatient--let me have my reasonably innocent fun. I've earned
it."

"Well, whose concierge did you bamboozle this time?"

Mandel'stahm looked slightly pained.

"Nobody's. I first tried to find all I could about your friend Helmer, by the
brilliant device of looking him up in the Interplanetary Who's Who. I assumed
he'd be there, and he was--a hundred-line

print-out.  I  looked  you  up  at  the  same  time,  by  the  way  ....  You  rate  one
hundred fifty lines, if that's any satisfaction."

"I know," said Duncan, with what patience he could muster. "Go on."

"I wondered if it would list any Terran contacts or interests, and agahn I was
in  luck.  He  belongs  to  the  Institution  of  Electronic  Engineers,  the  Royal
Astronomical Society, the Institute of Physics, and the

Institute  of  Astronautics--as  well  as  several  Titanian  professional
organizations, of course. And I see he's written half a dozen scientific papers,

and  been  joint  author  in  others:  the  Ionosphere  of  Saturn,  origins  of  ultra-
long-wave electromagnetic radiation, and other thrilling esoterica.., nothing of
any use to us, though.

"The Royal astronomers are in London, of course

--but the engineers and astronauts and physicists are all in New York, and I
wondered if he'd contacted them. So I called on another of my useful friends--
a scientist this time, and a most distinguished one, who 236

could open any doors without questions being asked.

I hoped that a visiting Titanian colleague was a rare enough phenomenon to
attract attention . . . and indeed he was."

Mandel'stahm  gve  another  of  his  pregnant  pauses,  so  that  Duncan  could
sknmer for a while, then went on.

"This is what puzzles me. Apart from ignoring the Embassy, and telling Miss
Ellerman  to  keep  quiet,  he's  done  absolutely  nothing  to  cover  his  tracks.  I
don't think that anyone with much to hide would behave in that way ....

"It was really very simple. The Electronics people were happy to help. They
told  us  he'd  left  North  Atlan  and  could  be  contacted  care  of  the  Assistant
Chief  Engineer,  Division  C,  World  Communications  Headquarters,  Tehran.
Not the sort of address you'd associate with gem smuggling and interplanetary
skulduggery

....

"So over to Tehran--just in time to miss him, but no matter. He'll be at the
same location now for a couple of days, and in view of his background, at last
we've got something that makes a little sense.

"World Com's Division C are the boys who keep Project c¥ct.ovs running.
And even I have heard

of that."

It had been conceived in the first bright dawn of the Space Age; the largest,
most  expensive,  and  potentially  most  promising  scientific  instrument  ever
devised.

Though it could erve many purposes, one was

paramount--the .search for intelligent life elsewhere in the universe.

One of the oldest dreams of mankind, this remained no More than a dream
until the rise of radio

astronomy, in the second half of the twentieth century.

Then, within the short span of two decades, the

combined skills of the engineers and the scientists gave humanity power to
span the interstellar gulfs-- ii it was willing to pay the price.

The first puny radio telescopes, a few tens of meters in di.ameter had listened
hopefully for signals

from the stars. No one had really expected success 237

from these pioneering efforts, nor was it achieved.

Making certain plausible assumptions about the distribution of intelligence in
the Galaxy, it was easy to

calculate  that  the  detection  of  a  radio-emitting  civilization  would  require
telescopes not decameters, but

kilometers, in aperture.

There was only one practical method of achieving this result--at least, with
structures confined to the surface of the Earth. To build a single giant bowl
was out of the question, but the same result could be obtained from an array
of hundreds of smaller ones.

CYCLOPS  was  visualized  as  an  antenna  "farm"  of  hundred-meter  dishes,
uniformly  spaced  over  a  circle  perhaps  five  kilometers  across.  The  faint
signals from each element in this army of antennas would be

added together, and then cunningly processed by

computers  programmed  to  look  for  the  unique  signatures  of  intelligence
against the background of cosmic noise.

The whole system would cost as much as the

original Apollo Project. But unlike Apollo, it could proceed in installments,
over a period of years or even decades. As soon as a relatively few antennas
had been built, CYCLOPS could start operating. From the very beginning, it
would be a tool of immense value to the radio astonomers. Over the years,
More and More antennas could be installed, until eventually the whole array
was filled in; and all the while CYCLOPS would steadily increase in power
and capability, able to probe deeper and deeper into the

universe.

It was a noble vision, though there were some

who feared its success as much as its possible failure.

However, during the Time of Troubles that brought the twentieth century to
its unlamented close, there was little hope of funding such a project. It could
be  considered  only  during  a  period  of  political  and  financial  stability;  and
therefore CYCLOPS did not get under way until a  hundred years after the
initial design studies.

A  child  of  the  brief  but  brilliant  Muslim  Renaissance,  it  helped  to  absorb
some of the immense

wealth accumulated by the Arab countries during the 238

Oil  Age.  The  millions  of  tons  of  metal  required  came  from  the  virtually
limitless resources of the Red Sea brines, oozing along the Great Rift Valley.
Here, where the crust of the Earth was literally coming apart at the seams as
the continental plates slowly separated, were metals and minerals enough to
banish all fear of shortages for centuries to come.

Ideally CYCLOPS should have been situated on

the Equator, so that its questing radio mirrors could sweep the heavens from
pole  to  pole.  Other  requirements  were  a  good  climate,  freedom  from
earthquakes

or other natural disasters--and, if possible,

a ring of mountains to act as a shield against radio interference. Of course, no

perfect site existed, and political, geographical, and engineering compromises
had to be made. After decades of often acrimonious discussion, the desolate
"Empty Quarter" of Saudi Arabia was chosen; it was the first time that anyone
had ever found a use for it.

Wide tracks were roughly graded through the wilderness so that ten-thousand-
ton hover-freighters

could carry in components from the factories on the shore of the Red Sea.
Later, these were supplemented by cargo airships. In the first phase of the

project, sixty parabolic antennas were arranged in the form of a giant cross,
it's five-kilometer arms extending north-south, east-.west. Some of the faithful
objected to this symbol of an alien religion, but it was

explained to them that this was only a temporary state of affairs. When the
"Eye of Allah" was completed, the offending sign would be utterly lost in

the total array of seven hundred huge dishes, spaced uniformly over a circle
eighty square kilometers in extent.

By  the  end  of  the  twenty-first  century,  however,  only  half  of  the  planned
seven hundred elements had been installed. Two hundred of them had filled in
most of the central core  of  the array, and the rest formed a kirid of picket
fence, outlining the circumference of the giant instrument. This reduction in

scale, while saving billions of solars, had degraded performance only slightly.
CYCLOPS  had  fulfilled  virtually  all  its  design  objectives,  and  during  the
course 239

of  the  twenty-second  century  had  wrought  almost  as  great  a  revolution  in
astronomy as had the reflectors on Mount Wilson and Mount Palomar, two
hundred

years earlier. By the end of that century, however, it had run into trouble--
through no fault oi its builders, or of the army of engineers and scientists who
served it.

CYCLOPS could not compete with the systems that

had  now  been  built  on  the  far  side  of  the  Moon--almost  perfectly  shielded
from terrestrial interference by three thousand kilometers of solid rock. For

many  decades,  it  had  worked  in  conjunction  with  them,  for  two  great
telescopes at either end of an Earth-Moon baseline formed an interferometer
that could probe details of planetary systems hundreds of light-years away.
But now there were radio telescopes on Mars; the Lunar observatory could
achieve far More with their co-operation than it could ever do with nearby
Earth. A baseline two hundred million kilometers long allowed one to survey
the surrounding stars with a precision never before imagined.

As  happens  sooner  or  later  with  all  scientific  instruments,  technical
developments )ad bypassed

CYCLOPS.  But  by  the  mid-twenty-third  century  it  was  facing  another
problem, which might well prove fatal. The Empty Quarter was no longer a
desert.

CYCLOPS had been built in a region which might

see no rains for five years at a time. At A1 Hadidah, there were meteorites
that had lain unrusting in the sand since the days of the Prophet. All this had
been changed by reforestation and climate control; for the first time since the
Ice Ages, the deserts were in retreat. More rain now fell on the Empty Quarter
in days than had once fallen in years.

The makers of CYCLOPS had never anticipated this.

They  had,  reasonably  enough,  based  all  their  designs  on  a  hot,  arid
environment. Now the maintenance

staff was engaged in a continual battle against corrosion, humidity in coaxial
cables, fungus-induced

breakdowns in high-tension circuits, and all the other ills that afflict electronic
equipment if given the slightest chance. Some of the hundred-meter antennas
had even rusted up solidly, so that they could no 240

longer be moved and had to be taken out of service.

For almost twenty years, the system had been

working at slowly decreasing efficiency, while the engineers, administrators,
and scientists carried out a triangular argument, no one party being able to
convince  either  of  the  others.  Was  it  worth  investing  billions  of  s61ars  to

refurbish the system--or would the

money be better spent on the other side of the Moon?

It was impossible to arrive at any clear-cut decision, for no one had ever been
able to put a value on pure scientific research.

Whatever its present problems, CYCLOPS had been

a spectacular success, helping reshape man's views of the universe not once,
but many times. It had pushed back the frontiers of knowledge to the very
microsecond after the Big Bang itself, and had trapped

radio  waves  that  had  circumnavigated  the  entire  span  of  creation.  It  had
probed  the  surfaces  of  distant  stars,  detected  their  qfidden  planets,  and
discovered such strange entities 3s neutrino suns, antitachyons, gravitational
lenses,  spacequakes,  and  revealed  the  mind-wrenching  realms  of  negative-
probability "Ghost"

states and inverted matter.

But there was one thing that it had not done. Despite scores of false alarms, it
had never succeeded in detecting signals from intelligent beings elsewhere in
the universe.

Either Man was alone, or nobody else was using

radio transmitters. The two explanations seemed

equally improbable.

MEETIN AT OYC, LOPS

He had known what to expect, or so he

had believed, but the reality was still overwhelming.

Duncan felt like a child in a forest of giant metal trees, extending in every
direction to the limit of vision.

Each of the identical "trees" had a slightly tapering trunk fifty meters high,

with a stairway

spiraling  round  it  up  to  the  platform  supporting  the  drive  mechanism.
Looming  above  this  was  the  huge  yet  surprisingly  delicate  hundred-meter-
wide bowl of the antenna itself, tilted toward the sky as it listened for signals
from the deeps of space.

Antenna 005, as its number indicated, was near

the center of the array, but it was impossible to tell this by visual inspection.
Whichever way Duncan

looked, the ranks and columns of steel towers dwindled into the distance until
eventually they formed a solid wall of metal.

The whole vast array was a miracle of precision

engineering, on a scale matched nowhere else on

Earth.  It  was  altogether  appropriate  that  many  key  components  had  been
manufactured in space; the

foamed metals and crystal fibers which gave the parabolic reflectors strength
with lightness could be produced only by the zero-gravity orbiting factories.
In More ways than one, CYCLOPS was a child of space.

Duncan turned to the guide who had driven him

through  the  labyrinth  of  access  tunnels  on  the  small,  chemically  powered
scooter.

"I don't see anyone," he complained. "Are you sure he's here?"

"This is where we left him, an hour ago. He'll be in the preamplifier assembly,
up there on the platform.

\

You'll have to shout--no radios allowed here, of course."

Duncan  could  not  help  smiling  at  this  further  example  of  the  CYCLOPS

management's almost fanatical

precautions  against  interference.  He  had  even  been  asked  to  surrender  .his
watch, lest its feeble electronic pulses be mistaken for signals from an alien
civilization a few hundred light-years away. His guide

was actually wearing spring-driven timepiece--the first that Duncan had ever
seen.

Cupping his hands around his mouth, Duncan

tilted his head toward th- metal tower looming above him and shouted "Kar' A
fraction of a second later, the K echoed back from the next antenna, then

reverberated feebly from the ones beyond. After that,'

the  silence  seemed  More  profound  than  before.  Duncan  did  not  feel  like
disturbing it again.

Nor was there any need. Fifty meters above, a figure had moved to the railing
around the platform; and it brought with it the familiar glint of gold.

"Who's there?"

Who do you think? Duncan asked himself. Of

course, it was hard to recognize a person from vertically overhed, and voices
were distorted in this inhumanly scaled place.

"It's Duncan."

There was a pause that seemed to last for the better part of a minute, but could
only  have  been  a  few  seconds  in  actuality.  Karl  was  obviously  surprised,
though by this time he must surely have guessed that Duncan knew of his
presence on Earth. Then he answered:

"I'm in the middle of a job. Come up, if you want to."

That  was  hardly  a  welcome,  but  the  voice  did  not  seem  hostile.  The  only
emotion  that  Duncan  could  identify  at  this  distance  was  a  kind  of  tired
resignation; and perhaps he was imagining even this.

Karl had vanished again, doubtless to continue

whatever task he had come here to perform. Duncan looked very thoughtfully
at the spiral stairway winding up the cylindrical trunk of the antenna tower.

Fifty meters was a trifling distance--but not in terms of Earth's gravity. It was
the equivalent of two hun-243

dred and fifty on Titan; he had never had to climb a quarter of a kilometer on
his own world.

Karl, of course, would have had little difficulty, since he had spent his early
years on Earth, and his muscles would have recovered much of their original
strength. Duncan wondered if this was a deliberate challenge. That would be
typical of Karl, and if so he had no choice in the matter.

As  he  stepped  onto  the  first  of  the  perforated  metal  stairs,  his  CYCLOPS
guide remarked hopefully:

"There's not much room up there on the platform.

Unless you want me, I'll stay here."

Duncan could recognize a lazy man when he met

one, but he was glad to accept the excuse. He did not wish any strangers to be
present when he came face to face with Karl. The confrontation was one that
he would have avoided if it had been at all possible, but this was not a JOB
that could be delegated

to  anyone  else---even  if  those  instructions  from  Colin  and  Malcolm  had
allowed it.

The climb was easy enough, though the safety rail was not as substantial as
Duncan would have

wished. Moreover, sections had been badly rusted, and now that he was close
enough to touch the metal he could see that the mounting was in even worse
condition  than  he  had  been  led  to  expect.  Unless  emergency  repairs  were
carried out very soon, CYCLOPS

would never see the dawn of the twenty-fourth century.

When Duncan had completed his first circuit, the guide called up to him: "I
forgot to tell you--we're selecting a new target in about five minutes. You'll
find it rather dramatic."

Duncan stared up at the huge bowl now completely blocking the sky above
him. The thought of all those tons of metal swinging around just overhead
was

quite disturbing, and he was glad that he had been warned in time.

The other saw his action and interpreted it correctly.

"It won't bother you. This antenna's been frozen for at least ten years. The
drive's seized up, and not worth repairing."

--

So  that  confirmed  a  suspicion  of  Duncan's,  which  he  had  dismissed  as  an
optical illusion. The great parabola above him was indeed at a slight angle to
all the others; it was no longer an active part of the CYCLOPS array, but was
now pointing blindly at the sky. The loss of one--or even a dozen--elements

would cause only a slight degradation of the system, but it was typical of the
general air of neglect.

One More circuit, and he would be at the platform.

Duncan paused for breath. He had been climbing

very  slowly,  but  already  his  legs  were  beginning  to  ache  with  the  wholly
unaccustomed effort. There had been no further sound from Karl. What was
he doing, in this fantastic place-of old triumphs and lost dreams?

And how would he react to this unexpected, and

doubtless  unwelcome,  confrontation,  when  they  were  face  to  face?  A  little
belatedly, it occurred to Duncan that a small platform fifty meters above the
ground,  and  in  this  frightful  gravity,  was  not  the  best  place  to  have  an
argument.  He  smiled  at  the  mental  image  this  conjured  up;  whatever  their
disagreement, violence was unthinkable.

Well, not quite unthinkable. He had just thought of it

'

Overhead

now was a narrow band of perforated

metal

flooring,  barely  wide  enough  for  the  rectangular  slot  through  which  the
stairway emerged. With a heartfelt sigh of relief, pulling himself upward with
mst-stained hands, Duncan climbed the last few steps

and stood amid monstrous bearings, silent hydraulic motors, a maze of cables,
much dismantled plumbing, and the delicate tracery of ribs supporting the

now useless hundred-meter parabola.

There

was still no sign of Karl, and Duncan began

a cautious circumnavigation of the antenna mounting.

The catwalk was about two meters wide, and the protective rail almost waist-
high, so there was no real danger.

Nevertheless, he kept well away from the edge and avoided looking at the
fifty-meter drop.

He

had barely completed half a circuit when all hell broke loose. There was a
sudden whirr of motors, the low booming of great machineries on the 245

move--and even the occasional accompaniment of

protesting shrieks from gears and bearings that did not wish to be disturbed.

On  every  side,  the  huge  skyward-facing  bowls  were  beginning  to  turn  in
unison,  swinging  around  to  the  south.  Only  the  one  immediately  overhead
was motionless, like a blind eye no longer able to react to

any  stimulus.  The  din  was  quite  astonishing,  and  continued  for  several
minutes. Then it stopped as abruptly as it had started. CYCLOPS had located
a new target for its scrutiny.

"Hello, Duncan," said Karl in the sudden silence.

"Welcome to Earth."

He had emerged, while Duncan was distracted by

the tumult, from a small cubicle on the underside of the parabola, and was
now climbing down a somewhat precarious arrangement of hanging ladders.
His

descent looked particularly hazardous because he was using only one hand;
the other was firmly clutching a large notebook, and Duncan did not relax
until Karl was safely on the platform, a few meters away. He made no attempt
to come closer, but stood looking at Duncan with a completely unfathomable
expression, neither friendly nor hostile.

Then there was one of those embarrassing pauses

when neither party wishes to speak first, and as it dragged on interminably
Duncan became aware for

the  first  time  of  an  omnipresent  faint  hum  from  all  around  him.  The
CYCLOPS array was alive now, its hundreds of tracking motors working in
precise synchronism.

There was no perceptible movement of the

great antenna's, but they would now be creeping

around  at  a  fraction  of  a  centimeter  a  second.  The  multiple  facets  of  the
CYCLOPS eye, having fixed their gaze upon the stars, were now turning at
the precise rate needed to counter the rotation of the Earth.

How foolish, in this awesome shrine dedicated to the cosmos itself, for two
grown men to behave like children, each trying to outface the other! Duncan
had  the  dual  advantage  of  surprise  and  a  clear  conscience;  he  would  have
nothing to lose by speaking

first. He-'did not wish to take the initiative and per246

haps antagonize Karl, so it was best to open with some innocuous triviality.

No, not the weather--the amount of Terran conversation devoted to that was
quite incredible!rebut

something equally neutral.

"That  was  the  hardest  work  I've  done  since  I  got  here.  I  can't  believe  that
people really climb mountains on this planet."

Karl  examined  this  brilliant  gambit  for  possible  booby  traps.  Then  he
shrugged his shoulders and

repli6d: "Earth's tallest mountain is two hundred times as high as this. People
climb it every year."

At least the ice was broken, and communication

had been established. Duncan permitted himself a sigh of relief; at the same
time,  now  that  they  were  at  close  quarters,  he  was  shocked  by  Karl's
appearance.

Some of that golden hair had turned to silver,

and there was much less of it. In the year since they had last met, Karl seemed
to have aged ten. There were crow's-feet wrinkles of anxiety around his eyes,
and his brow was now permanently furrowed. He

also  seemed  to  have  shrunk  considerably,  and  Earth's  gravity  could  not  be
wholly to blame, for Duncan was even More vulnerable to that. On Titan, he
had always had to look Up at Karl; now, as they stood face to face, their eyes
were level.

But Karl avoided his gaze and moved restlessly

back and forth, firmly clutching the notebook he was still carrying. Presently
he  walked  to  the  very  edge  of  the  platform  and  leaned  with  almost
ostentatious recklessness against the protective rail.

"Don't  do  that!"  protested  Duncan.  "It  makes  me  nervous."  That,  he

suspected, was the purpose of the exercise.

"Why should you care?"

The brusque answer saddened Duncan beyond

measure. He could only reply: "If you really don't know, it's too late for me to
explain."

"Well, I know this isn't a social visit. I suppose you've seen Calindy?"

"Yes. I've seen her."

"Whapre you trying to do?"

24'7

"I can't speak for Calindy. She doesn't even know that I'm here."

"What are the Makenzies trying to do? For the good of Titan, of course."

Duncan  knew  better  than  to  argue.  He  did  not  even  feel  angry  at  the
calculated provocation.

"All I'm trying to do is to avoid a scandal--if it's not too late."

"I don't know what you mean."

"You know perfectly well. Who authorized your trip to Earth? Who's paying
your expenses?"

Duncan had expected Karl to show some signs of

guilt, but he was mistaken.

"I have friends here. And I don't recall that the Makenzies worried too much
about  regulations.  How  did  Malcolm  get  the  first  Lunar  orbital  refueling
contract?"

"That was a hundred years ago, when he was trying to get the Titan economy
started.  There's  no  excuse  now  for  financial  irregularities.  Especially  for
purely personal ends."

This wast of course, a shot in the dark, but he

appeared to have landed on some target. For the first time, Karl looked angry.

"You  don't  know  what  you're  talking  about,"  he  snapped  back.  "One  day
Titan..."

c¥cLo?s gently but firmly interrupted him. They had quite forgotten the slow
tracking of the great antennas on every side, and were no longer even aware
of the faint whirr of the hundreds of drive motors. Until a few seconds ago,
the upper platform of 005 had been shielded by the inverted umbrella of the
next bowl, but now its shadow was no longer falling upon them. The artificial
eclipse was over, and they were blasted by the tropical sun.

Duncan closed his eyes until his dark glasses had adjusted to the glare. When
he opened them again, he was standing in a world divided sharply into night
and day. Everything on one side was clearly visible, while in the shadow only
a few centimeters away he could see absiutely nothing. The contrast between
light and darkness, exaggerated by his glasses, was 248

so great that Duncan could almost imagine he was on the airless Moon.

It was also uncomfortably hot, especially for

Titanians.

"If you don't mind," said Duncan, still determined to be polite, "we'll move
around to the shadow side."

It  would  be  just  like  Karl  to  refuse,  either  out  of  sheer  stubbornness  or  to
demonstrate his superiority. He was not even wearing dark glasses, though he
was holding the notebook to shield his eyes.

Rather to Duncan's surprise, Karl followed him

meekly enough around the catwalk, into the welcome shade on the northern
face of the tower. The utter banality of the interruption seemed to have put
him off

his stride.

"I was saying," continued Duncan, when they had settled down again, "that

I'm merely trying to avoid any unpleasantness that will embarrass both Earth
and Titan. There's nothing personal in this, and I wish that someone else were
doing it believe me."

Karl did not answer at once, but bent down and

carefully placed his notebook on the most rust-free section of the catwalk he
could find. The action reminded Duncan so vividly of old times that he was

absurdly moved. Karl had never been able to express his emotions properly
unless  his  hands  were  free,  and  that  notebook  was  obviously  a  major
hindrance.

"Listen carefully, Duncan," Karl began. "Whatever Calindy told you--" ·

"She's told me nothing."

"She must have helped you find me."

"Not even that. She doesn't even know I'm here."

"I don't believe you."

Duncan shrugged his shoulders and remained silent.

His strategy seemed to be working. By hinting

that he knew much More than he did which was

indeed little enough--he hoped to undercut Karl's confidence and gain further
admissi'ons from him.

But what he would do then, he still had no idea; he could only rely on Colin's
maxim of the masterful administration of the unforeseen.

Karl had now begun to pace back and forth in

such an agitated manner that, for the first time, Duncan felt distinctly nervous.
He  remembered  Calindy's  warning;  and  once  again,  he  reminded  himself
uneasily  that  this  was  not  at  all  a  good  place  for  a  confrontation  with  an
adversary who might be slightly

unbalanced.

Suddenly, Karl seemed to come to a decision. He

stopped his uncertain weaving along the narrow catwalk and turned on his
heel so abruptly that Duncan

drew back involuntarily. Then he realized, with both surprise and relief, that
Karl's hands were outstretched in a gesture of pleading, not of menace.

"Duncan," he began, in a voice that was now completely changed. "You can
help me. What I'm trying

to

It was as if the sun had exploded. Duncan threw

his hands before his eyes and clenched them tightly against the intolerable
glare. He heard a cry from Karl, and a moment later the other bumped into
him violently, rebounding at once.

The actinic detonation had lasted only a fraction of a second. Could it have
been lightning? But if so, where was the thunder? It should have come almost
instantaneously, for a flash as brilliant as this.

Duncan dared to open his eyes, and found that he could see again, though
through a veil of pinkish mist. But Karl, it was obvious, could not see at all;
he was blundering around blindly, with his hands

cupped tightly over his eyes. And still the expected thunder never came ....

If Duncan had not been half-paralyzed by shock,

he  might  yet  have  acted  in  time.  Everything  seemed  to  happen  in  slow
motion, as in a dream. He could not believe that it was real.

He saw Karl's foot hit the precious notebook, so that it went spinning off into
space, fluttering downward like some strange, white bird. Blinded though he
was, Karl must have realized what he had done. Totally disoriented, he made
one futile grab at the empty air, then crashed into the guardrail. Duncan tried
to reach him, but it was too late.

25O

Even then, it might not have mattered; but the years and the rust had done
their work. As the treacherous metal parted, it seemed to Duncan that Karl
cried out his name, in the last second of his life.

But of that he would never be sure.

THE

LISTENERS

I

lion,reV under no legal compulsion," Am

bassador

Farrell had explained. "If you wish, I could claim diplomatic immunity for
you. But it would be unwise, and might lead to various--ah--difficulties.

In any case, this inquiry is in the mutual interest of all concerned. We want to
find out what's happened, just as much as they do."

"And who are they?"

"Even if I knew, I couldn't tell you. Let's say Terran Security."

"You still have that kind of nonsense here? I thought spies and secret agents
went out a couple of hundred years ago."

"Bureaucracies are self-perpetuating--you should know that. But civilization
will always have its dis contents, to use a phrase I came across somewhere.

Though the police handles most matters, as they do on Titan, there are cases
which require--special treatment. By the way, I've been asked to make it clear
that  anything  you  care  to  say  will  be  privileged  and  won't  be  published
without your consent. And if you wish, I will come along with you for moral
sup port and guidance."

Even now, Duncan was not quite sure who the

Ambassador was representing, but the offer was a reasonable one and he hd

accepted it. He could see no harm in such a private meeting; some kind of ju-
251

dicial inquiry was obviously needed, but the less publicity, the better.

He had half expected to be taken in a blacked-out car on a long, tortuous drive
to some vast underground complex in the depths of Virginia or Maryland.

It  was  a  little  disappointing  to  end  up  in  a  small  room  at  the  old  State
Department  Building,  talking  to  an  Assistant  Under  Secretary  with  the
improbable name of John Smith; later checking on Duncan's

part disclosed that this actually was his name. However, it soon became clear
that there was much More

to this room than the plain desk and three comfortable chairs that met the eye.

Duncan's suspicions about the large mirror that

covered most of one wall were quickly confirmed.

His host--or interrogator, if one wanted to be melodramatic-saw the direction
of his glance and gave

him a candid smile.

"With your permission, Mr. Makenzie, we'd like to record this meeting. And
there are several other participants watching; they may join in from time to

time. If you don't mind, I'll refrain from introducing them."

Duncan nodded politely toward the mirror.

"I've  no  objection  to  recording,"  he  said.  "Do  you  mind  if  I  also  use  my
Mmsec.

There was a painful silence, broken only by an

ambassadorial chuckle. Then Mr. Smith answered:

"We would prefer to supply you with a transcript.

I can promise that it will be quite accurate."

Duncan did not press the point. Presumably, it

might cause embarrassment if some of the voices involved were recognized
by outsiders. In any case, a

transcript would be perfectly acceptable; he could trust his memory to spot
errors or deletions.

"Well, that's fine," said Mr. Smith, obviously relieved.

"Let's get started."

Simultaneously, something odd happened to the

room.  Its  acoustics  changed  abruptly;  it  was  as  if  it  had  suddenly  become
much larger. There was not

the slightest visible alteration, but Duncan had the uncanny feeling of unseen
presences all around him.

He would never know if they were actually in Wash252

ington,  or  on  the  far  side  of  the  Earth,  and  it  gave  him  an  uncomfortable,
naked sensation to be surrounded by invisible listeners--and watchers.

A moment later, a voice spoke quietly from the air immediately in front of
him.

"Good morning, Mr. Makenzie. It's good of you to spare us your time, and
please excuse our reticence.

If  you  think  this  is  some  kind  of  twentieth-century  spy  melodrama,  our
apologies.  Ninety-nine  times  out  of  hundred,  these  precautions  are  totally
unnecessary.

But we can never tell which occasion will be

the hundredth."

It  was  a  friendly,  powerful  voice,  very  deep  and  resonant,  yet  there  was
something  slightly  unnatural  about  it.  A  computer?  Duncan  asked  himself.
That  was  too  easy  an  assumption;  in  any  case,  there  was  no  way  of

distinguishing between computer vocalization and human speech---especially
now that a realis

tic  number  of  "ers,"  "wells,"  incomplete  sentences,  and  downright
grammatical  errors  could  be  incorporated  to  make  the  nonelectronic
participants in a conversation feel at ease. He guessed that he was listening to
a man talking through a speech-disguising circuit.

While Duncan was still trying to decide if any answer was necessary, another
speaker took over. This

time, the voice emerged about half a meter from his left ear.

"It's only fair to reassure you on one point, Mr.

Makenzie. As far as we can ascertain, no Terran laws have been broken. We
are  not  here  to  investigate  a  crime--only  to  solve  a  mystery,  to  explain  a
tragedy.

If any Titanian regulations are involved, that is your problem--not ours. I hope
you understand."

"Yes,"  Duncan  replied.  "I  assumed  that  was  the  case,  but  I'm  glad  to  have
your confirmation."

This  was  indeed  a  relief,  but  he  knew  better  than  to  relax.  Perhaps  this
statement was exactly what it seemed to be--a friendly.plea for co-operation.
But it might also be a trap.

Now  a  woman's  voice  came  from  immediately  behind  him,  and  he  had  to
resist the impulse to swing

around and look at the speaker. Was this quite

unnecessary shifting of sound focus a deliberate at253

tempt to disorient him? How naive did they take

him to be?

"To save us all time, let me explain that we have a complete summary of Mr.
Helmer's background."

And mine, thought Duncan. "Your government has been most helpful, but you
may have information

which is unknown to us, since you were one of his closest friends."

Duncan nodded, without bothering to speak. They

would know all about that friendship, and its ending.

As if responding to some hidden signal, Mr. Smith opened his briefcase and
carefully laid a small ob ject on the table.

"You'll recognize this, of course," the female voice continued. "The Helmer
family has asked that it be handed over to you for safe custody, with the other
property of the deceased."

The sight of Karl's Minisec--virtually the same

model as his own--was in itself such a shock that at first the remainder of the
message failed to get through. Then Duncan reacted with a start and said:

"Would you please repeat that?"

There was such a surprisingly long delay that he wondered if the speaker was
on the Moon; during

the course of the session, Duncan became almost cer tain of it. With all the
other interrogators, there was a quick give-and-take, but with the lone woman
there was always this invariable time-lag.

"The Helmers have asked that you be custodian of their son's effects, until
disposition is settled."

It was a gesture of peace, across the grave of all their hopes, and Duncan felt
his  eyes  stinging  with  unshed  tears.  He  looked,  at  the  handful  of  micro
electronics on the table and felt a deep reluctance even to touch it. There were
all Karl's secrets. Would the Helmets have asked him to accept this if they had
anything to hide? But there was a great deal, Duncan was certain, that Karl
had concealed from his own family; there would be much in the Minisec that
only he had ever known. True, it would be

guarded by carefully chosen code words, some of

them possibly linked with m*,ASE circuits to prevent

'I

unauthorized intrusion.

"Naturally," continued the voice from the Moon (if it wa,: from the Moon),
"we are interested in what may be in this Minisec. In particular, we would like
any list of contacts on Earth--addresses or personal numbers."

Yes, thought Duncan, I can understand that. I'm

sure you must have been tempted to do some interrogation already, but are
scared of possible ERASE

circuits and want to explore other alternatives

first ....

He stared thoughtfully at that little box on the table, with its multitudinous
studs and its now darkened read-out panel. There lay a device of a

complexity beyond all the dreams of earlier ages--a virtual microsimulacrnm
of  a  human  brain.  Within  it  were  billions  of  bits  of  information,  stored  in
endless  atomic  arrays,  waiting  to  be  recalled  by  the  right  sig-nal--or
obliterated by the wrong one. At the moment

it  was  lifeless,  inert,  like  consciousness  itself  in  the  profoundest  depths  of
sleep.  No--not  quite  inert;  the  clock  and  calendar  circuits  would  still  be
operating, ticking off the seconds and minutes and days

that now were no concern of Karl's.

Another voice broke in, this time from the right.

"We have asked Mr. Armand Helmer if his son left any code words with him,
as is usual in such cases. You may be hearing More on the matter

shortly. Meanwhile, no attempt will be made to obtain any read-outs. With
your permission, we would like to retain the Minisec for the present."

Duncan was getting a l'ttle tired of having decisions made for him--and the
Helmers had apparently

stated that he 'as to take possession of Karl's effects.

But there-was no point in objecting; and if he did, some legal formality would
undoubtedly materialize out of the same thin air as these mysterious voices.

Mr. Smith was digging into his case again.

"Now there is a second matter--I'm sure you'll also recognize this."

"Yes. Karl usually carried a sketchbook. Is this the one he had with him when-
-"

"It is. Would you like to go through it, and see if there is anything that strikes
you as unusual--note-255

worthy--of any possible value to this im;estigation?

Even if it seems utterly trivial or irrelevant, please don't hesitate to speak."

What a technological gulf, thought Duncan, between these two objects! The
Minisec was a triumph

of the Neoelectronic Age; the sketchbook had existed virtually unchanged for
at least a thousand years mand so had the pencil tucked into it. It was

very true, as some philosopher of history had once said, that mankind never
completely  abandons  any  of  its  ancient  tools.  Yet  Karl's  sketchbooks  had
always been something of an affectation; he could

make competent engineering drawings, but had never shown any genuine sign
of artistic talent.

As Duncan slowly turned the leaves, he was acutely conscious of the hidden
eyes all around him. Without the slightest doubt, every page here had been
carefully recorded, using all the techniques that could

bring out invisible marks and erasures. It was hard to believe that he could
add much to the investigations that had already been made.

Karl  apparently  used  his  sketchbooks  to  make  notes  of  anything  that
interested him, to conduct a sort of dialogue with himself, and to express his
emotions.

There  were  cryptic  words  and  numbers  in  small,  precise  handwriting,
fragments of calculations and equations, mathematical sketches...

And there were spacescapes, obviously rough

drawings of scenes on the outer moons, with the formalized circle-and-ellipse
of Saturn hanging in the sky..,

· . . circuit diagrams, with More calculations full of lambdas and omegas, and
vector notations th5t Duncan could recognize, but could not understand · . .
and then suddenly, bursting out of the pages of impersonal notes and rather
inept sketches, something that breathed life, something that might have been
the work of a real artist--a portrait of  Calindy, drawn with obvious, loving
care.

It should have been instantly recognizable; yet

strangely enough, for a fraction of a second, Duncan stared at it blankly. This
was not the Calindy he now knew, for the real woman was already obliterat-
256

ing the image fr°m the past. Here was Calindy as they had both remembered
her--the girl frozen forever in the bubble stero, beyond the reach of Time.

Duncan looked at the picture for long minutes before turning the page. It was
really excellent-quite

unlike all the other sketches. But then, how many times had Karl drawn it,
over and over again, dur-lng the intervening years?

No  one  spoke  from  the  air  around  him  or  interrupted  his  thoughts.  And
presently he moved on.

·  .  .  More  calculations  .  .  .  patterns  of  hexagons,  dwindling  away  into  the
distance--why, of course!

"That's the titanite lattice---but the number written against it means nothing to
me. It looks like a

Terran viddy coding."

'You  are  correct.  It  happens  to  be  the  number  of  a  gem  expert  here  in
Washington. Not Ivor Man-del'stahm, in case you're wondering. The person
concerned

assures us that Mr. Helmer never contacted

him, and we believe him. It's probably a number

he acquired somehow, jotted down, but never used."

·  .  .  More  calculations,  now  with  lots  of  frequencies  and  phase  angles.
Doubtless communications stuff--part of Karl's regular work...

· . . geometrical doodles, many of them based on the hexagon motif...

·..  Calindy  again---only  an  outline  sketch  this  time,  showing  none  of  the
loving care of the earlier draw·

. . a honeycomb pattern of little circles, seen in plan and elevation. Only a few
were  drawn  in  detail  but  it  was  obvious  that  there  must  be  hundreds.  The
interpretation was equally obvious.

"The CYCLOPS array--yes, he's written in the number of elements and the
over-all dimensions."

"Why do you think he was so interested?"

"That's  quite  natural--it's  the  biggest  and  most  famous  radio  telescope,  on
Earth. He often discussed

it with me."

"Did he ever speak of visiting it?"

"Very likely--but I don't remember· After all, this was some years ago."

The dra;,vings on the next few pages, though very 257

rough  and  diagrammatic,  were  clearly  details  of  c¥c.ovs--antenna  feeds,
tracking mechanisms, obscure

bits of circuitry, interspersed with yet More calculations.

One sketch had been started and never finished.

Duncan looked at it sadly, then turned the page. As he had expected, the next
sheet.was blank. '

"I'm sorry to disappoint you," he said, closing the book, "but I get nothing at
all from this. Kar--Mr.

Helmet's field was communications science; he helped design the Titan-Inner
Planets  Link.  This  is  all  part  of  his  work.  His  interest  is  completely
understandable, and I see nothing unusual about it."

"Perhaps so, Mr. Makenzie. But you haven't finished.''

Duncan  looked  in  surprise  at  the  empty  air.  Then  Under  Secretary  Smith
gestured toward the sketchbook.

"Never take anything for granted," he said mildly.

"Start at the other end."

Feeling slightly foolish, Duncan reopened the

sketchbook, then flipped it over as he realized that Karl had used it from both
directions. (But he had been badly shaken by those last drawings, and was not
thinking too clearly .... )

The inside back cover was blank, but the facing

page  bore  the  single  enigmatic  word  ^Rcus.  It  meant  nothing  to  Duncan,
though it did arouse some faint and unidentifiable association from history.
He turned the page--and had one of the biggest shocks of his life.

As he stared incredulously at the drawing that occupied the entire area of the
paper, he was suddenly

transported back to Golden Reef. There could be no misinterpretation; yet as
far as he knew, Karl had never shown the slightest interest in the minutiae of
terrestial  zoology.  The  very  idea  that  any  Titanian  might  be  fascinated  by
marine biology was faintly incongruous.

Yet here was a detailed study, with the perspective meticulously worked out
around the faintly limned x, y-, and z-axes of the spiny sea urchin, Diadema.
Only a dozen of its thin, radiating needles were 258

shown, but it was clear that there were hundreds, occupying the entire sphere
of space around it.

That  was  astonishing  enough,  but  there  was  something  even  More
remarkable. This drawing must have

required' hours of devoted labor. Karl  had dedicated to an unprepossessing
little invertebrate--which surely he could never have seen in his life!--all the
love and skill he had applied to the portrait of Calindy.

In  the  bright  sunshine  outside  the  old  State  Department,  Duncan  and  the
Ambassador had to wait

for five minutes 'before the next shuttle came gliding silently down Virginia
Avenue.  No  one  was  within  earshot,  so  Duncan  said  with  quiet  urgency:
"Does

'Argus' mean anything to you?"

"As a matter of fact, yes--though I'm damned if I see how it can help. I still
have  the  remnants  of  a  classical  education,  and  unless  I'm  very  much
mistaken, Argus was the name of Odysseus' old dog. It

'recognized  him  when  he  came  home  to  Ithaca  after  his  twenty  years  of
wandering, then died."

Duncan brooded over this information for a few

seconds, then shrugged his shoulders.

"You're right--that's no help at all. And I still want to know why these people I
met---or didn't meet-are so interested in Karl. As they admitted at the start,
there's  no  suggestion  that  he's  done  anything  illegal,  as  far  as  Earth  is
concerned.  And  I  suspect  that  he  may  have  only  bent  some  Titanian
regulations, not broken them."

"Just a moment--just a moment!" said the Ambassador.

"You've  reminded  me  of  something."  His  face  went  through  some  :.ather
melodramatic contortions, then smoothed itself out. He glanced around

conspiratorially, saw that 'there was no one within hearing and that the shuttle
was still three minutes away by the countdown indicator.

"I think I may have it, and I'll be obliged if you don't attribute this to me. But
just consider the following wild speculation...

"Every  organism  has  defense  mechanisms  to  protect  itself.  You've  just
encountered one--part of the-security system of Earth. This particular group,
what259

ever its responsibilities may be, probably consists of a fairly small number of
important people. I expect I know most of them--in fact, one voice . . . never
mind...

"You could call it a watchdog committee. Such a committee has to have a
name for itse--a secret

name, naturally. In the course of my duties, I occasionally hear of such things,
and carefully forget them ....

"Now, Argus was a watchdog. So what better name for such a group? Mind
you, I'm still not asserting anything. But imagine the acute embarrassment of
a  secret  organization  that  happens  to  find  its  name  carefully  spelled  out  in
highly mysterious circumstances."

It  was  a  very  plausible  theory,  and  Duncan  was  sure  that  the  Ambassador
would not have advanced it

without excellent reasons. But it did not go even halfway.

"That's all very well, and I'm prepared to accept it.

But what the devil has all this to do with a drawing of a sea urchin? I feel I'm
going slowly mad."

The shuttle was now gliding to a halt in front of them, and the Ambassador
waved him into it.

"If it's any consolation, Duncan, be assured that you're in very good company.

I'd sacrifice a fair share of my modest retirement benefits if I could eavesdrop
now on Under Secretary Smith and his invisible friends."

BUSINESS AND DESIRE

There was no way of telling, as Duncan

stood at the window of Calindy's apartment, that he was not looking down at
the busy traffic of 57th Street on a crisp winter night, when the first flakes of
snow were drifting down, to melt at once as they struck the heated sidewalks.
But this was summer, not winter; 260

and even President Bernstein's limousine was not as old as the cars moving
silently a hundred meters below.

He was watching the past, perhaps a hologram

from the,late twentieth century. Yet though Duncan knew thafhe was actually
far underground, there was nothing that he could do to convince his senses of
this fact.

He was alone with Calindy at last, though in circumstances of which he could
never have dreamed

only a few days ago. How ironic that, now the opportunity had come, he felt
barely the faintest flicker of desire!

"What  is  it?"  he  asked  suspiciously,  as  Calindy  handed  him  a  slim  crystal
goblet containing a few centimeters of blood-red liquid.

"If I told you, the name would mean nothing. And if I said what it cost, you'd
be scared to drink it. Just taste it slowly; you'll never have another chance,
and it will do you good."

It was good---smooth, slightly sweet, and, Duncan was quite certain, charged
with several megatons of slumbering energy. He sipped it very slowly indeed,
watching Calindy as she moved around the room.

He had not really known what to expect, yet her

apartment had still been something of a surprise. It was almost stark in its
simplicity,  but  large  and  beautifully  proportioned,  with  dove-gray  walls,  a
blue

vaulted ceiling like the sky itself, and a green carpet that gave the impression
of a small sea of grass lapping against the walls. There were fewer than a
dozen pieces of furniture: four deeply cushioned chairs, two divans, a closed
writing  desk,  a  glass  cabinet  full  of  delicate  chinaware,  a  low  table  upon
which were lying a small 6ox ad a splendid book on twenty~second-century
primitives--and, of course, the ubiquitous

Comsole,  its  screen  now  crawling  with  abstract  art  that  was  very  far  from
primitive.

Even without the force of gravity to remind him, there was no danger that
Duncan would forget he was on Earth. He doubted if a private home on any
other planet could show a display like this; but he would not like to live here.
Everything  was  a  little  too  perfect  and  displayed  altogether  too  clearly  the
Terran

obsession with the past. He suddenly remembered

Ambassador Farrell's remark: "We aren't decadent, but our children will be."
That would include Calindy's generation. Perhaps the Ambassador was right
....

He  took  another  sip,  staring  at  Calindy  in  silence  as  she  orbited  the  room.
Clearly ill at ease, she moved a chair through an imperceptible fraction of an
inch, and gave a picture an equally invisible adjustment.

Then she came back to the divan and sat down beside him.

A little More purposefully now, she leaned across the low coffee table and
picked up the box lying upon it.

"Have you seen one of these?" she asked, as she opened the lid.

Lying in a nest of velvet was something that looked like a large, silver egg,
about  twice  the  size  of  the  real  eggs  that  Duncan  had  encountered  in  the
Centennial Hotel.

"What is it?" he asked. "A piece of sculpture?"

"Pick it up---but be careful not to drop it."

Despite  this  warning,  that  was  very  nearly  what  he  did.  The  egg  was  not
particularly heavy, but it seemed alive--even squirming in his hand, though it
showed

no  sign  of  any  visible  movement.  However,  when  he  looked  at  it  More
carefully, he could see faint opalescent bands flowing over the surface and
momentarily

blurring  the  mirror  finish.  They  looked  very  much  like  waves  of  heat,  yet
there was no sensation of warmth.

"Cup it in both hands," Calindy instructed him,

"and close your eyes."

Duncan obeyed, despite an almost irresistible impulse to see what was really
happening to the extraordinary object he held. He felt completely disoriented,

because  it  seemed  that  the  sense  of  touch--the  most  reliable  of  all  man's
messengers from the external universe-was betraying him.

For the very texture of the egg was constantly

changing. It no longer felt like metal; unbelievably, it was furry. He might
Imve been fondling some small woollv animal--a kitten, perhaps ....

But only for seconds. The egg shivered, became

hard and rough--it was made of sandpaper, coarse enough to grate the skin...

·.. the sandpaper became satin, so smooth and silky that he wanted to caress
it. There was barely time to obey the impulse when...

·.. the egg was liquefying and becoming gelatinous.

It seemed about to ooze through his fingers, and Duncan had to force himself
not to drop it in disgust. O.nly the knowledge that this could not really be

happening gave him strength to control the reflex...

· . . it was made of wood; there was no doubt of that, for he could even feel
the grain...

· . . before it dissolved into myriads of separate bristles, each so sharp and
distinct that he could feel them prickling his skin ....

And there were sensations that he could not even name, some delightful, most
neutral, but some so unpleasant that he could scarcely control his revulsion.

At  last,  when  within  his  cupped  palms  Duncan  felt  the  unique,  the
incomparable touch of human skin, curiosity and amazement got the better of
him. He opened his hands; the silver egg was completely unchanged, though
now it felt as if it were carved from

soap.

"What in heaven's name is it?" he cried.

"It's a tactoid. You haven't heard of them?"

'No."

"Fascinating, isn't it? It does to the sense of touch what a kaleidoscope does to
vision.  No,  don't  ask  me  how  it  works--something  to  do  with  controlled
electrical

stimulation."

"What's it used for?"

"Must everything have a purpose? It's just a toy--a novelty. Hut I had a very
good reason for showing it to you."

"Oh, I know. 'The latest from Earth.'"

Calindy gave a wistful smile; she recognized that old catch phrase. It brought
back vividly to both of them those days together on Titan, a lifetime ago.

"Duncan," she said, so tauietlv that he could barely hear the words, "do you
think it was all my fault?"

They were now sittint two meters ar)art on the divan, and he had to twist his
body to face her. The

woman he saw now was no longer the self-assured

executive  and  impresario  he  had  met  on  the  Titanic,  but  an  unharp¥  and
uncertain girl. He wondered how long the mc/od of contrition would last, but
for the moment it was genuine enough.

"How can I answer that?" he replied. "I'm still completely in the dark. I don't
know what Karl was doing

on Earth, or why he came here."

This was only partially true; Karl's Minisec had gun to reveal its secrets. But
Duncan was not yet prepared to discuss those with anybody, least of all with
Calindy.

She looked at him with an air of faint surprise and answered: "Do you mean
to say that he never told you--in fifteen years?"

"Told me what?" said Duncan.

"What happened on that last night aboard Mentor."

"No," replied Duncan, with painful slowness. "He never talked about it."

After all these years, that betrayal was still a bitter memory. He knew now, of
course,  that  it  was  absurd  for  two  young  adults  like  Karl  and  Calindy,
obsessed  by  their  own  crier,  to  have  given  any  thought  to  the  feelings  of
theboy who adored them both. He could not blame them now; but in his heart
he had never forgiven them.

"So you didn't know that we used a joy machine."

"Oh, no!"

"I'm afraid so. It wasn't my idea. Karl insisted, and I didn't know any better.
But at least I had sense enough not to use it myself. Well, only at very low
power..."

"They were illegal even in those days. How did one get aboard Mentor?"

"There were a lot of things on Mentor that no one ever knew about."

"I'm sure of that. What happened?"

Calindy got to her feet again and began to pace

nervously to and fro. She avoided Duncan's eyes as she continued.

"I don't like to think about it. Even now, it frightens me, and I can understand
why people get hopelessly addicted. I'm sure your fingers have never

touched  anything  as--well,  I  suppose  --palpable  is  the  only  word--as  that
tactoid. The joy machine is just the same; it makes real life seem pale and
thin--and  Karl,  remember,  used  it  at  full  power.  I  told  him  not  to,  but  he
laughed. He was confident that he could handle it .... "

Yes, thought Duncan, that would be just like Karl.

Though he had never seen an emotion amplifier, one was kept under proper
supervision at the Oasis Central Hospital. It was a very valuable psychiatric
tool, but when the simple, portable versions quickly christened

"joy machines" had become available around the midcentury, they had spread
like a plague over the inhabited worlds. No one would ever know how many
immature young minds had been ruined by them.

"Brain burning" had been a disease of the sixties, until the epidemic had run
its course, leaving behind

it hundreds of emotional husks. Karl had been lucky to escape ....

But,  of  course,  he  had  not  escaped.  So  this  was  the  truth  about  his
"breakdown," and the explanation of his changed personality. Duncan began
to feel a cold anger toward Calindy. He did not believe her protestation of
innocence; she must have known better, even

then. But part of his anger was not based on moral judgments. He blamed
Calindy because she was alive, while Karl lay frozen in the Aden morgue,

like  some  splendid  marble  statue  defaced  by  time  and  carelessly  restored.
There he must wait until the legal

complications  involved  in  the  disposal  of  an  extraterrestrial  corpse  were
unraveled. This was another duty

that had fallen upon Duncan; he had done everything he believed necessary
before saying farewell to the friend he had lost before his death.

"I think I see the picture," continued Duncan, so harshly that Calindy looked
at him with sudden surprise.

"But tell me the rest--what happened then?"

"Karl used to send me long, crazy speeches--sealed, special delivery. He said
he would never be

able  to  love  anyone  else.  I  told  him  not  to  be  foolish,  but  to  forget  me  as
quickly as he could, since we'd never be able to meet again. What else could I
have said? I didn't realize how absolutely useless that ad265

vice was--like telling a man to stop breathing. I was ashamed to ask, and only
discovered years later what a joy machine does to the brain.

"You see, Duncan, he was telling the literal truth when he said he could never
love  anyone  else.  When  they  reinforce  the  pleasure  circuits,  joy  machines
create a permanent, almost unbreakable pattern of desires. The psychologists
call' it electro-imprinting. I believe that there are techniques to modify it now,
but there weren't fifteen years ago, even on Earth. And certainly not on Titan.

"After a while, I stopped answering; there was nothing I could say. But I still
heard from Karl several times a year. He swore that sooner or later, he would
get to Earth and see me again. I didn't take him seriously.''

Perhaps not, thought Duncan; but I am sure you

weren't wholly displeased. It must have been flattering to have held in your
hand the soul of someone as talented and beautiful as Karl--even if he had
been enslaved accidentally, with the aid of a machine ....

He  saw  very  clearly  now  why  all  Karl's  later  liaisons  and  marriages  had
exploded violently. They had been doomed to failure at the start. Always, the

image of Calindy would have stood, an unattainable ideal, between Karl and
happiness. How lonely he must have

been! And how many misunderstandings might have

been averted if the cause of his behavior had been realized in time.

Yet perhaps nothing could have been done, and in any case it was futile to
dream about missed opportunities.

Who was the old philosopher who had said:

"The human race will never know happiness, as long as the words 'If only...'
can still be spoken"?

"So it must have been a surprise, when he finally did turn up."

"No. He'd dropped several hints--I'd been half expecting him for a year. Then
he called me from Port

Van Allen, said he'd just arrived on a special flight, and would be seeing me
as soon as he'd completed his gravity reconditioning."

"It was a Terran Survey supply ship, going back empty--and fast. Even so, it
took him fifty days."

And it couldn't have been a very comfortable trip, Duncan added ,to himself
fifty days inside one of those space trucks, with minimal life-support systems.

What a contrast to Sirius! He felt sorry for the officers who had innocently
succumbed to Karl's persuasion, and hoped that the current Court of Inquiry
would not damage their careers.

Calindy had recovered some of her poise. She

stopped pacing around, and rejoined Duncan on the divan.

"I was not sure whether I really wanted to see him again, after all these years,
but I knew how determined he was; it would have been useless trying to

keep him away. So--I suppose you can say I took the line of least resistance."

She managed a wry smile, then continued: "It didn't work, of course, and I
should have known it. Then we saw in a newscast that you'd just arrived on
Earth."

"That must have been a shock to Karl. What did he say?"

"Not much; but I could see that he was upset and very surprised."

"Surely he must have made some comment."

"Only that i you contacted me, I was not to tell you that he was on Earth. That
was  the  first  time  I  suspected  something  was  wrong,  and  started  to  worry
about the titanite he'd asked me to sell."

"That's a trivial matter forget about it. Let's say it was just one of the many
tools that Karl used to reach his objective. But I'd like to know this when we
met aboard Titanic, was he still with you?"

Another  hesitation,  which  in  itself  supplied  half  the  answer.  Then  Calindy
replied, rather defiantly: "Of course he was. And he was very angry when I
said I'd met you. We had a bad row over that. Not the first one." She sighed,
slightly  too  dramatically.  "By  that  time,  even  Karl  realized  that  it  wouldn't
work

---that  it  was  quite  hopeless.  I'd  warned  him  many  times,  but  he  wouldn't
believe me. He refused to face the fact that the Calindy he'd known fifteen
/ears before, and whose image was burned in his brain, no

longer existed... '."

Duncan had never thought that he would see tears 267

in Calindy's eyes. But was she weeping for Karl, he wondered--or for her own
lost youth?

He tried to be cynical, but he did not succeed. He was sure that some part of
her sorrow was perfectly genuine, and despite himself was deeply touched by
it.  And  More  than  touched,  for  now,  to  his  great  surprise,  he  found  that
sympathy was not the only emotion

Calindy was arousing in him. He had never

realized before that shared grief could be an aphrodisiac.

This was a development that he did nothing to

discourage,, but he did not want to hurry matters.

There was still much that he hoped to learn and that only Calindy could tell
him.

"So he was always disappointed when we made love," she continued tearfully,
"though at first he tried to conceal it. I could tell--and it wasn't pleasant for
me. It made me feel--inadequate. You see, by this time I'd learned a good deal
about  imprinting  and  knew  exactly  what  the  trouble  was.  Karl's  case  isn't
unique ....

"So  he  got  More  and  More  frustrated--and  also  violent.  Sometimes  he
frightened me. You know how strong he was--look at this."

With  another  theatrical  gesture,  she  slipped  open  her  dress,  displaying  the
upper left arm--not to mention her entire left breast.

"He hit me hereso hard that I was badly bruised.

You can still see the mark."

With the best will in the worl& Duncan could discover no trace of a bruise on
the milky-white skin,

smooth as satin, that was exposed before his eyes.

Nevertheless, the revelation did not leave him unmoved.

"So  that's  why  you  switched  off  the  viddy,"  he  said  sympathetically,  and
edged closer.

"Then Ivor's friend called me, with that query about Titan. I thought it was an
odd coincidence . . .

you know, Duncan, that was an unkind trick to play on me."

She sounded More sad than angry; and she did not 268

move away from him. Almost half of the sofa was

now unoccupied.

"And then everything started to happen at once.

- Did you know that Terran Security sent two of its agents to interview me?"

"No, but I guessed it. What did you tell them?"

"Everything, of course. They were very kind and understanding."

"And also clumsy," said Duncan with deep bitterness.

"Oh, Duncan, that was an accident! You were an important guest--you 'had to
be protected. There would have been an interplanetary scandal if something
had happened just before you were going to

address  Congress.  But  you  should  never  have  gone  after  Karl,  in  such  a
dangerous place."

"It  wasn't  dangerous--we  were  having  a  perfectly  friendly  discussion.  H6w
did I know that trigger happy idiot was lurking in the next antenna?"

"What was he to do? He'd been ordered to protect you at all costs, and had
been warned that Karl might be violent. It looked as if you were starting to
fight--and that laser blast/would only have blinded Karl for a few h6urs. It
was all a terrible accident. No one was to blame."

Perhaps, thought Duncan; it would be a long, long time before he'could view
the whole sequence of

events dispassionately. If there was blame, it was spread thinly, and across
two worlds. Like most human tragedies, this one had been caused not by evil

intentions, but by errors of judgment, misunderstandings

....

If Malcolm and Colin had not insisted that he have a showdown with Karl,
confronting him with the

facts . . . if he had not wanted Karl to prove his innocence, and deliberately
given him the opportunity

to assert it, even to the extent--unconsciously, but he was aware of it nowf
putting himself in his

power . ·· Perhaps Karl had been really dangerous; that was something else he
would never know.

It seemed as if they had both been enmeshed in

some complex web of fate from which there had

never been any possibility of escape. And though the scale of that disaster
was  so  much  greater  that  the  very  comparison  appeared  ludicrous,  Duncan
was

again reminded of the Titanic. She too had been

doomed, as if the gods themselves conspired against her, by a whole series of
apparently random and trivial chances. If the radioed warnings had not been

buried  under  greetings  and  business  messages  .  .  .  If  that  iceberg  had  not
sliced so incredibly through all those watertight compartments . . . If the radio
operator on the ship only twenty kilometers away had not

gone off duty when the first of all SOS signals was flashed intq the Atlantic
night . If there had been enough lifeboats . . . It was like ;h failure of a whole
series  of  safety  devices,  one  by  one,  against  incalculable  odds,  until
catastrophe was inevitable.

"Perhaps you are right," said Duncan, trying to console himself as much as
Calindy. "I don't really blame anyone. Not even Karl."

"Poor Karl. He really loved me. To have come all the way to Earth..."

Duncan did not answer, though for a moment he

was tempted. Surely Calindy did not believe that this was the only reason!
Even a brain-burned man, imprinted by one of those diabolical joy machines,
was

driven  by  More  than  passion.  And  Karl's  main  objective  had  been  so

awesome that, even now, Duncan

could  scarcely  believe  the  picture  that  was  slowly  emerging  from  his
sketchbook and the guarded portions of his Minisec.

Karl had had a dream-or a nightmare--and

Duncan was the only man alive who even partially understood it. How utterly
baffled and bewildered the Argus Committee must be! That thought gave

Duncan a heady sense of power, though there were times when he wished that
the burden of knowledge had reached him in some other way, or had not come
at all ....

For power and happiness were incompatible. Karl

had reached for both, and both had slipped through his fingers. How Duncan
could profit by the lesson he 270

did not yet know; but it would be with him for all the years to come.

But if happiness was perhaps unattainable, at least pleasure was not beyond
his grasp, nor was it to be despised. For a few moments he could forget the
affairs of state and turn his back upon an enigma far More profound than any
of those that Calindy peddled to her clients.

It was strange how the wheel had gone full circle.

Fifteen years ago, he and Karl had turned to each other in shared sorrow for
the loss of Calindy. Now he and Calindy were mourning Karl.

And presently Duncan knew, though it could be

only  a  faint  shadow  of  that  unassuageable  hunger,  something  of  the
disappointment Karl must have experienced.

How true it was that one could never quite

recover the past ....

It was almost as good as he had hoped, but one

thing was lacking.

Calindy no longer tasted of honey.

ARGUS PANOPTES

So they had the wrong Argus. If this were

a time for humor, DUncan would have felt like laughing.

Colin had put him on the track, with one of his

usual economical Telexes. It should not have been necessary to go all the way
to Titan to check such an elementary point.

WHICH  ARGUS  DO  YOU  MEAN.9  Colin  had  asked.  THERE  WERE
THREE.

A  couple  of  minutes  with  the  Comsole's  ENCYCLOPEDIA  section  had
confirmed this. As Ambassador

Farrell had recalled, Argus was indeed Odysseus'

faithful  old  watchdog,  who  had  recognized  his  master  when  the  wanderer
returned from exile. The name

was certainly appropriate for a secret intelligence organization, though now
that  Duncan  had  started  making  inquiries,  it  turned  out  that  the  Argus
Committee was not as secret as it might have wished.

Bernie Patras (needless to say) had heard of it; so had George Washington,
who admitted with some

embarrassment: "Of course they've asked me questions.

But there's nothing to worry about."

Ivor Mandel'stahm had been More forthcoming--even a little sarcastic.

"I'm used to secrecy in my business, and I could teach these people a thing or
two.  They  wouldn't  have  lasted  five  minutes  under  Stalin--or  even  the  old

czars.  But  I  suppose  they're  necessary.  Society  will  always  need  some
warning system to spot malcontents

before they can cause real trouble. I only doubt if any system will really work,
when it's needed."

The second Argus had been the builder of Jason's mythical--or perhaps not so
mythical--ship, the Argo. Duncan had never heard of the Golden Fleece, and
the legend fascinated him. Argo would be a good name for a spaceship, he
thought; but even this association had nothing to do with Karl Helmer's notes.

He wondered how Karl had ever come across the

third Argus; his inquisitive mind had wandered down many byways of fantasy
as well as science. And now that he had the key, Duncan understood why the

project  that  had  clearly  dominated  Karl's  later  years  could  have  only  one
name--that of the all-seeing, multiple-eyed god, Argus Panoptes, who could
look in every direction simultaneously. Unlike poor Cyclops, who had only a
single line of vision...

There had been a delay of almost thirty hours before the legal computer on
Titan  could  probate  Karl's  will.  Then  Armand  Helmer  reported  that,  as
Duncan had hoped, it contained a list of obvious code words

--presumably the keys to the Minisec's private memories.

Armand had been perfectly willing to Telex the

codes, and Duncan had stopped him just in time.

Thanks to recent experience, the naive young Makenzie who had arrived on
Earth only a few weeks ago

had  now  developed  a  mild  paranoia.  He  hoped  that  it  would  not  become
obsessive, as sometimes seemed to be the case with Colin. Yet perhaps Colin
was fight ....

Not until the Argus Committee had, with some reluctance, handed over Karl's
Minisec did Duncan allow

Armand to radio the codes from Titan. Now it

would not matter even if they were intercepted. He alone could use them.

In all, there were a dozen combinations, with identical foraats. Each began
with the G/T or GO TO

instruction, followed by the six binary digits 101000.

That  might  be  an  arbitrary  number,  but  it  was  More  likely  to  have  some
mnemonic association. A common trick was to use one's day or year of birth;
Karl had been born in '40, and Duncan was not surprised at the answer when
he converted 101000 to base ten

--though he was a little disappointed at so obvious a subterfuge.

Yet the code was secure enough, for the chances

were astronomically remote that anyone, ia a random search, would ever hit
upon t.e alphabetical sequences that followed. Though they were easy to re-
member--at least for a Titanian--they were safe

from accidental triggering. Each was a name spelled backward--another old
trick, but one which never lost its effectiveness.

The list began with G/T 101000 SAMIM and continued with G/T 101000 S
¥TET, G/T 101000

suN^J, G/T 101000 EOIO, G/T 101000

Then Karl grew 6red of moons, for the next, unsurprisingly, was G/T 101000
D^M,A. That would

certainly  be  a  personal  messageland  so,  of  course,  would  be  G/T  101000
¥DIL^C ....

There was no G/T 101000 ^ctD. Though it

was unreasonable to have expected it, Duncan still felt a momentary flicker of
regret.

A  few  More  family  names,  but  he  scarcely  noticed  them,  for  his  eyes  had

already caught the final entry: G/T 101000 sta,. The search was ended.

' 273

But it was not yet successful; there could be one last barrier. Most men had
some secrets that they wished to preserve inviolate, even after death. It was
still possible that unless these codes were used correctly, they might trigger an
EISE instruction.

Possible  but  unlikely.  Karl  had  clearly  intended  these  memories  to  be
released,  or  he  would  not  have  left  the  codes  in  his  will,  with  no  warning
attached to them. Perhaps the wisest move would be to Telex Ar-mand again,
just in case Karl had left any further instructions that his distraught father had
overlooked.

That would take hours, and it might still prove

nothing. Duncan scanned the list again, looking for clues aad finding none.
The sequence 101000 might mean ERASE. He could speculate f,orever, and
get nowhere.

There  was  no  #  or  EXECUTE  sign  at  the  end  of  the  sequences,  but  that
proved nothing at all, for few people

bothered  to  write  down  anything  so  obvious;  nine  times  out  of  ten,  it  was
omitted  as  understood.  Yet  one  of  the  standard  ways  of  canceling  a  secret
ERASE order was to hit EXCUTE twice in quick succession. Another was to
do so with a definite interval between the two keyings. Did Karl's omission
have any significance, or was he merely following the usual convention?

The problem contained its own solution, though

emotion rather than intelligence pointed the way to it. Duncan could see no
flaw,  though  he  explored  every  possibility  that  he  could  imagine.  Then,
feeling a faint trace of guilt, he tapped out G/T 101000

Yr>mLAC,  pausing  for  a  fraction  of  a  second  before  he  completed  the
sequence with #.

If he was wrong, Calindy would never know what

she had lost. And though Karl's last message to her might 'have been erased,

none of the other stored memories would be placed in hazard.

His  fears  were  groundless.  Duncan  heard  only  the  opening  words--"Hello,
Calindy, when you hear this, I shall be . . ."--before he hit the STOP key and
the Minisec became silent again. He was after bigger game. Perhaps one day,
when he had the time--no, 274

that was a temptation he would be strong enough to resist ....

And  so,  in  the  secluded  luxury  of  the  Centennial  Hotel,  with  a  Do  NOT
DISTtJRB block on all visitors and incoming messages, Duncan keyed G/T
101000

suGv, #. For two days he canceled his appointments, and had all meals sent up
to  his  room.  Occasionally,  he  made  an  outgoing  call  to  check  upon  some
technical point, but most of the time he was alone, communing with the dead.

Finally he was ready to meet the Argus Committee again, on his own terms.
He understood everything

--except,  of  course,  the  greatest  mystery  of  all.  How  delighted  Karl  would
have been if he had ever known about Golden Reef ....

The room had not changed, and perhaps the invisible audience was the same.
But there was now no

trace of the slightly uncertain Duncan Makenzie who, only a few days ago,
had wondered if he should opt for diplomatic immunity.

They had accepted, without any dispute, his explanation of the word "Argus,"
though  he  did  not  imagine  they  were  much  impressed  by  his  suddenly
acquired  knowledge  of  classical  mythology.  He  could  tell  from  the  brief
questioning that there was a certain disappointment; perhaps the Committee
would have to find some other justification for its existence. (Was there really
an organized underground movement on Terra, or was it merely a joke? This
was hardly the right time to ask, though Duncan was tempted.)

Yet, ironicalJy, there was a small conspiracy, in this very room--a conspiracy
mutually agreed upon.

The Committee had gfiessed that he now appreciated the significance of the
name Argus to Terran security

--and he knew that it knew. Each side understood the other perfectly, and the
next item of business was quickly adopted.

"So  what  was  Mr.  Helmer's  Argus?"  asked  the  woman  whom  Duncan  had
tentatively placed up on

the Moon. "And can you account for his odd behavior?''

Duncan opened the stained notebook to display

that  astonishing  full-page  sketch  which  had  so  transfixed  him  at  its  first
revelation. Even now that he

knew its true scale, he could not think of it as anything except a drawing of a
sea urchin. But Diadema was only thirty or forty centimeters across; Argus
would  be  at  least  a  thousand  kilometers  in  diameter,  if  Karl's  analysis  was
right. And of that, Duncan no longer had any doubt, though he could never
give his full reasons.

"Karl  Helmer  had  a  vision,"  he  began.  I'll  try  to  pass  it  on  as  best  I  can,
though  this  is  not  my  field  of  knowledge.  But  I  knew  his  psychology  and
perhaps I can make you understand what he was trying

to do." ,

You may be disappointed again, he told himself

--you may dismiss the whole cdncept as a crazy

scientist's  delusion.  But  you'll  be  wrong;  this  could  be  infinitely  More
important than some trivial conspiracy threatening your tidy little world ....

"Karl was a scientist, who always hoped to make some great discovery--but
never did. Though he was highly imaginative, even his wildest flights were
always soundly based on reality. And he was ambitious

.... "

"1[ it were so," murmured a quiet voice from the air beside him, "it was a
grievous  [ault.  And  grievously  hath  Caesar  answered  it.  Sorry--please

continue.''

The reference was unfamiliar to Duncan, and he

showed his annoyance at the interruption by pausing for a few seconds.

"He  was  interested  in  everything--too  many  things,  perhaps-but  his  great
passion  was  the  still  unsolved  CETI  problem--communications  with
extraterrestrial intelligence. We used to argue about it for

hours  when  we  were  boys;  I  could  never  be  quite  sure  when  he  was
completely serious, but I am now.

"Why  have  we  never  detected  radio  signals  from  the  advanced  societies
which must surely be out there in space? Karl had many theories, but in the
end he settled on the simplest. It's not original, and I'm sure you've heard it
before.

"We ourselves broadcast radio signals for only 276

about a hundred years, roughly spanning the twentieth century. By the end of
that  time,  we'd  switched  to  cable  and  optical  and  satellite  systems,
concentrating all their power where it was needed, and not spilling most of it
wastefully  to  the  stars.  This  may  well  be  true  of  all  civilizations  with  a
technology  comparable  to  ours.  They  only  pollute  the  universe  with
indiscriminate radio noise for a century or two--a very

brief fraction of their entire history.

"So even if there are millions of advanced societies in this Galaxy, there may
be barely a handful just where we were three hundred years ago--still splash-
lng out radio waves in all directions. And the laws

of probability make it most unlikely that any of these early electronic cultures
will be within detection range; the nearest may be thousands of light-years
away.

"But before we abandon the search, we should explore all the possibilities--
and there's one that has

never been investigated, because until now there was little we could do about
it. For three centuries, we've been studying radio waves in the centimeter and

meter bands. But we have almost completely ignored the very long waves--
tens and hundreds of kilometers in length.

"Now of course there were several good reasons for this neglect. In the first
case, it's impossible to study these waves on Earth--they don't get through the
ionosphere,  and  so  never  reach  the  surface.  You  have  to  go  into  space  to
observe them.

· "But for the very longest waves, it's no good merely, going up to orbit, Or to
the other side of the Moon, where CYCLOPS II was built. You have to go
halfway out to the limits of the Solar System.

"For the Sun has an ionosphere, just like the Earth's--except that it's billions
of times larger. It absorbs all waves More than ten or twenty kilometers in
length. If we want to detect these, we have to go out to Saturn.

"Such waves have been observed, but only on a few occasions. ' About forty
years ago, a Solar Survey mission picked them up; it wasn't looking for radio
waves at all, but was measuring magnetic fields be-twee6

Jupiter and Saturn. It observed pulsations that

must have been due to a radio burst at around fifteen kilohertz, corresponding
to a wavelength of twenty kilometers. At first it was thought that they came
from Jupiter, which is still full of electromagnetic surprises, but that source
was eventually ruled out, and the origin is still a mystery.

"There  have  been  half  a  dozen  observations  since  then,  all  of  them  by
instruments that were measuring something else. No one's looked for these
waves directly; you'll see why in a moment.

"The most impressive example was detected ten years ago, in '66, by a team
doing a survey of Iapetus.

They obtained quite a long recording, rather

sharply  tuned  at  me  kilohertz--that's  thirty-three  kilometers  wavelength.  I
thought you might like to hear it .... "

Duncan consulted a slip of paper and carefully

tapped out a long sequence of numbers and letters on the Minisec. Into the
anechoic stillness of that strange room, Karl spoke from the grave, in a brisk,
businesslike voice.

"This  is  the  complete  recording,  demodulated  and  speeded  up  sixty-four
times, so that two hours is compressed into two minutes. Starting now."

Across twenty years of time, a childhood memory

suddenly  came  back  to  Duncan.  He  recalled  listening  out  into  the  Titanian
night for that scream from the edge of space, wondering if it was indeed the
voice of some monstrous beast, yet not really believing his own coniecture,
even before Karl had demolished it.

Now that fantasy returned, More powerful than ever.

This sound--or, rather, infrasound, for the original modulation was far below
the range of human hear-ing--was like the slow beating of a giant heart, or

the tolling of a bell so huge that a cathedral could be placed inside it, rather
than the reverse. Or perhaps the waves of the sea, rolling forever in unvarying
rhythm against some desolate shore, on a world so old that though Time still
existed, Change was dead ....

The recording, as it always did, set Duncan's skin crawling and'sent shivers
down his spine. And it brought back yet another memory--the image of that
mightiest of all Earth's creatures, leaping in power and 278

glory into the sky above Golden Reef. Could there be beasts among the stars,
to whom men would be as insignificant as the lice upon the whale?

It  was  a  relief  when  the  playback  came  to  an  end,  and  Karl's  surprisingly
unemotional voice commented:

"Note the remarkably constant frequency--the original period is 132 seconds,
not varying by

morf¢ than point one percent. This implies a fairly high Q-- say ...

"The rest is technical," said Duncan, switching off the recording. "I merely
wanted you to hear what the Iapetus survey team brought home with them.
And

it's something that could never have been picked up inside the orbit of Satur .

A voice he had not heard before--young, rather

self-assured--came out of the air behind him.

"But this is ',all old material, familiar to everyone In the field. Sandemann and
Koralski  showed  that  those  signals  were  almost  certainly  relaxation
oscillations, probably ina plasma cloud near one of Sat

urn's Trojan points."

Duncan felt his facade of instant expertise rapidly crumbling; he should have
guessed that there would be someone in his audience who would know far
More about this subject' than he did--and possibly, for that matter, even than
Karl.

"I'm not competent to discuss that," he replied.

"I'm only reporting Dr. Helmer's opinions. He believed that there was a whole
new  science  here,  waiting  to  be  opened  up.  After  all,  every  time  we  have
explored some new region of the spoctrum, it's led to astonishing and totally
unexpected discoveries. Helmer was

convinced that this would happen again.

"But to study these gigantic waves--up to a million times-, longer than those
observed in classical

radio  astronomy--we  must  use  correspondingly  gigantic  antenna  systems.
Both to collect them--be-cause

they're very weak--and to determine the

directions from which they come.

"This  was  Karl  Helmer's  Argus.  His  records  and  sketches  contain  quite
detailed designs. I leave it to others to say how practical they are.

"Argus would look in all directions simultane-279

ously, like the great missile-tracking radars of the twentieth century. It would

be the three-dimensional equivalent of CYCLOPS--and several hundred times
larger, because it would need to be at least a thousand kilometers in diameter.
Preferably  ten  thousand,  to  get  good  resolving  power  at  these  ultralow
frequencies.

"Yet it need contain much less material than CYCLOPS, because it would be
built in De"p Space, under weightless conditions. Helmer chose as its location
the satellite Mnemosyne, outermost of Saturn's

moons, and it seems a very logical choice. In fact the only choice...

"For Mnemosyne is twenty million kilometers from Saturn, well clear of the
planet's own feeble ionosphere, and also far enough out for its tidal forces to
be negligible.

But most important of All, it has almost zero

rotation. Only a modest amount of rocket power

would cancel its spin entirely. Mnemosyne would

then  be  the  only  body  in  the  universe  with  no  rotation  at  all,  and  Helmer
suggests  that  it  might  be  an  ideal  laboratory  for  various  cosmological
experiments."

"Such as a test of Mach's principle," interrupted that confident ybung voice.

"Yes," agreed Duncan, now More than ever impressed by his unknown critic.
"That was one possibility he mentioned. But back to Argus...

"Mnemosyne would serve as the core or nucleus of the array. Thousands of
elements--little  More  than  stiff  wires--would  radiate  from  it,  like--like  the
spines  of  a  sea  urchin.  Thus  it  could  comb  the  entire  sky  for  signals.  And
incidentally,  the  temperature  out  around  Mnemosyne  is  so  low  that  cheap
superconductors could be used, enormously increasing the efficiency of the
system.

"I won't get involved in the details of switching and phasing that would allow
Argus to swing its

antenna spines electrically--without moving them physically--so that it could
concentrate on any particular region of the sky. All this, and a great deal More

,  Helmer  had  worked  out  in  his  notes,  using  techniques  evolved  with
CYCLOPS and other radio telescopes.

"You may wonder--as I did---how he ever hoped to get such a gigantic project
started.  He  planned  a  simple  demonstration,  which  he  was  certain  would
provide enough evidence to prove his theories.

"He was going to launch two equal, massive

weights  in  exactly  opposite  directions,  each  towing  a  fine  wire,  several
hundred kilometers long. When the wires had been completely deployed, the
weights would be jettisoned----and he would have a simple dipole antenna,
perhaps a thousand kilometers long. He

hoped that he could persuade the Solar Survey to do the experiment, which
would be quite cheap, and

would certainly produce some results of value. Then he was going to follow it
up with More ambitious schemes, shooting wires out at right angles, and so

"But I think I've said enough to let you judge for yourselves. There's much
More I've not had time to transcribe. I hope you can be patient, at least until
after the Centennial. For that, as you are well aware, is what I really came for-
-and I have work to

do .... "

"Thank  3rou  for  your  moral  support,  Bob,"  said  Duncan  when  he  and  His
Excellency the Ambassador for Titan had emerged into the bright sunlight of
Virginia Avenue.

"I never said a word. I was completely out of my depth. And I kept hoping
that someone would put the question I'm still anxious to see answered."

"What's that?" Duncan asked suspiciously.

"How did Helmer think he could get away with it?"

"Oh, that," said Duncan, mildly disappointed; this aspect of the matter seemed
so unimportant now. "I think I understand his strategy. Four years ago, when

we turned down his project for a simple long-wave detecting system--because
we couldn't afford

it, and he wouldn't say what he was really driving at he decided he'd have to
go  directly  to  Earth  and  convince  the  top  scientists  there.  That  meant
acquiring funds, somehow. I'm sure he hoped that he'd be

vindicated so quickly that we'd forget any minor in281

fraction of the exchange laws. It was a gamble, of course, but he felt it so
important that he was prepared to take risks."

"Hmm," said the Ambassador, obviously not tOO

impressed. "I know that Helmer was a friend of yours, and I don't want to
speak harshly of him.

But wouldn't it be fair to call him a scientific genius

--and a criminal psychopath?"

Rather to his surprise, Duncan found himself bristling at this description. Yet
he had to admit it con-rained some truth. One of the attributes of the

psychopath--a term still popular among laymen,

despite  three  hundred  years  of  professional  attempts  to  eradicate  it--was  a
moral blindness to any interests but his own. Of course, Karl could always
produce a very convincing argument that his interests

were  for  the  best  of  all  concerned.  The  Makenzies,  Duncan  realized  with
some embarrassment, were also skilled at this kind of exercise.

"If there were irrational elements in Karl's behavior, they were at least partly
due  to  a  breakdown  he  had  fifteen  years  ago.  But  that  never  affected  his
scientific judgment; everyone I've spbken to agrees that Argus is sound."

"I don't doubt it--but why is it important?"

"I'd  hoped,"  said  Duncan  mildly,  "that  I'd  made  that  clear  to  our  invisible
friends."

And  I  believe  I  have,  he  told  himself,  to  at  least  one  of  them.  His  most
penetrating questioner was certainly one of Terra's top radio astronomers. He
would understand, and only a few allies at that level were necessary. Duncan
was certain that someday

they  would  meet  again,  this  time  eye  to  eye,  and  with  a  pointed  lack  of
reference to any prior encounter.

"As to why it's important, Bob, I'll tell you something that I didn't mention to
the Committee, and

which I'm sure Karl never considered, because he was too engrossed in his
own affairs. Do you realize what a project like Argus would do to the Titan
economy?

It would bring us billions and make us the

scientific hub of the Solar System. It might even go a long way to solve our
financial problems, when the demand for hydrogen starts to drop in the '80's."

"I  appreciate  that,"  Farrell  answered  dryly,  "especially  as  my  taxes  will  go
toward it. But let notho

ing interfere with the March of Science."

Duncan laughed sympathetically. He liked Bob

Farrell, and he had been extremely helpful. But he was less and less sure of
the Ambassador's loyalties, and it might soon be time to find a replacement.

Unfortt/nately, it would again have to be a Terran, because of this infernal
gravity; but that was a problem Titan Would always have to live with.

He  could  certainly  never  tell  his  own  ambassador,  still  less  the  Argus
Committee, why Karl's brainchild might be so vital to the human race. There
were speculations in that Minisec--luckily, there was no hint

of them in the sketchbook--which had best not be published for many years,
until the project had

proved itself.

Karl had been right so often in the past, seizing on truths beyond all bounds of
logic and reason, that Duncan felt sure that this last awesome intuition was
also correct. Or if it was not, the truth was even stranger; in any event, it was
a truth that must be learned. Though the knowledge might be overwhelm-hag,
the price of ignorance could be--extinction.

Here on the streets of this beautiful city, steeped in sunlight and in history, it
'was hard to take Karl's final comments seriously, as he speculated about the
origin of those mysterious waves. And surely even Karl did not really believe
all the thoughts he had spoken into the secret memory of his Minisec, during
the long voyage to Earth...

But he was diabolically persuasive, and his arguments had an irresistible logic
and momentum of their

own. Even if he did not believe'all his own conjectures, he might still be right.

"Item  one,"  he  had  murmured  to  himself  (it  must  have  been  hard  to  get
privacy on that freighter, and Duncan could sometimes hear the noises of the
shill, the movements of the other crew members), "these kilohertz waves have
a limited range because of interstellar absorption. They would not normally
be able

to  pass  from  one  star  to  another,  unless  plasma  clouds  act  as  waveguides,
channeling them over greater

distances. So their origin must be close to the Solar System.

"My calculations all point to a sourceor sources

--at about a tenth of a light-year from the Sun. Only a fortieth of the way to
Alpha Centauri, but two hundred times the distance of Pluto . . . No man's
land--the edge of the wilderness between the stars.

But  that's  exactly  where  the  comets  are  born,  in  a  great,  invisible  shell
surrounding the Solar System.

There's  enough  material  out  there  for  a  trillion  of  those  strange  objects,

orbiting in a cosmic freezer.

"What's going on, in those huge clouds of hydrogen and helium and all the
other  elements?  There's  not  much  energy--but  there  may  be  enough.  And
where

there's matter and energy--and Time--sooner or

later there's organization.

"Call them Star Beasts. Would they be alive? No

--that  word  doesn't  apply.  Let's  just  say--'Organized  systems.'  They'd  be
hundreds  or  thousands  of  kilometers  across,  and  they  might  live--I  mean,
maintain

their individual identity--for millions of years.

"That's a thought. The comets that we observe are they the corpses of Star
Beasts,  sent  sunward  for  cremation?  Or  executed  criminals?  I'm  being
ridiculously anthropomorphic--but what else can I be?

"And are they intelligent? What does that word mean? Are ants intelligent--
are the cells of the human body intelligent? Do all the Star Beasts surrounding
the Solar System make a single entity--and does It know about us? Or does It
care?

"Perhaps the Sun keeps them at bay, as in ancient times the campfire kept off
the wolves and

saber-toothed tigers. But we are already a long way from the Sun, and sooner
or later we will meet

them. The More we learn, the better.

"And there's one question I'm almost afraid to think about. Are they gods? oR
m THEY EATERS OF GODS?"

INDEPENDENCE DAY

Extract from the Congressional Record for

2276 July 4. Address by the Honorable Duncan

Makenzie, Special Assistant to the Chief Administrator, Republic of Titan.

Mr. Speaker, Members of Congress, Distinguished

Guests--let ,me first express my deep gratitude to the Centennial Committee,
whose generosity made

possible my visit to Earth and to these United States.

I bring greetings to all of you from Titan, largest of Saturn's many moons--
and the most distant world yet occupied by mankind.

Five hundred years ago this land was also a frontier-not only geographically
but politically. Your

ancestors, less than twenty generations in the past, created the first democratic
constitution  that  really  worked---and  that  still  works  today,  on  worlds  that
they could not have imagined in their wildest dreams.

During these celebrations, many have spoken of

the  legacy  that  the  founders  of  the  Republic  left  us  on  that  day,  half  a
thousand years ago. But there have been four Centennials since then; I would
like to look briefly at each of them, to see what lessons they have for us.

At the first, in 1876, the United States was still recovering from a disastrous
Civil  War.  Yet  it  was  also  laying  the  foundations  of  the  technological
revolution that would soon transform the Earth. Perhaps

it is no coincidence that in the very year of the first Centennial, this country
brought forth the invention which really began the conquest of space.

For in 1876, Alexander Graham Bell made the first practical telephone. We
take electronic communica-285

tions so utterly for granted that we cannot imagine a society without them; we

would  be  deaf  and  dumb  if  these  extensions  of  our  senses  were  suddenly
removed.

So let us remember that just four hundred

years  ago,  the  telephone  began  the  abolition  of  space  mat  least  upon  this
planet.

A century later, in 1976, that process had almost finished-and the conquest of
interplanetary  space  was  about  to  begin.  By  that  time,  the  first  man  had
already reached the Moon, using techniques which today seem unbelievably
primitive. Although all historians now agree that the Apollo Project marked
the

United States's supreme achievement, and its greatest moment of triumph, it
was 
inspired 
by 
political 
motives 
that 
seem 
ludicrous--indeed,

incomprehensible

--to our modern minds. And it is no reflection, on those first engineers and
astronauts that their brilliant pioneering effort was a technological dead end,
and  that  serious  space  travel  did  not  begin  for  several  decades,  with  much
More advanced vehicles and propulsion systems.

A  century  later,  in  2076,  all  the  tools  needed  to  open  up  the  planets  were
ready to hand. Long-duration life-support systems had been perfected;

after the initial disasters, the fusion drive had been tamed. But humanity was
exhausted by the effort

of global rebuilding following the Time of Troubles, and in the aftermath of
the Population Crash there was little enthusiasm for the colonization of new
worlds.

Despite these problems, mankind had set its feet irrevocably on the road to
the  stars.  During  the  twenty-first  century,  the  Lunar  Base  became  self-
supporting, the Mars Colony was established, and we

had secured a bridgehead on Mercury. Venus and

the Gas Giants defied us--as indeed they still do--but we had visited all the
larger moons and asteroids of the Solar System.

By 2176, just a hundred years ago, a substantial fraction of the human race
was no longer Earthborn.

For the first time we had the assurance that whatever happened to the mother
world, our cultural heritage 286

would  not  be  lost.  It  was  secure  until  the  death  of  the  Sun--and  perhaps
beyond ....

The entury that lies behind us has been one of

consolidation, rather than of fresh discovery. I am proud thaf my world has
played a major role in this process, for without the easily accessible hydrogen
of  the  Titanian  atmosphere,  travel  between  the  planets  would  still  be
exorbitantly expensive.

Now the old question arises: Where do we go from here? The stars are as
remote as ever; our first probes, after two centuries of travel, have yet to reach
Proxima.,,.Centauri, the Sun's closest neighbor.

Though our telescopes can now see to the limits of space, no man has yet
traveled beyond Pluto. And we have still to set foot on far Persephone, which
we could have reached at any time during the last hundred years ....

Is it true, as many have suggested, that the frontier has again closed? Men
have believed that

before, and always they have been wrong. We can

laugh  now  at  those  early-twentieth-century  pessimists  who  lamented  that
there were no More worlds to discover--at

the very- moment when Goddard and

Korolev and yon Braun were playing with their first primitive rockets. And
earlier still, just before Columbus opened the way to this continent, it must
have

seemed to the peoples of Europe that the future

could hold nothing to match the splendors of the past.

I do not believe that we have come to the end of History, and that what lies
ahead is only an elaboration and extension of our present powers, on planets

already  discovered.  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  this  feeling  is  now
widespread and makes itself apparent in many ways. There is an unhealthy
preoccupation with the past, and an attempt to reconstruct or

relive it. Not, I hasten to add, that this is always bad

--what we are doing now proves that it is not.

We should respect the past, but not worship it.

While we look back upon the four Centennials that lie behind us, we should
think also of those that will be celebrated in the years to come. What of 2376,
2476 . . . 2776, a full thousand years after the birth of the Republic? How will
the people of those days 287

remember  us?  We  remember  the  United  States  chiefly  by  Apollo;  can  we
bequeath any comparable

achievement to the ages ahead?

There are many problems still to be solved, on

all the planets. Unhappiness, disease--even poverty

--still exist. We are still far from Utopia, and we may never achieve it. But we
know that all these problems can be solved, with the tools that we already
possess. No pioneering, no great discoveries,

are necessary here. Now that the worst evils of the past have been eliminated,
we can look elsewhere, with a clear conscience, for new tasks to challenge the
mind and inspire the spirit.

Civilization needs long-range goals. Once, the Solar System provided them,
but now we must look

beyond. I am not speaking of manned travel to the stars, which may still lie
centuries ahead. What I refer to is the quest for intelligence in the universe,
which was begun with such high hopes More than three centuries ago--and
has not yet succeeded.

You are all familiar with cYcLoPs, the largest

radio telescope on Earth. That was built primarily to search for evidence of
advanced civilizations. It transformed astronomy; but despite many false

alarms,  it  never  detected  a  single  intelligent  message  from  the  stars.  This
failure has done much to turn men's minds inward from the greater universe,
to concentrate their energies upon the tiny oasis of the Solar

System ....

Could it be that we are looking in the wrong place?

The wrong place, that is, in the enormously wide spectrum of radiations that
travel between the stars.

All  our  radio  telescopes  have  searched  the  short  waves--centimeters,  or  at
most, meters--in length.

But  what  of  the  long  and  ultralong  waves--not  only  kilometers  but  even
megameters from crest to crest?

Radio waves of frequencies so low that they would sound like musical notes
in 6ur ears could detect them.

We know that such waves exist, but we have

never been able to study them, here on Earth. They are blocked, far out in the
fringes of the Solar System, by the gale of electrons that blows forever from
288

the  Sun.  To  know  what  the  universe  is  saying  with  these  vast,  slow
undulations,  we  must  build  radio  telescopes  of  enormous  size,  beyond  the
limits of the Sun's own billion-kilometer-deep ionosphere--that is, at least as
fa: out as the orbit of Saturn. For the first time, this i now possible. For the
first time, there are real incentiges for doing so ....

We tend to judge the universe by our own physical size and our own time
scale; it seems natural for us to work with waves that we could span with our

arms,  or  even  with  our  fingertips.  But  the  cosmos  is  not  built  to  these
dimensions; nor, perhaps, are all the entities that dwell among the stars.

These giant radio waves are More commensurate

with  the  scale  of  the  Milky  Way,  and  their  slow  vibrations  are  a  better
measure of its eon-long Galactic

Year.  They  may  have  much  to  tell  us  when  we  begin  to  decipher  their
messages.

How those scientist-statesmen Franklin and Jefferson would have welcomed
such a project! They

would have grasped its scope, if not its technology--for they were interested
in every branch of knowledge between heaven and Earth.

The problems they faced, five hundred years ago, will never rise again. The
age of convict between nations is over. But we have other challenges, which
may yet tax us to the utmost. Let us be thankful that the universe can always
provide great goals beyond ourselves, and enterprises to which we can pledge
our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.

Duncan  Makenzie  closed'  the  beautifully  designed  souvenir  book--a
masterpiece of the printer's art, such as had not been seen for centuries find
might never be seen again. Only five hundred copies had been produced--one
for every year. He would carry his back in triumph to Titan, where for the rest
of his life it would be among his most cherished possessions.

Many people had complimented him on his speech,

enshrined  forever  in  these  pages--and,  much  More  accessibly,  in  library
memories and information banks throughout the Solar System. Yet he had felt
em289

barrassed to receive those plaudits, for in his heart he knew that he had not
earned them. The Duncan

of a few weeks ago could never have conceived that address; he was little
More than a medium, passing on a message from the dead. The words were
his,

but all the thoughts were Karl's.

How astonished, he told himself wryly, all his

friends on Titan must have been, when they watched the ceremony! Perhaps it
had been slightly inappropriate to use such a forum as this for what

might be considered self-serving propaganda-even special pleading on behalf
of his own world. But Duncan had a clear conscience, and as yet there had
been no criticism on this score. Even those who were baffled by his thesis had
been  grateful  for  the  excitel  ment  he  had  injected  into  all  the  routine
formalities.

And even if his speech was only a seven-day wonder to the general public, it
would not be forgotten.

He had planted a seed; one day it would grow--on barren Mnemosyne.

Meanwhile, there was a slight practical problem, though it was not yet urgent.
This splendid volume, with its thick vellum, and its tooled leather binding,
weighed about five kilograms.

The Makenzies hated waste and extravagance. It

would be pleasant to have the book on the voyage home, but excess baggage
to Titan was a hundred

solars a kilo ....

It  would  have  to  go  back  by  slow  boat,  on  one  of  the  empty  tankers--
UNACCOMPANIED FREIGHT, MAY BE STOWED IN VACUUM

THE

MIRROR OF THE SEA

Dr. Yehudi ben Mohammed did not look as

if  he  belonged  in  a  modern  hospital,  surrounded  by  flickering  life-function
displays, Comsole readouts, whispering voices from hidden speakers, and all
the aseptic technology of life and death. In his spotless white robes, with the
double circlet of gold cord around

his headdress, he should have been holding court in a desert tent, or scanning

the horizon from the back of his camel for the first glimpse of an oasis.

Duncan remembered how one of the younger doctors had commented, during
his  first  visit:  "Sometimes  I  think  El  Hadj  believes  he's  a  reincarnation  of
Saladin and Lawrence of Arabia." Although Duncan did not

understand the full flavor of the references, this was obviously said More in
affectionate jest than in criticism.

Did the surgeon, he wondered, wear those robes

in the operating theater? They would not be inappropriate there; and certainly
they did not interfere with the feline grace of his movements.

"I'm glad," said Dr. Yehudi, toying with the jeweled dagger on his elaborhtely
inlaid desk--the two

touches 
of 
antiquity 
in 
an 
otherwise 
late-twentythird-century

environment"that you've finally made up

your mind. The--ah---delay has caused certain problems, but we've overcome
them. We now have four

perfectly  viable  embryos,  and  the  first  will  be  transplanted  in  a  week.  The
others will be kept as backups,

in case of a rejection--though that is now very rare."

And  what  will  happen  to  the  unwanted  three?  Duncan  asked  himself,  and
shied away from the answer.

One human being had been created who would never otherwise have existed.
That was the positive side; 291

better  to  forget  the  three  ghosts  who  for  a  brief  while  had  hovered  on  the
borders of reality. Yet it was hard to be coldly logical in matters like this. As
he stared across the intricate arabesques, Duncan wondered at the psychology
of the calm and elegant figure whose skillful hands had controlled so many

destinies. In their own small way, on their own little world, the Makenzies
had played at God; but this was something beyond his understanding.

Of course, one could always take refuge in the

cold mathematics of reproduction. Old Mother Nature had not the slightest
regard for human ethics or feelings.

In  the  course  of  a  lifetime,  every  man  generated  enough  spermatozoa  to
populate the entire Solar System, many times over--and all but two or three of

that  potential  multitude  were  doomed.  Had  anyone  ever  gone  mad  by
visualizing each ejaculation as a hundred million murders? Quite possibly; no
wonder that the adherents of some old religions had refused to look through
the microscope ....

There were moral obligations and uncertainties behind every act. In the long
run, a man could only

obey the promptings of that mysterious entity called Conscience and hope that
the outcome would not be too disastrous. Not, of course, that one could ever
know the final results of any actions.

Strange, thought Duncan, how he had resolved the doubts that had assailed
him when he first came to the island. He had learned to take the broader view,
and to place the hopes and aspirations of the Makenzies in a wider context.
Above all, he had seen the

dangers  of  overreaching  ambition;  but  the  lesson  of  Karl's  fate  was  still
ambiguous and would give him cause to wonder all his life.

With a mild sense of shock, Duncan realized that he had already signed the
legal documents and was returning them to Dr. Yehudi. No matter; he had

read them carefully and knew his responsibilities.

"I, Duncan Makenzie, resident of the satellite Titan presently in orbit around
the planet Saturn" (when didthe lawyers think it was going to run away?) "do
hereby accept guardianship of one cloned male

child, identified by the chromosome chart herewith attached, and will to the
best of my ability .... "etc., etc., etc. Perhaps the world would have been a
better place if the parents of normally conceived children had been forced to

sign such a contract. This

thought, however, was some hundred billion births too late.

The surgeon flowed upward to his full commanding two meters in a gesture
of  dismissal  which,  from  anyone  else,  would  have  seemed  slightly
discourteous. But not here, for E1 Hadj had much on his mind. All the while
they had been talking, his eyes had seldom strayed from the pulsing lines of
life  and  death  on  the  read-outs  that  covered  almost  one  whole  wall  of  his
office.

In the main hall of the Administration Building, Duncan paused for a moment
before the giant, slowly rotating DNA helix which dominated the entrance.

As his gaze roamed along the spokes of the twisted ladder, contemplating its
all-but-infinite  possibilities,  he  could  not  help  thinking  again  of  the
pentominoes that Grandma Ellen had set out before him years ago.

There were only twelve of those shapes--yet it would take the lifetime of the
universe to exhaust their possibilities.

And here was no mere dozen, but billions

upon billions of locations to be filled by the letters of the genetic code. The
total number of combinations was not one to stagger the mind because there
was no way whatsoever in which the mind could grasp

even the faintest conception of it. The number of electrons required to pack
the entire cosmos solid from

end to end was virtually zero in comparison.

Duncan stepped out into the blazing sunlight, waited for his dark glasses to
adjust themselves, and set off in search of Dr. Todd, guide and friend of his
previous visit. He would not be leaving for another four

hours, and there was one major item of business still to be settled.

Luckily, as Sweeney Todd explained, there was no need to go out to the Reef.

"I can't imagine why you're interested in those ugly beasts. But you'll find
some on a patch of dead coral 293

at the end of that groin; not much else will live there.

The water's only a meter deep--you won't even need flippers, just a strong pair
of shoes. If you do step on a stonefish, your screams will bring us in time to
save your life--though you may wish we hadn't."

That was not very encouraging, but ten minutes later Duncan was cautiously
walking out into the shallows, bent double as he peered through his borrowed

face mask.

There was none of the beauty here that he had

seen on the approach to Golden Reef. The water was crystal clear, but the sea
bed was a submarine des-eft.

It was mostly white sand, mingled with broken

pieces of coral, like the bleached bones of tiny animals.

A few small, drably colored fish were swimming

around,  and  others  stared  at  him  with  anxious,  unfriendly  eyes  from  little
burrows in the sand. Once, a

brilliantly blue creature like a flattened eel came darting at him and, to his
great surprise, gave him a painful nip before he chased it away. It was every
bit of three centimeters long, and Duncan, who had never heard of cleaning
symbiosis, worried about poison for a few minutes. However, he felt no pangs
of imminent dissolution, so pushed his way onward through

the tepid water.

The concrete groin--part of the island's defense against the ceaseless erosion
of  the  waves--stretched  out  for  a  hundred  meters  from  the  shore  and  then
disappeared beneath the surface. Near its seaward end, Duncan came across a
pile of jumbled rocks, perhaps hurled up by some storm. They must have been
here  for  many  years,  for  they  were  cemented  together  with  barnacles  and
small, jagged oysters. Among their caves and crevices, Duncan found what he
was seeking.

Each  sea  urchin  appeared  to  have  hollowed  out  its  own  cavity  in  the  hard

rock;  Duncan  could  not  imagine  how  the  creatures  had  performed  this
remarkable

feat of burrowing. Anchored securely in place, with only a bristling frieze of
black  spines  exposed  to  the  outer  world,  they  were  invulnerable  to  all
enemies--except Man. But Duncan wished them no harm, and

this time had not even brought a knife. He had seen 294

enough  of  death,  and  his  sole  purpose  now  was  to  confirm--or  refute--the
impression that had haunted

him ever since he had set eyes on that drawing in Karl's notebook.

Once again, the long black spines started to swing slowly toward his shadow.
These primitive creatures, despite their apparent lack of sense organs, knew
that he was there, and reacted to his presence. They were scanning their little
universe, as Argus would search the stars ....

Of  course,  there  would  be  no  actual  physical  movement  of  the  Argus
antennas--that was unnecessary,

and  would  be  impossible  with  such  fragile,  thousand-kilometer-long
structures. Yet their electronic sweep-hag

of  the  skies  would  have  an  uncanny  parallel  with  Diadema's  protective
reaction. If some planet-sized monster, which used ultralong radio waves for
vision, could observe the Argus system at work, what it "saw"

would be not unlike this humble reef dweller.

For a moment, Duncan had a curious fantasy. He

imagined that he was such a monster, observing Argus in silhouette against
the background radio glow

of the Galaxy. There would be hundreds of thin black lines, radiating out from
a  central  point--most  of  them  stationary,  but  some  of  them  waving  slowly
back and forth, as if responding to a shadow from the stars.

Yet it was hard to realize that even if Argus was built, no human eye could
ever see it in its entirety The structure would be so huge that its slender rods

and wires would be totally invisible from any distance.

Perhaps, as Karl had suggested in his notes, there would be warning lights
dotted all over the millions of square kilometers of the spherical surface and
strung  along  the  six  principle  axes.  To  an  approaching  spaceship,  it  would
look like some glittering Star Day ornament.

Or--and this was More appropriate--a discarded

toy from the nursery of the Gods...

Toward evening, while he was waiting for the shuttle back to the mainland,
Duncan found a secluded corner of the coffeeshop-cum-bar which overlooked
295

the lagoon. He sat there thoughtfully, sipping from time to time at a Terran
drink he had discovered--something called a Torn Collins. It was a bad idea,

acquiring vices which could not be exported to Titan; on the other hand, it
could  equally  well  be  argued  that  it  was  foolish  not  to  enjoy  the  unique
pleasures of Earth, even if one had to relinquish them all too soon.

There was also endless enioyment in watching the play of wind over the water
protected by the barrier of the inner reef. Some stretches were absolutely flat,
reflecting the blue of the unclouded sky as if in a flawless mirror. Yet other
areas,  apparently  no  different,  were  continually  quivering  so  that  not  for  a
moment was the surface still; it was crossed and crisscrossed by innumerable
tiny wavelets, no More than

a  centimeter  in  height.  Presumably  some  relationship  between  the  varying
depth  of  the  lagoon  and  the  velocity  of  the  wind  was  responsible  for  the
phenomenon,

quite unlike anything that Duncan had ever before seen. No matter what the
explanation, it was enchantingly beautiful, for the countless refiection, of the

sun  in  the  dancing  water  created  sparklingpatterns  that  seemed  to  move
forever down the wind, yet remained always in the same spot.

Duncan had never been hypnotized, nor had he

experienced More than a few of the nine states of consciousness between full

awareness  and  profound  sleep.  The  alcohol  might  have  helped,  but  the
scintillating  sea  was  undoubtedly  the  main  factor  in  producing  his  present
mood. He was completely alert--indeed, his mind seemed to be working with
unusual

clarity--but he no longer felt bound by the laws of logic that had controlled all
his life. It was almost as

/f he was in one of those dreams where the most fantastic things can happen,
and are accepted as matter-of-fact, everyday occurrences.

He knew that he was facing a mystery, of the sort that was anathema to the
reputedly hardheaded

Makenzies. Here was something that he could never explain to Malcolm and
Colin; they would not laugh 296

at him--or so he hoped but they would never take him seriously.

Besides, it was so utterly trivial. He had not been vouchsafed some blinding
revelation, like an ancient prophet receiving the word of God. All that had
happened was that he had come across the same very un,

usual  shape  in  two  quite  independent  contexts;  it  might  have  been  a  mere
coincidence,  and  the  sense  of  dd]cl  vu  pure  self-delusion.  That  was  the
simple, logical answer, which would certainly satisfy everyone else.

It would never satisfy Duncan. He had experienced that indescribable shock a
man  may  know  only  once  in  a  lifetime,  when  he  is  in  the  presence  of  the
transcendental and feels the sure foundations of his world

and his philosophy trembling beneath his feet.

When he saw that careful drawing in Karl's sketch4

book, Duncan had recognized it at once. But now it seemed to him that the
recog-nition came not only from the past, but also from the future. It was as if
he  had  caught  a  momentary  glimpse  in  the  Mirror  of  Time,  reflecting
something that had not yet occurred--and something that must be awesomely
important for it to have succeeded in reversing the flow of causality.

Project Argus was part of the destiny of mankind; of this, Duncan was now

sure beyond any need for rational proof. But whether it would be beneficent
was another question. All knowledge was a two-edged

sword, and it might well be that any messages from the stars would not be to
the liking of the human race. Duncan remembered the dying cries of the

sea urchin he had killed, out there on Golden Reef.

Were those faint but sinister crepitations wholly mean-ingless--an accidental
by-product? Or did they have

some  More  profound  significance?  His  instincts  gave  him  not  the  slightest
clue, one way or the other.

But it was an act of faith to Duncan, and to those he had worked with all his
life,  that  it  was  cowardice  not  to  face  the  truth,  whatever  it  might  be  and
wherever  it  might  lead.  If  the  time  was  coming  for  mankind  to  face  the
powers behind the stars, so be it. He had no doubts. All he felt now was a
calm content297

ment--even if it was the calm at the center of the cyclone.

Duncan watched the light trembling and dancing

on the lagoon, as the sun sank lower and lower toward the horizon and the
hidden coast of Africa.

Sometimes he thought he could see, in those flaring, coruscating patterns, the
warning beacons of Argus, staking a claim to the billions of cubic kilometers
of space they enclosed fifty or a hundred years from Now ....

Changing shape even as Duncan watched, the Sun

kissed the horizon and spread out a crimson, bell-shaped skirt across the sea.
Now it looked like the

film  of  an  atomic  blast  but  run  backward,  so  that  the  fires  of  hell  sank
harmlessly into the ocean. The last golden arc of the departing disc lingered
on the edge of the world for an instant, and at the very second it disappeared
there was a momentary flash of

green.

As long as Duncan lived, he might never see such heartbreaking beauty again.
It was a memory to take back to Titan, from the island on which he had made
the great decision of his life and opened the next chapter in the story of the
outer worlds.

Part IV

HOMECOMING

It was over. All the good-byes had been said

to crew and passengers, all the formalities had been completed, everything he
had  brought  from  Earth  was  already  moving  along  the  conveyor  belt.
Everything, that is, except for the most important gift of all.

He could walk through that door marked TT^N

CrtZENS, and he would be home. Already he had

forgotten the crippling gravity of Earth; that--and so much else--was fading
into the past like a dissolving dream. This was where he belonged and where

his life's work would be done. He would never again go sunward, though he
knew there would be times

when some remembered beauty of the mother world

would drive a dagger into his heart.

The family must be waiting, there in the reception lounge; and now, with only
seconds before the moment of reunion, Duncan felt a reluctance to face the
whole Makenzie clan. He let the other travelers go hurrying past him, while
he stood irresolutely, trying to pluck up his courage and clutching his precious
bundle awkwardly to his chest. Then he moved forward,

under the archway, and out onto the ramp.

There were so many of them! Malcolm and Colin,

of course, Marissa, More beautiful and desirable than even in his most restless
dreams,  now  free  of  Calindy  forever;  Clyde  and  Carline--could  she  really
have grown so much, in so short a time? And at least twenty nephews and
nieces whose names he knew as well

as his own, but just couldn't recall at the moment.

No--it  was  impossible!  But  there  she  was,  standing  a  little  apart  from  the
others, leaning heavily on her cane, yet otherwise completely unaltered since
he had 300

last seen her on the cliffs of Loch Hellbrew. Much else had changed indeed if
Grandma Ellen had

turned to Oasis for the first time in fifty years.

As she saw Duncan's astonished gaze, she gave a

barely  perceptible  smile.  It  was  More  than  a  greeting;  it  was  a  signal  of
reassurance. She already knows, thought Duncan. She knows and approves.
When the full fury of the Makenzies breaks upon my head I can rely on her
....

There flashed into his mind an old Terran phrase, whose origin he had long
ago forgotten: the Moment of Truth. Well, here it was--

They all crowded eagerly around him as he drew

back  the  shawl.  For  an  instant  only  he  felt  regret;  perhaps  he  should  have
given some warning. No, it was

better this way. Now they would learn that he was his own man at last, no
longer  a  pawn  of  others--however  much  he  might  'owe  to  them,  however
much he might be part of them.

The child was still sleeping, but normally now, not in the electronic trance
that had protected it on the long voyage from Earth. Suddenly it threw out a

chubby arm, and tiny fingers gripped Duncan's hand with surprising strength.
They looked like the pale white tentacles of a sea anemone against the dark
brown of Duncan's skin.

The little head was still empty even of dreams, and the face was as void and
formless as that of any month-old baby. But already the smooth, pink scalp
bore  an  unmistakable  trace  of  hair--the  golden  hair  that  would  soon  bring
back to Titan the lost glories of the distant Sun.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND NOTES

My first thanks should go to Truman Talley,

who in the early '50's made what was then (and for that matter still is) a most
generous offer for this book, on the strength of the title and one conversation.
I

.have  often  wished  that  I  could  remember  what  I  said  then;  it  might  have
saved me much trouble, twenty years later. I now have no idea if this book
bears the slightest resemblance to that early concept, but "Mac's"

initial encouragement kept me from abandoning it.

Like  many  other  addicts,  I  was  introduced  to  polyominoes  by  Martin
Gardner's Scientific American Book of Mathematical Puzzles and Diversions,
which, however,

fiendishly refrains from giving the solution to the 20 X 3 rectangle. In his
definitive  book  Polyominoes,  Solomon  W.  Golomb  takes  mercy  on  his
readers.

In

the  hope  of  preventing  a  few  nervous  breakdowns,  I  reproduce  his  answer
herewith:

UXPILNFTWYZV

Anyone who wishes to construct this rectangle Jrom the twelve pentominoes
should have no difficulty in matching them with the letters they (sometimes
approximately) resemble. It is easy to see that the second

of  the  (only)  two  solutions  is  obtained  by  rotating  a  seven-element  central
portion.

Dr. Golomb, who is now professor of Electrical

Engineering and Mathematics at the University. of Southern California, has
also invented an ingemous game called Pentominoes®(distributed in North

America by Hallmark Cards and in Europe by Zimpfer Puzzles). It has More
openings than chess. In an ear302

lier version of 2001:.4 Space Odyssey, Stanley Kubrick shot Hal playing this
game against the astronauts.

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Robert  Forward  of  the  Hughes  Research  Laboratory,
Malibu, for introducing me to the fascinating concept of mini black holes, and
for  making  such  encouraging  noises  about  the  somewhat  outrageous
propulsion system of S. S. Sirius that I am almost inclined to patent it ....

Dr. Grote Reber, the father of radio astronomy and builder of the world's first
radio telescope, started me thinking about the extent of the heliosphere and its
possible consequences. I am grateful for his comments on cutoff frequencies,
but he is in no way responsible for my wilder extrapolations of his ideas. Dr.
Adrian  Webster,  of  Cavendish  Laboratory's  Mullard  Radio  Astronomy
Observatory, also gave much vital information,

and he too is not to be blamed for my use of it.

I am especially indebted to Dr. Bernard Oliver,

vice-president  and  director  of  research  of  HewlettPackard,  not  only  for
hospitality at Palo Alto but also

for an advance copy of the Project cYcLoPs Design Study (NASA/Ames CR
114445), which he directed.

And I hope Barney will forgive me for the

assumption--which in fact I regard as highly improbable-that c¥cIovs would
not have detected intelligent

signals, even after two hundred years of operation.

Indignant antenna designers who feel that Argus

would not work as specified are invited to contemplate ABM search radars,
and to Think Big. All I will say in self-defense is that the Argus elements
would  be  superconducting,  active,  and  i:livided  into  many  switchable
subsections,  perhaps  with  cross-connections  between  the-"spines."  I  leave
minor practical details (as in the case of the Asymptotic Drive) as an exercise

for the student.

The  "exasperated"  remark  in  Chapter  21  was  made  to  me  at  a  NASA
conference by Professor Neil Armstrong

in July 1970. I hope it is the last word on some famous first words.

I  am  deeply  grateful  to  my  old  friend  William  MacQuitty,  producer  of  A
Night to Remember, for much

material concerning the Titanic including the menu in Chapter 27. Collectors
of unlikely coincidences 303

may  be  interested  to  know  that  just  three  hours  after  I  had  decided  to
incorporate it in the text, I read in the May 1974 Skin Diver that the Titanic
Enthusiasts of America had served this menu at their Annual

Dinner ....

Some readers may feel that the coincidences--or

"correspondences"--that play a key part in this story are too unlikely to be
plausible. But they were, in fact, suggested by far More preposterous events
in my own life; and anyone who doubts that this sort of thing can happen is
referred to Arthur Koestler's The Roots of Coincidence. I read this fascinating
book only after completing Imperial Earth, though that fact itself now seems
somewhat improbable to me.

Even More improbable is the fact that when, on

July 24, 1975, I appeared as a witness before the House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Space

Science (in the very building libeled and demolished in Chapter 33!), I was
able to quote extensively from Duncan's address to Congress in Chapter 41.
Thus the House of Representatives' hearings now contain extracts from the
Congressional Record for July 4, 2276, which should cause confusion among
future

historians.

The curious acoustic behavior of the spiny sea urchin, Diadema setosum, was

observed by me on Una-watuna

Reef, off the south coast of Sri Lanka. I have

never seen this recorded elsewhere, so it may be my one original contribution
to marine biology.

Finally, my speculations about conditions on Titan were triggered by a series
of papers that Dr. Carl Sagan was good enough to send me. Needless to say, I
am also indebted to Carl for many other stimulating ideas, which any properly
designed universe would be very foolish to ignore. "For if not true, they are
well imagined .... "

ARTHUR C. CLARKE

Cinnamon Gardens, Colombo

January 1974---January 1975

ADDITIONAL NOTE

Several expert readers have accused me of grave

error by assuming that Malcolm would pass on the Makenzie defect to his
clones.  Though  I  was  well  aware  of  this  problem  (and  tried  to  avoid  it  by
being carefully unspecific) I did not go into the matter as seriously as I should
have done. I am still hoping that some ingenious geneticist will be able to
contrive a solution; unfortunately, I doubt if I will be able to understand it.

Meanwhile, for those biologists who refuse to be placated, I can only fall back
upon what is known in the trade as Bradbury's Defense, viz:

One dreadful boy ran up to me and said:

"That bt/ok of yours, The Martian Chronicles?"

"Yes," I said.

"On page 92, where you have the moons of Mars rising in the East?"

"Yeah4" I said.

"Nah," he said.

So I hit him.*

ARTHUR C. CLARKE

Colombo, June 1976

* Mars and the Mind o! Men (Harer & Row 1973.) 305

Look into the future

through the eyes of

Arthur C.

Clarke.

Available at your bookstore or use this coupon,

----THE  FOUNTAINS  OF  PARADISE  25356  $2.50  Winner  et  the  Nebula
Award.  Vannavar  Morgan  was  obsessed  with  building  an  unthinkable
invention; an eievator into space, gateway to the stars...

.--.-CHILDHOOD'S END 28465 $2.25 Clarke's masterwork about Mankind's
newest masters: the Overlords, "A first-rate tour-de-force!"--The New York
7Jmes

,,, EARTHLIGHT

27273 $1.75

The  discovery  of  mineral  wealth  on  the  Moon  leads  to  a  violent  rivalry
between the Earth, Venus and Mars. "Mr. Clarke is our ablest practitioner of
science fiction! "--The New York Times Book Review

RENDEZVOUSWITHRAMA 29197 $2,50

A self-contained world within a gigantic alien artifact is the setting for this
famous  novel  that  won  all  major  sf  awards.  "Story-telling  of  the  highest
order!"--Te New York Sunday Times

!toxed Set/containing RENDEZVOUS WITH RAMA,

CHILDH00D' END and THE FOUNTAINS OF PARADISE

29093 $7.25

BALLANTINE MAIL SALES

Dept. AL, 201 E. 50th St., New York, N.Y. 10022

Please send me the BALLANTINE or DEL REY BOOKS if have checked
above.  I  am  encrosing  $  ..........  (add  50¢  per  copy  to  cover  postage  and
handling). Send check or money order -- no cash or C.O.D.'s please. Prices
and numbers are subject to change without notice.

Name

Address

City

State

Zip Code.

Allow at least 4 weeks for delivery.

AL8

JAMES

P. HOGAN

The man who is putting science

back into science fiction!

·

Available at your bookstore or use this coupon.

THRICE UPON ATIME 27518 $2.25

;

Time  communication  isn't  exactly  time  travel;  but  it  creates  the  same
paradoxes.

And for scientist Murdoch Ross, there are no easy soJutions. A gripping novel
of time, probability--and destiny.

-.-.--THIETWO FACES OFTOMORROW

27517 $1.95

A  super  science  thriller  of  the  evolution  of  true  machine  intelligence  that
required  a  drastic  stnulus  and  produced  a  unique  entity  with  unexpected
responses.

--INHERIT THE STARS 28907 $1.95'

Scientists had finally found a Man in the Moon...but he was wearing a space
suit,  was  fully  human  and  had  been  there  for  50,000  years.  "Pure  science
fiction.., Arthur Clarke, move over!"--Isaac Asimov

-..--THE GENTLE GIANTS OF GANYMEDE 29048 $1.95

The  thrilling  sequel  to  Inhedt  the  Stars,  Involving  a  strange  shipload  of
humanoid giants.

..THEGENESIS M^CHINE 29563 $2.25

The revolutionary unified field theo, held all the answers--and a choice for
man between destruction and vast new frontiers. "Hogan invents a theory that
might really work!"--Marvin Minsky, Professor of Science, MiT.

. BALLANTINE MAIL SALES

Dept. AL, 201 E. 50th St., New York, N.Y. 10022

Please  send  me  the  BALLANTINE  or  DEL  REY  8OOKS  I  h,ve  checked
above.  I  am  enclosing  $  ..........  (add  50¢  per  copy  to  cover  postage  and
handling). Send check or money order -- no cash or C.O.D.'s please. Prices
and numbers are subject to change without notice.

Name

Address.

City

State.

Zip Code

Allow at least 4 weeks for delivery.

AL7

The HUGO and NEBULA award winner! Rich man or dead man--those were
the  choices  Gateway  offered,  and  Robinette  Broadhead  happily  took  his
chances.

BEYOND THE BLUE EVENT HORIZON

27535 2.50

-"-'-he  spellbinding  sequel  to  GATEWAY.  Winner  of  THE  HUGO,  THE
NEBULA, and THE

JOHN W, CAMPBELL MEMORIAL AWARD,

THEWAYTHE FUTUREWAS 2059 1.95

The fascinating look at the world of science fiction by one of It's living lends.

--PREFERREDRISK

28575 1.95

An award*winning novel that Is "fast...wry...Ingenious. Zips along the broad
highway  charted  by  George  Orwell  in  1984--...."  TIME  magazine
BALLANTINE MAIL SALES

Dept. AL, 201 E. 50th St., New Yod(, N.Y. 1002:2

........... (add 50¢ per copy to

cover  postage  and  handling).  Send  check  or  money  order  --  no  cash  or
C.O.D.'s please. Prices and numbers are subject to chanle without notice.

Name.

I

I Address

i

!

a City

State, .Zip Code

..

Allow at least 4 weeks for delivery.

G-6

Table of Contents

Part I1
Part-ill
Part IV

