Little Dorrit 

Preface to the 1857 Edition 

BOOK THE FIRST: POVERTY 

1.  Sun and Shadow 

2.  Fellow Travellers 

3.  Home 

4.  Mrs Flintwinch has a Dream 

5.  Family Affairs 

6.  The Father of the Marshalsea 

7.  The Child of the Marshalsea 

8.  The Lock 

9.  little Mother 

10.  Containing the whole Science of Government 

11.  Let Loose 

12.  Bleeding Heart Yard 

13.  Patriarchal 

14.  Little Dorrit's Party 

15.  Mrs Flintwinch has another Dream 

16.  Nobody's Weakness 

17.  Nobody's Rival 

18.  Little Dorrit's Lover 

19.  The Father of the Marshalsea in two or three Relations 

20.  Moving in Society 

21.  Mr Merdle's Complaint 

22.  A Puzzle 

23.  Machinery in Motion 

24.  Fortune-Telling 

25.  Conspirators and Others 

26.  Nobody's State of Mind 

27.  Five-and-Twenty 

28.  Nobody's Disappearance 

29.  Mrs Flintwinch goes on Dreaming 

30.  The Word of a Gentleman 

31.  Spirit 

32.  More Fortune-Telling 

33.  Mrs Merdle's Complaint 

34.  A Shoal of Barnacles 

35.  What was behind Mr Pancks on Little Dorrit's Hand 

36.  The Marshalsea becomes an Orphan 

2.  Mrs General 

3.  On the Road 

4.  A Letter from Little Dorrit 

5.  Something Wrong Somewhere 

6.  Something Right Somewhere 

7.  Mostly, Prunes and Prism 

8.  The Dowager Mrs Gowan is reminded that 'It Never Does' 

9.  Appearance and Disappearance 

10.  The Dreams of Mrs Flintwinch thicken 

11.  A Letter from Little Dorrit 

12.  In which a Great Patriotic Conference is holden 

13.  The Progress of an Epidemic 

14.  Taking Advice 

15.  No just Cause or Impediment why these Two Persons should 

     not be joined together 

16.  Getting on 

17.  Missing 

18.  A Castle in the Air 

19.  The Storming of the Castle in the Air 

20.  Introduces the next 

21.  The History of a Self-Tormentor 

22.  Who Passes by this Road so late? 

23.  Mistress Affery makes a Conditional Promise, respecting her Dreams 

24.  The Evening of a Long Day 

25.  The Chief Butler Resigns the Seals of Office 

26.  Reaping the Whirlwind 

27.  The Pupil of the Marshalsea 

28.  An Appearance in the Marshalsea 

29.  A Plea in the Marshalsea 

30.  Closing in 

31.  Closed 

32.  Going 

33.  Going! 

34.  Gone 

PREFACE TO THE 1857 EDITION 

two years.  I must have been very ill employed, if I could not 

its being read as a whole.  But, as it is not unreasonable to 

looked at in its completed state, and with the pattern finished. 

common experience of an Englishman, without presuming to mention 

the unimportant fact of my having done that violence to good 

Chelsea.  If I might make so bold as to defend that extravagant 

conception, Mr Merdle, I would hint that it originated after the 

will sometimes claim to be a good and an expressly religious 

design, it would be the curious coincidence that it has been 

brought to its climax in these pages, in the days of the public 

submit myself to suffer judgment to go by default on all these 

counts, if need be, and to accept the assurance (on good authority) 

that nothing like them was ever known in this land. 

Some of my readers may have an interest in being informed whether 

I went to look.  I found the outer front courtyard, often mentioned 

every brick of the jail for lost.  Wandering, however, down a 

certain adjacent 'Angel Court, leading to Bermondsey', I came to 

that arose in my mind's-eye when I became Little Dorrit's 

largest baby I ever saw, offered a supernaturally intelligent 

explanation of the locality in its old uses, and was very nearly 

correct.  How this young Newton (for such I judge him to be) came 

young to know anything about it of himself.  I pointed to the 

window of the room where Little Dorrit was born, and where her 

I asked him who was Tom Pythick?  and he said, 'Joe Pythick's 

uncle.' 

the very paving-stones of the extinct Marshalsea jail; will see its 

narrow yard to the right and to the left, very little altered if at 

will look upon rooms in which the debtors lived; and will stand 

among the crowding ghosts of many miserable years. 

many readers.  In the Preface to its next successor, Little Dorrit, 

I have still to repeat the same words.  Deeply sensible of the 

affection and confidence that have grown up between us, I add to 

this Preface, as I added to that, May we meet again! 

May 1857  

BOOK THE FIRST 

POVERTY 

Sun and Shadow 

Thirty years ago, Marseilles lay burning in the sun, one day. 

fervid sky, and been stared at in return, until a staring habit had 

become universal there.  Strangers were stared out of countenance 

by staring white houses, staring white walls, staring white 

streets, staring tracts of arid road, staring hills from which 

verdure was burnt away.  The only things to be seen not fixedly 

grapes.  These did occasionally wink a little, as the hot air 

barely moved their faint leaves. 

pure sea would not pass; but it lay as quiet as the abominable 

pool, with which it never mixed.  Boats without awnings were too 

hot to touch; ships blistered at their moorings; the stones of the 

quays had not cooled, night or day, for months.  Hindoos, Russians, 

Chinese, Spaniards, Portuguese, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Genoese, 

blue to be looked at, and a sky of purple, set with one great 

flaming jewel of fire. 

of Italian coast, indeed, it was a little relieved by light clouds 

of mist, slowly rising from the evaporation of the sea, but it 

softened nowhere else.  Far away the staring roads, deep in dust, 

interminable plain.  Far away the dusty vines overhanging wayside 

cottages, and the monotonous wayside avenues of parched trees 

the horses with drowsy bells, in long files of carts, creeping 

they were awake, which rarely happened; so did the exhausted 

labourers in the fields.  Everything that lived or grew, was 

oppressed by the glare; except the lizard, passing swiftly over 

rough stone walls, and the cicala, chirping his dry hot chirp, like 

a rattle.  The very dust was scorched brown, and something quivered 

in the atmosphere as if the air itself were panting. 

dozing, spitting, and begging--was to plunge into a fiery river, 

and swim for life to the nearest strip of shade.  So, with people 

lounging and lying wherever shade was, with but little hum of 

church bells and rattling of vicious drums, Marseilles, a fact to 

be strongly smelt and tasted, lay broiling in the sun one day. 

blinked at it, and left it to such refuse of reflected light as it 

could find for itself, were two men.  Besides the two men, a 

notched and disfigured bench, immovable from the wall, with a 

draught-board rudely hacked upon it with a knife, a set of 

two mats, and two or three wine bottles.  That was all the chamber 

seen vermin, the two men. 

always inspected from the gloomy staircase on which the grating 

gave.  There was a broad strong ledge of stone to this grating 

where 

the bottom of it was let into the masonry, three or four feet above 

elbow; and so he held on negligently, for his greater ease. 

imprisoned light, the imprisoned damps, the imprisoned men, were 

all deteriorated by confinement.  As the captive men were faded and 

haggard, so the iron was rusty, the stone was slimy, the wood was 

rotten, the air was faint, the light was dim.  Like a well, like a 

of the spice islands of the Indian ocean. 

Brigand of a Sun that never shines in here!' 

of a wild beast in similar expectation.  But his eyes, too close 

together, were not so nobly set in his head as those of the king of 

change; they glittered, and they opened and shut.  So far, and 

pair.  He had a hook nose, handsome after its kind, but too high 

quantity of dry hair, of no definable colour, in its shaggy state, 

but shot with red.  The hand with which he held the grating (seamed 

grime. 

brown coat. 

I will.  It's all the same.' 

with his back against the wall opposite to the grating. 

little pause, he had looked round the prison-room, as if for 

certain information. 

I am.  See here!  Marseilles harbour;' on his knees on the 

pavement, mapping it all out with a swarthy forefinger; 'Toulon 

(where the galleys are), Spain over there, Algiers over there.  

Creeping away to the left here, Nice.  Round by the Cornice to 

Genoa.  Genoa Mole and Harbour.  Quarantine Ground.  City there; 

hey!  there's no room for Naples;' he had got to the wall by this 

time; 'but it's all one; it's in there!' 

lively look for a prison.  A sunburnt, quick, lithe, little man, 

lighting up his grotesque brown face, intensely black hair 

clustering about his brown throat, a ragged red shirt open at his 

red cap, a red sash round his waist, and a knife in it. 

Civita Vecchia, Leghorn, Porto Fino, Genoa, Cornice, Off Nice 

jailer and his keys is where I put this thumb; and here at my wrist 

they keep the national razor in its case--the guillotine locked 

up.' 

throat. 

prattle of a sweet little voice mingled with the noise they made; 

and the prison-keeper appeared carrying his daughter, three or four 

years old, and a basket. 

see, going round with me to have a peep at her father's birds.  

Fie, then!  Look at the birds, my pretty, look at the birds.' 

the grate, especially at the little bird, whose activity he seemed 

to mistrust.  'I have brought your bread, Signor John Baptist,' 

said he (they all spoke in French, but the little man was an 

Italian); 'and if I might recommend you not to game--' 

teeth as he smiled. 

look of no particular liking at the other man, 'and you lose.  It's 

he gets sausage of Lyons, veal in savoury jelly, white bread, 

strachino cheese, and good wine by it.  Look at the birds, my 

pretty!' 

John Baptist rose and moved towards it, as if it had a good 

attraction for him.  The other bird remained as before, except for 

an impatient glance at the basket. 

ledge of the grate, 'she shall feed the birds.  This big loaf is 

the cage.  So, there's a tame bird to kiss the little hand!  This 

savoury jelly is for Monsieur Rigaud.  Again--these three white 

bird!' 

Smooth, well-shaped hand, with evident dread--more than once 

drawing back her own and looking at the man with her fair brow 

roughened into an expression half of fright and half of anger.  

Whereas she had put the lump of coarse bread into the swart, 

scaled, knotted hands of John Baptist (who had scarcely as much 

for Monsieur Rigaud), with ready confidence; and, when he kissed 

her hand, had herself passed it caressingly over his face.  

him anything; and, so soon as he had all his viands about him in 

an appetite. 

was more remarkable than prepossessing.  His moustache went up 

under his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache, in a 

very sinister and cruel manner. 

of your society at an hour after mid-day, to-day.' 

mouth. 

contentedly, to munch his bread. 

fingers, as if he were threatening to tear him to pieces.  'My 

friend, how is it possible for me to tell how long you are to lie 

here?  What do I know, John Baptist Cavalletto?  Death of my life!  

a hurry to be tried.' 

but Monsieur Rigaud had already resumed his meal, though not with 

quite so quick an appetite as before. 

child in his arms, and dictating the words with a kiss. 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine! 

     Who passes by this road so late? 

          Always gay!' 

and in good time and tune, though a little hoarsely: 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine! 

     Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower, 

          Always gay!' 

prison-keeper had to stop at last for his little daughter to hear 

Then the child's head disappeared, and the prison-keeper's head 

disappeared, but the little voice prolonged the strain until the 

door clashed. 

who was thoroughly accustomed to pavements; and placing three hunks 

were a sort of game. 

his mouth water; Monsieur Rigaud soon dispatched them, in spite of 

clean as he could, and to wipe them on his vine leaves.  Then, as 

he paused in his drink to contemplate his fellow-prisoner, his 

moustache went up, and his nose came down. 

Baptist, holding up his knife. 

'How sauce?' 

so--like a fried fish.  Or so--like Lyons sausage,' said John 

soberly chewing what he had in his mouth. 

this.' 

Signor Cavalletto, jumping to his feet, received the bottle 

lips. 

with it. 

language, and with the quick conciliatory manner of his own 

countrymen. 

stock into a breast-pocket, and stretched himself out at full 

length upon the bench.  Cavalletto sat down on the pavement, 

There seemed to be some uncomfortable attraction of Monsieur 

pavement where the thumb had been in the plan.  They were so drawn 

in that direction, that the Italian more than once followed them to 

and back from the pavement in some surprise. 

long pause.  'Look at the light of day.  Day?  the light of 

yesterday week, the light of six months ago, the light of six years 

ago.  So slack and dead!' 

the staircase wall, through which the sky was never seen--nor 

anything else. 

from this funnel to which they had both involuntarily turned their 

eyes, 'you know me for a gentleman?' 

three days, at five this afternoon.' 

the mats, or rolled them up, or found the draughts, or collected 

the dominoes, or put my hand to any kind of work?' 

right forefinger which is the most expressive negative in the 

Italian language. 

was a gentleman?' 

head a most vehement toss.  The word being, according to its 

denial, a taunt, a compliment, a joke, and fifty other things, 

became in the present instance, with a significance beyond all 

power of written expression, our familiar English 'I believe you!' 

live, and a gentleman I'll die!  It's my intent to be a gentleman.  

It's my game.  Death of my soul, I play it out wherever I go!' 

air: 

trader, whose papers are wrong, and whom the police lay hold of 

frontier) at the disposition of other little people whose papers 

are wrong; and he instinctively recognises my position, even by 

however the game goes.' 

Again his moustache went up, and his nose came down. 

rather difficult of association with merriment. 

I shall not return here.  Either I shall go free, or I shall go to 

and showed more momentary discomfiture than might have been 

expected. 

gentleman.  I own no particular country.  My father was Swiss-- 

Canton de Vaud.  My mother was French by blood, English by birth.  

I myself was born in Belgium.  I am a citizen of the world.' 

folds of his cloak, together with his manner of disregarding his 

companion and addressing the opposite wall instead, seemed to 

intimate that he was rehearsing for the President, whose 

examination he was shortly to undergo, rather than troubling 

himself merely to enlighten so small a person as John Baptist 

Cavalletto. 

have lived here, and lived there, and lived like a gentleman 

everywhere.  I have been treated and respected as a gentleman 

intriguers--your men of the Exchange?' 

were a witness to his gentility that had often done him good 

service before. 

had been ill.  When your lawyers, your politicians, your 

a failing state of health.  I had lived in the house some four 

months when Monsieur Henri Barronneau had the misfortune to die;-- 

at any rate, not a rare misfortune, that.  It happens without any 

aid of mine, pretty often.' 

Monsieur Rigaud had the magnanimity to throw him another.  He 

lighted the second at the ashes of the first, and smoked on, 

looking sideways at his companion, who, preoccupied with his own 

case, hardly looked at him. 

thing) was beautiful.  I continued to live at the Cross of Gold.  

I married Madame Barronneau.  It is not for me to say whether there 

think me better suited to her than her former husband was.' 

mere swagger and challenge; but in this particular, as in many 

others, blustering assertion goes for proof, half over the world. 

prejudice me, I hope?' 

that little man briskly shook his head in the negative, and 

altro, altro--an infinite number of times. 

nothing in defence of pride, but I am proud.  It is also my 

character to govern.  I can't submit; I must govern.  

Unfortunately, the property of Madame Rigaud was settled upon 

herself.  Such was the insane act of her late husband.  More 

unfortunately still, she had relations.  When a wife's relations 

interpose against a husband who is a gentleman, who is proud, and 

who must govern, the consequences are inimical to peace.  There was 

yet another source of difference between us.  Madame Rigaud was 

us; and, propagated and exaggerated by the slanders of the 

relations of Madame Rigaud, to become notorious to the neighbours.  

have been seen to slap her face--nothing more.  I have a light 

in that manner, I have done it almost playfully.' 

woman seriously. 

of Madame Rigaud had put themselves forward openly, I should have 

known how to deal with them.  They knew that, and their 

machinations were conducted in secret; consequently, Madame Rigaud 

could not obtain it without collision--and I, too, a man whose 

character it is to govern!  One night, Madame Rigaud and myself 

were walking amicably--I may say like lovers--on a height 

overhanging the sea.  An evil star occasioned Madame Rigaud to 

advert to her relations; I reasoned with her on that subject, and 

remonstrated on the want of duty and devotion manifested in her 

allowing herself to be influenced by their jealous animosity 

towards her husband.  Madame Rigaud retorted; I retorted; Madame 

Rigaud grew warm; I grew warm, and provoked her.  I admit it.  

distance), tore my clothes, tore my hair, lacerated my hands, 

trampled and trod the dust, and finally leaped over, dashing 

herself to death upon the rocks below.  Such is the train of 

from Madame Rigaud a relinquishment of her rights; and, on her 

persistence in a refusal to make the concession I required, 

struggling with her--assassinating her!' 

them, with his back to the light. 

all that?' 

the wall. 

John Baptist polished his knife in silence. 

stood for 'Oh, by no means!' 

over his shoulder with an oath, 'let them do their worst!' 

bent his head to put his knife in his sash. 

walking to and fro, and necessarily crossed at every turn.  

Cavalletto continuing to go slowly to and fro at a grotesque kind 

these inclinings. 

sound of voices succeeded, and the tread of feet.  The door 

clashed, the voices and the feet came on, and the prison-keeper 

with his keys in his hands, 'have the goodness to come out.' 

'Why, unless you did,' returned the jailer, 'you might depart in so 

many pieces that it would be difficult to get you together again.  

There's a crowd, Monsieur Rigaud, and it doesn't love you.' 

the corner of the chamber.  'Now,' said he, as he opened it and 

appeared within, 'come out.' 

like the whiteness of Monsieur Rigaud's face as it was then.  

like that expression in every little line of which the frightened 

heart is seen to beat.  Both are conventionally compared with 

death; but the difference is the whole deep gulf between the 

struggle done, and the fight at its most desperate extremity. 

hat; threw the end of his cloak over his shoulder again; and walked 

any further notice of Signor Cavalletto.  As to that little man 

himself, his whole attention had become absorbed in getting near 

the door and looking out at it.  Precisely as a beast might 

approach the opened gate of his den and eye the freedom beyond, he 

passed those few moments in watching and peering, until the door 

was closed upon him. 

Rigaud in the midst of the party, put himself with consummate 

went jingling down the staircase.  The door clashed--the key 

turned--and a ray of unusual light, and a breath of unusual air, 

of smoke from the cigar. 

ape, or roused bear of the smaller species--the prisoner, now left 

departure.  As he yet stood clasping the grate with both hands, an 

uproar broke upon his hearing; yells, shrieks, oaths, threats, 

but a raging swell of sound distinctly heard. 

his anxiety to know more, the prisoner leaped nimbly down, ran 

died away.  How many better prisoners have worn their noble hearts 

out so; no man thinking of it; not even the beloved of their souls 

careering in the sunlight jauntily, and men cheering them on.  Even 

the said great personages dying in bed, making exemplary ends and 

sounding speeches; and polite history, more servile than their 

instruments, embalming them! 

compass of those walls for the exercise of his faculty of going to 

sleep when he would, lay down upon the bench, with his face turned 

lightness, in his good humour, in his short-lived passion, in his 

sleep, in his fits and starts, altogether a true son of the land 

that gave him birth. 

in a red, green, golden glory; the stars came out in the heavens, 

feebly imitate the goodness of a better order of beings; the long 

it shall give up its dead. 

Fellow Travellers 

howl to be heard.' 

Marseilles, we know what Marseilles is.  It sent the most 

insurrectionary tune into the world that was ever composed.  It 

couldn't exist without allonging and marshonging to something or 

other--victory or death, or blazes, or something.' 

Marseilles; and taking up a determined position by putting his 

hands in his pockets and rattling his money at it, apostrophised it 

with a short laugh. 

business, instead of shutting 'em up in quarantine!' 

'Out to-day!' repeated the first.  'It's almost an aggravation of 

been in for?' 

East, and as the East is the country of the plague--' 

the thing.  I came here as well as ever I was in my life; but to 

it--and I have got it.' 

smiling. 

observation you would think of making.  I have been waking up night 

after night, and saying, NOW I have got it, NOW it has developed 

case for their precautions.  Why, I'd as soon have a spit put 

lead the life I have been leading here.' 

cheerful feminine voice. 

nature) to be in that peculiar state of mind in which the last word 

say no more about it because it's over?' 

face which had been looking at homely things for five-and-fifty 

years or more, and shone with a bright reflection of them. 

goodness sake content yourself with Pet.' 

being close behind him, touched him on the shoulder, and Mr Meagles 

immediately forgave Marseilles from the bottom of his heart. 

free in natural ringlets.  A lovely girl, with a frank face, and 

wonderful eyes; so large, so soft, so bright, set to such 

dimpled and spoilt, and there was in Pet an air of timidity and 

dependence which was the best weakness in the world, and gave her 

been without. 

falling back a step himself, and handing his daughter a step 

man and man, you know, DID you ever hear of such damned nonsense as 

putting Pet in quarantine?' 

'Come!' said Mr Meagles, 'that's something to be sure.  I am 

obliged to you for that remark.  Now, Pet, my darling, you had 

better go along with Mother and get ready for the boat.  The 

officer of health, and a variety of humbugs in cocked hats, are 

coming off to let us out of this at last: and all we jail-birds are 

to breakfast together in something approaching to a Christian style 

again, before we take wing for our different destinations.  

Tattycoram, stick you close to your young mistress.' 

off in the train of Mrs Meagles and Pet.  They crossed the bare 

scorched terrace all three together, and disappeared through a 

staring white archway.  Mr Meagles's companion, a grave dark man of 

gone; until Mr Meagles tapped him on the arm. 

the morning.  Mr Meagles's companion resumed the conversation. 

wondered at the oddity of it.' 

you see, practical people.' 

and interesting conversations we have had together, walking up and 

down on these stones,' said the other, with a half smile breaking 

through the gravity of his dark face. 

took Pet to church at the Foundling--you have heard of the 

Found Children in Paris?' 

music--because, as practical people, it is the business of our 

(my usual name for Mrs Meagles) began to cry so, that it was 

it's through my loving her so much, that it ever came into my 

head."  "That ever what came into your head, Mother?"  "O dear, 

dear!" cried Mother, breaking out again, "when I saw all those 

Heaven, I thought, does any wretched mother ever come here, and 

look among those young faces, wondering which is the poor child she 

brought into this forlorn world, never through all its life to know 

was practical in Mother, and I told her so.  I said, "Mother, 

that's what I call practical in you, my dear."' 

I think you'll approve of.  Let us take one of those same little 

children to be a little maid to Pet.  We are practical people.  So 

if we should find her temper a little defective, or any of her ways 

account.  We shall know what an immense deduction must be made from 

no child-brother or sister, no individuality of home, no Glass 

Slipper, or Fairy Godmother.  And that's the way we came by 

Tattycoram.' 

Why, she was called in the Institution, Harriet Beadle--an 

and then into Tatty, because, as practical people, we thought even 

a playful name might be a new thing to her, and might have a 

Beadle, that I needn't say was wholly out of the question.  If 

there is anything that is not to be tolerated on any terms, 

anything that represents in coats, waistcoats, and big sticks our 

English holding on by nonsense after every one has found it out, it 

is a beadle.  You haven't seen a beadle lately?' 

no.' 

breast with great animation, 'don't you see a beadle, now, if you 

can help it.  Whenever I see a beadle in full fig, coming down a 

turn and run away, or I should hit him.  The name of Beadle being 

out of the question, and the originator of the Institution for 

turn to and fro, and, after standing for a moment at the wall 

glancing down at the sea, had resumed their walk, 'is your only 

child, I know, Mr Meagles.  May I ask you--in no impertinent 

that you have had other children?' 

other child.' 

eyes--exactly like Pet's--above the table, as she stood on tiptoe 

holding by it.' 

in the minds of Mrs Meagles and myself which perhaps you may--or 

perhaps you may not--understand.  Pet and her baby sister were so 

tell us that our dead child was a mere infant.  We have changed 

always with us.  As Pet has grown, that child has grown; as Pet has 

become more sensible and womanly, her sister has become more 

to convince me that if I was to pass into the other world to- 

by a daughter, just like Pet, as to persuade me that Pet herself is 

not a reality at my side.' 

'I understand you,' said the other, gently. 

in which we all have our equal share, but which is not often so 

on her character.  Then, her mother and I were not young when we 

though we have tried to adapt ourselves to her.  We have been 

advised more than once when she has been a little ailing, to change 

need to stick at a bank-desk now (though I have been poor enough in 

my time I assure you, or I should have married Mrs Meagles long 

Desert, and all the rest of it; and this is how Tattycoram will be 

a greater traveller in course of time than Captain Cook.' 

welcome.  And now, Mr Clennam, perhaps I may ask you whether you 

have yet come to a decision where to go next?' 

liable to be drifted where any current may set.' 

so--that you don't go straight to London,' said Mr Meagles, in the 

tone of a confidential adviser. 

none that I can put in action now.  Trained by main force; broken, 

not bent; heavily ironed with an object on which I was never 

of the world before I was of age, and exiled there until my 

father's death there, a year ago; always grinding in a mill I 

always hated; what is to be expected from me in middle life?  Will, 

sound the words.' 

mother.  I am the only child of parents who weighed, measured, and 

priced everything; for whom what could not be weighed, measured, 

and priced, had no existence.  Strict people as the phrase is, 

professors of a stern religion, their very religion was a gloomy 

sacrifice of tastes and sympathies that were never their own, 

offered up as a part of a bargain for the security of their 

possessions.  Austere faces, inexorable discipline, penance in this 

and the void in my cowed heart everywhere--this was my childhood, 

life.' 

picture offered to his imagination.  'That was a tough 

commencement.  But come!  You must now study, and profit by, all 

that lies beyond it, like a practical man.' 

your direction--' 

else.' 

smile.  'Enough of me.  Here is the boat.' 

hats landed and came up the steps, and all the impounded travellers 

congregated together.  There was then a mighty production of papers 

on the part of the cocked hats, and a calling over of names, and 

liberty to depart whithersoever they would. 

recovering their freedom, but flitted across the harbour in gay 

boats, and reassembled at a great hotel, whence the sun was 

ceilings, and resounding corridors tempered the intense heat.  

with a superb repast; and the quarantine quarters became bare 

wines, flowers from Genoa, snow from the mountain tops, and all the 

colours of the rainbow flashing in the mirrors. 

Meagles.  'One always begins to forgive a place as soon as it's 

left behind; I dare say a prisoner begins to relent towards his 

prison, after he is let out.' 

in groups.  Father and Mother Meagles sat with their daughter 

between them, the last three on one side of the table: on the 

hair and beard, of a swart and terrible, not to say genteelly 

and a handsome young Englishwoman, travelling quite alone, who had 

usual materials: travellers on business, and travellers for 

Turkey trades; a clerical English husband in a meek strait- 

waistcoat, on a wedding trip with his young wife; a majestic 

English mama and papa, of the patrician order, with a family of 

three growing-up daughters, who were keeping a journal for the 

of ultimately toning herself off into the married state. 

'Do you mean that a prisoner forgives his prison?' said she, slowly 

and with emphasis. 

language, 'it's being so easy to forgive?' 

accident acquired any knowledge whatever of the language of any 

country into which he travelled.  'Oh!' said he.  'Dear me!  But 

that's a pity, isn't it?' 

easy to forgive.' 

belief in many respects, for some years.  It is our natural 

progress, I have heard.' 

Meagles, cheerily. 

always hate that place and wish to burn it down, or raze it to the 

ground.  I know no more.' 

of his habits to address individuals of all nations in idiomatic 

English, with a perfect conviction that they were bound to 

agree with me, I think?' 

Meagles returned with much satisfaction, 'You are right.  My 

opinion.' 

company a speech.  It was short enough and sensible enough, 

considering that it was a speech at all, and hearty.  It merely 

chance, and had all preserved a good understanding together, and 

were now about to disperse, and were not likely ever to find 

farewell to one another, and give one another good-speed in a 

simultaneous glass of cool champagne all round the table?  It was 

ever. 

with the rest, and silently withdrew to a remote corner of the 

to watch the reflection of the water as it made a silver quivering 

positively, whether she avoided the rest, or was avoided. 

could hardly see the face, so still and scornful, set off by the 

arched dark eyebrows, and the folds of dark hair, without wondering 

what its expression would be if a change came over it.  That it 

could soften or relent, appeared next to impossible.  That it could 

deepen into anger or any extreme of defiance, and that it must 

change in that direction when it changed at all, would have been 

trimmed into no ceremony of expression.  Although not an open face, 

there was no pretence in it.  'I am self-contained and self- 

reliant; your opinion is nothing to me; I have no interest in you, 

it said plainly.  It said so in the proud eyes, in the lifted 

nostril, in the handsome but compressed and even cruel mouth.  

head would have shown an unsubduable nature. 

her family and Mr Clennam, who were now the only other occupants of 

the room), and was standing at her side. 

one to meet you here, Miss Wade?' 

for you?' 

tenderly, 'that you will feel quite deserted when we are all gone.' 

of course, that we are any company to you, or that we have been 

able to be so, or that we thought you wished it.' 

hand as it lay impassive on the sofa between them, 'will you not 

will be very glad.' 

Clennam.  'Anything short of speaking the language, I shall be 

delighted to undertake, I am sure.' 

and I prefer to go my own way in my own manner.' 

puzzled look.  'Well!  There's character in that, too.' 

I may not show my appreciation of it as others might.  A pleasant 

journey to you.  Good-bye!' 

put hers in it, and it lay there just as it had lain upon the 

couch. 

only waits to say it to Pet.  Good-bye!  We may never meet again.' 

was the composed reply; 'and what it is set to us to do to them, 

and what it is set to them to do to us, will all be done.' 

Pet's ear.  It implied that what was to be done was necessarily 

evil, and it caused her to say in a whisper, 'O Father!' and to 

shrink childishly, in her spoilt way, a little closer to him.  This 

was not lost on the speaker. 

Yet,' looking full upon her, 'you may be sure that there are men 

YOU, and who will do it.  Of a certainty they will do it.  They may 

be coming hundreds, thousands, of miles over the sea there; they 

may be close at hand now; they may be coming, for anything you know 

or anything you can do to prevent it, from the vilest sweepings of 

this very town.' 

on her beauty that gave it, though scarcely yet in its prime, a 

wasted look, she left the room. 

had secured for her own occupation.  When she had almost completed 

was, she heard an angry sound of muttering and sobbing.  A door 

just left; the maid with the curious name. 

an unsparing hand. 

whiles.  'Not caring what becomes of me!  Leaving me here hungry 

and thirsty and tired, to starve, for anything they care!  Beasts!  

Devils!  Wretches!' 

great scarlet blots.  'It's nothing to you what's the matter.  It 

don't signify to any one.' 

yonder; and both times you found me.  I am afraid of you.' 

whatever it is--I don't know what it is.  But I am ill-used, I am 

ill-used, I am ill-used!'  Here the sobs and the tears, and the 

surprise, went on together anew. 

It was wonderful to see the fury of the contest in the girl, and 

the bodily struggle she made as if she were rent by the Demons of 

old. 

that looks after her, as if I was old, and it's she that's always 

a fool of her, they spoil her.  She thinks of nothing but herself, 

the girl went on. 

you must not mind it.' 

won't bear it; I can't bear it; I shall die if I try to bear it!' 

the dissection and exposition of an analogous case. 

fulness of life, until by little and little her passionate 

exclamations trailed off into broken murmurs as if she were in 

pain.  By corresponding degrees she sank into a chair, then upon 

her knees, then upon the ground beside the bed, drawing the 

coverlet with her, half to hide her shamed head and wet hair in it, 

and half, as it seemed, to embrace it, rather than have nothing to 

take to her repentant breast. 

you.  Go away from me, and let me pray and cry myself better!' 

The day passed on; and again the wide stare stared itself out; and 

to act and react on one another, move all we restless travellers 

through the pilgrimage of life. 

CHAPTER 3 

It was a Sunday evening in London, gloomy, close, and stale.  

Maddening church bells of all degrees of dissonance, sharp and 

steeped the souls of the people who were condemned to look at them 

out of windows, in dire despondency.  In every thoroughfare, up 

almost every alley, and down almost every turning, some doleful 

bell was throbbing, jerking, tolling, as if the Plague were in the 

city and the dead-carts were going round.  Everything was bolted 

and barred that could by possibility furnish relief to an 

overworked people.  No pictures, no unfamiliar animals, no rare 

plants or flowers, no natural or artificial wonders of the ancient 

South Sea gods in the British Museum might have supposed themselves 

at home again.  Nothing to see but streets, streets, streets.  

Nothing to breathe but streets, streets, streets.  Nothing to 

make the best of it--or the worst, according to the probabilities. 

and morality, Mr Arthur Clennam, newly arrived from Marseilles by 

way of Dover, and by Dover coach the Blue-eyed Maid, sat in the 

window of a coffee-house on Ludgate Hill.  Ten thousand responsible 

composed, as if they were every one inhabited by the ten young men 

of the Calender's story, who blackened their faces and bemoaned 

crowded rooms on Saturday night, would be corrupt on Sunday 

morning; albeit my lord, their county member, was amazed that they 

close wells and pits of houses, where the inhabitants gasped for 

air, stretched far away towards every point of the compass.  

the place of a fine fresh river.  What secular want could the 

week, lay among these Arcadian objects, from the sweet sameness of 

which they had no escape between the cradle and the grave--what 

secular want could they possibly have upon their seventh day?  

Clearly they could want nothing but a stringent policeman. 

Mr Arthur Clennam sat in the window of the coffee-house on Ludgate 

many sick people it might be the death of in the course of the 

and more exasperating.  At the quarter, it went off into a 

voluble manner to Come to church, Come to church, Come to church!  

scanty, and slowly hammered out in low spirits, They WON'T come, 

they WON'T come, they WON'T come!  At the five minutes, it 

abandoned hope, and shook every house in the neighbourhood for 

of despair. 

stopped. 

I have hated this day!' 

hands before him, scared out of his senses by a horrible tract 

which commenced business with the poor child by asking him in its 

really, in a frock and drawers, was not in a condition to satisfy-- 

parenthesis in every other line with some such hiccupping reference 

his boyhood, when, like a military deserter, he was marched to 

chapel by a picquet of teachers three times a day, morally 

handcuffed to another boy; and when he would willingly have 

face and unrelenting of heart, would sit all day behind a Bible-- 

bound, like her own construction of it, in the hardest, barest, and 

the leaves--as if it, of all books!  were a fortification against 

him. 

see bed-room?' 

am going home.' 

gome.' 

inhabitants were ever conscious of them, how they must pity 

themselves for their old places of imprisonment.  Sometimes a face 

would appear behind the dingy glass of a window, and would fade 

away into the gloom as if it had seen enough of life and had 

vanished out of it.  Presently the rain began to fall in slanting 

under cover of the public passage opposite, and to look out 

wet umbrellas began to appear, draggled skirts, and mud.  What the 

say?  But it seemed to collect in a moment, as a crowd will, and in 

sprang up under his touch, one might have fancied them astonished 

dismal scene. 

out.  In the country, the rain would have developed a thousand 

fresh scents, and every drop would have had its bright association 

with some beautiful form of growth or life.  In the city, it 

stained, wretched addition to the gutters. 

the water's edge, through some of the crooked and descending 

the river and Cheapside.  Passing, now the mouldy hall of some 

obsolete Worshipful Company, now the illuminated windows of a 

Congregationless Church that seemed to be waiting for some 

adventurous Belzoni to dig it out and discover its history; passing 

silent warehouses and wharves, and here and there a narrow alley 

leading to the river, where a wretched little bill, 

FOUND DROWNED, was weeping on the wet wall; he came at last to the 

long, narrow, heavily-framed windows.  Many years ago, it had had 

it in its mind to slide down sideways; it had been propped up, 

however, and was leaning on some half-dozen gigantic crutches: 

which gymnasium for the neighbouring cats, weather-stained, smoke- 

to be no very sure reliance. 

seems never to have been extinguished since I came home twice a 

year from school, and dragged my box over this pavement.  Well, 

well, well!' 

work of festooned jack-towels and children's heads with water on 

with keen eyes. 

assist his keen eyes.  'Ah, Mr Arthur?' he said, without any 

emotion, 'you are come at last?  Step in.' 

you don't come up to your father in my opinion.  Nor yet your 

mother.' 

bedridden, and hasn't been out of it fifteen times in as many 

while he looked at the visitor.  The visitor offered his hand.  The 

old man took it coldly enough, and seemed to prefer his jaws, to 

which he returned as soon as he could. 

Sabbath, Arthur,' he said, shaking his head warily. 

I have stood between your father and mother for a number of years.  

I don't pretend to stand between your mother and you.' 

come home.  Please to wait here.  You won't find the room changed.' 

clerk or servant, and in fact had long been both.  There was 

lowered into the depths of its proper pocket by an old black 

ribbon, and had a tarnished copper key moored above it, to show 

where it was sunk.  His head was awry, and he had a one-sided, 

propped up in a similar manner. 

up the candle, and examined the room.  The old articles of 

dimmer for the fly and smoke plagues of London, were framed and 

glazed upon the walls.  There was the old cellaret with nothing in 

it, lined with lead, like a sort of coffin in compartments; there 

been many a time the sole contents, in days of punishment, when he 

had regarded it as the veritable entrance to that bourne to which 

the tract had found him galloping.  There was the large, hard- 

featured clock on the sideboard, which he used to see bending its 

figured brows upon him with a savage joy when he was behind-hand 

with his lessons, and which, when it was wound up once a week with 

an iron handle, used to sound as if it were growling in ferocious 

anticipation of the miseries into which it would bring him.  But 

here was the old man come back, saying, 'Arthur, I'll go before and 

light you.' 

floor of which had gradually so sunk and settled, that the fire- 

place was in a dell.  On a black bier-like sofa in this hollow, 

propped up behind with one great angular black bolster like the 

a widow's dress. 

remembrance.  To sit speechless himself in the midst of rigid 

This embrace concluded, he sat down on the opposite side of her 

little table.  There was a fire in the grate, as there had been 

mound of damped ashes on the top of the fire, and another little 

day for fifteen years.  There was a smell of black dye in the 

stuff of the widow's dress for fifteen months, and out of the bier- 

like sofa for fifteen years. 

heart upon its hollow vanities.' 

timid chill and reserve of his childhood. 

lost the use of my limbs.  I never leave my room.  I have not been 

over her shoulder. 

dimness behind. 

forward into what doubtful light there was, and kissed her hand 

once; then subsided again into the dimness. 

duties, and I am thankful for the privilege.  It is a great 

privilege.  But no more of business on this day.  It is a bad 

night, is it not?' 

the reach of all changing emotions. 

and her own now rested together. 

death, safely, mother.' 

that his watch should be sent straight to you.' 

"your mother."  A moment before, I thought him wandering in his 

mind, as he had been for many hours--I think he had no 

himself in his bed and try to open it.' 

open it?' 

be, for anything I knew, some memorandum there.  However, as I need 

not tell you, mother, there was nothing but the old silk watch- 

paper worked in beads, which you found (no doubt) in its place 

between the cases, where I found and left it.' 

this day,' and then added, 'Affery, it is nine o'clock.' 

room, and quickly returned with a tray on which was a dish of 

little rusks and a small precise pat of butter, cool, symmetrical, 

white, and plump.  The old man who had been standing by the door in 

stairs as he had looked at the son down-stairs, went out at the 

on which was the greater part of a bottle of port wine (which, to 

judge by his panting, he had brought from the cellar), a lemon, a 

the kettle, he filled a tumbler with a hot and odorous mixture, 

measured out and compounded with as much nicety as a physician's 

prescription.  Into this mixture Mrs Clennam dipped certain of the 

the rusks, which were to be eaten alone.  When the invalid had 

fiercely, wrathfully--praying that her enemies (she made them by 

her tone and manner expressly hers) might be put to the edge of the 

bones might be ground to dust, and that they might be utterly 

exterminated.  As she read on, years seemed to fall away from her 

son like the imaginings of a dream, and all the old dark horrors of 

his usual preparation for the sleep of an innocent child to 

overshadow him. 

the room.  Then the sick woman was ready for bed. 

touch me, for my hand is tender.'  He touched the worsted muffling 

brass there would have been no new barrier between them--and 

followed the old man and woman down-stairs. 

shadows of the dining-room, would he have some supper? 

partridge in the larder--her first this year; say the word and I'll 

cook it.' 

of her bottle of port, if you like.  I'll tell Jeremiah that you 

ordered me to bring it you.' 

be.  You've got half the property, haven't you?' 

' 

clever one!--and he gives it her when he has a mind to't, he does!' 

her.  My husband, Jeremiah Flintwinch, can conquer even your 

mother.  What can he be but a clever one to do that!' 

the other end of the room.  Though a tall, hard-favoured, sinewy 

without much fear of discovery, she collapsed before the little 

keen-eyed crab-like old man. 

find Master Arthur something or another to pick at?' 

'Very well, then,' said the old man; 'make his bed.  Stir 

yourself.'  His neck was so twisted that the knotted ends of his 

and energy, always contending with a second nature of habitual 

repression, gave his features a swollen and suffused look; and 

all, exactly as some timely hand had cut him down. 

mother,' said Jeremiah.  'Your having given up the business on your 

father's death--which she suspects, though we have left it to you 

to tell her--won't go off smoothly.' 

came for me to give up that.' 

fending off that, and getting crushed and pounded betwixt em; and 

I've done with such work.' 

than enough of such matters on a Sabbath night.  Affery, woman, 

have you found what you want yet?' 

Clennam helped her by carrying the load himself, wished the old man 

rest, by being the place of banishment for the worn-out furniture.  

chairs without any seats; a threadbare patternless carpet, a maimed 

table, a crippled wardrobe, a lean set of fire-irons like the 

skeleton of a set deceased, a washing-stand that looked as if it 

the dismal accommodation of lodgers who might prefer to impale 

themselves.  Arthur opened the long low window, and looked out upon 

his childish fancy in all directions, let it look where it would. 

at Affery Flintwinch making the bed. 

and proceeded to get a pillow into its case. 

case between her teeth. 

should I have thought of your marrying each other.' 

in its case. 

'That's what I mean.  When did you begin to think otherwise?' 

that he was still looking at her as if waiting for the rest of her 

reply, she gave it a great poke in the middle, and asked, 'How 

could I help myself?' 

and she could go about then.' 

'Well?' 

up their minds to it, what's left for me to do?  Nothing.' 

of a mind in it, how could it ever have been?  Jeremiah never 

courted me; t'ant likely that he would, after living in the house 

with me and ordering me about for as many years as he'd done.  He 

tell you something.  What do you think of the name of Flintwinch?" 

going to take it," he said.  "Take it?" I says.  "Jere-MI-ah?" Oh!  

he's a clever one!' 

quite concluded her story. 

'Well?' said Arthur again. 

why.  She's failing in health, and she'll want pretty constant 

attendance up in her room, and we shall have to be much with her, 

and there'll be nobody about now but ourselves when we're away from 

her, and altogether it will be more convenient.  She's of my 

opinion," he said, "so if you'll put your bonnet on next Monday 

morning at eight, we'll get it over."' Mrs Flintwinch tucked up the 

bed. 

says it.  Well!--Jeremiah then says to me, "As to banns, next 

Sunday being the third time of asking (for I've put 'em up a 

about it herself, and now she'll find you prepared, Affery." That 

same day she spoke to me, and she said, "So, Affery, I understand 

very welcome under the circumstances to me.  He is a sensible man, 

and a trustworthy man, and a persevering man, and a pious man."  

What could I say when it had come to that?  Why, if it had been--a 

said a word upon it, against them two clever ones.' 

'And so you may, Arthur.' 

dark corner?'  

about.  Have you forgot your old sweetheart?  Long and long ago, 

I'll be bound.' 

And if you like to have her, why you can.' 

Jeremiah on the stairs!'  She was gone in a moment.   

weaving, in that old workshop where the loom of his youth had 

stood, the last thread wanting to the pattern.  The airy folly of 

face of the pretty girl from whom he had parted with regret, had 

had an unusual interest for him, and a tender hold upon him, 

because of some resemblance, real or imagined, to this first face 

that had soared out of his gloomy life into the bright glories of 

was wanting in it to think about, so much that might have been 

better directed and happier to speculate upon--to make him a 

dreamer, after all. 

CHAPTER 4 

When Mrs Flintwinch dreamed, she usually dreamed, unlike the son of 

dream that night, and before she had left the son of her old 

mistress many hours.  In fact it was not at all like a dream; it 

was not on the same floor, for it was a room at the side of the 

diverging from the main staircase nearly opposite to Mrs Clennam's 

door.  It could scarcely be said to be within call, the walls, 

temperature.  At the head of the bed and within a foot of Mrs 

Clennam's hand.  Whenever this bell rang, up started Affery, and 

was in the sick room before she was awake. 

lord had not yet appeared.  It was her lord himself who became-- 

most philosophers--the subject of Mrs Flintwinch's dream. 

It seemed to her that she awoke after sleeping some hours, and 

found Jeremiah not yet abed.  That she looked at the candle she had 

left burning, and, measuring the time like King Alfred the Great, 

asleep for some considerable period.  That she arose thereupon, 

the staircase, much surprised, to look for Jeremiah. 

straight down it without any of those deviations peculiar to 

In one corner of the hall, behind the house-door, there was a 

used, a light was burning. 

asleep or in a fit, but he was calmly seated in a chair, awake, and 

in his usual health.  But what--hey?--Lord forgive us!--Mrs 

giddy. 

sat on one side of the small table, looking keenly at himself on 

waking Flintwinch had his full front face presented to his wife; 

the sleeping Flintwinch was in profile.  The waking Flintwinch was 

she might have distinguished between a tangible object and its 

reflection in a glass, Affery made out this difference with her 

head going round and round. 

been resolved by his impatience.  He looked about him for an 

would have run him through the body. 

have enforced silence on his companion by putting them down his 

'I forgot where I was.' 

nap.' 

'Where's your hat?  Where's your coat?  Where's the box?' 

carefulness in a shawl.  'Stop a minute.  Now give me the sleeve-- 

Mr Flintwinch had pulled him into his coat with vehement energy.  

'You promised me a second glass after I was rested.' 

port-wine bottle, and filled a wine-glass. 

in the Docks, with hours to spare.  'Her health.' 

under his arms pretty easily.  Jeremiah watched his manner of 

adjusting it, with jealous eyes; tried it with his hands, to be 

sure that he had a firm hold of it; bade him for his life be 

careful what he was about; and then stole out on tiptoe to open the 

door for him.  Affery, anticipating the last movement, was on the 

that, standing there, she could hear the door open, feel the night 

air, and see the stars outside. 

afraid of her husband, that being on the staircase, she had not the 

before he had fastened the door), but stood there staring.  

backward and he walking forward, they came into their own room.  

the throat, and shook her until she was black in the face. 

been dreaming of?  Wake up, wake up!  What's the matter?' 

eyes. 

below, and find you in your wrapper here, with the nightmare.  

expressive countenance, 'if you ever have a dream of this sort 

again, it'll be a sign of your being in want of physic.  And I'll 

give you such a dose, old woman--such a dose!' 

CHAPTER 5 

As the city clocks struck nine on Monday morning, Mrs Clennam was 

wheeled by Jeremiah Flintwinch of the cut-down aspect to her tall 

cabinet.  When she had unlocked and opened it, and had settled 

himself more effectually--and her son appeared. 

she had shown over-night when speaking of the weather. 

I know it and can bear it.' 

on a dumb church organ.  Her son thought so (it was an old thought 

with him), while he took his seat beside it. 

in it, by which any explorer could have been guided to the gloomy 

labyrinth of her thoughts. 

upon business?' 

your pleasure, ever since.' 

leave, I travelled a little for rest and relief.' 

his last words. 

'For rest and relief.' 

her lips to repeat the words to herself, as calling it to witness 

how little of either it afforded her. 

direction and management of the estate, there remained little 

had time to arrange matters to your satisfaction.' 

vouchers have all been examined and passed.  You can inspect them 

when you like, Arthur; now, if you please.' 

completed.  Shall I proceed then?' 

our dealings have been progressively on the decline.  We have never 

shown much confidence, or invited much; we have attached no people 

to us; the track we have kept is not the track of the time; and we 

have been left far behind.  I need not dwell on this to you, 

mother.  You know it necessarily.' 

instance of what I say.  In my father's earlier time, and in his 

uncle's time before him, it was a place of business--really a place 

incongruity here, out of date and out of purpose.  All our 

consignments have long been made to Rovinghams' the commission- 

merchants; and although, as a check upon them, and in the 

stewardship of my father's resources, your judgment and 

watchfulness have been actively exerted, still those qualities 

would have influenced my father's fortunes equally, if you had 

lived in any private dwelling: would they not?' 

'that a house serves no purpose, Arthur, in sheltering your infirm 

and afflicted--justly infirm and righteously afflicted--mother?' 

my sinfulness I merit bitter disappointment, and I accept it.' 

apprehensions that you would--' 

was surprised. 

myself to advise you; you will continue it, I see.  If I had any 

to conform myself, in heart and spirit, to your rules; I cannot say 

myself, or any one; but I have habitually submitted, and I only ask 

you to remember it.' 

of her mystical religion, veiled in gloom and darkness, with 

Lord, wither them, crush them; do Thou as I would do, and Thou 

shalt have my worship: this was the impious tower of stone she 

built up to scale Heaven. 

of matter!' 

mind, night and day, this long time.  It is far more difficult to 

say than what I have said.  That concerned myself; this concerns us 

all.' 

looking towards the fire, with the impenetrability of an old 

Egyptian sculpture. 

reserve with me yielded to you.  You were much the stronger, 

mother, and directed him.  As a child, I knew it as well as I know 

this, after twenty years?' 

against his will: 

suspect--' 

before; but with the frown fixed above them, as if the sculptor of 

ages. 

mind--remorse?  Whether you ever observed anything in his conduct 

hint at such a thing?' 

infer that your father was a prey to,' she returned, after a 

silence.  'You speak so mysteriously.' 

one, and made no reparation?' 

keep him further off, but gave him no reply. 

even in this confidence, to breathe it.  But I cannot shake it off. 

nothing to wear it out.  Remember, I was with my father.  Remember, 

I saw his face when he gave the watch into my keeping, and 

struggled to express that he sent it as a token you would 

understand, to you.  Remember, I saw him at the last with the 

read, but to which he could give no shape.  The more remote and 

cruel this vague suspicion that I have, the stronger the 

me.  For Heaven's sake, let us examine sacredly whether there is 

any wrong entrusted to us to set right.  No one can help towards 

it, mother, but you.  ' 

it, from time to time, a little on its wheels, and gave her the 

interposed her left arm, bent at the elbow with the back of her 

in a fixed silence. 

and I must speak of such things now, mother--some one may have been 

grievously deceived, injured, ruined.  You were the moving power of 

all this machinery before my birth; your stronger spirit has been 

years.  You can set these doubts at rest, I think, if you will 

really help me to discover the truth.  Will you, mother?' 

not more immovable in its two folds, than were her firm lips. 

house, or to any one belonging to it, that it is worth less to me 

my father's last hours with remorse, and that it is not honestly 

and justly mine.' 

There was a bell-rope hanging on the panelled wall, some two or 

foot, she drove her wheeled chair rapidly back to it and pulled it 

violently--still holding her arm up in its shield-like posture, as 

if he were striking at her, and she warding off the blow. 

the door.  'What!  You're hammer and tongs, already, you two?' he 

pretty sure of it.' 

as she went on, pointed at the object of her anger. 

his mother to become, with him, a spy upon his father's 

and asks to whom they shall be given up, as reparation and 

restitution!' 

being beyond her control that it was even lower than her usual 

tone.  She also spoke with great distinctness. 

of reparation, fresh from journeying and junketing in foreign 

because it is appointed that I shall so make reparation for my 

sins.  Reparation!  Is there none in this room?  Has there been 

none here this fifteen years?' 

heaven, posting up the entries to her credit, strictly keeping her 

set-off, and claiming her due.  She was only remarkable in this, 

for the force and emphasis with which she did it.  Thousands upon 

her son in a threatening way. 

'  In the days of old, Arthur, treated of in this commentary, there 

were pious men, beloved of the Lord, who would have cursed their 

God and man, and perish, down to the baby at the breast.  But I 

only tell you that if you ever renew that theme with me, I will 

darkened room to look upon me lying dead, my body should bleed, if 

I could make it, when you came near me.' 

some sort a religious proceeding, she handed back the book to the 

old man, and was silent. 

made a third) what is all this about?' 

was said to my mother only.' 

mother?  Well!  But your mother mentioned that you had been 

you be suspecting next?' 

about this.' 

see how we stand.  Have you told Mr Arthur that he mustn't lay 

offences at his father's door?  That he has no right to do it?  

That he has no ground to go upon?' 

hadn't told him so before, and you tell him so now.  Ay, ay!  

That's right!  You know I stood between you and his father so long, 

that it seems as if death had made no difference, and I was still 

upon.' 

himself, slowly wheeled his mistress back to her cabinet.  'Now,' 

things half done, and so should be wanted again when you come to 

the other half and get into one of your flights, has Arthur told 

you what he means to do about the business?' 

what she pleases.' 

the prime of his life, would infuse new youth and strength into it, 

old and faithful servant.  Jeremiah, the captain deserts the ship, 

but you and I will sink or float with it.' 

sudden look at the son, which seemed to say, 'I owe YOU no thanks 

for this; YOU have done nothing towards it!' and then told the 

Time for your oysters!' and with that change of subject, which 

involved no change of expression or manner, rang the bell. 

for having been supposed to be unacquainted with reparation, 

refused to eat her oysters when they were brought.  They looked 

tempting; eight in number, circularly set out on a white plate on 

she resisted all persuasions, and sent them down again--placing the 

act to her credit, no doubt, in her Eternal Day-Book. 

been in the dimly-lighted room last night.  Now that he had an 

opportunity of observing her, Arthur found that her diminutive 

figure, small features, and slight spare dress, gave her the 

appearance of being much younger than she was.  A woman, probably 

street for little more than half that age.  Not that her face was 

in it than naturally belonged to her utmost years; but she was so 

little and light, so noiseless and shy, and appeared so conscious 

of being out of place among the three hard elders, that she had all 

the manner and much of the appearance of a subdued child. 

hydraulic pressure, Mrs Clennam showed an interest in this 

dependent.  Even in the moment of her entrance, upon the violent 

ringing of the bell, when the mother shielded herself with that 

singular action from the son, Mrs Clennam's eyes had had some 

individual recognition in them, which seemed reserved for her.  As 

colour in black itself, so, even in the asperity of Mrs Clennam's 

demeanour towards all the rest of humanity and towards Little 

Dorrit, there was a fine gradation. 

or at so little--from eight to eight, Little Dorrit was to be 

between the two eights was a mystery. 

extraordinary repugnance to dining in company; would never do so, 

this bit of work to begin first, or that bit of work to finish 

first; and would, of a certainty, scheme and plan--not very 

the great anxiety of Little Dorrit's day was set at rest. 

away so scared if encountered on the stairs.  But it seemed to be 

a tiny form, a quick little pair of busy hands, and a shabby 

dress--it must needs have been very shabby to look at all so, being 

so neat--were Little Dorrit as she sat at work. 

Dorrit as a matter of course, she had nothing for it but to follow 

suit.  Similarly, if the two clever ones had agreed to murder 

Little Dorrit by candlelight, Mrs Affery, being required to hold 

the candle, would no doubt have done it. 

and preparing a baking-dish of beef and pudding for the dining- 

room, Mrs Affery made the communications above set forth; 

invariably putting her head in at the door again after she had 

taken it out, to enforce resistance to the two clever ones.  It 

the only son should be pitted against them. 

years upon years, seemed to have settled down into a gloomy 

ever been there, had long ago started away on lost sunbeams--got 

itself absorbed, perhaps, into flowers, butterflies, plumage of 

from the foundation to the roof; the ceilings were so fantastically 

clouded by smoke and dust, that old women might have told fortunes 

tumbled down the chimneys, and eddied about in little dusky 

whirlwinds when the doors were opened.  In what had once been a 

the frames; but even these were short of heads and legs, and one 

undertaker-like Cupid had swung round on its own axis and got 

upside down, and another had fallen off altogether.  The room 

Arthur Clennam's deceased father had occupied for business 

purposes, when he first remembered him, was so unaltered that he 

might have been imagined still to keep it invisibly, as his visible 

relict kept her room up-stairs; Jeremiah Flintwinch still going 

speechless on the wall, with the eyes intently looking at his son 

as they had looked when life departed from them, seemed to urge him 

awfully to the task he had attempted; but as to any yielding on the 

of setting his distrust at rest, he had abandoned hope a long time. 

book-keepers. 

with Mr Flintwinch, the new partner.  Mr Flintwinch informed him 

'And don't you lay offences at your father's door, Mr Arthur,' 

added Jeremiah, 'once for all, don't do it!  Now, we have done with 

the subject.' 

particular little office, as if to do honour to his accession to 

new dignity.  He resumed this occupation when he was replete with 

of his knife, and had drawn liberally on a barrel of small beer in 

the scullery.  Thus refreshed, he tucked up his shirt-sleeves and 

plainly saw that his father's picture, or his father's grave, would 

be as communicative with him as this old man. 

'You hadn't made Mr Arthur's bed when I was up there last.  Stir 

yourself.  Bustle.' 

unwilling to assist at another implacable consignment of his 

mother's enemies (perhaps himself among them) to mortal 

lodging at the coffee-house where he had left his luggage.  Mr 

Flintwinch taking kindly to the idea of getting rid of him, and his 

business hours were agreed upon, which his mother, Mr Flintwinch, 

and papers; and he left the home he had so lately found, with 

depressed heart. 

a walk, were from ten to six for about a fortnight.  Sometimes 

the occasion of his arrival.  His original curiosity augmented 

every day, as he watched for her, saw or did not see her, and 

fell into a habit of discussing with himself the possibility of her 

being in some way associated with it.  At last he resolved to watch 

Little Dorrit and know more of her story. 

CHAPTER 6 

Thirty years ago there stood, a few doors short of the church of 

the way going southward, the Marshalsea Prison.  It had stood there 

it is gone now, and the world is none the worse without it. 

houses standing back to back, so that there were no back rooms; 

environed by a narrow paved yard, hemmed in by high walls duly 

spiked at top.  Itself a close and confined prison for debtors, it 

contained within it a much closer and more confined jail for 

excise or customs who had incurred fines which they were unable to 

pay, were supposed to be incarcerated behind an iron-plated door 

closing up a second prison, consisting of a strong cell or two, and 

a blind alley some yard and a half wide, which formed the 

mysterious termination of the very limited skittle-ground in which 

the Marshalsea debtors bowled down their troubles. 

outgrown the strong cells and the blind alley.  In practice they 

the present day with other cells that are not at all strong, and 

arms), except at certain constitutional moments when somebody came 

from some Office, to go through some form of overlooking something 

which neither he nor anybody else knew anything about.  On these 

truly British occasions, the smugglers, if any, made a feint of 

walking into the strong cells and the blind alley, while this 

somebody pretended to do his something: and made a reality of 

the administration of most of the public affairs in our right 

little, tight little, island. 

when the sun shone on Marseilles and on the opening of this 

gentleman, who was going out again directly.  Necessarily, he was 

upon a debtor who was not.  He brought in a portmanteau with him, 

which he doubted its being worth while to unpack; he was so 

perfectly clear--like all the rest of them, the turnkey on the lock 

said--that he was going out again directly. 

style; with a mild voice, curling hair, and irresolute hands--rings 

trembling lip a hundred times in the first half-hour of his 

wife. 

'em was and some of 'em wasn't.  In general, more no than yes.  

'What like is she, you see?' he philosophically asked: 'that's what 

it hinges on.' 

am at a loss to think how she will ever make her way here, if she 

walks.' 

hope she will.  She may not think of it.' 

the top of his well-worn wooden stool, as he might have offered 

she'll get her brother, or her sister, to come along with her.' 

'She has no brother or sister.' 

the refusal of all his suggestions. 

the children.' 

you up like a corner pin, we've a reg'lar playground o' children 

here.  Children!  Why we swarm with 'em.  How many a you got?' 

again, and turning into the prison. 

observed to himself, 'which makes three on you.  And your wife 

another, I'll lay a crown.  Which makes four on you.  And another 

coming, I'll lay half-a-crown.  Which'll make five on you.  And 

I'll go another seven and sixpence to name which is the 

helplessest, the unborn baby or you!' 

little boy of three years old, and a little girl of two, and he 

stood entirely corroborated. 

a week or two. 

the carrier, this afternoon.' 

turnkey. 

for a few weeks.' 

when he was gone. 

which he knew no more than that he had invested money in it; by 

this direction, and of mysterious spiriting away of property in 

that; and as nobody on the face of the earth could be more 

than the debtor himself, nothing comprehensible could be made of 

his case.  To question him in detail, and endeavour to reconcile 

his answers; to closet him with accountants and sharp 

was only to put the case out at compound interest and 

and the sharpest practitioners gave him up as a hopeless job. 

take him by the shoulders and shove him out.' 

turnkey one forenoon to tell him, breathless and pale, that his 

wife was ill. 

lodging only to-morrow.  What am I to do!  Oh, good heaven, what am 

I to do!' 

'but come along with me.' 

constantly crying under his breath, What was he to do!  while his 

irresolute fingers bedabbled the tears upon his face--up one of the 

common staircases in the prison to a door on the garret story.  

Upon which door the turnkey knocked with the handle of his key. 

seated at a rickety table, playing at all-fours, smoking pipes, and 

drinking brandy. 

'Doctor,' said the turnkey, 'here's a gentleman's wife in want of 

you without a minute's loss of time!' 

puffiness, red-facedness, all-fours, tobacco, dirt, and brandy; the 

all-fourey, tobaccoer, dirtier, and brandier.  The doctor was 

amazingly shabby, in a torn and darned rough-weather sea-jacket, 

time the experienced surgeon carried by a passenger ship), the 

and no visible linen.  'Childbed?' said the doctor.  'I'm the boy!' 

With that the doctor took a comb from the chimney-piece and stuck 

his chin in the frowsy wrapper round his neck, and became a ghastly 

medical scarecrow. 

in the prison had got hold of the news, and were in the yard.  Some 

of them had already taken possession of the two children, and were 

hospitably carrying them off; others were offering loans of little 

comforts from their own scanty store; others were sympathising with 

the greatest volubility.  The gentlemen prisoners, feeling 

themselves at a disadvantage, had for the most part retired, not to 

them now complimented the doctor with whistles as he passed below, 

while others, with several stories between them, interchanged 

sarcastic references to the prevalent excitement. 

the high walls.  In the debtor's confined chamber, Mrs Bangham, 

charwoman and messenger, who was not a prisoner (though she had 

been once), but was the popular medium of communication with the 

outer world, had volunteered her services as fly-catcher and 

general attendant.  The walls and ceiling were blackened with 

flies.  Mrs Bangham, expert in sudden device, with one hand fanned 

the patient with a cabbage leaf, and with the other set traps of 

vinegar and sugar in gallipots; at the same time enunciating 

the occasion. 

'But p'raps they'll take your mind off of it, and do you good.  

now, my dear?  No better?  No, my dear, it ain't to be expected; 

happen here, my dear, not for I couldn't name the time when.  And 

there ain't your dear gentleman along with Dr Haggage!  And now 

indeed we ARE complete, I THINK!' 

with a sense of absolute completeness, but as he presently 

Mrs Bangham took possession of the poor helpless pair, as everybody 

else and anybody else had always done, the means at hand were as 

keep Mrs Bangham up to the mark.  As thus: 

minutes, 'go outside and fetch a little brandy, or we shall have 

you giving in.' 

attendance on this lady, and don't choose to allow any discussion 

on your part.  Go outside and fetch a little brandy, or I foresee 

that you'll break down.' 

you look but poorly, sir.' 

you, but you are mine.  Never you mind ME, if you please.  What you 

have got to do, is, to do as you are told, and to go and get what 

I bid you.' 

potion, took his own.  He repeated the treatment every hour, being 

very determined with Mrs Bangham.  Three or four hours passed; the 

flies fell into the traps by hundreds; and at length one little 

lesser deaths. 

well-formed.  Halloa, Mrs Bangham!  You're looking queer!  You be 

off, ma'am, this minute, and fetch a little more brandy, or we 

shall have you in hysterics.' 

irresolute hands, like leaves from a wintry tree.  Not one was left 

upon them that night, when he put something that chinked into the 

doctor's greasy palm.  In the meantime Mrs Bangham had been out on 

an errand to a neighbouring establishment decorated with three 

golden balls, where she was very well known. 

composed.  Doing charmingly.' 

'though I little thought once, that--' 

doctor.  'Bah, bah, sir, what does it signify?  A little more 

creditors and bring a man's heart into his mouth.  Nobody comes 

here to ask if a man's at home, and to say he'll stand on the door 

this place.  It's freedom, sir, it's freedom!  I have had to-day's 

tell you this: I don't know that I have ever pursued it under such 

quiet circumstances as here this day.  Elsewhere, people are 

restless, worried, hurried about, anxious respecting one thing, 

have done all that--we know the worst of it; we have got to the 

bottom, we can't fall, and what have we found?  Peace.  That's the 

word for it.  Peace.'  With this profession of faith, the doctor, 

who was an old jail-bird, and was more sodden than usual, and had 

the additional and unusual stimulus of money in his pocket, 

facedness, all-fours, tobacco, dirt, and brandy. 

If he had been a man with strength of purpose to face those 

him, or broken his heart; but being what he was, he languidly 

slipped into this smooth descent, and never more took one step 

upward. 

make plain, through having them returned upon his hands by a dozen 

agents in succession who could make neither beginning, middle, nor 

end of them or him, he found his miserable place of refuge a 

quieter refuge than it had been before.  He had unpacked the 

about the yard, and everybody knew the baby, and claimed a kind of 

proprietorship in her. 

day.  'You'll be the oldest inhabitant soon.  The Marshalsea 

laudatory terms to new-comers, when his back was turned.  'You took 

notice of him,' he would say, 'that went out of the lodge just 

now?' 

piano for him.  Played it, I understand, like one o'clock-- 

beautiful!  As to languages--speaks anything.  We've had a 

Frenchman here in his time, and it's my opinion he knowed more 

French than the Frenchman did.  We've had an Italian here in his 

characters behind other locks, I don't say you won't; but if you 

come to the Marshalsea.' 

did--went upon a visit to a poor friend and old nurse in the 

fortnight afterwards; and an attorney's clerk, who was going 

grey); and the turnkey noticed that his hands went often to his 

but in black. 

Mrs Bangham, and to execute commissions in a knowing manner, and to 

be of the prison prisonous, of the streets streety. 

and his legs got weak, and he was short of breath.  The well-worn 

wooden stool was 'beyond him,' he complained.  He sat in an arm- 

chair with a cushion, and sometimes wheezed so, for minutes 

by these fits, the debtor often turned it for him. 

'You and me,' said the turnkey, one snowy winter's night when the 

lodge, with a bright fire in it, was pretty full of company, 'is 

the oldest inhabitants.  I wasn't here myself above seven year 

and all, you'll be the Father of the Marshalsea.' 

from generation to generation--a Marshalsea generation might be 

the soft manner and the white hair, was the Father of the 

Marshalsea. 

he was vain, the fleeting generations of debtors said. 

exaction of this ceremony.  The wits would perform the office of 

bowed-down beneficence.  They were welcome to the Marshalsea, he 

would tell them.  Yes, he was the Father of the place.  So the 

world was kind enough to call him; and so he was, if more than 

small at first, but there was very good company there--among a 

mixture--necessarily a mixture--and very good air. 

then at long intervals even half-a-sovereign, for the Father of the 

He received the gifts as tributes, from admirers, to a public 

character.  Sometimes these correspondents assumed facetious names, 

as the Brick, Bellows, Old Gooseberry, Wideawake, Snooks, Mops, 

and was always a little hurt by it. 

In the fulness of time, this correspondence showing signs of 

wearing out, and seeming to require an effort on the part of the 

many of them might not be equal, he established the custom of 

paper, and would come back again calling 'Hi!' 

By this time the collegian would be up with him, and he would 

'I forgot to leave this,' the collegian would usually return, 'for 

the Father of the Marshalsea.' 

But, to the last, the irresolute hand of old would remain in the 

pocket into which he had slipped the money during two or three 

turns about the yard, lest the transaction should be too 

conspicuous to the general body of collegians. 

rather large party of collegians, who happened to be going out, 

who had been taken in execution for a small sum a week before, had 

'settled' in the course of that afternoon, and was going out too.  

with him, and a bundle; and was in high spirits. 

Plasterer called out, 'I say!--sir!' and came back to him. 

halfpence in his hand, 'but it's well meant.' 

copper yet.  His children often had, and with his perfect 

white lime, bestowing halfpence on him, front to front, was new. 

be seen; and the action was so delicate, and the man was so 

could make him no less acknowledgment than, 'I know you meant it 

kindly.  Say no more.' 

more by you than the rest of 'em do, I fancy.' 

you again?' 

'If I live a week you shall.' 

Symposium in the Snuggery that night, marvelled what had happened 

to their Father; he walked so late in the shadows of the yard, and 

seemed so downcast. 

CHAPTER 7 

Haggage's brandy, was handed down among the generations of 

collegians, like the tradition of their common parent.  In the 

and prosaic sense; it being almost a part of the entrance footing 

college. 

'I ought to be her godfather.' 

when the turnkey, being relieved, was off the lock; and that the 

he came back, 'like a good 'un.' 

stood it by the high fender of the lodge fire-place; liked to have 

her company when he was on the lock; and used to bribe her with 

lodge-steps of her own accord at all hours of the day.  When she 

fell asleep in the little armchair by the high fender, the turnkey 

it dressing and undressing a doll which soon came to be unlike 

dolls on the other side of the lock, and to bear a horrible family 

resemblance to Mrs Bangham--he would contemplate her from the top 

the collegians would express an opinion that the turnkey, who was 

a bachelor, had been cut out by nature for a family man.  But the 

see other people's children there.' 

At what period of her early life the little creature began to 

perceive that it was not the habit of all the world to live locked 

line.  A pitiful and plaintive look, with which she had begun to 

of this discovery. 

something in it for only him that was like protection, this Child 

or wandered about the prison-yard, for the first eight years of her 

life.  With a pitiful and plaintive look for her wayward sister; 

inner gateway 'Home.' 

fender in the lodge, looking up at the sky through the barred 

grating, too. 

'Thinking of the fields,' the turnkey said once, after watching 

her, 'ain't you?' 

flourish of his key.  'Just about there.' 

particular request and instruction. 

daisies, and there's'--the turnkey hesitated, being short of floral 

nomenclature--'there's dandelions, and all manner of games.' 

within.  'O are you quite sure and certain, Bob?' 

found his little friend getting him into a political, social, or 

excursions that these two curious companions made together.  They 

used to issue from the lodge on alternate Sunday afternoons with 

great gravity, bound for some meadows or green lanes that had been 

there she picked grass and flowers to bring home, while he smoked 

other delicacies; and then they would come back hand in hand, 

unless she was more than usually tired, and had fallen asleep on 

his shoulder. 

a question which cost him so much mental labour, that it remained 

undetermined on the day of his death.  He decided to will and 

bequeath his little property of savings to his godchild, and the 

point arose how could it be so 'tied up' as that only she should 

ease with which it got loose, that through a series of years he 

and other professional gentleman who passed in and out. 

professional gentleman's waistcoat; 'supposing a man wanted to 

leave his property to a young female, and wanted to tie it up so 

that nobody else should ever be able to make a grab at it; how 

would you tie up that property?' 

complacently answer. 

a grab at that property when she came into it--how about that?' 

claim on it than you,' would be the professional answer. 

and they came over her.  Where's your law for tying it up then?' 

thought about it all his life, and died intestate after all. 

sixteen.  The first half of that space of her life was only just 

widower.  From that time the protection that her wondering eyes had 

deserting her livelier place by the high fender, and quietly 

of childhood into the care-laden world. 

her sister, in her brother, in the jail; how much, or how little of 

the wretched truth it pleased God to make visible to her; lies 

be something which was not what the rest were, and to be that 

something, different and laborious, for the sake of the rest.  

priest, and not of the heart impelled by love and self-devotion to 

the lowliest work in the lowliest way of life! 

daily tone and habits of the common members of the free community 

who are not shut up in prisons; born and bred in a social 

condition, false even with a reference to the falsest condition 

their own peculiar stain, their own unwholesome and unnatural 

taste; the Child of the Marshalsea began her womanly life. 

(not unkindly meant, but deeply felt) of her youth and little 

figure, what humble consciousness of her own babyhood and want of 

much weariness and hopelessness, and how many secret tears; she 

time came.  She took the place of eldest of the three, in all 

in her own heart, its anxieties and shames. 

down in words and figures how much the bare necessaries that they 

wanted would cost, and how much less they had to buy them with.  

by desultory starts, during three or four years.  There was no 

instruction for any of them at home; but she knew well--no one 

could be no father to his own children. 

contriving.  Once, among the heterogeneous crowd of inmates there 

appeared a dancing-master.  Her sister had a great desire to learn 

thirteen years old, the Child of the Marshalsea presented herself 

to the dancing-master, with a little bag in her hand, and preferred 

her humble petition. 

surveying the small figure and uplifted face. 

of the little bag; 'but if, while you stay here, you could be so 

kind as to teach my sister cheap--' 

to set to his creditors, lead off, turn the Commissioners, and 

progress was made.  Indeed the dancing-master was so proud of it, 

and so wishful to display it before he left to a few select friends 

among the collegians, that at six o'clock on a certain fine 

so much ground was covered, and the steps were so conscientiously 

was thoroughly blown. 

child to try again.  She watched and waited months for a 

seamstress.  In the fulness of time a milliner came in, and to her 

she repaired on her own behalf. 

door of the milliner, whom she found in tears and in bed: 'but I 

was born here.' 

milliner sat up in bed, drying her eyes, and said, just as the 

dancing-master had said: 

shaking her head. 

you?  It has not done me much good.' 

comes here,' she returned in all simplicity; 'but I want to learn 

just the same.' 

hers, which came so often in her way.  The milliner--who was not 

pupils, and made her a cunning work-woman in course of time. 

Father of the Marshalsea gradually developed a new flower of 

more dependent he became on the contributions of his changing 

hour ago, he would wipe away the tears that streamed over his 

bread.  So, over and above other daily cares, the Child of the 

fiction that they were all idle beggars together. 

group--ruined by his brother, the Father of the Marshalsea, and 

an inevitable certainty--on whom her protection devolved.  

announced, and never took to that luxury any more.  He had been a 

fell with his brother, resorted for support to playing a clarionet 

as dirty as himself in a small Theatre Orchestra.  It was the 

there a long time when she took her poor station in it; and he 

accepted the task of serving as her escort and guardian, just as he 

would have accepted an illness, a legacy, a feast, starvation-- 

anything but soap. 

necessary for the Child of the Marshalsea to go through an 

elaborate form with the Father. 

here a good deal in the day, but she is going to live outside with 

uncle.' 

to, and looked after.' 

him and look after him, Amy, a great deal more than ever your 

that Amy herself went out by the day to work. 

She was not born here as I was, you know, father.' 

often should, too.  So, you and Fanny and your uncle, my dear, 

me.' 

Bangham in executing commissions, and out of the slang interchange 

with very doubtful companions consequent upon both; was her hardest 

task.  At eighteen he would have dragged on from hand to mouth, 

from hour to hour, from penny to penny, until eighty.  Nobody got 

she could find no patron for him but her old friend and godfather. 

was Edward, and Ted had been transformed into Tip, within the 

walls. 

fulfilment, as to sound Tip in reference to the expediency of 

running away and going to serve his country.  But Tip had thanked 

him, and said he didn't seem to care for his country. 

him.  Suppose I try and get him into the law?' 

in the office of an attorney in a great National Palladium called 

the Palace Court; at that time one of a considerable list of 

places know them no more. 

in his pockets, and incidentally observed to his sister that he was 

not going back again. 

rank of her charges. 

and Mrs Bangham succession, his small second mother, aided by her 

the hop trade, into the law again, into an auctioneers, into a 

brewery, into a stockbroker's, into the law again, into a coach 

office, into a waggon office, into the law again, into a general 

dealer's, into a distillery, into the law again, into a wool house, 

into a dry goods house, into the Billingsgate trade, into the 

into, he came out of tired, announcing that he had cut it.  

Wherever he went, this foredoomed Tip appeared to take the prison 

prowl about within their narrow limits in the old slip-shod, 

purposeless, down-at-heel way; until the real immovable Marshalsea 

Nevertheless, the brave little creature did so fix her heart on her 

brother's rescue, that while he was ringing out these doleful 

changes, she pinched and scraped enough together to ship him for 

Canada.  When he was tired of nothing to do, and disposed in its 

the hope of his being put in a straight course at last. 

when you have made your fortune.' 

and much more tired than ever. 

he found a pursuit for himself, and announced it. 

more, old girl.' 

me a berth.' 

him once.  A whisper passed among the elder collegians that he had 

articles for massive silver, and paying for them with the greatest 

liberality in bank notes; but it never reached her ears.  One 

evening she was alone at work--standing up at the window, to save 

walked in. 

questions.  He saw how anxious and timid she was, and appeared 

sorry. 

well, I am less surprised and sorry than I might have been, Tip.' 

in what I may call a new way.  I am off the volunteer list 

altogether.  I am in now, as one of the regulars.' 

do?  I am in for forty pound odd.' 

She cried, with her clasped hands lifted above her head, that it 

would kill their father if he ever knew it; and fell down at Tip's 

graceless feet. 

bring him to understand that the Father of the Marshalsea would be 

beside himself if he knew the truth.  The thing was 

yielded to it in that light only, when he submitted to her 

want of precedent for his return; it was accounted for to the 

father in the usual way; and the collegians, with a better 

one miserable yard and block of houses as her birthplace and home, 

she passed to and fro in it shrinkingly now, with a womanly 

consciousness that she was pointed out to every one.  Since she had 

begun to work beyond the walls, she had found it necessary to 

conceal where she lived, and to come and go as secretly as she 

with this concealment, and her light step and her little figure 

shunned the thronged streets while they passed along them. 

things else.  Innocent, in the mist through which she saw her 

father, and the prison, and the turbid living river that flowed 

through it and flowed on. 

This was the life, and this the history, of Little Dorrit; now 

going home upon a dull September evening, observed at a distance by 

Dorrit; turning at the end of London Bridge, recrossing it, going 

suddenly once more, and flitting in at the open outer gate and 

little court-yard of the Marshalsea. 

CHAPTER 8 

what place that was.  He suffered a few people to pass him in whose 

stood pausing in the street, when an old man came up and turned 

into the courtyard. 

manner, which made the bustling London thoroughfares no very safe 

coat, once blue, reaching to his ankles and buttoned to his chin, 

red cloth with which that phantom had been stiffened in its 

clumsy and large, that he shuffled like an elephant; though how 

case, containing some wind instrument; in the same hand he had a 

out pinch, as Arthur Clennam looked at him. 

touching him on the shoulder.  The old man stopped and looked 

round, with the expression in his weak grey eyes of one whose 

thoughts had been far off, and who was a little dull of hearing 

also. 

place?' 

on its road, and pointing at the place without looking at it.  

'This is the Marshalsea, sir.' 

necessary to insist upon that designation, 'the debtors' prison.' 

significance of his emphasis, 'but it is not every one who can go 

out.' 

in his hand, and turning upon his interrogator as if such questions 

hurt him.  'I am.' 

a good object.  Do you know the name of Dorrit here?' 

dozen words.  I was wholly unprepared for your announcement, and 

hope that assurance is my sufficient apology for having taken the 

liberty of addressing you.  I have recently come home to England 

the city--a young woman working at her needle, whom I have only 

heard addressed or spoken of as Little Dorrit.  I have felt 

sincerely interested in her, and have had a great desire to know 

up, pass in at that door.' 

that replied to him.  'Not a sailor?  I judged from your sunburnt 

face that you might be.  Are you in earnest, sir?' 

am, in plain earnest.' 

a weak and quavering voice.  'I am merely passing on, like the 

shadow over the sun-dial.  It would be worth no man's while to 

yield any satisfaction.  The young woman whom you saw go in here is 

You say you have seen her at your mother's (I know your mother 

befriends her), you have felt an interest in her, and you wish to 

know what she does here.  Come and see.' 

facing round again, 'has been here many years; and much that 

reasons that I needn't enter upon now.  Be so good as to say 

nothing that goes beyond what is said among us.  If you keep within 

our bounds, you cannot well be wrong.  Now!  Come and see.' 

was turned, and a strong door was opened from within.  It admitted 

them into a lodge or lobby, across which they passed, and so 

always plodding on before, turned round, in his slow, stiff, 

stooping manner, when they came to the turnkey on duty, as if to 

present his companion.  The turnkey nodded; and the companion 

passed in without being asked whom he wanted. 

wry old curtain and blind, had not the air of making it lighter.  

A few people loitered about, but the greater part of the population 

was within doors.  The old man, taking the right-hand side of the 

the stairs.  'They are rather dark, sir, but you will not find 

anything in the way.' 

He had no sooner turned the handle than the visitor saw Little 

alone. 

and was already warming it on a gridiron over the fire for her 

father, clad in an old grey gown and a black cap, awaiting his 

ale-pot.  Such zests as his particular little phial of cayenne 

with his eyes than by the slight impulsive motion of his hand, 

entreated her to be reassured and to trust him. 

This is my brother William, sir.' 

to you, sir.' 

flat of his hand, and so holding it, ready to put on again, 'you do 

me honour.  You are welcome, sir;' with a low bow.  'Frederick, a 

chair.  Pray sit down, Mr Clennam.' 

his own seat.  There was a wonderful air of benignity and patronage 

the collegians. 

gentlemen to these walls.  Perhaps you are aware--my daughter Amy 

may have mentioned that I am the Father of this place.' 

girl, sir, a dear girl, and long a comfort and support to me.  Amy, 

customs to which we are reduced here.  Is it a compliment to ask 

you if you would do me the honour, sir, to--' 

that the probability of his daughter's having had a reserve as to 

her family history, should be so far out of his mind. 

before herself, and touched his glass with her lips; but Arthur saw 

she was troubled and took nothing.  Her look at her father, half 

admiring him and proud of him, half ashamed for him, all devoted 

and loving, went to his inmost heart. 

at distinction.  'Frederick,' said he, 'you and Fanny sup at your 

lodgings to-night, I know.  What have you done with Fanny, 

Frederick?' 

'She is walking with Tip.' 

wild, and difficult to settle, but his introduction to the world 

was rather'--he shrugged his shoulders with a faint sigh, and 

looked round the room--'a little adverse.  Your first visit here, 

sir?' 

'my first.' 

knowledge.  It very seldom happens that anybody--of any 

pretensions-any pretensions--comes here without being presented to 

me.' 

brother,' said Frederick, faintly lighting up with a ray of pride. 

day to remember the name of the gentleman from Camberwell who was 

introduced to me last Christmas week by that agreeable coal- 

merchant who was remanded for six months.' 

with any hope of information. 

action with so much delicacy.  Ha!  Tush!  The name has quite 

escaped me.  Mr Clennam, as I have happened to mention handsome and 

delicate action, you may like, perhaps, to know what it was.' 

head beginning to droop and the pale face with a new solicitude 

stealing over it. 

almost a duty to mention it.  I said at the time that I always 

would mention it on every suitable occasion, without regard to 

the Father of the place.' 

her timid little shrinking figure turning away, was to see a sad, 

sad sight. 

And it is, I cannot but confess it, it is too often--hem-- 

Mr Clennam, in a manner highly gratifying to my feelings, and 

some of it were still before him.  'It appeared from his 

conversation that he had a garden, though he was delicate of 

mentioning it at first, as gardens are--hem--are not accessible to 

brought from his conservatory.  On my taking notice of its rich 

colour, he showed me a piece of paper round it, on which was 

written, "For the Father of the Marshalsea," and presented it to 

ha--I did so; and I found that it contained--ahem--two guineas.  I 

this--ahem--this particular Testimonial.' 

Arthur was in the act of saying the little he could say on such a 

theme, when a bell began to ring, and footsteps approached the 

stranger; and a young man who was with her, stopped too. 

The bell is a signal for visitors to retire, and so they have come 

to say good night; but there is plenty of time, plenty of time.  

Girls, Mr Clennam will excuse any household business you may have 

girl. 

of drawers above and a bedstead below, and produced two little 

made up?' Clennam heard the sister ask in a whisper.  To which Amy 

answered 'Yes.'  He had risen now, and took the opportunity of 

at the top of the fireplace was superfluous; but constant pains and 

care had made it neat, and even, after its kind, comfortable. 

go.  'Come, Fanny, come, Fanny,' he said, with his ragged clarionet 

case under his arm; 'the lock, child, the lock!' 

already clattered down-stairs.  'Now, Mr Clennam,' said the uncle, 

looking back as he shuffled out after them, 'the lock, sir, the 

lock.' 

his testimonial to the Father of the Marshalsea, without giving 

pain to his child; the other to say something to that child, though 

it were but a word, in explanation of his having come there. 

any account,' said the visitor, hurriedly.  'Pray allow me to--' 

chink, chink, chink. 

down-stairs with great speed. 

two or three stragglers were hurrying to the lodge, and he was 

following, when he caught sight of her in the doorway of the first 

house from the entrance.  He turned back hastily. 

You know the terms on which I and my mother are, and may not be 

surprised that I have preserved our distant relations at her house, 

lest I should unintentionally make her jealous, or resentful, or do 

short time, has greatly increased my heartfelt wish to be a friend 

to you.  It would recompense me for much disappointment if I could 

hope to gain your confidence.' 

to her. 

but I wish you had not watched me.' 

father's behalf; and he respected it, and was silent. 

should have done without the employment she has given me; I am 

Thank you, thank you.' 

'Let me ask you one question before I leave.  Have you known my 

mother long?' 

father and I--a poor labouring man, but the best of friends--and I 

nothing, and Mrs Clennam found me that way, and sent for me.  The 

gate will be locked, sir!' 

compassion for her, and by deep interest in her story as it dawned 

upon him, that he could scarcely tear himself away.  But the 

gliding back to her father. 

standing there with the disagreeable conviction upon him that he 

behind. 

Oh!  It's you, is it, Mr Clennam?' 

prison-yard, as it began to rain. 

'You've done it,' observed Tip; 'you must be sharper than that next 

time.' 

our governor must never know it.  I don't see why, myself.' 

any difficulty to her as a matter of course. 

give that trouble.' 

there.' 

room he had lately left, where the light was still burning.  'Yes, 

sir,' said Tip, following his glance.  'That's the governor's.  

little ghost, and vanish away without a sound.' 

But she stands by the governor, poor dear girl, day and night.' 

the prison, where the collegians had just vacated their social 

held, was the Snuggery in question; the presidential tribune of the 

chairman, the pewter-pots, glasses, pipes, tobacco-ashes, and 

general flavour of members, were still as that convivial 

of the qualities popularly held to be essential to grog for ladies, 

in respect that it was hot and strong; but in the third point of 

analogy, requiring plenty of it, the Snuggery was defective; being 

but a cooped-up apartment. 

here to be prisoners--landlord, waiter, barmaid, potboy, and all.  

boasted that he stood up litigiously for the interests of the 

college; and he had undefined and undefinable ideas that the 

marshal intercepted a 'Fund,' which ought to come to the 

collegians.  He liked to believe this, and always impressed the 

shadowy grievance on new-comers and strangers; though he could not, 

had got rooted in his soul.  He had fully convinced himself, 

collegian, was swindled by the marshal, regularly every Monday.  

Apparently, he helped to make the bed, that he might not lose an 

opportunity of stating this case; after which unloading of his 

mind, and after announcing (as it seemed he always did, without 

anything coming of it) that he was going to write a letter to the 

papers and show the marshal up, he fell into miscellaneous 

of the whole party, that they had come to regard insolvency as the 

normal state of mankind, and the payment of debts as a disease that 

occasionally broke out. 

In this strange scene, and with these strange spectres flitting 

an awful enjoyment of the Snuggery's resources, pointed out the 

wealthy, and wise, was to come to the Marshalsea. 

into a very fair bed; and the stranger was left to the Windsor 

chairs, the presidential tribune, the beery atmosphere, sawdust, 

long, long, in linking itself to the rest.  The novelty of the 

locked up, the remembrance of that room up-stairs, of the two 

brothers, and above all of the retiring childish form, and the face 

in which he now saw years of insufficient food, if not of want, 

kept him waking and unhappy. 

prison, but always concerning the prison, ran like nightmares 

through his mind while he lay awake.  Whether coffins were kept 

they were kept, where people who died in the prison were buried, 

how they were taken out, what forms were observed, whether an 

chances there were of escape?  Whether a prisoner could scale the 

walls with a cord and grapple, how he would descend upon the other 

side?  whether he could alight on a housetop, steal down a 

staircase, let himself out at a door, and get lost in the crowd?  

As to Fire in the prison, if one were to break out while he lay 

there? 

father, with the steadfast look with which he had died, 

arm up, warding off his suspicion; Little Dorrit, with her hand on 

the degraded arm, and her drooping head turned away. 

this poor girl!  What if the prisoner now sleeping quietly--Heaven 

back his fall to her.  What if any act of hers and of his father's, 

should have even remotely brought the grey heads of those two 

brothers so low! 

in his prison: I in mine.  I have paid the penalty.' 

of him.  When he fell asleep, she came before him in her wheeled 

sprang up causelessly frightened, the words were in his ears, as if 

her voice had slowly spoken them at his pillow, to break his rest: 

justice is done; what do I owe on this score!' 

of rain with it.  But the equinoctial gales were blowing out at 

sea, and the impartial south-west wind, in its flight, would not 

neglect even the narrow Marshalsea.  While it roared through the 

steeple of St George's Church, and twirled all the cowls in the 

neighbourhood, it made a swoop to beat the Southwark smoke into the 

who were yet lighting their fires, half suffocated them. 

though his bed had been in a more private situation, and less 

affected by the raking out of yesterday's fire, the kindling of to- 

day's under the collegiate boiler, the filling of that Spartan 

vessel at the pump, the sweeping and sawdusting of the common room, 

and other such preparations.  Heartily glad to see the morning, 

though little rested by the night, he turned out as soon as he 

heavy hours before the gate was opened. 

of sea-sickness to look up at the gusty sky.  The rain, carried 

aslant by flaws of wind, blackened that side of the central 

building which he had visited last night, but left a narrow dry 

trough under the lee of the wall, where he walked up and down among 

pump, and the stray leaves of yesterday's greens.  It was as 

haggard a view of life as a man need look upon. 

brought him there.  Perhaps she glided out of her doorway and in at 

but he saw nothing of her.  It was too early for her brother; to 

would be sluggish to leave whatever frowsy bed he occupied at 

night; so, as Arthur Clennam walked up and down, waiting for the 

gate to open, he cast about in his mind for future rather than for 

present means of pursuing his discoveries. 

step, taking an early comb at his hair, was ready to let him out.  

found himself again in the little outer court-yard where he had 

spoken to the brother last night. 

the rain until the gate should open; others, who had timed their 

arrival with greater nicety, were coming up now, and passing in 

with damp whitey-brown paper bags from the grocers, loaves of 

waiters upon insolvency, was a sight to see.  Such threadbare coats 

of other men and women, were made up of patches and pieces of other 

people's individuality, and had no sartorial existence of their own 

proper.  Their walk was the walk of a race apart.  They had a 

eternally going to the pawnbroker's.  When they coughed, they 

coughed like people accustomed to be forgotten on doorsteps and in 

draughty passages, waiting for answers to letters in faded ink, 

which gave the recipients of those manuscripts great mental 

disturbance and no satisfaction.  As they eyed the stranger in 

passing, they eyed him with borrowing eyes--hungry, sharp, 

speculative as to his softness if they were accredited to him, and 

the likelihood of his standing something handsome.  Mendicity on 

commission stooped in their high shoulders, shambled in their 

unsteady legs, buttoned and pinned and darned and dragged their 

clothes, frayed their button-holes, leaked out of their figures in 

dirty little ends of tape, and issued from their mouths in 

alcoholic breathings. 

Little Dorrit again before he went away.  She would have recovered 

her first surprise, and might feel easier with him.  He asked this 

place to get a cup of coffee at.  The nondescript replied in 

within a stone's throw. 

That was the one!  That was the one?  The nondescript had known her 

lodged in the same house with herself and uncle. 

coffee-shop until the nondescript should bring him word that Dorrit 

had waited on her father last night, begged the favour of a few 

words with her at her uncle's lodging; he obtained from the same 

the clarionet-player's dwelling. 

to be as full of bell-handles as a cathedral organ is of stops.  

Doubtful which might be the clarionet-stop, he was considering the 

point, when a shuttlecock flew out of the parlour window, and 

alighted on his hat.  He then observed that in the parlour window 

was a blind with the inscription, MR CRIPPLES's ACADEMY; also in 

another line, EVENING TUITION; and behind the blind was a little 

white-faced boy, with a slice of bread-and-butter and a battledore. 

blind, returned the shuttlecock, and put his question. 

fact).  'Mr Dorrit?  Third bell and one knock.' 

The pupils of Mr Cripples appeared to have been making a copy-book 

of the street-door, it was so extensively scribbled over in pencil. 

in combination, suggested intentions of personality on the part Of 

Mr Cripples's pupils.  There was ample time to make these 

observations before the door was opened by the poor old man 

himself. 

last night?' 

you come up-stairs and wait for her?' 

'Thank you.' 

very close, and had an unwholesome smell.  The little staircase 

windows looked in at the back windows of other houses as 

In the back garret--a sickly room, with a turn-up bedstead in it, 

so hastily and recently turned up that the blankets were boiling 

over, as it were, and keeping the lid open--a half-finished 

breakfast of coffee and toast for two persons was jumbled down 

anyhow on a rickety table. 

some consideration, that Fanny had run away, went to the next room 

a sharp adjuration of 'Don't, stupid!' and an appearance of loose 

stocking and flannel, concluded that the young lady was in an 

undress.  The uncle, without appearing to come to any conclusion, 

hands at the fire; not that it was cold, or that he had any waking 

idea whether it was or not. 

by discovered what he was doing, left off, reached over to the 

chimney-piece, and took his clarionet case down. 

'Ha!' muttered the old man, 'yes, yes, yes, yes, yes!' 

it was not the little paper of snuff (which was also on the 

his pinches as in everything else, but a certain little trickling 

of enjoyment of them played in the poor worn nerves about the 

corners of his eyes and mouth. 

thought of her.' 

'We should all have been lost without Amy.  She is a very good 

girl, Amy.  She does her duty.' 

custom, which he had heard from the father last night with an 

stinted her praises, or were insensible to what she did for them; 

but that they were lazily habituated to her, as they were to all 

the rest of their condition.  He fancied that although they had 

before them, every day, the means of comparison between her and one 

not as having risen away from the prison atmosphere, but as 

appertaining to it; as being vaguely what they had a right to 

expect, and nothing more. 

face, and decayed figure, as if he were still drooping in his 

chair. 

timid manner.  Her lips were a little parted, as if her heart beat 

faster than usual. 

time.' 

past your usual hour.' 

'Not to-day, sir.  I am not wanted to-day.' 

may be going?  I can then speak to you as we walk, both without 

pretence of having mislaid his walking-stick, to give her time to 

set the bedstead right, to answer her sister's impatient knock at 

and they went down-stairs; she first, he following; the uncle 

standing at the stair-head, and probably forgetting them before 

they had reached the ground floor. 

silence, until the mysterious visitor was at a safe distance; when 

they burst into pebbles and yells, and likewise into reviling 

done greater justice to their education. 

Little Dorrit, and Little Dorrit took it.  'Will you go by the Iron 

street?'  Little Dorrit answered, if he pleased, and presently 

she had herself received her education, such as it was, in Mr 

ceremonies between them, and bring them more naturally together 

than Beau Nash might have done if they had lived in his golden 

days, and he had alighted from his coach and six for the purpose. 

but no rain fell as they walked towards the Iron Bridge.  The 

little creature seemed so young in his eyes, that there were 

her, as if she were a child.  Perhaps he seemed as old in her eyes 

as she seemed young in his. 

to be locked in.  It was very unfortunate.' 

a majestic hotel to her, and that she treasured its reputation. 

'I believe it is very expensive,' said Little Dorrit, 'but MY 

And wine,' she added timidly. 

'Were you ever there?' 

luxuries of that superb establishment, the Marshalsea Hotel! 

acquainted with my mother.  Did you ever hear her name before she 

sent for you?' 

scared when the encounter took place, and shrunk away again), that 

he felt it necessary to say: 

the least alarm or anxiety.  Quite the reverse.  And you think that 

at no time of your father's life was my name of Clennam ever 

familiar to him?' 

afresh. 

pools on the road and pavement, and raining them down into the 

smoke and mist raced after them, the dark tide ran fierce and 

strong in the same direction.  Little Dorrit seemed the least, the 

quietest, and weakest of Heaven's creatures. 

poor child.' 

knew it to be so, and was touched with more pity; thinking of the 

dark boisterous streets to such a place of rest. 

'You spoke so feelingly to me last night, sir, and I found 

afterwards that you had been so generous to my father, that I could 

tears rose in her eyes, but did not fall. 

he must have grown different in some things since.' 

me.' 

he has anything to be ashamed of for himself, or that I have 

anything to be ashamed of for him.  He only requires to be 

understood.  I only ask for him that his life may be fairly 

as he related it.  He is very much respected.  Everybody who comes 

is far more thought of than the Marshal is.' 

she grew boastful of her father. 

quite a study.  I see none like them in that place, but he is 

they make him presents, as because they know him to be needy.  He 

prison a quarter of a century, and be prosperous!' 

tears, what a great soul of fidelity within her, how true the light 

that shed false brightness round him! 

because I am ashamed of him.  God forbid!  Nor am I so much ashamed 

of the place itself as might be supposed.  People are not bad 

because they come there.  I have known numbers of good, 

indeed in me, to forget that I have had many quiet, comfortable 

hours there; that I had an excellent friend there when I was quite 

a baby, who was very very fond of me; that I have been taught 

there, and have worked there, and have slept soundly there.  I 

think it would be almost cowardly and cruel not to have some little 

attachment for it, after all this.' 

said, raising her eyes appealingly to her new friend's, 'I did not 

mean to say so much, nor have I ever but once spoken about this 

before.  But it seems to set it more right than it was last night.  

unless I should have spoken so confusedly, that--that you can 

scarcely understand me, which I am afraid may be the case.' 

her as well as he could. 

concerning your father.  Has he many creditors?' 

if you cannot--who is the most influential of them?' 

hear long ago of Mr Tite Barnacle as a man of great power.  He was 

Government--high in the Circumlocution Office.  She appeared to 

of this formidable Mr Tite Barnacle of Grosvenor Square, or very 

near it, and the Circumlocution Office, which quite crushed her 

when she mentioned him. 

Barnacle.' 

quickness intercepted it.  'Ah!' said Little Dorrit, shaking her 

head with the mild despair of a lifetime.  'Many people used to 

hopeless it is.' 

from the sunken wreck he had a dream of raising; and looked at him 

with eyes which assuredly, in association with her patient face, 

her fragile figure, her spare dress, and the wind and rain, did not 

turn him from his purpose of helping her. 

now--where could father live, or how could he live?  I have often 

life outside as he is for that.' 

Here for the first time she could not restrain her tears from 

busy, trembled as they clasped each other. 

little money, and that Fanny earns a little money.  He is so 

anxious about us, you see, feeling helplessly shut up there.  Such 

a good, good father!' 

soon gone.  She was not accustomed to think of herself, or to 

piles of city roofs and chimneys among which the smoke was rolling 

heavily, and at the wilderness of masts on the river, and the 

plying her needle in his mother's room. 

'Oh very, very glad, sir!' 

friend you had?' 

to him not to form high social expectations of Plornish.  He lived 

little gateway. 

he sought to do for the present, except that he wished to leave her 

with a reliance upon him, and to have something like a promise from 

her that she would cherish it. 

take you back--you are going back?' 

professions, and say no more.' 

poor, mean shops, and were jostled by the crowds of dirty hucksters 

usual to a poor neighbourhood.  There was nothing, by the short 

way, that was pleasant to any of the five senses.  Yet it was not 

a common passage through common rain, and mire, and noise, to 

Clennam, having this little, slender, careful creature on his arm.  

How young she seemed to him, or how old he to her; or what a secret 

either to the other, in that beginning of the destined interweaving 

of their stories, matters not here.  He thought of her having been 

born and bred among these scenes, and shrinking through them now, 

the squalid needs of life, and of her innocence; of her solicitude 

for others, and her few years, and her childish aspect. 

a voice cried, 'Little mother, little mother!'  Little Dorrit 

bounced against them (still crying 'little mother'), fell down, and 

scattered the contents of a large basket, filled with potatoes, in 

the mud. 

began to pick up the potatoes, in which both Little Dorrit and 

Arthur Clennam helped.  Maggy picked up very few potatoes and a 

in the basket.  Maggy then smeared her muddy face with her shawl, 

see what she was like. 

limpid and almost colourless; they seemed to be very little 

that attentive listening expression in her face, which is seen in 

only redeemed from being so by a smile; a good-humoured smile, and 

pleasant in itself, but rendered pitiable by being constantly 

made it so very difficult for her old black bonnet to retain its 

baby.  A commission of haberdashers could alone have reported what 

the rest of her poor dress was made of, but it had a strong general 

Her shawl looked particularly like a tea-leaf after long infusion. 

Maggy, still calling her little mother, had begun to fondle, 

answered in words (they were under a gateway into which the 

majority of the potatoes had rolled). 

are you?' 

infinite tenderness. 

expressive way from herself to her little mother. 

as any one.'  Maggy laughed.  'And is as trustworthy as the Bank of 

England.'  Maggy laughed.  'She earns her own living entirely.  

Entirely, sir!' said Little Dorrit, in a lower and triumphant tone. 

hands and clapping them together.  'A gentleman from thousands of 

miles away, wanting to know your history!' 

much attached to me.  Her old grandmother was not so kind to her as 

she should have been; was she, Maggy?' 

hand, drank out of it, and said, 'Gin.'  Then beat an imaginary 

child, and said, 'Broom-handles and pokers.' 

face while she spoke, 'she had a bad fever, sir, and she has never 

grown any older ever since.' 

Ev'nly place!' 

turning towards Arthur for an instant and speaking low, 'and she 

always runs off upon that.' 

oranges!  Such d'licious broth and wine!  Such Chicking!  Oh, AIN'T 

it a delightful place to go and stop at!' 

in her former tone of telling a child's story; the tone designed 

she came out.  Then, because she was never to be more than ten 

years old, however long she lived--' 

(Maggy mighty grave of a sudden.) 

Maggy began to take pains to improve herself, and to be very 

attentive and very industrious; and by degrees was allowed to come 

in and out as often as she liked, and got enough to do to support 

as Maggy knows!' 

though he had never seen the fondling of the small spare hand; 

though he had had no sight for the tears now standing in the 

colourless eyes; though he had had no hearing for the sob that 

checked the clumsy laugh.  The dirty gateway with the wind and rain 

the gateway to finish it.  Nothing would serve Maggy but that they 

the fat figures in the tickets of prices, for the most part 

correctly.  She also stumbled, with a large balance of success 

against her failures, through various philanthropic recommendations 

to Try our Mixture, Try our Family Black, Try our Orange-flavoured 

adulterated articles.  When he saw how pleasure brought a rosy tint 

into Little Dorrit's face when Maggy made a hit, he felt that he 

could have stood there making a library of the grocer's window 

until the rain and wind were tired. 

Little Dorrit.  Little as she had always looked, she looked less 

the little mother attended by her big child. 

had tamely fluttered in, he saw it shut again; and then he came 

away. 

CHAPTER 10 

The Circumlocution Office was (as everybody knows without being 

told) the most important Department under Government.  No public 

largest public pie, and in the smallest public tart.  It was 

equally impossible to do the plainest right and to undo the 

in saving the parliament until there had been half a score of 

boards, half a bushel of minutes, several sacks of official 

memoranda, and a family-vault full of ungrammatical correspondence, 

on the part of the Circumlocution Office. 

one sublime principle involving the difficult art of governing a 

country, was first distinctly revealed to statesmen.  It had been 

foremost to study that bright revelation and to carry its shining 

was required to be done, the Circumlocution Office was beforehand 

TO DO IT. 

public departments; and the public condition had risen to be--what 

it was. 

all public departments and professional politicians all round the 

Circumlocution Office.  It is true that every new premier and every 

their utmost faculties to discovering How not to do it.  It is true 

that from the moment when a general election was over, every 

done, and who had been asking the friends of the honourable 

gentleman in the opposite interest on pain of impeachment to tell 

him why it hadn't been done, and who had been asserting that it 

It is true that the royal speech at the opening of such session 

virtually said, My lords and gentlemen, you have a considerable 

stroke of work to do, and you will please to retire to your 

respective chambers, and discuss, How not to do it.  It is true 

that the royal speech, at the close of such session, virtually 

said, My lords and gentlemen, you have through several laborious 

months been considering with great loyalty and patriotism, How not 

to do it, and you have found out; and with the blessing of 

you.  All this 

is true, but the Circumlocution Office went beyond it. 

not to do it, in motion.  Because the Circumlocution Office was 

who appeared to be by any surprising accident in remote danger of 

doing it, with a minute, and a memorandum, and a letter of 

instructions that extinguished him.  It was this spirit of national 

philosophers, soldiers, sailors, petitioners, memorialists, people 

the foolscap paper of the Circumlocution Office. 

(and they had better have had wrongs at first, than have taken that 

bitter English recipe for certainly getting them), who in slow 

lapse of time and agony had passed safely through other public 

over-reached by that, and evaded by the other; got referred at last 

day.  Boards sat upon them, secretaries minuted upon them, 

commissioners gabbled about them, clerks registered, entered, 

the business of the country went through the Circumlocution Office, 

except the business that never came out of it; and its name was 

Legion. 

Sometimes, parliamentary questions were asked about it, and even 

parliamentary motions made or threatened about it by demagogues so 

How to do it.  Then would the noble lord, or right honourable 

gentleman, in whose department it was to defend the Circumlocution 

of the occasion.  Then would he come down to that house with a slap 

Circumlocution Office not only was blameless in this matter, but 

matter.  Then would he be there to tell that honourable gentleman 

he be there to tell that honourable gentleman that it would have 

been more to his honour, more to his credit, more to his good 

taste, more to his good sense, more to half the dictionary of 

never approached this matter.  Then would he keep one eye upon a 

coach or crammer from the Circumlocution Office sitting below the 

bar, and smash the honourable gentleman with the Circumlocution 

nothing to say and said it, or that it had something to say of 

voted immaculate by an accommodating majority. 

a long career of this nature, that several solemn lords had 

attained the reputation of being quite unearthly prodigies of 

head of the Circumlocution Office.  As to the minor priests and 

acolytes of that temple, the result of all this was that they stood 

that had an absolute right to do whatever it liked; or took refuge 

in total infidelity, and considered it a flagrant nuisance. 

Circumlocution Office.  The Tite Barnacle Branch, indeed, 

that direction, and took it ill if any other family had much to say 

to it.  The Barnacles were a very high family, and a very large 

all sorts of public places.  Either the nation was under a load of 

obligation to the Barnacles, or the Barnacles were under a load of 

obligation to the nation.  It was not quite unanimously settled 

which; the Barnacles having their opinion, the nation theirs. 

Office, when that noble or right honourable individual sat a little 

him in a newspaper, was more flush of blood than money.  As a 

Barnacle he had of course put in his son Barnacle Junior in the 

office.  But he had intermarried with a branch of the 

with the patrician requirements of Barnacle junior, the three young 

rather longer than he could have desired; a circumstance which he 

always attributed to the country's parsimony. 

For Mr Tite Barnacle, Mr Arthur Clennam made his fifth inquiry one 

day at the Circumlocution Office; having on previous occasions 

awaited that gentleman successively in a hall, a glass case, a 

waiting room, and a fire-proof passage where the Department seemed 

he had been before, with the noble prodigy at the head of the 

Department; but was absent.  Barnacle Junior, however, was 

that young gentleman singeing the calves of his legs at the 

parental fire, and supporting his spine against the mantel-shelf.  

It was a comfortable room, handsomely furnished in the higher 

official manner; an presenting stately suggestions of the absent 

Barnacle, in the thick carpet, the leather-covered desk to sit at, 

the leather-covered desk to stand at, the formidable easy-chair and 

hearth-rug, the interposed screen, the torn-up papers, the 

dispatch-boxes with little labels sticking out of them, like 

mahogany, and a general bamboozling air of How not to do it. 

youthful aspect, and the fluffiest little whisker, perhaps, that 

ever was seen.  Such a downy tip was on his callow chin, that he 

might have urged that, if he had not singed the calves of his legs, 

he would have died of cold.  He had a superior eye-glass dangling 

round his neck, but unfortunately had such flat orbits to his eyes 

and such limp little eyelids that it wouldn't stick in when he put 

it up, but kept tumbling out against his waistcoat buttons with a 

click that discomposed him very much. 

in the way to-day,' said Barnacle Junior.  'Is this anything that 

I can do?' 

feeling all round himself, but not able to find it.) 

Mr Barnacle.' 

know,' said Barnacle Junior. 

junior. 

search after it that Mr Clennam felt it useless to reply at 

present.) 

face, 'anything about--Tonnage--or that sort of thing?' 

stuck his glass in it, in that inflammatory manner that his eye 

began watering dreadfully.) 

you are going that way.  Twenty-four, Mews Street, Grosvenor 

home by it.' 

(The misguided young Barnacle evidently going blind on his eye- 

glass side, but ashamed to make any further alteration in his 

painful arrangements.) 

go. 

he got to the door, unwilling wholly to relinquish the bright 

place if it HAD been anything about tonnage, Mr Clennam withdrew to 

pursue his inquiries. 

itself, but it was very near it.  It was a hideous little street of 

inhabited by coachmen's families, who had a passion for drying 

gates.  The principal chimney-sweep of that fashionable quarter 

lived at the blind end of Mews Street; and the same corner 

contained an establishment much frequented about early morning and 

twilight for the purchase of wine-bottles and kitchen-stuff.  

while their proprietors were dining elsewhere; and the dogs of the 

neighbourhood made appointments to meet in the same locality.  Yet 

for they were in great request), the house agent advertised it as 

a gentlemanly residence in the most aristocratic part of town, 

inhabited solely by the elite of the beau monde. 

particular branch would have had a pretty wide selection among, let 

for a third of the money.  As it was, Mr Barnacle, finding his 

gentlemanly residence extremely inconvenient and extremely dear, 

always laid it, as a public servant, at the door of the country, 

and adduced it as another instance of the country's parsimony. 

front, little dingy windows, and a little dark area like a damp 

waistcoat-pocket, which he found to be number twenty-four, Mews 

a sort of bottle filled with a strong distillation of Mews; and 

when the footman opened the door, he seemed to take the stopper 

out. 

to the Grosvenor Square houses.  Admirable in his way, his way was 

closeness of his pantry.  A sallow flabbiness was upon him when he 

took the stopper out, and presented the bottle to Mr Clennam's 

nose. 

that I have just now seen the younger Mr Barnacle, who recommended 

me to call here.' 

strong box, and carried the plate and jewels about with him 

buttoned up) pondered over the card a little; then said, 'Walk in.' 

door open, and in the consequent mental confusion and physical 

brought himself up safely on the door-mat. 

the inner hall-door, another bottle seemed to be presented and 

himself with both the bottles at once, looking out at a low 

hutches of their own free flunkey choice. 

Mr Barnacle himself, the express image and presentment of How not 

to do it. 

parsimonious and the Circumlocution Office was not so badgered.  He 

wound and wound folds of white cravat round his neck, as he wound 

His wristbands and collar were oppressive; his voice and manner 

coat buttoned up to inconvenience, a waistcoat buttoned up to 

inconvenience, an unwrinkled pair of trousers, a stiff pair of 

boots.  He was altogether splendid, massive, overpowering, and 

Sir Thomas Lawrence all the days of his life. 

'Mr Clennam?' said Mr Barnacle.  'Be seated.' 

Circumlocution--' giving it the air of a word of about five-and- 

twenty syllables--'Office.' 

deny that it is a liberty; proceed to take another liberty, and let 

me know your business.' 

in the inquiry I am about to make.' 

sitting for his portrait to a new and strange artist, appeared to 

say to his visitor, 'If you will be good enough to take me with my 

present lofty expression, I shall feel obliged.' 

confused affairs so far as to ascertain whether it may not be 

possible, after this lapse of time, to ameliorate his unhappy 

condition.  The name of Mr Tite Barnacle has been mentioned to me 

as representing some highly influential interest among his 

creditors.  Am I correctly informed?' 

on any account whatever, to give a straightforward answer, Mr 

Barnacle said, 'Possibly.' 

have possibly recommended--possibly--I cannot say--that some public 

claim against the insolvent estate of a firm or copartnership to 

which this person may have belonged, should be enforced.  The 

question may have been, in the course of official business, 

The Department may have either originated, or confirmed, a Minute 

making that recommendation.' 

responsible for any gentleman's assumptions.' 

state of the case?' 

Public,' mentioning that obscure body with reluctance, as his 

natural enemy, 'to memorialise the Circumlocution Department.  Such 

formalities as are required to be observed in so doing, may be 

known on application to the proper branch of that Department.' 

Department itself for a formal answer to that inquiry.' 

always checked a little by that word of impertinent signification, 

'if the--Public approaches it according to the official forms; if 

the--Public does not approach it according to the official forms, 

the--Public has itself to blame.' 

wounded man of place, and a wounded man of a gentlemanly residence, 

out into Mews Street by the flabby footman. 

the Circumlocution Office, and once more sent up his card to 

Barnacle junior by a messenger who took it very ill indeed that he 

should come back again, and who was eating mashed potatoes and 

gravy behind a partition by the hall fire. 

way on to four o'clock. 

Barnacle junior, looking over his shoulder. 

about and putting up the eye-glass. 

claim of the Crown against a prisoner for debt, named Dorrit.' 

as if the thing were growing serious. 

Barnacle junior stared at him until his eye-glass fell out, and 

then put it in again and stared at him until it fell out again.  

'You have no right to come this sort of move,' he then observed 

with the greatest weakness.  'Look here.  What do you mean?  You 

told me you didn't know whether it was public business or not.' 

inquiry. 

defenceless way, 'Look here!  Upon my SOUL you mustn't come into 

the place saying you want to know, you know!' The effect of that 

the same words and tone as before.  The effect of that upon young 

Barnacle was to make him a wonderful spectacle of failure and 

helplessness. 

Secretarial Department,' he said at last, sidling to the bell and 

ringing it.  'Jenkinson,' to the mashed potatoes messenger, 'Mr 

Wobbler!' 

that functionary pointed out Mr Wobbler's room.  He entered that 

and easy desk, one of whom was polishing a gun-barrel on his 

pocket-handkerchief, while the other was spreading marmalade on 

bread with a paper-knife. 

assurance. 

good supply of Rats, and timed the Dog.  Finding the Dog able to do 

it immensely, made the match, and heavily backed the Dog.  When the 

match came off, some devil of a fellow was bought over, Sir, Dog 

was made drunk, Dog's master was cleaned out.' 

looking up from that occupation, 'What did he call the Dog?' 

Found him particularly like her when hocussed.' 

barrel, considering it, on inspection, in a satisfactory state, 

referred it to the other; receiving confirmation of his views, he 

fitted it into its place in the case before him, and took out the 

stock and polished that, softly whistling. 

what he wanted to know. 

'Never heard of it.  Nothing at all to do with it.  Better try Mr 

Clive, second door on the left in the next passage.' 

with the gun called out 'Mister!  Hallo!' 

here!' 

A few steps brought him to the second door on the left in the next 

passage.  In that room he found three gentlemen; number one doing 

nothing particular, number two doing nothing particular, number 

three doing nothing particular.  They seemed, however, to be more 

directly concerned than the others had been in the effective 

execution of the great principle of the office, as there was an 

awful inner apartment with a double door, in which the 

Circumlocution Sages appeared to be assembled in council, and out 

of which there was an imposing coming of papers, and into which 

another gentleman, number four, was the active instrument. 

in the same barrel-organ way.  As number one referred him to number 

two, and as number two referred him to number three, he had 

occasion to state it three times before they all referred him to 

number four, to whom he stated it again. 

young fellow--he was a Barnacle, but on the more sprightly side of 

bother yourself about it, I think.' 

at a loss how to receive it. 

never go on with it,' said number four. 

England.' 

frank smile.  'I don't express an opinion about that; I only 

express an opinion about you.  I don't think you'd go on with it.  

However, of course, you can do as you like.  I suppose there was a 

failure in the performance of a contract, or something of that 

kind, was there?' 

Department the contract was in, and then you'll find out all about 

it there.' 

memorialise that Department (according to regular forms which 

back to be signed by that Department, sent back to be countersigned 

that Department.  You'll find out when the business passes through 

each of these stages by asking at both Departments till they tell 

you.' 

could not help saying. 

supposing for a moment that it was.  This light in hand young 

that he might be ready for any little bit of fat that came to hand; 

likely to become a statesman, and to make a figure. 

is,' pursued this bright young Barnacle, 'then you can watch it 

from time to time through that Department.  When it comes regularly 

through this Department.  We shall have to refer it right and left; 

Department about it, and don't hear anything satisfactory about it, 

why then you had better--keep on writing.' 

you at any rate,' said he, 'for your politeness.' 

thing, and see how you like it.  It will be in your power to give 

it up at any time, if you don't like it.  You had better take a lot 

of forms away with you.  Give him a lot of forms!'  With which 

instruction to number two, this sparkling young Barnacle took a 

fresh handful of papers from numbers one and three, and carried 

them into the sanctuary to offer to the presiding Idol of the 

Circumlocution Office. 

went his way down the long stone passage and the long stone 

and was waiting, not over patiently, for two people who were 

speaker and recognised Mr Meagles.  Mr Meagles was very red in the 

man who was with him, said, 'come out, you rascal, come Out!' 

unexpected sight to see Mr Meagles burst the swing doors open, and 

emerge into the street with the short man, who was of an 

exchanging looks of surprise with the porter.  He followed, 

however, quickly; and saw Mr Meagles going down the street with his 

enemy at his side.  He soon came up with his old travelling 

companion, and touched him on the back.  The choleric face which Mr 

Meagles turned upon him smoothed when he saw who it was, and he put 

out his friendly hand. 

come over from abroad.  I am glad to see you.' 

come upon me in a more prepossessing condition as to coolness.' 

state that attracted the attention of the passersby; more 

particularly as he leaned his back against a railing, took off his 

his reddened ears and neck, without the least regard for public 

opinion. 

I am cooler.' 

Park?' 

have turned his eyes towards the offender whom Mr Meagles had so 

angrily collared.  'He's something to look at, that fellow is.' 

had the appearance of a sagacious master in some handicraft.  He 

had a spectacle-case in his hand, which he turned over and over 

that is never seen but in a hand accustomed to tools. 

'and I'll introduce you presently.  Now then!' 

the Park, what this unknown (who complied in the gentlest manner) 

could have been doing.  His appearance did not at all justify the 

suspicion that he had been detected in designs on Mr Meagles's 

pocket-handkerchief; nor had he any appearance of being quarrelsome 

escape; and seemed a little depressed, but neither ashamed nor 

Meagles have collared him in the Circumlocution Office?  He 

perceived that the man was not a difficulty in his own mind alone, 

on the short way to the Park was by no means well sustained, and Mr 

Meagles's eye always wandered back to the man, even when he spoke 

of something very different. 

said: 

name is Doyce, Daniel Doyce.  You wouldn't suppose this man to be 

a notorious rascal; would you?' 

with the man there. 

him to be a public offender; would you?' 

of?  Murder, manslaughter, arson, forgery, swindling, house- 

breaking, highway robbery, larceny, conspiracy, fraud?  Which 

should you say, now?' 

'I should say,' returned Arthur Clennam, observing a faint smile in 

Daniel Doyce's face, 'not one of them.' 

he has been trying to turn his ingenuity to his country's service.  

That makes him a public offender directly, sir.' 

secret process) of great importance to his country and his fellow- 

creatures.  I won't say how much money it cost him, or how many 

years of his life he had been about it, but he brought it to 

he never complains!' 

Clennam, he addresses himself to the Government.  The moment he 

addresses himself to the Government, he becomes a public offender!  

again, 'he ceases to be an innocent citizen, and becomes a culprit. 

at, handed over by this highly-connected young or old gentleman, to 

that highly-connected young or old gentleman, and dodged back 

again; he is a man with no rights in his own time, or his own 

property; a mere outlaw, whom it is justifiable to get rid of 

anyhow; a man to be worn out by all possible means.' 

as Mr Meagles supposed. 

over,' cried Mr Meagles, 'but tell Mr Clennam what you confessed to 

me.' 

committed an offence.  In dancing attendance at the various 

offices, I was always treated, more or less, as if it was a very 

saving and a great improvement.' 

be able to believe me when I tell you the rest of the case.' 

course narrative which we all know by heart.  How, after 

interminable attendance and correspondence, after infinite 

impertinences, ignorances, and insults, my lords made a Minute, 

number three thousand four hundred and seventy-two, allowing the 

culprit to make certain trials of his invention at his own expense. 

lame to get near it, and the final ancient member was too pig- 

headed to look at it.  How there were more years; more 

Minute, number five thousand one hundred and three, whereby they 

resigned the business to the Circumlocution Office.  How the 

if it were a bran new thing of yesterday, which had never been 

a reference of the invention to three Barnacles and a 

could be hammered about it; who got bored about it, and reported 

physical impossibilities about it.  How the Circumlocution Office, 

morning, and how the Brazen Head had spoken, and had been, upon the 

be pursued in respect of the business: that was to say, either to 

leave it alone for evermore, or to begin it all over again. 

there, in that presence, took Doyce by the collar, and told him it 

was plain to me that he was an infamous rascal and treasonable 

him out of the office door by the collar, that the very porter 

might know I was a practical man who appreciated the official 

estimate of such characters; and here we are!' 

told them perhaps that the Circumlocution Office had achieved its 

with them yet sticking to it, that was the ship's look out, and not 

theirs. 

which I own does not improve my state of mind, that even now you 

don't hear him complain.' 

with some wonder, 'great forbearance.' 

man.' 

know a little about them from time to time.  Mine is not a 

particular case.  I am not worse used than a hundred others who 

was going to say.' 

case; but I am very glad that you do.' 

way, and looking into the distance before him as if his grey eye 

but it's a certain sort of relief to know that I might have counted 

on this.' 

then, as if he were contemplating some half-finished work of his 

hand and thinking about it. 

trees.  'Yes.  No doubt I am disappointed.  Hurt?  Yes.  No doubt 

the same way--' 

into foreign countries, that's quite different.  And that's the 

reason why so many go there.' 

our government, it is its regular way.  Have you ever heard of any 

projector or inventor who failed to find it all but inaccessible, 

and whom it did not discourage and ill-treat?' 

I'll answer that.  Never.' 

pretty many cases of its fixed determination to be miles upon 

miles, and years upon years, behind the rest of us; and of its 

even after the better things were well known and generally taken 

up?' 

will do at such a temperature, and such a body under such a 

sure.' 

With that he put up his spectacle-case, and said to Arthur, 'If I 

that I feel it towards our mutual friend.  Many's the day, and 

many's the way in which he has backed me.' 

respect for his own case, that he should abstain from idle 

what a blessed thing it would have been for this man, if he had 

taken a lesson from the gentlemen who were so kind as to take a 

nation's affairs in charge, and had learnt How not to do it. 

began to cool and clear up. 

grim.  Where do you think of going, Dan?' 

'Why then, we'll all go back to the factory, or walk in that 

direction,' returned Mr Meagles cheerfully.  'Mr Clennam won't be 

deterred by its being in Bleeding Heart Yard.' 

'Bleeding Heart Yard?' said Clennam.  'I want to go there.' 

destination for a man who had been in official correspondence with 

Office. 

A late, dull autumn night was closing in upon the river Saone.  The 

as if they were half curious, and half afraid, to see their 

of the river Saone it was wet, depressing, solitary; and the night 

deepened fast. 

figure in the landscape.  Cain might have looked as lonely and 

avoided.  With an old sheepskin knapsack at his back, and a rough, 

the cloak he carried over his shoulder, and the clothes he wore, 

if the clouds were hurrying from him, as if the wail of the wind 

fitful autumn night were disturbed by him. 

Then he limped on again, toiling and muttering. 

these stones that cut like knives!  To the devil with this dismal 

darkness, wrapping itself about one with a chill!  I hate you!' 

looking into the distance before him, stopped again. 

'I, hungry, thirsty, weary.  You, imbeciles, where the lights are 

wish I had the sacking of your town; I would repay you, my 

children!' 

town, brought the town no nearer; and the man was yet hungrier, and 

thirstier, and wearier, when his feet were on its jagged pavement, 

and he stood looking about him. 

cooking; there was the cafe with its bright windows, and its 

rattling of dominoes; there was the dyer's with its strips of red 

cloth on the doorposts; there was the silversmith's with its 

earrings, and its offerings for altars; there was the tobacco 

the refuse in the kennels, and the faint lamps slung across the 

six grey horses with their tails tied up, getting under weigh at 

the cabbage leaves lay thickest, trodden about the public cistern 

at which women had not yet left off drawing water.  There, in the 

clouded the Break of Day, but it seemed light and warm, and it 

embellishment of billiard cue and ball, that at the Break of Day 

and lodgings, whether one came on horseback, or came on foot; and 

that it kept good wines, liqueurs, and brandy.  The man turned the 

handle of the Break of Day door, and limped in. 

to a few men who occupied the room.  Two were playing dominoes at 

one of the little tables; three or four were seated round the 

was left alone for the time; the landlady of the Daybreak sat 

behind her little counter among her cloudy bottles of syrups, 

needle. 

landlady beside him. 

quickly as you can; and some wine at once.  I am exhausted.' 

from the great loaf that was set before him with his cloth and 

napkin, soup-plate, salt, pepper, and oil, he rested his back 

against the corner of the wall, made a couch of the bench on which 

should be ready. 

stove, and that temporary inattention to and distraction from one 

another, which is usually inseparable in such a company from the 

arrival of a stranger.  It had passed over by this time; and the 

men had done glancing at him, and were talking again. 

been telling, to a close, 'that's the true reason why they said 

that the devil was let loose.'  The speaker was the tall Swiss 

of the church into the discussion--especially as the devil was in 

question. 

Day, had resumed her needlework behind her counter.  She was a 

smart, neat, bright little woman, with a good deal of cap and a 

work. 

Marseilles, some fly-catchers swallowed it.  But I?  No, not I.' 

'Doubtless you were enraged against that man, madame?' 

work, opening them very wide, and tossing her head on one side.  

'Naturally, yes.' 

he had the good fortune to escape.  So much the worse.' 

turning his cigar between his lips.  'It may have been his 

It is always possible that he had, and has, good in him if one did 

players at dominoes glanced up from their game, as if to protest 

Break of Day. 

woman, I.  I know nothing of philosophical philanthropy.  But I 

that there are people (men and women both, unfortunately) who have 

no good in them--none.  That there are people whom it is necessary 

to detest without compromise.  That there are people who must be 

dealt with as enemies of the human race.  That there are people who 

(in this world here where I find myself, and even at the little 

this man--whatever they call him, I forget his name--is one of 

them.' 

Great Britain. 

putting down her work, and rising to take the stranger's soup from 

her husband, who appeared with it at a side door, 'puts anybody at 

isn't worth a sou.' 

to a sitting one, he looked her full in the face, and his moustache 

went up under his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache. 

was acquitted on his trial that people said at Marseilles that the 

and what it meant; nothing more.' 

'Rigaud!  To be sure.' 

a dish of vegetables.  He ate all that was placed before him, 

certain small talk at which he assisted, as if his condition were 

far above his appearance. 

felt their inferiority, but in any case they dispersed by degrees, 

traveller sat smoking by the stove, warming his ragged feet. 

that this was a handsome man, at another moment that this was an 

ill-looking man, observed the nose coming down and the moustache 

a criminal, she said, who had killed his wife. 

you know it?' 

'Monsieur, the law could not prove it against him to its 

to pieces.' 

that he was not ill-looking after all. 

what became of him?' 

stage at which her vivacious earnestness had ceased to nod it, 

keeping time to what she said.  It had been mentioned at the 

he had escaped his deserts; so much the worse. 

was smoothing his shaggy moustache. 

'May one ask to be shown to bed, madame?' 

conduct him up-stairs.  There was one traveller there, asleep, who 

had gone to bed very early indeed, being overpowered by fatigue; 

for twenty.  This the landlady of the Break of Day chirpingly 

side door. 

himself in his cook's cap, lighted the traveller up a steep and 

narrow staircase; the traveller carrying his own cloak and 

reference to the pleasure of seeing her again to-morrow.  It was a 

large room, with a rough splintery floor, unplastered rafters 

overhead, and two bedsteads on opposite sides.  Here 'my husband' 

put down the candle he carried, and with a sidelong look at his 

whether he was a good or a bad physiognomist, had fully made up his 

mind that the guest was an ill-looking fellow. 

prepared for him, and, sitting down on the rush chair at the 

bedside, drew his money out of his pocket, and told it over in his 

must eat at the cost of some other man to-morrow!' 

palm, the deep breathing of the traveller in the other bed fell so 

regularly upon his hearing that it attracted his eyes in that 

direction.  The man was covered up warm, and had drawn the white 

curtain at his head, so that he could be only heard, not seen.  But 

the deep regular breathing, still going on while the other was 

had laid aside his coat and cravat, became at length a strong 

provocative to curiosity, and incentive to get a glimpse of the 

sleeper's face. 

little nearer, and a little nearer to the sleeping traveller's bed, 

still continuing, he put his smooth white hand (such a treacherous 

gently lifted it away. 

Cavalletto!' 

the stealthy presence at his bedside, stopped in his regular 

looking placidly at his old prison companion, and then, all at 

once, with a cry of surprise and alarm, sprang out of bed. 

cried the other, in a suppressed voice. 

his trousers, and tying his coat by the two sleeves round his neck, 

back upon the door, and set his shoulders against it. 

name you used to call me--don't use that--Lagnier, say Lagnier!' 

width, made a number of those national, backhanded shakes of the 

right forefinger in the air, as if he were resolved on negativing 

the whole term of his life. 

Touch the hand of a gentleman!' 

Baptist, not at all steady on his legs as yet, advanced and put his 

hand in his patron's.  Monsieur Lagnier laughed; and having given 

it a squeeze, tossed it up and let it go. 

twirl; 'as tight on as your own.' 

to recall where he was.  His patron took that opportunity of 

turning the key in the door, and then sat down upon his bed. 

trim for a gentleman, you'll say.  No matter, you shall see how 

Soon I'll mend it.  Come and sit down.  Take your old place!' 

at the bedside, keeping his eyes upon his patron all the time. 

hole again, hey?  How long have you been out?' 

and since then I have changed about.  I have been doing odds and 

Saone.'  As he spoke, he rapidly mapped the places out with his 

sunburnt hand upon the floor. 

'And where are you going?' 

'Going, my master?' 

how.  'By Bacchus!' he said at last, as if he were forced to the 

admission, 'I have sometimes had a thought of going to Paris, and 

perhaps to England.' 

perhaps to England.  We'll go together.' 

seemed not quite convinced that it was a surpassingly desirable 

arrangement. 

will force myself to be recognised as a gentleman, and you shall 

profit by it.  It is agreed?  Are we one?' 

sleep--how I appear before you, I, Lagnier.  Remember that.  Not 

the other.' 

up his mouth. 

and stoned?  Do YOU want to be trampled upon and stoned?  You would 

be.  You don't imagine that they would set upon me, and let my 

prison chum go?  Don't think it!' 

friend's jaw, from which his friend inferred that if the course of 

would so distinguish him with his notice as to ensure his having 

his full share of it.  He remembered what a cosmopolitan gentleman 

Monsieur Lagnier was, and how few weak distinctions he made. 

wronged since you last saw me.  You know that I am sensitive and 

brave, and that it is my character to govern.  How has society 

and especially women, running at me armed with any weapons they 

could lay their hands on.  I have lain in prison for security, with 

the place of my confinement kept a secret, lest I should be torn 

vile mud and weather ever since, until my feet are crippled--look 

me, possessing the qualities I have mentioned, and which you know 

me to possess.  But society shall pay for it.' 

his lips. 

drinking-shop, society pursues me.  Madame defames me, and her 

guests defame me.  I, too, a gentleman with manners and 

accomplishments to strike them dead!  But the wrongs society has 

heaped upon me are treasured in this breast.' 

tossing his head and shutting his eyes, as if there were the 

'Put my shoes there,' continued Lagnier.  'Hang my cloak to dry 

is it?  Hah.  Very well!' 

bound round his wicked head, and only his wicked head showing above 

did. 

need a long rest.  Let me sleep in the morning.' 

wishing him a happy night, put out the candle.  One might have 

Supposed that the next proceeding of the Italian would have been to 

upon his bed with some of its coverings over him, and his coat 

still tied round his neck, to get through the night. 

astir there but the smell of coffee, wine, tobacco, and syrups; and 

madame's little counter looked ghastly enough.  But he had paid 

door, and run away. 

looked out of the upper window.  When the sun had raised his full 

disc above the flat line of the horizon, and was striking fire out 

of the long muddy vista of paved road with its weary avenue of 

the flaming pools of rain-water, which black speck was John Baptist 

Cavalletto running away from his patron. 

CHAPTER 12 

there now but for hunters of men--Bleeding Heart Yard was to be 

stacks of chimneys, and a few large dark rooms which had escaped 

being walled and subdivided out of the recognition of their old 

proportions, gave the Yard a character.  It was inhabited by poor 

the desert pitch their tents among the fallen stones of the 

the Yard, that it had a character. 

the original approach, and got out of it by a low gateway into a 

maze of shabby streets, which went about and about, tortuously 

gateway, was the factory of Daniel Doyce, often heavily beating 

like a bleeding heart of iron, with the clink of metal upon metal. 

its name.  The more practical of its inmates abided by the 

tradition of a murder; the gentler and more imaginative 

the legend of a young lady of former times closely imprisoned in 

her chamber by a cruel father for remaining true to her own true 

love, and refusing to marry the suitor he chose for her.  The 

window behind the bars, murmuring a love-lorn song of which the 

she died.  It was objected by the murderous party that this Refrain 

romantic, still lodging in the Yard.  But, forasmuch as all 

hoped, howsoever bad we are, will continue until the end of the 

world to be the dispensation under which we shall live--the 

day by a great majority.  Neither party would listen to the 

showing the Bleeding Heart to have been the heraldic cognisance of 

the old family to whom the property had once belonged.  And, 

filled with the earthiest and coarsest sand, the Bleeding Heart 

little golden grain of poetry that sparkled in it. 

Meagles, and Clennam.  Passing along the Yard, and between the open 

gateway.  Here Arthur Clennam stopped to look about him for the 

domicile of Plornish, plasterer, whose name, according to the 

custom of Londoners, Daniel Doyce had never seen or heard of to 

that hour. 

It was plain enough, nevertheless, as Little Dorrit had said; over 

Yard which she had described as his place of habitation, was a 

large house, let off to various tenants; but Plornish ingeniously 

hinted that he lived in the parlour, by means of a painted hand 

form) referred all inquirers to that apartment. 

Mr Meagles, Clennam went alone into the entry, and knocked with his 

with a child in her arms, whose unoccupied hand was hastily 

large part of her waking existence. 

woman, 'not to deceive you, he's gone to look for a job.' 

but she had a trick of answering in this provisional form. 

at any minute of time.  Walk in, sir.' 

Arthur entered the rather dark and close parlour (though it was 

lofty too), and sat down in the chair she placed for him. 

take it kind of you.' 

much in his looks, elicited her explanation. 

their while to move their hats,' said Mrs Plornish.  'But people 

think more of it than people think.' 

a courtesy being unusual, Was that all!  And stooping down to pinch 

little fellow, ain't he, sir?  But this one is rather sickly.'  She 

tenderly hushed the baby in her arms, as she said it.  'You 

wouldn't mind my asking if it happened to be a job as you was come 

about, sir, would you?' asked Mrs Plornish wistfully. 

than answer No.  But he was obliged to answer No; and he saw a 

a young woman, made somewhat slatternly in herself and her 

belongings by poverty; and so dragged at by poverty and the 

face into wrinkles. 

gone underground, they do indeed.'  (Herein Mrs Plornish limited 

the Circumlocution Office and the Barnacle Family.) 

Really he is.' 

Really he was.  He was one of those many wayfarers on the road of 

it was such an exceptional case when his powers were in any 

request, that his misty mind could not make out how it happened.  

He took it as it came, therefore; he tumbled into all kinds of 

life, got himself considerably bruised. 

Plornish, lifting up her eyebrows, and searching for a solution of 

the problem between the bars of the grate; 'nor yet for want of 

working at them when they are to be got.  No one ever heard my 

husband complain of work.' 

take extraordinarily ill, as though they had an absolute right to 

a Yard as any in Britain, was never the better for the demand.  

their great principle to look into the matter; and indeed the 

all other high old families except the Stiltstalkings. 

lord returned.  A smooth-cheeked, fresh-coloured, sandy-whiskered 

the face, flannel-jacketed, lime-whitened. 

conversation with you on the subject of the Dorrit family.' 

now?' 

pleasure of being acquainted with the gentleman, neither. 

'Miss Dorrit.' 

Why, yes,' said Plornish, taking a chair, and lifting the elder 

child upon his knee, that he might have the moral support of 

side of the Lock myself, and in that way we come to know Miss 

Dorrit.  Me and my wife, we are well acquainted with Miss Dorrit.' 

'Intimate!' cried Mrs Plornish.  Indeed, she was so proud of the 

the Yard by magnifying to an enormous amount the sum for which Miss 

her claiming to know people of such distinction. 

her,' said Plornish tautologically. 

aware,' said Plornish, lowering his voice, and speaking with a 

that they work for a living.  No!' said Plornish, looking with a 

ridiculous triumph first at his wife, and then all round the room.  

'Dursn't let him know it, they dursn't!' 

for the first time, that it might not be a very fine trait of 

it up. 

were speaking of.' 

his lips, turned it with his tongue like a sugar-plum, considered, 

found himself unequal to the task of lucid explanation, and 

was, old woman.' 

laying her chin upon the little hand as it tried to disarrange the 

gown again, 'came here one afternoon with a bit of writing, telling 

that how she wished for needlework, and asked if it would be 

here.'  (Plornish repeated, her address here, in a low voice, as if 

he were making responses at church.) 'Me and Plornish says, No, 

Miss Dorrit, no ill-conwenience,' (Plornish repeated, no ill- 

conwenience,) 'and she wrote it in, according.  Which then me and 

Plornish says, Ho Miss Dorrit!'  (Plornish repeated, Ho Miss 

Dorrit.) 'Have you thought of copying it three or four times, as 

the way to make it known in more places than one?  No, says Miss 

worked, having a job just then,' (Plornish repeated job just then,) 

'and likewise to the landlord of the Yard; through which it was 

repeated, employ Miss Dorrit; and Mrs Plornish having come to an 

end, feigned to bite the fingers of the little hand as she kissed 

it. 

collects the rents.  That,' added Mr Plornish, dwelling on the 

subject with a slow thoughtfulness that appeared to have no 

is about what they are, you may believe me or not, as you think 

proper.' 

An old acquaintance of mine, long ago!' 

made none.  As there truly was no reason why he should have the 

least interest in it, Arthur Clennam went on to the present purport 

Tip's release, with as little detriment as possible to the self- 

understand that the Plaintiff was a 'Chaunter'--meaning, not a 

and that more would be a waste of money.  The Principal and 

instrument soon drove off together to a stable-yard in High 

the shot he had been made to swallow for the improvement of his 

form), was to be parted with for a twenty-pound note, in 

consequence of his having run away last week with Mrs Captain 

who, in mere spite, insisted on selling him for that ridiculous 

this yard alone and leaving his Principal outside, found a 

gentleman with tight drab legs, a rather old hat, a little hooked 

a private friend of Captain Barbary); who happened to be there, in 

as per advertisement.  This gentleman, happening also to be the 

Plaintiff in the Tip case, referred Mr Plornish to his solicitor, 

and declined to treat with Mr Plornish, or even to endure his 

note: in which case only, the gentleman would augur from 

Then said Captain Maroon, 'Now, how much time do you want to make 

the other twenty in?  Now, I'll give you a month.'  Then said 

do with you.  You shall get me a good bill at four months, made 

payable at a banking-house, for the other twenty!'  Then said 

Captain Maroon, when THAT wouldn't suit, 'Now, come; Here's the 

when THAT wouldn't suit, 'Now, I'll tell you what it is, and this 

shuts it up; he has used me bad, but I'll let him off for another 

if you don't like it, leave it.'  Finally said Captain Maroon, when 

of the first offer, gave a receipt in full and discharged the 

prisoner. 

Your wishes shall be attended to.' 

A Friend who hopes that for his sister's sake, if for no one 

else's, he will make good use of his liberty.' 

to Little Dorrit, I shall feel under an obligation to you.' 

pleasure an a--it'l be ekally a pleasure and a--' Finding himself 

unable to balance his sentence after two efforts, Mr Plornish 

wisely dropped it.  He took Clennam's card and appropriate 

pecuniary compliment. 

was in the same mind.  So his Principal offered to set him down at 

the Marshalsea Gate, and they drove in that direction over 

Blackfriars Bridge.  On the way, Arthur elicited from his new 

Yard.  They was all hard up there, Mr Plornish said, uncommon hard 

see, some people as was better off said, and a good many such 

people lived pretty close up to the mark themselves if not beyond 

it so he'd heerd, that they was 'improvident' (that was the 

favourite word) down the Yard.  For instance, if they see a man 

with his wife and children going to Hampton Court in a Wan, perhaps 

once in a year, they says, 'Hallo!  I thought you was poor, my 

improvident friend!'  Why, Lord, how hard it was upon a man!  What 

was a man to do?  He couldn't go mollancholy mad, and even if he 

you would be the worse for it.  Yet you seemed to want to make a 

man mollancholy mad.  You was always at it--if not with your right 

hand, with your left.  What was they a doing in the Yard?  Why, 

a working at their sewing, or their shoe-binding, or their 

day, and not more than able to keep body and soul together after 

of trades you could name, all wanting to work, and yet not able to 

get it.  There was old people, after working all their lives, going 

and being shut up in the workhouse, much worse fed and lodged and 

treated altogether, than--Mr Plornish said manufacturers, but 

appeared to mean malefactors.  Why, a man didn't know where to turn 

himself for a crumb of comfort.  As to who was to blame for it, Mr 

who suffered, but he couldn't tell you whose fault it was.  It 

undertook that line of business, and that it didn't come right of 

itself.  And, in brief, his illogical opinion was, that if you 

for doing of it; so far as he could make out, that was about what 

Plornish turn the tangled skein of his estate about and about, like 

until they reached the prison gate.  There, he left his Principal 

alone; to wonder, as he rode away, how many thousand Plornishes 

were not known by ear in that glorious institution. 

The mention of Mr Casby again revived in Clennam's memory the 

smouldering embers of curiosity and interest which Mrs Flintwinch 

of wooden-headed old Christopher (so he was still occasionally 

spoken of by some irreverent spirits who had had dealings with him, 

who was reputed to be rich in weekly tenants, and to get a good 

and alleys. 

After some days of inquiry and research, Arthur Clennam became 

freedom again.  He had no hopeful inquiry to make at present, 

concerning Little Dorrit either; but he argued with himself that it 

add that beyond all doubt he would have presented himself at Mr 

Casby's door, if there had been no Little Dorrit in existence; for 

we all know how we all deceive ourselves--that is to say, how 

people in general, our profounder selves excepted, deceive 

themselves--as to motives of action. 

its way, that he was still patronising Little Dorrit in doing what 

had no reference to her, he found himself one afternoon at the 

corner of Mr Casby's street.  Mr Casby lived in a street in the 

to the top of Pentonville Hill; but which had run itself out of 

breath in twenty yards, and had stood still ever since.  There is 

no such place in that part now; but it remained there for many 

with unfruitful gardens and pimpled with eruptive summerhouses, 

that it had meant to run over in no time. 

little changed as my mother's, and looks almost as gloomy.  But the 

even here.' 

brought a woman-servant to the door, those faded scents in truth 

of the bygone spring.  He stepped into the sober, silent, air-tight 

house--one might have fancied it to have been stifled by Mutes in 

sound and motion.  The furniture was formal, grave, and quaker- 

like, but well-kept; and had as prepossessing an aspect as 

pocket ticked audibly. 

life, whose smooth grey eyebrows seemed to move to the ticking as 

the fire-light flickered on them, sat in an arm-chair, with his 

list shoes on the rug, and his thumbs slowly revolving over one 

another.  This was old Christopher Casby--recognisable at a 

furniture--as little touched by the influence of the varying 

jars. 

had changed very little in his progress through life.  Confronting 

him, in the room in which he sat, was a boy's portrait, which 

anybody seeing him would have identified as Master Christopher 

he had had, at any time, as much taste or use as for a diving-bell; 

to precocious contemplation by the spire of a village church.  

There was the same smooth face and forehead, the same calm blue 

eye, the same placid air.  The shining bald head, which looked so 

benevolent because it was never cut; were not, of course, to be 

rudiments of the Patriarch with the list shoes. 

very bumpy in the head, Patriarch was the word for him.  He had 

been accosted in the streets, and respectfully solicited to become 

a Patriarch for painters and for sculptors; with so much 

Arts to remember the points of a Patriarch, or to invent one.  

informed, 'Old Christopher Casby, formerly Town-agent to Lord 

Decimus Tite Barnacle,' had cried in a rapture of disappointment, 

friend to the friendless!'  With that head, however, he remained 

old Christopher Casby, proclaimed by common report rich in house 

property; and with that head, he now sat in his silent parlour.  

Indeed it would be the height of unreason to expect him to be 

sitting there without that head. 

eyebrows turned towards him. 

announced?' 

chair, if you please--have I the pleasure of knowing--?  Ah!  

truly, yes, I think I have!  I believe I am not mistaken in 

supposing that I am acquainted with those features?  I think I 

address a gentleman of whose return to this country I was informed 

by Mr Flintwinch?' 

met?' 

fluctuations in his health and spirits, Clennam answered generally 

and shook hands with the possessor of 'that head' as it shed its 

patriarchal light upon him. 

that he was nervous. 

grieved to hear it, Mr Clennam, I was grieved.' 

him. 

were not on friendly terms.  There was a little family 

misunderstanding among us.  Your respected mother was rather 

self, your worthy self.' 

with his blooming face, and that head, and his blue eyes, he seemed 

to be delivering sentiments of rare wisdom and virtue.  In like 

manner, his physiognomical expression seemed to teem with 

benignity.  Nobody could have said where the wisdom was, or where 

be somewhere about him. 

and gone.  I do myself the pleasure of making a visit to your 

respected mother occasionally, and of admiring the fortitude and 

strength of mind with which she bears her trials, bears her 

trials.'  When he made one of these little repetitions, sitting 

side, and a gentle smile, as if he had something in his thoughts 

the pleasure of uttering it, lest he should soar too high; and his 

meekness therefore preferred to be unmeaning. 

said Arthur, catching at the opportunity as it drifted past him, 

'to mention Little Dorrit to my mother.' 

a small tenant of mine?  Yes, yes.  Dorrit?  That's the name.  Ah, 

yes, yes!  You call her Little Dorrit?' 

no further. 

been married a few months.  She resides with me again.  She will be 

here.' 

request, if your kindness had not anticipated me.' 

had a long wide-skirted bottle-green coat on, and a bottle-green 

pair of trousers, and a bottle-green waistcoat.  The Patriarchs 

were not dressed in bottle-green broadcloth, and yet his clothes 

looked patriarchal. 

audible again, when a quick hand turned a latchkey in the house- 

eager short dark man came into the room with so much way upon him 

that he was within a foot of Clennam before he could stop. 

'He will be here directly, if you want him.' 

beads of eyes; a scrubby little black chin; wiry black hair 

striking out from his head in prongs, like forks or hair-pins; and 

or a compound of nature and art.  He had dirty hands and dirty 

broken nails, and looked as if he had been in the coals; he was in 

a little labouring steam-engine. 

a puff, he worked out by another door. 

the last of the Patriarchs, which were afloat in the air, had, by 

some forgotten means, come in contact with Arthur's sensorium.  He 

was aware of motes and specks of suspicion in the atmosphere of 

that time; seen through which medium, Christopher Casby was a mere 

Inn signpost, without any Inn--an invitation to rest and be 

thankful, when there was no place to put up at, and nothing 

'that head,' and as being a crafty impostor.  Other motes there 

were which showed him as a heavy, selfish, drifting Booby, who, 

other men, on the discovery that to get through life with ease and 

credit, he had but to hold his tongue, keep the bald part of his 

enough to seize the idea and stick to it.  It was said that his 

to his having the least business capacity, but to his looking so 

supremely benignant that nobody could suppose the property screwed 

or jobbed under such a man; also, that for similar reasons he now 

alone in the ticking parlour) that many people select their models, 

will annually be found embodying all the cardinal virtues, on 

account of his eyelashes, or his chin, or his legs (thereby 

students of nature), so, in the great social Exhibition, 

accessories are often accepted in lieu of the internal character. 

deciding on it, that the last of the Patriarchs was the drifting 

head highly polished: and that, much as an unwieldy ship in the 

broadside on, stern first, in its own way and in the way of 

it in tow, and bustle off with it; similarly the cumbrous Patriarch 

had been taken in tow by the snorting Pancks, and was now following 

in the wake of that dingy little craft. 

meditations.  Clennam's eyes no sooner fell upon the subject of his 

old passion than it shivered and broke to pieces. 

reality, and the contrast is a fatal shock to it.  Such was 

Clennam's case.  In his youth he had ardently loved this woman, and 

imagination.  That wealth had been, in his desert home, like 

Robinson Crusoe's money; exchangeable with no one, lying idle in 

the dark to rust, until he poured it out for her.  Ever since that 

memorable time, though he had, until the night of his arrival, as 

for anything he knew), he had kept the old fancy of the Past 

unchanged, in its old sacred place.  And now, after all, the last 

of the Patriarchs coolly walked into the parlour, saying in effect, 

'Be good enough to throw it down and dance upon it.  This is 

Flora.' 

breath; but that was not much.  Flora, whom he had left a lily, had 

become a peony; but that was not much.  Flora, who had seemed 

enchanting in all she said and thought, was diffuse and silly.  

That was much.  Flora, who had been spoiled and artless long ago, 

was determined to be spoiled and artless now.  That was a fatal 

blow. 

own funeral, if she had lived and died in classical antiquity, 'I 

be found out, it's really shocking!' 

had not stood still with himself. 

amazingly well that you have no right to say anything of the kind, 

while, as to me, you know--oh!' cried Flora with a little scream, 

'I am dreadful!' 

drama under representation, glowed with vacant serenity. 

she said, never once came to a full stop, 'look at Papa, is not 

unnatural of Papa to be such a reproach to his own child, if we go 

suppose that I am Papa's Mama!' 

perceive already you have not lost your old way of paying 

compliments, your old way when you used to pretend to be so 

sentimentally struck you know--at least I don't mean that, I--oh I 

don't know what I mean!'  Here Flora tittered confusedly, and gave 

him one of her old glances. 

name.  He received an answer from some little Dock beyond, and was 

towed out of sight directly. 

his hat, being in a ludicrous dismay, and not knowing what to do: 

'you could never be so unkind as to think of going, Arthur--I mean 

Mr Arthur--or I suppose Mr Clennam would be far more proper--but I 

am sure I don't know what I am saying--without a word about the 

it would be much better not to speak of them and it's highly 

probable that you have some much more agreeable engagement and pray 

let Me be the last person in the world to interfere with it though 

there was a time, but I am running into nonsense again.' 

days she referred to?  Could there have been anything like her 

present disjointed volubility in the fascinations that had 

captivated him? 

commas, and very few of them, 'that you are married to some Chinese 

lady, being in China so long and being in business and naturally 

Pagodian dissenter.' 

to any lady, Flora.' 

long on my account!' tittered Flora; 'but of course you never did 

eyes are really so long and narrow always putting me in mind of 

mother-of-pearl fish at cards and do they really wear tails down 

their back and plaited too or is it only the men, and when they 

pull their hair so very tight off their foreheads don't they hurt 

themselves, and why do they stick little bells all over their 

bridges and temples and hats and things or don't they really do 

it?'  Flora gave him another of her old glances.  Instantly she 

went on again, as if he had spoken in reply for some time. 

pray excuse me--old habit--Mr Clennam far more proper--what a 

no doubt actually is, and the sums of money that must be made by 

those two trades where everybody carries them and hangs them 

everywhere, the little shoes too and the feet screwed back in 

infancy is quite surprising, what a traveller you are!' 

In his ridiculous distress, Clennam received another of the old 

glances without in the least knowing what to do with it. 

language which I am persuaded you speak like a Native if not better 

for you were always quick and clever though immensely difficult no 

doubt, I am sure the tea chests alone would kill me if I tried, 

improper--as no one could have believed, who could have ever 

imagined Mrs Finching when I can't imagine it myself!' 

all this, by a certain warmth of heart that expressed itself in her 

tone when she referred, however oddly, to the youthful relation in 

which they had stood to one another.  'Finching?' 

he proposed to me which he did seven times and handsomely consented 

I must say to be what he used to call on liking twelve months, 

after all, he wasn't answerable for it and couldn't help it could 

he, Excellent man, not at all like you but excellent man!' 

moment; for she recovered breath in the act of raising a minute 

corner of her pocket-handkerchief to her eye, as a tribute to the 

ghost of the departed Mr F., and began again. 

you should be formally friendly to me under the altered 

suppose not you ought to know, but I can't help recalling that 

there was a time when things were very different.' 

again. 

and in finding that, like me, you have not forgotten the old 

and hope.' 

however I know you are disappointed in me, I suppose the Chinese 

I am the cause myself, it's just as likely.' 

very well.' 

perception of a cleverer woman.  The inconsistent and profoundly 

unreasonable way in which she instantly went on, nevertheless, to 

interweave their long-abandoned boy and girl relations with their 

slightest notice and to the great terror of Clennam, the tone of a 

love-quarrel, 'I wish to make, one explanation I wish to offer, 

when your Mama came and made a scene of it with my Papa and when I 

was called down into the little breakfast-room where they were 

looking at one another with your Mama's parasol between them seated 

on two chairs like mad bulls what was I to do?' 

concluded, is it worth while seriously to--' 

was Paul and Virginia which had to be returned and which was 

Come to Pekin Nankeen and What's the third place, barefoot.' 

you.  We were both too young, too dependent and helpless, to do 

anything but accept our separation.--Pray think how long ago,' 

gently remonstrated Arthur. 

back drawing-room--there is the back drawing-room still on the 

first floor and still at the back of the house to confirm my 

he was all attention he called next day he soon began to call three 

evenings a week and to send in little things for supper it was not 

approval of Papa and what could I do?' 

'but what you did.  Let an old friend assure you of his full 

conviction that you did quite right.' 

offer, there was a time ere Mr F. first paid attentions incapable 

of being mistaken, but that is past and was not to be, dear Mr 

his nose everywhere where he is not wanted.' 

the old time--poor Flora left herself at eighteen years of age, a 

long long way behind again; and came to a full stop at last. 

behind, and grafted the rest on to the relict of the late Mr F.; 

thus making a moral mermaid of herself, which her once boy-lover 

contemplated with feelings wherein his sense of the sorrowful and 

his sense of the comical were curiously blended. 

herself and Clennam of the most thrilling nature; as if the first 

of a train of post-chaises and four, extending all the way to 

Scotland, were at that moment round the corner; and as if she 

couldn't (and wouldn't) have walked into the Parish Church with 

late Mr F. enjoying herself in the most wonderful manner, by 

putting herself and him in their old places, and going through all 

the old performances--now, when the stage was dusty, when the 

scenery was faded, when the youthful actors were dead, when the 

orchestra was empty, when the lights were out.  And still, through 

been prettily natural to her, he could not but feel that it revived 

at sight of him, and that there was a tender memory in it. 

signalled 'Yes!'  Clennam so wished he could have done more than 

that had been, or that never had been--that he thought the least 

atonement he could make for the disappointment he almost felt 

ashamed of, was to give himself up to the family desire.  

Therefore, he stayed to dinner. 

account of Bleeding Heart Yard.  Pancks instantly made fast to him 

and hauled him out. 

with all the places belonging to you.' 

have said himself whatever Pancks said for him. 

the ship instead of the Tug.  'The people are so poor there?' 

hands out of his rusty iron-grey pockets to bite his nails, if he 

Besides, if they ARE poor, you can't help it.  You'd be poor 

yourself if you didn't get your rents.' 

pursued Pancks.  'You're not going to lodge 'em for nothing.  

You're not going to open your gates wide and let 'em come free.  

Not if you know it, you ain't.' 

why have you got the other?  What have you been and done with your 

money?  What do you mean by it?  What are you up to?  That's what 

for you!'  Mr Pancks here made a singular and startling noise, 

produced by a strong blowing effort in the region of the nose, 

unattended by any result but that acoustic one. 

address. 

want is a good investment and a quick return.  You take it where 

you can find it.  You ain't nice as to situation--not you.' 

through it anywhere, so that it only got fastened on.  Another 

seemed to have damaged her face in two or three places with some 

blunt instrument in the nature of a spoon; her countenance, and 

particularly the tip of her nose, presenting the phenomena of 

no name but Mr F.'s Aunt. 

her a legacy?  Clennam in return implied his hope that Mr F. had 

endowed the wife whom he adored, with the greater part of his 

worldly substance, if not with all.  Flora said, oh yes, she didn't 

mean that, Mr F. had made a beautiful will, but he had left her as 

a separate legacy, his Aunt.  She then went out of the room to 

'Mr F.'s Aunt.' 

Aunt, were extreme severity and grim taciturnity; sometimes 

interrupted by a propensity to offer remarks in a deep warning 

voice, which, being totally uncalled for by anything said by 

anybody, and traceable to no association of ideas, confounded and 

terrified the Mind.  Mr F.'s Aunt may have thrown in these 

observations on some system of her own, and it may have been 

ingenious, or even subtle: but the key to it was wanted. 

Patriarchal household promoted quiet digestion) began with some 

soup, some fried soles, a butter-boat of shrimp sauce, and a dish 

of potatoes.  The conversation still turned on the receipt of 

Mr Pancks courageously nodded his head and said, 'All right, 

ma'am.'  But the effect of this mysterious communication upon 

Clennam was absolutely to frighten him.  And another circumstance 

invested this old lady with peculiar terrors.  Though she was 

inclinations on the subject of potatoes.  His expressive action 

would be hopelessly lost upon her, and what could he do?  No man 

from the spoon, as Clennam did, cowed and baffled. 

remotest way connected with ganders--and the dinner went on like a 

disenchanted feast, as it truly was.  Once upon a time Clennam had 

sat at that table taking no heed of anything but Flora; now the 

principal heed he took of Flora was to observe, against his will, 

sherry with sentiment, and that if she were a little overgrown, it 

always been a mighty eater, and he disposed of an immense quantity 

of solid food with the benignity of a good soul who was feeding 

some one else.  Mr Pancks, who was always in a hurry, and who 

referred at intervals to a little dirty notebook which he kept 

beside him (perhaps containing the names of the defaulters he meant 

about, and a puff and a snort occasionally, as if he were nearly 

ready to steam away. 

and drinking with her past appetite for romantic love, in a way 

that made Clennam afraid to lift his eyes from his plate; since he 

could not look towards her without receiving some glance of 

Mr F.'s Aunt sat silently defying him with an aspect of the 

greatest bitterness, until the removal of the cloth and the 

appearance of the decanters, when she originated another 

consulting anybody. 

for Mr F.'s Aunt?' 

London was not the fire in which your uncle George's workshops was 

burned down.' 

or other ill-usage, Mr F.'s Aunt, instead of relapsing into 

silence, made the following additional proclamation: 

extremely injurious and personal a character by levelling it 

straight at the visitor's head, that it became necessary to lead Mr 

F.'s Aunt from the room.  This was quietly done by Flora; Mr F.'s 

come there for, then?' with implacable animosity. 

lady, but was sometimes a little singular, and 'took dislikes'-- 

peculiarities of which Flora seemed to be proud rather than 

no fault to find with the old lady for eliciting it, now that he 

was relieved from the terrors of her presence; and they took a 

would shortly get under weigh, and that the Patriarch would go to 

Mr Pancks in which direction he was going? 

'Shall we walk together?' said Arthur. 

memory of the late Mr F. and that she should be at home to-morrow 

at half-past one and that the decrees of Fate were beyond recall 

and that she considered nothing so improbable as that he ever 

frankness to the existing Flora--not the vanished Flora, or the 

mermaid--but Flora wouldn't have it, couldn't have it, was wholly 

destitute of the power of separating herself and him from their 

bygone characters.  He left the house miserably enough; and so much 

more light-headed than ever, that if it had not been his good 

fortune to be towed away, he might, for the first quarter of an 

hour, have drifted anywhere. 

of Flora, he found Pancks at full speed, cropping such scanty 

pasturage of nails as he could find, and snorting at intervals.  

These, in conjunction with one hand in his pocket and his roughened 

reflected. 

to feel it.' 

after.  But I like business,' said Pancks, getting on a little 

faster.  'What's a man made for?' 

he made no answer. 

will pull long faces to me, and say, Poor as you see us, master, 

haven't a word to answer.  What else are you made for?  That 

clinches it.' 

as you like to bolt my meals in, and keep me at it.  Keep me always 

at it, and I'll keep you always at it, you keep somebody else 

always at it.  There you are with the Whole Duty of Man in a 

commercial country.' 

'Have you no taste for anything, Mr Pancks?' 

will show me how.'  He blew off that sound again, and it occurred 

to his companion for the first time that it was his way of 

laughing.  He was a singular man in all respects; he might not have 

been quite in earnest, but that the short, hard, rapid manner in 

which he shot out these cinders of principles, as if it were done 

by mechanical revolvency, seemed irreconcilable with banter. 

anything but advertisements relative to next of kin.  If that's a 

Clennam?' 

character to let a chance escape her.' 

'You'd have heard of something to your advantage.' 

time.' 

Clennam to have it for the asking,' said Pancks, taking his note- 

book from his breast pocket and putting it in again.  'I turn off 

here.  I wish you good night.' 

untrammelled by having any weight in tow, was already puffing away 

into the distance. 

more depressed and cast away if he had been in a wilderness.  He 

turned slowly down Aldersgate Street, and was pondering his way 

people flocked towards him on the same pavement, and he stood aside 

shoulders.  He soon saw that it was a litter, hastily made of a 

scraps of conversation in the crowd, and a muddy bundle carried by 

one man, and a muddy hat carried by another, informed him that an 

had passed him half-a-dozen paces, for some readjustment of the 

of the array. 

him, who stood shaking his head, inviting conversation. 

prosecuted and fined, them Mails.  They come a racing out of Lad 

Mails.' 

of the bystanders who would listen, several voices, out of pure 

sympathy with the sufferer, confirmed him; one voice saying to 

see one on 'em pull up within half a inch of a boy, last night;' 

another, 'I see one on 'em go over a cat, sir--and it might have 

better than against them Mails. 

save his life from them Mails,' argued the first old man; 'and he 

limb.  What can you expect from a poor foreigner who don't know 

nothing about 'em!' 

'Dutchman, sir,' 'Prooshan, sir,' and other conflicting testimony, 

he now heard a feeble voice asking, both in Italian and in French, 

He was immediately handed to the front, to speak to him. 

he asked the man on the litter, in Italian. 

pleases me to hear the old music, though I am very bad.' 

was at a convenient height from the ground, and by stooping he 

could lightly raise the head with one hand and hold the glass to 

his lips with the other.  A little, muscular, brown man, with black 

ears. 

'Marseilles.' 

though born here, I came from Marseilles a little while ago.  Don't 

be cast down.'  The face looked up at him imploringly, as he rose 

from wiping it, and gently replaced the coat that covered the 

care of.  Courage!  You will be very much better half an hour 

hence.' 

to give the forefinger a back-handed shake in the air. 

encouraging word now and then, accompanied it to the neighbouring 

hospital of Saint Bartholomew.  None of the crowd but the bearers 

a cool, methodical way, and carefully examined by a surgeon who was 

as near at hand, and as ready to appear as Calamity herself.  'He 

examination with a businesslike delight in it, 'before we 

pronounce.' 

and two hands, and over and under, and up and down, and in this 

clapped the patient on the shoulder, and said, 'He won't hurt.  

He'll do very well.  It's difficult enough, but we shall not want 

the patient, who was full of gratitude, and, in his demonstrative 

times. 

There's a compound fracture above the knee, and a dislocation 

friendly clap on the shoulder again, as if he really felt that he 

was a very good fellow indeed, and worthy of all commendation for 

having broken his leg in a manner interesting to science. 

pain like a brave fellow, my friend, and to be thankful that all 

goes as well as it does,' he added, in that tongue, 'and you'll 

else the matter, and how our ribs are?' 

Clennam remained until everything possible to be done had been 

to which he was in due time removed, until he had fallen into a 

promise to return to-morrow, and left it to be given to him when he 

should awake. 

All these proceedings occupied so long that it struck eleven 

o'clock at night as he came out at the Hospital Gate.  He had hired 

way to that quarter, by Snow Hill and Holborn. 

last adventure, he was naturally in a thoughtful mood.  As 

recalling Flora.  She necessarily recalled to him his life, with 

all its misdirection and little happiness. 

he had stood at the window of his old room looking out upon the 

remembrance; that one remembrance proved, only that day, to be a 

piece of folly. 

another.  For, while all that was hard and stern in his 

recollection, remained Reality on being proved--was obdurate to the 

sight and touch, and relaxed nothing of its old indomitable 

former night, when he had dreamed with waking eyes.  but he had not 

felt it then; and he had now. 

rooted in his nature, a belief in all the gentle and good things 

had rescued him to be a man of honourable mind and open hand.  Bred 

his Creator to the making of his Creator in the image of an erring 

man, this had rescued him to judge not, and in humility to be 

merciful, and have hope and charity. 

Leaving himself in the dark, it could rise into the light, seeing 

it shine on others and hailing it. 

on the way by which other men had come to it.  That he should have 

him for any staff to bear him company upon his downward journey and 

blaze departed, from which the afterglow subsided, in which the 

'How soon I too shall pass through such changes, and be gone!' 

flower, and seeing all the branches wither and drop off, one by 

one, as he came down towards them. 

my long exile, my return, my mother's welcome, my intercourse with 

Arthur Clennam, 'what have I found!' 

and came as if they were an answer: 

CHAPTER 14 

shall begin that course by seeing him. 

a place with famous coffee-houses, where gentlemen wearing gold- 

laced coats and swords had quarrelled and fought duels; costly 

winter at guineas a-piece, pine-apples at guineas a pound, and peas 

where there was a mighty theatre, showing wonderful and beautiful 

ideas of Covent Garden, as having all those arches in it, where the 

miserable children in rags among whom she had just now passed, like 

young rats, slunk and hid, fed on offal, huddled together for 

want, beauty, ugliness, fair country gardens, and foul street 

in Little Dorrit's eyes, as they timidly saw it from the door. 

round wondering to see her, was the gentleman whom she sought.  The 

brown, grave gentleman, who smiled so pleasantly, who was so frank 

was something that reminded her of his mother, with the great 

fell still. 

must be very much surprised.' 

of her name, Maggy appeared from the landing outside, on the broad 

became fixedly solemn. 

to say so lightly clad, but stopped himself in what would have been 

a reference to her poverty, saying instead, 'And it is so cold.' 

heaped them together and got a blaze. 

she hid her thin, worn shoe. 

did he dine to-day, and leave this little creature to the mercy of 

the cold stones!'  She had no belief that it would have been a just 

sometimes present themselves to people.  It was a part of her 

father's misfortunes that they did. 

the pale fire, and raising her eyes again to the face which in its 

harmonious look of interest, and pity, and protection, she felt to 

be a mystery far above her in degree, and almost removed beyond her 

guessing at; 'may I tell you something, sir?' 

A slight shade of distress fell upon her, at his so often calling 

such a slight thing; but he said directly: 

now gave yourself the name they give you at my mother's, and as 

Little Dorrit.' 

correction. 

could be.  There was a glow of pride in her big child, 

overspreading her face, when it again met the eyes of the grave 

brown gentleman.  She wondered what he was thinking of, as he 

looked at Maggy and her.  She thought what a good father he would 

be.  How, with some such look, he would counsel and cherish his 

daughter. 

MY brother is at large.' 

trembling in all her little figure and in her voice, 'is, that I am 

not to know whose generosity released him--am never to ask, and am 

grateful heart!' 

would be thankful himself (and with reason), that he had had the 

means and chance of doing a little service to her, who well 

deserved a great one. 

tell him that he can never, never know how I feel his goodness, and 

how my good father would feel it.  And what I was going to say, 

sir, is, that if I knew him, and I might--but I don't know him and 

I must not--I know that!--I would tell him that I shall never any 

more lie down to sleep without having prayed to Heaven to bless him 

and reward him.  And if I knew him, and I might, I would go down on 

my thankful tears fall on it; for I have no other thanks to give 

him!' 

to him, but he gently prevented her, and replaced her in her chair. 

that it was all done.  And now tell me, Who am quite another 

person--who am nothing more than the friend who begged you to trust 

far through the streets at this late hour, my slight, delicate,' 

child was on his lips again, 'Little Dorrit!' 

with the quiet effort that had long been natural to her, 'to the 

theatre where my sister is engaged.' 

seemed to have the power of going to sleep and waking up whenever 

Chicking in it.' 

'because I like sometimes to know, of my own knowledge, that my 

sister is doing well; and like to see her there, with my own eyes, 

I can do that, because when I am not out at work, I am with my 

I pretend to-night that I am at a party.' 

to the face, and read its expression so plainly that she answered 

it.  'Oh no, certainly!  I never was at a party in my life.'  She 

paused a little under his attentive look, and then said, 'I hope 

there is no harm in it.  I could never have been of any use, if I 

had not pretended a little.' 

contrive for them, think for them, and watch over them, without 

for supposed neglect.  But what was really in his mind, was the 

weak figure with its strong purpose, the thin worn shoes, the 

insufficient dress, and the pretence of recreation and enjoyment.  

He asked where the suppositious party was?  At a place where she 

And she glanced for an instant at the shawl she wore. 

away from home.  And London looks so large, so barren, and so 

wild.'  In Little Dorrit's eyes, its vastness under the black sky 

was awful; a tremor passed over her as she said the words. 

was the first cause of my coming away from home.  And being away, 

and coming (on purpose) round by where you lived and seeing a light 

in the window--' 

Dorrit's eyes, the outside of that window had been a distant star 

on other nights than this.  She had toiled out of her way, tired 

gentleman from so far off, who had spoken to her as a friend and 

protector. 

First, what I have tried to say, but never can--never shall--' 

'Hush, hush!  That is done with, and disposed of.  Let us pass to 

her on the table. 

think Mrs Clennam must have found out my secret, and must know 

where I come from and where I go to.  Where I live, I mean.' 

consideration, why she supposed so. 

watched me.' 

his brows, and considered again; why did she suppose that? 

when I was going back.  Both times I thought (though that may 

accident.' 

'Did he say anything?' 

fire; 'it's always on one side.' 

and shy--and then said, musing again: 

'Is my mother at all changed to you?' 

Dorrit, looking at him in a suppliant way, and gradually 

withdrawing her eyes as he looked at her, 'whether you would advise 

me what I ought to do.' 

between these two, to stand for a hundred gentle phrases, according 

to the varying tone and connection in which it was used; 'do 

nothing.  I will have some talk with my old friend, Mrs Affery.  Do 

nothing, Little Dorrit--except refresh yourself with such means as 

there are here.  I entreat you to do that.' 

softly put her glass towards her, 'nor thirsty.--I think Maggy 

might like something, perhaps.' 

said Clennam: 'but before we awake her, there was a third thing to 

say.' 

it unreasonable or ungrateful in me,' said Little Dorrit, with 

returning and increasing agitation. 

afraid that I shall put a wrong construction on it, whatever it 

is.' 

saying that you are coming to-morrow?' 

not to do?' 

'No, you are not wrong,' said Little Dorrit, shaking her head.  'If 

let me ask you for it.' 

Don't give it to him.  Save him and spare him that, and you will be 

able to think better of him!' 

her anxious eyes--that her wish should be sacred with him. 

delicately and truly good, that I want him to be better in your 

that you of all the world should see him in his only moments of 

degradation.' 

Dorrit!  This is quite understood now.' 

from saying this; I have thought about it, days and nights; but 

when I knew for certain you were coming again, I made up my mind to 

speak to you.  Not because I am ashamed of him,' she dried her 

and love him, and am proud of him.' 

gone.  Maggy being broad awake, and in the act of distantly 

gloating over the fruit and cakes with chuckles of anticipation, 

with her eyes in a prominent state, 'Oh, ain't it d'licious!  Ain't 

it hospitally!'  When she had finished the wine and these 

her basket) with every eatable thing upon the table, and to take 

especial care to leave no scrap behind.  Maggy's pleasure in doing 

as good a turn as circumstances could have given to the late 

conversation. 

suddenly remembering it.  'Where are you going?' 

be quite safe, quite well taken care of.' 

alone.' 

Little Dorrit. 

obtruding himself upon her: the rather, because he could well 

understand that Maggy's lodging was of the obscurest sort.  'Come, 

Maggy,' said Little Dorrit cheerily, 'we shall do very well; we 

know the way by this time, Maggy?' 

away they went.  Little Dorrit turned at the door to say, 'God 

as audible above--who knows!--as a whole cathedral choir. 

a second time on Little Dorrit's privacy, but to satisfy his mind 

by seeing her secure in the neighbourhood to which she was 

against the bleak damp weather, flitting along in the shuffling 

habit of considering her a child apart from the rest of the rough 

carry her to her journey's end. 

any risk of being houseless until morning; had no idea of the truth 

until long, long afterwards. 

this is a good lodging for you, Maggy, and we must not give 

offence.  Consequently, we will only knock twice, and not very 

dear.  We must be patient, and wait for day.' 

out into the leading street again, and heard the clocks strike 

half-past one.  'In only five hours and a half,' said Little 

Dorrit, 'we shall be able to go home.'  To speak of home, and to go 

and look at it, it being so near, was a natural sequence.  They 

'I hope he is sound asleep,' said Little Dorrit, kissing one of the 

bars, 'and does not miss me.' 

down Maggy's basket in a corner to serve for a seat, and keeping 

empty and silent, Little Dorrit was not afraid; but when she heard 

Come away!'  Maggy would then wake up more or less fretfully, and 

they would wander about a little, and come back again. 

the cold, and shivered and whimpered.  'It will soon be over, 

dear,' said Little Dorrit patiently.  'Oh it's all very fine for 

you, little mother,' returned Maggy, 'but I'm a poor thing, only 

ten years old.'  At last, in the dead of the night, when the street 

it were alone; looking up at the stars, and seeing the clouds pass 

over them in their wild flight--which was the dance at Little 

Dorrit's party. 

'If it was light and warm and beautiful, and it was our house, and 

could be!  I wonder--' Such a vista of wonder opened out before 

her, that she sat looking up at the stars, quite lost, until Maggy 

was querulous again, and wanted to get up and walk. 

little spots of lighted water where the bridge lamps were 

reflected, shining like demon eyes, with a terrible fascination in 

them for guilt and misery.  They had shrunk past homeless people, 

lying coiled up in nooks.  They had run from drunkards.  They had 

bye corners, or running away at full speed.  Though everywhere the 

leader and the guide, Little Dorrit, happy for once in her youthful 

appearance, feigned to cling to and rely upon Maggy.  And more than 

once some voice, from among a knot of brawling or prowling figures 

in their path, had called out to the rest to 'let the woman and the 

child go by!' 

sounded from the steeples.  They were walking slowly towards the 

east, already looking for the first pale streak of day, when a 

woman came after them. 

sound. 

better answer. 

'I don't know as I can,' said Maggy. 

doing with the child?' 

close at Maggy's side. 

her out in the cruel streets at such a time as this?  Have you no 

eyes, that you don't see how delicate and slender she is?  Have you 

more pity on this cold and trembling little hand?' 

own two, chafing it.  'Kiss a poor lost creature, dear,' she said, 

bending her face, 'and tell me where's she taking you.' 

that had suddenly released hers.  'I am not afraid of you.' 

child.' 

you can't look at me out of a child's eyes.  I never should have 

touched you, but I thought that you were a child.'  And with a 

strange, wild cry, she went away. 

of the streets; in the waggons, carts, and coaches; in the workers 

traffic at markets; in the stir of the riverside.  There was coming 

day in the flaring lights, with a feebler colour in them than they 

would have had at another time; coming day in the increased 

sharpness of the air, and the ghastly dying of the night. 

went up the steps and looked in. 

as if he were going to bed in a vault. 

present herself and her charge before him. 

I have been at church here.' 

you're one of our curiosities.' 

so early?' 

the vestry.  You'll find a fire in the vestry, on account of the 

painters.  I'm waiting for the painters, or I shouldn't be here, 

when we have it in our power to warm her up comfortable.  Come 

along.' 

stirred the vestry fire, he looked round the shelves of registers 

you have lived there, without so much as a day's or a night's 

absence, ever since.  Is it true?' 

Something else to him, to wit: 'I am sorry to see, though, that you 

are faint and tired.  Stay a bit.  I'll get some cushions out of 

opens.  I'll call you.' 

He soon brought in the cushions, and strewed them on the ground. 

thanking.  I've daughters of my own.  And though they weren't born 

must put something under the cushion for your head.  Here's a 

burial volume.  just the thing!  We have got Mrs Bangham in this 

book.  But what makes these books interesting to most people is-- 

not who's in 'em, but who isn't--who's coming, you know, and when.  

That's the interesting question.' 

Dorrit was soon fast asleep with her head resting on that sealed 

book of Fate, untroubled by its mysterious blank leaves. 

wretchedness, and exposure of the great capital; the wet, the cold, 

the party from which Little Dorrit went home, jaded, in the first 

grey mist of a rainy morning. 

CHAPTER 15 

The debilitated old house in the city, wrapped in its mantle of 

decay and worn out with it, never knew a healthy or a cheerful 

interval, let what would betide.  If the sun ever touched it, it 

was but with a ray, and that was gone in half an hour; if the 

moonlight ever fell upon it, it was only to put a few patches on 

its doleful cloak, and make it look more wretched.  The stars, to 

be sure, coldly watched it when the nights and the smoke were clear 

should alike find rain, hail, frost, and thaw lingering in that 

dismal enclosure when they had vanished from other places; and as 

to snow, you should see it there for weeks, long after it had 

changed from yellow to black, slowly weeping away its grimy life.  

The place had no other adherents.  As to street noises, the 

going past, and rushed out again: making the listening Mistress 

by instantaneous flashes.  So with whistling, singing, talking, 

moment, and went upon their way. 

The varying light of fire and candle in Mrs Clennam's room made the 

greatest change that ever broke the dead monotony of the spot.  In 

her two long narrow windows, the fire shone sullenly all day, and 

sullenly all night.  On rare occasions it flashed up passionately, 

as she did; but for the most part it was suppressed, like her, and 

preyed upon itself evenly and slowly.  During many hours of the 

going, would be thrown upon the house wall that was over the 

gateway, and would hover there like shadows from a great magic 

would gradually disappear: Mistress Affery's magnified shadow 

always flitting about, last, until it finally glided away into the 

air, as though she were off upon a witch excursion.  Then the 

the dawn, and at last died under the breath of Mrs Affery, as her 

shadow descended on it from the witch-region of sleep. 

summoning some one, and that the most unlikely some one in the 

sick-room light were in effect a watch-light, burning in that place 

every night until an appointed event should be watched out!  Which 

of the vast multitude of travellers, under the sun and the stars, 

climbing the dusty hills and toiling along the weary plains, 

journeying by land and journeying by sea, coming and going so 

surely hither? 

Abbey and a seaman's hammock in the bosom of the deep, the mitre 

guillotine--the travellers to all are on the great high road, but 

it has wonderful divergencies, and only Time shall show us whither 

each traveller is bound. 

heavy all day, dreamed this dream: 

skirt of her gown tucked up, before the collapsed fire in the 

quick beats like a rapid step; while a shock or tremble was 

communicated to her heart, as if the step had shaken the floor, or 

even as if she had been touched by some awful hand.  She thought 

that this revived within her certain old fears of hers that the 

knowing how she got up, to be nearer company. 

she went to the ripped-up window in the little room by the street 

door to connect her palpitating heart, through the glass, with 

shoes in her hand, partly to be near the clever ones as a match for 

most ghosts, and partly to hear what they were talking about. 

it from you.' 

just ajar, and most distinctly heard her husband say these bold 

words. 

'there is a demon of anger in you.  Guard against it.' 

nonsense with me, I won't take it from you--I'd make 'em say it, 

whether they liked it or not.' 

sticking to his figurative expression with tenacious and 

impenetrable obstinacy: 'I mean dropped down upon me.' 

chuckled at having forced her to adopt his phrase,) 'for having 

to complain of it as almost a breach of confidence.  You did not 

mean it--' 

back the concession.  'I did mean it.' 

she replied, after a pause that seemed an angry one.  'It is 

useless my addressing myself to a rash and headstrong old man who 

has a set purpose not to hear me.' 

no such purpose.  I have told you I did mean it.  Do you wish to 

know why I meant it, you rash and headstrong old woman?' 

with her indignation.  'Yes.' 

and you ought to have done it.  Because, before you went into any 

tantrum about yourself, who are--' 

may go a word too far.' 

had altered his position in the room, when he spoke again more 

mildly: 

father.  Arthur's father!  I had no particular love for Arthur's 

father.  I served Arthur's father's uncle, in this house, when 

Arthur's father was not much above me--was poorer as far as his 

pocket went--and when his uncle might as soon have left me his heir 

as have left him.  He starved in the parlour, and I starved in the 

was not much more than a flight of breakneck stairs between us.  I 

young.  And when he brought you home here, the wife his uncle had 

looking woman at that time) to know who'd be master.  You have 

now.  Don't lean against the dead.' 

Jeremiah, 'and that's why you drop down upon me.  You can't forget 

that I didn't submit.  I suppose you are astonished that I should 

consider it worth my while to have justice done to Arthur's father? 

is.  I may be a bit of an oddity in point of temper, but this is my 

temper--I can't let anybody have entirely their own way.  You are 

a determined woman, and a clever woman; and when you see your 

purpose before you, nothing will turn you from it.  Who knows that 

better than I do?' 

to myself.  Add that.' 

you'll do it.' 

cried, with stern emphasis, and appearing from the sound that 

followed to strike the dead-weight of her arm upon the table. 

purposes, and you make everything go down before them.  Now, I 

lost in you.  Swallow up everybody else, and welcome.  The 

alive.' 

understanding between them.  Descrying thus much of force of 

character in Mr Flintwinch, perhaps Mrs Clennam had deemed alliance 

with him worth her while. 

Flintwinch, 'and then you must expect to hear of it again.' 

she ran away; but that, as he did not issue forth when she had 

stood listening and trembling in the shadowy hall a little time, 

she crept up-stairs again, impelled as before by ghosts and 

curiosity, and once more cowered outside the door. 

nearly time for tea.  Little Dorrit is coming, and will find me in 

the dark.' 

down upon the table: 

work here for ever?  To come to tea here for ever?  To come 

backwards and forwards here, in the same way, for ever?' 

Are we not all cut down like the grass of the field, and was not I 

shorn by the scythe many years ago: since when I have been lying 

here, waiting to be gathered into the barn?' 

women, strong men, and what not, have been cut down and carried; 

time and mine may be a long one yet.  When I say for ever, I mean 

answer. 

need of the slight help I can give her, and deserves it; so long, 

to come here, I being spared.' 

chin. 

than that!' she ejaculated in her sternly wondering way. 

other fixedly. 

demanded in a much lower voice, and with an amount of expression 

words, 'where she lives?' 

pounce as if he had sprung upon her. 

her any day?' 

reading them off from separate bits of metal that she took up one 

secret from me.' 

how?' said Jeremiah; and he said it with a twist, as if his words 

had come out of him in his own wry shape. 

energy that made Affery start, 'why do you goad me?  Look round 

this room.  If it is any compensation for my long confinement 

pleasant change I am also shut up from the knowledge of some things 

grudge me that belief?' 

from me, and do you keep it from me also.  Let her come and go, 

alleviation belongs to my condition.  Is it so much, that you 

torment me like an evil spirit?' 

sound of the wheeled chair was heard upon the floor, and Affery's 

bell rang with a hasty jerk. 

as she could, descended the kitchen stairs almost as rapidly as she 

in despite of which importunate summons, Affery still sat behind 

her apron, recovering her breath. 

still remaining behind her apron, he came stumbling down the 

kitchen stairs, candle in hand, sidled up to her, twitched her 

apron off, and roused her. 

rung for fifty times.' 

the candle to her head, as if he had some idea of lighting her up 

for the illumination of the kitchen. 

grin, and giving one of the legs of Mistress Affery's chair a kick. 

I think it must be that.' 

about?' 

the kitchen here--just here.' 

walls. 

Jeremiah; I have felt it before.  I have felt it up-stairs, and 

night--a rustle and a sort of trembling touch behind me.' 

nose to that lady's lips as a test for the detection of spirituous 

liquors, 'if you don't get tea pretty quick, old woman, you'll 

the other end of the kitchen.' 

hasten up-stairs to Mrs Clennam's chamber.  But, for all that, she 

now began to entertain a settled conviction that there was 

something wrong in the gloomy house.  Henceforth, she was never at 

peace in it after daylight departed; and never went up or down 

stairs in the dark without having her apron over her head, lest she 

should see something. 

her new experiences and perceptions, as everything about her was 

mysterious to herself she began to be mysterious to others: and 

found the house and everything in it difficult to make out to her 

own. 

knock came to the door which always announced Little Dorrit.  

Mistress Affery looked on at Little Dorrit taking off her homely 

bonnet in the hall, and at Mr Flintwinch scraping his jaws and 

contemplating her in silence, as expecting some wonderful 

or blow them all three to pieces. 

'Affery, I am glad it's you.  I want to ask you a question.'  

Affery immediately replied, 'For goodness sake don't ask me 

dreamed out of the other.  Don't ask me nothing!  I don't know 

from him, and came near him no more. 

inclination, now sat every night in the dimness from which she had 

momentarily emerged on the evening of Arthur Clennam's return, 

her mistress and her husband and the noises in the house.  When the 

would distract Mistress Affery's eyes towards the door, as if she 

make the party one too many. 

except on certain occasions, generally at about the quiet hour 

towards bed-time, when she would suddenly dart out of her dim 

What's that noise?' 

dose, old woman, such a dose!  You have been dreaming again!' 

CHAPTER 16 

The time being come for the renewal of his acquaintance with the 

Meagles family, Clennam, pursuant to contract made between himself 

and Mr Meagles within the precincts of Bleeding Heart Yard, turned 

his face on a certain Saturday towards Twickenham, where Mr Meagles 

dry, and any English road abounding in interest for him who had 

had rarely diversified his life afar off. 

the heath.  It was bright and shining there; and when he found 

himself so far on his road to Twickenham, he found himself a long 

way on his road to a number of airier and less substantial 

destinations.  They had risen before him fast, in the healthful 

the country without musing upon something.  And he had plenty of 

the Land's End. 

as he began to consider how to increase this inheritance, or to lay 

it by, so often his misgiving that there was some one with an 

subject to outlast the longest walk.  Again, there was the subject 

of his relations with his mother, which were now upon an equable 

and peaceful but never confidential footing, and whom he saw 

subject: for the circumstances of his life, united to those of her 

own story, presented the little creature to him as the only person 

one hand, and affectionate protection on the other; ties of 

compassion, respect, unselfish interest, gratitude, and pity.  

Thinking of her, and of the possibility of her father's release 

circumstance he could foresee that might enable him to be such a 

life, smoothing her rough road, and giving her a home--he regarded 

her, in that perspective, as his adopted daughter, his poor child 

of the Marshalsea hushed to rest.  If there were a last subject in 

his thoughts, and it lay towards Twickenham, its form was so 

which these other subjects floated before him. 

which, as he gained upon it, he thought he knew.  He derived this 

impression from something in the turn of the head, and in the 

figure's action of consideration, as it went on at a sufficiently 

sturdy walk.  But when the man--for it was a man's figure--pushed 

object before him, he knew it to be Daniel Doyce. 

glad to see you again, and in a healthier place than the 

Circumlocution Office.' 

his hand.  'I am glad to see you, sir.  Will you excuse me if I 

forget your name?' 

Clennam.  How do you do, Mr Clennam?' 

we may be going to the same place, Mr Doyce.' 

of conversation.  The ingenious culprit was a man of great modesty 

and good sense; and, though a plain man, had been too much 

accustomed to combine what was original and daring in conception 

an ordinary man.  It was at first difficult to lead him to speak 

by admitting slightly, oh yes, he had done this, and he had done 

was his discovery, but it was his trade, you see, his trade; until, 

as he gradually became assured that his companion had a real 

interest in his account of himself, he frankly yielded to it.  Then 

had originally been apprenticed by his widowed mother to a lock- 

maker; that he had 'struck out a few little things' at the lock- 

maker's, which had led to his being released from his indentures 

wish to bind himself to a working engineer, under whom he had 

Clyde, where he had studied, and filed, and hammered, and improved 

his knowledge, theoretical and practical, for six or seven years 

more.  There he had had an offer to go to Lyons, which he had 

accepted; and from Lyons had been engaged to go to Germany, and in 

elsewhere.  And so he had come home.  And so at home he had 

established himself in business, and had invented and executed, and 

service, he had been enrolled in the Great British Legion of 

and had been decorated with the Great British Order of Merit, the 

Order of the Disorder of the Barnacles and Stiltstalkings. 

your thoughts that way, Mr Doyce.' 

nation, he must follow where it leads him.' 

'Hadn't he better let it go?' said Clennam. 

smile.  'It's not put into his head to be buried.  It's put into 

that to the last you shall struggle hard for it.  Every man holds 

a discovery on the same terms.' 

quiet companion, 'you are not finally discouraged even now?' 

is as true as it ever was.' 

too abruptly, asked Mr Doyce if he had any partner in his business 

to relieve him of a portion of its anxieties? 

I could not easily take to the notion of another when I lost him, 

I bought his share for myself and have gone on by myself ever 

inventor can be a man of business, you know.' 

and laughing outright.  'I don't know why we unfortunate creatures 

should be supposed to want common sense, but it is generally taken 

our excellent friend over yonder,' said Doyce, nodding towards 

a man not quite able to take care of himself?' 

for he recognised the truth of the description. 

not guilty of any inventions,' said Daniel Doyce, taking off his 

hat to pass his hand over his forehead, 'if it's only in deference 

to the current opinion, and to uphold the credit of the Works.  I 

my way of conducting them; but that's for him to say--whoever he 

is--not for me.' 

'You have not chosen him yet, then?' 

The fact is, there's more to do than there used to be, and the 

Works are enough for me as I grow older.  What with the books and 

correspondence, and foreign journeys for which a Principal is 

negotiating the matter, if I find a spare half-hour between this 

and Monday morning, with my--my Nurse and protector,' said Doyce, 

has had a good apprenticeship to it.' 

at their journey's end.  A composed and unobtrusive self- 

sustainment was noticeable in Daniel Doyce--a calm knowledge that 

what was true must remain true, in spite of all the Barnacles in 

less when even that sea had run dry--which had a kind of greatness 

in it, though not of the official quality. 

that showed it to the best advantage.  It was a charming place 

(none the worse for being a little eccentric), on the road by the 

May of the Year as Pet now was in the May of her life; and it was 

defended by a goodly show of handsome trees and spreading 

evergreens, as Pet was by Mr and Mrs Meagles.  It was made out of 

so there was a hale elderly portion, to represent Mr and Mrs 

Pet.  There was even the later addition of a conservatory 

sheltering itself against it, uncertain of hue in its deep-stained 

glass, and in its more transparent portions flashing to the sun's 

have stood for Tattycoram.  Within view was the peaceful river and 

the ferry-boat, to moralise to all the inmates saying: Young or 

old, passionate or tranquil, chafing or content, you, thus runs the 

current always.  Let the heart swell into what discord it will, 

thus plays the rippling water on the prow of the ferry-boat ever 

the rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet, upon 

road of time, are so capricious and distracted. 

to receive them.  Mr Meagles had scarcely come out, when Mrs 

Meagles came out.  Mrs Meagles had scarcely come out, when Pet came 

out.  Pet scarcely had come out, when Tattycoram came out.  Never 

had visitors a more hospitable reception. 

within our own home-limits, as if we were never going to expand-- 

marshonging here!' 

him. 

wasn't it?  Do you know, I have often wished myself back again?  We 

were a capital party.' 

to it when he was not travelling. 

your account, and in order that you might see the place at its 

and the birds, being practical people too, come about us in 

I shall drop the Mister); I heartily assure you, we are delighted.' 

recalled what Little Dorrit had said to him in his own room, and 

looking down at the Mediterranean.' 

wasn't it?  I don't want a military government, but I shouldn't 

neighbourhood sometimes.  It's Devilish still.' 

observed in the covered frames and furniture, and wrapped-up 

were always coming back the day after to-morrow.  Of articles 

collected on his various expeditions, there was such a vast 

houses in that department of industry; bits of mummy from Egypt 

(and perhaps Birmingham); model gondolas from Venice; model 

villages from Switzerland; morsels of tesselated pavement from 

Moorish slippers, Tuscan hairpins, Carrara sculpture, Trastaverini 

cameos, Geneva jewellery, Arab lanterns, rosaries blest all round 

views, like and unlike, of a multitude of places; and there was one 

little picture-room devoted to a few of the regular sticky old 

tongue a Catch-em-alive O.  Of these pictorial acquisitions Mr 

Meagles spoke in the usual manner.  He was no judge, he said, 

rate ought to know something of the subject, had declared that 

'Sage, Reading' (a specially oily old gentleman in a blanket, with 

like rich pie-crust), to be a fine Guercino.  As for Sebastian del 

Piombo there, you would judge for yourself; if it were not his 

might not be--perhaps he had only touched it.  Daniel Doyce said 

overhear the remark. 

a scoop for shovelling out money. 

four-and-twenty blackbirds, counting out my money.' 

pretty little girls with their arms entwined.  'Yes, Clennam,' said 

some seventeen years ago.  As I often say to Mother, they were 

babies then.' 

name is Minnie; her sister's Lillie.' 

me?' asked Pet herself, now standing in the doorway. 

is not your portrait.' 

followed her daughter.  'It's always the same, Clennam; nobody can 

decide.  The child to your left is Pet.' 

at it again, he saw, by the reflection of the mirror, Tattycoram 

pass away with an angry and contemptuous frown upon her face, that 

changed its beauty into ugliness. 

jack.' 

to itself on any account.  'Figures, and wheels, and cogs, and 

levers, and screws, and cylinders, and a thousand things.' 

the less.  But never mind, never mind!  Whatever pleases you, 

pleases me.' 

room by the fire, whether there might be in the breast of this 

honest, affectionate, and cordial Mr Meagles, any microscopic 

portion of the mustard-seed that had sprung up into the great tree 

of the Circumlocution Office.  His curious sense of a general 

much on anything in Doyce's personal character as on the mere fact 

of his being an originator and a man out of the beaten track of 

other men, suggested the idea.  It might have occupied him until he 

before he was in quarantine at Marseilles, and which had now 

returned to it, and was very urgent with it.  No less a question 

than this: Whether he should allow himself to fall in love with 

Pet? 

other, and tried the calculation again, but could not bring out the 

total at less.) He was twice her age.  Well!  He was young in 

appearance, young in health and strength, young in heart.  A man 

was certainly not old at forty; and many men were not in 

he thought of the point, but what she thought of it. 

for him, and he knew that he had a sincere regard for Mr Meagles 

and his good wife.  He could foresee that to relinquish this 

beautiful only child, of whom they were so fond, to any husband, 

of approaching it.  And why not in his favour, as well as in 

another's? 

it. 

this point, his hopes began to fail him.  He came to the final 

allow himself to fall in love with Pet. 

indeed.  They had so many places and people to recall, and they 

were all so easy and cheerful together (Daniel Doyce either sitting 

out like an amused spectator at cards, or coming in with some 

shrewd little experiences of his own, when it happened to be to the 

have known so much of one another. 

of fellow-travellers.  'Has anybody seen Miss Wade?' 

for, and was bending over her, putting it on, when she lifted up 

her dark eyes and made this unexpected answer. 

where?' 

answer 'With my eyes!'  But her only answer in words was: 'I met 

her near the church.' 

'What was she doing there I wonder!' said Mr Meagles.  'Not going 

to it, I should think.' 

as if some one else was touching me!' 

done, who laughed next moment.  Tattycoram set her full red lips 

together, and crossed her arms upon her bosom. 

'Did you wish to know, sir,' she said, looking at Mr Meagles, 'what 

Miss Wade wrote to me about?' 

question, and we are all friends here, perhaps you may as well 

mention it, if you are so inclined.' 

Tattycoram, 'and she had seen me not quite--not quite--' 

little time--count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.' 

treated.  I was to think of it, and could speak to her by the 

church.  So I went there to thank her.' 

having been so near me without my knowing it.  Tatty dear!' 

Tattycoram.' 

beautiful curls, and Tattycoram went away. 

waiter on his right hand to twirl the sugar towards himself.  

that there are times when that girl's whole nature seems to roughen 

were bound up in her, poor soul.  I don't like to think of the way 

in which that unfortunate child, with all that passion and protest 

in her, feels when she hears the Fifth Commandment on a Sunday.  I 

am always inclined to call out, Church, Count five-and-twenty, 

Tattycoram.' 

in the persons of two parlour-maids with rosy faces and bright 

have anything at all?' 

A certain Mrs Tickit, who was Cook and Housekeeper when the family 

were at home, and Housekeeper only when the family were away, 

completed the establishment.  Mr Meagles regretted that the nature 

of the duties in which she was engaged, rendered Mrs Tickit 

unpresentable at present, but hoped to introduce her to the new 

visitor to-morrow.  She was an important part of the Cottage, he 

said, and all his friends knew her.  That was her picture up in the 

corner.  When they went away, she always put on the silk-gown and 

the jet-black row of curls represented in that portrait (her hair 

was reddish-grey in the kitchen), established herself in the 

Doctor Buchan's Domestic Medicine, and sat looking over the blind 

all day until they came back again.  It was supposed that no 

persuasion could be invented which would induce Mrs Tickit to 

dispense with the attendance of Dr Buchan; the lucubrations of 

never yet consulted to the extent of one word in her life. 

otherwise?  Who could be much with so pliable and beautiful a 

creature, and not yield to her endearing influence?  Who could pass 

of her very presence in the room?  This was Clennam's reflection, 

notwithstanding the final conclusion at which he had arrived up- 

stairs. 

sir?' asked the astonished Mr Meagles, who was his partner. 

Meagles. 

in the morning?  The host replying willingly, Arthur lingered 

behind a moment, having his own word to add to that topic. 

when you advised me to go straight to London?' 

'And when you gave me some other good advice which I needed at that 

time?' 

course I remember our being very pleasant and confidential 

together.' 

an occupation that was painful to me for many reasons, wish to 

devote myself and what means I have, to another pursuit.' 

looking for a partner in his business--not a partner in his 

mechanical knowledge, but in the ways and means of turning the 

business arising from it to the best account.' 

and scoop. 

and opportunities at all likely to coincide, perhaps you will let 

of the details, and they may be unsuitable on both sides.' 

to the scales and scoop. 

belonging to the scales and scoop. 

responds, and you think well of it.  If you will at present, 

therefore, allow me to place it in your hands, you will much oblige 

me.' 

think something may come of this.  Of one thing you may be 

perfectly certain.  Daniel is an honest man.' 

to you.' 

'You must guide him, you know; you must steer him; you must direct 

him; he is one of a crotchety sort,' said Mr Meagles, evidently 

meaning nothing more than that he did new things and went new ways; 

'but he is as honest as the sun, and so good night!' 

Clennam went back to his room, sat down again before his fire, and 

heart, and make the man who should be so happy as to communicate 

it, the most fortunate and enviable of all men, that he was very 

glad indeed he had come to that conclusion. 

conclusion, he followed out the theme again a little way in his 

mind; to justify himself, perhaps. 

some twenty years or so; who was a diffident man, from the 

circumstances of his youth; who was rather a grave man, from the 

engaging qualities which he admired in others, from having been 

no kind sisters to present to her; who had no congenial home to 

make her known in; who was a stranger in the land; who had not a 

nothing in his favour but his honest love and his general wish to 

do right--suppose such a man were to come to this house, and were 

to yield to the captivation of this charming girl, and were to 

would be!' 

Year after year so much allowance for the drifting of the ferry- 

rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet. 

that he had imagined.  It was nobody's, nobody's within his 

to compound for its insensibility to happiness with its 

insensibility to pain. 

him.  As the morning was fine and he had an hour on his hands, he 

crossed the river by the ferry, and strolled along a footpath 

through some meadows.  When he came back to the towing-path, he 

found the ferry-boat on the opposite side, and a gentleman hailing 

it and waiting to be taken over. 

sprightly and gay appearance, a well-knit figure, and a rich dark 

complexion.  As Arthur came over the stile and down to the water's 

occupation of idly tossing stones into the water with his foot.  

with his heel, and getting them into the required position, that 

Clennam thought had an air of cruelty in it.  Most of us have more 

an obstacle, or even destroying an insentient object. 

he took no notice of a fine Newfoundland dog, who watched him 

attentively, and watched every stone too, in its turn, eager to 

spring into the river on receiving his master's sign.  The ferry- 

boat came over, however, without his receiving any sign, and when 

it grounded his master took him by the collar and walked him into 

it. 

company, dripping wet.  Lie down.' 

Clennam followed the man and the dog into the boat, and took his 

seat.  The dog did as he was ordered.  The man remained standing, 

with his hands in his pockets, and towered between Clennam and the 

prospect.  Man and dog both jumped lightly out as soon as they 

of them. 

little lane by which the garden-gate was approached.  The moment he 

wall. 

by one of the rosy maids, and on the lawn were the Newfoundland dog 

and the man. 

to the master of the dog, 'Mr Clennam, sir,' and tripped away. 

the man.  Upon which the dog became mute.  'Allow me to introduce 

myself--Henry Gowan.  A pretty place this, and looks wonderfully 

well this morning!' 

thought, that if he had not made that decided resolution to avoid 

falling in love with Pet, he would have taken a dislike to this 

Henry Gowan. 

extolled the place. 

like you to have seen it then.' 

wished him in the crater of Mount Etna, in return for this 

civility. 

during the last three years, and it's--a Paradise.' 

made her out within her hearing to be an angel, Confusion to him!  

And ah!  how beaming she looked, and how glad!  How she caressed 

the dog, and how the dog knew her!  How expressive that heightened 

colour in her face, that fluttered manner, her downcast eyes, her 

irresolute happiness!  When had Clennam seen her look like this?  

Not that there was any reason why he might, could, would, or should 

himself to see her look like this; but still--when had he ever 

known her do it! 

talked about a Paradise, had gone up to her and taken her hand.  

her dear bosom.  She had laughed and welcomed them, and made far 

there had been any third person looking on who loved her. 

in his and wished him good morning, and gracefully made as if she 

would take his arm and be escorted into the house.  To this Gowan 

had no objection.  No, he knew he was too safe. 

they all three (four, counting the dog, and he was the most 

it, nor the touch of uneasiness on Mrs Meagles as she directed her 

eyes towards it, was unobserved by Clennam. 

the world with you this morning?' 

Kingston, my present headquarters, where I am making a sketch or 

they had come over together. 

attentive.) 

inattentive.) 'I have taken the liberty of making an addition to 

your family dinner-party to-day, which I hope will not be 

of it,' he explained, turning to the latter.  'The young fellow 

wrote to propose himself to me; and as he is well connected, I 

thought you would not object to my transferring him here.' 

complacency. 

Barnacle, who is in his father's Department.  I can at least 

guarantee that the river shall not suffer from his visit.  He won't 

set it on fire.' 

Lord Decimus now?  His Lordship married, in seventeen ninety-seven, 

Lady Jemima Bilberry, who was the second daughter by the third 

marriage--no!  There I am wrong!  That was Lady Seraphina--Lady 

Jemima was the first daughter by the second marriage of the 

fifteenth Earl of Stiltstalking with the Honourable Clementina 

Toozellem.  Very well.  Now this young fellow's father married a 

Joddleby.--I am getting a little too far back, Gowan; I want to 

full flavour of the genealogical tree.  'By George, you are right, 

Gowan.  So he is.' 

discovery.  'Then on the mother's side, Lady Stiltstalking is his 

great aunt.' 

at all events.' 

harmless outburst from Mr Meagles, like that which had made him 

burst out of the Circumlocution Office, holding Doyce by the 

go into the next street to find, and which no amount of 

Circumlocution experience could long subdue in him.  Clennam looked 

plate, and made no sign, and said no word. 

'Clarence is a great ass, but he is one of the dearest and best 

fellows that ever lived!' 

engaging, the simplest, truest, kindest, dearest, best fellow that 

ever lived.  The process by which this unvarying result was 

attained, whatever the premises, might have been stated by Mr Henry 

nicety, in every man's case, and posting up a careful little 

account of Good and Evil with him.  I do this so conscientiously, 

gratifying report, that there is much less difference than you are 

inclined to suppose between an honest man and a scoundrel.'  The 

effect of this cheering discovery happened to be, that while he 

seemed to be scrupulously finding good in most men, he did in 

reality lower it where it was, and set it up where it was not; but 

that was its only disagreeable or dangerous feature. 

satisfaction as the Barnacle genealogy had done.  The cloud that 

Clennam had never seen upon his face before that morning, 

uneasy observation of him on the comely face of his wife.  More 

than once or twice when Pet caressed the dog, it appeared to 

Clennam that her father was unhappy in seeing her do it; and, in 

one particular instance when Gowan stood on the other side of the 

was either the fact too, or he fancied further, that Pet herself 

was not insensible to these little incidents; that she tried, with 

glimpse of her in her father's room, clinging to both her parents 

said it in an off-hand and amusing manner.  He appeared to be an 

both in his devotion to art and his attainments--which Clennam 

could scarcely understand. 

looking out of window. 

home.' 

pace,' said Doyce, 'and I doubt if they care to be taken quite so 

coolly.' 

very distant ramification of the Barnacles; and that the paternal 

Gowan, originally attached to a legation abroad, had been pensioned 

off as a Commissioner of nothing particular somewhere or other, and 

had died at his post with his drawn salary in his hand, nobly 

defending it to the last extremity.  In consideration of this 

eminent public service, the Barnacle then in power had recommended 

widow; to which the next Barnacle in power had added certain shady 

old lady still lived, deploring the degeneracy of the times in 

Henry Gowan, inheriting from his father, the Commissioner, that 

difficult to settle; the rather, as public appointments chanced to 

be scarce, and his genius, during his earlier manhood, was of that 

exclusively agricultural character which applies itself to the 

that way, and partly to grieve the souls of the Barnacles-in-chief 

who had not provided for him.  So it had come to pass successively, 

first, that several distinguished ladies had been frightfully 

perfect Cuyps, perfect phaenomena; then, that Lord Decimus had 

bought his picture, and had asked the President and Council to 

taken pains to bring him into fashion.  But, somehow, it had all 

failed.  The prejudiced public had stood out against it 

obstinately.  They had determined not to admire Lord Decimus's 

late, and by working heart and soul, might and main.  So now Mr 

Gowan, like that worn-out old coffin which never was Mahomet's nor 

anybody else's, hung midway between two points: jaundiced and 

jealous as to the one he had left: jaundiced and jealous as to the 

other that he couldn't reach. 

made that rainy Sunday afternoon and afterwards. 

attended by his eye-glass; in honour of whose family connections, 

and had murmured involuntarily, 'Look here!  upon my soul, you 

know!' before his presence of mind returned. 

was a part of his general debility: 

fellow?' 

most tremendous manner.  Went up to our place and Pitched into my 

back to our Department, and Pitched into me.  Look here.  You never 

saw such a fellow.' 

you know!  Pervaded our Department--without an appointment--and 

said he wanted to know!' 

this disclosure, would have strained his eyes injuriously but for 

the opportune relief of dinner.  Mr Meagles (who had been extremely 

solicitous to know how his uncle and aunt were) begged him to 

conduct Mrs Meagles to the dining-room.  And when he sat on Mrs 

whole family were there. 

the dinner, like the dinner itself, were lukewarm, insipid, 

Conversationless at any time, he was now the victim of a weakness 

under a pressing and continual necessity of looking at that 

gentleman, which occasioned his eye-glass to get into his soup, 

into his wine-glass, into Mrs Meagles's plate, to hang down his 

to his bosom by one of the dingy men.  Weakened in mind by his 

frequent losses of this instrument, and its determination not to 

stick in his eye, and more and more enfeebled in intellect every 

of the dinner-table.  His discovery of these mistakes greatly 

increased his difficulties, but never released him from the 

necessity of looking at Clennam.  And whenever Clennam spoke, this 

coming, by some artful device, round to that point of wanting to 

know, you know. 

much enjoyment of the time.  Mr Meagles, however, thoroughly 

seemed to feel that this small spice of Barnacle imparted to his 

frank, fine, genuine qualities paled; he was not so easy, he was 

of Mr Meagles, and where should we find another such case! 

Gowan went away on foot, accompanied by the objectionable dog.  Pet 

had taken the most amiable pains all day to be friendly with 

that is to say, would have been, if he had loved her. 

the chair by the fire, Mr Doyce knocked at the door, candle in 

hand, to ask him how and at what hour he proposed returning on the 

had been his rival. 

pocket, looking hard at the flame of his candle, with a certain 

more. 

'I thought our good friend a little changed, and out of spirits, 

after he came this morning?' said Clennam. 

'But not his daughter?' said Clennam. 

flame of his candle, slowly resumed: 

of separating her from Mr Gowan.  He rather thinks she is disposed 

I dare say you do) of the hopefulness of such a marriage.' 

at him. 

airily. 

gentleman's part, but none has been made.  Since their recent 

return, our friend has yielded to a weekly visit, but that is the 

utmost.  Minnie would not deceive her father and mother.  You have 

among them, extending even beyond this present life.  All that 

there is between Miss Minnie and Mr Gowan, I have no doubt we see.' 

infuse some encouragement and hope into the mind of the person by 

whom it had been uttered.  Such tone was probably a part of his 

anything of that kind, without Clennam's hearing it too? 

trees.  The rain fell heavily, drearily.  It was a night of tears. 

had had the weakness to do it; if he had, little by little, 

persuaded himself to set all the earnestness of his nature, all the 

that cast; if he had done this and found that all was lost; he 

would have been, that night, unutterably miserable.  As it was-- As 

it was, the rain fell heavily, drearily. 

CHAPTER 18 

Archer shot off a few featherless arrows now and then from a mouldy 

bow, and winged a Collegian or two. 

time, to leave him the inheritance of an unstained key; and had 

from his early youth familiarised him with the duties of his 

office, and with an ambition to retain the prison-lock in the 

mother in the conduct of a snug tobacco business round the corner 

of Horsemonger Lane (his father being a non-resident turnkey), 

which could usually command a neat connection within the College 

walls. 

name, Chivery), a year older than herself, had eyed her with 

admiring wonder.  When he had played with her in the yard, his 

favourite game had been to counterfeit locking her up in corners, 

tall enough to peep through the keyhole of the great lock of the 

stood taking cold in one eye by dint of peeping at her through that 

airy perspective. 

her lodgings, on the occasion of her birthday, 'Welcome sweet 

nursling of the Fairies!'  At twenty-three, the same hand 

falteringly presented cigars on Sundays to the Father of the 

Marshalsea, and Father of the queen of his soul. 

weak light hair.  One of his eyes (perhaps the eye that used to 

other, as if it couldn't collect itself.  Young John was gentle 

likewise.  But he was great of soul.  Poetical, expansive, 

faithful. 

lights and shades.  Following it out to blissful results, he had 

she had rented so long.  There was a beautiful propriety in that.  

It looked over the wall, if you stood on tip-toe; and, with a 

very Arbour.  There was a charming idea in that.  Then, being all 

with them on their way to the Insolvent Shrine; with the Arbour 

time, in pastoral domestic happiness.  Young John drew tears from 

his eyes by finishing the picture with a tombstone in the adjoining 

churchyard, close against the prison wall, bearing the following 

touching inscription: 'Sacred to the Memory Of JOHN CHIVERY, Sixty 

years Turnkey, and fifty years Head Turnkey, Of the neighbouring 

thirty-first of December, One thousand eight hundred and eighty- 

six, Aged eighty-three years.  Also of his truly beloved and truly 

loving wife, AMY, whose maiden name was DORRIT, Who survived his 

Marshalsea aforesaid.  There she was born, There she lived, There 

she died.' 

state of mind that had impelled him to conduct himself with 

Mrs Chivery, a prudent woman, had desired her husband to take 

strengthened by an alliance with Miss Dorrit, who had herself a 

kind of claim upon the College and was much respected there.  Mrs 

hand, their John had means and a post of trust, on the other hand, 

and not as a diplomatist, had then, from a different point of view, 

desired her husband to recollect that their John had never been 

couldn't say he wouldn't be if he was crossed.  These arguments had 

few words, that he had on sundry Sunday mornings, given his boy 

what he termed 'a lucky touch,' signifying that he considered such 

commendation of him to Good Fortune, preparatory to his that day 

declaring his passion and becoming triumphant.  But Young John had 

on these occasions that he had returned excited to the tobacco 

shop, and flown at the customers. 

In this affair, as in every other, Little Dorrit herself was the 

and attained a sort of station by making a peg of it on which to 

sister asserted the family gentility by flouting the poor swain as 

he loitered about the prison for glimpses of his dear.  Tip 

character of the aristocratic brother, and loftily swaggering in 

the little skittle ground respecting seizures by the scruff of the 

unknown executing on some little puppy not mentioned.  These were 

sometimes even condescended to walk up and down the yard with the 

donor (who was proud and hopeful then), and benignantly to smoke 

his arm-chair and newspaper to him, when he came into the Lodge 

him, that, if he would like at any time after dusk quietly to step 

out into the fore-court and take a look at the street, there was 

not much to prevent him.  If he did not avail himself of this 

latter civility, it was only because he had lost the relish for it; 

indeed, the Chiveries.  Their behaviour gratifies me.' 

reverence.  He never dreamed of disputing their pretensions, but 

did homage to the miserable Mumbo jumbo they paraded.  As to 

resenting any affront from her brother, he would have felt, even if 

he had not naturally been of a most pacific disposition, that to 

offence; still, he felt the fact to be not incompatible with its 

nobility, and sought to propitiate and conciliate that gallant 

spirit and courtly manners, who always bore with him--he deeply 

honoured.  Her sister he considered somewhat vain and proud, but a 

and loved her for being simply what she was. 

advantage of a retired walk under the wall of that pleasant 

establishment.  The business was of too modest a character to 

support a life-size Highlander, but it maintained a little one on 

had found it necessary to take to a kilt. 

attired in a plum-coloured coat, with as large a collar of black 

velvet as his figure could carry; a silken waistcoat, bedecked with 

the prudent Mrs Chivery perceived that in addition to these 

him the way that he should go; and when she saw him, in this heavy 

marching order, turn the corner to the right; she remarked to Mr 

which way the wind blew. 

purpose of receiving presentations.  After making the tour of the 

yard, Little Dorrit's lover with a hurried heart went up-stairs, 

and knocked with his knuckles at the Father's door. 

father's, the Marshalsea's father's.  He was seated in his black 

for holding his Court. 

in mind. 

John, thank you.  But really, I am afraid I am too-- No?  Well 

you please, Young John.  And sit down, sit down.  You are not a 

stranger, John.' 

great hat round and round upon his left-hand, like a slowly 

twirling mouse-cage; 'Miss Amy quite well, sir?' 

'Yes, John, yes; very well.  She is out.' 

'Indeed, sir?' 

go out a good deal.  But at their time of life, it's natural, 

John.' 

on duty at present, I think, John?' 

the great hat, and then Young John said, rising, 'I am afraid I 

must wish you good day, sir.' 

'So soon?  Good day, Young John.  Nay, nay,' with the utmost 

condescension, 'never mind your glove, John.  Shake hands with it 

on.  You are no stranger here, you know.' 

descended the staircase.  On his way down he met some Collegians 

'Much obliged to you for your little testimonial, John!' 

thought, and he wondered what she might be thinking about.  There 

were the piles of city roofs and chimneys, more free from smoke 

Perhaps she was thinking about them. 

to her. 

back from him, with an expression in her face of fright and 

She had turned away and glided off so often when she had seen him 

it accidental.  But he had hoped that it might be shyness, her 

retiring character, her foreknowledge of the state of his heart, 

anything short of aversion.  Now, that momentary look had said, 

than you!' 

in her soft little voice, 'Oh, Mr John!  Is it you?'  But she felt 

looking at one another equally confused. 

you--' 

father, father!' in a heartrending tone, and turning her face away. 

so very kind as to say that I was not a stranger there, and in all 

ways gratifying me very much.' 

dear, dear father, how can you, can you, do it!' 

not knowing what to make of this, until, having taken out her 

handkerchief and put it to her still averted face, she hurried 

away.  At first he remained stock still; then hurried after her. 

senses, if I have to think that I have driven you away like this.' 

what to do!' 

to associate himself with it as its cause, that shook him from his 

great hat to the pavement.  He felt it necessary to explain 

himself.  He might be misunderstood--supposed to mean something, or 

to have done something, that had never entered into his 

imagination.  He begged her to hear him explain himself, as the 

greatest favour she could show him. 

were vain to conceal it.  There never was a Chivery a gentleman 

that ever I heard of, and I will not commit the meanness of making 

a false representation on a subject so momentous.  Miss Amy, I know 

sister, spurn me from a height.  What I have to do is to respect 

them, to wish to be admitted to their friendship, to look up at the 

lowly--and ever wish them well and happy.' 

between the hardness of his hat and the softness of his heart 

(albeit, perhaps, of his head, too), that was moving.  Little 

Dorrit entreated him to disparage neither himself nor his station, 

and, above all things, to divest himself of any idea that she 

they seem to me--Revolving ages--a heart-cherished wish to say 

something to you.  May I say it?' 

great speed half across the Bridge without replying! 

up one that I would fling myself off that parapet to give half a 

twopence.' 

made him respectable.  Little Dorrit learnt from it what to do. 

shall say any more--if you please, no.' 

want to say it earnestly, and with as plain a meaning as it is 

possible to express.  When you think of us, John--I mean my 

brother, and sister, and me--don't think of us as being any 

that instead of what you are doing now.' 

mind, and would be heartily glad to do anything she wished. 

the less, the better.  When you think of me at all, John, let it 

set of duties always occupying her; as a weak, retired, contented, 

I come outside the gate, I am unprotected and solitary.' 

much want him to remember that? 

you not to forget to-day, and not to say any more to me.  You are 

I always will.  I am going to show you, at once, that I fully trust 

you.  I like this place where we are speaking better than any place 

only necessary for me to tell you so, to be quite sure that you 

will never come here again in search of me.  And I am--quite sure!' 

wretch, but her word was more than a law for him. 

deserve to be happy, and you will be, John.' 

must be known--swelled to the size of the heart of a gentleman; and 

into tears. 

Good-bye, John.  God bless you!' 

of a seat, and not only rested her little hand upon the rough wall, 

but laid her face against it too, as if her head were heavy, and 

her mind were sad. 

It was an affecting illustration of the fallacy of human projects, 

to behold her lover, with the great hat pulled over his eyes, the 

velvet collar turned up as if it rained, the plum-coloured coat 

new inscription for a tombstone in St George's Churchyard: 

mentioning, Who died about the end of the year one thousand eight 

hundred and twenty-six, Of a broken heart, Requesting with his last 

breath that the word AMY might be inscribed over his ashes, which 

CHAPTER 19 

children on the Poor side, except on Sunday mornings, Christmas 

Days, and other occasions of ceremony, in the observance whereof he 

benignity that was highly edifying--the brothers, walking up and 

a position; that in this regard only, if in no other, the brothers 

were a spectacle to wonder at. 

Sunday interview with her lover on the Iron Bridge.  The cares of 

state were over for that day, the Drawing Room had been well 

sixpence accidentally left on the table had accidentally increased 

to twelve shillings, and the Father of the Marshalsea refreshed 

his superiority, but considerate of that poor creature, bearing 

with him, and breathing toleration of his infirmities in every 

little puff of smoke that issued from his lips and aspired to get 

over the spiked wall, he was a sight to wonder at. 

groping mind, submissively shuffled at his side, accepting his 

on so at his side until he took another pinch, or stood still to 

look about him--perchance suddenly missing his clarionet. 

on, but the yard was still pretty full, the Collegians being mostly 

out, seeing their friends to the Lodge.  As the brothers paced the 

yard, William the bond looked about him to receive salutes, 

returned them by graciously lifting off his hat, and, with an 

body were not easily impressible, but even they, according to their 

sight to wonder at. 

the Marshalsea.  'Anything the matter?' 

and eyes again.  'No, William, no.  Nothing is the matter.' 

Frederick--' 

be.  Don't talk so.  That's all over.' 

whom he was on friendly terms, as who should say, 'An enfeebled old 

man, this; but he is my brother, sir, my brother, and the voice of 

Nature is potent!' and steered his brother clear of the handle of 

the pump by the threadbare sleeve.  Nothing would have been wanting 

to the perfection of his character as a fraternal guide, 

philosopher and friend, if he had only steered his brother clear of 

ruin, instead of bringing it upon him. 

consideration, 'that I am tired, and will go home to bed.' 

don't sacrifice your inclination to me.' 

Frederick, 'weaken me.' 

Not to revert again to that little eccentricity which I mentioned 

Here is the parade, always at your service.  Why not use it more 

regularly than you do?' 

example.  Necessity and time have taught me what to do.  At certain 

stated hours of the day, you will find me on the parade, in my 

a sense of the importance of these arrangements, and you know what 

a good girl she is.' 

Yes, yes, yes, yes.' 

rouse you, my good Frederick; you want to be roused.' 

eyes to his face.  'But I am not like you.' 

depreciation, 'Oh!  You might be like me, my dear Frederick; you 

might be, if you chose!' and forbore, in the magnanimity of his 

strength, to press his fallen brother further. 

woman, wife or mother, was weeping with a new Collegian.  The time 

in the fresher passengers taken aboard at the last port.  He was 

if not in words, he always testified his displeasure at these 

interruptions of the general harmony; and it was so well 

him. 

an air of endurance and clemency; being in a bland temper and 

graciously disposed to overlook the tears.  In the flaring gaslight 

visitors, and some who had no visitors, watching the frequent 

turning of the key, and conversing with one another and with Mr 

Chivery.  The paternal entrance made a sensation of course; and Mr 

hoped he found himself tolerable. 

little sullen. 

looked, I assure you.' 

For what did it bring him in?  It only brought him in wexation.  

And he could get that anywhere for nothing. 

out?' 

not quite well.  Take care, Frederick, take care.  Good night, my 

dear Frederick!' 

company in the Lodge, Frederick slowly shuffled out of the door 

which Mr Chivery unlocked for him.  The Father of the Marshalsea 

come to no harm. 

see him go along the passage and down the steps.  Take care, 

Frederick!  (He is very infirm.) Mind the steps!  (He is so very 

absent.) Be careful how you cross, Frederick.  (I really don't like 

liable to be run over.)' 

and much anxious guardianship, he turned his regards upon the 

assembled company in the Lodge: so plainly indicating that his 

brother was to be pitied for not being under lock and key, that an 

brother Frederick was much broken, no doubt, and it might be more 

combination of qualities--he did not say high qualities, but 

of a child; but would he, though unsuited for most other places, do 

forbid that Frederick should be there in any other character than 

in his present voluntary character!  Gentlemen, whoever came to 

deal.  Was his beloved brother Frederick that man?  No.  They saw 

him, even as it was, crushed.  Misfortune crushed him.  He had not 

power of recoil enough, not elasticity enough, to be a long time in 

and--and --Testimonials that he might under such circumstances 

to himself, and no depreciation of his claims as a gentleman.  

Gentlemen, God bless you! 

again, and going with his own poor shabby dignity past the 

Collegian in the dressing-gown who had no coat, and past the 

no cares, and past the lean clerk Collegian in buttonless black who 

had no hopes, up his own poor shabby staircase to his own poor 

shabby room. 

all prisoners and captives!--and rose to welcome him. 

gave him his black velvet cap.  Yes, uncle had gone home.  Had her 

father enjoyed his walk?  Why, not much, Amy; not much.  No!  Did 

he not feel quite well? 

him that was like a touch of shame; and when he spoke, as he 

Chivery.  He is not--ha!--not nearly so obliging and attentive as 

usual to-night.  It--hem!--it's a little thing, but it puts me out, 

my love.  It's impossible to forget,' turning his hands over and 

as mine, I am unfortunately dependent on these men for something 

every hour in the day.' 

he spoke.  Bending her head she looked another way. 

was quite--quite short with me.  Other people there too!  Why, good 

spoke, he was opening and shutting his hands like valves; so 

before his own knowledge of his meaning. 

once, a turnkey of the name of Jackson (I don't think you can 

remember him, my dear, you were very young), and--hem!--and he had 

a--brother, and this--young brother paid his addresses to--at 

name was Captain Martin; and he consulted me on the question 

other brother.  Captain Martin was a gentleman and a man of honour, 

him on--I am doubtful whether "lead him on" was Captain Martin's 

exact expression: indeed I think he said tolerate him--on her 

two, I don't see--' 

him, and her hand had gradually crept to his lips.  For a little 

while there was a dead silence and stillness; and he remained 

and her head bowed down upon his shoulder. 

yet, look at one another.  By little and little he began; laying 

down his knife and fork with a noise, taking things up sharply, 

biting at his bread as if he were offended with it, and in other 

his plate from him, and spoke aloud; with the strangest 

inconsistency. 

whether such a blighted life as mine comes to an end, now, next 

week, or next year?  What am I worth to anyone?  A poor prisoner, 

fed on alms and broken victuals; a squalid, disgraced wretch!' 

up her hands to him. 

looking at her as wildly as if he had gone mad.  'I tell you, if 

independent--by God I was, child!--and people sought me out, and 

envied me.  Envied me!' 

flourished in the air, but he resisted, and put her hand away. 

he cried, looking haggardly about, 'fail to preserve at least that 

little of the times of his prosperity and respect.  Let his 

children have that clue to what he was.  Unless my face, when I am 

happen, I don't know--my children will have never seen me.' 

long even for that.' 

Only think of me, father, for one little moment!' 

breaking down into a miserable whining. 

it.  I am not quite trodden down.  Go out and ask who is the chief 

person in the place.  They'll tell you it's your father.  Go out 

some delicacy.  They'll say, your father.  Go out and ask what 

out at the gate.  They'll say your father's.  Well then.  Amy!  

redeem him?  Will you have nothing to remember him by but his ruin 

and decay?  Will you be able to have no affection for him when he 

is gone, poor castaway, gone?' 

head rest against her cheek, and bewailed his wretchedness.  

his hands about her as she embraced him, cried, O Amy, his 

and laborious for him!  Then he reverted to himself, and weakly 

told her how much better she would have loved him if she had known 

how (at which he cried again) she should first have ridden at his 

fatherly side on her own horse, and how the crowd (by which he 

he then had in his pocket) should have trudged the dusty roads 

respectfully. 

grain of his soul, he revealed his degenerate state to his 

his humiliation.  Little recked the Collegians who were laughing in 

their rooms over his late address in the Lodge, what a serious 

Sunday night. 

father in his prison as her mother had ministered to her.  Little 

much more, in comforting her father's wasted heart upon her 

innocent breast, and turning to it a fountain of love and fidelity 

that never ran dry or waned through all his years of famine. 

and the whole world acknowledged him.  When his tears were dried, 

touch of shame, and had recovered his usual bearing, she prepared 

the remains of his supper afresh, and, sitting by his side, 

velvet cap and old grey gown, magnanimous again; and would have 

comported himself towards any Collegian who might have looked in to 

ask his advice, like a great moral Lord Chesterfield, or Master of 

the ethical ceremonies of the Marshalsea. 

wardrobe; when he was pleased to say, that Yes, indeed, those 

invited her attention to his coat as it hung behind the door: 

example to his children, already disposed to be slovenly, if he 

went among them out at elbows.  He was jocular, too, as to the 

heeling of his shoes; but became grave on the subject of his 

buy him a new one. 

thought of HER dress, her shoes, her need of anything.  No other 

her wants. 

He kissed her many times with 'Bless you, my love.  Good night, MY 

dear!' 

'Don't think of me, my dear,' he said, giving her his kind 

permission fully.  'Come back by all means.' 

together very softly lest she should awake him.  But he overheard 

her, and called out who was that? 

raised himself a little in his low bed, as she kneeled beside it to 

the private father and the Father of the Marshalsea were strong 

within him then. 

recreations, many cares I am afraid?' 

you; but all I have been able to do, I have done.' 

know.' 

sound of self-approval, the momentary outburst of a noble 

it.  Amy, my love, you are by far the best loved of the three; I 

have had you principally in my mind--whatever I have done for your 

mysteries, can surely know to what extent a man, especially a man 

brought down as this man had been, can impose upon himself.  

Enough, for the present place, that he lay down with wet eyelashes, 

serene, in a manner majestic, after bestowing his life of 

to be even what he was. 

but too content to see him with a lustre round his head.  Poor 

dear, good dear, truest, kindest, dearest, were the only words she 

had for him, as she hushed him to rest. 

which her tenderness could hardly repair, she sat by him in his 

calling him in a whisper by some endearing name.  At times she 

stood aside so as not to intercept the low fire-light, and, 

look now at all as he had looked when he was prosperous and happy; 

in that awful time.  At the thought of that time, she kneeled 

me!  O look down upon my dear, long-suffering, unfortunate, much- 

changed, dear dear father!' 

she give him a last kiss and leave the small room.  When she had 

stolen down-stairs, and along the empty yard, and had crept up to 

her own high garret, the smokeless housetops and the distant 

As she gently opened the window, and looked eastward down the 

She thought of the sunrise on rolling rivers, of the sunrise on 

wide seas, of the sunrise on rich landscapes, of the sunrise on 

great forests where the birds were waking and the trees were 

seen him in my life!' 

CHAPTER 20 

write a satire on family pride, he would have had no need to go for 

an avenging illustration out of the family of his beloved.  He 

the family name; so ready to beg or borrow from the poorest, to eat 

of anybody's bread, spend anybody's money, drink from anybody's cup 

and break it afterwards.  To have painted the sordid facts of their 

have made Young John a satirist of the first water. 

of his release, that Clennam scarcely needed to have been at the 

pains of impressing the mind of Mr Plornish on that subject.  

compliment with HIS compliments, and there was an end of it.  

Issuing forth from the gate on these easy terms, he became a 

billiard-marker; and now occasionally looked in at the little 

skittle-ground in a green Newmarket coat (second-hand), with a 

Collegians. 

feeling had never induced him to spare her a moment's uneasiness, 

perceiving that she sacrificed her life to her father, and in his 

having no idea that she had done anything for himself. 

the College, this narrative cannot precisely state.  Probably at 

It is certain that the more reduced and necessitous they were, the 

more pompously the skeleton emerged from its tomb; and that when 

always came out with the ghastliest flourish. 

room to arrange.  She had no engagement to go out to work, however, 

come in on Saturday night, received the intimation from the elbow 

of a more seasoned Collegian, 'Look out.  Here she is!' 

She wanted to see her sister, but when she got round to Mr 

to the theatre where they were engaged.  Having taken thought of 

this probability by the way, and having settled that in such case 

was on that side of the river, and not very far away. 

the ways of gold mines, and when she was directed to a furtive sort 

of door, with a curious up-all-night air about it, that appeared to 

be ashamed of itself and to be hiding in an alley, she hesitated to 

her applying to them, reassured by this resemblance, for a 

direction to Miss Dorrit, they made way for her to enter a dark 

hall--it was more like a great grim lamp gone out than anything 

else--where she could hear the distant playing of music and the 

a corner, like a spider; and he told her that he would send a 

through.  The first lady who went through had a roll of music, half 

altogether, that it seemed as if it would be an act of kindness to 

me; I'll soon find Miss Dorrit for you,' Miss Dorrit's sister went 

were tumbling over one another, and where there was such a 

ropes, and rollers, and such a mixing of gaslight and daylight, 

the universe.  Little Dorrit, left to herself, and knocked against 

by somebody every moment, was quite bewildered, when she heard her 

sister's voice. 

morrow, and knew you might be engaged all day to-day, I thought--' 

and tables were heaped together, and where a number of young ladies 

everywhere while they chattered. 

put his head round a beam on the left, and said, 'Less noise there, 

gentleman with a quantity of long black hair looked round a beam on 

the right, and said, 'Less noise there, darlings!' and also 

disappeared. 

ever get here?' 

bring me in.' 

believe.  I couldn't have managed it, Amy, though I know so much 

more of the world.' 

a plain domestic little creature, without the great and sage 

experience of the rest.  This family fiction was the family 

assertion of itself against her services.  Not to make too much of 

them. 

have got something on your mind about me?' said Fanny.  She spoke 

as if her sister, between two and three years her junior, were her 

prejudiced grandmother. 

bracelet, Fanny--' 

beam on the right, and said, 'Look out there, darlings!' and also 

disappeared.  Thereupon all the young ladies rose and began shaking 

their skirts out behind. 

going to say?' 

to know a little more if you will confide more to me.' 

said the gentleman with the black hair.  They were every one gone 

rapid interruptions.  Her sister and the rest were a long time 

gone; and during their absence a voice (it appeared to be that of 

the gentleman with the black hair) was continually calling out 

two, three, four, five, six--go!  Steady, darlings!  One, two, 

three, four, five, six--go!'  Ultimately the voice stopped, and 

they all came back again, more or less out of breath, folding 

themselves in their shawls, and making ready for the streets.  

'Stop a moment, Amy, and let them get away before us,' whispered 

Fanny.  They were soon left alone; nothing more important 

gentleman with the black hair looking round his old beam, and 

accustomed manner. 

out of the way, and there was a great empty well before them, 

looking down into the depths of which Fanny said, 'Now, uncle!' 

made him out at the bottom of the well, in an obscure corner by 

their little strip of sky, might have been the point of his better 

down below there to the bottom.  He had been in that place six 

pass his whole life, night and day, and Sunday and all, in the 

offered over the rails, and he had always responded to this 

attention with a momentary waking up of manner that had the pale 

phantom of a gentleman in it: beyond this he never, on any 

occasion, had any other part in what was going on than the part 

written out for the clarionet; in private life, where there was no 

part for the clarionet, he had no part at all.  Some said he was 

lifted up his bowed head, never varied his shuffling gait by 

to be summoned by his niece, he did not hear her until she had 

spoken to him three or four times; nor was he at all surprised by 

the presence of two nieces instead of one, but merely said in his 

some underground way which emitted a cellarous smell. 

me?' 

condescension with which she put aside the superiority of her 

almost equal terms, had a vast deal of the family in it. 

you.' 

ever a little provoking, I am sure you'll consider what a thing it 

to it.  I shouldn't care,' said the Daughter of the Father of the 

Marshalsea, 'if the others were not so common.  None of them have 

come down in the world as we have.  They are all on their own 

level.  Common.' 

her.  Fanny took out her handkerchief, and rather angrily wiped her 

eyes.  'I was not born where you were, you know, Amy, and perhaps 

you shall know all about it.  We'll drop him at the cook's shop 

where he is going to dine.' 

a dirty street, which was made almost opaque by the steam of hot 

meats, vegetables, and puddings.  But glimpses were to be caught of 

a roast leg of pork bursting into tears of sage and onion in a 

and blisterous Yorkshire pudding, bubbling hot in a similar 

receptacle, of a stuffed fillet of veal in rapid cut, of a ham in 

baked potatoes glued together by their own richness, of a truss or 

were a few wooden partitions, behind which such customers as found 

it more convenient to take away their dinners in stomachs than in 

their hands, Packed their purchases in solitude.  Fanny opening her 

reticule, as they surveyed these things, produced from that 

repository a shilling and handed it to Uncle.  Uncle, after not 

looking at it a little while, divined its object, and muttering 

mist. 

tired to walk to Harley Street, Cavendish Square.' 

toss she gave to her new bonnet (which was more gauzy than 

serviceable), made her sister wonder; however, she expressed her 

readiness to go to Harley Street, and thither they directed their 

handsomest house, and knocking at the door, inquired for Mrs 

Merdle.  The footman who opened the door, although he had powder on 

his head and was backed up by two other footmen likewise powdered, 

stairs with powder going before and powder stopping behind, and 

drawing-rooms, where there was a parrot on the outside of a golden 

cage holding on by its beak, with its scaly legs in the air, and 

putting itself into many strange upside-down postures.  This 

peculiarity has been observed in birds of quite another feather, 

climbing upon golden wires. 

imagined, and would have been splendid and costly in any eyes.  She 

looked in amazement at her sister and would have asked a question, 

of communication with another room.  The curtain shook next moment, 

and a lady, raising it with a heavily ringed hand, dropped it 

behind her again as she entered. 

young and fresh from the hand of her maid.  She had large unfeeling 

handsome eyes, and dark unfeeling handsome hair, and a broad 

unfeeling handsome bosom, and was made the most of in every 

her face, she wore a rich white fillet tied over her head and under 

looked as if, for certain, it had never been, in familiar parlance, 

'chucked' by the hand of man, it was the chin curbed up so tight 

and close by that laced bridle. 

that you had a sister.' 

should say, 'I have caught you.  I know you didn't!'  All her 

of crimson and gold cushions, on an ottoman near the parrot. 

through an eye-glass. 

'Has not a professional air.  Very pleasant; but not professional.' 

mixture of deference and hardihood, 'has been asking me to tell 

her?' 

'Do you think, at your sister's age--' hinted Mrs Merdle. 

I am.' 

finger, 'is so difficult to explain to young persons (indeed is so 

difficult to explain to most persons), that I am glad to hear that. 

-- Bird, be quiet!' 

Society and it asserted its right to its exactions. 

unless we are Savages in the Tropical seas (I should have been 

is a most extensive merchant, his transactions are on the vastest 

be quiet!' 

end it. 

acquaintance,' she began again, addressing Little Dorrit, 'by 

relating the circumstances that are much to her credit, I cannot 

first married extremely young) of two or three-and-twenty.' 

sister. 

moment.' 

snow; quite forgetting the sisters except at odd times, and 

apparently addressing some abstraction of Society; for whose 

behoof, too, she occasionally arranged her dress, or the 

composition of her figure upon the ottoman. 

I dare say, but we are not in a natural state.  Much to be 

lamented, no doubt, particularly by myself, who am a child of 

nature if I could but show it; but so it is.  Society suppresses us 

and dominates us-- Bird, be quiet!' 

The parrot had broken into a violent fit of laughter, after 

twisting divers bars of his cage with his crooked bill, and licking 

them with his black tongue. 

wide range of experience, and cultivated feeling,' said Mrs Merdle 

from her nest of crimson and gold--and there put up her glass to 

sometimes has a fascination for young men of that class of 

character.  In saying the stage, I mean the people on it of the 

female sex.  Therefore, when I heard that my son was supposed to be 

moving in Society are usually fascinated.' 

other with a hard sound. 

was much surprised and much distressed.  But when I found that your 

sister, by rejecting my son's advances (I must add, in an 

unexpected manner), had brought him to the point of proposing 

traced the outline of her left eyebrow, and put it right. 

theatre, and represent my state of mind to the dancer.  I made 

so, than in meeting me with--what shall I say--a sort of family 

assertion on her own part?'  Mrs Merdle smiled. 

although you found me in that situation, I was so far above the 

through her glass, 'precisely what I was on the point of telling 

recalling it so accurately and anticipating me.  I immediately,' 

addressing Little Dorrit, '(for I am the creature of impulse), took 

on hers, in token of the delight I had in our being able to 

approach the subject so far on a common footing.'  (This was 

her way to the interview, with a general eye to bribery.) 

unfortunate, but we are not common.' 

of the superiority of your son's standing in Society, it was barely 

was eminently superior, and was acknowledged by every one.' 

sister the rest.' 

breadth of bosom which seemed essential to her having room enough 

to be unfeeling in, 'but it is to your sister's credit.  I pointed 

out to your sister the plain state of the case; the impossibility 

she moved--though charming, I have no doubt; the immense 

had so high an opinion of, upon which we should find ourselves 

compelled to look down with contempt, and from which (socially 

short, I made an appeal to that laudable pride in your sister.' 

a toss of her gauzy bonnet, 'that I had already had the honour of 

him.' 

mentioned that before.  If I did not think of it, perhaps it was 

because my mind reverted to the apprehensions I had at the time 

event of such a marriage, and would be an absolute beggar.  (I 

mention that merely as a fact which is part of the narrative, and 

not as supposing it to have influenced your sister, except in the 

system is, we must all be influenced by such considerations.) 

sister, we came to the complete understanding that there was no 

her with a mark or two of my appreciation at my dressmaker's.' 

face. 

best of terms.  On which occasion,' added Mrs Merdle, quitting her 

nest, and putting something in Fanny's hand, 'Miss Dorrit will 

of the parrot, as he tore at a claw-full of biscuit and spat it 

out, seemed to mock them with a pompous dance of his body without 

moving his feet, and suddenly turned himself upside down and 

trailed himself all over the outside of his golden cage, with the 

aid of his cruel beak and black tongue. 

one might have the pleasure of knowing a number of charming and 

talented persons from whom I am at present excluded.  A more 

be a poem when I learnt lessons, something about Lo the poor 

Indians whose something mind!  If a few thousand persons moving in 

Society, could only go and be Indians, I would put my name down 

directly; but as, moving in Society, we can't be Indians, 

unfortunately--Good morning!' 

shut out into unpowdered Harley Street, Cavendish Square. 

'Well?' said Fanny, when they had gone a little way without 

speaking.  'Have you nothing to say, Amy?' 

didn't like this young man, Fanny?' 

say, I am so very sorry, Fanny, that you suffered this lady to give 

you anything.' 

pull she gave her arm.  'Have you no spirit at all?  But that's 

just the way!  You have no self-respect, you have no becoming 

pride.  just as you allow yourself to be followed about by a 

contemptible little Chivery of a thing,' with the scornfullest 

emphasis, 'you would let your family be trodden on, and never 

turn.' 

had any experience of anything, to be as false and insolent as a 

woman can be--would you let her put her foot upon your family, and 

thank her for it?' 

you make her do?  Make her pay for it, you stupid child; and do 

your family some credit with the money!' 

practising his clarionet in the dolefullest manner in a corner of 

the room.  Fanny had a composite meal to make, of chops, and 

porter, and tea; and indignantly pretended to prepare it for 

herself, though her sister did all that in quiet reality.  When at 

last Fanny sat down to eat and drink, she threw the table 

implements about and was angry with her bread, much as her father 

had been last night. 

'because I am a dancer, why did you put me in the way of being one? 

It was your doing.  You would have me stoop as low as the ground 

before this Mrs Merdle, and let her say what she liked and do what 

she liked, and hold us all in contempt, and tell me so to my face.  

Because I am a dancer!' 

as she likes, without any check--I suppose because he has been in 

the law, and the docks, and different things.  Why, it was your 

doing, Amy.  You might at least approve of his being defended.' 

corner, sometimes taking it an inch or so from his mouth for a 

moment while he stopped to gaze at them, with a vague impression 

that somebody had said something. 

you go out to work, you might at least feel for him, I should 

think, knowing what he has undergone so long.' 

went on again. 

girl in the world, and she wished she was dead.  After that, her 

sister.  Little Dorrit tried to stop her from saying anything, but 

she answered that she would, she must!  Thereupon she said again, 

as passionately as she had said what she regretted. 

seen this differently, if you had known a little more of Society.' 

proud and spirited--more than I ought to be, perhaps?' 

may have been thinking, you know, of the family.  Now, may it not 

be so, Amy?' 

heart. 

to it, and which does make it different from other aspects of 

loving, good girl.' 

time to go; which she conveyed to her uncle by shutting up his 

scrap of music, and taking the clarionet out of his mouth. 

the Marshalsea.  It fell dark there sooner than elsewhere, and 

going into it that evening was like going into a deep trench.  The 

shadow of the wall was on every object.  Not least upon the figure 

in the old grey gown and the black velvet cap, as it turned towards 

her when she opened the door of the dim room. 

her hand.  'It was not unreasonable in Fanny.' 

CHAPTER 21 

Upon that establishment of state, the Merdle establishment in 

Harley Street, Cavendish Square, there was the shadow of no more 

up on opposite sides of dinner-tables, in the shade of their own 

loftiness, staring at the other side of the way with the dullness 

of the houses. 

who take their stand by the street will be.  The expressionless 

form, all approachable by the same dull steps, all fended off by 

escapes, the same inconvenient fixtures in their heads, and 

occasional bow-window, the stuccoed house, the newly-fronted house, 

blinds always down, the house with the hatchment always up, the 

and found nobody at home--who has not dined with these?  The house 

know her?  The showy house that was taken for life by the 

disappointed gentleman, and which does not suit him at all--who is 

unacquainted with that haunted habitation? 

aware; but Mr and Mrs Merdle it delighted to honour.  Society was 

aware of Mr and Mrs Merdle.  Society had said 'Let us license them; 

let us know them.' 

in everything good, from banking to building.  He was in 

Chairman of this, Trustee of that, President of the other.  The 

got?  Have you got Merdle?'  And, the reply being in the negative, 

had said, 'Then I won't look at you.' 

Merdle wanted something to hang jewels upon, and he bought it for 

the purpose.  Storr and Mortimer might have married on the same 

speculation. 

jewels showed to the richest advantage.  The bosom moving in 

Society with the jewels displayed upon it, attracted general 

admiration.  Society approving, Mr Merdle was satisfied.  He was 

as little for himself out of all his gain and care, as a man might. 

in company; he had not very much to say for himself; he was a 

reserved man, with a broad, overhanging, watchful head, that 

cuffs, as if they were in his confidence, and had reasons for being 

anxious to hide his hands.  In the little he said, he was a 

pleasant man enough; plain, emphatic about public and private 

confidence, and tenacious of the utmost deference being shown by 

every one, in all things, to Society.  In this same Society (if 

that were it which came to his dinners, and to Mrs Merdle's 

and was mostly to be found against walls and behind doors.  Also 

when he went out to it, instead of its coming home to him, he 

seemed a little fatigued, and upon the whole rather more disposed 

liberality. 

the bosom had entered into competition with the snows of North 

America, and had come off at little disadvantage in point of 

whiteness, and at none in point of coldness.  The colonel's son was 

Mrs Merdle's only child.  He was of a chuckle-headed, high- 

shouldered make, with a general appearance of being, not so much a 

that a by-word went among his companions that his brain had been 

frozen up in a mighty frost which prevailed at St john's, New 

infancy, through the negligence of a nurse, fallen out of a high 

window on his head, which had been heard by responsible witnesses 

to crack.  It is probable that both these representations were of 

young lady to whom he tendered a matrimonial proposal that she was 

about her.' 

upon another man; but Mr Merdle did not want a son-in-law for 

himself; he wanted a son-in-law for Society.  Mr Sparkler having 

races, and all the lounges, and all the parties, and being well 

known, Society was satisfied with its son-in-law.  This happy 

result Mr Merdle would have considered well attained, though Mr 

Sparkler had been a more expensive article.  And he did not get Mr 

Sparkler by any means cheap for Society, even as it was. 

Little Dorrit was stitching at her father's new shirts by his side 

from the City, magnates from the Commons and magnates from the 

magnates, Treasury magnates, Horse Guard magnates, Admiralty 

us up. 

has made another enormous hit.  They say a hundred thousand 

pounds.' 

clear but that it might be four.  It was one of those happy strokes 

of calculation and combination, the result of which it was 

difficult to estimate.  It was one of those instances of a 

comprehensive grasp, associated with habitual luck and 

here was Brother Bellows, who had been in the great Bank case, and 

who could probably tell us more.  What did Brother Bellows put this 

new success at? 

could only tell them in passing that he had heard it stated, with 

great appearance of truth, as being worth, from first to last, 

half-a-million of money. 

House of Commons.  Bishop said he was glad to think that this 

wealth flowed into the coffers of a gentleman who was always 

disposed to maintain the best interests of Society. 

the last arrival.  Treasury said Merdle's work punished him a 

dinner.  Pulverous particles got into the dishes, and Society's 

a countess who was secluded somewhere in the core of an immense 

dress, to which she was in the proportion of the heart to the 

and nobody knew what sort of small person carried it. 

everything to drink.  It is to be hoped it enjoyed itself; for Mr 

Merdle's own share of the repast might have been paid for with 

eighteenpence.  Mrs Merdle was magnificent.  The chief butler was 

the next magnificent institution of the day.  He was the stateliest 

man in the company.  He did nothing, but he looked on as few other 

men could have done.  He was Mr Merdle's last gift to Society.  Mr 

him--and had got him. 

bosom.  Treasury said, Juno.  Bishop said, Judith. 

martial.  Brothers Bellows and Bench struck in.  Other magnates 

Sometimes a magnate addressed him, to turn the stream of his own 

particular discussion towards him; but Mr Merdle seldom gave much 

attention to it, or did more than rouse himself from his 

calculations and pass the wine. 

Merdle individually that he held little levees by the sideboard, 

and checked them off as they went out at the door. 

him) on a new achievement.  To extend the triumphs of such men was 

congratulations with pride, and I am glad you approve.' 

smiling Treasury turned him by the arm towards the sideboard and 

us and help us.' 

to one so eminent to--to come among us, and give us the weight of 

to him as a duty.  In fact, as a duty that he owed to Society.' 

its claims were paramount to every other consideration.  Treasury 

moved on, and Bar came up. 

Bar, with his little insinuating jury droop, and fingering his 

persuasive double eye-glass, hoped he might be excused if he 

mentioned to one of the greatest converters of the root of all evil 

into the root of all good, who had for a long time reflected a 

mentioned, disinterestedly, and as, what we lawyers called in our 

of a very considerable estate in one of the eastern counties-- 

lying, in fact, for Mr Merdle knew we lawyers loved to be 

particular, on the borders of two of the eastern counties.  Now, 

the title was perfectly sound, and the estate was to be purchased 

by one who had the command of--Money (jury droop and persuasive 

eye-glass), on remarkably advantageous terms.  This had come to 

have the honour of dining with my esteemed friend Mr Merdle this 

evening, and, strictly between ourselves, I will mention the 

opportunity.'  Such a purchase would involve not only a great 

legitimate political influence, but some half-dozen church 

presentations of considerable annual value.  Now, that Mr Merdle 

capital, and of fully employing even his active and vigorous 

question arose in his mind, whether one who had deservedly gained 

himself of such influences as these; and to exercise them--we would 

not say for his own, or for his party's, but we would say for 

Society's--benefit. 

of his constant consideration, and Bar took his persuasive eye- 

glass up the grand staircase.  Bishop then came undesignedly 

sidling in the direction of the sideboard. 

than when they accumulated under the magic touch of the wise and 

to the welfare of our brethren at large. 

couldn't mean him, and with inconsistency expressed his high 

gratification in Bishop's good opinion. 

right leg, as though he said to Mr Merdle 'don't mind the apron; a 

mere form!' put this case to his good friend: 

little money in the direction of a mission or so to Africa? 

Bishop put another case: 

proceedings of our Combined Additional Endowed Dignitaries 

money in that direction might be a great conception finely 

executed? 

inquiring. 

It was not that HE looked to them, but that Society looked to them. 

Dignitaries, but it was Society that was in a state of the most 

friend's regard on all occasions for the best interests of Society; 

and he considered that he was at once consulting those interests 

prosperity, continued increase of riches, and continued things in 

general. 

until the soul of the chief butler glowed with a noble resentment, 

stream of people on the grand staircase.  Mrs Merdle was at home, 

got more than he wanted. 

everybody, and whom everybody knew.  On entering at the door, he 

on the arm. 

or let me come to you.  ' 

and as Mr Merdle was swept away by the crowd, they made their 

varied with various textures of brain and peculiarities of 

constitution, as he had had occasion to notice in several of his 

breadth, depression and dyspepsia ensued.  Not to intrude on the 

sacred mysteries of medicine, he took it, now (with the jury droop 

and persuasive eye-glass), that this was Merdle's case?  Bishop 

by the good woman in whose house he at that time lodged, with a 

glass of sound sherry, nutmeg, and powdered sugar acted like a 

charm.  Without presuming to offer so simple a remedy to the 

he would venture to inquire whether the strain, being by way of 

intricate calculations, the spirits might not (humanly speaking) be 

restored to their tone by a gentle and yet generous stimulant? 

He has the constitution of a rhinoceros, the digestion of an 

suppose himself unwell without reason, you may think strange.  But 

I have found nothing the matter with him.  He may have some deep- 

present I have not found it out.' 

displaying precious stones in rivalry with many similar superb 

jewel-stands; there was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on young 

Sparkler hovering about the rooms, monomaniacally seeking any 

sufficiently ineligible young lady with no nonsense about her; 

there was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on the Barnacles and 

the company.  Even on himself, its shadow was faint enough as he 

moved about among the throng, receiving homage. 

another in all things else, that it is hard to imagine his 

deep-seated recondite complaint, and did any doctor find it out?  

at any stage of the sun's course. 

Mr Clennam did not increase in favour with the Father of the 

on the great Testimonial question was not calculated to awaken 

admiration in the paternal breast, but had rather a tendency to 

give offence in that sensitive quarter, and to be regarded as a 

positive shortcoming in point of gentlemanly feeling.  An 

impression of disappointment, occasioned by the discovery that Mr 

Clennam scarcely possessed that delicacy for which, in the 

began to darken the fatherly mind in connection with that 

gentleman.  The father went so far as to say, in his private family 

to pay his respects; but he didn't find that he got on with him 

was) wanting in him.  Howbeit, the father did not fail in any 

much attention; perhaps cherishing the hope that, although not a 

man of a sufficiently brilliant and spontaneous turn of mind to 

repeat his former testimonial unsolicited, it might still be within 

the compass of his nature to bear the part of a responsive 

gentleman, in any correspondence that way tending. 

been accidentally locked in on the night of his first appearance, 

the Father of the Marshalsea with the stupendous idea of getting 

the child of the Marshalsea, Clennam soon became a visitor of mark. 

when that officer was on the lock, for he made little distinction 

between Mr Chivery's politeness and that of the other turnkeys.  It 

at once, and stood forth from his companions in bold relief. 

Lodge, had contrived to rid it of all sauntering Collegians; so 

that Clennam, coming out of the prison, should find him on duty 

alone. 

manner; 'but which way might you be going?' 

key on his lips. 

you go round by Horsemonger Lane?  Could you by any means find time 

to look in at that address?' handing him a little card, printed for 

Importers of pure Havannah Cigars, Bengal Cheroots, and fine- 

flavoured Cubas, Dealers in Fancy Snuffs, &C.  &C. 

is, it's my wife.  She's wishful to say a word to you, sir, upon a 

point respecting--yes,' said Mr Chivery, answering Clennam's look 

of apprehension with a nod, 'respecting her.' 

your way.  Please to ask for Mrs Chivery!'  These instructions, Mr 

little slide in the outer door, which he could draw back from 

within for the inspection of visitors when it pleased him. 

address set forth upon it, and speedily arrived there.  It was a 

very small establishment, wherein a decent woman sat behind the 

counter working at her needle.  Little jars of tobacco, little 

boxes of cigars, a little assortment of pipes, a little jar or two 

of snuff, and a little instrument like a shoeing horn for serving 

it out, composed the retail stock in trade. 

solicitation of Mr Chivery.  About something relating to Miss 

head. 

peep.' 

very little dull back-yard.  In this yard a wash of sheets and 

table-cloths tried (in vain, for want of air) to get itself dried 

a chair, like the last mariner left alive on the deck of a damp 

young man. 

doing there? 

linen; but when there's linen to keep the neighbours' eyes off, 

he'll sit there, hours.  Hours he will.  Says he feels as if it was 

regions of the business. 

the matter with Our John, sir; he's a breaking his heart for her, 

good to his parents when bust?' 

about Horsemonger Lane for her feelings and her conversation, 

began again to shake her head and dry her eyes. 

for both their sakes, implore you so to do!' 

so habituated to consider Miss Dorrit in a light altogether removed 

surprise.  Does she know your son?' 

shiver, 'she never could have seen him on a Sunday without knowing 

he was that.  His cane alone would have told it long ago, if 

pinting, for nothing.  How did I first know it myself?  Similarly.' 

emphasis from the foregoing circumstantiality and repetition. 

causes you so much uneasiness?' 

as tenants by the quarter, came!'  An effect in the nature of an 

affidavit was gained from this speech by Mrs Chivery's peculiar 

power of construction. 

'May I venture to inquire what is your version of the matter?' 

a child when in that yard a child she played.  He has known her 

ever since.  He went out upon the Sunday afternoon when in this 

very parlour he had dined, and met her, with appointment or without 

her.  Her brother and sister is high in their views, and against 

sharing her with any one.  Under which circumstances she has 

answered Our John, "No, John, I cannot have you, I cannot have any 

be a constant slave to them that are not worthy that a constant 

Here the good woman pointed to the little window, whence her son 

might be seen sitting disconsolate in the tuneless groves; and 

united sakes of both the young people, to exercise his influence 

towards the bright reversal of these dismal events. 

positions of Little Dorrit and her family were concerned, that 

Clennam could not feel positive on the other side.  He had come to 

attach to Little Dorrit an interest so peculiar--an interest that 

removed her from, while it grew out of, the common and coarse 

things surrounding her--that he found it disappointing, 

Chivery in the back-yard, or any such person.  On the other hand, 

of domesticated fairy of her, on the penalty of isolation at heart 

fancy, and not a kind one.  Still, her youthful and ethereal 

her own individuality, and the strong difference between herself 

be in unison, with this newly presented idea. 

his mind--he did that, indeed, while she was yet speaking--that he 

might be relied upon to do his utmost at all times to promote the 

happiness of Miss Dorrit, and to further the wishes of her heart if 

were.  At the same time he cautioned her against assumptions and 

to win her son's confidence and so to make quite sure of the state 

of the case.  Mrs Chivery considered the latter precaution 

interview, but thanked him nevertheless for the trouble he had 

kindly taken.  They then parted good friends, and Arthur walked 

away. 

crowds making a confusion, he avoided London Bridge, and turned off 

have that minute come there for air.  He had left her in her 

father's room within an hour. 

face and manner when no one else was by.  He quickened his pace; 

but before he reached her, she turned her head. 

expected mine.' 

'I did not expect any.  But when I heard a step, I thought it-- 

sounded like yours.' 

sometimes have a sensation as if it was almost unfeeling to walk 

here.' 

change and motion.  Then to go back, you know, and find him in the 

same cramped place.' 

the spirit and influence of such things to cheer him.' 

make me out too powerful.  If you were in prison, could I bring 

such comfort to you?' 

'Yes, Little Dorrit, I am sure of it.' 

agitation on her face, that her mind was with her father.  He 

remained silent for a few moments, that she might regain her 

composure.  The Little Dorrit, trembling on his arm, was less in 

unison than ever with Mrs Chivery's theory, and yet was not 

irreconcilable with a new fancy which sprung up within him, that 

the hopeless unattainable distance. 

Dorrit looked up, surprised, and they confronted Maggy, who brought 

herself at sight of them to a dead stop.  She had been trotting 

along, so preoccupied and busy that she had not recognised them 

until they turned upon her.  She was now in a moment so conscience- 

stricken that her very basket partook of the change. 

and sends me out I must go.  If he takes and says, "Maggy, you 

hurry away and back with that letter, and you shall have a sixpence 

if the answer's a good 'un," I must take it.  Lor, Little Mother, 

what's a poor thing of ten year old to do?  And if Mr Tip--if he 

he says, "I'll have a Try too," and if he goes into the George and 

writes a letter and if he gives it me and says, "Take that one to 

the same place, and if the answer's a good 'un I'll give you a 

shilling," it ain't my fault, mother!' 

that the letters were addressed. 

that's got anything to do with it--it's you, you know,' said Maggy, 

and give 'em to you.' 

said Clennam in a low voice. 

whisper.  'Little Mother wasn't to know nothing of it, and she 

would never have known nothing of it if you had only gone So and 

So, instead of bothering and loitering about.  It ain't my fault.  

I must do what I am told.  They ought to be ashamed of themselves 

for telling me.' 

his incarceration during three-and-twenty years (doubly 

sum of Three Pounds Ten Shillings upon his I.O.U., which he begged 

knew, be gratified to hear that he had at length obtained permanent 

employment of a highly satisfactory nature, accompanied with every 

prospect of complete success in life; but that the temporary 

inability of his employer to pay him his arrears of salary to that 

date (in which condition said employer had appealed to that 

a false friend and the present high price of provisions, had 

reduced him to the verge of ruin, unless he could by a quarter 

Mr Clennam would be happy to learn, he had, through the promptitude 

of several friends who had a lively confidence in his probity, 

already raised, with the exception of a trifling balance of one 

period of one month, would be fraught with the usual beneficent 

consequences. 

excusing himself from compliance with the demand of the son.  He 

then commissioned Maggy to return with his replies, and gave her 

would have disappointed her otherwise. 

before, she said all at once: 

They were nothing.  You know what they were.  They were nothing.' 

leave any of them.  When I am gone, they pervert--but they don't 

mean it--even Maggy.' 

was only saving you uneasiness.' 

the other day that my sister told me I had become so used to the 

least thing there.  Good-bye.  I had far better stay at home!' 

itself from her suppressed heart, made it difficult for Clennam to 

keep the tears from his eyes as he saw and heard her. 

painful to me to hear you call it home.' 

forget it for a single moment?' 

'You never do, dear Little Dorrit, in any good and true service.' 

much better, much more dutiful, much happier.  Please don't go with 

me, let me go by myself.  Good-bye, God bless you.  Thank you, 

thank you.' 

move while her slight form went quickly away from him.  When it had 

fluttered out of sight, he turned his face towards the water and 

stood thinking. 

letters; but so much so, and in that unrestrainable way? 

keenly and additionally sensitive just now.  Now, was there some 

one in the hopeless unattainable distance?  Or had the suspicion 

been brought into his mind, by his own associations of the troubled 

hour the peaceful flowing of the stream, here the rushes, there the 

lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet? 

Little Dorrit thought of him--too faithfully, ah, too faithfully!-- 

in the shadow of the Marshalsea wall. 

Mr Meagles bestirred himself with such prompt activity in the 

matter of the negotiation with Daniel Doyce which Clennam had 

entrusted to him, that he soon brought it into business train, and 

'Doyce is highly gratified by your good opinion,' he opened the 

examine the affairs of the Works for yourself, and entirely 

understand them.  He has handed me the keys of all his books and 

papers--here they are jingling in this pocket--and the only charge 

he has given me is "Let Mr Clennam have the means of putting 

himself on a perfect equality with me as to knowing whatever I 

nothing to do with him."  And there, you see,' said Mr Meagles, 

'you have Daniel Doyce all over.' 

honourable.  Very odd though.  Now, would you believe, Clennam,' 

said Mr Meagles, with a hearty enjoyment of his friend's 

' 

to pursue the subject at all?' 

connection with it than he declared off.' 

never do!" What did he mean by that?  I asked him.  No matter, 

Meagles; that would never do.  Why would it never do?  You'll 

conversation in the course of which he had referred to his 

intention of taking a partner, supposing at the time that you were 

says he, "Mr Clennam might now believe, if I entertained his 

open free speech.  Which I can't bear," says he, "which I really 

But it took a morning to scale that wall; and I doubt if any other 

it.  Well, Clennam.  This business-like obstacle surmounted, he 

the books and form my own opinion.  I looked over the books, and 

formed my own opinion.  "Is it, on the whole, for, or against?" 

friend, give Mr Clennam the means of forming his opinion.  To 

enable him to do which, without bias and with perfect freedom, I 

shall go out of town for a week."  And he's gone,' said Mr Meagles; 

that's the rich conclusion of the thing.' 

'Leaving me,' said Clennam, 'with a high sense, I must say, of his 

candour and his--' 

interrupt his good-humoured friend. 

may want explanation, but to be strictly impartial, and to do 

nothing more.' 

forenoon.  Little peculiarities were easily to be detected by 

experienced eyes in Mr Doyce's way of managing his affairs, but 

they almost always involved some ingenious simplification of a 

difficulty, and some plain road to the desired end.  That his 

papers were in arrear, and that he stood in need of assistance to 

develop the capacity of his business, was clear enough; but all the 

the purposes of the pending investigation; everything was in its 

calculations and entries, in his own hand, of which there were 

were always plain and directed straight to the purpose.  It 

occurred to Arthur that a far more elaborate and taking show of 

business--such as the records of the Circumlocution Office made 

less intelligible. 

the facts it was essential to become acquainted with.  Mr Meagles 

was at hand the whole time, always ready to illuminate any dim 

place with the bright little safety-lamp belonging to the scales 

and scoop.  Between them they agreed upon the sum it would be fair 

to offer for the purchase of a half-share in the business, and then 

Mr Meagles unsealed a paper in which Daniel Doyce had noted the 

the hand, 'that if I had looked high and low for a partner, I 

believe I could not have found one more to my mind.' 

matched.  You keep him in check, Clennam, with your common sense, 

and you stick to the Works, Dan, with your--' 

hand to the other.  Here's my own right hand upon it, as a 

practical man, to both of you.' 

possession of private personal means not exceeding a few hundred 

pounds; but it opened to him an active and promising career.  The 

too; even Bleeding Heart Yard dined and was full of meat.  Two 

months had barely gone by in all, when Bleeding Heart Yard had 

become so familiar with short-commons again, that the treat was 

paint of the inscription on the door-posts, DOYCE AND CLENNAM; when 

the firm in his mind for years. 

with benches, and vices, and tools, and straps, and wheels; which, 

when they were in gear with the steam-engine, went tearing round as 

though they had a suicidal mission to grind the business to dust 

doors in the floor and roof with the workshop above and the 

brought to Clennam's mind the child's old picture-book, where 

similar rays were the witnesses of Abel's murder.  The noises were 

sufficiently removed and shut out from the counting-house to blend 

chink in the planking.  The workshop was arrived at by a step- 

ladder from the outer yard below, where it served as a shelter for 

the large grindstone where tools were sharpened.  The whole had at 

of getting the array of business documents into perfect order, he 

glanced at these things with a feeling of pleasure in his pursuit 

that was new to him. 

labouring up the step-ladder.  The unusual apparition was followed 

by another bonnet.  He then perceived that the first bonnet was on 

ascent with considerable difficulty. 

Clennam lost no time in opening the counting-house door, and 

more necessary by Mr F.'s Aunt already stumbling over some 

impediment, and menacing steam power as an Institution with a stony 

reticule she carried. 

and bruised all over and you in the machinery and foundry way too 

only think, and never told us!' 

esteemed insteps with her umbrella, and vindictively glared. 

though naturally it was not to be expected that there should be any 

attraction at our house and you were much more pleasantly engaged, 

that's pretty certain, and is she fair or dark blue eyes or black 

I wonder, not that I expect that she should be anything but a 

perfect contrast to me in all particulars for I am a disappointment 

as I very well know and you are quite right to be devoted no doubt 

though what I am saying Arthur never mind I hardly know myself Good 

gracious!' 

and sees it all, don't tell me anything about it for I know I have 

being snapped and very proper.' 

youthful glances. 

taking the liberty of this intrusion but I thought I might so far 

presume upon old times for ever faded never more to bloom as to 

great deal superior to China not to be denied and much nearer 

though higher up!' 

Flora, very much for your kind remembrance.' 

doubt whatever should have been before you had genuinely remembered 

make, one last explanation I wish to offer--' 

explanations?  I assure you none are needed.  I am satisfied--I am 

perfectly satisfied.' 

following inexorable and awful statement: 

this missile, that Clennam was quite at a loss how to defend 

the honour of a visit from this venerable lady, when it was plain 

she held him in the utmost abhorrence.  He could not but look at 

her with disconcertment, as she sat breathing bitterness and scorn, 

observing aloud that Mr F.'s Aunt had a great deal of spirit.  

Stimulated either by this compliment, or by her burning 

indignation, that illustrious woman then added, 'Let him meet it if 

he can!'  And, with a rigid movement of her stony reticule (an 

Clennam was the unfortunate person at whom the challenge was 

hurled. 

business and though the wine trade still business is equally 

business call it what you will and business habits are just the 

mat at ten minutes before six in the afternoon and his boots inside 

without a motive which being kindly meant it may be hoped will be 

kindly taken Arthur, Mr Clennam far more proper, even Doyce and 

Clennam probably more business-like.' 

are always welcome.' 

until the word is out, such is the habit of times for ever fled, 

and so true it is that oft in the stilly night ere slumber's chain 

people--very polite but more polite than true I am afraid, for to 

go into the machinery business without so much as sending a line or 

a card to papa--I don't say me though there was a time but that is 

look like it you must confess.' 

so much more disjointed and voluble than in the preceding 

interview. 

and why should it be expected and if it's not to be expected why 

should it be, and I am far from blaming you or any one, When your 

mama and my papa worried us to death and severed the golden bowl--I 

mean bond but I dare say you know what I mean and if you don't you 

don't lose much and care just as little I will venture to add--when 

changed and in giving my hand to Mr F. I know I did so with my eyes 

the chemist's and I did it for the best.' 

it very coolly, if I hadn't known it to be China I should have 

guessed myself the Polar regions, dear Mr Clennam you are right 

however and I cannot blame you but as to Doyce and Clennam papa's 

we never should have heard one word about it I am satisfied.' 

less trying to me than Mr Clennam--when I know it and you know it 

too and can't deny it.' 

visit.' 

my mind that Mr F.'s Aunt and I would come and call because when 

papa--which was before that--happened to mention her name to me and 

instead of putting it out.' 

bewildered, 'do you mean Mr F.'s--' 

old remembrances--who ever heard of Mr F.'s Aunt doing needlework 

and going out by the day?' 

'Why yes of course,' returned Flora; 'and of all the strangest 

with a turnpike, or a favourite pony or a puppy or a bird or 

something from a seed-shop to be put in a garden or a flower-pot 

and come up speckled.' 

you, was he?  What did he say?' 

he said when we were talking of you--I don't know who began the 

that point.' 

captivating bashfulness, 'that I must admit, Papa said you had 

spoken of her in an earnest way and I said what I have told you and 

that's all.' 

when required for I know she often goes to your mama's and I know 

that your mama has a very touchy temper Arthur--Doyce and Clennam-- 

hour but I am running into nonsense.' 

than her youngest glances, that she was glad he thought so.  She 

the mermaid away for ever. 

Dorrit, and the kindness you can show her--' 

I do not feel that I have the right to tell you what I know of her, 

for I acquired the knowledge confidentially, and under 

the little creature, and a respect for her that I cannot express to 

you.  Her life has been one of such trial and devotion, and such 

her, far less speak of her, without feeling moved.  Let that 

friendliness with my thanks.' 

Flora couldn't accept it frankly, found it worth nothing openly, 

must make the old intrigue and mystery of it.  As much to her own 

counting-house, and seeing two figures approaching, she cried with 

infinite relish, 'Papa!  Hush, Arthur, for Mercy's sake!' and 

her spirits. 

counting-house in the wake of Pancks.  Pancks opened the door for 

him, towed him in, and retired to his own moorings in a corner. 

thought I'd come also, thought I'd come also.' 

profound), by means of his blue eyes, his shining head, and his 

long white hair, was most impressive.  It seemed worth putting down 

'And you are in a new business, Mr Clennam?  I wish you well, sir, 

I wish you well!' he seemed to have done benevolent wonders. 

his acknowledgments; the relict of the late Mr F. meanwhile 

protesting, with a gesture, against his use of that respectable 

name; 'that she hopes occasionally to employ the young needlewoman 

you recommended to my mother.  For which I have been thanking her.' 

and took him in tow. 

You knew nothing about her, you didn't.  The name was mentioned to 

you, and you passed it on.  That's what YOU did.' 

much the same thing.' 

have been.  You gave no guarantee.  You knew nothing about her.' 

'You are not acquainted, then,' said Arthur, hazarding a random 

question, 'with any of her family?' 

You can't be acquainted with people you never heard of, can you?  

You should think not!' 

shaking his head benevolently, as the case required. 

way, what being a reference means.  It's all your eye, that is!  

for one another, if you'd let 'em.  What would be the good of 

letting 'em?  It's no satisfaction to be done by two men instead of 

one.  One's enough.  A person who can't pay, gets another person 

two wooden legs getting another person with two wooden legs, to 

of them able to do a walking match.  And four wooden legs are more 

troublesome to you than two, when you don't want any.'  Mr Pancks 

concluded by blowing off that steam of his. 

been sitting upright in a cataleptic state since her last public 

a startling effect on the nerves of the uninitiated, and with the 

deadliest animosity observed: 

in it.  You couldn't do it when your Uncle George was living; much 

less when he's dead.' 

ma'am!  Bless my soul!  I'm surprised to hear it.'  Despite his 

depressing effect on the little assembly; firstly, because it was 

impossible to disguise that Clennam's unoffending head was the 

nobody ever knew on these occasions whose Uncle George was referred 

to, or what spectral presence might be invoked under that 

appellation. 

Aunt proved so lively as to take the suggestion in unexpected 

dudgeon and declare that she would not go; adding, with several 

injurious expressions, that if 'He'--too evidently meaning 

Clennam--wanted to get rid of her, 'let him chuck her out of 

that ceremony. 

out at the counting-house door, and slipped in again a moment 

in the country for some weeks.  'Why, bless my heart, ma'am!' said 

delighted to see you.  Favour me with your arm, ma'am; we'll have 

company.'  And so escorted Mr F.'s Aunt down the private staircase 

of the counting-house with great gallantry and success.  The 

patriarchal Mr Casby then rose with the air of having done it 

himself, and blandly followed: leaving his daughter, as she 

cup of life to the dregs; and further to hint mysteriously that the 

late Mr F. was at the bottom of it. 

suspicions.  They were all in his mind, blending themselves with 

the duties he was mechanically discharging, when a shadow on his 

papers caused him to look up for the cause.  The cause was Mr 

prongs of hair had darted up like springs and cast it off, with his 

jet-black beads of eyes inquisitively sharp, with the fingers of 

his right hand in his mouth that he might bite the nails, and with 

the fingers of his left hand in reserve in his pocket for another 

and papers. 

might come in again?  Clennam replied with a nod of his head in the 

made himself fast by leaning his arms upon it, and started 

conversation with a puff and a snort. 

breast of that lady,' said Clennam.  'Do you know why?' 

hat, which was beside him on the desk, and looked in at it as it 

lay at the bottom of the hat: all with a great appearance of 

consideration. 

it of me.' 

the look. 

'Whatever you can and will tell me.'  This comprehensive summary of 

part of Mr Pancks's machinery. 

extraordinary that you should come, with such an object, to me.' 

present world, except to stick to business?  No business.' 

It was as scrubby and dingy as ever, and as eager and quick as 

ever, and he could see nothing lurking in it that was at all 

ear in the voice. 

not my proprietor's.' 

proprietor's I hear name--name of young person Mr Clennam wants to 

of business for information.  Say, Plornish, though six weeks in 

Say, both refer to Mr Clennam.  Put the case.' 

'Well?' 

am.' 

back a step (in Tug metaphor, took half a turn astern) as if to 

show his dingy hull complete, then forged a-head again, and 

directed his quick glance by turns into his hat where his note-book 

was, and into Clennam's face. 

broken nail.  'I see!  "What's your motive?"' 

not stateable at present, ridiculous to state at present; but good. 

his forefinger still up as a caution.  'Better admit motive to be 

good.' 

buttoning it with care in an inner breast-pocket, and looking 

'I want supplementary information of any sort.' 

many wondering speculations in his mind.  After a little 

Mr Pancks, if he failed in his present research, was pretty sure to 

find other means of getting it. 

that his own intentions were good (two declarations which that 

coaly little gentleman with the greatest ardour repeated), openly 

told him that as to the Dorrit lineage or former place of 

habitation, he had no information to communicate, and that his 

appeared to be now reduced to five members; namely, to two 

children.  The ages of the whole family he made known to Mr Pancks, 

as nearly as he could guess at them; and finally he described to 

time and events through which he had become invested with that 

and more portentous manner as he became more interested, listened 

with great attention; appearing to derive the most agreeable 

sensations from the painfullest parts of the narrative, and 

particularly to be quite charmed by the account of William Dorrit's 

long imprisonment. 

Pancks nodded), 'and for knowing as much as I can.  So devoted a 

man of business as you are--eh?' 

force. 

when you have it in your power, as I have enlightened you.  It may 

not give you a very flattering idea of my business habits, that I 

prefer to make them a point of honour.  I have seen so much 

Pancks, I am tired of them.' 

find me stick to it.' 

his ten nails all round; evidently while he fixed in his mind what 

supplying a gap in his memory should be no longer at hand.  'It's 

all right,' he said at last, 'and now I'll wish you good day, as 

it's collecting day in the Yard.  By-the-bye, though.  A lame 

foreigner with a stick.' 

Is he good for it?' 

my bond, you see.  Pay up, or produce your property!  That's the 

watchword down the Yard.  The lame foreigner with the stick 

represented that you sent him; but he could represent (as far as 

that goes) that the Great Mogul sent him.  He has been in the 

hospital, I believe?' 

discharged.' 

steam in a moment, and, without any other signal or ceremony, was 

before he seemed to be well out of the counting-house. 

consternation, as the grim Pancks cruised in it; haranguing the 

inhabitants on their backslidings in respect of payment, demanding 

defaulters, sending a swell of terror on before him, and leaving it 

in his wake.  Knots of people, impelled by a fatal attraction, 

fragments of his discourses to the inmates; and, when he was 

quickly but that he would be prematurely in among them, demanding 

remainder of the day, Mr Pancks's What were they up to?  and What 

did they mean by it?  sounded all over the Yard.  Mr Pancks 

wouldn't hear of excuses, wouldn't hear of complaints, wouldn't 

hear of repairs, wouldn't hear of anything but unconditional money 

down.  Perspiring and puffing and darting about in eccentric 

the tide of the yard into a most agitated and turbid state.  It had 

been seen fuming away on the horizon at the top of the steps. 

universally agreed that Mr Pancks was a hard man to have to do 

with; and that it was much to be regretted, so it was, that a 

gentleman like Mr Casby should put his rents in his hands, and 

and wearing, and things would be very different. 

floated serenely through the Yard in the forenoon before the 

harrying began, with the express design of getting up this 

trustfulness in his shining bumps and silken locks--at which 

identical hour and minute, that first-rate humbug of a thousand 

guns was heavily floundering in the little Dock of his exhausted 

Tug at home, and was saying, as he turned his thumbs: 

me, sir, and I must insist on making this observation forcibly in 

justice to myself, that you ought to have got much more money, much 

more money.' 

CHAPTER 24 

a series of coughs so very noticeable as to favour the idea that 

her father, as regarded her seamstress occupation, was an 

illustration of the axiom that there are no such stone-blind men as 

those who will not see, obtained an audience with her on the common 

staircase outside the door. 

I met with such.  The way she snapped a person's head off, dear 

me!' 

from Mr F.'s Aunt.  'For,' said he, to excuse himself, 'she is, I 

do assure you, the winegariest party.' 

sufficiently to observe: 

she's Mr Casby's daughter; and if Mr Casby an't well off, none 

better, it an't through any fault of Pancks.  For, as to Pancks, he 

does, he really does, he does indeed!' 

conscientiously emphatic. 

Casby's house that is, and Pancks he has a office at the back, 

where he really does, beyond belief--she would be glad for to 

engage her.  She was a old and a dear friend, she said particular, 

his friend.  Them was her words.  Wishing to know whether Miss 

Dorrit could come to-morrow morning, I said I would see you, Miss, 

was engaged to-morrow, when.' 

kind of you, but you are always kind.' 

door for her readmission, and followed her in with such an 

exceedingly bald pretence of not having been out at all, that her 

his affable unconsciousness, however, he took no heed.  Plornish, 

after a little conversation, in which he blended his former duty as 

qualified again by his low estate as a plasterer, took his leave; 

making the tour of the prison before he left, and looking on at a 

game of skittles with the mixed feelings of an old inhabitant who 

had his private reasons for believing that it might be his destiny 

to come back again. 

trust, set off for the Patriarchal tent.  She went by the Iron 

part of her journey than in any other.  At five minutes before 

high as she could reach. 

on her return to the parental roof, reinvested herself with the 

title under which she had lived there--was not yet out of her 

bedroom, but she was to please to walk up into Miss Flora's 

two, with a supplementary tray upon it laid for one.  The young 

to please to take a chair by the fire, and to take off her bonnet 

and make herself at home.  But Little Dorrit, being bashful, and 

how to do it; so she was still sitting near the door with her 

by the fire reading the paper, and hadn't that heedless girl given 

her the message then, and had she really been in her bonnet all 

taking it off in the best-natured manner in the world, was so 

hands like the gentlest of women. 

breakfast-table full of business, and plunged over head and ears 

into loquacity. 

all mornings because my intention and my wish was to be ready to 

meet you when you came in and to say that any one that interested 

called me and there I still am snoring I dare say if the truth was 

known and if you don't like either cold fowl or hot boiled ham 

which many people don't I dare say besides Jews and theirs are 

scruples of conscience which we must all respect though I must say 

I wish they had them equally strong when they sell us false 

articles for real that certainly ain't worth the money I shall be 

quite vexed,' said Flora. 

tea was all she usually-- 

wink by splashing hot water into her eyes as she bent down to look 

and companion you know if you will let me take that liberty and I 

should be ashamed of myself indeed if you could come here upon any 

tired my dear.' 

'You turn so pale you have walked too far before breakfast and I 

Flora, 'dear dear is there anything that would do you good?' 

I am quite well.' 

with a marble pavement and balustrades and a mountain, I never saw 

him near it nor not likely in the wine trade, excellent man but not 

at all in that way.' 

the references to that work of art. 

sight,' said Flora, 'though of course I am unable to say how long 

that might have lasted if he hadn't been cut short while I was a 

new broom, worthy man but not poetical manly prose but not 

romance.' 

it a head that would have been, in an intellectual point of view, 

top-heavy for Shakespeare. 

toast, 'as I openly said to Mr F. when he proposed to me and you 

hackney-coach once in a boat once in a pew once on a donkey at 

became marble and stern reality usurped the throne, Mr F. said very 

much to his credit that he was perfectly aware of it and even 

tray.' 

began to take her own breakfast, talking all the while. 

separated from Arthur, have you known him long?' 

known Mr Clennam ever since his return. 

Flora, 'for travelling-people usually get more or less mahogany and 

very true unless tea, so it was at his mother's was it really that 

you knew him first, highly sensible and firm but dreadfully 

severe--ought to be the mother of the man in the iron mask." 

'Mrs Clennam has been kind to me,' said Little Dorrit. 

it's naturally pleasant to my feelings to have a better opinion of 

her than I had before, though what she thinks of me when I run on 

never know or can imagine.' 

looking timidly about; 'can I get it?' 

'there's not the slightest hurry and it's better that we should 

begin by being confidential about our mutual friend--too cold a 

mutual friend--than become through mere formalities not you but me 

like the Spartan boy with the fox biting him, which I hope you'll 

'Hadn't I better work the while?' she asked.  'I can work and 

attend too.  I would rather, if I may.' 

work, that Flora answered, 'Well my dear whatever you like best,' 

put it by her side, took out her little pocket-housewife, threaded 

the needle, and began to hem. 

are well?' 

thorough good romantic disclosure.  She started off at score, 

tossing her head, sighing in the most demonstrative manner, making 

a great deal of use of her eyebrows, and occasionally, but not 

often, glancing at the quiet face that bent over the work. 

general way but because I feel I carry it stamped in burning what's 

his names upon my brow that before I was introduced to the late Mr 

F. I had been engaged to Arthur Clennam--Mr Clennam in public where 

reserve is necessary Arthur here--we were all in all to one another 

it was the morning of life it was bliss it was frenzy it was 

everything else of that sort in the highest degree, when rent 

asunder we turned to stone in which capacity Arthur went to China 

and I became the statue bride of the late Mr F.' 

immensely. 

marble within and Mr F.'s Aunt followed in a glass-coach which it 

stands to reason must have been in shameful repair or it never 

could have broken down two streets from the house and Mr F.'s Aunt 

will not attempt, suffice it to say that the hollow form of 

Mr F. and myself went upon a continental tour to Calais where the 

for ever that was not yet to be.' 

greatest complacency, in a rambling manner sometimes incidental to 

flesh and blood. 

immediate neighbourhood of Number Thirty Little Gosling Street 

upwards soared with Mr F. to another sphere.' 

her eyes. 

indulgent husband, only necessary to mention Asparagus and it 

appeared or to hint at any little delicate thing to drink and it 

during some years until one day papa came smoothly blundering in 

and said that Arthur Clennam awaited me below, I went below and 

found him ask me not what I found him except that he was still 

unmarried still unchanged!' 

watching the stitches. 

betray us all must be secret as the tomb wonder not therefore that 

even if I should seem comparatively cold to Arthur or Arthur should 

we understand them hush!' 

whatever she said in it. 

upon me.' 

and kissed her hand.  'You are very cold,' said Flora, changing to 

her own natural kind-hearted manner, and gaining greatly by the 

you are not strong.' 

Mr Clennam's kindness in confiding me to one he has known and loved 

so long.' 

always honest when she gave herself time to think about it, 'it's 

as well to leave that alone now, for I couldn't undertake to say 

after all, but it doesn't signify lie down a little!' 

shall be quite well directly,' returned Little Dorrit, with a faint 

smile.  'You have overpowered me with gratitude, that's all.  If I 

keep near the window for a moment I shall be quite myself.' 

retired to her former place.  It was a windy day, and the air 

stirring on Little Dorrit's face soon brightened it.  In a very few 

were as nimble as ever. 

Flora, and that she would therefore do so now with Flora's 

permission.  Receiving an encouraging answer, she condensed the 

narrative of her life into a few scanty words about herself and a 

no incoherence. 

and Mr Pancks, who were already in the dining-room waiting to 

chamber.) By those gentlemen she was received according to their 

characters; the Patriarch appearing to do her some inestimable 

Mr Pancks blowing off his favourite sound as a salute. 

circumstances, and particularly under Flora's insisting on her 

drinking a glass of wine and eating of the best that was there; but 

her constraint was greatly increased by Mr Pancks.  The demeanour 

a taker of likenesses, so intently did he look at her, and so 

frequently did he glance at the little note-book by his side.  

snorts became a demand for payment. 

something to drink had broken out in the house.  The Patriarch was 

fast asleep, with his philanthropic mouth open under a yellow 

Pancks softly appeared before her, urbanely nodding. 

voice. 

inches.  'What are those now, Miss Dorrit?' 

Not in the least looking at them, but looking at Little Dorrit.  

teller.' 

way, sometimes; privately, very privately, Miss Dorrit.' 

she laid her work in her lap for a moment, and held out her left 

hand with her thimble on it. 

blunt forefinger.  'But what else are we made for?  Nothing.  

Hallo!' looking into the lines.  'What's this with bars?  It's a 

College!  And what's this with a grey gown and a black velvet cap?  

what's this thinking for 'em all?  Why, this is you, Miss Dorrit!' 

or correcting the impression was gone. 

her hand with his clumsy finger, 'if this isn't me in the corner 

here!  What do I want here?  What's behind me?' 

behind him. 

Miss Dorrit.' 

his prongs of hair, so that they stood up in their most portentous 

manner; and repeated slowly, 'Remember what I say, Miss Dorrit.  

You shall live to see.' 

only by his knowing so much about her. 

that, ever!' 

looked to him for an explanation of his last words. 

imitation of a surprised look and manner that appeared to be 

matter when, no matter where.  I am nobody.  Don't take on to mind 

me.  Don't mention me.  Take no notice.  Will you agree, Miss 

Dorrit?' 

astounded.  'Why?' 

behind me on that little hand.  I have told you you shall live to 

see.  Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?' 

Not to mind me when I come and go.  It's very easy.  I am no loss, 

grubber.  You need do no more than think, "Ah!  Pancks the gipsy at 

his fortune-telling--he'll tell the rest of my fortune one day--I 

shall live to know it."  Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?' 

suppose so, while you do no harm.' 

stooped forward.  'Honest creature, woman of capital points, but 

heedless and a loose talker, Miss Dorrit.'  With that he rubbed his 

away to the door, and urbanely nodded himself out again. 

conduct on the part of her new acquaintance, and by finding herself 

involved in this singular treaty, her perplexity was not diminished 

by ensuing circumstances.  Besides that Mr Pancks took every 

him in the street, constantly.  When she went to Mr Casby's, he was 

always there.  When she went to Mrs Clennam's, he came there on any 

when she found him to her astonishment in the Lodge one night, 

at his ease within the prison; to hear of his presenting himself 

to the members of the institution, singing a song, and treating the 

company to five gallons of ale--report madly added a bushel of 

shrimps.  The effect on Mr Plornish of such of these phenomena as 

he became an eye-witness of in his faithful visits, made an 

phenomena themselves.  They seemed to gag and bind him.  He could 

only stare, and sometimes weakly mutter that it wouldn't be 

believed down Bleeding Heart Yard that this was Pancks; but he 

College on that gentleman's arm.  Throughout he never took any 

notice of Little Dorrit, save once or twice when he happened to 

come close to her and there was no one very near; on which 

occasions, he said in passing, with a friendly look and a puff of 

encouragement, 'Pancks the gipsy--fortune-telling.' 

many heavier loads, in her own breast.  A change had stolen, and 

was stealing yet, over the patient heart.  Every day found her 

the prison unnoticed, and elsewhere to be overlooked and forgotten, 

were, for herself, her chief desires. 

and character, she was glad to retreat as often as she could 

without desertion of any duty.  There were afternoon times when she 

with her father, when she could be spared and was better away.  

led to her room, and take her seat at the window.  Many 

combinations did those spikes upon the wall assume, many light 

fell upon the rust, while Little Dorrit sat there musing.  New zig- 

zags sprung into the cruel pattern sometimes, when she saw it 

through a burst of tears; but beautified or hardened still, always 

over it and under it and through it, she was fain to look in her 

solitude, seeing everything with that ineffaceable brand. 

little but cleanliness and air to set it off; for what 

embellishment she had ever been able to buy, had gone to her 

father's room.  Howbeit, for this poor place she showed an 

increasing love; and to sit in it alone became her favourite rest. 

when she was seated at her window, and heard Maggy's well-known 

step coming up the stairs, she was very much disturbed by the 

apprehension of being summoned away.  As Maggy's step came higher 

could do to speak, when Maggy at length appeared. 

come down and see him.  He's here.' 

says to me, Maggy, will you be so kind and go and say it's only 

me.' 

lie down.  See!  I lie down now, to ease my head.  Say, with my 

grateful regard, that you left me so, or I would have come.' 

Maggy, 'to turn your face away, neither!' 

she went on.  'If you can't bear the looks of a poor thing, it 

would be better to tell her so at once, and not go and shut her out 

like that, hurting her feelings and breaking her heart at ten year 

old, poor thing!' 

too.  Don't go and have all the crying to yourself,' expostulated 

Maggy, 'that an't not being greedy.'  And immediately began to 

blubber. 

with the excuse; but the promise of being told a story--of old her 

great delight--on condition that she concentrated her faculties 

upon the errand and left her little mistress to herself for an hour 

longer, combined with a misgiving on Maggy's part that she had left 

and, at the appointed time, came back. 

head, Little Mother.  Oh my!  Ain't you been a-crying!' 

I did not go down.' 

in which her awkward hands became skilful), hugged her again, 

exulted in her brighter looks, and stationed her in her chair by 

the window.  Over against this chair, Maggy, with apoplectic 

own knees, and said, with a voracious appetite for stories, and 

with widely-opened eyes: 

'What shall it be about, Maggy?' 

one.  Beyond all belief, you know!' 

upon her face, which was flushed by the sunset, began: 

and silver, diamonds and rubies, riches of every kind.  He had 

palaces, and he had--' 

lots of Chicking.' 

was grown up, she was the wonder of the world.  Now, near the 

Palace where this Princess lived, there was a cottage in which 

there was a poor little tiny woman, who lived all alone by 

herself.' 

spinning at her wheel, and she looked at the tiny woman, and the 

in at the door, and there, as usual, was the tiny woman spinning at 

at her.' 

Little Mother.' 

of knowing secrets, and she said to the tiny woman, Why do you keep 

it there?  This showed her directly that the Princess knew why she 

the Princess said, I never will betray you.  Let me see it.  So the 

tiny woman closed the shutter of the cottage window and fastened 

should suspect her, opened a very secret place and showed the 

Princess a shadow.' 

'It was the shadow of Some one who had gone by long before: of Some 

come back.  It was bright to look at; and when the tiny woman 

as a great, great treasure.  When the Princess had considered it a 

this every day?  And she cast down her eyes, and whispered, Yes.  

who were expecting him--' 

remembrance was stolen or kept back from nobody.  The Princess made 

answer, Ah!  But when the cottager died it would be discovered 

there.  The tiny woman told her No; when that time came, it would 

sink quietly into her own grave, and would never be found.' 

suppose, Maggy.'  ('And well she might be,' said Maggy.) 

and there she saw the tiny woman always alone by herself spinning 

woman was not to be seen.  When the Princess made inquiries why the 

wheel had stopped, and where the tiny woman was, she was informed 

tiny woman being dead.' 

then she'd have got over it.') 

woman, dried her eyes and got out of her carriage at the place 

where she had stopped it before, and went to the cottage and peeped 

in at the door.  There was nobody to look at her now, and nobody 

for her to look at, so she went in at once to search for the 

treasured shadow.  But there was no sign of it to be found 

truth, and that it would never give anybody any trouble, and that 

it had sunk quietly into her own grave, and that she and it were at 

rest together. 

shade it. 

'Ah!' 

the same if she had been ever so old.' 

And sat staring and ruminating. 

As she glanced down into the yard, she saw Pancks come in and leer 

up with the corner of his eye as he went by. 

window and was leaning on her shoulder.  'I see him come in and out 

often.' 

'But I doubt if he could tell many people even their past or 

present fortunes.' 

prison, shook her head. 

'But let us come away from the window.' 

CHAPTER 25 

lodged on the second-floor of a professional gentleman in an 

poised on a spring and starting open with a click like a trap; and 

who wrote up in the fan-light, RUGG, GENERAL AGENT, ACCOUNTANT, 

DEBTS RECOVERED. 

little slip of front garden abutting on the thirsty high-road, 

floor, and enlivened the garden railings with glass-cases 

and what they had become after six lessons when the young family 

was under restraint.  The tenancy of Mr Pancks was limited to one 

airy bedroom; he covenanting and agreeing with Mr Rugg his 

landlord, that in consideration of a certain scale of payments 

accurately defined, and on certain verbal notice duly given, he 

should be at liberty to elect to share the Sunday breakfast, 

dinner, tea, or supper, or each or any or all of those repasts or 

meals of Mr and Miss Rugg (his daughter) in the back-parlour. 

counsel for Miss Rugg, witheringly denounced on that occasion up to 

pence an epithet, and having been cast in corresponding damages, 

still suffered occasional persecution from the youth of 

Pentonville.  But Miss Rugg, environed by the majesty of the law, 

and having her damages invested in the public securities, was 

regarded with consideration. 

his blushes had been drawn out of him long ago, and who had a 

ragged yellow head like a worn-out hearth broom; and in the society 

of Miss Rugg, who had little nankeen spots, like shirt buttons, all 

over her face, and whose own yellow tresses were rather scrubby 

than luxuriant; Mr Pancks had usually dined on Sundays for some few 

bread, Dutch cheese, and porter.  Mr Pancks was one of the very few 

marriageable men for whom Miss Rugg had no terrors, the argument 

firstly, 'that it wouldn't do twice,' and secondly, 'that he wasn't 

at Miss Rugg on easy terms. 

his quarters in Pentonville, except in the sleeping line; but now 

his duties as his proprietor's grubber were in no wise lessened; 

roses than was to be discovered in its many thorns; some new branch 

of industry made a constant demand upon him.  When he cast off the 

and labour away afresh in other waters. 

to an introduction to his amiable wife and disconsolate son, may 

have been easy; but easy or not, Mr Pancks soon made it.  He 

after his first appearance in the College, and particularly 

addressed himself to the cultivation of a good understanding with 

prudent Mrs Chivery, who wondered greatly at this change, would 

have protested against it as detrimental to the Highland 

typification on the doorpost but for two forcible reasons; one, 

be good for his drooping spirits; the other, that Mr Pancks 

confidentially agreed to pay her, for the occupation of her son's 

time, at the handsome rate of seven and sixpence per day.  The 

proposal originated with himself, and was couched in the pithy 

terms, 'If your John is weak enough, ma'am, not to take it, that is 

no reason why you should be, don't you see?  So, quite between 

ourselves, ma'am, business being business, here it is!' 

already remarked that he was a man of few words; and it may be here 

observed that he had imbibed a professional habit of locking 

the Marshalsea debtors.  Even his custom of bolting his meals may 

that, as to all other purposes, he kept his mouth as he kept the 

Marshalsea door.  He never opened it without occasion.  When it was 

necessary to let anything out, he opened it a little way, held it 

and would keep a visitor who wanted to go out, waiting for a few 

turn of the key should suffice for both, similarly he would often 

reserve a remark if he perceived another on its way to his lips, 

his inner knowledge being to be found in his face, the Marshalsea 

histories upon which it was turned. 

Pentonville, was an unprecedented fact in his calendar.  But he 

the dangerous (because expensive) fascinations of Miss Rugg.  The 

banquet was appointed for a Sunday, and Miss Rugg with her own 

hands stuffed a leg of mutton with oysters on the occasion, and 

sent it to the baker's--not THE baker's but an opposition 

made.  And rum was brought home by Mr Pancks on Saturday night, to 

gladden the visitor's heart. 

The store of creature comforts was not the chief part of the 

visitor's reception.  Its special feature was a foregone family 

confidence and sympathy.  When Young John appeared at half-past one 

without the ivory hand and waistcoat of golden sprigs, the sun 

shorn of his beams by disastrous clouds, Mr Pancks presented him to 

who loved Miss Dorrit. 

'I am glad,' said Mr Rugg, challenging him specially in that 

acquaintance, sir.  Your feelings do you honour.  You are young; 

may you never outlive your feelings!  If I was to outlive my own 

considered to possess a remarkably good address; 'if I was to 

man who would put me out of existence.' 

in the singular number--'and she can feel for you.' 

greeting, professed himself to that effect. 

hat--we are rather short of pegs--I'll put it in the corner, nobody 

will tread on it there--What I envy you, sir, is the luxury of your 

sometimes denied us.' 

what was right, and what showed how entirely he was devoted to Miss 

Dorrit.  He wished to be unselfish; and he hoped he was.  He wished 

to do anything as laid in his power to serve Miss Dorrit, 

was but little that he could do, but he hoped he did it. 

and intend to play a good knife and fork?' 

present.' 

he, 'at the time when, in vindication of her outraged feelings and 

consumed at that period did not exceed ten ounces per week.' 

'I think I go a little beyond that, sir,' returned the other, 

hesitating, as if he confessed it with some shame. 

'No, sir, certainly,' Young John added with simplicity, 'I should 

be very sorry if there was.' 

Mr Chivery.  For what we are going to receive, may we (and Miss 

Dorrit) be truly thankful!' 

introduction to the feast, it might have appeared that Miss Dorrit 

was expected to be one of the company.  Pancks recognised the sally 

Rugg, perhaps making up some of her arrears, likewise took very 

kindly to the mutton, and it rapidly diminished to the bone.  A 

amount of cheese and radishes vanished by the same means.  Then 

came the dessert. 

but curious, and rather in the nature of a conspiracy.  Mr Pancks 

of meditation.  When Mr Pancks, who supported the character of 

cards. 

takes it?' 

Chivery?'  Young John assenting, Pancks dealt him his card, and 

consulted his hand again. 

Bible; I may as well take that, too.  That's two to me.  Two to 

Dunstable for you, Mr Rugg.  Two to me, was it?  Yes, two to me.  

Here's a Stone; three to me.  And a Still-born Baby; four to me.  

And all, for the present, told.' 

breast-pocket and tugged out a canvas bag; from which, with a 

little portions.  'Cash goes out fast,' he said anxiously, as he 

pushed a portion to each of his male companions, 'very fast.' 

own charges, or that it's not advisable to allow me the time 

give me greater satisfaction than to walk myself off my legs 

without fee or reward.' 

had had her laugh out.  Meanwhile Mr Pancks, looking, not without 

some pity, at Young John, slowly and thoughtfully twisted up his 

not forgetting her fair self, and handed to every one his glass.  

glass at arm's length above the centre of the table, by that 

gesture invited the other three to add theirs, and to unite in a 

certain point, and would have been wholly so throughout, if Miss 

Rugg, as she raised her glass to her lips in completion of it, had 

not happened to look at Young John; when she was again so overcome 

by the contemptible comicality of his disinterestedness as to 

splutter some ambrosial drops of rum and water around, and withdraw 

in confusion. 

The only waking moments at which he appeared to relax from his 

without a pervading object, were when he showed a dawning interest 

Baptist in the Yard--was such a chirping, easy, hopeful little 

or had brought tied up in one of the smallest bundles that ever 

were seen, he put as bright a face upon it as if he were in the 

most flourishing circumstances when he first hobbled up and down 

teeth. 

persuaded that every foreigner had a knife about him; in the 

second, they held it to be a sound constitutional national axiom 

that he ought to go home to his own country.  They never thought of 

inquiring how many of their own countrymen would be returned upon 

generally recognised; they considered it particularly and 

peculiarly British.  In the third place, they had a notion that it 

Englishman, and that all kinds of calamities happened to his 

things that England did.  In this belief, to be sure, they had long 

hope to be under the protection of Providence; and who, when they 

believed it, disparaged them in private as the most prejudiced 

people under the sun. 

badly off; and though they were as ill off themselves as they could 

desire to be, that did not diminish the force of the objection.  

They believed that foreigners were dragooned and bayoneted; and 

and that didn't count.  They believed that foreigners were always 

immoral; and though they had an occasional assize at home, and now 

and then a divorce case or so, that had nothing to do with it.  

being escorted to the poll in droves by Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle, 

be tedious, they had many other beliefs of a similar kind. 

make head as well as he could; not absolutely single-handed, 

because Mr Arthur Clennam had recommended him to the Plornishes (he 

lived at the top of the same house), but still at heavy odds.  

However, the Bleeding Hearts were kind hearts; and when they saw 

the little fellow cheerily limping about with a good-humoured face, 

doing no harm, drawing no knives, committing no outrageous 

immoralities, living chiefly on farinaceous and milk diet, and 

it would be hard to visit that affliction on his head.  They began 

but treating him like a baby, and laughing immoderately at his 

if he were stone deaf.  They constructed sentences, by way of 

the savages to Captain Cook, or by Friday to Robinson Crusoe.  Mrs 

Plornish was particularly ingenious in this art; and attained so 

considered in the Yard but a very short remove indeed from speaking 

in a copious vocabulary; and whenever he appeared in the Yard 

ladies would fly out at their doors crying 'Mr Baptist--tea-pot!' 

'Mr Baptist--dust-pan!'  'Mr Baptist--flour-dredger!'  'Mr 

Baptist--coffee-biggin!'  At the same time exhibiting those 

articles, and penetrating him with a sense of the appalling 

difficulties of the Anglo-Saxon tongue. 

of his occupation, that Mr Pancks's fancy became attracted by the 

little man.  Mounting to his attic, attended by Mrs Plornish as 

simple tools, in the blithest way possible. 

his right hand as there were shillings, and made a cut crosswise in 

the air for an odd sixpence. 

receive it, though.' 

explained to Mr Baptist.  'E please.  E glad get money.' 

uncommonly attractive to Mr Pancks.  'How's he getting on in his 

limb?' he asked Mrs Plornish. 

week he'll be able to leave off his stick entirely.'  (The 

Baptist, 'E ope you leg well soon.') 

were a mechanical toy.  'How does he live?' 

power of carving them flowers that you see him at now.'  (Mr 

'E please.  Double good!') 

'He can live on very little, sir, and it is expected as he will be 

makes 'em for him, in short, when he knows he wants 'em.' 

said Mr Pancks. 

to walk much; but he goes about the Yard, and he chats without 

children, and he sits in the sun--he'll sit down anywhere, as if it 

was an arm-chair--and he'll sing, and he'll laugh!' 

his head was always laughing.' 

Yard,' said Mrs Plornish, 'he'll peep out in the curiousest way!  

don't want to see, and some of us don't know what to think.' 

said in his own tongue, it didn't matter.  Altro! 

Plornish. 

afternoon.  Altro!' 

the stairs, look in at Mr Baptist's door, and, finding him in his 

altro, altro, altro!'  After this highly condensed conversation, Mr 

Pancks would go his way with an appearance of being lightened and 

refreshed. 

CHAPTER 26 

If Arthur Clennam had not arrived at that wise decision firmly to 

of much perplexity, involving difficult struggles with his own 

waging within it, between a tendency to dislike Mr Henry Gowan, if 

not to regard him with positive repugnance, and a whisper that the 

it finds ill-will gaining upon it, and can discern between-whiles 

that its origin is not dispassionate, such a nature becomes 

distressed. 

aforesaid.  As it was, Mr Gowan seemed transferred to Daniel 

Doyce's mind; at all events, it so happened that it usually fell to 

occurrence now; as the two partners shared a portion of a roomy 

house in one of the grave old-fashioned City streets, lying not far 

from the Bank of England, by London Wall. 

excused himself.  Mr Doyce was just come home.  He put in his head 

at the door of Clennam's sitting-room to say Good night. 

thought you might not care to be disturbed.' 

not have known what he had been reading; really might not have had 

him.  He shut it up, rather quickly. 

particularly well, I thought.' 

'And how did you get on, you four?' asked Clennam gaily. 

his-name.  He was there.' 

'Who is he?' said Clennam. 

forgot him.' 

always there on Sunday.' 

'Yes.  He was there, he was there.  Oh yes, he was there.  And his 

dog.  He was there too.' 

I am to the man.' 

winding up his watch. 

judgments--I am supposing a general case--' 

almost without our knowing it, are unfair, that it is necessary to 

keep a guard upon them.  For instance, Mr--' 

almost always devolved. 

good deal of various kinds of life.  It might be difficult to give 

an unselfish reason for being prepossessed against him.' 

friend's face, the nearer he draws to, and the oftener he looks at, 

the face of his daughter.  In short, I see him with a net about the 

'that he will not make her happy.' 

'We don't know,' returned his partner, 'that the earth will last 

another hundred years, but we think it highly probable.' 

least try to be, if not generous (which, in this case, we have no 

of his ambition; and we will not question her natural right to 

bestow her love on one whom she finds worthy of it.' 

correction.' 

be a poor thing to gratify a prejudice against him.  And I resolve, 

for my part, not to depreciate him.' 

privilege of objecting to him,' returned the other.  'But, if I am 

upright man you are, and how much to be respected.  Good night, MY 

had been something serious at the bottom of their conversation; and 

they separated. 

had always observed that even a passing allusion to Mr Henry Gowan 

when he was not among them, brought back the cloud which had 

obscured Mr Meagles's sunshine on the morning of the chance 

encounter at the Ferry.  If Clennam had ever admitted the forbidden 

real trial; under the actual circumstances, doubtless it was 

nothing--nothing. 

of this period might have been a little meritorious.  In the 

constant effort not to be betrayed into a new phase of the 

besetting sin of his experience, the pursuit of selfish objects by 

honour and generosity, there might have been a little merit.  In 

selfish sparing of himself, he should bring any slight distress 

the greater equality of Mr Gowan's years and the greater 

attractions of his person and manner, there might have been a 

little merit.  In doing all this and much more, in a perfectly 

unaffected way and with a manful and composed constancy, while the 

as these; and such a state of mind was nobody's--nobody's. 

ease to treat him with, which might of itself (in the 

have been a very uncomfortable element in his state of mind. 

Gowan, calling on Clennam the next morning.  'We had an agreeable 

day up the river there.' 

he is!' 

green, trusts in such wonderful things!' 

grate on Clennam's hearing.  He put it aside by merely repeating 

that he had a high regard for Mr Doyce. 

laying down nothing by the way and picking up nothing by the way, 

good soul!  Upon my life Mr Clennam, one feels desperately worldly 

for myself, let me add, without including you.  You are genuine 

also.' 

too, I hope?' 

another man's--any great professor who beats me hollow--and the 

you.  They all do it.' 

'All painters?' 

market.  Give almost any man I know ten pounds, and he will impose 

upon you to a corresponding extent; a thousand pounds--to a 

corresponding extent; ten thousand pounds--to a corresponding 

a capital world it is!' cried Gowan with warm enthusiasm.  'What a 

jolly, excellent, lovable world it is!' 

mention was chiefly acted on by--' 

Circumlocution Office.' 

afresh, 'they are darling fellows!  Even poor little Clarence, the 

that would astonish you!' 

ultimately shipwreck everybody and everything, still, that will 

probably not be in our time--and it's a school for gentlemen.' 

people who pay to keep the pupils there, I am afraid,' said 

Clennam, shaking his head. 

to present you to my mother, Mr Clennam.  Pray do me the favour to 

give me the opportunity.' 

desired less, or would have been more at a loss how to avoid. 

red-brick dungeon at Hampton Court,' said Gowan.  'If you would 

make your own appointment, suggest your own day for permitting me 

charmed.  Really that's the state of the case.' 

and unused; and in his simplicity and modesty, he could only say 

that he was happy to place himself at Mr Gowan's disposal.  

it was on his part, and a very unwelcome day when it came and they 

went down to Hampton Court together. 

times, to be encamped there like a sort of civilised gipsies.  

were going away the moment they could get anything better; there 

was also a dissatisfied air about themselves, as if they took it 

very ill that they had not already got something much better.  

made dining-rooms out of arched passages, and warded off obscure 

to see them; many objects of various forms, feigning to have no 

connection with their guilty secret, a bed; disguised traps in 

walls, which were clearly coal-cellars; affectations of no 

thoroughfares, which were evidently doors to little kitchens.  

Callers looking steadily into the eyes of their receivers, 

closets accidentally left open, pretended not to see bottles; 

visitors with their heads against a partition of thin canvas, and 

a page and a young female at high words on the other side, made 

the small social accommodation-bills of this nature which the 

for, one another. 

constantly soured and vexed by two mental trials: the first, the 

building.  Under the latter great wrong, a few suffered 

expected the earth to open and swallow the public up; but which 

desirable event had not yet occurred, in consequence of some 

reprehensible laxity in the arrangements of the Universe. 

a situation in the Post-Office which he had been for some time 

expecting, and to which he was not yet appointed.  He perfectly 

knew that the public could never have got him in, but he grimly 

gratified himself with the idea that the public kept him out.  

Under the influence of this injury (and perhaps of some little 

neglectful of his person and morose in mind; and now beholding in 

Clennam one of the degraded body of his oppressors, received him 

with ignominy. 

Mrs Gowan, however, received him with condescension.  He found her 

a courtly old lady, formerly a Beauty, and still sufficiently well- 

favoured to have dispensed with the powder on her nose and a 

who must have had something real about her or she could not have 

existed, but it was certainly not her hair or her teeth or her 

and sullen appearance; both of whom had come to dinner.  But, as 

off lightly. 

Stiltstalking, who had been maintained by the Circumlocution Office 

the distinguished honour of remembering him at a distance of a 

quarter of a century. 

like a stiff snow-drift) was so obliging as to shade the dinner.  

There was a whisper of the pervading Bohemian character in the 

nomadic nature of the service and its curious races of plates and 

dishes; but the noble Refrigerator, infinitely better than plate or 

chilled the gravy, and blighted the vegetables. 

small footboy, who waited on the malevolent man who hadn't got into 

unbuttoned and his heart laid bare, would have been seen, as a 

distant adherent of the Barnacle family, already to aspire to a 

situation under Government. 

son's being reduced to court the swinish public as a follower of 

the low Arts, instead of asserting his birthright and putting a 

ring through its nose as an acknowledged Barnacle, headed the 

learned for the first time what little pivots this great world goes 

round upon. 

times had been fully ascertained, 'if John Barnacle had but 

abandoned his most unfortunate idea of conciliating the mob, all 

would have been well, and I think the country would have been 

preserved.' 

The old lady with the high nose assented; but added that if 

been preserved. 

and Tudor Stiltstalking, when they came over to one another and 

formed their ever-memorable coalition, had boldly muzzled the 

to discuss the conduct of any appointed authority abroad or at 

home, he thought the country would have been preserved. 

Stiltstalkings) wanted preserving, but how it came to want 

was all about John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking, William 

the feature of the conversation which impressed Clennam, as a man 

quite right to sit there, silently hearing a great nation narrowed 

to such little bounds.  Remembering, however, that in the 

the life of its soul, the question was usually all about and 

between John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking, William Barnacle and 

Tudor Stiltstalking, Tom, Dick, or Harry Barnacle or Stiltstalking, 

himself that mob was used to it. 

the three talkers against each other, and in seeing Clennam 

startled by what they said.  Having as supreme a contempt for the 

class that had thrown him off as for the class that had not taken 

him on, he had no personal disquiet in anything that passed.  His 

healthy state of mind appeared even to derive a gratification from 

Clennam's position of embarrassment and isolation among the good 

company; and if Clennam had been in that condition with which 

he sat at the table. 

centuries in arrears, and delivered solemn political oracles 

Mrs Gowan, who had been accustomed in her days of a vacant arm- 

Lancaster Stiltstalking. 

I believe, the pleasure of cultivating your acquaintance.' 

did not yet quite understand. 

answer; very difficult indeed to smile, and say 'Who?' 

unfortunate fancy.  There!  If it is a point of honour that I 

should originate the name--Miss Mickles--Miggles.' 

corroborated with so much gravity and emphasis.  He picked the 

people up at Rome, I think?' 

replied, 'Excuse me, I doubt if I understand your expression.' 

her little table.  'Came upon them.  Found them out.  Stumbled UP 

against them.' 

first presented Mr Henry Gowan to his daughter.' 

plebeian?' 

myself, that I do not feel qualified to judge.' 

to her looks?' 

you had travelled with them?' 

during some months.'  (Nobody's heart might have been wrung by the 

remembrance.) 

them.  You see, Mr Clennam, this thing has been going on for a long 

time, and I find no improvement in it.  Therefore to have the 

opportunity of speaking to one so well informed about it as 

yourself, is an immense relief to me.  Quite a boon.  Quite a 

blessing, I am sure.' 

confidence.  I am far from being so well informed as you suppose me 

to be.  Your mistake makes my position a very delicate one.  No 

word on this topic has ever passed between Mr Henry Gowan and 

myself.' 

cavalry. 

between you?  No.  That I can imagine.  But there are unexpressed 

confidences, Mr Clennam; and as you have been together intimately 

a pursuit which--well!' shrugging her shoulders, 'a very 

respectable pursuit, I dare say, and some artists are, as artists, 

quite superior persons; still, we never yet in our family have gone 

beyond an Amateur, and it is a pardonable weakness to feel a 

little--' 

to be magnanimous, could not keep down the thought that there was 

even as it was. 

these people naturally strain every nerve to catch him, I can 

entertain very little hope, Mr Clennam, that the thing will be 

compensate for the connection: still, he acts for himself; and if 

I find no improvement within a short time, I see no other course 

than to resign myself and make the best of these people.  I am 

infinitely obliged to you for what you have told me.' 

As she shrugged her shoulders, Clennam stiffly bowed again.  With 

then said in a still lower tone than he had adopted yet: 

great misconception if I may venture to call it so, seems to 

require setting right.  You have supposed Mr Meagles and his family 

to strain every nerve, I think you said--' 

obstinacy, with her green fan between her face and the fire. 

know Mr Meagles to be unhappy in this matter; and to have 

to it.' 

'Just what I mean.' 

the way to hold him?' said Mrs Gowan, contemptuously; 'and do not 

people, Mr Clennam: evidently people of business!  I believe 

Miggles belonged to a Bank.  It ought to have been a very 

very well done, indeed.' 

It made such a painful impression upon him to hear her talking in 

is unjust, a perfectly groundless suspicion.' 

Certainty.  It is very knowingly done indeed, and seems to have 

lips with her fan, and tossing her head, as if she added, 'Don't 

such an alliance.' 

Gowan came across the room saying, 'Mother, if you can spare Mr 

and Mrs Gowan showed him, to the last, the same look and the same 

tapped contemptuous lips. 

bored you?' 

on the road home.  Gowan, driving, lighted a cigar; Clennam 

declined one.  Do what he would, he fell into such a mood of 

abstraction that Gowan said again, 'I am very much afraid my mother 

has bored you?'  To which he roused himself to answer, 'Not at 

all!' and soon relapsed again. 

thoughtfulness would have turned principally on the man at his 

side.  He would have thought of the morning when he first saw him 

'Does he jerk me out of the path in the same careless, cruel way?' 

He would have thought, had this introduction to his mother been 

brought about by him because he knew what she would say, and that 

he could thus place his position before a rival and loftily warn 

him off, without himself reposing a word of confidence in him?  He 

he brought him there to play with his repressed emotions, and 

torment him?  The current of these meditations would have been 

stayed sometimes by a rush of shame, bearing a remonstrance to 

unenvious course he had resolved to keep.  At those times, the 

striving within him would have been hardest; and looking up and 

an injury. 

have gradually trailed off again into thinking, 'Where are we 

that it was not even loyal to her to dislike him, and that in being 

so easily prejudiced against him he was less deserving of her than 

at first. 

afraid my mother must have bored you dreadfully.' 

'Believe me, not at all,' said Clennam.  'It's nothing--nothing!' 

CHAPTER 27 

return from his long exile, caused Arthur Clennam much uneasiness 

at this period.  What Mr Pancks already knew about the Dorrit 

family, what more he really wanted to find out, and why he should 

perplexed him.  Mr Pancks was not a man to waste his time and 

specific object Clennam could not doubt.  And whether the 

light, in some untimely way, secret reasons which had induced his 

mother to take Little Dorrit by the hand, was a serious 

speculation. 

a wrong come to light, and be reparable.  The shadow of a supposed 

act of injustice, which had hung over him since his father's death, 

was so vague and formless that it might be the result of a reality 

widely remote from his idea of it.  But, if his apprehensions 

down all he had, and begin the world anew.  As the fierce dark 

teaching of his childhood had never sunk into his heart, so that 

first article in his code of morals was, that he must begin, in 

practical humility, with looking well to his feet on Earth, and 

that he could never mount on wings of words to Heaven.  Duty on 

earth, restitution on earth, action on earth; these first, as the 

costing absolutely nothing. 

reason he had to suppose that there was any likelihood of that 

strange personage being on that track at all, there were times when 

all barks labour in cross seas, he tossed about and came to no 

haven. 

association, did not mend the matter.  She was so much out, and so 

much in her own room, that he began to miss her and to find a blank 

in her place.  He had written to her to inquire if she were better, 

and she had written back, very gratefully and earnestly telling him 

not seen her, for what, in their intercourse, was a long time. 

had mentioned that she was out visiting--which was what he always 

said when she was hard at work to buy his supper--and found Mr 

Meagles in an excited state walking up and down his room.  On his 

opening the door, Mr Meagles stopped, faced round, and said: 

you mean?' 

stopped at eight, and took herself off.' 

Bastille couldn't keep her.' 

must have the unfortunate temperament of the poor impetuous girl 

this way.  Pet and Mother and I have been having a good deal of 

wish; they have referred to our going away again.  In proposing to 

do which, I have had, in fact, an object.' 

the person.  Henry Gowan.' 

all we could to get the better of it, Clennam.  We have tried 

of no use.  Our late conversations have been upon the subject of 

an entire separation and breaking off for that term.  Upon that 

question, Pet has been unhappy, and therefore Mother and I have 

been unhappy.' 

Clennam said that he could easily believe it. 

woman, that we do, in families, magnify our troubles and make 

mountains of our molehills in a way that is calculated to be rather 

question with us; and we may be excused, I hope, for making much of 

don't you think so?' 

recognition of this very moderate expectation. 

couldn't stand it.  The chafing and firing of that girl, the 

it wouldn't have happened.' 

his heart was even more expressed than in his times of cheerfulness 

and gaiety, stroked his face down from his forehead to his chin, 

and shook his head again. 

thought it all for herself), we are practical people, my dear, and 

what was raging in her mother's heart before ever such a creature 

as this poor thing was in the world; we'll gloss her temper over, 

Mother, we won't notice it at present, my dear, we'll take 

advantage of some better disposition in her another time.  So we 

she broke out violently one night.' 

family's, 'I can only refer you to what I have just repeated as 

having been pretty near my words to Mother.  As to How, we had said 

Good night to Pet in her presence (very affectionately, I must 

allow), and she had attended Pet up-stairs--you remember she was 

her maid.  Perhaps Pet, having been out of sorts, may have been a 

little more inconsiderate than usual in requiring services of her: 

thoughtful and gentle.' 

unfortunate Tattycoram loud and angry, and before we could ask what 

was the matter, Pet came back in a tremble, saying she was 

frightened of her.  Close after her came Tattycoram in a flaming 

rage.  "I hate you all three," says she, stamping her foot at us.  

"I am bursting with hate of the whole house."' 

and-twenty, Tattycoram.' 

of profound regret. 

control herself to go any further.  There she broke down, poor 

burst out.  She detested us, she was miserable with us, she 

couldn't bear it, she wouldn't bear it, she was determined to go 

away.  She was younger than her young mistress, and would she 

and interesting, and to be cherished and loved?  No.  She wouldn't, 

she wouldn't, she wouldn't!  What did we think she, Tattycoram, 

might have been if she had been caressed and cared for in her 

childhood, like her young mistress?  As good as her?  Ah!  Perhaps 

fifty times as good.  When we pretended to be so fond of one 

another, we exulted over her; that was what we did; we exulted over 

her and shamed her.  And all in the house did the same.  They 

amused by the child's trying to call her (Tattycoram) by the 

wretched name we gave her; and had laughed at the name.  Why, who 

like a dog or a cat?  But she didn't care.  She would take no more 

would go.  She would leave us that minute, nobody should stop her, 

and we should never hear of her again.' 

he described her to have been. 

reason then, with that vehement panting creature (Heaven knows what 

her mother's story must have been); so I quietly told her that she 

should not go at that late hour of night, and I gave her MY hand 

and took her to her room, and locked the house doors.  But she was 

gone this morning.' 

'And you know no more of her?' 

day.  She must have gone very early and very silently.  I have 

found no trace of her down about us.' 

see her?  I assume that?' 

want to give her another chance; come!  You yourself,' said Mr 

his own at all, 'want to give the poor passionate girl another 

chance, I know, Clennam.' 

'when you are all so forgiving.  What I was going to ask you was, 

have you thought of that Miss Wade?' 

but for finding Mother and Pet, when I went home, full of the idea 

what she said that day at dinner when you were first with US.' 

which do mysteriously get into houses sometimes, which nobody seems 

to have picked up in a distinct form from anybody, and yet which 

handed him a slip of paper, on which was written the name of one of 

the dull by-streets in the Grosvenor region, near Park Lane. 

'Here is no number,' said Arthur looking over it. 

immovable woman's, I thought perhaps--' Clennam finished the 

sentence for him by taking up his hat again, and saying he was 

ready. 

great streets of melancholy stateliness, and the little streets 

that try to be as stately and succeed in being more melancholy, of 

houses, with barbarous old porticoes and appurtenances; horrors 

that came into existence under some wrong-headed person in some 

ensuing generations and determined to do so until they tumbled 

down; frowned upon the twilight.  Parasite little tenements, with 

the cramp in their whole frame, from the dwarf hall-door on the 

the boudoir commanding the dunghills in the Mews, made the evening 

their little supplementary bows and balconies were supported on 

it, loomed down upon the street, like an Archbishop discoursing on 

Vanity.  The shops, few in number, made no show; for popular 

opinion was as nothing to them.  The pastrycook knew who was on his 

cylinders of dowager peppermint-drops in his window, and half-a- 

greengrocer's whole concession to the vulgar mind.  A single basket 

made of moss, once containing plovers' eggs, held all that the 

had gone to.  On the doorsteps there were lounging footmen with 

of monstrous birds; and butlers, solitary men of recluse demeanour, 

each of whom appeared distrustful of all other butlers.  The roll 

of carriages in the Park was done for the day; the street lamps 

were lighting; and wicked little grooms in the tightest fitting 

garments, with twists in their legs answering to the twists in 

their minds, hung about in pairs, chewing straws and exchanging 

fraudulent secrets.  The spotted dogs who went out with the 

it looked like a condescension in those animals to come out without 

them, accompanied helpers to and fro on messages.  Here and there 

on the shoulders of the people, and where gentlemen out of livery 

were not much wanted. 

inquiries.  Nothing was there, or anywhere, known of such a person 

one of the parasite streets; long, regular, narrow, dull and 

little area gates, where a dejected youth stood spiking his chin on 

the summit of a precipitous little shoot of wooden steps, but could 

way, and down it on the other, what time two vociferous news- 

and never would happen, pitched their hoarse voices into the secret 

chambers; but nothing came of it.  At length they stood at the 

corner from which they had begun, and it had fallen quite dark, and 

they were no wiser. 

dingy house, apparently empty, with bills in the windows, 

announcing that it was to let.  The bills, as a variety in the 

funeral procession, almost amounted to a decoration.  Perhaps 

because they kept the house separated in his mind, or perhaps 

agreed, and back they went. 

and knocked again.  After that knock they heard a movement below, 

and somebody shuffling up towards the door. 

to be an old woman.  'Excuse our troubling you,' said Clennam.  

'Pray can you tell us where Miss Wade lives?'  The voice in the 

darkness unexpectedly replied, 'Lives here.' 

'you had better come in, and I'll ask.' 

figure rustling away, and speaking from a higher level, said, 'Come 

light of the street shining through a window; and the figure left 

them shut in an airless room. 

succeeded; that's the main point.  Here's a light coming!' 

was the same that had spoken before); 'she'll come directly.'  

hands on her apron, which she might have done for ever without 

cleaning them, looked at the visitors with a dim pair of eyes, and 

backed out. 

as she might have established herself in an Eastern caravanserai.  

of furniture that evidently did not belong to the room, and a 

disorder of trunks and travelling articles, formed the whole of her 

little apartment had broken out into a pier-glass and a gilt table; 

but the gilding was as faded as last year's flowers, and the glass 

a minute or two to look about them, when the door opened and Miss 

Wade came in. 

to be seated; and declining to take a seat herself, at once 

anticipated any introduction of their business. 

me with this visit.  We may come to it at once.' 

whether you know anything of her?' 

I shall be happy to have her back, and that my wife and daughter 

will be happy to have her back.  She has been with us a long time: 

we don't forget her claims upon us, and I hope we know how to make 

allowances.' 

level, measured voice.  'For what?' 

interposed, seeing Mr Meagles rather at a loss, 'for the passionate 

sense that sometimes comes upon the poor girl, of being at a 

disadvantage.  Which occasionally gets the better of better 

remembrances.' 

'Indeed?' was all she answered. 

acknowledgment of his remark that Mr Meagles stared at her under a 

sort of fascination, and could not even look to Clennam to make 

another move.  After waiting, awkwardly enough, for some moments, 

Arthur said: 

opened a door while saying this, and now led the girl in by the 

hand.  It was very curious to see them standing together: the girl 

attentively regarding her, and suggesting to an observer, with 

extraordinary force, in her composure itself (as a veil will 

nature. 

again, a foil to his pretty daughter, a slave to her pleasant 

family.  You can have your droll name again, playfully pointing you 

out and setting you apart, as it is right that you should be 

pointed out and set apart.  (Your birth, you know; you must not 

forget your birth.) You can again be shown to this gentleman's 

daughter, Harriet, and kept before her, as a living reminder of her 

own superiority and her gracious condescension.  You can recover 

gentlemen how humbled and penitent you are, and by going back to 

them to be forgiven.  What do you say, Harriet?  Will you go?' 

folds it had been puckering up, 'I'd die sooner!' 

quietly round and said with a smile, 'Gentlemen!  What do you do 

upon that?' 

motives and actions so perverted, had prevented him from 

interposing any word until now; but now he regained the power of 

speech. 

it to you, and conscious that you know it--' 

with the same busy hand. 

so intent upon you, Tattycoram,' she glanced at them for a moment, 

blood in which I and my friend here equally know she has spoken, 

has once seen her is not likely to forget.  I'll not ask you, with 

your remembrance of my house and all belonging to it, whether you 

believe it.  I'll only say that you have no profession to make to 

me or mine, and no forgiveness to entreat; and that all in the 

world that I ask you to do, is, to count five-and-twenty, 

Tattycoram.' 

won't.  Miss Wade, take me away, please.' 

rich colour, her quick blood, her rapid breath, were all setting 

'I'd be torn to pieces first.  I'd tear myself to pieces first!' 

What do you do upon that?' 

besides with an earnest hand.  'Hear that lady's voice, look at 

that lady's face, consider what is in that lady's heart, and think 

that lady's influence over you--astonishing to us, and I should 

hardly go too far in saying terrible to us to see--is founded in 

passion fiercer than yours, and temper more violent than yours.  

What can you two be together?  What can come of it?' 

voice or manner.  'Say anything you will.' 

Meagles, 'at her present pass; though I hope not altogether to 

are, but you don't hide, can't hide, what a dark spirit you have 

within you.  If it should happen that you are a woman, who, from 

her against you, and I warn you against yourself.' 

Clennam, perhaps you will induce your friend--' 

'Tattycoram, my poor dear girl, count five-and-twenty.' 

'Do not reject the hope, the certainty, this kind man offers you,' 

said Clennam in a low emphatic voice.  'Turn to the friends you 

have not forgotten.  Think once more!' 

and speaking with her hand held to her throat, 'take me away!' 

ask of you in the world, my child!  Count five-and-twenty!' 

her face resolutely to the wall.  Miss Wade, who had watched her 

under this final appeal with that strange attentive smile, and that 

repressing hand upon her own bosom with which she had watched her 

if she took possession of her for evermore. 

dismiss the visitors. 

you have spoken of not knowing what I am, and also of the 

foundation of my influence here, you may now know that it is 

founded in a common cause.  What your broken plaything is as to 

birth, I am.  She has no name, I have no name.  Her wrong is my 

wrong.  I have nothing more to say to you.' 

cruel faces: a very faint smile, lifting the nostril, scarcely 

touching the lips, and not breaking away gradually, but instantly 

dismissed when done with: 

contrast of her extraction to this girl's and mine, and in the high 

good fortune that awaits her.' 

Not resting satisfied with the endeavours he had made to recover 

his lost charge, Mr Meagles addressed a letter of remonstrance, 

the stubborn girl by the hand of her late young mistress, which 

returned weeks afterwards as having been refused at the house- 

door), he deputed Mrs Meagles to make the experiment of a personal 

interview.  That worthy lady being unable to obtain one, and being 

once more what he could do.  All that came of his compliance was, 

woman, that Miss Wade was gone, that the waifs and strays of 

furniture were gone, and that the old woman would accept any number 

of half-crowns and thank the donor kindly, but had no information 

whatever to exchange for those coins, beyond constantly offering 

agent's young man had left in the hall. 

leave her hopeless, in case of her better dispositions obtaining 

six successive days, published a discreetly covert advertisement in 

who had lately left home without reflection, would at any time 

been before, and no reproaches need be apprehended.  The unexpected 

Meagles for the first time that some hundreds of young persons must 

wrong young people came down to Twickenham, who, not finding 

themselves received with enthusiasm, generally demanded 

back.  Nor were these the only uninvited clients whom the 

would seem to be always watching eagerly for any hook, however 

small, to hang a letter upon, wrote to say that having seen the 

advertisement, they were induced to apply with confidence for 

various sums, ranging from ten shillings to fifty pounds: not 

because they knew anything about the young person, but because they 

felt that to part with those donations would greatly relieve the 

advertiser's mind.  Several projectors, likewise, availed 

themselves of the same opportunity to correspond with Mr Meagles; 

as, for example, to apprise him that their attention having been 

called to the advertisement by a friend, they begged to state that 

meantime if he would oblige them with the funds necessary for 

bringing to perfection a certain entirely novel description of 

Pump, the happiest results would ensue to mankind. 

took his walking-stick. 

his walk, and passed through the meadows by the river side.  He had 

Everything within his view was lovely and placid.  The rich foliage 

of the trees, the luxuriant grass diversified with wild flowers, 

the little green islands in the river, the beds of rushes, the 

water-lilies floating on the surface of the stream, the distant 

water and the evening air, were all expressive of rest.  In the 

occasional leap of a fish, or dip of an oar, or twittering of a 

bird not yet at roost, or distant barking of a dog, or lowing of a 

cow--in all such sounds, there was the prevailing breath of rest, 

which seemed to encompass him in every scent that sweetened the 

the purple tree-tops far away, and on the green height near at hand 

Between the real landscape and its shadow in the water, there was 

no division; both were so untroubled and clear, and, while so 

fraught with solemn mystery of life and death, so hopefully 

mercifully beautiful. 

about him and suffer what he saw to sink into his soul, as the 

shadows, looked at, seemed to sink deeper and deeper into the 

water.  He was slowly resuming his way, when he saw a figure in the 

evening and its impressions. 

face was towards him, and she appeared to have been coming from the 

entered his mind all at once that she was there of a set purpose to 

speak to him. 

I meant at first.  I thought it likely I might meet you, and that 

made me more confident.  You always come this way, do you not?' 

falter on his arm, and saw the roses shake. 

thinking it so likely I might meet you.  Mr Doyce arrived more than 

an hour ago, and told us you were walking down.' 

thanked her.  They were now by an avenue of trees.  Whether they 

turned into it on his movement or on hers matters little.  He never 

knew how that was. 

at the other end, we come upon the ferry and the cottage by the 

best approach, I think.' 

In her simple garden-hat and her light summer dress, with her rich 

trustfulness in him were strikingly blended with a kind of timid 

sorrow for him, she was so beautiful that it was well for his 

been thinking of another tour abroad?  He said he had heard it 

mentioned.  She broke another momentary silence by adding, with 

some hesitation, that papa had abandoned the idea. 

to give you my confidence, if you would not mind having the 

goodness to receive it.  I should have very much liked to have 

much our friend.' 

to me.  Pray trust me.' 

raising her eyes frankly to his face.  'I think I would have done 

so some time ago, if I had known how.  But I scarcely know how, 

even now.' 

bless his wife and him!' 

hand as it lay with the trembling roses in it on his arm, took the 

remaining roses from it, and put it to his lips.  At that time, it 

prospect, a very much older man who had done with that part of 

life. 

while, slowly and silently, under the umbrageous trees.  Then he 

that she would say to him as her friend and her father's friend, 

in him, any service she would ask of him, any little aid to her 

happiness that she could give him the lasting gratification of 

believing it was in his power to render? 

bursting into tears again: 'O Mr Clennam!  Good, generous, Mr 

Clennam, pray tell me you do not blame me.' 

effect that she thanked him from her heart (as she did, if it be 

now and then a word of encouragement from him, as they walked on 

slowly and almost silently under the darkening trees. 

you ask me nothing?' 

but I do so dearly love it!' 

so neglectful of it, so unthankful.' 

change of time.  All homes are left so.' 

scarcity of far better and more endearing and more accomplished 

much of me!' 

pictured what would happen. 

first I cannot be to him anything like what I have been these many 

that I beg and entreat you to remember him, and sometimes to keep 

you know I was fonder of him when I left him, than I ever was in 

talked to me this very day--there is nobody he likes so well as 

you, or trusts so much.' 

the water to his eyes.  He said, cheerily, but not quite so 

cheerily as he tried to say, that it should be done--that he gave 

her his faithful promise. 

pretty in, her innocent grief, than Clennam could trust himself 

feel my loss in a different way, and will look forward in a 

different manner.  But you know what a dear, devoted mother she is, 

and you will remember her too; will you not?' 

she wished. 

knowledge of one another, and to be a happiness to one another, and 

so dearly; oh, as you are a kind, true man!  when I am first 

separated from home (I am going a long distance away), try to 

reconcile papa to him a little more, and use your great influence 

reconcilement of ingrain differences ever effected!  It has been 

tried many times by other daughters, Minnie; it has never 

succeeded; nothing has ever come of it but failure. 

do it. 

withdrew her arm.  Speaking to him with her eyes lifted up to his, 

him, she said: 

you have anything to forgive me (not anything that I have wilfully 

noble heart!' 

shrinking.  He kissed it, and answered, Heaven knew that he had 

again, she whispered, 'Good-bye!' and he repeated it.  It was 

taking leave of all his old hopes--all nobody's old restless 

doubts.  They came out of the avenue next moment, arm-in-arm as 

in the darkness, like their own perspective of the past. 

speaking near the garden gate.  Hearing Pet's name among them, 

wondering and laughing until they came up; but as soon as they had 

all come together, it ceased, and Pet glided away. 

down on the brink of the river, in the light of the rising moon, 

the house.  Mr Meagles and Clennam walked up and down together for 

broke silence. 

in their communication, 'do you remember my telling you, as we 

walked up and down one hot morning, looking over the harbour at 

and me to have grown as she had grown, and changed as she had 

changed?' 

separate those twin sisters, and that, in our fancy, whatever Pet 

was, the other was?' 

further to-night.  I feel to-night, my dear fellow, as if you had 

loved my dead child very tenderly, and had lost her when she was 

like what Pet is now.' 

he put his hand in his breast and tenderly took out the handful of 

roses.  Perhaps he put them to his heart, perhaps he put them to 

his lips, but certainly he bent down on the shore and gently 

launched them on the flowing river.  Pale and unreal in the 

moonlight, the river floated them away. 

cheerful.  They talked of many subjects (his partner never had had 

so to bed, and to sleep.  While the flowers, pale and unreal in the 

the eternal seas. 

CHAPTER 29 

transactions, and the invalid within it turned the same unvarying 

each recurring with its accompanying monotony, always the same 

reluctant return of the same sequences of machinery, like a 

dragging piece of clockwork. 

them, images of people as they too used to be, with little or no 

allowance made for the lapse of time since they were seen; of 

these, there must have been many in the long routine of gloomy 

personally sequestered from it, to suppose mankind stricken 

all recluses. 

Mr Flintwinch, with his wry presence brought to bear upon her daily 

out of her, if there had been less resistance in her; but she was 

regard her liege-lord and her disabled mistress with a face of 

waking state, was occupation enough for her. 

and saw more people than had been used to come there for some 

but he did receive letters, and comers, and keep books, and 

correspond.  Moreover, he went about to other counting-houses, and 

Coffee House, and the Jerusalem Coffee House, and on 'Change; so 

that he was much in and out.  He began, too, sometimes of an 

evening, when Mrs Clennam expressed no particular wish for his 

exchange Small socialities with mercantile Sea Captains who 

Mrs Clennam held a council on matters of business; and it appeared 

that the two clever ones were making money. 

person, never of strong intellect, who was becoming foolish.  

Perhaps because her appearance was not of a commercial cast, or 

perhaps because it occurred to him that his having taken her to 

wife might expose his judgment to doubt in the minds of customers, 

peace on the subject of her conjugal relations, and should no 

by making springs after her on the staircase, and shaking her, 

thus waylaid next. 

and was neatly gathering up her shreds and odds and ends before 

going home.  Mr Pancks, whom Affery had just shown in, was 

coupled with the remark that, 'happening to find himself in that 

direction,' he had looked in to inquire, on behalf of his 

proprietor, how she found herself.  Mrs Clennam, with a deep 

contraction of her brows, was looking at him. 

change that I await here is the great change.' 

the figure of the little seamstress on her knee picking threads and 

fraying of her work from the carpet.  'You look nicely, ma'am.' 

to do.' 

'Thank you, ma'am,' said Mr Pancks, 'such is my endeavour.' 

'Beg Mr Casby and his daughter not to trouble themselves, by 

deputy, about me.  When they wish to see me, they know I am here to 

see them.  They have no need to trouble themselves to send.  You 

have no need to trouble yourself to come.' 

looking uncommonly nicely, ma'am.' 

prolong his visit.  He stirred up his hair with his sprightliest 

expression, glanced at the little figure again, said 'Good evening, 

and steamed out.  Mrs Clennam, her chin resting on her hand, 

stood looking at her as if she were spell-bound. 

which Pancks had gone out, to Little Dorrit, rising from the 

carpet.  With her chin drooping more heavily on her hand, and her 

gaze, and looked down.  Mrs Clennam still sat intent. 

you know of that man?' 

about, and that he has spoken to me.' 

nothing rough or disagreeable.' 

here or anywhere for that, ma'am, I can't think.' 

set face, as intent upon a subject in her mind as it had lately 

been upon the form that seemed to pass out of her view, sat 

absorbed.  Some minutes elapsed before she came out of this 

thoughtfulness, and resumed her hard composure. 

ma'am.' 

momentary recollection of the story of the Princess may have been 

in her mind. 

now?' 

to the door, 'that man?' 

one at all like him, or belonging to him.' 

mine.  I ask, because I take an interest in you; and because I 

believe I was your friend when you had no other who could serve 

you.  Is that so?' 

for you and the work you gave me, we should have wanted 

everything.' 

dead husband's, which always lay upon her table.  'Are there many 

of you?' 

regularly out of what we get.' 

else there may be of you?' asked Mrs Clennam, speaking 

deliberately, and meditatively turning the watch over and over. 

her soft voice, and timid uncomplaining way; 'but I think not 

harder--as to that--than many people find it.' 

too, or I much mistake you.' 

said Little Dorrit.  'I am indeed.' 

Mrs Clennam, with a gentleness of which the dreaming Affery had 

never dreamed her to be capable, drew down the face of her little 

seamstress, and kissed her on the forehead.  'Now go, Little 

Dorrit,' said she,'or you will be late, poor child!' 

find the other clever one kissing Little Dorrit next, and then the 

two clever ones embracing each other and dissolving into tears of 

attended the light footsteps down the stairs, that the house door 

might be safely shut. 

among less wonderful phenomena he might have been reasonably 

his finger to his nose (as Mrs Affery distinctly heard), 'Pancks 

a gipsy and a fortune-teller in it now!' cried Mistress Affery.  

'What next!  She stood at the open door, staggering herself with 

this enigma, on a rainy, thundery evening.  The clouds were flying 

fast, and the wind was coming up in gusts, banging some 

chimney-cowls and weather-cocks, and rushing round and round a 

confined adjacent churchyard as if it had a mind to blow the dead 

citizens out of their graves.  The low thunder, muttering in all 

attempted desecration, and to mutter, 'Let them rest!  Let them 

rest!' 

equalled by her dread of the haunted house with a premature and 

not, until the question was settled for her by the door blowing 

to be done now, what's to be done now!' cried Mistress Affery, 

all alone by herself inside, and can no more come down to open it 

than the churchyard dead themselves!' 

several times.  Why she should then stoop down and look in at the 

keyhole of the door as if an eye would open it, it would be 

difficult to say; but it is none the less what most people would 

have done in the same situation, and it is what she did. 

a man's hand. 

ends, where it had a tinge of red--and a high hook nose.  He 

laughed at Mistress Affery's start and cry; and as he laughed, his 

moustache went up under his nose, and his nose came down over his 

moustache. 

frightened at?' 

here!  The wind has been and blown the door to, and I can't get 

in.' 

you know such a name as Clennam about here?' 

her room, and lost the use of her limbs and can't stir to help 

cried Affery, driven into a frantic dance by these accumulated 

considerations, 'if I ain't a-going headlong out of my mind!' 

door. 

not choose but keep her eyes upon. 

presenting myself in that room without a ladder.  Now, madam, 

frankly --frankness is a part of my character--shall I open the 

door for you?' 

Affery, 'for she may be a-calling to me at this very present 

minute, or may be setting herself a fire and burning herself to 

a-going out of my mind at thinking of it!' 

'Yes, yes, yes,' cried Affery.  'Long ago.' 

character.  I am just landed from the packet-boat, as you may see.' 

saturated with water; she had previously observed that he was 

dishevelled and sallow, as if from a rough voyage, and so chilled 

that he could not keep his teeth from chattering.  'I am just 

within the regular hours (necessary business because money- 

authorised neighbouring somebody to do it in return for my opening 

the door, I'll open the door.  If this arrangement should be 

objectionable, I'll--' and with the same smile he made a 

significant feint of backing away. 

gave in her willing adhesion to it.  The gentleman at once 

way up the bricks, and in a moment had his hand at the sash, 

raising it.  His eyes looked so very sinister, as he put his leg 

into the room and glanced round at Mistress Affery, that she 

thought with a sudden coldness, if he were to go straight up-stairs 

to murder the invalid, what could she do to prevent him? 

cloak and threw it on, 'if you have the goodness to--what the 

Devil's that!' 

shock it communicated to the air, yet subdued as if it were far 

over again,' said Affery, who had caught his arm. 

He could hardly be a very brave man, even she thought in her dreamy 

start and fright, for his trembling lips had turned colourless.  

After listening a few moments, he made light of it. 

genius?'  He held the door in his hand, as though he were quite 

ready to shut her out again if she failed. 

Affery. 

round the corner.' 

returned to the gateway to peep at him.  Seeing him still on the 

threshold, more out of the house than in it, as if he had no love 

the next street, and sent a message into the tavern to Mr 

Flintwinch, who came out directly.  The two returning together--the 

lady in advance, and Mr Flintwinch coming up briskly behind, 

What is it?  Why does no one answer?  Who is that, down there?' 

CHAPTER 30 

When Mr and Mrs Flintwinch panted up to the door of the old house 

in the twilight, Jeremiah within a second of Affery, the stranger 

started back.  'Death of my soul!' he exclaimed.  'Why, how did you 

get here?' 

Mr Flintwinch, to whom these words were spoken, repaid the 

stranger's wonder in full.  He gazed at him with blank 

some one he had not been aware of standing behind him; he gazed at 

he looked to his wife for explanation; receiving none, he pounced 

did it, 'Affery, my woman, you must have a dose, my woman!  This is 

some of your tricks!  You have been dreaming again, mistress.  

What's it about?  Who is it?  What does it mean!  Speak out or be 

choked!  It's the only choice I'll give you.' 

moment, her choice was decidedly to be choked; for she answered not 

a syllable to this adjuration, but, with her bare head wagging 

violently backwards and forwards, resigned herself to her 

of gallantry, interposed. 

who stopped and released his victim.  'Thank you.  Excuse me.  

Husband and wife I know, from this playfulness.  Haha!  Always 

I suggest that somebody up-stairs, in the dark, is becoming 

energetically curious to know what is going on here?' 

step into the hall and call up the staircase.  'It's all right, I 

am here, Affery is coming with your light.'  Then he said to the 

you, and get up-stairs!' and then turned to the stranger and said 

to him, 'Now, sir, what might you please to want?' 

propose a candle.' 

where you are while I get one.' 

the gloom of the house as Mr Flintwinch turned, and pursued him 

with his eyes into the little room, where he groped about for a 

phosphorus box.  When he found it, it was damp, or otherwise out of 

order; and match after match that he struck into it lighted 

sprinkle his hands with pale little spots of fire, but not 

of this fitful illumination of his visage, looked intently and 

watchfulness clear away from his face, as it broke into the 

doubtful smile that was a large ingredient in its expression. 

pretty sharp survey of the smiling visitor in his turn, 'as to step 

into my counting-house.-- It's all right, I tell you!' petulantly 

breaking off to answer the voice up-stairs, still unsatisfied, 

all in her!' 

a hundred, sir, let me tell you.' 

left in the House now.  My partner.' 

Saying something apologetically as he crossed the hall, to the 

effect that at that time of night they were not in the habit of 

the stranger, with his wryest twist upon him, 'Your commands.' 

been advised from Paris--' 

Blandois,' said Jeremiah. 

say, with a laugh in his glittering eyes, which it occurred to Mr 

Flintwinch were too near together: 

I supposed when I really did for the moment take you to be the same 

in the dusk--for which I ought to apologise; permit me to do so; a 

readiness to confess my errors is, I hope, a part of the frankness 

of my character--still, however, uncommonly like.' 

letter of advice from anywhere respecting anybody of the name of 

Blandois.' 

'Just so,' said the stranger. 

book from his breast-pocket, selected a letter from that 

acquainted with the writing.  Perhaps the letter speaks for itself, 

and requires no advice.  You are a far more competent judge of such 

business, as what the world calls (arbitrarily) a gentleman.' 

have to present to you, on behalf of a highly esteemed 

M.  Blandois' drafts at sight to the extent of, say Fifty Pounds 

sterling (l50),' &c.  &c. 

fashioned, steady way of business, sir--we shall be happy to render 

could not yet be advised of it.  Probably you came over with the 

delayed mail that brings the advice.' 

Blandois, passing his white hand down his high-hooked nose, 'I know 

been here hours ago, and then I should not have to apologise-- 

permit me to apologise--for presenting myself so unreasonably, and 

apologise again--the esteemed lady, Mrs Clennam, in her invalid 

chamber above stairs.' 

Flintwinch had already begun to think this a highly gentlemanly 

for Mr Blandois to-night, out of business hours? 

'I must change, and eat and drink, and be lodged somewhere.  Have 

place, the better.  Next door, if that's all.' 

when Mr Blandois took him up. 

gentleman, by Heaven!  I will not deny, but I have no 

unaccommodating prejudiced habits.  A clean room, a hot dish for 

dinner, and a bottle of not absolutely poisonous wine, are all I 

want tonight.  But I want that much without the trouble of going 

one unnecessary inch to get it.' 

which were restless; 'there is a coffee-house and tavern close 

here, which, so far, I can recommend; but there's no style about 

it.' 

not too troublesome), and I shall be infinitely obliged.' 

Mr Flintwinch, upon this, looked up his hat, and lighted Mr 

it, he bethought himself of going up to tell the invalid that he 

would not be absent five minutes. 

wait on Mrs Clennam, to offer my personal compliments, and to 

apologise for having occasioned any agitation in this tranquil 

corner, if it should suit her convenience to endure the presence of 

clothes and fortified himself with something to eat and drink.' 

no attractions, wishes me to say that she won't hold you to your 

offer, in case you should think better of it.' 

to slight a lady; to slight a lady would be to be deficient in 

chivalry towards the sex; and chivalry towards the sex is a part of 

my character!'  Thus expressing himself, he threw the draggled 

skirt of his cloak over his shoulder, and accompanied Mr Flintwinch 

his portmanteau on the outer side of the gateway. 

little bar in which the widow landlady and her two daughters 

received him; it was much too big for the narrow wainscoted room 

with a bagatelle-board in it, that was first proposed for his 

reception; it perfectly swamped the little private holiday sitting- 

dry clothes and scented linen, with sleeked hair, a great ring on 

each forefinger and a massive show of watch-chain, Mr Blandois 

waiting for his dinner, lolling on a window-seat with his knees 

drawn up, looked (for all the difference in the setting of the 

jewel) fearfully and wonderfully like a certain Monsieur Rigaud who 

had once so waited for his breakfast, lying on the stone ledge of 

the iron grating of a cell in a villainous dungeon at Marseilles. 

Monsieur Rigaud at breakfast.  His avaricious manner of collecting 

all the eatables about him, and devouring some with his eyes while 

disregard of other people, as shown in his way of tossing the 

little womanly toys of furniture about, flinging favourite cushions 

with his big body and his great black head, had the same brute 

so busy among the dishes had the old wicked facility of the hands 

the picture. 

in that most evil of smiles, and with his surface eyes looking as 

of reflecting light stopped by some similar process, Nature, always 

not her fault, if the warning were fruitless.  She is never to 

blame in any such instance. 

as it parted from his thin lips in a thin stream: 

Haha!  Holy blue, you have begun well, Blandois!  At a pinch, an 

excellent master in English or French; a man for the bosom of 

families!  You have a quick perception, you have humour, you have 

effect, you are a gentleman!  A gentleman you shall live, my small 

subdue the society which has grievously wronged you, to your own 

by nature, my Blandois!' 

drink out his bottle of wine.  Both being finished, he shook 

himself into a sitting attitude; and with the concluding serious 

apostrophe, 'Hold, then!  Blandois, you ingenious one, have all 

and Co. 

instructions from her lord, had lighted up two candles in the hall 

and a third on the staircase, and who conducted him to Mrs 

Clennam's room.  Tea was prepared there, and such little company 

arrangements had been made as usually attended the reception of 

expected visitors.  They were slight on the greatest occasion, 

never extending beyond the production of the China tea-service, and 

rest, there was the bier-like sofa with the block upon it, and the 

figure in the widow's dress, as if attired for execution; the fire 

topped by the mound of damped ashes; the grate with its second 

little mound of ashes; the kettle and the smell of black dye; all 

as they had been for fifteen years. 

consideration of Clennam and Co.  Mrs Clennam, who had the letter 

looked very closely at one another.  That was but natural 

curiosity. 

who come here on business have any remembrance to bestow on one so 

removed from observation.  It would be idle to expect that they 

the exception, I don't complain of the rule.  ' 

disturbed her by unhappily presenting himself at such an 

unconscionable time.  For which he had already offered his best 

apologies to Mr--he begged pardon--but by name had not the 

distinguished honour-- 

consideration. 

days than Mr Flintwinch.  ' 

'What do you call yourself?' was the surly demand of that 

gentleman.  'You have the head of two men.' 

of her eyes in jeremiah's direction, 'from taking a responsible 

part in the business, even if I had the ability; and therefore Mr 

is not what it used to be; but some of our old friends (principally 

the writers of this letter) have the kindness not to forget us, and 

as we ever did.  This however is not interesting to you.  You are 

English, sir?' 

effect, I am of no country,' said Mr Blandois, stretching out his 

leg and smiting it: 'I descend from half-a-dozen countries.' 

everywhere!' 

adore your sex, but I am not married--never was.' 

attracted her own eyes so that she could not get them away.  The 

effect of this fancy was to keep her staring at him with the tea- 

pot in her hand, not only to her own great uneasiness, but 

and Mr Flintwinch's.  Thus a few ghostly moments supervened, when 

they were all confusedly staring without knowing why. 

with you?' 

extended towards the visitor.  'It ain't me.  It's him!' 

hot, and slowly rising with a look of such deadly wrath that it 

contrasted surprisingly with the slight force of his words.  'How 

is it possible to understand this good creature?' 

in that direction.  'She don't know what she means.  She's an 

have such a dose!  Get along with you, my woman,' he added in her 

you're shaken to yeast.' 

apron over her head, and in a twinkling vanished.  The visitor 

gradually broke into a smile, and sat down again. 

tea himself, 'she's failing and breaking up; that's what she's 

about.  Do you take sugar, sir?  ' 

very remarkable watch!' 

between it and Mrs Clennam's own particular table.  Mr Blandois in 

his gallantry had risen to hand that lady her tea (her dish of 

toast was already there), and it was in placing the cup 

conveniently within her reach that the watch, lying before her as 

it always did, attracted his attention.  Mrs Clennam looked 

suddenly up at him. 

said, taking it in his hand.  'Heavy for use, but massive and 

am, I am genuine myself.  Hah!  A gentleman's watch with two cases 

in the old fashion.  May I remove it from the outer case?  Thank 

you.  Aye?  An old silk watch-lining, worked with beads!  I have 

often seen these among old Dutch people and Belgians.  Quaint 

things!' 

'Very.  But this is not so old as the watch, I think?' 

N. F.?  It might be almost anything.' 

contents, began to do so: always entirely filling his mouth before 

refilled it. 

make no doubt,' observed Mr Blandois, as he snapped on the case 

again.  'I adore her memory on the assumption.  Unfortunately for 

my peace of mind, I adore but too readily.  It may be a vice, it 

may be a virtue, but adoration of female beauty and merit 

constitutes three parts of my character, madam.' 

directed to the invalid. 

'Those letters are not intended, I believe, for the initials of any 

name.' 

Forget!' 

backward to his former chair, 'you do not forget.' 

he had taken yet, but made his succeeding pause under new 

cup held still at his lips, while his eyes were still directed at 

the invalid.  She had that force of face, and that concentrated air 

replied with her deliberate strength of speech: 

'No, sir, I do not forget.  To lead a life as monotonous as mine 

has been during many years, is not the way to forget.  To lead a 

of having (as we all have, every one of us, all the children of 

desire to forget.  Therefore I have long dismissed it, and I 

neither forget nor wish to forget.' 

putting the cup in the tea-tray, as done with, turned his eyes upon 

Mr Blandois as if to ask him what he thought of that? 

I am proud to have had sufficient apprehension and appreciation 

(but without appreciation I could not be Blandois) to employ.' 

gentleman of pleasure, and change, and politeness, accustomed to 

court and to be courted--' 

comprehending what belongs to mine in my circumstances.  Not to 

pale books before her, '(for you go your own way, and the 

consequences are on your own head), I will say this much: that I 

shape my course by pilots, strictly by proved and tried pilots, 

under whom I cannot be shipwrecked--can not be--and that if I were 

should not be half as chastened as I am.' 

invisible opponent.  Perhaps with her own better sense, always 

turning upon herself and her own deception. 

might complain of the life to which I am now condemned.  I never 

do; I never have done.  If I forgot that this scene, the Earth, is 

expressly meant to be a scene of gloom, and hardship, and dark 

trial, for the creatures who are made out of its dust, I might have 

If I did not know that we are, every one, the subject (most justly 

the subject) of a wrath that must be satisfied, and against which 

mere actions are nothing, I might repine at the difference between 

me, imprisoned here, and the people who pass that gateway yonder.  

But I take it as a grace and favour to be elected to make the 

satisfaction I am making here, to know what I know for certain 

here, and to work out what I have worked out here.  My affliction 

might otherwise have had no meaning to me.  Hence I would forget, 

and I do forget, nothing.  Hence I am contented, and say it is 

better with me than with millions.' 

As she spoke these words, she put her hand upon the watch, and 

restored it to the precise spot on her little table which it always 

occupied.  With her touch lingering upon it, she sat for some 

moments afterwards, looking at it steadily and half-defiantly. 

fidgety, and now struck in. 

Clennam, and you have spoken piously and well.  Mr Blandois, I 

suspect, is not of a pious cast.' 

'On the contrary, sir!' that gentleman protested, snapping his 

fingers.  'Your pardon!  It's a part of my character.  I am 

sensitive, ardent, conscientious, and imaginative.  A sensitive, 

that, or nothing!' 

might be nothing, as he swaggered out of his chair (it was 

characteristic of this man, as it is of all men similarly marked, 

that whatever he did, he overdid, though it were sometimes by only 

sir,' she then said, 'though really through your accidental 

me, if you please.'  For he was evidently going to do it.  'Mr 

stay in this city may prove agreeable.' 

is an old room,' he remarked, with a sudden sprightliness of 

manner, looking round when he got near the door, 'I have been so 

interested that I have not observed it.  But it's a genuine old 

room.' 

smile.  'A place of no pretensions, but a piece of antiquity.' 

oblige me more.  An old house is a weakness with me.  I have many 

all its varieties.  I have been called picturesque myself.  It is 

no merit to be picturesque--I have greater merits, perhaps--but I 

may be, by an accident.  Sympathy, sympathy!' 

and very bare,' said Jeremiah, taking up the candle.  'It's not 

'On the contrary, Mr Flintwinch; if not tiresome to you, I shall be 

ravished!' 

worth coming so high to see.  I confess I don't.' 

passages, and came down the staircase again.  By this time Mr 

any room, after throwing one quick glance around, but always found 

his thoughts, he turned about on the staircase for another 

fixing one another, the visitor, with that ugly play of nose and 

moustache, laughed (as he had done at every similar moment since 

they left Mrs Clennam's chamber) a diabolically silent laugh. 

height; and as he went first down the staircase, and was usually a 

increased.  He postponed looking at Mr Blandois again until this 

Mr Clennam's room.  But, then twisting himself suddenly round upon 

him, he found his look unchanged. 

Do you never hear any haunted noises here?' 

in that capacity.' 

himself about again, and again found himself the subject of the 

same look and smile.  'Yes, Mr Blandois,' he replied tartly.  'It 

and that's all I can tell you of its pedigree.' 

stairs.' 

as he did during the whole of this dialogue, like some screw- 

machine that fell short of its grip; for the other never changed, 

and he always felt obliged to retreat a little.  'She is a 

remarkable woman.  Great fortitude--great strength of mind.' 

his left forefinger towards the portrait, and then, putting his 

Mr Flintwinch with the advancing nose and the retreating moustache. 

Flintwinch.  'I can't say.  I don't know.  There are secrets in all 

families.' 

suddenly that Mr Flintwinch found his face almost brushed by the 

dilated chest.  'I say there are secrets in all families.' 

and rolling him backwards and forwards.  'Haha!  you are right.  So 

in some families, Mr Flintwinch!'  With that, after clapping Mr 

humorous way he were rallying him on a joke he had made, he threw 

it, and burst into a roar of laughter.  It was in vain for Mr 

Flintwinch to try another screw at him.  He had his laugh out. 

of face here too, though not of the same character.  Looks as if he 

leisurely strolling out with him into the hall, declared it to be 

him that he would not have missed inspecting it for a hundred 

pounds. 

Throughout these singular freedoms on the part of Mr Blandois, 

which involved a general alteration in his demeanour, making it 

much coarser and rougher, much more violent and audacious than 

before, Mr Flintwinch, whose leathern face was not liable to many 

changes, preserved its immobility intact.  Beyond now appearing 

perhaps, to have been left hanging a trifle too long before that 

friendly operation of cutting down, he outwardly maintained an 

equable composure.  They had brought their survey to a close in the 

little room at the side of the hall, and he stood there, eyeing Mr 

Blandois. 

'I didn't expect it.  You seem to be quite in good spirits.' 

more refreshed in spirits.  Do you ever have presentiments, Mr 

Flintwinch?' 

that gentleman. 

pleasure to come.' 

on, I'll mention it.' 

that we shall be well acquainted.  Do you find it coming on?' 

'I can't say I do.' 

acquainted.--You have no feeling of that sort yet?' 

dear deep old dog as he was. 

invitation, and they went out to the quarters where the traveller 

roofs, and pavements, ever since nightfall.  The thunder and 

lightning had long ago passed over, but the rain was furious.  On 

their arrival at Mr Blandois' room, a bottle of port wine was 

ordered by that gallant gentleman; who (crushing every pretty thing 

he could collect, in the soft disposition of his dainty figure) 

coiled himself upon the window-seat, while Mr Flintwinch took a 

chair opposite to him, with the table between them.  Mr Blandois 

proposed having the largest glasses in the house, to which Mr 

Flintwinch assented.  The bumpers filled, Mr Blandois, with a 

roystering gaiety, clinked the top of his glass against the bottom 

of Mr Flintwinch's, and the bottom of his glass against the top of 

Mr Flintwinch's, and drank to the intimate acquaintance he foresaw. 

get, and said nothing.  As often as Mr Blandois clinked glasses 

part of the wine as well as his own: being, except in the article 

of palate, a mere cask. 

night; or, if occasion were, all next day and all next night; 

whereas Mr Blandois soon grew indistinctly conscious of swaggering 

too fiercely and boastfully.  He therefore terminated the 

entertainment at the end of the third bottle. 

business-like face at parting. 

both hands, 'I'll draw upon you; have no fear.  Adieu, my 

Flintwinch.  Receive at parting;' here he gave him a southern 

embrace, and kissed him soundly on both cheeks; 'the word of a 

gentleman!  By a thousand Thunders, you shall see me again!' 

came duly to hand.  Inquiring after him at night, Mr Flintwinch 

the Continent by way of Calais.  Nevertheless, Jeremiah scraped out 

keep his word on this occasion, and would be seen again. 

CHAPTER 31 

Anybody may pass, any day, in the thronged thoroughfares of the 

metropolis, some meagre, wrinkled, yellow old man (who might be 

the Heavens dull enough to be suspected of casting off so feeble a 

a little frightened by the noise and bustle.  This old man is 

always a little old man.  If he were ever a big old man, he has 

he has dwindled into a less old man.  His coat is a colour, and 

and Fate has lent this old coat to this old man, as one of a long 

thumbed and napless and yet an obdurate hat, which has never 

adapted itself to the shape of his poor head.  His coarse shirt and 

ways; as though he passed the greater part of his time in a 

nightcap and gown.  And so, like the country mouse in the second 

old man passes in the streets. 

chance acquaintance very often--has warmed up his weakness with a 

is going home to the Workhouse; and on his good behaviour they do 

few years he has before him to go out in, under the sun); and on 

two score and nineteen more old men, every one of whom smells of 

all the others. 

like a worn-out bird; who had been in what he called the music- 

binding business, and met with great misfortunes, and who had 

do anything at all with it but find it no thoroughfare,--had 

retired of his own accord to the Workhouse which was appointed by 

which was bad political economy), on the settlement of that 

Nandy (he was always so called in his legal Retreat, but he was Old 

Mr Nandy among the Bleeding Hearts) had sat in a corner of the 

Plornish fireside, and taken his bite and sup out of the Plornish 

cupboard.  He still hoped to resume that domestic position when 

Fortune should smile upon his son-in-law; in the meantime, while 

she preserved an immovable countenance, he was, and resolved to 

remain, one of these little old men in a grove of little old men 

with a community of flavour. 

and no Old Men's Ward for his dwelling-place, could quench his 

talents as she could possibly have been if they had made him Lord 

Chancellor.  She had as firm a belief in the sweetness and 

been Lord Chamberlain.  The poor little old man knew some pale and 

there was no such music at the Opera as the small internal 

these ditties, like a weak, little, broken barrel-organ, ground by 

a baby.  On his 'days out,' those flecks of light in his flat vista 

of pollard old men,' it was at once Mrs Plornish's delight and 

sorrow, when he was strong with meat, and had taken his full 

retirement--and then would Mrs Plornish declare she did believe 

there never was such a singer as Father, and wipe her eyes. 

the noble Refrigerator come home triumphantly from a foreign court 

Bleeding Heart Yard.  'Here's Father,' she would say, presenting 

ever; you'd never have forgotten it, if you'd aheard him just now.' 

marrying Mr Nandy's daughter, and only wondered how it was that so 

gifted an old gentleman had not made a fortune.  This he 

That's where it is, I consider.' 

Old Nandy had been several times to the Marshalsea College, 

communicating with his son-in-law during his short durance there; 

national institution. 

man held of him in vassalage under some feudal tenure.  He made 

little treats and teas for him, as if he came in with his homage 

state. 

been meritoriously faithful.  When he mentioned him, he spoke of 

privacy, no visitors, no station, no respect, no speciality.  Most 

deplorable!' 

such old men should not be born.  He passed along the streets as 

and son-in-law, and gave them Phyllis.  He had hardly concluded, 

when Little Dorrit looked in to see how they all were. 

nice?  And such voice he's in!' 

seen him this long time. 

now.  Won't you, Father?' 

drink of any sort in this present roof, you're fully welcome to 

much or little.  And this is what I mean and so I don't deceive 

you, and consequently which is to stand out is to entreat of you, 

and therefore why not do it?' 

had composed it (as no doubt he had) with enormous labour, Mrs 

Plornish's father pipingly replied: 

is the same I thank you kindly for.  But no, Thomas.  Until such 

times as it's not to take it out of your children's mouths, which 

take it is, and call it by what name you will it do remain and 

come, no Thomas, no!' 

corner of her apron in her hand, brought herself back to the 

conversation again by telling Miss Dorrit that Father was going 

over the water to pay his respects, unless she knew of any reason 

why it might not be agreeable. 

me I shall be so glad to take care of him--so glad,' said Little 

Dorrit, always thoughtful of the feelings of the weak, 'of his 

company.' 

be going for a walk along with Miss Dorrit!  Let me tie your neck- 

yourself, Father, if ever there was one.' 

arms, and her strong child tumbling down the steps, looking after 

her little old father as he toddled away with his arm under Little 

Dorrit's. 

what he would do if he had a ship full of gold coming home to him 

himself at a Tea Gardens, and live there all the rest of their 

new bonnet bound for the same port. 

never mean it!' 

young lady with burning indignation, 'but I don't think even I 

could have believed this, of even you!' 

coming along the open streets, in the broad light of day, with a 

Pauper!' (firing off the last word as if it were a ball from an 

air-gun). 

'O Fanny!' 

knew such a thing.  The way in which you are resolved and 

You bad little thing!' 

take care of this poor old man?' 

The principal pleasure of your life is to remind your family of 

is to keep low company.  But, however, if you have no sense of 

decency, I have.  You'll please to allow me to go on the other side 

of the way, unmolested.' 

and who had been hustled and cursed by impatient passengers for 

there's nothing the matter in the honoured family?' 

arm again, Mr Nandy.  We shall soon be there now.' 

Lodge and found Mr Chivery on the lock, and went in.  Now, it 

view, he displayed the utmost agitation and despondency of mind; 

stood with his hat in his hand, as he always did in that gracious 

the staircase. 

under her protection, with a hurried promise to return to him 

directly, Little Dorrit hastened after her father, and, on the 

staircase, found Fanny following her, and flouncing up with 

and uttered a groan. 

I hope you believe me, Miss?' 

I made you unhappy, father?  Not I, I hope!' 

sufficiently strong expression--'you Common-minded little Amy!  You 

complete prison-child!' 

But you have cut me to the soul.' 

'Innocent in intention!' the implacable Fanny struck in.  'Stuff in 

intention!  Low in intention!  Lowering of the family in 

intention!' 

again!' 

face of Providence by attempting to deny it!' 

several times across his face, and then grasping it convulsively in 

position here.  I may have succeeded; I may not.  You may know it; 

you may not.  I give no opinion.  I have endured everything here 

handkerchief to his eyes again.  Little Dorrit, on the ground 

beside him, with her imploring hand upon his arm, watched him 

remorsefully.  Coming out of his fit of grief, he clenched his 

pocket-handkerchief once more. 

all my troubles there has been that--Spirit in myself, and that-- 

that submission to it, if I may use the term, in those about me, 

which has spared me--ha--humiliation.  But this day, this minute, 

I have keenly felt it.' 

(air-gun again). 

for having wounded your dear heart--no!  Heaven knows I don't!'  

but beg and pray you to be comforted and overlook it.  But if I had 

come here with him, father, I would not, indeed.  What I have been 

so unhappy as to do, I have done in mistake.  I would not wilfully 

bring a tear to your eyes, dear love!' said Little Dorrit, her 

anything it could take away.' 

half in passion and half out of it, half spiteful with herself and 

daughter to his breast, and patted her head. 

forget it as soon as I can.  I,' with hysterical cheerfulness, 'I-- 

shall soon be able to dismiss it.  It is perfectly true, my dear, 

that I am always glad to see my old pensioner--as such, as such-- 

hum--the bruised reed--I trust I may so call him without 

this is the case, my dear child.  At the same time, I preserve in 

Becoming Spirit.  And there are some things which are,' he stopped 

condescending to my old pensioner--it is not that that hurts me.  

It is, if I am to close the painful subject by being explicit, that 

I have seen my child, my own child, my own daughter, coming into 

this College out of the public streets--smiling!  smiling!--arm in 

arm with--O my God, a livery!' 

clenched pocket-handkerchief raised in the air.  His excited 

which Fanny (still wishing herself dead, and indeed now going so 

far as to add, buried) cried 'Come in!' 

'What is it, Young John?' 

and a message with it, I thought, happening to be there myself, 

much distracted by the piteous spectacle of Little Dorrit at her 

father's feet, with her head turned away. 

message was, sir, that Mr Clennam also sent his compliments, and 

word that he would do himself the pleasure of calling this 

afternoon, hoping to see you, and likewise,' attention more 

distracted than before, 'Miss Amy.' 

in it), he reddened a little, and patted Amy on the head afresh.  

'Thank you, Young John.  Quite right.  Much obliged to you for your 

attention.  No one waiting?' 

we none of us are, except father--but she's pretty well, sir.' 

'Say we sent our remembrances, will you?  Say kind remembrances, if 

you please, Young John.' 

having spontaneously composed on the spot an entirely new epitaph 

for himself, to the effect that Here lay the body of John Chivery, 

Who, Having at such a date, Beheld the idol of his life, In grief 

terminated his existence by his own rash act. 

improved his spirits remarkably, and he was quite lightsome.  

by himself any longer, or he will begin to suppose he is not 

shall I?' 

her sobbing to a close. 

myself again, my love, quite myself.  Go to your room, Amy, and 

make yourself look comfortable and pleasant to receive Mr Clennam.' 

Dorrit, finding it more difficult than before to regain her 

composure.  'I would far rather not see Mr Clennam.' 

being here to receive Mr Clennam, my dear, especially this 

afternoon.  So go and freshen yourself up, Amy; go and freshen 

yourself up, like a good girl.' 

pausing for a moment as she went out of the room, to give her 

sister a kiss of reconciliation.  Upon which, that young lady, 

feeling much harassed in her mind, and having for the time worn out 

the wish with which she generally relieved it, conceived and 

wicked wretch, and making mischief between two sisters. 

spirits, went down into the yard, and found his old pensioner 

standing there hat in hand just within the gate, as he had stood 

saying, 'How are you, Nandy?  Are you pretty well?'  To which that 

vocalist returned, 'I thank you, honoured sir, I am all the better 

'Be covered, my good Nandy; put your hat on,' with great 

consideration. 

tea ready, and instructed her to buy certain tea-cakes, fresh 

butter, eggs, cold ham, and shrimps: to purchase which collation he 

gave her a bank-note for ten pounds, laying strict injunctions on 

advanced stage of progress, and his daughter Amy had come back with 

her work, when Clennam presented himself; whom he most graciously 

received, and besought to join their meal. 

happiness of doing.  Fanny, my dear, you are acquainted with Mr 

Clennam.'  Fanny acknowledged him haughtily; the position she 

tacitly took up in all such cases being that there was a vast 

conspiracy to insult the family by not understanding it, or 

sufficiently deferring to it, and here was one of the conspirators. 

Nandy, a very faithful old man.'  (He always spoke of him as an 

my daughter Amy has mentioned to me that you know poor Plornish?' 

Mr Clennam.' 

Arthur, secretly pitying the bowed and submissive figure. 

are always glad to see him,' observed the Father of the Marshalsea. 

the day.') 

be pushed.  'If Maggy will spread that newspaper on the window- 

sill, my dear,' remarked the Father complacently and in a half 

while we are having ours.' 

width, standard measure, Mrs Plornish's father was handsomely 

regaled.  Clennam had never seen anything like his magnanimous 

in the contemplation of its many wonders. 

if he were a gracious Keeper making a running commentary on the 

decline of the harmless animal he exhibited. 

last teeth,' he explained to the company, 'are going, poor old 

boy.') 

instantly replying, observed, ('His hearing is becoming very 

defective.  He'll be deaf directly.') 

yard within the walls of that place of yours?' 

informed the circle ('Legs going.') 

was? 

fork to consider.  'How old, sir?  Let me think now.' 

and five months.  It's one or the other.' 

returned, with infinite forbearance.  ('Faculties evidently 

decaying--old man rusts in the life he leads!') 

the pensioner, the better he appeared to like him; and when he got 

out of his chair after tea to bid the pensioner good-bye, on his 

he made himself look as erect and strong as possible. 

one in his hand.  'We call it tobacco.' 

duty to Miss Amy and Miss Fanny.  I wish you good night, Mr 

Clennam.' 

'You must come again, mind, whenever you have an afternoon.  You 

night, Nandy.  Be very careful how you descend the stairs, Nandy; 

they are rather uneven and worn.'  With that he stood on the 

landing, watching the old man down: and when he came into the room 

that, Mr Clennam, though one has the consolation of knowing that he 

Spirit broken and gone--pulverised--crushed out of him, sir, 

completely!' 

enunciator, while Maggy and her Little Mother washed the tea- 

service and cleared it away.  He noticed that his companion stood 

at the window with the air of an affable and accessible Sovereign, 

recognition of their salutes just stopped short of a blessing. 

bedstead, Fanny fell to tying her bonnet as a preliminary to her 

departure.  Arthur, still having his purpose, still remained.  At 

He kissed Amy as she started up to meet him, nodded to Fanny, 

nodded to his father, gloomed on the visitor without further 

recognition, and sat down. 

you see--' 

'Yes, I see, Amy.  If you refer to the presence of any visitor you 

have here--I say, if you refer to that,' answered Tip, jerking his 

after a moment's pause, 'that visitor will understand me, when I 

say that's all I say.  In short, I suppose the visitor will 

understand that he hasn't used me like a gentleman.' 

referred to with tranquillity. 

know that when I address what I call a properly-worded appeal, and 

an urgent appeal, and a delicate appeal, to an individual, for a 

small temporary accommodation, easily within his power--easily 

within his power, mind!--and when that individual writes back word 

to me that he begs to be excused, I consider that he doesn't treat 

me like a gentleman.' 

no sooner heard this sentiment, than he began in angry voice:-- 

the fact of the line of conduct I choose to adopt towards the 

individual present, you ought to be proud of my showing a proper 

spirit.' 

becoming spirit.  Is it come to this that my son teaches me--ME-- 

spirit!' 

has not treated me like a gentleman.  And there's an end of it.' 

there shall not be an end of it.  You have made up your mind?  You 

have made up your mind?' 

ask me to desist; there is a--hum--a general principle involved 

here, which rises even above considerations of--ha--hospitality.  

I object to the assertion made by my son.  I--ha--I personally 

repel it.' 

shoulder. 

dabbed his face.  'I am outraged and insulted by it.  Let me 

have made a--hum--an appeal, and a properly-worded appeal, and a 

small temporary accommodation.  Let me suppose that that 

accommodation could have been easily extended, and was not 

extended, and that that individual informed me that he begged to be 

excused.  Am I to be told by my own son, that I therefore received 

it?' 

account be calmed.  He said his spirit was up, and wouldn't endure 

this. 

upon him by his own blood? 

injury of your own accord!' said the young gentleman morosely.  

'What I have made up my mind about has nothing to do with you.  

other people's hats?' 

point out to you, sir, with indignation, that--hum--the--ha-- 

delicacy and peculiarity of your father's position should strike 

you dumb, sir, if nothing else should, in laying down such--ha-- 

such unnatural principles.  Besides; if you are not filial, sir, if 

you--ha--an Atheist?  And is it Christian, let me ask you, to 

stigmatise and denounce an individual for begging to be excused 

this time, when the same individual may--ha--respond with the 

not to--hum--not to try him again?'  He had worked himself into 

quite a religious glow and fervour. 

sensible or fair argument here to-night, and so the best thing I 

can do is to cut.  Good night, Amy.  Don't be vexed.  I am very 

sorry it happens here, and you here, upon my soul I am; but I can't 

altogether part with my spirit, even for your sake, old girl.' 

Miss Fanny; who did not consider it spirited on her part to take 

leave of Clennam with any less opposing demonstration than a stare, 

importing that she had always known him for one of the large body 

of conspirators. 

inclined to sink into despondency again, and would have done so, 

but that a gentleman opportunely came up within a minute or two to 

attend him to the Snuggery.  It was the gentleman Clennam had seen 

impalpable grievance about the misappropriated Fund on which the 

Marshal was supposed to batten.  He presented himself as deputation 

to escort the Father to the Chair, it being an occasion on which he 

enjoyment of a little Harmony. 

confidence in your hands, and perhaps you may do something towards 

erasing from Mr Clennam's mind the--ha--untoward and unpleasant 

circumstance which has occurred since tea-time.' 

therefore required no erasure. 

his note and enclosure that afternoon, 'Heaven ever bless you!' 

could speak to Little Dorrit with nobody by.  Maggy counted as 

nobody, and she was by. 

CHAPTER 32 

opaque frilling hiding what profile she had (she had none to 

spare), and her serviceable eye brought to bear upon her 

occupation, on the window side of the room.  What with her flapping 

cap, and what with her unserviceable eye, she was quite partitioned 

off from her Little Mother, whose seat was opposite the window.  

The tread and shuffle of feet on the pavement of the yard had much 

having set strongly in the direction of Harmony.  Some few who had 

no music in their souls, or no money in their pockets, dawdled 

when the Collegians took the benefit of the act of sleep.  The 

occasional rattle of applause upon the tables of the Snuggery, 

responsive acceptance, by the united children, of some toast or 

some boastful bass was in blue water, or in the hunting field, or 

fast. 

gently put his hand upon her work, and said, 'Dear Little Dorrit, 

let me lay it down.' 

nervously clasping together, but he took one of them. 

'How seldom I have seen you lately, Little Dorrit!' 

having been with those good people close by me.  Why not come to 

me, then?' 

generally are now, are you not?' 

almost with as much concern as tenderness. 

her head bent and her whole form trembling. 

little while before he spoke again. 

a relief to an overcharged heart.' 

just now.  It is of no moment; not the least.  I am only 

unfortunate to have come in the way.  Let it go by with these 

tears.  It is not worth one of them.  One of them?  Such an idle 

to save you a moment's heart-ache, Little Dorrit.' 

to be sorry for and ashamed of, it is such a bad return to you--' 

'Forgetfulness in you who remember so many and so much, would be 

new indeed.  Shall I remind you that I am not, and that I never 

was, anything but the friend whom you agreed to trust?  No.  You 

remember it, don't you?' 

my mistaken brother was here.  You will consider his bringing-up in 

this place, and will not judge him hardly, poor fellow, I know!'  

tone, 'You have not been ill, Mr Clennam?' 

said in reply: 

command than that.  I thought I had.  I must learn them of you.  

Who could teach me better!' 

that looked upon him with the same light and strength as hers. 

pleasure to confide in my Little Dorrit.  Let me confess then, 

that, forgetting how grave I was, and how old I was, and how the 

time for such things had gone by me with the many years of sameness 

marking it--that, forgetting all this, I fancied I loved some one.' 

than him.  'I did wonder at it a little.' 

in the avenue on the night of the roses, the feeling that he was an 

older man, who had done with that tender part of life, 'I found out 

my mistake, and I thought about it a little--in short, a good 

deal--and got wiser.  Being wiser, I counted up my years and 

considered what I am, and looked back, and looked forward, and 

quickly.' 

easing and serving her. 

connection with me, was gone, and would never shine again.' 

dagger in his hand, and the cruel wounds it struck in the faithful 

bleeding breast of his Little Dorrit! 

space of years that there is between us, and recall to you that I 

have passed, by the amount of your whole life, the time that is 

present to you?' 

touch you without touching me; that nothing can make you happy or 

unhappy, but it must make me, who am so grateful to you, the same.' 

her clear true eyes, he saw the quickened bosom that would have 

joyfully thrown itself before him to receive a mortal wound 

directed at his breast, with the dying cry, 'I love him!' and the 

remotest suspicion of the truth never dawned upon his mind.  No.  

He saw the devoted little creature with her worn shoes, in her 

common dress, in her jail-home; a slender child in body, a strong 

heroine in soul; and the light of her domestic story made all else 

dark to him. 

So far removed, so different, and so much older, I am the better 

to be trusted; and any little constraint that you might feel with 

another, may vanish before me.  Why have you kept so retired from 

me?  Tell me.' 

here,' said Little Dorrit, faintly. 

and comfort, if you would!' 

trouble. 

it from Maggy at her work.  All of a sudden Maggy stared again, and 

this time spoke: 

about the Princess.  She had a secret, you know.' 

Princess was that, Maggy?' 

had a secret?  _I_ never said so.' 

it there?  And so the t'other one says to her, no I don't; and so 

the cupboard, and there it is.  And she wouldn't go into the 

herself. 

it was only a Fairy Tale she had one day made up for Maggy, and 

subject where it was. 

stronger interest in her welfare than he had, or to be more set 

upon promoting it than he was.  When she answered fervently, she 

more delicate point--the suspicion he had formed. 

to you; I have tried for opportunities.  Don't mind me, who, for 

the matter of years, might be your father or your uncle.  Always 

you away from the duties you discharge here.  If I were not sure of 

it, I should, before now, have implored you, and implored your 

place.  But you may have an interest--I will not say, now, though 

one else; an interest not incompatible with your affection here.' 

afterwards.  The time came when he remembered it well, long 

afterwards, within those prison walls; within that very room. 

truth to me, point out the object of such an interest to me, and I 

will try with all the zeal, and honour, and friendship and respect 

that I feel for you, good Little Dorrit of my heart, to do you a 

lasting service.' 

looking at him with her work-worn hands folded together, and in the 

same resigned accents as before. 

unhesitating trust in me.' 

anxiety, concealed from me?' 

place, I may believe that there is no grief beyond this room, now, 

and its usual occupants, which preys on Little Dorrit's mind?' 

may!' 

was coming up or down, here creaked under a quick tread, and a 

further sound was heard upon it, as if a little steam-engine with 

as if it were stooping down and snorting in at the keyhole. 

ale and tobacco smoke. 

curious air; as if, instead of being his proprietor's grubber, he 

the turnkeys, and all the Collegians.  In his great self- 

satisfaction he put his cigar to his lips (being evidently no 

smoker), and took such a pull at it, with his right eye shut up 

and choking.  But even in the midst of that paroxysm, he still 

the gi-ipsy, fortune-telling.' 

'I've been singing.  I've been taking a part in White sand and grey 

sand.  I don't know anything about it.  Never mind.  I'll take any 

part in anything.  It's all the same, if you're loud enough.' 

perceived that though he might be a little the worse (or better) 

distilled from any grain or berry. 

mind my running round, and looking in for a moment.  Mr Clennam I 

heard was here, from Mr Dorrit.  How are you, Sir?' 

'Gay!' said Pancks.  'I'm in wonderful feather, sir.  I can't stop 

Eh, Miss Dorrit?' 

like a dark species of cockatoo. 

chair, and I said, "I'll go and support him!" I ought to be down in 

Miss Dorrit?' 

presenting a knuckle to any part of his figure. 

She was half afraid of him, and irresolute what to say.  He 

laughed, with a nod towards Clennam. 

shouldn't take on to mind me before people, but we didn't mean Mr 

Clennam.  He's one of us.  He's in it.  An't you, Mr Clennam?--Eh, 

Miss Dorrit?' 

observed that they exchanged quick looks. 

it was.  Oh, I know!  Capital company here.  I've been treating 'em 

all round.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?' 

looks between the two. 

property, that's the fact.  I can afford to be liberal.  I think 

I'll give 'em a treat here.  Tables laid in the yard.  Bread in 

stacks.  Pipes in faggots.  Tobacco in hayloads.  Roast beef and 

plum-pudding for every one.  Quart of double stout a head.  Pint of 

wine too, if they like it, and the authorities give permission.-- 

Eh, Miss Dorrit?' 

of Mr Pancks), that she only moved her lips in answer, without 

forming any word. 

shall, my darling.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?' 

myriads of points that break out in the large change of a great 

firework, was a wonderful mystery. 

'em to miss me.  Mr Clennam, you and I made a bargain.  I said you 

should find me stick to it.  You shall find me stick to it now, 

you good night.  Miss Dorrit, I wish you good fortune.' 

followed him with such a hurried step, that he had very nearly 

yard. 

out there both together. 

words he presented another man without a hat, and also with a 

when compared with the rampancy of Mr Pancks. 

'Mr Clennam, Mr Rugg,' said Pancks.  'Stop a moment.  Come to the 

pump.' 

the handle.  Mr Rugg complying to the letter, Mr Pancks came forth 

snorting and blowing to some purpose, and dried himself on his 

handkerchief. 

astonished.  'But upon my soul, to hear her father making speeches 

Mr Rugg--a little higher, sir,--that'll do!' 

evening, did Mr Pancks, of all mankind, fly over the head and 

shoulders of Mr Rugg of Pentonville, General Agent, Accountant, and 

Recoverer of Debts.  Alighting on his feet, he took Clennam by the 

his pocket a bundle of papers.  Mr Rugg, also, pantingly produced 

from his pocket a bundle of papers. 

convey, 'We rather think so.' 

'You are to understand'--snorted Pancks, feverishly unfolding 

'Where's the Pedigree?  Where's Schedule number four, Mr Rugg?  Oh! 

very day virtually complete.  We shan't be legally for a day or 

day for I don't know how long.  Mr Rugg, you know how long?  Never 

mind.  Don't say.  You'll only confuse me.  You shall tell her, Mr 

Rugg?  Oh!  Here we are!  There sir!  That's what you'll have to 

break to her.  That man's your Father of the Marshalsea!' 

CHAPTER 33 

people, the Miggleses, and submitting her philosophy to the draught 

marriage.  In her progress to, and happy arrival at, this 

affections but by three politic considerations. 

the smallest intention to ask her consent, or any mistrust of his 

ability to dispense with it; the second, that the pension bestowed 

upon her by a grateful country (and a Barnacle) would be freed from 

that Henry's debts must clearly be paid down upon the altar-railing 

there is added the fact that Mrs Gowan yielded her consent the 

moment she knew of Mr Meagles having yielded his, and that Mr 

its way all along, it becomes the height of probability that the 

relict of the deceased Commissioner of nothing particular, turned 

these ideas in her sagacious mind. 

her individual dignity and the dignity of the blood of the 

unfortunate business; that she was sadly cut up by it; that this 

the move by now impounding the family itself for the same purpose.  

In the first interview she accorded to Mr Meagles, she slided 

herself into the position of disconsolately but gracefully yielding 

to irresistible pressure.  With the utmost politeness and good- 

breeding, she feigned that it was she--not he--who had made the 

that innocent lady; and, when her future daughter-in-law was 

time allowing a few tears to carry before them, in little pills, 

that she suffered much inwardly for the show of composure with 

which she bore her misfortune. 

Power), Mrs Merdle occupied a front row.  True, the Hampton Court 

faces to worship his wealth.  In which compensating adjustment of 

and all the rest of them. 

town for the purpose in a one-horse carriage irreverently called at 

that period of English history, a pill-box.  It belonged to a job- 

the day, or hour, to most of the old ladies in Hampton Court 

the whole equipage should be tacitly regarded as the private 

should betray personal knowledge of nobody but the jobber in 

possession.  So the Circumlocution Barnacles, who were the largest 

job but the job immediately in hand. 

with the parrot on a neighbouring stem watching her with his head 

on one side, as if he took her for another splendid parrot of a 

larger species.  To whom entered Mrs Gowan, with her favourite 

green fan, which softened the light on the spots of bloom. 

hand with this fan after a little indifferent conversation, 'you 

because you represent and express Society so well.' 

review; and having ascertained that show-window of Mr Merdle's and 

the London jewellers' to be in good order, replied: 

found a handsome establishment by marriage.  Society does not see, 

otherwise, what he has to do with marriage.  Bird, be quiet!' 

conference as if he were a judge (and indeed he looked rather like 

one), had wound up the exposition with a shriek. 

neat action; 'cases there are where a man is not young or elegant, 

of a different kind.  In such cases--' 

looks out for this sort of thing, my dear.'  Then the parrot 

'Bird!  Do be quiet!' 

'But, young men,' resumed Mrs Merdle, 'and by young men you know 

what I mean, my love--I mean people's sons who have the world 

before them--they must place themselves in a better position 

patience with their making fools of themselves.  Dreadfully worldly 

putting up her glass again, 'does it not?' 

and creatures instead of banker's accounts (which would be 

the distinction to Edmund Sparkler.' 

name was mentioned, replied as follows: 

unfortunate concessions of John Barnacle's!--and you therefore know 

the reasons for my being as poor as Thingummy.' 

Mrs Gowan.  'Either will do.  It would be idle to disguise, 

of your son and mine.  I may add, too, that Henry has talent--' 

greatest suavity. 

what is the most inferior class of marriage to which I can 

reconcile myself.' 

(beautiful-formed arms, and the very thing for bracelets), that she 

omitted to reply for a while.  Roused at length by the silence, she 

folded the arms, and with admirable presence of mind looked her 

friend full in the face, and said interrogatively, 'Ye-es?  And 

then?' 

'I should be glad to hear what you have to say to it.' 

last, burst into a fit of laughter, bobbed himself derisively up 

possibly twist it. 

lady,' said Mrs Merdle; 'but Society is perhaps a little mercenary, 

you know, my dear.' 

that Henry will be relieved from debt--' 

observed in a comfortable sort of way. 

a-year, or perhaps altogether something more, which, in Italy-' 

friend.  She understood.  Say no more! 

double chin; might be called a chin and a half at present), 'that's 

all!  On the death of the old people, I suppose there will be more 

And as to that, they may live for ever.  My dear, they are just the 

kind of people to do it.' 

and who knew what Society's mothers were, and what Society's 

daughters were, and what Society's matrimonial market was, and how 

sufficiently good catch.  Knowing, however, what was expected of 

her, and perceiving the exact nature of the fiction to be nursed, 

she took it delicately in her arms, and put her required 

contribution of gloss upon it. 

yourself with.  You must exercise the strength of mind for which 

you are renowned, and make the best of it.' 

Henry.' 

myself morning, noon, and night, for means to detach Henry from the 

connection.' 

I acted with inexcusable weakness?' 

(speaking as a Priestess of Society) that she was highly to be 

taken the highest of parts, and had come out of the furnace 

refined.  And Mrs Gowan, who of course saw through her own 

threadbare blind perfectly, and who knew that Mrs Merdle saw 

gone into it, with immense complacency and gravity. 

when all the region of Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was 

point when Mr Merdle came home from his daily occupation of causing 

civilised globe capable of the appreciation of world-wide 

commercial enterprise and gigantic combinations of skill and 

the terms in which everybody defined it on all ceremonious 

occasions, and which it was the last new polite reading of the 

parable of the camel and the needle's eye to accept without 

inquiry. 

For a gentleman who had this splendid work cut out for him, Mr 

his vast transactions, he had accidentally made an interchange of 

two ladies in the course of a dismal stroll through his mansion, 

chief butler. 

didn't know there was anybody here but the parrot.' 

said she was just going, and had already risen to take her leave, 

if he were taking himself into custody.  In this attitude he fell 

directly into a reverie from which he was only aroused by his 

wife's calling to him from her ottoman, when they had been for some 

quarter of an hour alone. 

have not heard a word of my complaint.' 

you were suffering from a complaint.  What complaint?' 

I--what may you have to complain of in me, Mrs Merdle?'  In his 

shape this question.  As a kind of faint attempt to convince 

himself that he was the master of the house, he concluded by 

on that subject by instantly driving his bill into it. 

finger in his mouth, 'that you had a complaint against me?' 

might as well have stated it to the wall.  I had far better have 

stated it to the bird.  He would at least have screamed.' 

Merdle, taking a chair. 

better do that, than be so moody and distraught.  One would at 

least know that you were sensible of what was going on around you.' 

Merdle, heavily. 

complaint I make against you, it is, in so many plain words, that 

yourself to Society.' 

head that he seemed to lift himself up by it as he started out of 

his chair, cried: 

more for Society than I do?  Do you see these premises, Mrs Merdle? 

and see yourself, Mrs Merdle?  Do you know the cost of all this, 

oughtn't to go into Society?  I, who shower money upon it in this 

way?  I, who might always be said--to--to--to harness myself to a 

day of my life.' 

You don't know half of what I do to accommodate Society.  You don't 

know anything of the sacrifices I make for it.' 

And I believe I know (indeed, not to make any ridiculous pretence 

about it, I know I know) who sustains you in it, Mr Merdle.' 

it, I mean a person who provides it with all sorts of expensive 

fit for it after all I have done for it--after all I have done for 

lift up her eyelids, 'after all--all!--to tell me I have no right 

to mix with it after all, is a pretty reward.' 

about with you as you do.' 

'How do I carry them about, Mrs Merdle?' asked Mr Merdle. 

in the glass.' 

nearest mirror, and asked, with a slow determination of his turbid 

blood to his temples, whether a man was to be called to account for 

his digestion? 

your digestion.  I speak of your manner.' 

supply manner, and I supply money.' 

cushions, 'to captivate people.  I don't want you to take any 

trouble upon yourself, or to try to be fascinating.  I simply 

as everybody else does.' 

it.' 

cares an projects about, instead of leaving them in the City, or 

wherever else they belong to,' said Mrs Merdle.  'Or seeming to.  

Seeming would be quite enough: I ask no more.  Whereas you couldn't 

you habitually show yourself to be, if you were a carpenter.' 

remark, 'that it is not the tone of Society, and that you ought to 

correct it, Mr Merdle.  If you have any doubt of my judgment, ask 

even Edmund Sparkler.'  The door of the room had opened, and Mrs 

Merdle now surveyed the head of her son through her glass.  

'Edmund; we want you here.' 

young lady with no nonsense about her), upon this followed up his 

head with his body, and stood before them.  To whom, in a few easy 

words adapted to his capacity, Mrs Merdle stated the question at 

issue. 

had heard it noticed by fellers.' 

Which in truth was no unreasonable inference; seeing that Mr 

Sparkler would probably be the last person, in any assemblage of 

passed in his presence. 

noticed.' 

'I couldn't,' said Mr Sparkler, after feeling his pulse as before, 

loose.  But being in company with the brother of a doosed fine 

period alluded to--' 

impatiently.  'What did the brother say?' 

feller as myself.  Equally hard up for a remark.' 

was.' 

'But tell us what it was.' 

some severe mental discipline before he replied: 

occasionally compliment my Governor in a very handsome way on being 

immensely rich and knowing--perfect phenomenon of Buyer and Banker 

business.' 

her, 'is exactly my complaint.  Edmund, give me your arm up- 

stairs.' 

himself he went down-stairs, and looked intently at all the carpets 

on the ground-floor; and then came up-stairs again, and looked 

intently at all the carpets on the first-floor; as if they were 

who had any business to approach them.  Let Mrs Merdle announce, 

season, she could not announce more widely and unmistakably than Mr 

Merdle did that he was never at home. 

he rode out to dinner, with Mrs Merdle, in her own handsome 

chariot.  At dinner, he was envied and flattered as a being of 

might, was Treasuried, Barred, and Bishoped, as much as he would; 

out again in his own hall, like a rushlight, by the chief butler, 

went sighing to bed. 

CHAPTER 34 

Mr Henry Gowan and the dog were established frequenters of the 

high and very large family might shed as much lustre on the 

marriage as so dim an event was capable of receiving. 

have held all the members and connections of that illustrious 

house.  Secondly, because wherever there was a square yard of 

possession of it in the British name, but to that spot of earth, so 

a Barnacle and a despatch-box.  Thus the Barnacles were all over 

the world, in every direction--despatch-boxing the compass. 

in summoning the Barnacles from every speck of ocean and dry land 

on which there was nothing (except mischief) to be done and 

anything to be pocketed, it was perfectly feasible to assemble a 

good many Barnacles.  This Mrs Gowan applied herself to do; calling 

on Mr Meagles frequently with new additions to the list, and 

of the most elevated Barnacle expected; though he was far from 

insensible of the honour of having such company.  This guest was 

Clennam.  But Clennam had made a promise he held sacred, among the 

trees that summer night, and, in the chivalry of his heart, 

regarded it as binding him to many implied obligations.  In 

forgetfulness of himself, and delicate service to her on all 

occasions, he was never to fail; to begin it, he answered Mr 

Meagles cheerfully, 'I shall come, of course.' 

Meagles's way, the worthy gentleman being not at all clear in his 

Barnacleism might produce some explosive combination, even at a 

marriage breakfast.  The national offender, however, lightened him 

of his uneasiness by coming down to Twickenham to represent that he 

that he might not be invited.  'For,' said he, 'as my business with 

this set of gentlemen was to do a public duty and a public service, 

of being of one mind.'  Mr Meagles was much amused by his friend's 

than usual, when he rejoined: 'Well, well, Dan, you shall have your 

own crotchety way.' 

by all quiet and unpretending means, that he was frankly and 

conversation one day, when they were walking near the Cottage 

within a week of the marriage, 'I am a disappointed man.  That you 

know already.' 

know how.' 

family, or a connection, or whatever you like to call it, that 

it into its head not to do it at all.  So here I am, a poor devil 

of an artist.' 

him up. 

beautiful and charming girl whom I love with all my heart.' 

('Is there much of it?' Clennam thought.  And as he thought it, 

felt ashamed of himself.) 

liberal good old boy.  Still, I had other prospects washed and 

combed into my childish head when it was washed and combed for me, 

and I took them to a public school when I washed and combed it for 

myself, and I am here without them, and thus I am a disappointed 

man.' 

himself), was this notion of being disappointed in life, an 

as his property, having already carried it detrimentally into his 

pursuit?  And was it a hopeful or a promising thing anywhere? 

worth that--though they are charming fellows, and I have the 

good world, and I love it!' 

by Jove I glow with admiration of it, and with ardour to run a race 

old callings, isn't it?' 

being a disappointed man may show itself.  I may not be able to 

some danger of my being just enough soured not to be able to do 

that.' 

helps himself in his, and pass the bottle of smoke.  To keep up the 

pretence as to labour, and study, and patience, and being devoted 

many pleasures for it, and living in it, and all the rest of it--in 

short, to pass the bottle of smoke according to rule.' 

is; and to think himself bound to uphold it, and to claim for it 

the respect it deserves; is it not?' Arthur reasoned.  'And your 

vocation, Gowan, may really demand this suit and service.  I 

confess I should have thought that all Art did.' 

stopping to look at him, as if with irrepressible admiration.  

'What a capital fellow!  You have never been disappointed.  That's 

easy to see.' 

on: 

give any money (if I had any), to live in such a rose-coloured 

mist.  But what I do in my trade, I do to sell.  What all we 

fellows do, we do to sell.  If we didn't want to sell it for the 

disappointed man.  You hear the truth.' 

Whatever he had heard, and whether it deserved that name or 

he began to fear Henry Gowan would always be a trouble to him, and 

that so far he had gained little or nothing from the dismissal of 

Nobody, with all his inconsistencies, anxieties, and 

contradictions.  He found a contest still always going on in his 

breast between his promise to keep Gowan in none but good aspects 

Gowan in aspects that had no good in them.  Nor could he quite 

support his own conscientious nature against misgivings that he 

he had been; and he knew that he had once disliked Gowan for no 

better reason than that he had come in his way. 

Gowan and his young wife gone, and himself left to fulfil his 

promise, and discharge the generous function he had accepted.  This 

Before Pet, or before Gowan, Mr Meagles was radiant; but Clennam 

had more than once found him alone, with his view of the scales and 

old clouded face on which Gowan had fallen like a shadow.  In the 

arrangement of the house for the great occasion, many little 

the midst of these mute witnesses, to the life they had had 

together, even Pet herself would yield to lamenting and weeping.  

Mrs Meagles, the blithest and busiest of mothers, went about 

singing and cheering everybody; but she, honest soul, had her 

red, and would then come out, attributing that appearance to 

pickled onions and pepper, and singing clearer than ever.  Mrs 

Tickit, finding no balsam for a wounded mind in Buchan's Domestic 

Medicine, suffered greatly from low spirits, and from moving 

was not in parlour condition as to her attire, and that she 

solicited a sight of 'her child' in the kitchen; there, she would 

bless her child's face, and bless her child's heart, and hug her 

servant, which is a very pretty tenderness indeed. 

the feast. 

There was Mr Tite Barnacle, from the Circumlocution Office, and 

Mews Street, Grosvenor Square, with the expensive Mrs Tite Barnacle 

the three expensive Miss Tite Barnacles, double-loaded with 

rather hanging fire.  There was Barnacle junior, also from the 

itself, and, sooth to say, not at all impairing the efficiency of 

Barnacle, deriving from the sprightly side of the family, also from 

along, and treating it, in his sparkling way, as one of the 

it.  There were three other Young Barnacles from three other 

offices, insipid to all the senses, and terribly in want of 

Old Rome, the new singer, or Jerusalem. 

Barnacle himself, in the odour of Circumlocution--with the very 

smell of Despatch-Boxes upon him.  Yes, there was Lord Decimus Tite 

that it behoves a Minister of this free country to set bounds to 

the philanthropy, to cramp the charity, to fetter the public 

spirit, to contract the enterprise, to damp the independent self- 

reliance, of its people.  That was, in other words, that this great 

the ship to do anything but prosper in the private loaf and fish 

the ship above water without him.  On this sublime discovery in the 

highest glory of the Barnacle family; and let any ill-advised 

to do it, that Bill was as good as dead and buried when Lord 

Decimus Tite Barnacle rose up in his place and solemnly said, 

soaring into indignant majesty as the Circumlocution cheering 

the philanthropy, to cramp the charity, to fetter the public 

spirit, to contract the enterprise, to damp the independent self- 

reliance, of its people.  The discovery of this Behoving Machine 

out, though it was always going round and round in all the State 

Departments. 

William Barnacle, who had made the ever-famous coalition with Tudor 

fresh out of him, with a 'First, I will beg you, sir, to inform the 

House what Precedent we have for the course into which the 

honourable gentleman to favour him with his own version of the 

Precedent; sometimes telling the honourable gentleman that he 

there was no Precedent.  But Precedent and Precipitate were, under 

all circumstances, the well-matched pair of battle-horses of this 

able Circumlocutionist.  No matter that the unhappy honourable 

gentleman had been trying in vain, for twenty-five years, to 

the wretched honourable gentleman could possibly produce a 

honourable gentleman for that ironical cheer, and would close with 

NO Precedent for this.  It might perhaps have been objected that 

the William Barnacle wisdom was not high wisdom or the earth it 

bamboozled would never have been made, or, if made in a rash 

mistake, would have remained blank mud.  But Precedent and 

which he practised with great success and admiration in all 

Barnacle Governments.  This was, when he was asked a Parliamentary 

had done immense service, and brought him into high esteem with the 

Circumlocution Office. 

were going through their probation to prove their worthiness.  

These Barnacles perched upon staircases and hid in passages, 

did all their hearing, and ohing, and cheering, and barking, under 

disagreeable subjects off until late in the night and late in the 

session, and then with virtuous patriotism cried out that it was 

sent, and swore that Lord Decimus had revived trade from a swoon, 

and commerce from a fit, and had doubled the harvest of corn, 

quadrupled the harvest of hay, and prevented no end of gold from 

and buttered the Barnacles on all sorts of toasts.  And they stood, 

under similar orders, at all sorts of elections; and they turned 

out of their own seats, on the shortest notice and the most 

unreasonable terms, to let in other men; and they fetched and 

carried, and toadied and jobbed, and corrupted, and ate heaps of 

not a list, in all the Circumlocution Office, of places that might 

Treasury to a Chinese consul, and up again to a governor-general of 

every one of these hungry and adhesive Barnacles were down. 

attended the marriage, for there were not two score in all, and 

what is that subtracted from Legion!  But the sprinkling was a 

swarm in the Twickenham cottage, and filled it.  A Barnacle 

(assisted by a Barnacle) married the happy pair, and it behoved 

Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle himself to conduct Mrs Meagles to 

breakfast. 

been.  Mr Meagles, hove down by his good company while he highly 

did not improve him.  The fiction that it was not Mr Meagles who 

had stood in the way, but that it was the Family greatness, and 

that the Family greatness had made a concession, and there was now 

openly expressed.  Then the Barnacles felt that they for their 

parts would have done with the Meagleses when the present 

their parts.  Then Gowan asserting his rights as a disappointed man 

who had his grudge against the family, and who, perhaps, had 

give them some annoyance as with any other benevolent object, aired 

his pencil and his poverty ostentatiously before them, and told 

please to remember the poor painter.  Then Lord Decimus, who was a 

windiest creature here: proposing happiness to the bride and 

of any sincere disciple and believer stand on end; and trotting, 

with the complacency of an idiotic elephant, among howling 

labyrinths of sentences which he seemed to take for high roads, and 

never so much as wanted to get out of.  Then Mr Tite Barnacle could 

not but feel that there was a person in company, who would have 

disturbed his life-long sitting to Sir Thomas Lawrence in full 

official character, if such disturbance had been possible: while 

Barnacle junior did, with indignation, communicate to two vapid 

gentlemen, his relatives, that there was a feller here, look here, 

who had come to our Department without an appointment and said he 

would be jolly; wouldn't it? 

painfullest.  When Mr and Mrs Meagles at last hung about Pet in the 

room with the two pictures (where the company were not), before 

simple than the three were.  Gowan himself was touched, and 

answered Mr Meagles's 'O Gowan, take care of her, take care of 

I will!' 

to Clennam of confidence in his promise, Pet fell back in the 

carriage, and her husband waved his hand, and they were away for 

Dover; though not until the faithful Mrs Tickit, in her silk gown 

and jet black curls, had rushed out from some hiding-place, and 

thrown both her shoes after the carriage: an apparition which 

occasioned great surprise to the distinguished company at the 

windows. 

the chief Barnacles being rather hurried (for they had it in hand 

just then to send a mail or two which was in danger of going 

straight to its destination, beating about the seas like the Flying 

Dutchman, and to arrange with complexity for the stoppage of a good 

their several ways; with all affability conveying to Mr and Mrs 

they had been doing at a sacrifice for Mr and Mrs Meagles's good, 

which they always conveyed to Mr John Bull in their official 

condescension to that most unfortunate creature. 

father and mother and Clennam.  Mr Meagles called only one 

remembrance to his aid, that really did him good. 

upon.' 

really did him good.  'It's very gratifying,' he said, often 

repeating the remark in the course of the evening.  'Such high 

company!' 

CHAPTER 35 

It was at this time that Mr Pancks, in discharge of his compact 

with Clennam, revealed to him the whole of his gipsy story, and 

told him Little Dorrit's fortune.  Her father was heir-at-law to a 

great estate that had long lain unknown of, unclaimed, and 

accumulating.  His right was now clear, nothing interposed in his 

way, the Marshalsea gates stood open, the Marshalsea walls were 

down, a few flourishes of his pen, and he was extremely rich. 

Pancks had shown a sagacity that nothing could baffle, and a 

patience and secrecy that nothing could tire.  'I little thought, 

sir,' said Pancks, 'when you and I crossed Smithfield that night, 

of it.  I little thought, sir, when I told you you were not of the 

by the name alone.  How, having often found two exactly similar 

names, even belonging to the same place, to involve no traceable 

consanguinity, near or distant, he did not at first give much heed 

to this, except in the way of speculation as to what a surprising 

next degree, because there was something uncommon in the quiet 

was Mr Pancks's expression), grain by grain.  How, in the beginning 

of the labour described by this new verb, and to render which the 

more expressive Mr Pancks shut his eyes in pronouncing it and shook 

to sudden darkness and no hopes, and back again, and back again.  

How he had made acquaintances in the Prison, expressly that he 

might come and go there as all other comers and goers did; and how 

himself and by his son; to both of whom he easily became known; 

with both of whom he talked much, casually ('but always Moleing 

being at all suspected, two or three little points of family 

others.  How it had at length become plain to Mr Pancks that he had 

that his discovery had but to be ripened to legal fulness and 

seeing to whom he was devoted.  And how, until the present hour, 

when authorities mighty in the Bank and learned in the law declared 

being. 

our papers in the Prison yard, or say that very day, nobody but 

ourselves would have been cruelly disappointed, or a penny the 

worse.' 

throughout the narrative, was reminded by this to say, in an 

amazement which even the preparation he had had for the main 

disclosure smoothed down, 'My dear Mr Pancks, this must have cost 

you a great sum of money.' 

we did it as cheap as it could be done.  And the outlay was a 

difficulty, let me tell you.' 

again. 

his hair into a condition as elevated as himself.  'First, I spent 

all I had of my own.  That wasn't much.' 

though.  Then, what did you do?' 

the dryest snorts.  'Generous old buck.  Confiding old boy.  

Philanthropic old buck.  Benevolent old boy!  Twenty per cent.  I 

shop.' 

condition, been a little premature. 

appearing greatly to relish this descriptive epithet, 'that I had 

got a little project on hand; a hopeful one; I told him a hopeful 

the twenty on in a business-like way, and putting it into the note, 

that, I should have been his grubber for the next seven years at 

would do a man good to serve him on such terms--on any terms.' 

Pancks really thought so or not. 

I dribbled it out like so much blood, I had taken Mr Rugg into the 

secret.  I proposed to borrow of Mr Rugg (or of Miss Rugg; it's the 

Pleas once).  He lent it at ten, and thought that pretty high.  But 

the crown of his hat, it's high.  And as to the brim of his hat, 

it's narrow.  And there's no more benevolence bubbling out of him, 

than out of a ninepin.' 

to be a large one.' 

matter I place in your hands.  I authorize you now to break all 

Can't be done too soon.' 

yet in bed.  For Mr Pancks had knocked up the house and made his 

or standing still, had delivered himself of the whole of his 

details (illustrated with a variety of documents) at the bedside.  

He now said he would 'go and look up Mr Rugg', from whom his 

excited state of mind appeared to require another back; and 

bundling up his papers, and exchanging one more hearty shake of the 

off. 

of the patriarchal street nearly an hour before her time; but he 

was not sorry to have the opportunity of calming himself with a 

leisurely walk. 

knocker, he was informed that she had come, and was shown up-stairs 

to Flora's breakfast-room.  Little Dorrit was not there herself, 

starched.' 

a visit; but you will excuse it when I tell you the cause.' 

excuse me Doyce and Clennam infinitely more correct and though 

unquestionably distant still 'tis distance lends enchantment to the 

view, at least I don't mean that and if I did I suppose it would 

again and you put it all out of my head.' 

strange indeed for Arthur Clennam--Doyce and Clennam naturally 

therefore never ate it.' 

finished that operation. 

tea-pot lid, 'is sitting prosingly breaking his new laid egg in the 

Tapping and need never know that you are here, and our little 

from cutting out on the large table overhead.' 

friend he came to see; and what he had to announce to their little 

the good-natured creature she really was. 

know I shall go off dead and screaming and make everybody worse, 

and the dear little thing only this morning looking so nice and 

account.' 

communication.  Flora nodded in return to thank him, and hurried 

out of the room. 

moment she was at the door.  Do what he could to compose his face, 

Clennam!  What's the matter?' 

come to tell you something, but it is a piece of great good- 

fortune.' 

'Good-fortune?' 

partly so to preserve their relative positions as that her intent 

look at him should be shaken by no change of attitude in either of 

them.  Her lips seemed to repeat 'Wonderful fortune?'  He repeated 

it again, aloud. 

shoots of expression passed all over it.  They were all expressions 

He would have clasped the little figure closer, but he saw that the 

eyes appealed to him not to be moved. 

free within a few days.  Your father will be free within a few 

again. 

good-fortune, my dear Little Dorrit.  Shall I tell you more?' 

nothing.  Shall I tell you more?  Remember!  He knows nothing of 

it; we must go to him, from here, to tell him of it!' 

arm, and, after a pause, bent down his ear to listen. 

waiting to be paid over to him as his inheritance; you are all 

Heaven that you are rewarded!' 

raised her arm towards his neck; cried out 'Father!  Father!  

Father!' and swooned away. 

the Marshalsea to take a spoonful of unclaimed dividends, for it 

would do her good; or whether she congratulated Little Dorrit's 

father on coming into possession of a hundred thousand smelling- 

bottles; or whether she explained that she put seventy-five 

lump sugar, and that she entreated Little Dorrit to take that 

A tributary stream of confusion, moreover, poured in from an 

adjoining bedroom, where Mr F.'s Aunt appeared, from the sound of 

her voice, to be in a horizontal posture, awaiting her breakfast; 

and from which bower that inexorable lady snapped off short taunts, 

whenever she could get a hearing, as, 'Don't believe it's his 

doing!' and 'He needn't take no credit to himself for it!' and 

'It'll be long enough, I expect, afore he'll give up any of his own 

and to relieve those inveterate feelings with which Mr F.'s Aunt 

regarded him. 

the joyful tidings to him, and not to leave him in his jail a 

him, did more for her speedy restoration than all the skill and 

attention on earth could have done.  'Come with me to my dear 

thought of nothing but him.  Kneeling down and pouring out her 

among the cups and saucers into a wonderful flow of tears and 

speech. 

little thing a cup of tea and make her put it to her lips at least 

pray Arthur do, not even Mr F.'s last illness for that was of 

another kind and gout is not a child's affection though very 

painful for all parties and Mr F. a martyr with his leg upon a rest 

and the wine trade in itself inflammatory for they will do it more 

I am sure to think of nothing at all this morning and now Mines of 

never will be strong enough to tell him all about it upon 

teaspoons, mightn't it be even best to try the directions of my own 

I force myself to do it as a prescription and find the benefit, 

you'd rather not why no my dear I'd rather not but still I do it as 

more so I do assure you from the bottom of my own I do myself 

by Arthur not Doyce and Clennam for this once so good-bye darling 

and God bless you and may you be very happy and excuse the liberty, 

shall be laid by for a keepsake just as it is and called Little 

never did myself and now I never shall!' 

came out of the house with Clennam, and took coach for the 

Marshalsea. 

wealth and grandeur.  When Arthur told her that she would soon ride 

familiar experiences would have vanished away, she looked 

he would be, her tears of joy and innocent pride fell fast.  Seeing 

Arthur kept that single figure before her; and so they rode 

carry him the great news. 

saw something in their faces which filled him with astonishment.  

though he perceived that they had come back accompanied by a ghost 

a-piece.  Two or three Collegians whom they passed, looked after 

them too, and presently joining Mr Chivery, formed a little group 

originated a whisper that the Father was going to get his 

in the College. 

his hand, and he had just looked round; surprised at first, no 

doubt, by her step upon the stairs, not expecting her until night; 

came in, the same unwonted look in both of them which had already 

speak, but laid down his glasses and his newspaper on the table 

beside him, and looked at them with his mouth a little open and his 

looked attentively in her face. 

gentleness, prepared me for it, father--prepared me for it, 

father--I think I could not have borne it.' 

face.  He put his hand suddenly to his heart, and looked at 

Clennam. 

at an end, sir.  They are rare, but not at an end.' 

himself upon the breast, instead of saying 'me.' 

his glasses exactly level on the table: 'what such surprise can be 

in store for me?' 

change into a very old haggard man.  The sun was bright upon the 

wall beyond the window, and on the spikes at top.  He slowly 

the wall. 

out.  Mr Dorrit, there is not the smallest doubt that within a few 

with here--the best of all the riches you can have elsewhere--the 

treasure at your side.' 

daughter, laying her face against his, encircled him in the hour of 

adversity encircled him with her love and toil and truth; and 

poured out her full heart in gratitude, hope, joy, blissful 

ecstasy, and all for him. 

mother saw him long ago.  O my dear, my dear!  O father, father!  

O thank God, thank God!' 

word.  His steadfast look was now divided between her and Clennam, 

and he began to shake as if he were very cold.  Explaining to 

Little Dorrit that he would run to the coffee-house for a bottle of 

wine, Arthur fetched it with all the haste he could use.  While it 

people asked him what had happened; when he hurriedly informed them 

that Mr Dorrit had succeeded to a fortune. 

placed her father in his easy chair, and had loosened his shirt and 

lips.  When he had swallowed a little, he took the glass himself 

cried, with his handkerchief before his face. 

diverting his attention from the main surprise, by relating its 

details.  Slowly, therefore, and in a quiet tone of voice, he 

explained them as best he could, and enlarged on the nature of 

Pancks's service. 

the Father, starting up and moving hurriedly about the room.  

beg to be informed at your earliest convenience, what advances you 

have made my son.' 

moment. 

from here in anybody's debt.  All the people who have been--ha-- 

Chivery shall be rewarded.  Young John shall be rewarded.  I 

to bring a sum of money for the purpose.' 

present moment, what I could not an hour ago have conscientiously 

taken.  I am obliged to you for the temporary accommodation.  

closed upon the money, and he carried it about with him.  'Be so 

I have already referred; being careful, if you please, not to omit 

advances made to my son.  A mere verbal statement of the gross 

amount is all I shall--ha--all I shall require.' 

moment to kiss her, and to pat her head. 

speedy and complete change in your very plain dress.  Something 

must be done with Maggy too, who at present is--ha--barely 

respectable, barely respectable.  And your sister, Amy, and your 

brother.  And my brother, your uncle--poor soul, I trust this will 

rouse him--messengers must be despatched to fetch them.  They must 

must be informed directly.  We owe it as a duty to them and to 

do anything.' 

to the fact that they did something for a livelihood. 

spread already,' said Clennam, looking down from the window.  'Will 

you show yourself to them, Mr Dorrit?  They are very earnest, and 

they evidently wish it.' 

some change in my dress first, and to have bought a-- 

it must be done.  Fasten the collar of my shirt, my dear.  Mr 

Clennam, would you oblige me--hum--with a blue neckcloth you will 

chest, my love.  It looks--ha--it looks broader, buttoned.' 

taking Clennam and his daughter for supporters, appeared at the 

window leaning on an arm of each.  The Collegians cheered him very 

protection.  When he withdrew into the room again, he said 'Poor 

no second entreaty; and she prepared her father's bed, and begged 

him to lie down.  For another half-hour or more he would be 

persuaded to do nothing but go about the room, discussing with 

the whole of the prisoners to go to the windows of the official 

last stretched himself upon the bed. 

in his hand), when he unexpectedly sat up and said: 

that I could--ha--could pass through the Lodge at this moment, 

and--hum--take a walk?' 

now in itself a form, I fear it is one that for a little longer has 

to be observed too.' 

At this he shed tears again. 

very easily of hours, sir!  How long do you suppose, sir, that an 

hour is to a man who is choking for want of air?' 

some more tears and querulously complaining that he couldn't 

breathe, he slowly fell into a slumber.  Clennam had abundant 

the father on his bed, and the daughter fanning his face. 

Little Dorrit had been thinking too.  After softly putting his grey 

towards Arthur, who came nearer to her, and pursued in a low 

whisper the subject of her thoughts. 

and longer?' 

and said: 

money both.' 

worse of me; it has grown up with me here.' 

Dorrit's mind no more than this.  Engendered as the confusion was, 

in compassion for the poor prisoner, her father, it was the first 

speck Clennam had ever seen, it was the last speck Clennam ever 

saw, of the prison atmosphere upon her. 

light.  The little spot made them the more beautiful. 

room, her hand slowly slackened and failed in its fanning movement, 

and her head dropped down on the pillow at her father's side.  

and passed from the prison, carrying the quiet with him into the 

turbulent streets. 

CHAPTER 36 

And now the day arrived when Mr Dorrit and his family were to leave 

were to know them no more. 

length, and had been imperious with Mr Rugg touching the delay.  He 

had been high with Mr Rugg, and had threatened to employ some one 

which he found him, but to do his duty, sir, and to do it with 

promptitude.  He had told Mr Rugg that he knew what lawyers and 

gentleman's humbly representing that he exerted himself to the 

utmost, Miss Fanny was very short with him; desiring to know what 

talked to. 

with whom he had never had any previous difference, Mr Dorrit 

comported himself with severity.  That officer, on personally 

tendering his congratulations, offered the free use of two rooms in 

his house for Mr Dorrit's occupation until his departure.  Mr 

Dorrit thanked him at the moment, and replied that he would think 

of it; but the Marshal was no sooner gone than he sat down and 

wrote him a cutting note, in which he remarked that he had never on 

any former occasion had the honour of receiving his congratulations 

(which was true, though indeed there had not been anything 

of himself and family, to repudiate the Marshal's offer, with all 

those thanks which its disinterested character and its perfect 

independence of all worldly considerations demanded. 

Although his brother showed so dim a glimmering of interest in 

their altered fortunes that it was very doubtful whether he 

understood them, Mr Dorrit caused him to be measured for new 

called in for himself; and ordered that his old clothes should be 

taken from him and burned.  Miss Fanny and Mr Tip required no 

and the three passed this interval together at the best hotel in 

the neighbourhood--though truly, as Miss Fanny said, the best was 

hired a cabriolet, horse, and groom, a very neat turn out, which 

fluttered the Marshal's daughters by the display of inaccessible 

bonnets. 

Among other items, Messrs Peddle and Pool, solicitors, of Monument 

four pounds nine shillings and eightpence, being the amount of 

principal and interest computed at the rate of five per cent.  per 

Clennam.  In making this communication and remittance, Messrs 

Mr Clennam that the favour of the advance now repaid (including 

name.  With which they requested a stamped receipt, and remained 

done, within the so-soon-to-be-orphaned Marshalsea, by Mr Dorrit so 

greatest liberality, and with no lack of formality; always first 

writing to appoint a time at which the applicant might wait upon 

him in his room, and then receiving him in the midst of a vast 

accumulation of documents, and accompanying his donation (for he 

said in every such case, 'it is a donation, not a loan') with a 

great deal of good counsel: to the effect that he, the expiring 

Father of the Marshalsea, hoped to be long remembered, as an 

even there. 

newspapers.  Perhaps more of them thought, too, than were quite 

aware of it, that the thing might in the lottery of chances have 

happened to themselves, or that something of the sort might yet 

happen to themselves some day or other.  They took it very well.  

poor; but even these did not grudge the family their brilliant 

reverse.  There might have been much more envy in politer places.  

It seems probable that mediocrity of fortune would have been 

hand to mouth--from the pawnbroker's hand to the day's dinner. 

and glass (though it was not afterwards displayed in the family 

mansion or preserved among the family papers); and to which he 

with a full conviction of its sincerity; and again generally 

exhorted them to follow his example--which, at least in so far as 

would have gladly imitated.  He took the same occasion of inviting 

them to a comprehensive entertainment, to be given to the whole 

honour of taking a parting glass to the health and happiness of all 

those whom he was about to leave behind. 

two in the afternoon, and his dinners now came in from the hotel at 

six), but his son was so good as to take the head of the principal 

table, and to be very free and engaging.  He himself went about 

had enjoyed themselves, and what was more, that they would enjoy 

and that he bade them welcome. 

after all but that in trying to return thanks he broke down, in the 

manner of a mere serf with a heart in his breast, and wept before 

them all.  After this great success, which he supposed to be a 

he had beforehand presented with ten pounds each, and who were all 

in attendance.  Mr Chivery spoke to the toast, saying, What you 

oldest inhabitant to himself; and left the tenantry to their 

diversions. 

and when the stones of its much-trodden pavement were to know them 

no more. 

greater part of the Collegians were brightened up as much as 

circumstances allowed.  Two or three flags were even displayed, and 

of his great attention was given to his brother, as to whose 

bearing on the great occasion he felt anxious. 

pass among our friends together.  I think it is right that we 

should go out arm in arm, my dear Frederick.' 

constraint upon yourself, throw a little (pray excuse me, 

Frederick), a little Polish into your usual demeanour--' 

to do all that.  I don't know how.  All forgotten, forgotten!' 

Your position--' 

brother's, and then, drawing a long breath, cried, 'Hah, to be 

sure!  Yes, yes, yes.' 

'Your position, my dear Frederick, is now a fine one.  Your 

it, but to adorn it.' 

what it is.' 

a heart as yours with.' 

William, to do anything it can for you.' 

satisfaction, 'Blessings on your attachment, my poor dear fellow!' 

as we walk out, to show that you are alive to the occasion --that 

you think about it--' 

submissive brother. 

what, in leaving these good people, I think myself.' 

which a softened compassion predominates, What will they do without 

me!' 

that as we go, What will they do without my brother!  Poor things!  

What will they do without him!' 

Fanny followed, also arm-in-arm; Mr Plornish and Maggy, to whom had 

been entrusted the removal of such of the family effects as were 

be packed in a cart. 

work.  In the yard, was Young John making a new epitaph for 

himself, on the occasion of his dying of a broken heart.  In the 

hand, and the wives and female relatives of many more Collegians 

yard, was the man with the shadowy grievance respecting the Fund 

which the Marshal embezzled, who had got up at five in the morning 

whose utmost energies were always set on getting into debt, who 

broke into prison with as much pains as other men have broken out 

of it, and who was always being cleared and complimented; while the 

insolvent at his elbow--a mere little, snivelling, striving 

it a hard matter, indeed, to get a Commissioner to release him with 

much reproof and reproach.  In the yard, was the man of many 

the yard, was the man of no children and large resources, whose 

failure astonished nobody.  There, were the people who were always 

going out to-morrow, and always putting it off; there, were the 

people who had come in yesterday, and who were much more jealous 

and resentful of this freak of fortune than the seasoned birds.  

who did so really because their eyes, accustomed to the gloom of 

bright sunshine.  There, were many whose shillings had gone into 

his pocket to buy him meat and drink; but none who were now 

that assistance.  It was rather to be remarked of the caged birds, 

that they were a little shy of the bird about to be so grandly 

free, and that they had a tendency to withdraw themselves towards 

the bars, and seem a little fluttered as he passed. 

head like Sir Roger de Coverley 

going to church, he spoke to people in the background by their 

Christian names, he condescended to all present, and seemed for 

their consolation to walk encircled by the legend in golden 

characters, 'Be comforted, my people!  Bear it!' 

ring in the echoes of the prison walls, the family had got into 

their carriage, and the attendant had the steps in his hand. 

once, 'Where's Amy!' 

thought she was 'somewhere or other.'  They had all trusted to 

the right moment.  This going away was perhaps the very first 

action of their joint lives that they had got through without her. 

points, when Miss Fanny, who, from her seat in the carriage, 

commanded the long narrow passage leading to the Lodge, flushed 

indignantly. 

begged and prayed her to change, and which she over and over again 

objected to, and promised to change to-day, saying she wished to 

Amy disgracing us to the last moment and at the last moment, by 

too!' 

appeared at the carriage-door, bearing the little insensible figure 

in his arms. 

reproach.  'I ran up to her room (which Mr Chivery showed me) and 

sunk down overpowered.  It may have been the cheering, or it may 

have happened sooner.  Take care of this poor cold hand, Miss 

Dorrit.  Don't let it fall.' 

believe I know what to do, if you will give me leave.  Dear Amy, 

and ashamed!  Do rouse yourself, darling!  Oh, why are they not 

driving on!  Pray, Pa, do drive on!' 

a sharp 'By your leave, sir!' bundled up the steps, and they drove 

away. 

RICHES 

CHAPTER 1 

the highest ridges of the Alps. 

Baskets, troughs, and tubs of grapes stood in the dim village 

doorways, stopped the steep and narrow village streets, and had 

crushed under foot, lay about everywhere.  The child carried in a 

sling by the laden peasant woman toiling home, was quieted with 

of the wooden chalet by the way to the Waterfall, sat Munching 

drinking, talking grapes.  A pity that no ripe touch of this 

which after all was made from the grapes! 

rarely seen, had sparkled in the view; and the snowy mountain-tops 

had been so clear that unaccustomed eyes, cancelling the 

intervening country, and slighting their rugged heights for 

something fabulous, would have measured them as within a few hours 

easy reach.  Mountain-peaks of great celebrity in the valleys, 

And now, when it was dark below, though they seemed solemnly to 

the sunset faded out of them and left them coldly white, they were 

yet distinctly defined in their loneliness above the mists and 

shadows. 

Seen from these solitudes, and from the Pass of the Great Saint 

Bernard, which was one of them, the ascending Night came up the 

mountain like a rising water.  When it at last rose to the walls of 

the convent of the Great Saint Bernard, it was as if that weather- 

waves. 

the mountain.  As the heat of the glowing day when they had stopped 

searching cold of the frosty rarefied night air at a great height, 

scrambled and turned from block to block, as though they were 

ascending the broken staircase of a gigantic ruin, was their way 

poor brown scrubby moss, freezing in the chinks of rock.  Blackened 

skeleton arms of wood by the wayside pointed upward to the convent 

wandered about, hunted by a moaning wind; and snow, the besetting 

drifted sharply down. 

his broad-brimmed hat and round jacket, carrying a mountain staff 

or two upon his shoulder, with whom another guide conversed.  There 

fatigue of the journey, and a new sensation of a catching in the 

water, and partly as if they had been sobbing, kept them silent. 

through the snow and mist.  The guides called to the mules, the 

loosened, and in a sudden burst of slipping, climbing, jingling, 

clinking, and talking, they arrived at the convent door. 

a pool of mud.  Riding-saddles and bridles, pack-saddles and 

strings of bells, mules and men, lanterns, torches, sacks, 

provender, barrels, cheeses, kegs of honey and butter, straw 

bundles and packages of many shapes, were crowded confusedly 

the clouds, everything was seen through cloud, and seemed 

of the mules was cloud, the lights were encircled by cloud, 

speakers close at hand were not seen for cloud, though their voices 

of mules hastily tied to rings in the wall, one would bite another, 

and no bystander discerning what was wrong.  In the midst of this, 

poured forth its contribution of cloud, as if the whole rugged 

as it had emptied itself, leaving the snow to fall upon the bare 

mountain summit. 

travellers, there, too, silently assembled in a grated house half- 

a-dozen paces removed, with the same cloud enfolding them and the 

found upon the mountain.  The mother, storm-belated many winters 

ago, still standing in the corner with her baby at her breast; the 

hunger, still pressing it with his dry lips after years and years.  

An awful company, mysteriously come together!  A wild destiny for 

that mother to have foreseen!  'Surrounded by so many and such 

companions upon whom I never looked, and never shall look, I and my 

our name, or one word of our story but the end.' 

then.  They thought much more of alighting at the convent door, and 

warming themselves at the convent fire.  Disengaged from the 

turmoil, which was already calming down as the crowd of mules began 

to be bestowed in the stable, they hurried shivering up the steps 

the floor, of tethered beasts, like the smell of a menagerie of 

wild animals.  There were strong arched galleries within, huge 

stone piers, great staircases, and thick walls pierced with small 

sunken windows--fortifications against the mountain storms, as if 

they had been human enemies.  There were gloomy vaulted sleeping- 

guests.  Finally, there was a parlour for guests to sit in and sup 

red and high. 

drew round the hearth.  They were in three parties; of whom the 

of inconvenience was accommodated elsewhere under the same roof.  

The party that had overtaken them, and followed in their train, 

consisted of only three members: one lady and two gentlemen.  The 

third party, which had ascended from the valley on the Italian side 

of the Pass, and had arrived first, were four in number: a 

plethoric, hungry, and silent German tutor in spectacles, on a tour 

with three young men, his pupils, all plethoric, hungry, and 

silent, and all in spectacles. 

waiting for supper.  Only one among them, one of the gentlemen 

belonging to the party of three, made advances towards 

conversation.  Throwing out his lines for the Chief of the 

chose to be included, that it had been a long day, and that he felt 

strong or accustomed traveller, and had been over-fatigued two or 

that it had been but a passing discomfort.  That he trusted (by 

he might be permitted to express his hope that she was now none the 

worse, and that she would not regret having made the journey. 

quite restored, and has been greatly interested.' 

assumed. 

years,' replied the Chief, with a flourish of his hand. 

lady, who had not yet been referred to otherwise than as one of the 

ladies in whose behalf he felt so sensitive an interest. 

distinction.  It was what he had meant to say.  Every lady must 

doubtless be incommoded by having to do with that proverbially 

unaccommodating animal, the mule. 

reserved and haughty, 'to leave the carriages and fourgon at 

Martigny.  And the impossibility of bringing anything that one 

wants to this inaccessible place, and the necessity of leaving 

every comfort behind, is not convenient.' 

manner was perfect, considered as a piece of machinery, here 

interposed a remark in a low soft voice. 

seen.  As a place much spoken of, it is necessary to see it.' 

General,' returned the other, carelessly. 

spot before?' 

'Yes,' returned Mrs General.  'I have been here before.  Let me 

face from the hot wood, after exposure to the mountain air and 

snow.  You, too, my dear,' to the other and younger lady, who 

General, I am Perfectly comfortable, and prefer remaining as I am.' 

world seemed hardly large enough to yield him an amount of travel 

proportionate to his equipment. 

wonder what they'll give us!  Has anybody any idea?' 

gentleman of the party of three. 

fire,' returned the other. 

hearth, cocking his glass at the company, with his back to the 

Of the Poultry species and were trussed for roasting, lost 

explanation, when it was discovered--through all eyes turning on 

had not heard what had passed through having fainted with her head 

upon his shoulder. 

light?' addressing his companion, 'and to show the way?  In this 

strange rambling place I don't know that I could find it.' 

had not spoken yet. 

them on the road), there was a prospect of too much assistance.  

his shoulder, lifted her up, and carried her away. 

black moustache in a contemplative manner, as if he felt himself 

committed to the late retort.  While the subject of it was 

breathing injury in a corner, the Chief loftily addressed this 

gentleman. 

to--hum--to--but we will waive that, we will waive that.  Your 

friend is a little impatient, sir.' 

Geneva, where we and much good company met some time ago, and 

having had the honour of exchanging company and conversation with 

that gentleman on several subsequent excursions, I can hear 

nothing--no, not even from one of your appearance and station, 

sir--detrimental to that gentleman.' 

remarking that your friend has shown impatience, I say no such 

on the subject of the fire being equally accessible to the whole of 

equal on these occasions--I consider right.' 

obedient servant.  I beg your son to receive the assurance of my 

that my friend is sometimes of a sarcastic temper.' 

'The lady is my friend's wife, sir.'   

'She is very handsome.' 

artistic, tour.' 

wafting the kiss the length of his arm towards Heaven.  As who 

should say, I devote him to the celestial Powers as an immortal 

artist! 

sarcastically (I make the concession of both words); but he has 

them.  Sparks that have been struck out during our intercourse have 

shown me this.' 

disposing of the subject, 'that the lady's indisposition may be 

only temporary.' 

towards evening of a slight bruise in the side.  She spoke of it 

more than once, as we followed your party up the mountain.' 

an hour until supper appeared. 

no old Fathers) to take the head of the table.  It was like the 

with no apparent sense upon him of his late skirmish with the 

completely dressed traveller. 

many of its famous dogs now?' 

question.' 

Saint Bernard monks than he resembled the conventional breed of 

Saint Bernard dogs, replied, doubtless those were the three in 

question. 

before.' 

when he (the dog) had gone down with one of the order to solicit 

aid for the convent. 

Monsieur was right. 

Again Monsieur was right.  The dog was very important.  People were 

justly interested in the dog.  As one of the dogs celebrated 

everywhere, Ma'amselle would observe. 

yet well accustomed to the French tongue.  Mrs General, however, 

observed it for her. 

the young man who had been put out of countenance. 

replied in French, 'No.  Not this one.' 

and he will do it without doubt.  For example, I am well 

convinced,' smiling sedately, as he cut up the dish of veal to be 

handed round, on the young man who had been put out of countenance, 

hasten with great ardour to fulfil his duty.' 

evinced a provident anxiety to get his full share of the supper), 

joined the conversation. 

tourist-travellers, is it not?' 

left to the winter snows.' 

'And then,' said the insinuating traveller, 'for the scratching 

dogs and the buried children, according to the pictures!' 

'How, then the scratching dogs and the buried children according to 

the pictures?' 

given. 

companion, 'that none but smugglers come this way in the winter or 

can have any possible business this way?' 

have consequently died out rather--though this house of 

idea!' cried the artist traveller, unexpectedly rising into a tone 

of enthusiasm.  'It's a sublime idea.  It's the finest idea in the 

went on eating his veal with great composure. 

speech to make it rather discordant, though the manner was refined 

it was so skilfully thrown off as to be very difficult for one not 

perfectly acquainted with the English language to understand, or , 

even understanding, to take offence at: so simple and dispassionate 

was its tone.  After finishing his veal in the midst of silence, 

the speaker again addressed his friend. 

not yet in the prime of life, who in so graceful a way and with 

such courtly urbanity and modesty presides over us!  Manners fit 

for a crown!  Dine with the Lord Mayor of London (if you can get an 

finest cut face I ever saw, a face in perfect drawing, leaves some 

laborious life and comes up here I don't know how many feet above 

the level of the sea, for no other purpose on earth (except 

hotel for idle poor devils like you and me, and leave the bill to 

want more to touch us?  Because rescued people of interesting 

holding on here round the necks of the most sagacious of dogs 

carrying wooden bottles, shall we disparage the place?  No!  Bless 

the place.  It's a great place, a glorious place!' 

important party, had swelled as if with a protest against his being 

it incumbent on him to take the lead in most places, and having 

deserted that duty for a little while. 

must be a very dreary life here in the winter. 

air was difficult to breathe for a length of time consecutively.  

The cold was very severe.  One needed youth and strength to bear 

it.  However, having them and the blessing of Heaven-- 

haired gentleman. 

take exercise there. 

ha--very limited.' 

visit, and that tracks had to be made to them also. 

ha--hum--so very contracted.  More than that, it was always the 

same, always the same. 

that almost all objects had their various points of view.  Monsieur 

view.  Monsieur was not used to confinement. 

to receive quite a shock from the force of the argument. 

servants-- 

next day; I will pass these barriers, I will enlarge those bounds.  

Monsieur could not realise, perhaps, how the mind accommodated 

itself in such things to the force of necessity. 

more.' 

very cold at the greater part of the table, the other guests also 

resumed their former seats by the fire, designing to toast 

themselves well before going to bed.  The host, when they rose from 

the table, bowed to all present, wished them good night, and 

withdrew.  But first the insinuating traveller had asked him if 

they could have some wine made hot; and as he had answered Yes, and 

had presently afterwards sent it in, that traveller, seated in the 

centre of the group, and in the full heat of the fire, was soon 

engaged in serving it out to the rest. 

silently attentive in her dark corner (the fire-light was the chief 

light in the sombre room, the lamp being smoky and dull) to what 

a little hesitation among the sounding passages and the many ways, 

were at their supper.  From these she obtained a lamp, and a 

direction to the lady's room. 

knocking at it two or three times without receiving an answer, she 

pushed it gently open, and looked in. 

covered when she revived from her fainting fit.  A dull light 

in a soft whisper, 'Are you better?' 

awake her.  Her visitor, standing quite still, looked at her 

attentively. 

beautiful a face.  O how unlike me!' 

it filled her eyes with tears. 

could very easily be wrong on any other subject, but not on this, 

not on this!' 

sleeper's hair, and then touched the hand that lay outside the 

covering. 

what has affected him so much.' 

and started. 

stairs.  I came to ask if you were better, and if I could do 

anything for you.' 

my assistance?' 

to, and is almost easy now.  It made me giddy and faint in a 

at once.' 

'May I stay with you until some one comes?  Would you like it?' 

feel the cold too much.' 

The other as quickly moved a part of some travelling wrapper from 

herself, and drew it over her, so that her arm, in keeping it about 

her, rested on her shoulder. 

on her, 'that you seem as if you had come to me from home.' 

mean, before I was married.' 

the best part of it with me, and missed nothing.  I felt solitary 

as I dropped asleep here, and, missing it a little, wandered back 

to it.'  There was a sorrowfully affectionate and regretful sound 

for the moment. 

a pause;'for do you know, I think I have been looking for you some 

time.' 

'Looking for me?' 

whenever I found you.  This is it.  Unless I greatly mistake, it is 

addressed to you?  Is it not?' 

put her lips to her visitor's cheek, and pressed her hand. 

time I see her.' 

don't know my story?  Perhaps he never told you my story ?' 

a little prejudiced.' 

husband is sure not to see it.  He might see it and speak of it, 

to be certain?' 

the letter, when they heard some one in the gallery outside. 

after seeing you (I could hardly fail to see you sooner or later), 

well and happy.' 

thanked him affectionately, and would never forget him.' 

again before very long.  Good night!' 

gallery was not he: it was the traveller who had wiped the wine- 

drops from his moustache with the piece of bread.  When he heard 

the step behind him, he turned round--for he was walking away in 

the dark. 

His politeness, which was extreme, would not allow of the young 

her lamp, held it so as to throw the best light on the stone steps, 

and followed her all the way to the supper-room.  She went down, 

not easily hiding how much she was inclined to shrink and tremble; 

for the appearance of this traveller was particularly disagreeable 

what he would have been in the scenes and places within her 

little less than terrific. 

drinking the hot wine down to the lees, with a monstrous shadow 

imitating him on the wall and ceiling. 

and drank with a new relish. 

withdraw.  He answered in the affirmative. 

offering my compliments in fairer scenes, and under softer 

circumstances, than on this dismal mountain.' 

him. 

poor gentlemen do not travel like princes, but the courtesies and 

graces of life are precious to us.  To your health, sir!' 

your daughters!' 

ha--our people in attendance?' 

as the gentleman crossed the room towards it with his arm drawn 

through his daughter's.  'Good repose!  To the pleasure of seeing 

you once more!  To to-morrow!' 

smile, the young lady drew a little nearer to her father, and 

passed him with a dread of touching him. 

solitude, if one went to bed two hours hence.' 

was absent.  Taking it in his hand, he read these entries. 

     William Dorrit, Esquire 

     Frederick Dorrit, Esquire 

     Edward Dorrit, Esquire 

     Miss Dorrit 

     Miss Amy Dorrit 

     Mrs General 

     and Suite. 

     From France to Italy. 

     From France to Italy. 

To which he added, in a small complicated hand, ending with a long 

lean flourish, not unlike a lasso thrown at all the rest of the 

names: 

     From France to Italy. 

And then, with his nose coming down over his moustache and his 

moustache going up and under his nose, repaired to his allotted 

cell. 

CHAPTER 2 

sufficient importance in the suite of the Dorrit Family to have a 

line to herself in the Travellers' Book. 

five as a single lady can be.  A stiff commissariat officer of 

sixty, famous as a martinet, had then become enamoured of the 

harnessed.  His proposal of marriage being accepted by the lady, 

the commissary took his seat behind the proprieties with great 

came in the way of the proprieties; but always in a high style and 

with composure. 

hearse, and they all had feathers and black velvet housings with 

transpired that the commissary had so far stolen a march on Mrs 

interest of his money.  Mrs General consequently found her means so 

she might have felt disposed to question the accuracy of that 

could take nothing away with him. 

'form the mind,' and eke the manners of some young lady of 

distinction.  Or, that she might harness the proprieties to the 

General's communication of this idea to her clerical and 

lady's undoubted merit, it might have appeared as though they 

wanted to get rid of her.  Testimonials representing Mrs General as 

a prodigy of piety, learning, virtue, and gentility, were lavishly 

even shed tears in recording his testimony to her perfections 

(described to him by persons on whom he could rely), though he had 

General in all his life. 

Mrs General.  At length a county-widower, with a daughter of 

either of the native dignity or of the artificial policy of Mrs 

General (but certainly one or the other) to comport herself as if 

she were much more sought than seeking, the widower pursued Mrs 

manners. 

in the course of which time she made the tour of Europe, and saw 

most of that extensive miscellany of objects which it is essential 

that all persons of polite cultivation should see with other 

people's eyes, and never with their own.  When her charge was at 

length formed, the marriage, not only of the young lady, but 

likewise of her father, the widower, was resolved on.  The widower 

then finding Mrs General both inconvenient and expensive, became of 

a sudden almost as much affected by her merits as the archdeacon 

all quarters where he thought an opportunity might arise of 

name more honourable than ever. 

had lately succeeded to his property, mentioned to his bankers that 

he wished to discover a lady, well-bred, accomplished, well 

connected, well accustomed to good society, who was qualified at 

once to complete the education of his daughters, and to be their 

matron or chaperon.  Mr Dorrit's bankers, as bankers of the county- 

widower, instantly said, 'Mrs General.' 

trouble of going down to the county of the county-widower to see 

highest expectations. 

remune--' 

Dorrit, with which I have always regarded it.  I am not, as I hope 

you are aware, a governess--' 

return for any consideration.  Neither do I know how, or where, to 

find a case parallel to my own.  It is peculiar.' 

the subject be approached. 

'I cannot object,' said Mrs General--'though even that is 

intervals, to pay to my credit at my bankers'.' 

known to Mr Dorrit's family--I think two daughters were 

mentioned?--' 

companion, protector, Mentor, and friend.' 

He almost said as much. 

which my friends here have been accustomed to make to my bankers'.' 

county-widower, and finding that he had been accustomed to pay 

lustrous surface which suggests that it is worth any money, he made 

regarding her as a member of his family.  Mrs General conceded that 

high privilege, and here she was. 

with it, was of a dignified and imposing appearance; ample, 

rustling, gravely voluminous; always upright behind the 

fold in her dress, or displacing a pin.  If her countenance and 

any other inscription on her face.  A cool, waxy, blown-out woman, 

who had never lighted well. 

Mrs General had no opinions.  Her way of forming a mind was to 

mental grooves or rails on which she started little trains of other 

people's opinions, which never overtook one another, and never got 

anywhere.  Even her propriety could not dispute that there was 

it was to put it out of sight, and make believe that there was no 

such thing.  This was another of her ways of forming a mind--to 

cram all articles of difficulty into cupboards, lock them up, and 

comparison, the properest. 

Passion was to go to sleep in the presence of Mrs General, and 

the world, when all these deductions were made, it was Mrs 

General's province to varnish.  In that formation process of hers, 

she dipped the smallest of brushes into the largest of pots, and 

varnished the surface of every object that came under 

consideration.  The more cracked it was, the more Mrs General 

varnished it. 

touch, an atmosphere of varnish round Mrs General's figure.  Mrs 

General's dreams ought to have been varnished--if she had any-- 

lying asleep in the arms of the good Saint Bernard, with the 

feathery snow falling on his house-top. 

CHAPTER 3 

new existence.  To help the delusion, the solid ground itself 

seemed gone, and the mountain, a shining waste of immense white 

sky above and the earth far below. 

beginning at the convent door and winding away down the descent in 

broken lengths which were not yet pieced together, showed where the 

Brethren were at work in several places clearing the track.  

Already the snow had begun to be foot-thawed again about the door.  

Mules were busily brought out, tied to the rings in the wall, and 

voices of drivers and riders sounded musically.  Some of the 

level summit by the dark water near the convent, and on the 

a clear tinkling of bells and a pleasant harmony of tongues. 

loaves, butter, and milk.  It also shone on the courier of the 

Dorrit family, making tea for his party from a supply he had 

were chiefly laid in for the use of the strong body of 

inconvenience.  Mr Gowan and Blandois of Paris had already 

breakfasted, and were walking up and down by the lake, smoking 

their cigars. 

'Gowan, eh?' muttered Tip, otherwise Edward Dorrit, Esquire, 

have got to say!  If it was worth my while, I'd pull his nose.  But 

it isn't worth my while--fortunately for him.  How's his wife, Amy? 

said Tip, 'or he and I might have come into collision.' 

not be fatigued and shaken by the ride down until to-morrow.' 

You haven't been relapsing into (Mrs General is not here) into old 

habits, have you, Amy?' 

Fanny, and at his father too. 

Tip,' said Little Dorrit. 

lay aside.' 

natural once, that it seemed at the moment the right word.' 

Mrs Gowan.  You can't blind me.' 

patience' (which indeed was the truth). 

mean?  Explain yourself.' 

Amy will understand me.  She knew, or knew of, this Mrs Gowan 

before yesterday, and she may as well admit that she did.' 

your sister--any--ha--authority for this curious statement?' 

answer, 'we don't go creeping into people's rooms on the tops of 

cold mountains, and sitting perishing in the frost with people, 

unless we know something about them beforehand.  It's not very hard 

to divine whose friend Mrs Gowan is.' 

succeeded in goading herself into a state of much ill-usage and 

grievance, which she was often at great pains to do: 'that I 

believe her to be a friend of that very objectionable and 

unpleasant person, who, with a total absence of all delicacy, which 

pointedly allude.' 

dignified affection, 'is this the case?' 

Pa, I do declare once for all'--this young lady was in the habit of 

declaring the same thing once for all every day of her life, and 

once for all that it ought to be put a stop to.  Is it not enough 

that we have gone through what is only known to ourselves, but are 

we to have it thrown in our faces, perseveringly and 

most?  Are we to be exposed to this unnatural conduct every moment 

of our lives?  Are we never to be permitted to forget?  I say 

again, it is absolutely infamous!' 

stand by you whenever I can, and on most occasions.  But I must 

man who treated me in the most ungentlemanly way in which one man 

minded thief, you know, or he never could have conducted himself as 

he did.' 

one of ourselves rushing about with tumblers of cold water, like a 

in the street, could but go plunging about with tumblers, as this 

thing.' 

'He is part of the same thing,' returned Miss Fanny, 'and of a 

piece with all the rest.  He obtruded himself upon us in the first 

instance.  We never wanted him.  I always showed him, for one, that 

exposing us; and then we are to be demeaned for the service of his 

friends!  Why, I don't wonder at this Mr Gowan's conduct towards 

you.  What else was to be expected when he was enjoying our past 

misfortunes--gloating over them at the moment!' 

'Father--Edward--no indeed!' pleaded Little Dorrit.  'Neither Mr 

nor Mrs Gowan had ever heard our name.  They were, and they are, 

quite ignorant of our history.' 

known about us, you might have felt yourself called upon to 

conciliate them.  That would have been a weak and ridiculous 

denounce that.' 

you are so hard with me.' 

should think myself bound to consider at every step, "Am I going, 

what I fancy I should do, if it was my case.' 

his authority, and to point their moral by his wisdom. 

without considerable reason.  You have now a--hum--a great position 

but by--ha--by me, and--ha hum--by us.  Us.  Now, it is incumbent 

upon all people in an exalted position, but it is particularly so 

on this family, for reasons which I--ha--will not dwell upon, to 

make themselves respected.  To be vigilant in making themselves 

respected.  Dependants, to respect us, must be--ha--kept at a 

distance and--hum--kept down.  Down.  Therefore, your not exposing 

any time dispensed with their services and performed them for 

yourself, is--ha--highly important.' 

everything.' 

'Fanny,' returned her father, grandiloquently, 'give me leave, my 

I do not, Amy, share your sister's sentiments--that is to say 

altogether--hum--altogether--in reference to Mr Clennam.  I am 

content to regard that individual in the light of--ha--generally-- 

a well-behaved person.  Hum.  A well-behaved person.  Nor will I 

ha--my society.  He knew my society to be--hum--sought, and his 

plea might be that he regarded me in the light of a public 

knowledge of Mr Clennam (it was very slight), which,' here Mr 

Dorrit became extremely grave and impressive, 'would render it 

highly indelicate in Mr Clennam to--ha--to seek to renew 

communication with me or with any member of my family under 

perceive the impropriety of any such attempt, I am bound as a 

for a moment--ha--hold any correspondence with so--hum--coarse a 

mind.  In either case, it would appear that Mr Clennam is put 

him or he with us.  Ha--Mrs General!' 

the breakfast-table, terminated the discussion.  Shortly 

afterwards, the courier announced that the valet, and the footman, 

were in readiness; so the breakfast party went out to the convent 

door to join the cavalcade. 

pulled off his slouched hat to Little Dorrit, she thought he had 

than he had in the fire-light over-night.  But, as both her father 

new blemish derived from her prison birth. 

Blandois, backed by the convent smoke which rose straight and high 

point looking down after them.  Long after he was a mere black 

stick in the snow, she felt as though she could yet see that smile 

of his, that high nose, and those eyes that were too near it.  And 

even after that, when the convent was gone and some light morning 

wayside seemed to be all pointing up at him. 

the streams descending from glaciers and snowy caverns were 

rocky rivulets, the verdant heights and dales, the wooden chalets 

and rough zigzag fences of Swiss country.  Sometimes the way so 

widened that she and her father could ride abreast.  And then to 

free, numerously served and attended, his eyes roving far away 

to darken his sight and cast its shadow on him, was enough. 

the clothes they gave him, and performed some ablutions as a 

a certain patient animal enjoyment, which seemed to express that 

be waited on, so that the servants devoted themselves to his 

an alteration in his manner to his younger niece.  Every day it 

age to youth, and still more rarely susceptible, one would have 

of helping her to alight, or handing her to the carriage, or 

Yet it never appeared misplaced or forced, being always heartily 

simple, spontaneous, and genuine.  Neither would he ever consent, 

even at his brother's request, to be helped to any place before 

her, or to take precedence of her in anything.  So jealous was he 

Great Saint Bernard, he took sudden and violent umbrage at the 

footman's being remiss to hold her stirrup, though standing near 

when she dismounted; and unspeakably astonished the whole retinue 

and threatening to trample him to death. 

person of the courier riding before, to see that the rooms of state 

Dorrit, Miss Amy Dorrit, and Mrs General; outside, some of the 

retainers, and (in fine weather) Edward Dorrit, Esquire, for whom 

the box was reserved.  Then came the chariot containing Frederick 

the mud and dust which the other vehicles left behind. 

were there, much company being on the road, from the patched 

upon a wooden tray on wheels, and having another wooden tray 

there was another adornment of the hotel which Mr Dorrit had not 

bargained for.  Two strange travellers embellished one of his 

rooms. 

afflicted, that he was the most miserable and unfortunate of 

beasts, that he had the head of a wooden pig.  He ought never to 

have made the concession, he said, but the very genteel lady had so 

their little dessert and half-cup of coffee, the note was paid, the 

horses were ordered, they would depart immediately; but, owing to 

that he felt to be incessantly engaged in dissecting his dignity. 

you have--ha--had the audacity to place one of my rooms at the 

disposition of any other person?' 

have been overcome by that too genteel lady.  He besought 

Monseigneur not to enrage himself.  He threw himself on Monseigneur 

for clemency.  If Monseigneur would have the distinguished goodness 

to occupy the other salon especially reserved for him, for but five 

minutes, all would go well. 

leave your house without eating or drinking, or setting foot in it. 

me from other gentlemen?' 

was the most amiable of the whole body of nobility, the most 

Monseigneur from others, it was only because he was more 

distinguished, more cherished, more generous, more renowned. 

'You have affronted me.  You have heaped insults upon me.  How dare 

you?  Explain yourself.' 

confide himself to the so well-known magnanimity of Monseigneur! 

you, why?  I wish to know on--ha--what authority, on whose 

authority.  Reply sir.  Explain.  Answer why.' 

cause.  There was no why.  Monsieur the Courier would represent to 

Monseigneur, that he deceived himself in suspecting that there was 

to present to him.  The very genteel lady-- 

have treated this family with disrespect; you have been insolent to 

this family.  I'll ruin you.  Ha--send for the horses, pack the 

carriages, I'll not set foot in this man's house again!' 

colloquial powers of Edward Dorrit, Esquire, and scarcely within 

the province of the ladies.  Miss Fanny, however, now supported her 

father with great bitterness; declaring, in her native tongue, that 

it was quite clear there was something special in this man's 

impertinence; and that she considered it important that he should 

be, by some means, forced to give up his authority for making 

the reasons of his presumption could be, she was at a loss to 

imagine; but reasons he must have, and they ought to be torn from 

him. 

by the courier's now bestirring himself to get the carriages out.  

With the aid of some dozen people to each wheel, this was done at 

pending the arrival of the horses from the post-house. 

and at the inn-door, the landlord had slipped up-stairs to 

lady, and by his pointing out the offended majesty of Mr Dorrit to 

them with a significant motion of his hand. 

lady, and coming forward.  'I am a man of few words and a bad hand 

me to say that she hopes no Row.' 

and saluted the lady, in a distant, final, and invincible manner. 

way of appealing to Edward Dorrit, Esquire, on whom he pounced as 

a great and providential relief.  'Let you and I try to make this 

all right.  Lady so very much wishes no Row.' 

a diplomatic expression of countenance in replying, 'Why you must 

belong to you, it's not pleasant to find other people in 'em.' 

you and I try to make it all right, and avoid Row.  The fault is 

woman with no bigodd nonsense about her--well educated, too--she 

was too many for this chap.  Regularly pocketed him.' 

'If that's the case--' Edward Dorrit, Esquire, began. 

other gentleman, retiring on his main position, 'why Row?' 

and his family that the civil landlord is not to blame?' 

with trying it on.'  He then looked steadfastly at Edward Dorrit, 

Esquire, for some seconds, and suddenly added, in a burst of 

confidence, 'Old feller!  Is it all right?' 

step or two towards Mr Dorrit, 'but that I had better say myself, 

at once, that I assured this good man I took all the consequences 

on myself of occupying one of a stranger's suite of rooms during 

his absence, for just as much (or as little) time as I could dine 

in.  I had no idea the rightful owner would come back so soon, nor 

had I any idea that he had come back, or I should have hastened to 

explanation and apology.  I trust in saying this--' 

and speechless before the two Miss Dorrits.  At the same moment, 

formed by the family, the family equipages, and the family 

air, and negligently surveyed the lady from head to foot. 

this, she apologised for her boldness, and restored this well- 

a gracious reply; and said that his people should--ha--countermand 

his horses, and he would--hum--overlook what he had at first 

supposed to be an affront, but now regarded as an honour.  Upon 

this the bosom bent to him; and its owner, with a wonderful command 

of feature, addressed a winning smile of adieu to the two sisters, 

as young ladies of fortune in whose favour she was much 

prepossessed, and whom she had never had the gratification of 

seeing before. 

at the same moment as his lady-mother, could not by any means unfix 

himself again, but stood stiffly staring at the whole composition 

with Miss Fanny in the Foreground.  On his mother saying, 'Edmund, 

motion of his lips, to reply with some remark comprehending the 

utterance, but he relaxed no muscle.  So fixed was his figure, that 

it would have been matter of some difficulty to bend him 

sufficiently to get him in the carriage-door, if he had not 

of the chariot disappeared, and his eye usurped its place.  There 

it remained as long as so small an object was discernible, and 

probably much longer, staring (as though something inexpressibly 

a large locket. 

so much to think of with triumph afterwards, that it softened her 

asperities exceedingly.  When the procession was again in motion 

next day, she occupied her place in it with a new gaiety; and 

showed such a flow of spirits indeed, that Mrs General looked 

rather surprised. 

Fanny was pleased; but her part in the procession was a musing 

part, and a quiet one.  Sitting opposite her father in the 

travelling-carriage, and recalling the old Marshalsea room, her 

present existence was a dream.  All that she saw was new and 

wonderful, but it was not real; it seemed to her as if those 

visions of mountains and picturesque countries might melt away at 

any moment, and the carriage, turning some abrupt corner, bring up 

with a jolt at the old Marshalsea gate. 

nothing to plan and contrive, no cares of others to load herself 

with.  Strange as that was, it was far stranger yet to find a space 

the mountains themselves, that she had been unable to resign 

herself to it, and had tried to retain her old place about him.  

respect from their dependents; and that for her, his daughter, Miss 

Amy Dorrit, of the sole remaining branch of the Dorrits of 

Dorsetshire, to be known to--hum--to occupy herself in fulfilling 

respect.  Therefore, my dear, he--ha--he laid his parental 

injunctions upon her, to remember that she was a lady, who had now 

to conduct herself with--hum--a proper pride, and to preserve the 

rank of a lady; and consequently he requested her to abstain from 

doing what would occasion--ha--unpleasant and derogatory remarks.  

She had obeyed without a murmur.  Thus it had been brought about 

little patient hands folded before her, quite displaced even from 

the last point of the old standing ground in life on which her feet 

had lingered. 

long.  The gorges of the Simplon, its enormous depths and 

thundering waterfalls, the wonderful road, the points of danger 

where a loose wheel or a faltering horse would have been 

destruction, the descent into Italy, the opening of that beautiful 

gloomy and dark imprisonment--all a dream--only the old mean 

Marshalsea a reality.  Nay, even the old mean Marshalsea was shaken 

to its foundations when she pictured it without her father.  She 

could scarcely believe that the prisoners were still lingering in 

and that the turnkey still stood in the Lodge letting people in and 

out, all just as she well knew it to be. 

from a dream of her birth-place into a whole day's dream.  The 

painted room in which she awoke, often a humbled state-chamber in 

widely diversified, and misery throwing magnificence with the 

strength of fate.  To this would succeed a labyrinth of bare 

luggage being brought together by the servants for the day's 

ceremonies, was always an uneasy thing.  For then the courier (who 

then her father's valet would pompously induct him into his 

a weight on Little Dorrit's mind--absolutely made her cry at first, 

servants, they would swoop down-stairs.  There, a crowd would be 

collected to see them enter their carriages, which, amidst much 

they would do; and so they would be driven madly through narrow 

unsavoury streets, and jerked out at the town gate. 

woods of olives; white villages and towns on hill-sides, lovely 

without, but frightful in their dirt and poverty within; crosses by 

piles of building mouldering to dust; hanging-gardens where the 

weeds had grown so strong that their stems, like wedges driven 

all sorts everywhere: pitiful, picturesque, hungry, merry; children 

beggars and aged beggars.  Often at posting-houses and other 

brought to give them was all given away, she would sit with her 

folded hands, thoughtfully looking after some diminutive girl 

leading her grey father, as if the sight reminded her of something 

in the days that were gone. 

splendid rooms, had banquets every day, rode out among heaps of 

wonders, walked through miles of palaces, and rested in dark 

at confessionals and on the pavements; where there was the mist and 

scent of incense; where there were pictures, fantastic images, 

gaudy altars, great heights and distances, all softly lighted 

through stained glass, and the massive curtains that hung in the 

doorways.  From these cities they would go on again, by the roads 

a hovel without a gap in its filthy walls, not a window with a 

support life, nothing to eat, nothing to make, nothing to grow, 

nothing to hope, nothing to do but die. 

inmates were all banished, and which were all changed into 

and showing to the mind like hosts of rats who were (happily) 

soon, with them, be smashed on the heads of the other swarms of 

were all the ill-looking population left to be ruined, in the 

streets below. 

few months in a palace (itself six times as big as the whole 

Marshalsea) on the Grand Canal. 

broken by no sound but the softened ringing of church-bells, the 

corners of the flowing streets, Little Dorrit, quite lost by her 

of joining in their gaieties, and only asked leave to be left 

alone. 

kept in waiting, moored to painted posts at the door--when she 

about her.  Never thinking that it would be worth anybody's while 

to notice her or her doings, Little Dorrit, in her quiet, scared, 

lost manner, went about the city none the less. 

Little Dorrit was little indeed, leaning on the broad-cushioned 

figure of the English girl who was always alone. 

girl; such people were all unknown to her.  She would watch the 

sunset, in its long low lines of purple and red, and its burning 

flush high up into the sky: so glowing on the buildings, and so 

lightening their structure, that it made them look as if their 

strong walls were transparent, and they shone from within.  She 

black gondolas underneath, taking guests to music and dancing, 

that old gate now!  She would think of that old gate, and of 

herself sitting at it in the dead of the night, pillowing Maggy's 

she got to that, she would musingly watch its running, as if, in 

the general vision, it might run dry, and show her the prison 

old visitors: all lasting realities that had never changed. 

CHAPTER 4 

Dear Mr Clennam, 

glad to hear from me.  But I know you cannot be so glad to hear 

should be me, which can only be for a very little while together 

miss so much. 

though it was only weeks, I met young Mrs Gowan, who was on a 

you affectionately and would never forget you.  She was quite 

so beautiful and winning a creature!  I could not wonder at any one 

loving her.  No indeed. 

her--if I tell you that I wish she could have married some one 

be, and how I must alter to become like her!) I should feel that I 

was rather lonely and lost, for the want of some one who was 

a little, almost without knowing it.  But mind you are not made 

looked most beautiful. 

dare say you think little of having been a friend to me when I had 

friends), but I think much of it, and I never can forget it. 

Mrs Plornish prosper in the business which my dear father bought 

grandchildren, and sings all his songs over and over again.  I 

cannot quite keep back the tears from my eyes when I think of my 

and tell her, as a strict secret, with my love, that she never can 

have regretted our separation more than I have regretted it?  And 

will you tell them all that I have thought of them every day, and 

how faithful, you would almost pity me for being so far away and 

being so grand! 

well in health, and that all these changes are highly beneficial to 

when you used to see him.  There is an improvement in my uncle too, 

Fanny is very graceful, quick, and clever.  It is natural to her to 

be a lady; she has adapted herself to our new fortunes with 

wonderful ease. 

I cannot learn.  Mrs General is always with us, and we speak French 

When I say we speak French and Italian, I mean they do.  As for me, 

in old directions, and I begin to feel careful again about the 

and then I remember with a start that there are no such cares left, 

and that in itself is so new and improbable that it sets me 

wandering again.  I should not have the courage to mention this to 

any one but you. 

They are very beautiful, and they astonish me, but I am not 

collected enough--not familiar enough with myself, if you can quite 

understand what I mean--to have all the pleasure in them that I 

might have.  What I knew before them, blends with them, too, so 

curiously.  For instance, when we were among the mountains, I often 

felt (I hesitate to tell such an idle thing, dear Mr Clennam, even 

if Mrs Clennam's room where I have worked so many days, and where 

I first saw you, must be just beyond that snow.  Do you remember 

one night when I came with Maggy to your lodging in Covent Garden?  

travelling along for miles by the side of our carriage, when I have 

that night, and sat at the iron gate, and walked about till 

morning.  I often look up at the stars, even from the balcony of 

Maggy.  It is the same with people that I left in England. 

at first.  In my fanciful times, I fancy that they might be 

anywhere; and I almost expect to see their dear faces on the 

bridges or the quays. 

often feel the old sad pity for--I need not write the word--for 

upon me sometimes with such strength that I want to put my arms 

round his neck, tell him how I love him, and cry a little on his 

breast.  I should be glad after that, and proud and happy.  But I 

know that I must not do this; that he would not like it, that Fanny 

would be angry, that Mrs General would be amazed; and so I quiet 

must write a little more still, or what I wanted most of all to say 

in this weak letter would be left out of it.  In all these foolish 

because I know you will understand me if anybody can, and will make 

more allowance for me than anybody else would if you cannot--in all 

my memory, and that is that I hope you sometimes, in a quiet 

moment, have a thought for me.  I must tell you that as to this, I 

that--it would make me more unhappy than you can suppose.  It would 

would make me stranger to you than I was when you were so good to 

think of me as the daughter of a rich person; that you will never 

think of me as dressing any better, or living any better, than when 

you first knew me.  That you will remember me only as the little 

shabby girl you protected with so much tenderness, from whose 

think of me at all), and of my true affection and devoted 

               LITTLE DORRIT. 

Gowan.  Her words were, 'Very well and very happy.'  And she looked 

most beautiful. 

CHAPTER 5 

The family had been a month or two at Venice, when Mr Dorrit, who 

was much among Counts and Marquises, and had but scant leisure, set 

an hour of one day apart, beforehand, for the purpose of holding 

some conference with Mrs General. 

about a third of the area of the Marshalsea), to present his 

of an interview.  It being that period of the forenoon when the 

various members of the family had coffee in their own chambers, 

some couple of hours before assembling at breakfast in a faded hall 

which had once been sumptuous, but was now the prey of watery 

vapours and a settled melancholy, Mrs General was accessible to the 

valet.  That envoy found her on a little square of carpet, so 

extremely diminutive in reference to the size of her stone and 

purses by one of the three princes in the Arabian Nights, and had 

that moment been transported on it, at a wish, into a palatial 

saloon with which it had no connection. 

escorted Mrs General to the presence.  It was quite a walk, by 

--hoodwinked by a narrow side street with a low gloomy bridge in 

in them had been weeping tears of rust into the Adriatic for 

hushed murmur of the Grand Canal laving the doorways below, where 

his gondolas and gondoliers attended his pleasure, drowsily 

swinging in a little forest of piles. 

that had so long bided its time among the Collegians had burst into 

a rare butterfly--rose to receive Mrs General.  A chair to Mrs 

General.  An easier chair, sir; what are you doing, what are you 

about, what do you mean?  Now, leave us! 

'Mrs General,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I took the liberty--' 

disposition.  I had had my coffee.' 

placidity of one who was above correction, 'to solicit the favour 

of a little private conversation with you, because I feel rather 

worried respecting my--ha--my younger daughter.  You will have 

observed a great difference of temperament, madam, between my two 

daughters?' 

'There is a great difference.' 

with a deference not incompatible with majestic serenity. 

reliance.  Amy, none.' 

master who taught her sister to dance.  O Mrs General, Mrs General, 

the life of this slighted little creature from her childhood up! 

General, seated in her usual erect attitude on her coach-box behind 

there--perhaps, indeed, a little too much.' 

hum--too much material.  What material?' 

'I believe so.' 

they were very young; and that, in consequence of my not having 

been until lately the recognised heir to my property, they have 

lived with me as a comparatively poor, though always proud, 

gentleman, in--ha hum--retirement!' 

'Madam,'pursued Mr Dorrit, 'of my daughter Fanny, under her present 

guidance and with such an example constantly before her--' 

Fanny.  But my younger daughter, Mrs General, rather worries and 

vexes my thoughts.  I must inform you that she has always been my 

favourite.' 

partialities.' 

not Care to go about with us; she is lost in the society we have 

here; our tastes are evidently not her tastes.  Which,' said Mr 

Dorrit, summing up with judicial gravity, 'is to say, in other 

words, that there is something wrong in--ha--Amy.' 

little touch of varnish, 'that something is referable to the 

novelty of the position?' 

daughter of a gentleman, though--ha--himself at one time 

in--hum--retirement, need not of necessity find this position so 

very novel.' 

took the liberty of requesting this interview, in order that I 

might mention the topic to you, and inquire how you would advise 

me?' 

several times since we have been residing here, on the general 

that it is better not to wonder.  I have pointed out to her that 

the celebrated Mr Eustace, the classical tourist, did not think 

much of it; and that he compared the Rialto, greatly to its 

add, after what you have said, that I have not yet found my 

arguments successful.  You do me the honour to ask me what to 

accustomed to exercise influence over the minds of others.' 

unaccustomed to--an influential position.' 

would therefore the more confidently recommend that Mr Dorrit 

should speak to Amy himself, and make his observations and wishes 

to him, she is all the more likely to yield to his influence.' 

ha--was not sure that I might--hum--not encroach on--' 

mention it.' 

little bell to summon his valet, 'I will send for her at once.' 

a minute or two--' 

to request that subordinate to inform Miss Amy that Mr Dorrit 

wished to see her in his own room.  In delivering this charge to 

Tinkler, Mr Dorrit looked severely at him, and also kept a jealous 

came into the service, and might be derisively reviving its 

remembrance at the present moment.  If Tinkler had happened to 

Mr Dorrit, to the hour of his death, but that this was the case.  

again--he announced Miss Amy as if she had come to a funeral, he 

left a vague impression on Mr Dorrit's mind that he was a well- 

Catechism by a widowed mother. 

conversation between myself and Mrs General.  We agree that you 

scarcely seem at home here.  Ha--how is this?' 

a pretty form to the lips.  Papa, potatoes, poultry, prunes, and 

prism.  You will find it serviceable, in the formation of a 

demeanour, if you sometimes say to yourself in company--on entering 

prunes and prism.' 

Mrs General.' 

varnisher, promised to try. 

time.  Time for what?' 

in her desire to submit herself to Mrs General and please him. 

returned, 'it appears to me, I must say, that you have had 

abundance of time for that.  Ha--you surprise me.  You disappoint 

me.  Fanny has conquered any such little difficulties, and--hum-- 

why not you?' 

Amy.  I sent for you, in order that I might say--hum--impressively 

indebted for obligingly being present among us, on--ha--on this or 

not pleased with you.  You make Mrs General's a thankless task. 

You--ha--embarrass me very much.  You have always (as I have 

informed Mrs General) been my favourite child; I have always made 

beg, that you accommodate yourself better to --hum--circumstances, 

and dutifully do what becomes your--your station.' 

emphatic. 

you will seriously take pains and try to conduct yourself in a 

manner both becoming your position as--ha--Miss Amy Dorrit, and 

satisfactory to myself and Mrs General.' 

slowly opening them and rising, added these words: 

'If Miss Amy Dorrit will direct her own attention to, and will 

Dorrit will have no further cause of anxiety.  May I take this 

opportunity of remarking, as an instance in point, that it is 

scarcely delicate to look at vagrants with the attention which I 

They should not be looked at.  Nothing disagreeable should ever be 

anything that is not perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.'  

Having delivered this exalted sentiment, Mrs General made a 

sweeping obeisance, and retired with an expression of mouth 

indicative of Prunes and Prism. 

there was repressed emotion in her face. 

as he used to be before the prison days, had gradually begun to 

assume form in her mind.  She felt that, in what he had just now 

said to her and in his whole bearing towards her, there was the 

well-known shadow of the Marshalsea wall.  It took a new shape, but 

it was the old sad shadow.  She began with sorrowful unwillingness 

quarter of a century behind the prison bars.  She had no blame to 

bestow upon him, therefore: nothing to reproach him with, no 

tenderness. 

the brilliant light of a bright Italian day, the wonderful city 

the moment in the long-familiar gloom of his Marshalsea lodging, 

looking very much dissatisfied. 

indeed I have tried all along, though I have failed, I know.' 

hurt me.' 

shocked face, 'a painful topic, a series of events which I wish -- 

ha--altogether to obliterate.  This is understood by your sister, 

who has already remonstrated with you in my presence; it is 

to say, except yourself.  You, Amy--hum--you alone and only you -- 

constantly revive the topic, though not in words.' 

touched him.  The trembling hand may have said, with some 

expression, 'Think of me, think how I have worked, think of my many 

cares!'  But she said not a syllable herself. 

not foreseen, or she would have withheld her hand.  He began to 

justify himself in a heated, stumbling, angry manner, which made 

nothing of it. 

as the head of the place.  I--hum--I caused you to be respected 

there, Amy.  I--ha hum--I gave my family a position there.  I 

deserve a return.  I claim a return.  I say, sweep it off the face 

of the earth and begin afresh.  Is that much?  I ask, is that 

much?'  He did not once look at her, as he rambled on in this way; 

but gesticulated at, and appealed to, the empty air. 

I can eradicate the marks of what I have endured, and can emerge 

great deal to expect--I say again, is it a great deal to expect-- 

that my children should--hum--do the same and sweep that accursed 

experience off the face of the earth?' 

a carefully suppressed voice, lest the valet should overhear 

anything. 

it.  You alone, my favourite child, whom I made the friend and 

companion of my life when you were a mere--hum--Baby, do not do it. 

--ha--Mrs General, to you, for the purpose of doing it.  Is it 

surprising that I should be displeased?  Is it necessary that I 

should defend myself for expressing my displeasure?  No!' 

abatement of his flushed mood. 

express any displeasure at all.  I--hum--I necessarily make that 

that lady, what I desire to be blotted out.  Am I selfish?  Do I 

complain for my own sake?  No.  No.  Principally for--ha hum--your 

sake, Amy.' 

pursuing it, to have just that instant come into his head. 

--ha--systematically reproduce what the rest of us blot out; and 

seem--hum--I had almost said positively anxious--to announce to 

hum--a place that I myself decline to name.  But there is no 

inconsistency--ha--not the least, in my feeling hurt, and yet 

complaining principally for your sake, Amy.  I do; I say again, I 

General, to form a--hum--a surface.  It is for your sake that I 

words of Mrs General) to be ignorant of everything that is not 

perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.' 

fell silent; and after looking about the ceiling again for a little 

she afterwards sat at his bedside till morning; exclaimed that he 

was a poor ruin and a poor wretch in the midst of his wealth; and 

clasped her in his arms.  'Hush, hush, my own dear!  Kiss me!' was 

on the former occasion; and he was presently afterwards very high 

was the only time, in his life of freedom and fortune, when he 

spoke to his daughter Amy of the old days. 

her apartment, and Mr Edward from his apartment.  Both these young 

persons of distinction were something the worse for late hours.  As 

part, in diceing circles, or others of a kindred nature), during 

the greater part of every night.  For this gentleman, when his 

prepared for the highest associates, and having little to learn: so 

much was he indebted to the happy accidents which had made him 

acquainted with horse-dealing and billiard-marking. 

have practised pistol-shooting without much chance of discovery by 

the restoration to him of his clarionet, which Mr Dorrit had 

ordered to be confiscated, but which she had ventured to preserve.  

instrument, and that she detested the sound of it, the concession 

had been made.  But it was then discovered that he had had enough 

into the picture-galleries, always with his twisted paper of snuff 

in his hand (much to the indignation of Miss Fanny, who had 

proposed the purchase of a gold box for him that the family might 

not be discredited, which he had absolutely refused to carry when 

it was bought); and of passing hours and hours before the portraits 

of renowned Venetians.  It was never made out what his dazed eyes 

pursuit.  After the first few days, Little Dorrit happened one 

the greatest delight of which the old man had shown himself 

susceptible since his ruin, arose out of these excursions, when he 

would carry a chair about for her from picture to picture, and 

stand behind it, in spite of all her remonstrances, silently 

presenting her to the noble Venetians. 

having seen in a gallery, on the previous day, the lady and 

gentleman whom they had encountered on the Great Saint Bernard, 'I 

to our remembrance, I suspect, if Uncle hadn't tumbled over the 

subject.' 

inadvertently lighted upon, or accidentally referred to, be 

better?' 

I think not.  On the whole I prefer my own expression.'  This was 

time. 

said Little Dorrit, 'even if Uncle had not.  I have scarcely seen 

because I should like to pay a visit to Mrs Gowan, and to become 

expressing a wish to become better acquainted with anybody in 

Venice.  Though whether Mr and Mrs Gowan are desirable 

acquaintances, remains to be determined.' 

husband, I believe, without an Act of Parliament.' 

hesitation, 'there is any objection to my making this visit?' 

in a position to varnish the present article.  She could only 

that much depended on the quarter from which the lady under 

the social temple as the family of Dorrit. 

name of Clennam, whom he imperfectly remembered in some former 

in his eye, and the preliminary remark of 'I say--you there!  Go 

out, will you!'--which was addressed to a couple of men who were 

services could be temporarily dispensed with. 

proceeded. 

supposed to be much prepossessed myself--are known to people 

of importance, if that makes any difference.' 

greatest difference.  The connection in question, being really 

people of importance and consideration--' 

famous name of Merdle?' 

intimate with Mrs Merdle, and I know these two to be on their 

visiting list.' 

she were doing homage to some visible graven image. 

observed, with a decided change in his manner, 'how he becomes 

possessed of this--hum--timely information?' 

lady you had the parley with at what's-his-name place.' 

laughed and reddened. 

the name of the gentleman with whom you conferred was--ha-- 

Sparkler.  Indeed, you showed me his card.  Hum.  Sparkler.' 

name must be the same.  Mrs Merdle was married before, and he is 

her son.  She is in Rome now; where probably we shall know more of 

her, as you decide to winter there.  Sparkler is just come here.  

consequence of being tremendously smitten with a certain young 

lady.'  Here Edward Dorrit, Esquire, eyed Miss Fanny through his 

so, in part by the action of keeping his glass in his eye, and in 

part by the great subtlety of his smile. 

'Under these circumstances,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I believe I express 

that there is no objection, but--ha hum--quite the contrary--to 

your gratifying your desire, Amy.  I trust I may--ha--hail--this 

wide repute.  Mr Merdle's undertakings are immense.  They bring him 

benefits.  Mr Merdle is the man of this time.  The name of Merdle 

is the name of the age.  Pray do everything on my behalf that is 

civil to Mr and Mrs Gowan, for we will--ha--we will certainly 

notice them.' 

time, except by Little Dorrit.  The servants were recalled, and the 

meal proceeded to its conclusion.  Mrs General rose and left the 

Fanny remained whispering together across it, and when Mr Dorrit 

remained eating figs and reading a French newspaper, Uncle suddenly 

fixed the attention of all three by rising out of his chair, 

striking his hand upon the table, and saying, 'Brother!  I protest 

against it!' 

the ghost immediately afterwards, he could not have astounded his 

petrified, with a fig half way to his mouth. 

love you dearly.  In these many years I have never been untrue to 

struck any man who spoke ill of you.  But, brother, brother, 

brother, I protest against it!' 

rose on his head, markings of purpose on his brow and face which 

and there was an energy in his hand that made its action nervous 

once more. 

What is the matter?' 

you do it?  Have you no memory?  Have you no heart?' 

you attack me in this cruel manner?  What have I done?' 

guardian?  Where's your more than mother?  How dare you set up 

superiorities against all these characters combined in your sister? 

love my life--better than I love my life.  I don't deserve to be so 

treated.  I am as grateful to Amy, and as fond of Amy, as it's 

was so wickedly wronged.  And only because I am anxious for the 

family credit.' 

great scorn and indignation.  'Brother, I protest against pride.  

I protest against ingratitude.  I protest against any one of us 

here who have known what we have known, and have seen what we have 

seen, setting up any pretension that puts Amy at a moment's 

disadvantage, or to the cost of a moment's pain.  We may know that 

it's a base pretension by its having that effect.  It ought to 

bring a judgment on us.  Brother, I protest against it in the sight 

of God!' 

brother with his ordinary shuffling step, put the hand on his 

shoulder, and said, in a softened voice, 'William, my dear, I felt 

obliged to say it; forgive me, for I felt obliged to say it!' and 

then went, in his bowed way, out of the palace hall, just as he 

might have gone out of the Marshalsea room. 

continued to do so.  Edward, beyond opening his mouth in amazement, 

also had been utterly discomfited, and quite unable to assert 

himself in any way.  Fanny was now the first to speak. 

anything so harsh and unjustifiable, so disgracefully violent and 

cruel!  Dear, kind, quiet little Amy, too, what would she feel if 

she could know that she had been innocently the means of exposing 

I'll never tell her!' 

'My dear,' said he, 'I--ha--approve of your resolution.  It will 

be--ha hum--much better not to speak of this to Amy.  It might-- 

hum--it might distress her.  Ha.  No doubt it would distress her 

ha--keep this to ourselves.' 

forgive the wanton cruelty of Uncle!' 

unusually pale, 'I must request you not to say so.  You must 

remember that your uncle is--ha--not what he formerly was.  You 

must remember that your uncle's state requires--hum--great 

forbearance from us, great forbearance.' 

suppose that there Must be something wrong in him somewhere, or he 

fidelity that you know I have always shown him, to--ha--to draw 

your own conclusions, and to spare my brotherly feelings.' 

Fanny awakened much affectionate uneasiness in her sister's mind 

that day by passing the greater part of it in violent fits of 

herself dead. 

CHAPTER 6 

To be in the halting state of Mr Henry Gowan; to have left one of 

on neutral ground, cursing both; is to be in a situation 

unwholesome for the mind, which time is not likely to improve.  The 

worst class of sum worked in the every-day world is cyphered by the 

as to the merits and successes of others, and never in Addition as 

to their own. 

discontented boast of being disappointed, is a habit fraught with 

degeneracy.  A certain idle carelessness and recklessness of 

setting undeserving things up is one of its perverted delights; and 

there is no playing fast and loose with the truth, in any game, 

without growing the worse for it. 

painting that were completely destitute of merit, Gowan was the 

another had (provided he had much) in his whole mind and body.  If 

the objection were taken that the thing commended was trash, he 

present of the confession.' 

splenetic state, though this may have had the design in it of 

showing that he ought to be rich; just as he would publicly laud 

and decry the Barnacles, lest it should be forgotten that he 

belonged to the family.  Howbeit, these two subjects were very 

often on his lips; and he managed them so well that he might have 

praised himself by the month together, and not have made himself 

his claims on anybody's consideration. 

understood, wherever he and his wife went, that he had married 

to prevail on them to countenance her.  He never made the 

but it did happen that, with all his pains to depreciate himself, 

he was always in the superior position.  From the days of their 

honeymoon, Minnie Gowan felt sensible of being usually regarded as 

chivalrous love for her had cancelled that inequality. 

and at Venice Monsieur Blandois of Paris was very much in the 

society of Gowan.  When they had first met this gallant gentleman 

at Geneva, Gowan had been undecided whether to kick him or 

encourage him; and had remained for about four-and-twenty hours, so 

troubled to settle the point to his satisfaction, that he had 

thought of tossing up a five-franc piece on the terms, 'Tails, 

It chanced, however, that his wife expressed a dislike to the 

engaging Blandois, and that the balance of feeling in the hotel was 

against him.  Upon it, Gowan resolved to encourage him. 

was not.  Why should Gowan, very much the superior of Blandois of 

man?  In the first place, he opposed the first separate wish he 

was desirable to take an early opportunity of asserting his 

independence.  In the second place, he opposed the prevalent 

ill-conditioned man.  He found a pleasure in declaring that a 

courtier with the refined manners of Blandois ought to rise to the 

satire upon others who piqued themselves on personal graces.  He 

seriously protested that the bow of Blandois was perfect, that the 

address of Blandois was irresistible, and that the picturesque ease 

unpurchasable) for a hundred thousand francs.  That exaggeration in 

the manner of the man which has been noticed as appertaining to him 

and to every such man, whatever his original breeding, as certainly 

as the sun belongs to this system, was acceptable to Gowan as a 

less of what Blandois overdid.  Thus he had taken up with him; and 

way of having him for a companion.  This, though he supposed him to 

him to be a coward, while he himself was daring and courageous; 

though he thoroughly knew him to be disliked by Minnie; and though 

he cared so little for him, after all, that if he had given her any 

had no compunction whatever in flinging him out of the highest 

window in Venice into the deepest water of the city. 

alone; but as Fanny, who had not yet recovered from her Uncle's 

protest, though it was four-and-twenty hours of age, pressingly 

the gondolas under Mr Dorrit's window, and, with the courier in 

attendance, were taken in high state to Mrs Gowan's lodging.  In 

truth, their state was rather too high for the lodging, which was, 

as Fanny complained, 'fearfully out of the way,' and which took 

same lady disparaged as 'mere ditches.' 

away from somewhere else, and had floated by chance into its 

training as the poor wretches who were lying under its leaves.  The 

features of the surrounding picture were, a church with hoarding 

had themselves fallen into decay; a quantity of washed linen, 

spread to dry in the sun; a number of houses at odds with one 

hanging askew, and something draggled and dirty dangling out of 

most of them. 

for any gentleman of commercial pursuits bringing laws for all 

mankind from a British city--where two spare clerks, like dried 

bearded, behind a small counter in a small room, containing no 

other visible objects than an empty iron-safe with the door open, 

a jug of water, and a papering of garland of roses; but who, on 

could produce exhaustless mounds of five-franc pieces.  Below the 

Mrs Gowan's residence. 

were bursting out of them to impart geographical knowledge; 

ebb tide on a weedy shore was very strong; the place was better 

within, than it promised.  The door was opened by a smiling man 

like a reformed assassin--a temporary servant--who ushered them 

into the room where Mrs Gowan sat, with the announcement that two 

beautiful English ladies were come to see the mistress. 

covered basket, and rose, a little hurriedly.  Miss Fanny was 

skill of a veteran. 

large!); and particularly requested me to bring his card for Mr 

Gowan.  That I may be sure to acquit myself of a commission which 

he impressed upon me at least a dozen times, allow me to relieve my 

conscience by placing it on the table at once.' 

the Merdles.  We hope it may be another means of bringing us 

together.' 

not yet had the pleasure of a personal introduction to Mrs Merdle, 

but I suppose I shall be presented to her at Rome.' 

her own superiority.  'I think you'll like her.' 

shoulders, 'in London one knows every one.  We met her on our way 

here, and, to say the truth, papa was at first rather cross with 

friends again.' 

them, which did as well.  She looked at Mrs Gowan with keen and 

unabated interest; the sound of her voice was thrilling to her; 

nothing that was near her, or about her, or at all concerned her, 

matter here, than in any other case--but one. 

'Oh!  I am always well,' said Little Dorrit, timidly.  'I--yes, 

thank you.' 

looks had met.  Something thoughtfully apprehensive in the large, 

soft eyes, had checked Little Dorrit in an instant. 

I am almost bound to be jealous of you?' said Mrs Gowan. 

quieter and quicker of resource than any one he ever saw.' 

are here.  I should never be forgiven, if I were to let you--and 

Miss Dorrit--go, without doing so.  May I?  You can excuse the 

disorder and discomfort of a painter's studio?' 

Gowan went to a door, looked in beyond it, and came back.  'Do 

Henry the favour to come in,' said she, 'I knew he would be 

pleased!' 

Blandois of Paris in a great cloak and a furtive slouched hat, 

Great Saint Bernard, when the warning arms seemed to be all 

pointing up at him.  She recoiled from this figure, as it smiled at 

her. 

I am making a study of him.  It saves me money to turn him to some 

use.  We poor painters have none to spare.' 

ladies without coming out of his corner. 

inexorable with me, that I am afraid to stir.' 

the easel.  'Let the ladies at least see the original of the daub, 

that they may know what it's meant for.  There he stands, you see.  

his country, the common enemy waiting to do somebody a bad turn, an 

angelic messenger waiting to do somebody a good turn--whatever you 

think he looks most like!' 

'Say, Professore Mio, a poor gentleman waiting to do homage to 

elegance and beauty,' remarked Blandois. 

'Or say, Cattivo Soggetto Mio,' returned Gowan, touching the 

painted face with his brush in the part where the real face had 

Blandois.  Put it outside the cloak.  Keep it still.' 

naturally shake it. 

hand with a quick, impatient, unskilful touch, 'and these are the 

tokens of it.  Outside the cloak, man!--Corpo di San Marco, what 

are you thinking of?' 

more; now he raised it to twist his moustache, which had a damp 

appearance; and now he stood in the required position, with a 

little new swagger. 

they had looked at each other all the time.  She trembled now; 

beside him, whose head she caressed in her hand, and who had just 

Miss Dorrit.' 

will you look at him?' 

with both hands by the collar. 

'Blandois!  How can you be such a fool as to provoke him!  By 

obdurately pulling with his dead weight against his master, 

resolved to get across the room.  He had been crouching for a 

spring at the moment when his master caught him. 

between master and dog.  'Get back!  Down, Lion!  Get out of his 

sight, Blandois!  What devil have you conjured into the dog?' 

the room!  By my soul, he'll kill you!' 

vanished; then, in the moment of the dog's submission, the master, 

of his boot, so that his mouth was presently bloody. 

take you out and shoot you.' 

chest.  Lion's master stopped for a moment to take breath, and 

his frightened wife and her visitors.  Probably the whole 

occurrence had not occupied two minutes. 

favourite of his; but I am sure you will give him a character, 

Minnie, for never having been like this before.' 

deeply ashamed of having caused them this alarm, came trailing 

himself along the ground to the feet of his mistress. 

'You shall do penance for this.'  And he struck him again, and yet 

again. 

hurt him.  See how gentle he is!'  At her entreaty, Gowan spared 

him; and he deserved her intercession, for truly he was as 

submissive, and as sorry, and as wretched as a dog could be. 

unrestrained, even though Fanny had not been, under the best of 

circumstances, the least trifle in the way.  In such further 

departure, Little Dorrit fancied it was revealed to her that Mr 

beautiful child.  He seemed so unsuspicious of the depths of 

feeling which she knew must lie below that surface, that she 

hold, and they drifted anywhere. 

and remarking that when the high and mighty Barnacles, his 

with better, he would live in better to oblige them.  At the 

water's edge they were saluted by Blandois, who looked white enough 

after his late adventure, but who made very light of it 

notwithstanding,--laughing at the mention of Lion. 

when Little Dorrit became aware that Fanny was more showy in manner 

cause through the window and through the open door, saw another 

gondola evidently in waiting on them. 

sometimes shooting on a-head, and stopping to let them pass; 

sometimes, when the way was broad enough, skimming along side by 

gradually made no disguise that she was playing off graces upon 

somebody within it, of whom she at the same time feigned to be 

unconscious; Little Dorrit at length asked who it was? 

her Uncle's protest she might have said, You little fool, instead), 

'how slow you are!  Young Sparkler.' 

of black and gold.  The attendant gondola, having skimmed forward 

again, with some swift trace of an eye in the 

a fool, my love?' 

Dorrit. 

what an idiot in a state of desperation may do, but I should think 

it highly probable.  It's not such an enormous distance.  All 

Venice would scarcely be that, I imagine, if he's dying for a 

glimpse of me.' 

answer,' said her sister.  'I believe he is.  You had better ask 

Edward.  He tells Edward he is, I believe.  I understand he makes 

a perfect spectacle of himself at the Casino, and that sort of 

places, by going on about me.  But you had better ask Edward if you 

want to know.' 

moment. 

The creature has only been waiting to get his courage up, I 

suspect.' 

Here he is again.  Look at him.  O, you simpleton!' 

window like a knot in the glass, and no reason on earth for 

stopping his bark suddenly, except the real reason. 

Mrs Merdle herself, 'what do you mean?' 

'I mean,' said Little Dorrit--'I think I rather mean what do you 

mean, dear Fanny?' 

affectionate way: 

how did you think she carried it off?  Did you see what she decided 

on in a moment?' 

refer to that meeting under such different circumstances, and I'll 

never pretend to have any idea that these are the same girls.  

That's her way out of a difficulty.  What did I tell you when we 

came away from Harley Street that time?  She is as insolent and 

love, she may find people who can match her.' 

indicated with great expression where one of these people was to be 

found. 

it thoroughly into his most ridiculous of all ridiculous noddles 

(for one really can't call it a head), that he is to pretend to 

have been first struck with me in that Inn Yard.' 

have become a rather desirable match for a noddle?  And don't you 

see that she puts the deception upon us, and makes a pretence, 

while she shifts it from her own shoulders (very good shoulders 

they are too, I must say),' observed Miss Fanny, glancing 

complacently at herself, 'of considering our feelings?' 

going to have that done, Amy.  The pretext is none of mine; it's 

hers, and she shall have enough of it.' 

Spanish fan with one hand, squeezed her sister's waist with the 

other, as if she were crushing Mrs Merdle. 

and I'll follow it.  And, with the blessing of fate and fortune, 

I'll go on improving that woman's acquaintance until I have given 

her maid, before her eyes, things from my dressmaker's ten times as 

handsome and expensive as she once gave me from hers!' 

any question affecting the family dignity, and unwilling to lose to 

was thinking of; so well, that she soon asked her. 

encourage him.  But I'll make a slave of him.' 

black and gold, and used it to tap her sister's nose; with the air 

of a proud beauty and a great spirit, who toyed with and playfully 

instructed a homely companion. 

it shall not be my fault.' 

together now--that you can quite see the end of that course?' 

are my intentions.  And really they have taken me so long to 

develop, that here we are at home.  And Young Sparkler at the door, 

inquiring who is within.  By the merest accident, of course!' 

hand, affecting to put the question to a servant.  This conjunction 

of circumstances led to his immediately afterwards presenting 

himself before the young ladies in a posture, which in ancient 

times would not have been considered one of favourable augury for 

his suit; since the gondoliers of the young ladies, having been put 

boat in the gentlest collision with the bark of Mr Sparkler, as to 

him to exhibit the soles of his shoes to the object of his dearest 

bottom of his boat in the arms of one of his men. 

gentleman hurt, Mr Sparkler rose more restored than might have been 

Miss Fanny had no recollection of having ever seen him before, and 

announced himself by name.  Even then she was in a difficulty from 

the honour of seeing her at Martigny.  Then she remembered him, and 

hoped his lady-mother was well. 

least, poorly.' 

came to call upon Mr Edward Dorrit myself.  Indeed, upon Mr Dorrit 

likewise.  In fact, upon the family.' 

both within, Mr Sparkler humbly offered his arm.  Miss Fanny 

accepting it, was squired up the great staircase by Mr Sparkler, 

who, if he still believed (which there is not any reason to doubt) 

that she had no nonsense about her, rather deceived himself. 

imprisoned relations, Miss Fanny despatched emissaries for her 

father and brother.  Pending whose appearance, she showed to great 

advantage on a sofa, completing Mr Sparkler's conquest with some 

remarks upon Dante--known to that gentleman as an eccentric man in 

cathedral at Florence. 

courtly manners.  He inquired particularly after Mrs Merdle.  He 

twitched out of himself in small pieces by the shirt-collar, that 

Mrs Merdle having completely used up her place in the country, and 

feeling herself this year quite up to visiting about at people's 

places, had resolved to have a touch at Rome, where a woman like 

about her, couldn't fail to be a great acquisition.  As to Mr 

Merdle, he was so much wanted by the men in the City and the rest 

of those places, and was such a doosed extraordinary phenomenon in 

monetary system of the country would be able to spare him; though 

would be all the better for a temporary shy at an entirely new 

Sparkler conveyed to the Dorrit family that he was going, on rather 

particular business, wherever they were going. 

effected.  Being effected, Mr Dorrit expressed his hope that Mr 

Sparkler would shortly dine with them.  Mr Sparkler received the 

idea so kindly that Mr Dorrit asked what he was going to do that 

he was secured without postponement; being further bound over to 

accompany the ladies to the Opera in the evening. 

taking after his mother, and made a splendid appearance ascending 

she was now thrice charming, very becomingly dressed in her most 

suitable colours, and with an air of negligence upon her that 

doubled Mr Sparkler's fetters, and riveted them. 

'with--ha--Mr Gowan.  Mr Henry Gowan?' 

are cronies in fact.' 

magnificent as that of Lord Decimus himself, 'you should have 

people could have--ha--fetched them, and taken them home.  We could 

forgotten this.  Pray remind me of them to-morrow.' 

Dorrit. 

job. 

particular walk a man ought to have a particular pair of shoes; as, 

Whereas, he believed that Henry Gowan had no particular pair of 

shoes. 

take it.' 

present a gentleman so connected, with some--ha--Testimonial of my 

engage him to try his hand upon my family.' 

of the family (emphasising 'some' in a marked manner) to whom no 

painter could render justice.  But, for want of a form of words in 

which to express the idea, it returned to the skies. 

surmised, she said, that Mr Gowan had lost better and higher 

painting pictures for dinner, was so delightfully interesting, that 

she begged her papa to give him the commission whether he could 

paint a likeness or not: though indeed both she and Amy knew he 

These remarks made Mr Sparkler (as perhaps they were intended to 

do) nearly distracted; for while on the one hand they expressed 

Miss Fanny's susceptibility of the tender passion, she herself 

eyes goggled in his head with jealousy of an unknown rival. 

box, and Mr Sparkler entered on an evening of agony.  The theatre 

the representation; in whom Fanny was so interested, and in 

conversation with whom she fell into such charming attitudes, as 

she had little confidences with them, and little disputes 

concerning the identity of people in distant boxes, that the 

at the close of the performance.  She gave him her fan to hold 

while she adjusted her cloak, and it was his blessed privilege to 

Mr Sparkler thought, would just keep him going; and it is not 

impossible that Miss Dorrit thought so too. 

Mermen with other lights were ready at many of the doors.  The 

Dorrit Merman held his lantern low, to show the steps, and Mr 

as he watched her radiant feet twinkling down the stairs beside 

him.  Among the loiterers here, was Blandois of Paris.  He spoke, 

and moved forward beside Fanny. 

came together.  She started again to find Blandois close to her, 

handing Fanny into the boat. 

a visit from fair ladies.' 

and taking her seat. 

'Faith, dear ladies!' said Blandois, smiling and shrugging his 

shoulders, 'somebody has poisoned that noble dog.  He is as dead as 

the Doges!' 

CHAPTER 7 

Mrs General, always on her coach-box keeping the proprieties well 

together, took pains to form a surface on her very dear young 

friend, and Mrs General's very dear young friend tried hard to 

receive it.  Hard as she had tried in her laborious life to attain 

many ends, she had never tried harder than she did now, to be 

be operated upon by that smoothing hand, it is true; but she 

submitted herself to the family want in its littleness, and yielded 

to her hunger itself, in the days when she had saved her dinner 

that her father might have his supper. 

sustaining to her, and made her more grateful than to a less 

devoted and affectionate spirit, not habituated to her struggles 

often be observed in life, that spirits like Little Dorrit do not 

appear to reason half as carefully as the folks who get the better 

Little Dorrit.  It was nothing to her that the kindness took the 

to her that it kept her in a tributary position, and showed her in 

attendance on the flaming car in which Miss Fanny sat on an 

admiring Fanny's beauty, and grace, and readiness, and not now 

to Fanny was due to her own heart, and how much to Fanny's, she 

gave her all the sisterly fondness her great heart contained. 

deposit at the bottom of the mixture.  This rendered confidences 

relief they afforded her. 

would have taken another dip into society with the greatest 

pleasure in life, 'I am going to put something into your little 

head.  You won't guess what it is, I suspect.' 

in the ascendant all day--everything having been surface and 

had hoped that Mrs General was safely tucked up in bed for some 

hours. 

and ruffle surface. 

the heart of Sparkler), and tapped her sister frequently on the 

nose with it, laughing all the time. 

very cross, my dear.' 

smiling. 

enlighten you.  Amy, has it never struck you that somebody is 

monstrously polite to Mrs General?' 

'Because--' 

you, Amy, that Pa is monstrously polite to Mrs General.' 

remember my words.  Mrs General has designs on Pa!' 

on any one?' 

considers her such a wonder, such a paragon of accomplishment, and 

that opens a pretty picture of things, I hope?  Think of me with 

Mrs General for a Mama!' 

Mama;' but she looked anxious, and seriously inquired what had led 

Fanny to these conclusions. 

how I know when a man is struck with myself!  But, of course I do 

in much the same way, I suppose.  At all events, I know it.' 

necessity has he had, yet awhile, to say anything?' 

'My goodness me, Amy,' returned Fanny, 'is she the sort of woman to 

say anything?  Isn't it perfectly plain and clear that she has 

nothing to do at present but to hold herself upright, keep her 

aggravating gloves on, and go sweeping about?  Say anything!  If 

anything, child.  It would come out when she played it.' 

can take this for the present with sufficient coolness to think of 

such a chance.  It makes me hope that you may be able to bear the 

connection.  I should not be able to bear it, and I should not try. 

no knowing what might happen.  Especially as I should have many 

her own style.  Which I most decidedly should not be slow to avail 

myself of, Amy.' 

the two subjects of Mrs General and Mr Sparkler great prominence in 

Little Dorrit's mind, and thenceforth she thought very much of 

both. 

perfection that it hid whatever was below it (if anything), no 

observation was to be made in that quarter.  Mr Dorrit was 

undeniably very polite to her and had a high opinion of her; but 

any one could see what was going on there, and Little Dorrit saw it 

and pondered on it with many doubts and wonderings. 

and cruelty of his enslaver.  Sometimes she would prefer him to 

next day, or next hour, she would overlook him so completely, and 

drop him into such an abyss of obscurity, that he would groan under 

a weak pretence of coughing.  The constancy of his attendance never 

touched Fanny: though he was so inseparable from Edward, that, when 

irksome necessity of gliding out like a conspirator in disguised 

boats and by secret doors and back ways; though he was so 

day to inquire, as if Mr Dorrit were the prey of an intermittent 

thousand hours; though whenever the gondola of his mistress left 

the gate, the gondola of Mr Sparkler shot out from some watery 

ambush and gave chase, as if she were a fair smuggler and he a 

of the natural strength of his constitution with so much exposure 

to the air, and the salt sea, that Mr Sparkler did not pine 

that he grew bluffer every day, and that peculiarity in his 

appearance of seeming rather a swelled boy than a young man, became 

developed to an extraordinary degree of ruddy puffiness. 

of commissioning Mr Gowan to transmit him to posterity.  Blandois 

highly extolling it, it occurred to Mr Dorrit that it might be 

agreeable to Blandois to communicate to his friend the great 

opportunity reserved for him.  Blandois accepted the commission 

it before he was an hour older.  On his imparting the news to 

Gowan, that Master gave Mr Dorrit to the Devil with great 

liberality some round dozen of times (for he resented patronage 

almost as much as he resented the want of it), and was inclined to 

quarrel with his friend for bringing him the message. 

may I die if I see what you have to do with this.' 

I thought I was serving my friend.' 

for the sign of some public-house, and to get it done by a sign- 

painter.  Who am I, and who is he?' 

angrily whistled Mr Dorrit away.  But, next day, he resumed the 

subject by saying in his off-hand manner and with a slighting 

go and look after this job?' 

have I to do with it?  What is it to me?' 

One must eat!  So come along, my Blandois.' 

there.  'How are you, Sparkler?' said Gowan carelessly.  'When you 

have to live by your mother wit, old boy, I hope you may get on 

better than I do.' 

laughing, after receiving it gracefully enough, 'I am new to the 

trade, and not expert at its mysteries.  I believe I ought to look 

at you in various lights, tell you you are a capital subject, and 

consider when I shall be sufficiently disengaged to devote myself 

you.  I assure you,' and he laughed again, 'I feel quite a traitor 

artists, by not doing the hocus-pocus better.  But I have not been 

brought up to it, and it's too late to learn it.  Now, the fact is, 

If you are going to throw away a hundred guineas or so, I am as 

poor as a poor relation of great people usually is, and I shall be 

it, instead of a bad picture with a large name to it.' 

Dorrit remarkably well.  It showed that the gentleman, highly 

connected, and not a mere workman, would be under an obligation to 

him.  He expressed his satisfaction in placing himself in Mr 

Gowan's hands, and trusted that he would have the pleasure, in 

their characters of private gentlemen, of improving his 

acquaintance. 

since I joined the brotherhood of the brush (the most delightful 

fellows on the face of the earth), and am glad enough to smell the 

old fine gunpowder now and then, though it did blow me into mid-air 

laughed again in the easiest way, 'that I am lapsing into the 

freemasonry of the craft--for it's not so; upon my life I can't 

help betraying it wherever I go, though, by Jupiter, I love and 

honour the craft with all my might--if I propose a stipulation as 

to time and place?' 

Gowan's frankness. 

going to Rome.  I am going to Rome, having friends there.  Let me 

begin to do you the injustice I have conspired to do you, there-- 

not here.  We shall all be hurried during the rest of our stay 

yet--comprising the trade again, you see!--and can't fall on to 

order, in a hurry, for the mere sake of the sixpences.' 

These remarks were not less favourably received by Mr Dorrit than 

of Mr and Mrs Gowan at dinner, and they skilfully placed Gowan on 

his usual ground in the new family. 

disturbance about her in the Barnacle family; and that the Dowager 

the marriage until overpowered by her maternal feelings.  Mrs 

General likewise clearly understood that the attachment had 

occasioned much family grief and dissension.  Of honest Mr Meagles 

no mention was made; except that it was natural enough that a 

person of that sort should wish to raise his daughter out of his 

own obscurity, and that no one could blame him for trying his best 

to do so. 

accepted belief was too earnest and watchful to fail in accurate 

Mrs Gowan the touch of a shadow under which she lived, and she even 

it.  But it had an influence in placing obstacles in the way of her 

association with Mrs Gowan by making the Prunes and Prism school 

excessively polite to her, but not very intimate with her; and 

Little Dorrit, as an enforced sizar of that college, was obliged to 

submit herself humbly to its ordinances. 

established between the two, which would have carried them over 

greater difficulties, and made a friendship out of a more 

of Paris; an aversion amounting to the repugnance and horror of a 

active one.  To both of them, Blandois behaved in exactly the same 

manner; and to both of them his manner had uniformly something in 

it, which they both knew to be different from his bearing towards 

others.  The difference was too minute in its expression to be 

breadth of addition to the fall of his nose and the rise of the 

moustache in the most frequent movement of his face, conveyed to 

if he had said, 'I have a secret power in this quarter.  I know 

what I know.' 

Venice.  Mrs Gowan was herself there for the same purpose, and he 

seemed to convey to them, 'You were going to talk about me.  Ha!  

Behold me here to prevent it!' 

you leave here, to escort you home.' 

compliments, and his choicest conversation; but he conveyed to 

them, all the time, 'No, no, no, dear ladies.  Behold me here 

expressly to prevent it!' 

diabolical persistency in him, that at length, Mrs Gowan rose to 

depart.  On his offering his hand to Mrs Gowan to lead her down the 

staircase, she retained Little Dorrit's hand in hers, with a 

cautious pressure, and said, 'No, thank you.  But, if you will 

hat in hand, Mrs Gowan whispered: 

did.  You are?' 

generous and open himself.  But you and I feel sure that we think 

of him as he deserves.  He argued with Henry that the dog had been 

already poisoned when he changed so, and sprang at him.  Henry 

believes it, but we do not.  I see he is listening, but can't hear. 

turned his head, and looked at them from the bottom of the 

staircase.  Assuredly he did look then, though he looked his 

politest, as if any real philanthropist could have desired no 

him into the water flowing beyond the dark arched gateway in which 

he stood.  No such benefactor to mankind being on the spot, he 

followed. 

retraced her steps up the staircase, that he had made his way too 

people did the same, through Mr Dorrit's participation in his elder 

riches and importance, had seized the House of Dorrit. 

Marshalsea.  Numbers of people seemed to come abroad, pretty much 

relationship, curiosity, and general unfitness for getting on at 

couriers and local followers, just as the debtors had been brought 

into the prison.  They prowled about the churches and picture- 

their own minds, and seldom did what they said they would do, or 

the prison debtors.  They paid high for poor accommodation, and 

disparaged a place while they pretended to like it: which was 

exactly the Marshalsea custom.  They were envied when they went 

Snuggery belonged to the jail, was always in their mouths.  They 

into a slouching way of life: still, always like the people in the 

Marshalsea. 

an end, and they moved, with their retinue, to Rome.  Through a 

more haggard as they went on, and bringing them at length to where 

the very air was diseased, they passed to their destination.  A 

to stand still for ever on the ruins of something else--except the 

glorious multitude of fountains. 

the upper hand.  Everybody was walking about St Peter's and the 

object through somebody else's sieve.  Nobody said what anything 

was, but everybody said what the Mrs Generals, Mr Eustace, or 

somebody else said it was.  The whole body of travellers seemed to 

entrails of their intellects arranged according to the taste of 

that sacred priesthood.  Through the rugged remains of temples and 

in the endeavour to set their lips according to the received form.  

Mrs General was in her pure element.  Nobody had an opinion.  There 

and it had not a flaw of courage or honest free speech in it. 

Little Dorrit's notice very shortly after their arrival.  They 

received an early visit from Mrs Merdle, who led that extensive 

department of life in the Eternal City that winter; and the skilful 

manner in which she and Fanny fenced with one another on the 

small-swords. 

inauspiciously begun at Martigny.' 

quite transported with Venice.' 

turning the bosom towards that gentleman; 'Edmund having been so 

much indebted to him for rendering his stay agreeable.' 

the pleasure of inviting Mr Sparkler twice or thrice,--but it was 

nothing.  We had so many people about us, and kept such open house, 

that if he had that pleasure, it was less than nothing.' 

unusual gratification to--hum--show by any means, however slight 

princely a character as Mr Merdle's.' 

Merdle,' observed Fanny, as a means of dismissing Mr Sparkler into 

the background, 'is quite a theme of Papa's, you must know, Mrs 

Merdle.' 

understand from Mr Sparkler that there is no great--hum-- 

probability of Mr Merdle's coming abroad.' 

request, that I fear not.  He has not been able to get abroad for 

years.  You, Miss Dorrit, I believe have been almost continually 

abroad for a long time.' 

immense number of years.' 

hum--great advantage of becoming known to Mr Merdle on this side of 

England.  It is an honour I particularly desire and shall 

particularly esteem.' 

'Mr Merdle,' said Mrs Merdle, who had been looking admiringly at 

Fanny through her eye-glass, 'will esteem it, I am sure, no less.' 

But as her father when they had been to a brilliant reception at 

the advice of that wonderful man in the disposal of his fortune, 

she began to think it had a real meaning, and to entertain a 

curiosity on her own part to see the shining light of the time. 

     'It Never Does' 

While the waters of Venice and the ruins of Rome were sunning 

being sketched out of all earthly proportion, lineament, and 

likeness, by travelling pencils innumerable, the firm of Doyce and 

Clennam hammered away in Bleeding Heart Yard, and the vigorous 

sound trim; and the elder, left free to follow his own ingenious 

devices, had done much to enhance the character of the factory.  As 

an ingenious man, he had necessarily to encounter every 

discouragement that the ruling powers for a length of time had been 

able by any means to put in the way of this class of culprits; but 

do it must obviously be regarded as the natural and mortal enemy of 

How not to do it.  In this was to be found the basis of the wise 

warning every ingenious British subject to be ingenious at his 

peril: of harassing him, obstructing him, inviting robbers (by 

the best of confiscating his property after a short term of 

enjoyment, as though invention were on a par with felony.  The 

system had uniformly found great favour with the Barnacles, and 

sticking to a post. 

cheering him with a hearty co-operation, was a moral support to 

him, besides doing good service in his business relation.  The 

concern prospered, and the partners were fast friends. 

lightly forgotten it, he could never have conceived it, or had the 

patience and perseverance to work it out.  So Clennam thought, when 

he sometimes observed him of an evening looking over the models and 

them away again, that the thing was as true as it ever was. 

disappointment, would have been to fail in what Clennam regarded as 

at the door of the Circumlocution Office, originated in this 

'having a lenient consideration,' he stipulated, 'for my being no 

workman, Doyce.' 

if you had given yourself to it.  You have as good a head for 

understanding such things as I have met with.' 

that.  No man of sense who has been generally improved, and has 

provided he had the qualification I have named.' 

'At all events,' said Clennam--'this sounds as if we were 

exchanging compliments, but we know we are not--I shall have the 

advantage of as plain an explanation as can be given.' 

so.' 

of explaining what he himself perceived, and meant, with the direct 

force and distinctness with which it struck his own mind.  His 

was not easy to mistake him.  There was something almost ludicrous 

that he must be a visionary man, with the precise, sagacious 

travelling of his eye and thumb over the plans, their patient 

stoppages at particular points, their careful returns to other 

and his steady manner of making everything good and everything 

sound at each important stage, before taking his hearer on a 

line's-breadth further.  His dismissal of himself from his 

description, was hardly less remarkable.  He never said, I 

the whole thing as if the Divine artificer had made it, and he had 

happened to find it; so modest he was about it, such a pleasant 

laws. 

was quite charmed by this investigation.  The more he pursued it, 

the shrewd eye kindling with pleasure in it and love of it-- 

let it go without one effort more.  At length he said: 

'Doyce, it came to this at last--that the business was to be sunk 

with Heaven knows how many more wrecks, or begun all over again?' 

of it after a dozen years.' 

myself, when I am one of so large a company.' 

roughened hand, 'it shall be begun all over again!' 

Better put it by.  Far better put it by.  It will be heard of, one 

day.  I can put it by.  You forget, my good Clennam; I HAVE put it 

by.  It's all at an end.' 

and rebuffs are concerned, I admit, but not as far as mine are.  I 

shall do exactly as you have been doing since we have been 

together.  I will add (as I easily can) to what I have been doing, 

the attempt to get public justice done to you; and, unless I have 

some success to report, you shall hear no more of it.' 

urged that they had better put it by.  But it was natural that he 

should yield.  Yield he did.  So Arthur resumed the long and 

hopeless labour of striving to make way with the Circumlocution 

Office. 

his presence, and he was generally ushered into them by its 

the principal difference being that the object of the latter class 

of public business is to keep the pickpocket, while the 

Circumlocution object was to get rid of Clennam.  However, he was 

filling, corresponding, minuting, memorandum-making, signing, 

forwards, and referring sideways, crosswise, and zig-zag, 

recommenced. 

mentioned in the present record.  When that admirable Department 

got into trouble, and was, by some infuriated members of Parliament 

whom the smaller Barnacles almost suspected of labouring under 

diabolic possession, attacked on the merits of no individual case, 

but as an Institution wholly abominable and Bedlamite; then the 

the quantity of business (for the prevention of business) done by 

the Circumlocution Office.  Then would that noble or right 

honourable Barnacle hold in his hand a paper containing a few 

figures, to which, with the permission of the House, he would 

noble or right honourable Barnacle perceive, sir, from this little 

document, which he thought might carry conviction even to the 

fry), that within the short compass of the last financial half- 

year, this much-maligned Department (Cheers) had written and 

received fifteen thousand letters (Loud cheers), had written 

twenty-four thousand minutes (Louder cheers), and thirty-two 

thousand five hundred and seventeen memoranda (Vehement cheering).  

Nay, an ingenious gentleman connected with the Department, and 

himself a valuable public servant, had done him the favour to make 

during the same period.  It formed a part of this same short 

document; and he derived from it the remarkable fact that the 

to stretch, in graceful festoons, from Hyde Park Corner to the 

to do nothing. 

died of before his day--Arthur Clennam led a life of slight 

changes during many months. 

miss her very much, but not so much.  He knew to the full extent 

blank when her familiar little figure went out of it.  He felt, 

she were divided by a broad ground of separation.  The old interest 

he had had in her, and her old trusting reliance on him, were 

tendernesses. 

distance.  It helped him to a clearer and keener perception of the 

place assigned him by the family.  He saw that he was cherished in 

the jail and the rest of its belongings. 

innocent friend, his delicate child, his dear Little Dorrit.  This 

himself as a much older man than his years really made him.  He 

regarded her from a point of view which in its remoteness, tender 

her heart of its dearest drop of hope, and broken it. 

on himself as an elderly man, from whom such aspirations as he had 

combated in the case of Minnie Gowan (though that was not so long 

ago either, reckoning by months and seasons), were finally 

who was dead had lived to pass away in the bloom of womanhood, and 

Mrs Meagles would probably have been just what it was.  This 

that he had done with, and dismissed that part of life. 

letters how happy she was, and how she loved her husband; but 

Mr Meagles's face.  Mr Meagles had never been quite so radiant 

since the marriage as before.  He had never quite recovered the 

separation from Pet.  He was the same good-humoured, open creature; 

adopted a characteristic from them, it always had now, through all 

its changes of expression, a look of loss in it. 

Mrs Gowan drove up, in the Hampton Court equipage which pretended 

and Mrs Meagles with a call. 

encouraging her humble connections.  'And when did you last hear 

from or about my poor fellow?' 

politely kept alive, without any offence in the world, the pretence 

that he had fallen a victim to the Meagles' wiles. 

her than I have?' 

worldly advantages. 

in life.  I suppose they're as poor as mice, Papa Meagles?' 

ma'am.  I hope they will manage their little income.' 

yawn and the company, 'how can you, as a man of the world and one 

of the most business-like of human beings--for you know you are 

business-like, and a great deal too much for us who are not--' 

an artful schemer.) 

poor dear fellow!  The idea of his managing hundreds!  And the 

sweet pretty creature too.  The notion of her managing!  Papa 

Meagles!  Don't!' 

then, that Henry certainly does anticipate his means.' 

world none of us can have everything our own way.' 

good breeding that, so far, he had been brilliantly successful in 

world we must not expect everything, Papa Meagles.' 

colour, 'who does expect everything?' 

put me out.  You interrupting Papa, what was I going to say?' 

while she thought about it; a performance not tending to the 

cooling of that gentleman's rather heated spirits. 

poor fellow has always been accustomed to expectations.  They may 

have been realised, or they may not have been realised--' 

Meagles. 

former manner. 

for the consequences.  I myself always clearly foresaw the 

consequences, and am not surprised.  And you must not be surprised. 

coughed. 

notice that he is to hold himself in expectation of a baby, and all 

Henry!  But it can't be helped now; it's too late to help it now.  

Only don't talk of anticipating means, Papa Meagles, as a 

discovery; because that would be too much.' 

'There, there!' said Mrs Gowan, putting him in his inferior place 

with an expressive action of her hand.  'Too much for my poor 

fellow's mother to bear at this time of day.  They are fast 

married, and can't be unmarried.  There, there!  I know that!  You 

happy.  It is to be hoped they will still continue happy.  It is to 

be hoped Pretty One will do everything she can to make my poor 

fellow happy, and keep him contented.  Papa and Mama Meagles, we 

from the same side, and we never shall.  There, there!  Now I am 

good.' 

to Mr Meagles that he must not expect to bear his honours of 

alliance too cheaply, Mrs Gowan was disposed to forgo the rest.  If 

Mr Meagles had submitted to a glance of entreaty from Mrs Meagles, 

darling and pride of his heart; and if he could ever have 

championed her more devotedly, or loved her better, than in the 

days when she was the sunlight of his house, it would have been 

now, when, as its daily grace and delight, she was lost to it. 

else, or both--any genteel mystifications, I should probably not 

succeed in them.' 

than usual as the neighbouring surface became paler,'probably not.' 

restrain himself, 'I hope I may, without offence, ask to have no 

such mystification played off upon me.' 

'Mama Meagles,' observed Mrs Gowan, 'your good man is 

incomprehensible.' 

interposed to prevent that consummation. 

match.  Let me beg of you to remain quiet.  Come, Mrs Gowan, come!  

Let us try to be sensible; let us try to be good-natured; let us 

don't be one-sided, my dear madam; it's not considerate, it's not 

did not look happy as he spoke the words,) 'but let us hope they 

will make each other happy.' 

hearted and comfortable. 

can't quite leave it there; I must say just half-a-dozen words 

more.  Mrs Gowan, I hope I am not over-sensitive.  I believe I 

don't look it.' 

green fan together, for emphasis. 

little--I don't want to use a strong word--now shall I say hurt?' 

asked Mr Meagles at once with frankness and moderation, and with a 

conciliatory appeal in his tone. 

indifferent to me.' 

made to consequences having been foreseen, and to its being too 

late now, and so forth.' 

been at least surprised, because to hurt me wilfully on so tender 

a subject is surely not generous.' 

know.' 

pattern, Papa Meagles, I beg!' 

to state--' 

extremely deliberate and prepossessing in manner whenever that 

the sentence.  It is as much as to state--not that I wish to press 

it or even recall it, for it is of no use now, and my only wish is 

the last I always objected to this match of yours, and at a very 

late period yielded a most unwilling consent to it.' 

hear this!' 

of it.' 

himself in his chair with sufficient security to prevent his 

breaking out of it at the next word he spoke.  At last he said: 

what my opinions and my course were, all along, on that unfortunate 

subject.' 

accusatory intelligence, 'they were well understood by me, I assure 

you.' 

about it, in short, but passed his handkerchief before his Face. 

over her fan.  'As you have appealed to Mr Clennam, I may appeal to 

Mr Clennam, too.  He knows whether I did or not.' 

take any share in this discussion, more especially because I wish 

Mr Henry Gowan.  I have very strong reasons indeed, for 

entertaining that wish.  Mrs Gowan attributed certain views of 

before it took place; and I endeavoured to undeceive her.  I 

opposed to it, both in opinion and action.' 

see?  Very good!  Now Papa and Mama Meagles both!' here she rose; 

'allow me to take the liberty of putting an end to this rather 

formidable controversy.  I will not say another word upon its 

merits.  I will only say that it is an additional proof of what one 

word, that it never does.' 

way; and who cannot look at the untoward circumstance which has 

shaken them together in the same light.  It never does.' 

ascertained fact.  It never does.  I will therefore, if you please, 

receive my poor fellow's pretty wife, and I shall always make a 

point of being on the most affectionate terms with her.  But as to 

boring, they form a state of things quite amusing in its 

impracticability.  I assure you it never does.' 

to any one in it, and therewith took a final farewell of Papa and 

Mama Meagles.  Clennam stepped forward to hand her to the Pill-Box 

and she got into that vehicle with distinguished serenity, and was 

driven away. 

recounted to her particular acquaintance how, after a hard trial, 

she had found it impossible to know those people who belonged to 

Henry's wife, and who had made that desperate set to catch him.  

of them would give her favourite pretence a better air, might save 

her some occasional inconvenience, and could risk no loss (the 

pretty creature being fast married, and her father devoted to her), 

that point too, and decidedly in the affirmative. 

CHAPTER 9 

'Arthur, my dear boy,' said Mr Meagles, on the evening of the 

don't feel comfortable in remaining as we are.  That elegant 

connection of ours--that dear lady who was here yesterday--' 

bear that, if it was all the same to her.' 

son-in-law, it might even put us wrong with our daughter, and it 

you?' 

say.'  He had glanced at Mrs Meagles, who was always on the good 

that he would support Mr Meagles in his present inclinings. 

'to pack up bags and baggage and go among the Allongers and 

Marshongers once more.  I mean, we are very much disposed to be 

off, strike right through France into Italy, and see our Pet.' 

very like her daughter, once), 'that you could do better.  And if 

you ask me for my advice, it is that you set off to-morrow.' 

backed in an idea!' 

agreeable to him, answered that it was indeed. 

coming over his face, 'that my son-in-law is already in debt again, 

and that I suppose I must clear him again.  It may be as well, even 

yet naturally too) about Pet's state of health, and that she should 

it's never so Homely, why you see,' said Mr Meagles, adding a new 

version to the proverb, 'Rome is Rome, though it's never so 

Romely.' 

for going.' 

foreign languages beautifully, Arthur; you have heard her many a 

time), and you must pull me through it, Mother, as well as you can. 

shaking his head, 'a deal of pulling through.  I stick at 

at all a tight one.' 

shall go with you, if you like.  I could not afford to lose him, 

but you will bring him safe back.' 

it over, 'but I think not.  No, I think I'll be pulled through by 

Mother.  Cavallooro (I stick at his very name to start with, and it 

there's no saying when we may come home again; and it would never 

do to take him away for an indefinite time.  The cottage is not 

what it was.  It only holds two little people less than it ever 

empty now.  Once out of it, there's no knowing when we may come 

back to it.  No, Arthur, I'll be pulled through by Mother.' 

thought; therefore did not press his proposal. 

wouldn't trouble you,' Mr Meagles resumed, 'I should be glad to 

up the old place with a bit of life it was used to when it was 

full, and that the Babies on the wall there had a kind eye upon 

and we should every one of us have been so happy if it had fallen 

out--but, let us see--how's the weather for travelling now?'  Mr 

the window. 

the talk in that safe direction until it had become easy again, 

when he gently diverted it to Henry Gowan and his quick sense and 

dwelt on the indisputable affection he entertained for his wife.  

Clennam did not fail of his effect upon good Mr Meagles, whom these 

commendations greatly cheered; and who took Mother to witness that 

the single and cordial desire of his heart in reference to their 

daughter's husband, was harmoniously to exchange friendship for 

put its hair in papers--and within a few days Father and Mother 

were gone, Mrs Tickit and Dr Buchan were posted, as of yore, behind 

the dry fallen leaves in the garden walks. 

paying a visit.  Sometimes, he went down alone from Saturday to 

Monday; sometimes his partner accompanied him; sometimes, he merely 

all was right, and returned to London again.  At all times, and 

under all circumstances, Mrs Tickit, with her dark row of curls, 

and Dr Buchan, sat in the parlour window, looking out for the 

family return. 

So surprising was the something in question, that it actually 

brought Mrs Tickit out of the parlour window and produced her in 

the garden walk, when Clennam went in at the gate on its being 

opened for him. 

the parlour and closed the door; 'if ever I saw the led away and 

deluded child in my life, I saw her identically in the dusk of 

yesterday evening.' 

leap. 

eyes, being that I was waiting longer than customary for my cup of 

tea which was then preparing by Mary Jane.  I was not sleeping, nor 

person would strictly call watching with my eyes closed.' 

condition, Clennam said, 'Exactly.  Well?' 

might.' 

'Precisely so,' said Clennam.  'Well?' 

said this with an argumentative and philosophic air, 'however they 

may stray, will go more or less on what is uppermost in their 

Tickit, 'and we all find it so.  It an't our stations in life that 

of one thing and thinking of another in that manner, as it's 

getting dark, what I say is, that all times seem to be present, and 

say which is which.' 

new opening to Mrs Tickit's conversational powers. 

eyes and saw her actual form and figure looking in at the gate, I 

house as much as mine or your own, that I never thought at the 

moment of its having gone away.  But, sir, when I quivered my eyes 

again, and saw that it wasn't there, then it all flooded upon me 

with a fright, and I jumped up.' 

carry me; and if you'll credit it, Mr Clennam, there wasn't in the 

woman.' 

beyond the gate? 

sign of her!' 

He then asked Mrs Tickit how long a space of time she supposed 

clearly been startled out of slumber, that Clennam was much 

Tickit's feelings with that infidel solution of her mystery, he 

took it away from the cottage with him; and probably would have 

to change his opinion. 

was going on before him, under whose hand the street-lamps, blurred 

the sudden check given to both operations caused him to look 

freshly about him, as people under such circumstances usually do. 

his arm--Tattycoram and a strange man of a remarkable appearance: 

over his shoulder with the suspicious glance of one who was not 

unused to be mistrustful that his footsteps might be dogged.  It 

upon Clennam's face or any other. 

down, listening to the girl, when the stoppage ceased, and the 

obstructed stream of people flowed on.  Still bending his head and 

went. 

leading,--and went straight on, as if they were going to the 

Terrace which overhangs the river. 

roar of the great thoroughfare.  The many sounds become so deadened 

that the change is like putting cotton in the ears, or having the 

head thickly muffled.  At that time the contrast was far greater; 

opposite bank, no hanging bridge or fish-market near at hand, no 

traffic on the nearest bridge of stone, nothing moving on the 

stream but watermen's wherries and coal-lighters.  Long and broad 

black tiers of the latter, moored fast in the mud as if they were 

and kept what little water-movement there was, far out towards mid- 

stream.  At any hour later than sunset, and not least at that hour 

yet slunk out to beg or steal, it was a deserted place and looked 

on a deserted scene. 

girl and the strange man as they went down the street.  The man's 

to add the sound of his own.  But when they had passed the turning 

he made after them with such indifferent appearance of being a 

casual passenger on his way, as he could assume. 

terrace towards a figure which was coming towards them.  If he had 

distance, he might not have known it at first sight, but with the 

there; but he kept a careful eye on the three.  When they came 

together, the man took off his hat, and made Miss Wade a bow.  The 

accounted for his being late, or early, or what not; and then fell 

a pace or so behind, by herself.  Miss Wade and the man then began 

to walk up and down; the man having the appearance of being 

extremely courteous and complimentary in manner; Miss Wade having 

the appearance of being extremely haughty. 

yourself to yours, and ask me no question.' 

profound respect for the strength of your character, and my 

admiration of your beauty.' 

determine.  They turned and she turned.  She looked away at the 

by good fortune, to be a lounger really waiting for some one; and 

he sometimes looked over the railing at the water, and sometimes 

less conspicuous. 

must wait until to-morrow.' 

convenient to-night?' 

He of course stopped too.  And the girl stopped. 

for a round sum.' 

for sending him some money to-morrow.'  She said it with a slur of 

the word gentleman which was more contemptuous than any emphasis, 

and walked slowly on. 

The man bent his head again, and the girl spoke to him as they both 

the man with a scrutinising expression, and that she kept at a 

little distance from him, as they walked side by side to the 

further end of the terrace. 

could discern what was passing there, that the man was coming back 

his shoulder, singing a scrap of a French song. 

lounged out of view, and Miss Wade and Tattycoram were gone.  More 

than ever bent on seeing what became of them, and on having some 

further end of the terrace, looking cautiously about him.  He 

rightly judged that, at first at all events, they would go in a 

contrary direction from their late companion.  He soon saw them in 

allowing time for the man to get well out of their way.  They 

corner, they changed their pace for the pace of people with an 

object and a distance before them, and walked steadily away.  

Clennam, no less steadily, kept them in sight. 

They crossed the Strand, and passed through Covent Garden (under 

that night), and slanted away north-east, until they passed the 

view with ease.  He was beginning to wonder where they might be 

was in its turn swallowed up on the greater wonder with which he 

saw them stop at the Patriarchal door.  A low double knock at the 

bright brass knocker, a gleam of light into the road from the 

shut, and they were housed. 

house, Arthur knocked at the door.  It was opened by the usual 

maid-servant, and she showed him up at once, with her usual 

alacrity, to Flora's sitting-room. 

gentlewoman, basking in a balmy atmosphere of tea and toast, was 

ensconced in an easy-chair by the fireside, with a little table at 

Bending over a steaming vessel of tea, and looking through the 

steam, and breathing forth the steam, like a malignant Chinese 

come back again!' 

uncompromising relative of the lamented Mr F., measuring time by 

the acuteness of her sensations and not by the clock, supposed 

year had elapsed since he had had the temerity to present himself 

before her. 

reception, 'Doyce and Clennam what a start and a surprise for 

might be taken sometimes if at no other time about mid-day when a 

for you know you buy it somewhere and wherever bought a profit must 

be made or they would never keep the place it stands to reason 

without a motive still never seen and learnt now not to be 

expected, for as Mr F. himself said if seeing is believing not 

seeing is believing too and when you don't see you may fully 

and Clennam to remember me why should I for the days are gone but 

bring another teacup here directly and tell her fresh toast and 

pray sit near the fire.' 

visit; but was put off for the moment, in spite of himself, by what 

genuine pleasure she testified in seeing him. 

her chair near to his, 'about the good dear quiet little thing and 

horses without number most romantic, a coat of arms of course and 

wild beasts on their hind legs showing it as if it was a copy they 

health which is the first consideration after all for what is 

came that sixpence a day and find yourself and no gout so much 

the last man or that the previous little thing though far too 

slight and small but looked so fragile bless her?' 

order on the white handkerchief; then took the other piece of 

he felt obliged to look at her in return, against his personal 

inclinations. 

dreaded lady was occupied again. 

organ-boys come away from the neighbourhood not to be scorched 

nobody can wonder being so young and bringing their white mice with 

them most humane, and is she really in that favoured land with 

nothing but blue about her and dying gladiators and Belvederes 

though Mr F. himself did not believe for his objection when in 

between expensive quantities of linen badly got up and all in 

though perhaps in consequence of the extremes of rich and poor 

which may account for it.' 

it well or ill preserved for people differ so and Maccaroni if they 

really eat it like the conjurors why not cut it shorter, you are 

acquainted Arthur--dear Doyce and Clennam at least not dear and 

most assuredly not Doyce for I have not the pleasure but pray 

with Mantua-making for I never have been able to conceive?' 

'I believe there is no connection, Flora, between the two,' Arthur 

was beginning, when she caught him up again. 

neither but you understand me when one bright idea gilded the 

and all is over.' 

by this time so plainly written on his face, that Flora stopped in 

a tender look, and asked him what it was? 

in this house--with Mr Casby no doubt.  Some one whom I saw come 

in, and who, in a misguided and deplorable way, has deserted the 

house of a friend of mine.' 

room and will come back directly if you'll mind and at the same 

time not mind Mr F.'s Aunt while I'm gone.' 

Clennam under dreadful apprehension of this terrible charge. 

prolonged sniff.  Finding it impossible to avoid construing this 

demonstration into a defiance of himself, its gloomy significance 

being unmistakable, Clennam looked plaintively at the excellent 

though prejudiced lady from whom it emanated, in the hope that she 

might be disarmed by a meek submission. 

'None of your eyes at me,' said Mr F.'s Aunt, shivering with 

hostility.  'Take that.' 

boon with a look of gratitude, and held it in his hand under the 

F.'s Aunt, elevating her voice into a cry of considerable power, 

exclaimed, 'He has a proud stomach, this chap!  He's too proud a 

chap to eat it!' and, coming out of her chair, shook her venerable 

fist so very close to his nose as to tickle the surface.  But for 

the timely return of Flora, to find him in this difficult 

situation, further consequences might have ensued.  Flora, without 

the least discomposure or surprise, but congratulating the old lady 

back to her chair. 

being reseated.  'Give him a meal of chaff!' 

round Flora on her enemy.  'It's the only thing for a proud 

stomach.  Let him eat up every morsel.  Drat him, give him a meal 

of chaff!' 

reiterating, with inexpressible bitterness, that he was 'a chap,' 

and had a 'proud stomach,' and over and over again insisting on 

that equine provision being made for him which she had already so 

strongly prescribed. 

whispered Flora, 'would you object to putting your arm round me 

under my pelerine?'  

fair burden at the dining-room door; indeed, even there she was 

rather difficult to be got rid of, remaining in his embrace to 

murmur, 'Arthur, for mercy's sake, don't breathe it to papa!' 

alone, with his list shoes on the fender, twirling his thumbs as if 

he had never left off.  The youthful Patriarch, aged ten, looked 

Both smooth heads were alike beaming, blundering, and bumpy. 

hope you are well.  Please to sit down, please to sit down.' 

a face of blank disappointment, 'not to find you alone.' 

be sure!' 

proper.' 

Arthur quickly returned, 'What do you call her?' 

hair for a few seconds, during which Mr Casby twirled his thumbs, 

and smiled at the fire as if he were benevolently wishing it to 

burn him that he might forgive it, Arthur began: 

of giving the assurance that she has not yet forfeited the interest 

of those protectors.' 

Wade?' 

you had only sent in to me when they were here!  I observed the 

young woman, Mr Clennam.  A fine full-coloured young woman, Mr 

if I mistake not?' 

would be so good as to give me the address.' 

tut, tut!  what a pity, what a pity!  I have no address, sir.  Miss 

Wade mostly lives abroad, Mr Clennam.  She has done so for some 

years, and she is (if I may say so of a fellow-creature and a lady) 

pity, what a pity!' 

of the Portrait as out of the Patriarch; but he said nevertheless: 

mentioned, and under any obligation of secrecy that you may 

consider it your duty to impose, give me any information at all 

touching Miss Wade?  I have seen her abroad, and I have seen her at 

home, but I know nothing of her.  Could you give me any account of 

her whatever?' 

pity that she stayed so short a time, and you delayed!  As 

paid this lady money; but what satisfaction is it to you, sir, to 

know that?' 

philanthropically smiled at the fire, 'none at all, sir.  You hit 

the wise answer, Mr Clennam.  Truly, none at all, sir.' 

was so typical to Clennam of the way in which he would make the 

it nor allowing it to make the smallest advance, that it did much 

might have taken any time to think about it, for Mr Casby, well 

accustomed to get on anywhere by leaving everything to his bumps 

and his white hair, knew his strength to lie in silence.  So there 

forehead look largely benevolent in every knob. 

the inner Dock where the good ship Pancks was hove down when out in 

towards him.  It struck Arthur that the noise began demonstratively 

far off, as though Mr Pancks sought to impress on any one who might 

happen to think about it, that he was working on from out of 

hearing. 

Mr Pancks and he shook hands, and the former brought his employer 

a letter or two to sign.  Mr Pancks in shaking hands merely 

scratched his eyebrow with his left forefinger and snorted once, 

but Clennam, who understood him better now than of old, 

comprehended that he had almost done for the evening and wished to 

sauntered in the neighbourhood on Mr Pancks's line of road. 

Therefore he said, without any preface: 

anything about her? 

knows about herself.  She is somebody's child--anybody's--nobody's. 

be her parents, and her parents may be there for anything she 

knows.  They may be in any house she sees, they may be in any 

churchyard she passes, she may run against 'em in any street, she 

whatever.  Never did.  Never will.' 

'Mr Casby could enlighten her, perhaps?' 

when she can't do without it.  Sometimes she's proud and won't 

touch it for a length of time; sometimes she's so poor that she 

must have it.  She writhes under her life.  A woman more angry, 

money to-night.  Said she had peculiar occasion for it.' 

occasion--I mean into whose pocket the money is to go.' 

and handsome as she is, if I had wronged her; no, not for twice my 

had a lingering illness on me, and wanted to get it over.' 

tally pretty nearly with Mr Pancks's view. 

lay hold of.  Mentioning that, I may tell you, between ourselves, 

that I am sometimes tempted to do for him myself.' 

nails on Arthur's arm; 'I don't mean, cut his throat.  But by all 

that's precious, if he goes too far, I'll cut his hair!' 

Having exhibited himself in the new light of enunciating this 

tremendous threat, Mr Pancks, with a countenance of grave import, 

snorted several times and steamed away. 

CHAPTER 10 

The shady waiting-rooms of the Circumlocution Office, where he 

passed a good deal of time in company with various troublesome 

had afforded Arthur Clennam ample leisure, in three or four 

Wade and Tattycoram.  He had been able to make no more of it and no 

less of it, and in this unsatisfactory condition he was fain to 

leave it. 

round, he left his dwelling and his partner at nearly nine o'clock, 

whole neighbourhood under some tinge of its dark shadow.  As he 

seemed all depositories of oppressive secrets.  The deserted 

counting-houses, with their secrets of books and papers locked up 

in chests and safes; the banking-houses, with their secrets of 

pockets and a very few secret breasts; the secrets of all the 

dispersed grinders in the vast mill, among whom there were 

doubtless plunderers, forgers, and trust-betrayers of many sorts, 

air.  The shadow thickening and thickening as he approached its 

source, he thought of the secrets of the lonely church-vaults, 

where the people who had hoarded and secreted in iron coffers were 

and then of the secrets of the river, as it rolled its turbid tide 

between two frowning wildernesses of secrets, extending, thick and 

country swept by winds and wings of birds. 

melancholy room which his father had once occupied, haunted by the 

appealing face he had himself seen fade away with him when there 

air was secret.  The gloom, and must, and dust of the whole 

inflexible of face, indomitable of will, firmly holding all the 

secrets of her own and his father's life, and austerely opposing 

herself, front to front, to the great final secret of all life. 

of enclosure wherein the house stood opened, when another footstep 

the encounter took him altogether unprepared, so that the other 

passenger had had time to say, boisterously, 'Pardon!  Not my 

fault!' and to pass on before the instant had elapsed which was 

requisite to his recovery of the realities about him. 

before him was the man who had been so much in his mind during the 

last few days.  It was no casual resemblance, helped out by the 

man he had followed in company with the girl, and whom he had 

overheard talking to Miss Wade. 

strong drink) went down it so fast that Clennam lost him as he 

with an impulse to keep the figure in view a little longer, Clennam 

quickened his pace to pass the twist in the street which hid him 

from his sight.  On turning it, he saw the man no more. 

down the street: but it was empty.  There was no projecting shadow 

could have taken; nor had there been any audible sound of the 

man must have had a key in his hand, and must have opened one of 

the many house-doors and gone in. 

into the court-yard.  As he looked, by mere habit, towards the 

the figure he had just lost, standing against the iron railings of 

to himself.  Some of the many vagrant cats who were always prowling 

have stopped when he had stopped, and were looking at him with eyes 

by no means unlike his own from tops of walls and porches, and 

entertain himself thus; he immediately went forward, throwing the 

end of his cloak off his shoulder as he went, ascended the unevenly 

sunken steps, and knocked a sounding knock at the door. 

and ascended the steps too.  His friend looked at him with a 

braggart air, and sang to himself. 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine; 

     Who passes by this road so late? 

          Always gay!' 

After which he knocked again. 

my character to be impatient!' 

The sound of Mistress Affery cautiously chaining the door before 

that, at that time of night, with that knock!  'Why, Arthur!' she 

added with astonishment, seeing him first.  'Not you sure?  Ah, 

'Open the door, and let me take my dear friend Jeremiah to my arms! 

tell him that it is his little boy who is here, his cabbage, his 

well-beloved!  Open the door, beautiful Mrs Flintwinch, and in the 

meantime let me to pass upstairs, to present my compliments-- 

homage of Blandois--to my lady!  My lady lives always?  It is well. 

To Arthur's increased surprise, Mistress Affery, stretching her 

eyes wide at himself, as if in warning that this was not a 

gentleman for him to interfere with, drew back the chain, and 

hall, leaving Arthur to follow him. 

to my lady!' cried the stranger, clanking about the stone floor. 

gentleman?' 

ha, ha, ha!--who is this gentleman?' 

'Affery, let them both come up.  Arthur, come straight to me!' 

the son of my lady!' 

before, and, turning on his heel without acknowledgment, went up- 

lord. 

Blandois in that room, would have observed a difference in Mrs 

it; and her suppressed manner, and her set voice, were equally 

under her control.  It wholly consisted in her never taking her 

eyes off his face from the moment of his entrance, and in her twice 

or thrice, when he was becoming noisy, swaying herself a very 

little forward in the chair in which she sat upright, with her 

did not fail to observe this; though the difference between the 

present occasion and the former was not within his power of 

observation. 

Monsieur, your son.  It appears to me, madame, that Monsieur, your 

son, is disposed to complain of me.  He is not polite.' 

I would lose no time in placing you on the outside of it.' 

you are not the master, Arthur.' 

if I had any authority here I certainly would not suffer him to 

remain a minute, I object on your account.' 

object for myself.  And of course I should.' 

aloud, and rapped his legs with his hand. 

however directly she addressed her son, 'to speak to the prejudice 

because he does not conform to your standard, or square his 

similar grounds, object to you.' 

a letter of recommendation to us from highly esteemed and 

gentleman's object in coming here at present.  I am entirely 

ignorant of it, and cannot be supposed likely to be able to form 

the remotest guess at its nature;' her habitual frown became 

stronger, as she very slowly and weightily emphasised those words; 

'but, when the gentleman proceeds to explain his object, as I shall 

in the usual way of our business, which it will be both our 

business and our pleasure to advance.  It can be nothing else.' 

'We shall see,' she assented.  'The gentleman is acquainted with 

Flintwinch; and when the gentleman was in London last, I remember 

to have heard that he and Flintwinch had some entertainment or 

good-fellowship together.  I am not in the way of knowing much that 

passes outside this room, and the jingle of little worldly things 

that.' 

burden of the tune he had sung at the door. 

that your unreasonable temper should have found offence in him.  I 

regret it.  I say so to the gentleman.  You will not say so, I 

two the gentleman's business lies.' 

was heard to open and close.  In due sequence Mr Flintwinch 

appeared; on whose entrance the visitor rose from his chair, 

laughing loud, and folded him in a close embrace. 

my Flintwinch?  Rose-coloured?  So much the better, so much the 

better!  Ah, but you look charming!  Ah, but you look young and 

brave child!' 

twisted than ever, were like those of a teetotum nearly spent. 

coming on?' 

port, sir, I guess?' 

sat down again. 

looked on at all this, struck him dumb.  Mr Flintwinch, who had 

to him, brought himself up with a face completely unchanged in its 

stolidity except as it was affected by shortness of breath, and 

looked hard at Arthur.  Not a whit less reticent and wooden was Mr 

Flintwinch outwardly, than in the usual course of things: the only 

head: where it formed an ornamental appendage not unlike a bagwig, 

and gave him something of a courtly appearance. 

As Mrs Clennam never removed her eyes from Blandois (on whom they 

had some effect, as a steady look has on a lower sort of dog), so 

Jeremiah never removed his from Arthur.  It was as if they had 

tacitly agreed to take their different provinces.  Thus, in the 

with an instrument. 

rose, and impatiently put himself with his back to the sacred fire 

which had burned through so many years.  Thereupon Mrs Clennam 

very slightly with an action of dismissal: 

'Mother, I do so with reluctance.' 

leave us.  Come back at any other time when you may consider it a 

duty to bury half an hour wearily here.  Good night.' 

according to their usual custom, and he stood over her wheeled 

chair to touch her face with his lips.  He thought, then, that her 

Flintwinch's good friend, Mr Blandois, Mr Blandois snapped his 

finger and thumb with one loud contemptuous snap. 

Flintwinch,' said Clennam, 'with a great deal of surprise and a 

great deal of unwillingness.' 

standing astride before the fire, and so evidently saying it to 

arrest Clennam's retreating steps, that he lingered near the door; 

'I had a friend once, who had heard so much of the dark side of 

this city and its ways, that he wouldn't have confided himself 

alone by night with two people who had an interest in getting him 

this--unless he was bodily too strong for them.  Bah!  What a 

poltroon, my Flintwinch!  Eh?' 

circumstances--not even in a respectable house like this, my 

too!' 

came down over his moustache and his moustache went up under his 

nose, in an ominous and ugly smile. 

of the night-sky, 'what is going on here?' 

low, deadened voice. 

long.  Go away!' 

yellow blinds, seemed to say a response after Affery, and to 

mutter, 'Don't ask me anything.  Go away!' 

CHAPTER 11 

Dear Mr Clennam, 

no other trouble than the trouble of reading it (perhaps you may 

I am now going to devote an hour to writing to you again.  This 

time, I write from Rome. 

called the Via Gregoriana.  I dare say you know it. 

that is what you most want to hear.  Theirs is not a very 

saw it than you would have done, because you have been in many 

different countries and have seen many different customs.  Of 

course it is a far, far better place--millions of times--than any 

I have ever been used to until lately; and I fancy I don't look at 

it with my own eyes, but with hers.  For it would be easy to see 

even if she had not told me so with great love for it. 

paints.  The windows are blocked up where any one could look out, 

others who have lived there before--oh,--I should think, for years! 

but it was not quite so airy, nor so bright, nor so cheerful, nor 

so happy and youthful altogether as I should have liked it to be. 

quite convinced I should have known from the likeness if I had not 

She is very much alone.  Very much alone indeed. 

o'clock in the afternoon.  She was then dining alone, and her 

brazier with a fire in it, and she had no company or prospect of 

taken up by a stone statue of a Saint), to entertain her--as he 

though she was not so pretty.' 

have to say about her.  He must admire her beauty, and he must be 

proud of her, for everybody praises it, and he must be fond of her, 

and if it appears as careless and discontented in your eyes as it 

suited to her.  If it does not seem so to you, I am quite sure I am 

knowledge and goodness more than she could ever tell you if she was 

to try.  But don't be frightened, I am not going to try. 

dissatisfied way, he applies himself to his profession very little. 

and throws them down, and does them, or leaves them undone, without 

caring about them.  When I have heard him talking to Papa during 

the sittings for the picture, I have sat wondering whether it could 

be that he has no belief in anybody else, because he has no belief 

in himself.  Is it so?  I wonder what you will say when you come to 

which you would tell me on the Iron Bridge. 

it when he is with it--and she sometimes accompanies him, but 

lately she has gone out very little.  I think I have noticed that 

made some great self-interested success in marrying Mr Gowan, 

in all places where there are visitors, he has a large acquaintance 

much in his society both at home and away from home, though he 

treats this friend very coolly and is very uncertain in his 

that she does not like this friend.  He is so revolting to me, too, 

mind.  How much more to hers! 

to tell you so much while I am afraid it may make you a little 

for ever, that you may be certain she will love him, admire him, 

praise him, and conceal all his faults, until she dies.  I believe 

the truth of this, as you know everything, far far better than I; 

can never think too well of her. 

such friends now that I do so when we are quietly together, and she 

speaks to me by my name--I mean, not my Christian name, but the 

name you gave me.  When she began to call me Amy, I told her my 

she calls me Little Dorrit too. 

However, I must tell you, as I am to tell you all, that I fancy 

his mocking way with them was sometimes a slight given to their 

Mr Meagles change colour, and get up and go out, as if he was 

and reasonable, that he might spare them.  It is hard in him not to 

think of them a little more. 

it over a little, I felt more hopeful for your knowing at once that 

Indeed, you may be sure that is the truth. 

have little left to say. 

me.  She has a lover, who has followed her, first all the way from 

confided to me that he means to follow her everywhere.  I was much 

know what to say, but at last I told him that I thought he had 

spirited and clever to suit him.  Still, he said he would, all the 

same.  I have no lover, of course. 

perhaps say, Surely Little Dorrit will not leave off without 

telling me something about her travels, and surely it is time she 

did.  I think it is indeed, but I don't know what to tell you.  

Genoa and Florence among them, and have seen so many wonderful 

that why should I tire you with my accounts and descriptions? 

difficulties in my travelling mind were before, I will not be a 

cities are, their age itself is hardly so curious, to my 

reflections, as that they should have been in their places all 

through those days when I did not even know of the existence of 

more than two or three of them, and when I scarcely knew of 

anything outside our old walls.  There is something melancholy in 

it, and I don't know why.  When we went to see the famous leaning 

tower at Pisa, it was a bright sunny day, and it and the buildings 

and its shadow on the ground was so soft and retired!  I could not 

at first think how beautiful it was, or how curious, but I thought, 

'O how many times when the shadow of the wall was falling on our 

room, and when that weary tread of feet was going up and down the 

yard--O how many times this place was just as quiet and lovely as 

it is to-day!'  It quite overpowered me.  My heart was so full that 

them.  And I have the same feeling often--often. 

to myself to have dreamed more than before, I have always dreamed 

No, but that is not what I mean.  I have always dreamed of myself 

as a child learning to do needlework.  I have often dreamed of 

have dreamed of going down to Mrs General, with the patches on my 

clothes in which I can first remember myself.  I have over and over 

had a large company, in the mourning for my poor mother which I 

wore when I was eight years old, and wore long after it was 

Fanny and Edward by so plainly disclosing what they wished to keep 

secret.  But I have not grown out of the little child in thinking 

with the heart-ache at table, calculating the expenses of the 

dinner, and quite distracting myself with thinking how they were 

ever to be made good.  I have never dreamed of the change in our 

that memorable morning to break it; I have never even dreamed of 

you. 

others--so much by day, that I have no thoughts left to wander 

round you by night.  For I must now confess to you that I suffer 

to turn my face further away from it.  My heart is a little 

the knowledge that we are soon to turn away again.  So dearly do I 

dearly! 

all fond of the life here (except me), and there are no plans for 

have no hope that he will bring me with him. 

instruction, and I hope I am not quite so dull as I used to be.  I 

have begun to speak and understand, almost easily, the hard 

languages I told you about.  I did not remember, at the moment when 

I wrote last, that you knew them both; but I remembered it 

afterwards, and it helped me on.  God bless you, dear Mr Clennam.  

Do not forget your ever grateful and affectionate 

               LITTLE DORRIT. 

remembrance in which you can hold her.  You cannot think too 

regard.  He was very good to Little D. 

CHAPTER 12 

The famous name of Merdle became, every day, more famous in the 

land.  Nobody knew that the Merdle of such high renown had ever 

him, which had ever thrown, for any creature, the feeblest 

or pleasure, toil or rest, fact or fancy, among the multiplicity of 

worship was made, to be other than the commonest clay, with as 

humanity from tumbling to pieces.  All people knew (or thought they 

knew) that he had made himself immensely rich; and, for that reason 

excusably than the darkest savage creeps out of his hole in the 

ground to propitiate, in some log or reptile, the Deity of his 

benighted soul. 

protest against their meanness.  The multitude worshipped on 

feasts, and he sat at theirs.  There was a spectre always attendant 

on him, saying to these high priests, 'Are such the signs you 

trust, and love to honour; this head, these eyes, this mode of 

speech, the tone and manner of this man?  You are the levers of the 

you fall out by the ears, it seems that mother earth can give birth 

to no other rulers.  Does your qualification lie in the superior 

knowledge of men which accepts, courts, and puffs this man?  Or, if 

you when he appears among you, is your superior honesty your 

about town with Mr Merdle; and there was a tacit agreement that 

they must be stifled.  In Mrs Merdle's absence abroad, Mr Merdle 

still kept the great house open for the passage through it of a 

stream Of visitors.  A few of these took affable possession of the 

establishment.  Three or four ladies of distinction and liveliness 

used to say to one another, 'Let us dine at our dear Merdle's next 

Thursday.  Whom shall we have?'  Our dear Merdle would then receive 

and wander lumpishly about his drawing-rooms afterwards, only 

remarkable for appearing to have nothing to do with the 

entertainment beyond being in its way. 

relaxed nothing of his severity.  He looked on at these dinners 

the bosom was there; and his eye was a basilisk to Mr Merdle.  He 

to his mark.  He set forth the table for his own dignity.  If the 

but it was served for the maintenance of his rank.  As he stood by 

his own state of which he was, from unavoidable circumstances, 

or a choice wine-cooler, which had been sent to the Banker's. 

was to be there, Mr Tite Barnacle was to be there, the pleasant 

young Barnacle was to be there; and the Chorus of Parliamentary 

Barnacles who went about the provinces when the House was up, 

take up the Barnacles.  Some delicate little negotiations had 

occurred between him and the noble Decimus--the young Barnacle of 

engaging manners acting as negotiator--and Mr Merdle had decided to 

cast the weight of his great probity and great riches into the 

Enemy of Mankind could have been secured by a job, the Barnacles 

the country. 

was heresy to regard as anything less than all the British 

three feet deep all over--had written to this spouse of hers, 

several letters from Rome, in quick succession, urging upon him 

with importunity that now or never was the time to provide for 

Edmund Sparkler.  Mrs Merdle had shown him that the case of Edmund 

having some good thing directly.  In the grammar of Mrs Merdle's 

verbs on this momentous subject, there was only one mood, the 

Imperative; and that Mood had only one Tense, the Present.  Mrs 

Merdle's verbs were so pressingly presented to Mr Merdle to 

quite agitated. 

that stupendous creature's thoughts, had signified to him his 

intention of giving a special dinner: not a very large dinner, but 

come. 

or never took the liberty of standing with his back to the fire 

could not have done such a deed.  He would have clasped himself by 

the wrists in that constabulary manner of his, and have paced up 

and down the hearthrug, or gone creeping about among the rich 

objects of furniture, if his oppressive retainer had appeared in 

the room at that very moment.  The sly shadows which seemed to dart 

fire fell, were sufficient witnesses of his making himself so easy. 

at them might be taken to mean anything. 

the evening paper that night.  The wonderful Bank, of which he was 

the chief projector, establisher, and manager, was the latest of 

the many Merdle wonders.  So modest was Mr Merdle withal, in the 

a man in possession of his house under a distraint, than a 

ships were sailing into dinner. 

was the first arrival; but Bar overtook him on the staircase.  Bar, 

strengthened as usual with his double eye-glass and his little jury 

droop, was overjoyed to see the engaging young Barnacle; and opined 

that we were going to sit in Banco, as we lawyers called it, to 

take a special argument? 

Ferdinand; 'how so?' 

concourse on the plain without.' 

customer he had to deal with.  With Ferdinand Barnacle he was 

ran through the woof of all his patterns.  Every man with whom he 

over, if he could. 

mercantile star;--going into politics?' 

the engaging young Barnacle. 

which was a very different thing from his low-comedy laugh for 

comic tradesmen on common juries: 'he has been in Parliament for 

some time.  Yet hitherto our star has been a vacillating and 

wavering star?  Humph?' 

as he strolled up-stairs, and gave him no answer at all. 

be put off in that way, 'and therefore I spoke of our sitting in 

solemn occasion, when, as Captain Macheath says, "the judges are 

met: a terrible show!" We lawyers are sufficiently liberal, you 

Captain's,' said Bar, with a little jocose roll of his head; for, 

in his legal current of speech, he always assumed the air of 

the Captain's that Law, in the gross, is at least intended to be 

     "Since laws were made for every degree, 

     To curb vice in others as well as in me, 

     I wonder we ha'n't better company 

     Upon Tyburn Tree!"' 

These words brought them to the drawing-room, where Mr Merdle stood 

before the fire.  So immensely astounded was Mr Merdle by the 

entrance of Bar with such a reference in his mouth, that Bar 

our Westminster Hall authorities,' said he, 'but still no 

despicable one to a man possessing the largely-practical Mr 

Merdle's knowledge of the world.' 

subsequently looked as if he thought he wouldn't.  The interval 

afforded time for Bishop to be announced. 

Bishop came in with meekness, and yet with a strong and rapid step 

as if he wanted to get his seven-league dress-shoes on, and go 

Bishop had no idea that there was anything significant in the 

occasion.  That was the most remarkable trait in his demeanour.  He 

was crisp, fresh, cheerful, affable, bland; but so surprisingly 

innocent. 

well.  Young Mr Bishop was also well.  He was down, with his young 

with whom he was conversing or what he was talking about, got among 

and touched each individual gentleman of the jury on his own 

individual favourite spot.  With some of the Chorus, he laughed 

about the sleepy member who had gone out into the lobby the other 

night, and voted the wrong way: with others, he deplored that 

from taking an unnatural interest in the public service and the 

general health; he had also a little information to ask him for, 

concerning a professional man of unquestioned erudition and 

polished manners--but those credentials in their highest 

witness-box the day before yesterday, and from whom he had elicited 

so.  Without presuming to decide where doctors disagreed, it did 

by such encouragement, he could venture to say Humbug; and now 

Bar's mind was relieved. 

had only one idea in his head and that was a wrong one, had 

appeared by this time.  This eminent gentleman and Mr Merdle, 

seated diverse ways and with ruminating aspects on a yellow ottoman 

Cuyp picture over against them. 

time had limited himself to a branch of his usual function by 

looking at the company as they entered (and that, with more of 

up-stairs with him and announce him.  Lord Decimus being an 

overpowering peer, a bashful young member of the Lower House who 

when his Lordship came in. 

glad to see Physician, glad to see Tite Barnacle, glad to see 

Chorus, glad to see Ferdinand his private secretary.  Lord Decimus, 

though one of the greatest of the earth, was not remarkable for 

Cuyp, and made a third cow in the group. 

official reserve, for the Foreman's consideration.  Bar said that 

fruit this year.  Lord Decimus had not heard anything amiss of his 

peaches, but rather believed, if his people were correct, he was to 

have no apples.  No apples?  Bar was lost in astonishment and 

concern.  It would have been all one to him, in reality, if there 

had not been a pippin on the surface of the earth, but his show of 

what, Lord Decimus--for we troublesome lawyers loved to gather 

to what, Lord Decimus, was this to be attributed?  Lord Decimus 

said, 'As to pears, now?' 

Eton, upon which pear-tree the only joke of his life perennially 

bloomed.  It was a joke of a compact and portable nature, turning 

on the difference between Eton pears and Parliamentary pairs; but 

it was a joke, a refined relish of which would seem to have 

appeared to Lord Decimus impossible to be had without a thorough 

first had no idea of such a tree, sir, then gradually found it in 

blossom, saw it bear fruit, saw the fruit ripen; in short, 

cultivated the tree in that diligent and minute manner before it 

in apples was so overtopped by the wrapt suspense in which he 

pursued the changes of these pears, from the moment when Lord 

Decimus solemnly opened with 'Your mentioning pears recalls to my 

remembrance a pear-tree,' down to the rich conclusion, 'And so we 

pass, through the various changes of life, from Eton pears to 

Parliamentary pairs,' that he had to go down-stairs with Lord 

that he might hear the anecdote out.  By that time, Bar felt that 

he had secured the Foreman, and might go to dinner with a good 

appetite. 

in gold and silver, china and glass; innumerable things delicious 

to the senses of taste, smell, and sight, were insinuated into its 

composition.  O, what a wonderful man this Merdle, what a great 

man, what a master man, how blessedly and enviably endowed--in one 

word, what a rich man! 

indigestive way, and had as little to say for himself as ever a 

wonderful man had.  Fortunately Lord Decimus was one of those 

sublimities who have no occasion to be talked to, for they can be 

own greatness.  This enabled the bashful young Member to keep his 

eyes open long enough at a time to see his dinner.  But, whenever 

Lord Decimus spoke, he shut them again. 

his innocence stood in his way.  He was so soon left behind.  When 

there was any little hint of anything being in the wind, he got 

make them out at all. 

Mr Sparkler. 

vote was a vote, and always acceptable. 

Merdle. 

been fitting a tablespoon up his sleeve.  'It is not indispensable 

for him to be on the spot.' 

doubt will suffice for all.' 

aside, and clumsily hiding each of his hands in the coat-cuff of 

will not make any difficulty.' 

'I am glad you approve of them,' said Mr Merdle. 

a bright twinkle in his keen eye, as it slightly turned in the 

direction of his magnificent neighbour; 'we lawyers are always 

our patchwork minds, since there is no knowing when and where they 

may fit into some corner;--the people of those other two places 

now?  Do they yield so laudably to the vast and cumulative 

become absorbed so quietly and easily, and, as it were by the 

influence of natural laws, so beautifully, in the swoop of the 

majestic stream as it flows upon its wondrous way enriching the 

surrounding lands; that their course is perfectly to be calculated, 

and distinctly to be predicated?' 

about the nearest salt-cellar for some moments, and then said 

hesitating: 

will return anybody I send to them for that purpose.' 

Island, containing three little ignorant, drunken, guzzling, dirty, 

said they were a nice set of fellows.  Bishop, mentally 

absence of mind. 

variety of allusions to it.  Do you know anything of it, 

Ferdinand?' 

Department with which I have the honour to be associated;' this 

keep it up, we must keep the game alive; 'no end of trouble, and 

has put us into innumerable fixes.' 

quite tight.  'Fixes?' 

with an air of grave resentment. 

was the nature of these--a--Fixes, Ferdinand?' 

Dorrit) had incurred a responsibility to us, ages before the fairy 

came out of the Bank and gave him his fortune, under a bond he had 

signed for the performance of a contract which was not at all 

or buttons, or wine, or blacking, or oatmeal, or woollen, or pork, 

or hooks and eyes, or iron, or treacle, or shoes, or something or 

house burst, and we being among the creditors, detainees were 

counter-checking, signing and counter-signing, that it was six 

months before we knew how to take the money, or how to give a 

receipt for it.  It was a triumph of public business,' said this 

"if I wanted this office to give me two or three thousand pounds 

instead of take it, I couldn't have more trouble about it."  "You 

are right, old fellow," I told him, "and in future you'll know that 

we have something to do here."' The pleasant young Barnacle 

finished by once more laughing heartily.  He was a very easy, 

pleasant fellow indeed, and his manners were exceedingly winning. 

character.  He took it ill that Mr Dorrit had troubled the 

a buttoned-up man, and consequently a weighty one.  All buttoned-up 

men are weighty.  All buttoned-up men are believed in.  Whether or 

no the reserved and never-exercised power of unbuttoning, 

fascinates mankind; whether or no wisdom is supposed to condense 

and augment when buttoned up, and to evaporate when unbuttoned; it 

buttoned-up man.  Mr Tite Barnacle never would have passed for half 

his white cravat. 

family?' 

lord.' 

on Edmund Sparkler.  He is susceptible, and--I--think--the 

low voice across the table to Bishop, that it was a kind of 

to draw wealth to it, as something remarkably interesting and 

curious--something indefinably allied to the loadstone and 

gravitation.  Bishop, who had ambled back to earth again when the 

present theme was broached, acquiesced.  He said it was indeed 

highly important to Society that one in the trying situation of 

unexpectedly finding himself invested with a power for good or for 

warmth throughout the land.  Bishop seemed to like his own way of 

putting the case very much, and rather dwelt upon it; Bar, 

meanwhile (not to throw away a jury-man), making a show of sitting 

at his feet and feeding on his precepts. 

cooled in the shadow of Lord Decimus faster than he warmed with 

like a tall tower in a flat country, seemed to project himself 

cool the honourable Member's marrow, and give him a woeful idea of 

he encompassed his faltering steps with the gloomiest of shades; 

and desolation. 

hover about among the pictures, and to cause an interesting 

speculation to arise in all minds as to the probabilities of his 

ceasing to hover, and enabling the smaller birds to flutter up- 

stairs; which could not be done until he had urged his noble 

of his wings which came to nothing, he soared to the drawing-rooms. 

And here a difficulty arose, which always does arise when two 

one another.  Everybody (except Bishop, who had no suspicion of it) 

knew perfectly well that this dinner had been eaten and drunk, 

specifically to the end that Lord Decimus and Mr Merdle should have 

five minutes' conversation together.  The opportunity so 

elaborately prepared was now arrived, and it seemed from that 

moment that no mere human ingenuity could so much as get the two 

chieftains into the same room.  Mr Merdle and his noble guest 

persisted in prowling about at opposite ends of the perspective.  

look at the bronze horses near Mr Merdle.  Then Mr Merdle evaded, 

Then Lord Decimus evaded and wandered away, while he was getting 

his man up to the mark. 

he had been baffled twenty times. 

the other,' said Ferdinand,'it will not come off after all.' 

lord.' 

both!' said he, looking at his watch.  'I want to get away.  Why 

the deuce can't they come together!  They both know what they want 

and mean to do.  Look at them!' 

mind had been chalked on his back.  Bishop, who had just now made 

approach Lord Decimus and glide into conversation. 

said Ferdinand; 'and then I must lay hold of my illustrious 

kinsman, and decoy him if I can--drag him if I can't--to the 

conference.' 

ask for my poor aid, it shall be yours with the greatest pleasure.  

I don't think this is to be done by one man.  But if you will 

jauntily waving his double eye-glass by its ribbon, and jauntily 

manner ever seen, found himself at Mr Merdle's shoulder, and 

which he particularly wished to be guided by the light of his 

practical knowledge.  (Here he took Mr Merdle's arm and walked him 

gently away.) A banker, whom we would call A. B., advanced a 

considerable sum of money, which we would call fifteen thousand 

(Here, as they were getting towards Lord Decimus, he held Mr Merdle 

tight.) As a security for the repayment of this advance to P. Q.  

whom we would call a widow lady, there were placed in A. B.'s hands 

host with chopping our dry chaff of law, was really too bad!  

Another time!  Bar was truly repentant, and would not say another 

syllable.  Would Bishop favour him with half-a-dozen words?  (He 

had now set Mr Merdle down on a couch, side by side with Lord 

Decimus, and to it they must go, now or never.) 

always excepting Bishop, who had not the slightest idea that 

next drawing-room, and pretended to be chatting easily on the 

apprehension that some good thing was going to be diverted from 

them!  Bishop alone talked steadily and evenly.  He conversed with 

the great Physician on that relaxation of the throat with which 

lessening the great prevalence of that disorder in the church.  

Physician, as a general rule, was of opinion that the best way to 

reading.  Bishop said dubiously, did he really think so?  And 

Physician said, decidedly, yes he did. 

by Lord Decimus on Mr Merdle, or by Mr Merdle on Lord Decimus, and 

minutes more.  Then a half-suppressed gasp broke out among the 

Chorus; for Lord Decimus rose to take his leave.  Again coached up 

by Ferdinand to the point of making himself popular, he shook hands 

to Bar, 'I hope you were not bored by my pears?'  To which Bar 

retorted, 'Eton, my lord, or Parliamentary?' neatly showing that he 

had mastered the joke, and delicately insinuating that he could 

never forget it while his life remained. 

of Mr Merdle's saying something.  But Merdle, as usual, oozed 

sluggishly and muddily about his drawing-room, saying never a word. 

appointment was to be hailed as a graceful and gracious mark of 

homage, rendered by the graceful and gracious Decimus, to that 

commercial interest which must ever in a great commercial country-- 

and all the rest of it, with blast of trumpet.  So, bolstered by 

this mark of Government homage, the wonderful Bank and all the 

other wonderful undertakings went on and went up; and gapers came 

the golden wonder lived. 

and wondered how much money he had in the wonderful Bank.  But, if 

they had known that respectable Nemesis better, they would not have 

precision. 

CHAPTER 13 

That it is at least as difficult to stay a moral infection as a 

and rapidity of the Plague; that the contagion, when it has once 

people in the soundest health, and become developed in the most 

unlikely constitutions: is a fact as firmly established by 

experience as that we human creatures breathe an atmosphere.  A 

blessing beyond appreciation would be conferred upon mankind, if 

the tainted, in whose weakness or wickedness these virulent 

confinement (not to say summarily smothered) before the poison is 

communicable. 

so the sacred flame which the mighty Barnacles had fanned caused 

as Mr Merdle.  Nobody, as aforesaid, knew what he had done; but 

everybody knew him to be the greatest that had appeared. 

as on the Stock Exchange.  Mrs Plornish, now established in the 

small grocery and general trade in a snug little shop at the crack 

end of the Yard, at the top of the steps, with her little old 

him over the counter in conversation with her customers.  Mr 

the neighbourhood, said, trowel in hand, on the tops of scaffolds 

was the one, mind you, to put us all to rights in respects of that 

of Mr and Mrs Plornish was reputed in whispers to lay by the 

savings which were the result of his simple and moderate life, for 

investment in one of Mr Merdle's certain enterprises.  The female 

Bleeding Hearts, when they came for ounces of tea, and 

hundredweights of talk, gave Mrs Plornish to understand, That how, 

ma'am, they had heard from their cousin Mary Anne, which worked in 

the line, that his lady's dresses would fill three waggons.  That 

how she was as handsome a lady, ma'am, as lived, no matter wheres, 

was told, ma'am, it was her son by a former husband as was took 

marched again and victory crowned, if all you heard was to be 

believed.  That how it was reported that Mr Merdle's words had 

to make it worth his while; for it was such and only such that 

heighth down. 

magic name. 

the truth, sir, when I say I haven't got so much as a single 

sixpence of it to bless myself with.' 

expect it will do; do you?' 

Defaulter would admit, with a low-spirited 'No, sir,' having no 

such expectation. 

would proceed.  'He don't send me here for this.  Pay up!  Come!' 

gentleman whose name is in everybody's mouth--if my name was 

Merdle, sir--I'd soon pay up, and be glad to do it.' 

doors or in the entries, and in the presence of several deeply 

and the Defaulter, however black and discomfited before, always 

cheered up a little in making it. 

then.  No, believe me!' the Defaulter would proceed with a shake of 

have to ask me.' 

impossible to say anything fairer, and that this was the next thing 

to paying the money down. 

'Well!  You'll have the broker in, and be turned out; that's 

You are not Mr Merdle, any more than I am.' 

sir.' 

feeling, 'Only wish you were him, sir.' 

would go on with rising spirits, 'and it would be better for all 

wouldn't have to worry no one, then, sir.  You wouldn't have to 

in your own mind, sir, and you'd leave others easier, too, you 

would, if you were Mr Merdle.' 

responsive Bleeding Hearts would then gather round the Defaulter 

whom he had just abandoned, and the most extravagant rumours would 

of Mr Merdle's ready money. 

note-book under his arm to Mrs Plornish's corner.  Mr Pancks's 

similar seasons, and borne his part in recollections of Miss 

Dorrit. 

and presented, on the side towards the shop, a little fiction in 

of the parlour consisted in the wall being painted to represent the 

exterior of a thatched cottage; the artist having introduced (in as 

effective a manner as he found compatible with their highly 

disproportionate dimensions) the real door and window.  The modest 

sunflower and hollyhock were depicted as flourishing with great 

issuing from the chimney indicated good cheer within, and also, 

perhaps, that it had not been lately swept.  A faithful dog was 

represented as flying at the legs of the friendly visitor, from the 

threshold; and a circular pigeon-house, enveloped in a cloud of 

pigeons, arose from behind the garden-paling.  On the door (when it 

expressing man and wife.  No Poetry and no Art ever charmed the 

imagination more than the union of the two in this counterfeit 

uprooted the blooming garden and laid waste the adjacent country.  

To Mrs Plornish, it was still a most beautiful cottage, a most 

wonderful deception; and it made no difference that Mr Plornish's 

father sing a song inside this cottage, was a perfect Pastoral to 

Mrs Plornish, the Golden Age revived.  And truly if that famous 

period had been revived, or had ever been at all, it may be doubted 

whether it would have produced many more heartily admiring 

daughters than the poor woman. 

guessed it was you, Mr Pancks,' said she, 'for it's quite your 

regular night; ain't it?  Here's father, you see, come out to serve 

at the sound of the bell, like a brisk young shopman.  Ain't he 

voice as he is at present,' said Mrs Plornish, her own voice 

night to that degree that Plornish gets up and makes him this 

speech across the table.  "John Edward Nandy," says Plornish to 

father, "I never heard you come the warbles as I have heard you 

come the warbles this night."  An't it gratifying, Mr Pancks, 

though; really?' 

yet, though he had gone to the West-End with some work, and had 

said he should be back by tea-time.  Mr Pancks was then hospitably 

pressed into Happy Cottage, where he encountered the elder Master 

Plornish just come home from school.  Examining that young student, 

lightly, on the educational proceedings of the day, he found that 

M, had been set the copy 'Merdle, Millions.' 

we're mentioning millions?' 

would you go into the shop and tidy the window a little bit before 

tea, your taste being so beautiful?' 

disclosure she made might rouse his spirit and induce him to run 

Mr Pancks. 

only thing that stands in its way, sir, is the Credit.' 

commercial transactions with the inhabitants of Bleeding Heart 

shown an amount of emotion and a determination to support her in 

it, that did honour to human nature.  Recognising her claim upon 

their generous feelings as one who had long been a member of their 

with Mrs Plornish, come what would and bestow their patronage on no 

had even gone out of their way to purchase little luxuries in the 

one another, that if they did stretch a point, was it not for a 

neighbour and a friend, and for whom ought a point to be stretched 

and the articles in stock went off with the greatest celerity.  In 

have been a complete success; whereas, by reason of their 

exclusively confining themselves to owing, the profits actually 

realised had not yet begun to appear in the books. 

performances.  First, he was observed hiding at the top of the 

steps leading down into the Yard, and peeping up and down the 

street with his head cautiously thrust out close to the side of the 

shop-door.  After very anxious scrutiny, he came out of his 

altogether; then, suddenly turned about, and went, at the same 

pace, and with the same feint, up the street.  He had gone no 

come through the Yard and bolted in.  He was out of breath by that 

time, as he might well be, and his heart seemed to jerk faster than 

the little shop-bell, as it quivered and jingled behind him with 

his hasty shutting of the door. 

matter?' 

well as Mr Pancks himself, and could speak it very well too.  

Nevertheless, Mrs Plornish, with a pardonable vanity in that 

as interpreter. 

his right forefinger.  'Come there!' 

Italian tongue.  She immediately complied with Mr Baptist's 

request, and they all went into the cottage. 

Pancks in a new way with her usual fertility of resource.  'What 

appen?  Peaka Padrona!' 

'I have seen some one,' returned Baptist.  'I have rincontrato 

him.' 

him again.' 

'Ow you know him bad?' asked Mrs Plornish. 

Pancks with mild condescension, 'that he has met a bad man, but he 

hopes the bad man didn't see him--Why,' inquired Mrs Plornish, 

reverting to the Italian language, 'why ope bad man no see?' 

considerately protected, 'do not ask, I pray.  Once again I say it 

I do not wish to be known of him--never again!  Enough, most 

beautiful.  Leave it.' 

liveliness to the rout, that Mrs Plornish forbore to press him 

the hob.  But she was not the less surprised and curious for asking 

no more questions; neither was Mr Pancks, whose expressive 

incline.  Maggy, now better dressed than of yore, though still 

background from the first with open mouth and eyes, which staring 

though much appeared to be thought on all sides: by no means 

excepting the two young Plornishes, who partook of the evening meal 

as if their eating the bread and butter were rendered almost 

degrees began to chirp a little; but never stirred from the seat he 

not his usual place.  As often as the little bell rang, he started 

and peeped out secretly, with the end of the little curtain in his 

hand and the rest before his face; evidently not at all satisfied 

but that the man he dreaded had tracked him through all his 

doublings and turnings, with the certainty of a terrible 

bloodhound. 

dutiful proposal that her father should favour them with Chloe, 

when the bell rang again, and Mr Clennam came in. 

had received another letter from Miss Dorrit. 

attention from Mr Baptist.  Maggy, who pushed her way into the 

foreground immediately, would have seemed to draw in the tidings of 

that the last were obstructed by tears.  She was particularly 

very kindly conducted hospitals, in Rome.  Mr Pancks rose into new 

Everybody was pleased and interested, and Clennam was well repaid 

for his trouble. 

'But you are tired, sir.  Let me make you a cup of tea,' said Mrs 

kindly.' 

personal acknowledgments, tendered them in the form which always 

expressed his highest ideal of a combination of ceremony with 

sincerity. 

gentleman.  'Sir.  It's not too often that you see unpretending 

live to want 'em, it follows serve you right.' 

the same as mine, and therefore no more words and not being 

backwards with that opinion, which opinion giving it as yes, 

unanimously jined by all, and where there is not difference of 

Thomas, no !' 

high appreciation of so very slight an attention on his part; and 

straight home to refresh after a long day's labour, or he would 

have readily accepted the hospitable offer.  As Mr Pancks was 

by asking that gentleman if he would walk with him?  Mr Pancks said 

Cottage. 

into the street, 'and will share what dinner or supper there is, it 

sorts to-night.' 

want it done, and I'll do it.' 

and accord had been always improving since Mr Pancks flew over Mr 

Rugg's back in the Marshalsea Yard.  When the carriage drove away 

on the memorable day of the family's departure, these two had 

When the first letter came from little Dorrit, nobody was more 

that moment in Clennam's breast-pocket, particularly remembered him 

by name.  Though he had never before made any profession or 

was becoming attached to him.  All these strings intertwining made 

Pancks a very cable of anchorage that night. 

business, and you shall do just as you like.' 

now; did you?' said Pancks. 

'No.  Why?' 

has gone amiss with him to-day.  Have you any idea of any cause 

that can have overset him?' 

them. 

I think,' said Clennam.  'I have found him in every way so 

diligent, so grateful (for little enough), and so trustworthy, that 

proprietor, Mr Clennam.  You're much too delicate.' 

'For the matter of that,' returned Clennam laughing, 'I have not a 

large proprietary share in Cavalletto.  His carving is his 

livelihood.  He keeps the keys of the Factory, watches it every 

alternate night, and acts as a sort of housekeeper to it generally; 

but we have little work in the way of his ingenuity, though we give 

him what we have.  No!  I am rather his adviser than his 

be nearer the fact.  Speaking of being his banker, is it not 

people's heads, should run even in little Cavalletto's?' 

'Ventures?' retorted Pancks, with a snort.  'What ventures?' 

speaking of investments.' 

His quick way of replying caused Clennam to look at him, with a 

doubt whether he meant more than he said.  As it was accompanied, 

in the labouring of his machinery, Arthur did not pursue the 

matter, and they soon arrived at his house. 

Pancks's works in a highly effective manner; so that when Clennam 

produced his Eastern pipe, and handed Mr Pancks another Eastern 

pipe, the latter gentleman was perfectly comfortable. 

her favour.  He was the first to speak, and he spoke thus: 

why. 

head?  Eh?' said Pancks as he smoked.  'Wasn't that how you put 

it?' 

all meeting me with it, on my collecting days, here and there and 

everywhere.  Whether they pay, or whether they don't pay.  Merdle, 

Merdle, Merdle.  Always Merdle.' 

Arthur. 

see these people don't understand the subject.' 

'Not a bit,' cried Pancks.  'Know nothing of figures.  Know nothing 

of money questions.  Never made a calculation.  Never worked it, 

sir!' 

without change of countenance, produced a sound so far surpassing 

all his usual efforts, nasal or bronchial, that he stopped. 

the interruption. 

had?' 

of having been from the commencement of the conversation loaded 

They don't mean to be, but they're right.' 

Merdle?' 

calculations.  I've worked it.  They're safe and genuine.'  

and steadily at Clennam while inhaling and exhaling too. 

infection with which he was laden.  It is the manner of 

about. 

you would put that thousand pounds of yours, let us say, for 

instance, out at this kind of interest?' 

another long sagacious look at Clennam. 

man of immense resources--enormous capital--government influence.  

the fire gravely.  'You surprise me!' 

to do yourself!  Why don't you do as I do?' 

have told than if he had unconsciously taken a fever.  Bred at 

first, as many physical diseases are, in the wickedness of men, and 

then disseminated in their ignorance, these epidemics, after a 

period, get communicated to many sufferers who are neither ignorant 

himself from a subject of this class; but in this category he 

more virulent. 

word, 'your thousand pounds, Pancks?' 

'And only wish it ten!' 

night; the one, his partner's long-deferred hope; the other, what 

he had seen and heard at his mother's.  In the relief of having 

acceleration of force, to his point of departure. 

subject, after an interval of silent looking at the fire through 

the smoke of his pipe, he told Pancks how and why he was occupied 

with the great National Department.  'A hard case it has been, and 

a hard case it is on Doyce,' he finished by saying, with all the 

honest feeling the topic roused in him. 

Clennam?' 

'Manage the money part of the business?' 

workman.  He looks to you, sir.' 

no experience, I doubt if I am fit for it, I am growing old.' 

and series of snorts and puffs, engendered in Mr Pancks's 

astonishment at, and utter rejection of, the idea, that his being 

quite in earnest could not be questioned. 

hear him!' 

less than in these exclamations, to entertain the sentiment for a 

took place between the breath he jerked out of himself and the 

smoke he jerked into himself.  This abandonment of the second topic 

threw him on the third. 

favourable pause, 'I am in a very anxious and uncertain state; a 

state that even leads me to doubt whether anything now seeming to 

Shall I put a great trust in you?' 

convincing.  Arthur shook the hand warmly. 

never alluding to his mother by name, but speaking vaguely of a 

relation of his, confided to Mr Pancks a broad outline of the 

Mr Pancks listened with such interest that, regardless of the 

irons, and occupied his hands during the whole recital in so 

looked, when it came to a conclusion, like a journeyman Hamlet in 

conversation with his father's spirit. 

you never committed.  That's you.  A man must be himself.  But I 

say this, fearing you may want money to save your own blood from 

exposure and disgrace--make as much as you can!' 

Arthur shook his head, but looked at him thoughtfully too. 

concentration of all his energies on the advice.  'Be as rich as 

sake of others.  Take time by the forelock.  Poor Mr Doyce (who 

upon you.  You don't know what depends upon you.' 

to-night.  Why should you leave all the gains to the gluttons, 

doing it.  When I say you, I mean such men as you.  You know you 

are.  Why, I see it every day of my life.  I see nothing else.  

It's my business to see it.  Therefore I say,' urged Pancks, 'Go in 

and win!' 

Name up everywhere--immense resources--enormous capital--great 

utmost persuasion; reclaimed the pipe from the fire-irons, filled 

it anew, and smoked it out.  They said little more; but were 

he had shaken hands with Clennam, worked completely round him 

assurance that he might implicitly rely on Pancks, if he ever 

should come to need assistance; either in any of the matters of 

in any way affect himself. 

on other things, he thought of Mr Pancks's investment of his 

Department, and of the delight it would be to him to see Doyce 

better off.  He thought of the darkly threatening place that went 

by the name of Home in his remembrance, and of the gathering 

at his desk a couple of hours, without having it presented to one 

think it was curious too that it should be everywhere, and that 

nobody but he should seem to have any mistrust of it.  Though 

mistrust it; he had only happened to keep aloof from it. 

signs of sickening. 

CHAPTER 14 

When it became known to the Britons on the shore of the yellow 

of the Lords of their Circumlocution Office, they took it as a 

name was good enough for it; some, and these the more solemn 

political oracles, said that Decimus did wisely to strengthen 

himself, and that the sole constitutional purpose of all places 

to this article of faith; but their objection was purely 

theoretical.  In a practical point of view, they listlessly 

unknown, somewhere, or nowhere.  In like manner, at home, great 

numbers of Britons maintained, for as long as four-and-twenty 

consecutive hours, that those invisible and anonymous Britons 

'ought to take it up;' and that if they quietly acquiesced in it, 

they deserved it.  But of what class the remiss Britons were 

composed, and where the unlucky creatures hid themselves, and why 

they hid themselves, and how it constantly happened that they 

a loss to account for their not looking after those interests, was 

not, either upon the shore of the yellow Tiber or the shore of the 

black Thames, made apparent to men. 

it, with a careless grace that displayed it to advantage, as the 

place.  Mr Merdle wished him to take it, and he had taken it.  She 

was no denying that the thing was a compliment to Mr Merdle, and 

was not a bad thing for Edmund if he liked it.  It was just as well 

he should have something for doing it.  Whether it would be more 

agreeable to Edmund than the army, remained to be seen. 

of small account, and really enhancing them in the process.  While 

Henry Gowan, whom Decimus had thrown away, went through the whole 

altogether most lovable jackass that ever grazed on the public 

common; and that only one circumstance could have delighted him 

and that would have been his (Gowan's) getting it himself.  He said 

he would draw it charmingly; it was a delightful, appropriate, 

stop here.  He took pains, on all social occasions, to draw Mr 

Sparkler out, and make him conspicuous before the company; and, 

although the considerate action always resulted in that young 

gentleman's making a dreary and forlorn mental spectacle of 

himself, the friendly intention was not to be doubted. 

Sparkler's affections.  Miss Fanny was now in the difficult 

situation of being universally known in that light, and of not 

being by no means deficient in quickness, she sometimes came to his 

rescue against Gowan, and did him very good service.  But, while 

of him or more decidedly encourage him, distracted with 

apprehensions that she was every day becoming more and more 

Merdle triumphed in her distress.  With this tumult in her mind, it 

is no subject for surprise that Miss Fanny came home one night in 

sister away from the toilette-table at which she sat angrily trying 

to cry, and declared with a heaving bosom that she detested 

everybody, and she wished she was dead. 

idea of daring to pretend to assert that you have eyes in your 

head, and yet ask me what's the matter!' 

were the last subject in the Solar system that could possibly be 

near her mind.  'No, Miss Bat, it is not.' 

sister names; declaring with sobs that she knew she made herself 

hateful, but that everybody drove her to it. 

'I don't think you are well to-night, dear Fanny.' 

no boast of it.' 

remain quiet.  At first, Fanny took this ill, too; protesting to 

her looking-glass, that of all the trying sisters a girl could 

she knew she was at times a wretched temper; that she knew she made 

do her half the good as being told so; but that, being afflicted 

with a flat sister, she never WAS told so, and the consequence 

resulted that she was absolutely tempted and goaded into making 

herself disagreeable.  Besides (she angrily told her looking- 

glass), she didn't want to be forgiven.  It was not a right 

sister came and sat close at her side to comfort her, said, 'Amy, 

you're an Angel!' 

cannot and shall not go on as they are at present going on, and 

that there must be an end of this, one way or another.' 

Dorrit returned, 'Let us talk about it.' 

me.  Will you advise me, my sweet child?' 

well as I can.' 

anchor.' 

bottle of sweet toilette water from the table, and called to her 

forehead from time to time to cool them. 

sufficiently different (kiss me again, my darling), to make it very 

we labour, socially speaking, under disadvantages.  You don't quite 

understand what I mean, Amy?' 

more.' 

into fashionable life.' 

admiration, 'no one need find that out in you.' 

'But you are,' resumed Fanny, 'as is well known, the dearest little 

thing that ever was!  To resume, my child.  Pa is extremely 

gentlemanly and extremely well informed, but he is, in some 

trifling respects, a little different from other gentlemen of his 

partly, I fancy, on account of its often running in his mind that 

other people are thinking about that, while he is talking to them.  

Uncle, my love, is altogether unpresentable.  Though a dear 

shocking.  Edward is frightfully expensive and dissipated.  I don't 

mean that there is anything ungenteel in that itself--far from it-- 

but I do mean that he doesn't do it well, and that he doesn't, if 

I may so express myself, get the money's-worth in the sort of 

dissipated reputation that attaches to him.' 

in the sigh. 

who WILL catch mice.  That woman, I am quite sure and confident, 

will be our mother-in-law.' 

better.'  Feeling that she had been sharp again, she dabbed her 

spirited, Amy, as you very well know: too much so, I dare say) 

whether I shall make up my mind to take it upon myself to carry the 

family through.' 

'How?' asked her sister, anxiously. 

Merdle.' 

sweet water, with a still more anxious look.  Fanny, quite 

punishing her own forehead with the vehement dabs she now began to 

give it, fitfully went on. 

him enough.' 

any one, you would no more be yourself, but you would quite lose 

and forget yourself in your devotion to him.  If you loved him, 

fixedly. 

certainly seem to have hit upon yours, Amy.  There, you little 

thing, I was only in fun,' dabbing her sister's forehead; 'but 

don't you be a silly puss, and don't you think flightily and 

back to myself.' 

Mr Sparkler.' 

have not the slightest intention of doing so to-night, my dear, or 

to-morrow morning either.' 

indifference.  Then, suddenly changing her indifference into a 

you little thing!  It's all very fine and easy to talk about the 

clever men; but where are they?  I don't see them anywhere near 

me!' 

our situation.  I don't like our situation, and very little would 

induce me to change it.  Other girls, differently reared and 

differently circumstanced altogether, might wonder at what I say or 

I am driven by mine.' 

the wife of one very superior to Mr Sparkler.' 

I can assert myself with greater effect against that insolent 

woman.' 

son?' 

make it the business of my life.' 

the room; always stopping and standing still while she spoke. 

And I would!' 

should hear me say, Amy: affectionately, quite dutifully and 

I could make her seem older at once, by being myself so much 

younger.  I may not be as handsome as she is; I am not a fair judge 

a thorn in her side.  And I would be!' 

this?' 

is no matter; I am better fitted for such a life than for almost 

any other.' 

short proud laugh she took another walk, and after passing a great 

looking-glass came to another stop. 

not so sure of it.  Give some much younger woman the latitude as to 

dear!' 

her back to her seat in a gayer temper.  She took her sister's 

looked in her sister's face laughing: 

to such a tune as would disturb her insolent placidity a little.  

just a little, my dear Amy, just a little!' 

the four hands down, and laid only one on Amy's lips. 

than you do.  I have not nearly made up my mind, but it may be.  

Now we have talked this over comfortably, and may go to bed.  You 

best and dearest little mouse, Good night!'  With those words Fanny 

weighed her Anchor, and--having taken so much advice--left off 

being advised for that occasion. 

enslaver, with new reasons for attaching importance to all that 

passed between them.  There were times when Fanny appeared quite 

sharply impatient of it that she would all but dismiss him for 

good.  There were other times when she got on much better with him; 

when he amused her, and when her sense of superiority seemed to 

was sufficiently hard pressed to have fled from the scene of his 

London between himself and his enchantress.  But he had no greater 

and he followed his cruel mistress through rough and smooth, on 

equally strong compulsion. 

(as it generally happened that she did), was not expressive of 

concessions to the impartial bosom; but the utmost revenge the 

bosom took was, to say audibly, 'A spoilt beauty--but with that 

face and shape, who could wonder?' 

new understanding between Mr Sparkler and Fanny.  Mr Sparkler, as 

looking towards Fanny for leave.  That young lady was too discreet 

ever to look back again; but, if Mr Sparkler had permission to 

speak, she remained silent; if he had not, she herself spoke.  

Moreover, it became plain whenever Henry Gowan attempted to perform 

a sting in it that Gowan would draw back as if he had put his hand 

into a bee-hive. 

Little Dorrit in her fears, though it was not a great circumstance 

became fraternal.  Sometimes, when she was in the outer circle of 

assemblies--at their own residence, at Mrs Merdle's, or elsewhere-- 

Sparkler's arm.  Mr Sparkler never offered the slightest 

explanation of this attention; but merely smiled with an air of 

heavy a gentleman, was ominously expressive. 

heavy heart.  They had a room at one end of their drawing-room 

suite, nearly all irregular bay-window, projecting over the street, 

and commanding all the picturesque life and variety of the Corso, 

English time, the view from this window was very bright and 

peculiar; and Little Dorrit used to sit and muse here, much as she 

out at it, leaning on the brilliant colour.  But there was no 

procession that day, and Little Dorrit was rather surprised by 

Fanny's being at home at that hour, as she was generally out on 

horseback then. 

'I was thinking of you, Fanny.' 

were not thinking of this some one else too; were you, Amy?' 

felt the fraternal railing come behind her, and apparently stretch 

on to include Fanny. 

know what this means?' 

'and there's no nonsense about her--it's arranged--' 

said.' 

to say a word to Amy.' 

there was a girl, next to your highly endowed and beautiful sister, 

who had no nonsense about her--' 

nonsense about us.' 

girl who hasn't an atom of--' 

pretty foot upon the floor. 

a greater happiness to myself, myself-next to the happiness of 

being united to pre-eminently the most glorious of girls--than to 

not; but on the subject of Amy I am up to the mark!' 

growing, in comparison with his oratorical antecedents, quite 

will always be proud to entertain one whom I so much esteem.  And 

woman, with--' 

habit of it, and I thank you very much, my adorable girl, for 

taking the trouble to correct it; but my mother is admitted on all 

mention it any more.' 

inquired Fanny. 

apologise for having said so much.' 

railing, and neatly said that he thought he would, with submission, 

as well as she could discharge that office in the flutter and 

distress of her spirits. 

there.  Fanny laughed at first; but soon laid her face against her 

sister's and cried too--a little.  It was the last time Fanny ever 

showed that there was any hidden, suppressed, or conquered feeling 

in her on the matter.  From that hour the way she had chosen lay 

before her, and she trod it with her own imperious self-willed 

step. 

CHAPTER 15 

     should not be joined together 

accepted matrimonial overtures from Mr Sparkler, to whom she had 

dignity and with a large display of parental pride; his dignity 

which to make acquaintances, and his parental pride being developed 

by Miss Fanny's ready sympathy with that great object of his 

existence.  He gave her to understand that her noble ambition found 

aggrandisement of the family name. 

Fanny, and as opening a family connection of a gratifying nature 

a leading lady rich in distinction, elegance, grace, and beauty, he 

mentioned in very laudatory terms.  He felt it his duty to remark 

(he was sure a gentleman of Mr Sparkler's fine sense would 

interpret him with all delicacy), that he could not consider this 

proposal definitely determined on, until he should have had the 

privilege of holding some correspondence with Mr Merdle; and of 

ascertaining it to be so far accordant with the views of that 

eminent gentleman as that his (Mr Dorrit's) daughter would be 

and expectations warranted him in requiring that she should 

maintain in what he trusted he might be allowed, without the 

While saying this, which his character as a gentleman of some 

little station, and his character as a father, equally demanded of 

and to his family.  He concluded with some further and more general 

much as he would have received three or four half-crowns from him 

in the days that were gone. 

same being neither more nor less than that he had long perceived 

of his affections shut him up like a box with a spring lid, and 

sent him away. 

because she had not thought Edmund a marrying man.  Society had not 

thought Edmund a marrying man.  Still, of course she had seen, as 

that Edmund had been immensely captivated by Miss Dorrit, and she 

had openly said that Mr Dorrit had much to answer for in bringing 

so charming a girl abroad to turn the heads of his countrymen. 

direction which Mr Sparkler's affections have taken, is--ha- 

approved of by you?' 

'I assure you, Mr Dorrit,' returned the lady, 'that, personally, I 

am charmed.' 

express his hope that Mr Merdle's approval, too, would not be 

wanting? 

calls capitalists, having their own ideas of these matters.  But I 

Mr Merdle would be upon the whole,' here she held a review of 

herself before adding at her leisure, 'quite charmed.' 

Dorrit had coughed, as if some internal demur were breaking out of 

that remark, except in the mere openness of saying what is 

indeed that circumstances have made it Mr Merdle's accidental 

'but I am afraid, Mr Dorrit, it may have that tendency.' 

cough.  He remarked with his utmost politeness, that he must beg to 

protest against its being supposed, even by Mrs Merdle, the 

puny undertakings of the rest of men, had any lower tendency than 

best smile; 'let us hope so.  But I confess I am almost 

superstitious in my ideas about business.' 

business, like the time which was precious in it, was made for 

which was one of her best effects. 

always taken the greatest interest in Edmund, and has always 

public position, I think you know.  His private position rests 

solely 

you I know no more.' 

business was below the ken of enslavers and enchantresses.  He then 

Mr Merdle.  Mrs Merdle concurred with all her heart--or with all 

a preparatory letter by the next post to the eighth wonder of the 

world. 

subject with flourishes, as writing-masters embellish copy-books 

and ciphering-books: where the titles of the elementary rules of 

arithmetic diverge into swans, eagles, griffins, and other 

calligraphic recreations, and where the capital letters go out of 

their minds and bodies into ecstasies of pen and ink.  

Nevertheless, he did render the purport of his letter sufficiently 

it was soon announced that the corresponding powers had come to a 

satisfactory understanding. 

Now, and not before, Miss Fanny burst upon the scene, completely 

arrayed for her new part.  Now and not before, she wholly absorbed 

Mr Sparkler in her light, and shone for both, and twenty more.  No 

caused her so much trouble, this fair ship began to steer steadily 

on a shaped course, and to swim with a weight and balance that 

developed her sailing qualities. 

General--' 

don't see what Mrs General has got to do with it.' 

a lady, well bred and refined--' 

papa,' said Fanny.  'I am tired of Mrs General.' 

Mrs General.' 

what she has to do with my marriage.  Let her keep to her own 

matrimonial projects--if she has any.' 

him, contrasting strongly with his daughter's levity: 'I beg the 

favour of your explaining--ha--what it is you mean.' 

enough to occupy her spare time.  And that if she has not, so much 

the better; but still I don't wish to have the honour of making 

announcements to her.' 

retorted Fanny.  'She is watchful enough, I dare say.  I think I 

have seen her so.  Let her find it out for herself.  If she should 

not find it out for herself, she will know it when I am married.  

papa, if I say it strikes me that will be quite enough for Mrs 

General.' 

towards--ha--Mrs General.' 

because I assure you I do not consider Mrs General worth my 

animosity.' 

him, and now looking from him, said, 'Very well, papa.  I am truly 

sorry if you don't like it; but I can't help it.  I am not a child, 

and I am not Amy, and I must speak.' 

exemplary lady, who is--hum--a trusted member of this family, the-- 

ha--the change that is contemplated among us; if I--ha--not only 

request it, but--hum--insist upon it--' 

hope I may have my thoughts upon the subject, however, for I really 

cannot help it under the circumstances.'So, Fanny sat down 

with a meekness which, in the junction of extremes, became 

knowing what to answer, summoned Mr Tinkler into his presence. 

and all its testimonials in the pause, instantly flew at him with, 

'How dare you, sir?  What do you mean?' 

know--' 

mockery, sir.' 

domestic.  You are guilty of mockery.  You shall leave me--hum--the 

compliments to Mrs General, and I beg the favour of her coming to 

me, if quite convenient, for a few minutes.  Those are your 

orders.' 

Mr Dorrit was in a raging fume.  However that was, Mrs General's 

they settled down at the door and swept into the room with their 

customary coolness. 

into the chair which Mr Dorrit offered. 

undertake the--hum--formation of my daughters, and as I am 

persuaded that nothing nearly affecting them can--ha--be 

indifferent to you--' 

present--' 

made a very low inclination of her head to Mrs General, and came 

loftily upright again. 

Sparkler, with whom you are acquainted.  Hence, madam, you will be 

relieved of half your difficult charge--ha--difficult charge.'  Mr 

to the--hum--diminution of any other portion, direct or indirect, 

of the footing you have at present the kindness to occupy in my 

family.' 

too appreciative of my friendly services.' 

which the circumstances admitted, and I trust will allow me to 

offer her my sincere congratulations.  When free from the trammels 

of passion,' Mrs General closed her eyes at the word, as if she 

could not utter it, and see anybody; 'when occurring with the 

approbation of near relatives; and when cementing the proud 

congratulations.' 

her face, 'Papa, potatoes, poultry, Prunes, and prism.' 

the attention, and I will add distinction, of having this 

congratulations, are equally the meed of Mr Dorrit and of Miss 

Dorrit.' 

I hardly know what I should have done,' said Fanny, 'if you had 

interposed any objection, Mrs General.' 

uppermost and the left undermost, with a Prunes and Prism smile. 

the smile with one in which there was no trace of those 

ingredients, 'will of course be the highest object of my married 

life; to lose it, would of course be perfect wretchedness.  I am 

The best of us are so liable to mistakes, that even you, Mrs 

General, have fallen into a little error.  The attention and 

proceed from me.  The merit of having consulted you on the subject 

would have been so great in me, that I feel I must not lay claim to 

obliged to you for your encouragement and patronage, but it was 

papa who asked for it.  I have to thank you, Mrs General, for 

relieving my breast of a great weight by so handsomely giving your 

consent to my engagement, but you have really nothing to thank me 

object of your condescension, Mrs General.' 

With this address, which was delivered in her politest manner, 

stairs with a flushed face as soon as she was out of hearing, 

for the better opening of her eyes, tell her what had passed below, 

and ask her what she thought of Pa now? 

Towards Mrs Merdle, the young lady comported herself with great 

independence and self-possession; but not as yet with any more 

skirmish, as when Fanny considered herself patted on the back by 

and finding her attention otherwise engaged.  Society (for that 

vastly improved by her engagement.  She was much more accessible, 

much more free and engaging, much less exacting; insomuch that she 

now entertained a host of followers and admirers, to the bitter 

indignation of ladies with daughters to marry, who were to be 

regarded as Having revolted from Society on the Miss Dorrit 

she caused.  Miss Dorrit not only haughtily moved through it in her 

own proper person, but haughtily, even Ostentatiously, led Mr 

Sparkler through it too: seeming to say to them all, 'If I think 

proper to march among you in triumphal procession attended by this 

part, questioned nothing; but went wherever he was taken, did 

whatever he was told, felt that for his bride-elect to be 

and was truly grateful for being so openly acknowledged. 

England, and take his appointed part in the expression and 

direction of its genius, learning, commerce, spirit, and sense.  

The land of Shakespeare, Milton, Bacon, Newton, Watt, the land of 

a host of past and present abstract philosophers, natural 

called to Mr Sparkler to come and take care of it, lest it should 

depths of his country's soul, declared that he must go. 

little mystery and secrecy, Miss Fanny herself announced to her 

sister. 

I hurry to you the moment it IS broached.' 

'Your marriage, Fanny?' 

no.  For really it is not my marriage that is in question, half as 

much as it is Edmund's.' 

somewhat at a loss to understand this fine distinction. 

not wanted at any public office, or to give any vote anywhere else. 

away by himself, and, indeed, I don't like that he should be 

trusted by himself.  For, if it's possible--and it generally is--to 

do a foolish thing, he is sure to do it.' 

of business, the bonnet she wore, and dangled it by its strings 

upon the ground. 

himself, or is he not to go by himself, this other point arises, 

are we to be married here and shortly, or are we to be married at 

home months hence?' 

That woman,' she spoke of Mrs Merdle, of course, 'remains here 

until after Easter; so, in the case of my being married here and 

going to London with Edmund, I should have the start of her.  That 

is something.  Further, Amy.  That woman being out of the way, I 

Edmund and I should take up our abode in that house -.you know-- 

where you once went with a dancer, my dear, until our own house can 

be chosen and fitted up.  Further still, Amy.  Papa having always 

intended to go to town himself, in the spring,--you see, if Edmund 

and I were married here, we might go off to Florence, where papa 

might join us, and we might all three travel home together.  Mr 

Merdle has entreated Pa to stay with him in that same mansion I 

actions; and upon that point (which is not at all material) I can't 

speak positively.' 

Fanny in her manner of stating the case.  Not that her sister 

noticed it; for she was divided between regret at the coming 

plans for visiting England. 

little trying.  You know I particularly guarded myself against 

laying my words open to any such construction.  What I said was, 

that certain questions present themselves; and these are the 

questions.' 

strings with considerable impatience, 'it's no use staring.  A 

you advise me to do?' 

hesitation, 'do you think, Fanny, that if you were to put it off 

for a few months, it might be, considering all things, best?' 

'I don't think anything of the kind.' 

a chair.  But, becoming affectionate almost immediately, she 

sister, chair and all, in her arms. 

not.  But you are such a little oddity!  You make one bite your 

head off, when one wants to be soothing beyond everything.  Didn't 

I tell you, you dearest baby, that Edmund can't be trusted by 

himself?  And don't you know that he can't?' 

child!  If he is not to be trusted by himself, it follows, I 

suppose, that I should go with him?' 

'It--seems so, love,' said Little Dorrit. 

carry out that object, am I to understand, dearest Amy, that on the 

whole you advise me to make them?' 

suppose it must be done!  I came to you, my sweet, the moment I saw 

the doubt, and the necessity of deciding.  I have now decided.  So 

let it be.' 

advice and the force of circumstances, Fanny became quite 

benignant: as one who had laid her own inclinations at the feet of 

the sacrifice.  'After all, my Amy,' she said to her sister, 'you 

are the best of small creatures, and full of good sense; and I 

don't know what I shall ever do without you!' 

fond one. 

I hope we shall ever be next to inseparable.  And now, my pet, I am 

with Mrs General--' 

quietly. 

call Edward company, which he certainly is not, even when he is 

here, and still more certainly is not when he is away at Naples or 

in Sicily.  I was going to say--but you are such a beloved little 

General, Amy, don't you let her slide into any sort of artful 

understanding with you that she is looking after Pa, or that Pa is 

feeling her way with those gloves of hers.  But don't you 

comprehend her on any account.  And if Pa should tell you when he 

your mama (which is not the less likely because I am going away), 

my advice to you is, that you say at once," Papa, I beg to object 

Amy, is likely to be of the smallest effect, or that I think you 

likely to make it with any degree of firmness.  But there is a 

principle involved--a filial principle--and I implore you not to 

in making every one about you as uncomfortable as possible.  I 

concerned--but I wish to rouse you to a sense of duty.  As to any 

match, you shall not be left in the lurch , my love.  Whatever 

devoid of attractions--used, as that position always shall be, to 

the head and false hair (for I am confident it's not all real, ugly 

as it is and unlikely as it appears that any One in their Senses 

would go to the expense of buying it) of Mrs General!' 

life and arranged her worldly affairs, Fanny proceeded with 

characteristic ardour to prepare for the serious change in her 

condition. 

under the protection of the Courier, for the purchase of that 

outfit for a bride on which it would be extremely low, in the 

present narrative, to bestow an English name, but to which (on a 

rich and beautiful wardrobe purchased by these agents, in the 

course of a few weeks made its way through the intervening country, 

bristling with custom-houses, garrisoned by an immense army of 

the ancient Belisarius: and of whom there were so many Legions, 

that unless the Courier had expended just one bushel and a half of 

Through all such dangers, however, it was triumphantly brought, 

inch by inch, and arrived at its journey's end in fine condition. 

whose gentle bosoms it awakened implacable feelings.  Concurrently, 

active preparations were made for the day on which some of its 

treasures were to be publicly displayed.  Cards of breakfast- 

invitation were sent out to half the English in the city of 

Romulus; the other half made arrangements to be under arms, as 

criticising volunteers, at various outer points of the solemnity.  

post through the deep mud and ruts (from forming a surface under 

best hotel and all its culinary myrmidons, were set to work to 

prepare the feast.  The drafts of Mr Dorrit almost constituted a 

run on the Torlonia Bank.  The British Consul hadn't had such a 

marriage in the whole of his Consularity. 

a-days.  The murderous-headed statues of the wicked Emperors of the 

away with the Bride.  The choked old fountain, where erst the 

ceremony.  The Temple of Vesta might have sprung up anew from its 

nothing.  The celebration went off with admirable pomp; monks in 

day wore on to the hour of vespers; the festival wore away; the 

thousand churches rang their bells without any reference to it; and 

St Peter denied that he had anything to do with it. 

that they were all Bride.  Nobody noticed the Bridegroom.  Nobody 

sought her.  So, the Bride had mounted into her handsome chariot, 

a few minutes smoothly over a fair pavement, had begun to jolt 

through a Slough of Despond, and through a long, long avenue of 

same road, before and since. 

of depression as the being able to sit at work by her father, as in 

the old time, and help him to his supper and his rest.  But that 

with Mrs General on the coach-box.  And as to supper!  If Mr Dorrit 

confectioner, who must have put on caps as high as the Pope's 

saucepaned laboratory below, before he could have got it. 

loving, he would have done Little Dorrit more good; but she 

accepted him as he was--when had she not accepted him as he was !-- 

and made the most and best of him.  Mrs General at length retired.  

if she felt it necessary that the human imagination should be 

platoon-exercise, she withdrew.  Little Dorrit then put her arm 

round her father's neck, to bid him good night. 

the close of a day, that has--ha--greatly impressed and gratified 

me.' 

'A little tired you, dear, too?' 

purest kind.' 

her own heart. 

good example.  With a good example, my favourite and attached child 

--hum--to you.' 

though he stopped as if he expected her to say something. 

ha--connection, and to--hum--consolidate our social relations.  My 

love, I trust that the time is not far distant when some--ha-- 

eligible partner may be found for you.' 

it like one in sudden alarm. 

and foolish.  You have a--ha--responsibility imposed upon you by 

your position.  It is to develop that position, and be--hum -- 

be taken care of, I--hum--can, with the--ha--blessing of 

think of engrossing, and--ha--as it were, sacrificing you.' 

denial; at which to make it, with an air of taking credit for it; 

at which to believe it, if such a thing could be! 

my love, take the opportunity afforded by this gratifying and 

impressive occasion of--ha--solemnly remarking, that it is now a 

cherished wish and purpose of mine to see you--ha--eligibly (I 

repeat eligibly) married.' 

character and propriety of my sentiments.  But, as I know your 

loving and dutiful nature from--hum--from experience, I am quite 

satisfied that it is necessary to say no more.  I have--hum--no 

husband to propose at present, my dear: I have not even one in 

Hum.  Good night, my dear and sole remaining daughter.  Good night. 

it in his mind to replace her with a second wife, she drove it 

she had borne him single-handed, she drove the thought away; and 

entertained no harder reflection, in her tearful unrest, than that 

he now saw everything through their wealth, and through the care he 

always had upon him that they should continue rich, and grow 

richer. 

Fanny.  Little Dorrit would have been glad to bear him company so 

far, only for the sake of her own love, and then to have turned 

gone on with the Bride, the Valet was next in the line; and the 

succession would not have come to her, as long as any one could be 

got for money. 

anything--when the Roman establishment remained in their sole 

occupation; and Little Dorrit would often ride out in a hired 

old Temples, of the old commemorative Arches, of the old trodden 

of the faces and forms that of old peopled it--ruins of its loves, 

were before the solitary girl often sitting on some broken 

them both together. 

Up, then, would come Mrs General; taking all the colour out of 

hand; looking everywhere for Mr Eustace and company, and seeing 

nothing else; scratching up the driest little bones of antiquity, 

and bolting them whole without any human visitings--like a Ghoule 

in gloves. 

CHAPTER 16 

Cavendish Square, London, were received by the Chief Butler.  That 

great man was not interested in them, but on the whole endured 

them.  People must continue to be married and given in marriage, or 

Chief Butlers would not be wanted.  As nations are made to be 

population to be kept up, on his account. 

considered as an act of homage to the sex (of which he was an 

Duchess), and not as a committal of himself with the family. 

Sparkler.  His hand seemed to retreat up his sleeve as he advanced 

to do so, and he gave her such a superfluity of coat-cuff that it 

tables as if he were his own Police officer, saying to himself, 

'Now, none of that!  Come!  I've got you, you know, and you go 

quietly along with me!' 

sanctuary of down, silk, chintz, and fine linen--felt that so far 

her triumph was good, and her way made, step by step.  On the day 

before her marriage, she had bestowed on Mrs Merdle's maid with an 

air of gracious indifference, in Mrs Merdle's presence, a trifling 

little keepsake (bracelet, bonnet, and two dresses, all new) about 

to her.  She was now established in Mrs Merdle's own rooms, to 

which some extra touches had been given to render them more worthy 

of her occupation.  In her mind's eye, as she lounged there, 

surrounded by every luxurious accessory that wealth could obtain or 

been famous so long, outshining it, and deposing it.  Happy?  Fanny 

must have been happy.  No more wishing one's self dead now. 

a friend, and had preferred to take him to an hotel in Brook 

Street, Grosvenor Square.  Mr Merdle ordered his carriage to be 

ready early in the morning that he might wait upon Mr Dorrit 

immediately after breakfast. 

Bright the carriage looked, sleek the horses looked, gleaming the 

harness looked, luscious and lasting the liveries looked.  A rich, 

responsible turn-out.  An equipage for a Merdle.  Early people 

looked after it as it rattled along the streets, and said, with awe 

in their breath, 'There he goes!' 

its magnificent case came the jewel; not lustrous in itself, but 

quite the contrary. 

of thorough-bred horses into town, turned out to show him up- 

might look upon him.  Merdle!  O ye sun, moon, and stars, the great 

man!  The rich man, who had in a manner revised the New Testament, 

and already entered into the kingdom of Heaven.  The man who could 

have any one he chose to dine with him, and who had made the money! 

were the sick brought out and laid in the track of the Apostle--who 

had NOT got into the good society, and had NOT made the money. 

The Courier, with agitation in his voice, announced 'Miss 

Mairdale!'  Mr Dorrit's overwrought heart bounded as he leaped up. 

the--hum--sense, the high sense, I entertain of this--ha hum-- 

highly gratifying act of attention.  I am well aware, sir, of the 

many demands upon your time, and its--ha--enormous value,' Mr 

Dorrit could not say enormous roundly enough for his own 

satisfaction.  'That you should--ha--at this early hour, bestow any 

of your priceless time upon me, is--ha--a compliment that I 

acknowledge with the greatest esteem.'  Mr Dorrit positively 

trembled in addressing the great man. 

glad to see you, sir.' 

the visitor was seated, and was passing his great hand over his 

exhausted forehead.  'You are well, I hope, Mr Merdle?' 

Merdle. 

me,' said Mr Merdle, looking round the room. 

train of gunpowder had been fired there; and he looked like a man 

hand over his forehead, had prompted Mr Dorrit's solicitous 

inquiries. 

admired of all admirers, the leading fascination and charm of 

Society in Rome.  She was looking wonderfully well when I quitted 

it.' 

being SO.' 

principally under the chairs. 

and immediately afterwards dropping his eyes to the buttons of Mr 

Dorrit's waistcoat; 'if we speak of attractions, your daughter 

ought to be the subject of our conversation.  She is extremely 

beautiful.  Both in face and figure, she is quite uncommon.  When 

the young people arrived last night, I was really surprised to see 

such charms.' 

letter, what honour and happiness he felt in this union of their 

families.  And he offered his hand.  Mr Merdle looked at the hand 

for a little while, took it on his for a moment as if his were a 

yellow salver or fish-slice, and then returned it to Mr Dorrit. 

'to offer my services, in case I can do anything for you; and to 

me to-day, and every day when you are not better engaged during 

your stay in town.' 

exceeding a fortnight.' 

Merdle. 

Merdle, that I find a foreign life so well suited to my health and 

taste, that I--hum--have but two objects in my present visit to 

London.  First, the--ha--the distinguished happiness and--ha -- 

privilege which I now enjoy and appreciate; secondly, the 

of--ha, hum--my money.' 

can be of any use to you in that respect, you may command me.' 

so exalted a potentate might take it.  He had doubts whether 

wretchedly retail affair to so wholesale a dealer.  Greatly 

it directly, and heaped acknowledgments upon him. 

hum--rest of the civilised world, have followed in Mr Merdle's 

train.' 

curiously interested in the pattern of the carpet, 'and, therefore, 

you may consider me at your service.' 

handsome!' 

what I may call a mere outsider to come into any of the good 

things--of course I speak of my own good things--' 

there were no other good things. 

'--Unless at a high price.  At what we are accustomed to term a 

very long figure.' 

figure.  Good.  Ha.  Very expressive to be sure! 

the power of exercising some preference--people in general would be 

trouble.' 

'And public spirit and genius,' Mr Dorrit suggested. 

those qualities like a bolus; then added, 'As a sort of return for 

it.  I will see, if you please, how I can exert this limited power 

(for people are jealous, and it is limited), to your advantage.' 

'You are very good,' replied Mr Dorrit.  'You are very good.' 

and uprightness in these transactions; there must be the purest 

faith between man and man; there must be unimpeached and 

unimpeachable confidence; or business could not be carried on.' 

a certain extent.' 

it is--' 

appearance of its being depreciated, even by Mr Merdle himself.) 

myself and my fellow-man to prevent my parting with, if I choose.  

was passing the windows, 'shall be at your command whenever you 

think proper.' 

hand over his forehead.  Calm and silence.  Contemplation of Mr 

Dorrit's waistcoat buttons by Mr Merdle. 

up, as if he had been waiting in the interval for his legs and they 

anywhere, sir?  I shall be happy to set you down, or send you on.  

My carriage is at your disposal.' 

His banker's was in the City.  That was fortunate; Mr Merdle would 

while he assumed his coat?  Yes, he might and must; Mr Merdle 

insisted on it.  So Mr Dorrit, retiring into the next room, put 

glorious. 

flew off grey heads; and the general bowing and crouching before 

this wonderful mortal the like of which prostration of spirit was 

not to be seen--no, by high Heaven, no!  It may be worth thinking 

of by Fawners of all denominations--in Westminster Abbey and Saint 

Paul's Cathedral put together, on any Sunday in the year.  It was 

a rapturous dream to Mr Dorrit to find himself set aloft in this 

public car of triumph, making a magnificent progress to that 

befitting destination, the golden Street of the Lombards. 

leaving his poor equipage at Mr Dorrit's disposition.  So the dream 

glibly along, 'A wonderful man to be Mr Merdle's friend!' 

provided for, a brilliant company of such as are not made of the 

dust of the earth, but of some superior article for the present 

unknown, shed their lustrous benediction upon Mr Dorrit's 

so well that Mr Dorrit could all but have taken his affidavit, if 

required, that Mrs Sparkler had all her life been lying at full 

word in the English tongue as Marshalsea. 

Bar, Bishop, Treasury, Chorus, Everybody, wanted to make or improve 

forward indeed. 

looking at the dinners, in a manner that Mr Dorrit considered 

questionable.  He looked at him, as he passed through the hall and 

Dorrit did not like.  Seated at table in the act of drinking, Mr 

cold and ghostly eye.  It misgave him that the Chief Butler must 

have known a Collegian, and must have seen him in the College-- 

perhaps had been presented to him.  He looked as closely at the 

recall that he had ever seen him elsewhere.  Ultimately he was 

inclined to think that there was no reverence in the man, no 

supercilious eye, even when that eye was on the plate and other 

that this confinement in his eye was disagreeable, or to ask him 

what he meant, was an act too daring to venture upon; his severity 

with his employers and their visitors being terrific, and he never 

permitting himself to be approached with the slightest liberty. 

CHAPTER 17 

(whose victims were always dressed expressly for him), when one of 

Dorrit, taking it, read: 

'Mrs Finching.' 

The servant waited in speechless deference. 

Dorrit, perhaps avenging himself on the Chief Butler by Substitute. 

'A lady, sir.' 

I know no Finching of either sex.' 

unknown by name.  But she begged me to say, sir, that she had 

said, sir, the youngest Miss Dorrit.' 

man were solely responsible for it, 'that she can come up.' 

admitted she might leave some message, or might say something 

below, having a disgraceful reference to that former state of 

existence.  Hence the concession, and hence the appearance of 

Flora, piloted in by the man, man. 

have been a first-class pleasure if he had had it, 'of knowing 

Flora, putting aside her veil with a bashful tremor upon her, 

proceeded to introduce herself.  At the same time a singular 

combination of perfumes was diffused through the room, as if some 

some lavender-water had been put by mistake in a brandy-bottle. 

F.'s Aunt would have willingly accompanied me and as a character of 

such a knowledge of life as no doubt with so many changes must have 

educated in the neighbourhood of Blackheath at as high as eighty 

guineas which is a good deal for parents and the plate kept back 

he had learnt more in his first years as a commercial traveller 

hear of much less buy which preceded the wine trade a long time 

Bachelor, though why a Bachelor more clever than a married man I do 

not see and never did but pray excuse me that is not the point.' 

having known the dear little thing which under altered 

herself but quite the other way and as to anything lowering in it 

far from it the labourer is worthy of his hire and I am sure I only 

wish he got it oftener and more animal food and less rheumatism in 

the back and legs poor soul.' 

as the relict of the late Mr Finching stopped to take hers; 

to refer to--ha--to anything in the antecedents of--hum--a daughter 

of mine, involving--ha hum--daily compensation, madam, I beg to 

observe that the--ha--fact, assuming it--ha--to be fact, never was 

within my knowledge.  Hum.  I should not have permitted it.  Ha.  

Never!  Never!' 

have mentioned it on any account except as supposing it a 

much too fat though how to bring it down I know not, pray excuse me 

I am roving off again.' 

though not a freehold still a long lease at a peppercorn on the 

morning when Arthur--foolish habit of our youthful days and Mr 

Clennam far more adapted to existing circumstances particularly 

station--communicated the glad tidings imparted by a person of name 

of Pancks emboldens me.' 

frowned again, hesitated with his fingers at his lips, as he had 

hesitated long ago, and said, 'Do me the favour to--ha--state your 

pleasure, madam.' 

and highly natural it seems to me that you should be kind for 

though more stately I perceive a likeness filled out of course but 

slightest consultation with any human being and most decidedly not 

with Arthur--pray excuse me Doyce and Clennam I don't know what I 

golden chain to a purple time when all was ethereal out of any 

anxiety would be worth to me the ransom of a monarch not that I 

have the least idea how much that would come to but using it as the 

total of all I have in the world and more.' 

latter words, repeated, 'State your pleasure, madam.' 

being possible when I had the gratification of reading in the 

papers that you had arrived from Italy and were going back I made 

up my mind to try it for you might come across him or hear 

something of him and if so what a blessing and relief to all!' 

confusion, 'to whom--ha--To whom,' he repeated it with a raised 

voice in mere desperation, 'you at present allude?' 

one gathers what dreadfully ill-natured things some people are 

overcome it Doyce and Clennam--cannot fail to be.' 

practical difficulties as to finding the way to her pocket among 

the stripes of her dress at length to produce a police handbill, 

last from Venice, had unaccountably disappeared on such a night in 

such a part of the city of London; that he was known to have 

midnight; and that he had never been beheld since.  This, with 

description of the foreign gentleman who had so mysteriously 

vanished, Mr Dorrit read at large. 

know this gentleman.  He has been in my house.  He is intimately 

circumstances), of whom I am a--hum--patron.' 

this foreign gentleman along all the roads and up and down all the 

turnings and to make inquiries for him at all the hotels and 

somewhere and why doesn't he come forward and say he's there and 

clear all parties up?' 

'who is Clennam and Co.?  Ha.  I see the name mentioned here, in 

connection with the occupation of the house which Monsieur Blandois 

whom I had formerly--hum--some--ha--slight transitory knowledge, 

limbs and wheels instead and the grimmest of women though his 

mother.' 

mind by this account.  Neither was it rendered more favourable to 

in gaiters.  Which compound of man and woman, no limbs, wheels, 

rusty screw, grimness, and gaiters, so completely stupefied Mr 

Dorrit, that he was a spectacle to be pitied. 

'But I would not detain you one moment longer,' said Flora, upon 

whom his condition wrought its effect, though she was quite 

to give your promise as a gentleman that both in going back to 

low and if you found or heard of him make him come forward for the 

clearing of all parties.' 

as to be able to say, in a tolerably connected manner, that he 

should consider that his duty.  Flora was delighted with her 

success, and rose to take her leave. 

love to the dear little thing for it might not be acceptable, and 

indeed there is no dear little thing left in the transformation so 

lay no claim to any favour on our side you may be sure of that but 

doing it as Well as it could be done and I myself am one of them 

for I have said ever since I began to recover the blow of Mr F's 

death that I would learn the Organ of which I am extremely fond but 

of which I am ashamed to say I do not yet know a note, good 

evening!' 

time to collect his senses, he found that the interview had 

summoned back discarded reminiscences which jarred with the Merdle 

hotel.  He had another reason for this.  His time in London was 

in a condition to carry back to Mr Henry Gowan the result of his 

take advantage of that evening's freedom to go down to Clennam and 

Co.'s, easily to be found by the direction set forth in the 

handbill; and see the place, and ask a question or two there 

himself. 

let him, and having taken a short sleep by the fire for his better 

recovery from Mrs Finching, he set out in a hackney-cabriolet 

alone.  The deep bell of St Paul's was striking nine as he passed 

under the shadow of Temple Bar, headless and forlorn in these 

degenerate days. 

an hour than he had ever supposed it to be.  Many long years had 

his imagination impressed by it, that when his driver stopped, 

his belief this was the gateway they wanted, Mr Dorrit stood 

hesitating, with the coach-door in his hand, half afraid of the 

dark look of the place. 

Two of the handbills were posted on the entrance wall, one on 

either side, and as the lamp flickered in the night air, shadows 

lines.  A watch was evidently kept upon the place.  As Mr Dorrit 

paused, a man passed in from over the way, and another man passed 

out from some dark corner within; and both looked at him in 

passing, and both remained standing about. 

There was a dim light in two windows on the first-floor.  The door 

but it was not, for a light was visible, and a step was audible, 

and a woman with her apron thrown over her face and head stood in 

the aperture. 

Italy, and that he wished to ask a question relative to the missing 

person, whom he knew. 

he approached, and disclosed a pale affrighted face.  'Open the 

door, you fool,' said the old man; 'and let the gentleman in.' 

driver and the cabriolet, walked into the dim hall.  'Now, sir,' 

there are no secrets here, sir.' 

Before a reply could be made, a strong stern voice, though a 

woman's, called from above, 'Who is it?' 

Italy.' 

him on the road, saw the woman following, with her apron thrown 

over her head again in her former ghastly manner. 

abruptly, as she eyed her visitor with a steady look.  'You are 

from Italy, sir, are you.  Well?' 

Mr Dorrit was at a loss for any more distinct rejoinder at the 

moment than 'Ha--well?' 

where he is?  I hope you have?' 

Hold the light for him to read it.' 

through, as if he had not previously seen it; glad enough of the 

opportunity of collecting his presence of mind, which the air of 

and of Mrs Clennam were on him.  He found, when he looked up, that 

this sensation was not a fanciful one. 

Blandois a friend of yours?' 

that he was the questioned instead of the questioner, applied 

himself to the reversal of that unexpected order of things. 

with my family, my servants, and--hum--my rather large 

establishment.  Being in London for a short time on affairs 

connected with--ha--my estate, and hearing of this strange 

disappearance, I wished to make myself acquainted with the 

been in habits of close and daily intimacy with Monsieur Blandois.  

Mr Henry Gowan.  You may know the name.' 

Mrs Clennam said it, and Mr Flintwinch echoed it. 

him,' said Mr Dorrit, 'may I ask--say, three questions?' 

It is poor satisfaction to us.' 

'That once,' suggested Mr Flintwinch. 

Commission of the Peace; 'pray, madam, may I inquire, for the 

greater satisfaction of the gentleman whom I have the honour to-- 

present sheet?' 

however unimportant, to all the town.  We say, No.' 

Dorrit. 

'I suppose,' observed Mr Dorrit, glancing from Mrs Clennam to Mr 

Flintwinch, and from Mr Flintwinch to Mrs Clennam, 'you have no way 

of accounting to yourself for this mystery?' 

assign any reason for his supposing so. 

Dorrit's part, 'by having no doubt that he is travelling somewhere, 

or hiding somewhere.' 

'You asked me if I accounted for the disappearance to myself,' Mrs 

I do not pretend to account for it to you, sir.  I understand it to 

be no more my business to do that, than it is yours to require 

that.' 

not but observe how gloomily and fixedly she sat with her eyes 

fastened on the ground, and a certain air upon her of resolute 

in Mr Flintwinch, standing at a little distance from her chair, 

his chin. 

good Lord!  there it is again.  Hark, Jeremiah!  Now!' 

fallen into a confirmed habit of listening for sounds; but Mr 

Dorrit believed he did hear a something, like the falling of dry 

leaves.  The woman's terror, for a very short space, seemed to 

touch the three; and they all listened. 

sidling at her with his fists clenched, and his elbows quivering 

be walking in your sleep next, my woman, and playing the whole 

round of your distempered antics.  You must have some physic.  When 

I have shown this gentleman out, I'll make you up such a 

comfortable dose, my woman; such a comfortable dose!' 

Affery; but Jeremiah, without further reference to his healing 

'Now, sir; shall I light you down?' 

coming in; got into the vehicle he had left waiting, and was driven 

away. 

had given his name, number, and address to the two men, on their 

joint requisition; and also the address at which he had taken Mr 

Dorrit up, the hour at which he had been called from his stand and 

the way by which he had come.  This did not make the night's 

the cellar, and now bricked up in a wall. 

CHAPTER 18 

Manifold are the cares of wealth and state.  Mr Dorrit's 

his having had any knowledge of the intrusive person of that name, 

that arose within him whether or no he should take the Marshalsea 

in his way back, and look at the old gate.  He had decided not to 

Waterloo Bridge--a course which would have taken him almost within 

sight of his old quarters.  Still, for all that, the question had 

raised a conflict in his breast; and, for some odd reason or no 

table next day, he was so out of sorts about it that he continued 

at intervals to turn it over and over, in a manner frightfully 

inconsistent with the good society surrounding him.  It made him 

heavy eye of his the stream of his meditations. 

visit in a most brilliant manner.  Fanny combined with the 

attractions of her youth and beauty, a certain weight of self- 

he could leave her with a quiet mind to tread the paths of 

without prejudice to the retiring virtues of his favourite child-- 

that he had such another daughter. 

to--ha--assert its dignity and--hum--maintain its importance.  I 

know you will never disappoint it.' 

love to dearest Amy, and I will write to her very soon.' 

in an insinuating manner. 

would be at all agreeable to you to take.' 

Mr Sparkler was admitted to this closing audience, Mr Merdle came 

being in vain, he enjoyed the honour of being accompanied to the 

shaking hands on the step) had really overwhelmed him with 

attentions and services during this memorable visit.  Thus they 

parted; Mr Dorrit entering his carriage with a swelling breast, not 

at all sorry that his Courier, who had come to take leave in the 

of his departure. 

magnificence, when lo!  a sight presented itself that struck him 

tall hat under his arm, his ivory-handled cane genteelly 

embarrassing his deportment, and a bundle of cigars in his hand! 

to see him.' 

of tones, 'Ah!  Young John!  It is Young John, I think; is it not?' 

he may come up.  Let Young John follow.  I will speak to him 

above.' 

were reached.  Candles were lighted.  The attendants withdrew. 

by the collar when they were safely alone.  'What do you mean by 

this?' 

for he had rather expected to be embraced next--were of that 

powerfully expressive nature that Mr Dorrit withdrew his hand and 

merely glared at him. 

come here?  How dare you insult me?' 

as ever had been turned to Mr Dorrit's in his life--even in his 

College life: 'I thought, sir, you mightn't object to have the 

goodness to accept a bundle--' 

'I--hum--don't smoke.' 

I'll take the poker to you!' 

Once, he went to the window, and stood there with his forehead 

against the glass.  All of a sudden, he turned and said: 

the distance betwixt us, I am sure.  I know it's a liberty, sir, 

but I never thought you'd have taken it ill.  Upon my word and 

too proud to have come, I assure you, if I had thought so.' 

forehead against the glass for some time.  When he turned, he had 

it, and he looked tired and ill. 

some remembrances are not happy remembrances, and--hum--you 

shouldn't have come.' 

before, and Heaven knows I meant no harm, sir.' 

your hand, Young John, give me your hand.' 

and nothing could change his face now, from its white, shocked 

look. 

again, Young John.' 

little while, he turned it to his visitor, and said, with an effort 

to be easy: 

Young John?' 

ways complaining.' 

business likewise.' 

but we generally ARE pretty heavy.' 

makes much difference to us.  I wish you good night, sir.' 

cigars, John, I--ha--beg.' 

table. 

such a trusty messenger, to be divided among--ha hum--them--them-- 

according to their wants.  Would you object to take 

it, John?' 

be the better for it.' 

the hand in his. 

malice, I'm sure.' 

natural colour and expression, or restore John's natural manner. 

way, sir, I'm too proud and honourable to do it, sir.' 

that he might ascertain for himself whether John really went 

no doubt that he went direct out at the door, and away down the 

street with a quick step.  After remaining alone for an hour, Mr 

hearth-rug, sitting with his back towards him and his face to the 

if you like,' said Mr Dorrit, with a careless wave of his hand.  

of mine.' 

where every red-jacketed postilion was the sign of a cruel house, 

business of the human race, between London and Dover, being 

spoliation, Mr Dorrit was waylaid at Dartford, pillaged at 

Gravesend, rifled at Rochester, fleeced at Sittingbourne, and 

sacked at Canterbury.  However, it being the Courier's business to 

along the spring landscape, rising and falling to a regular 

rise in the dusty highway. 

and to find that the foreign air was lighter to breathe than the 

air of England. 

castle-building as he rode along.  It was evident that he had a 

taking towers down, adding a wing here, putting on a battlement 

there, looking to the walls, strengthening the defences, giving 

ornamental touches to the interior, making in all respects a superb 

castle of it.  His preoccupied face so clearly denoted the pursuit 

blind, who shoved his little battered tin-box in at the carriage 

window for Charity in the name of Heaven, Charity in the name of 

work he was at, as their countryman Le Brun could have known it 

a special physiognomical treatise. 

most famous jeweller's, and said he wanted to buy a little gift for 

a lady. 

little woman, dressed in perfect taste, who came out of a green 

entry of any articles more commercial than kisses, at a dainty 

little shining desk which looked in itself like a sweetmeat. 

Monsieur desire?  A love-gift? 

Mr Dorrit smiled, and said, Eh, well!  Perhaps.  What did he know?  

him some? 

show him many.  But pardon!  To begin with, he would have the great 

goodness to observe that there were love-gifts, and there were 

nuptial gifts.  For example, these ravishing ear-rings and this 

necklace so superb to correspond, were what one called a love- 

gift.  These brooches and these rings, of a beauty so gracious and 

nuptial gifts. 

to purchase both, and to present the love-gift first, and to finish 

with the nuptial offering? 

of her two little hands against each other, that would be generous 

lady so crushed with gifts would find them irresistible. 

got up his castle now to a much loftier altitude than the two 

square towers of Notre Dame. 

castle exclusively for his own eye, Mr Dorrit posted away for 

to night.  Falling asleep, and leaving great blocks of building 

them into their places.  What time the Courier in the rumble, 

smoking Young john's best cigars, left a little thread of thin 

pieces of Mr Dorrit's money. 

peerless building; nor was the Mediterranean deeper than its 

nor the hills and bay of Genoa the Superb, more beautiful.  Mr 

white houses and dirtier felons of Civita Vecchia, and thence 

on the way. 

CHAPTER 19 

walls of Rome, when Mr Dorrit's carriage, still on its last 

wearisome stage, rattled over the solitary Campagna.  The savage 

while the light lasted, had all gone down with the sun, and left 

the wilderness blank.  At some turns of the road, a pale flare on 

the horizon, like an exhalation from the ruin-sown land, showed 

that the city was yet far off; but this poor relief was rare and 

its petrified swell and the gloomy sky. 

curious, in every swerve of the carriage, and every cry of the 

the box evidently quaked.  The Courier in the rumble was not 

altogether comfortable in his mind.  As often as Mr Dorrit let down 

smoking John Chivery out, it is true, but still generally standing 

up the while and looking about him, like a man who had his 

up the glass again, reflect that those postilions were cut-throat 

for all this, he worked at his castle in the intervals. 

crazy wall, deserted houses, leaking wells, broken water-tanks, 

spectral cypress-trees, patches of tangled vine, and the changing 

was crumbling away, from the unsightly buildings to the jolting 

road--now, these objects showed that they were nearing Rome.  And 

into a ditch and robbing him; until, letting down the glass again 

and looking out, he perceived himself assailed by nothing worse 

than a funeral procession, which came mechanically chaunting by, 

priest by torchlight; of a lowering aspect, with an overhanging 

threaten that important traveller; likewise the action of his hand, 

which was in fact his manner of returning the traveller's 

salutation, seemed to come in aid of that menace.  So thought Mr 

Dorrit, made fanciful by the weariness of building and travelling, 

reversed) beating at the gates of Rome. 

it was later than he would care, in those parts, to be out.  Thus, 

appeared to receive him.  Was Miss Dorrit from home?  he asked.  

No.  She was within.  Good, said Mr Dorrit to the assembling 

servants; let them keep where they were; let them help to unload 

the carriage; he would find Miss Dorrit for himself. 

into various chambers which were empty, until he saw a light in a 

other rooms; and it looked warm and bright in colour, as he 

approached it through the dark avenue they made. 

There was a draped doorway, but no door; and as he stopped here, 

why like jealousy?  There was only his daughter and his brother 

of the evening wood fire; she seated at a little table, busied with 

some embroidery work.  Allowing for the great difference in the 

still-life of the picture, the figures were much the same as of 

old; his brother being sufficiently like himself to represent 

himself, for a moment, in the composition.  So had he sat many a 

poverty.  Whence, then, the pang in his heart? 

when?' 

so ready, and so interested.' 

considerate of me, and so tender with me, and so delicate in trying 

to hide your attentions from me, that I--well, well, well!  It's 

treasured up, my darling, treasured up.' 

Little Dorrit, cheerfully. 

revived that former pain in her father's breast; in his poor weak 

breast, so full of contradictions, vacillations, inconsistencies, 

the little peevish perplexities of this ignorant life, mists which 

the morning without a night only can clear away. 

'since we have been alone.  I say, alone, for I don't count Mrs 

General; I don't care for her; she has nothing to do with me.  But 

I know Fanny was impatient of me.  And I don't wonder at it, or 

complain of it, for I am sensible that I must be in the way, though 

I try to keep out of it as well as I can.  I know I am not fit 

company for our company.  My brother William,' said the old man 

admiringly, 'is fit company for monarchs; but not so your uncle, my 

dear.  Frederick Dorrit is no credit to William Dorrit, and he 

knows it quite well.  Ah!  Why, here's your father, Amy!  My dear 

William, welcome back!  My beloved brother, I am rejoiced to see 

you!' 

stood in the doorway.) 

little impatient, and a little querulous.  'I am glad to find you 

at last, Amy,' he said.  'Ha.  Really I am glad to find--hum--any 

one to receive me at last.  I appear to have been--ha--so little 

right to offer an apology for--ha--taking the liberty of coming 

back at all.' 

given you up for to-night.' 

an elaboration of fraternity in which there was severity; 'and I 

hope I can travel without detriment at--ha--any hour I choose.' 

given offence.  'Surely, William.' 

trouble you, Amy.  Could I have a morsel of bread and a glass of 

wine, or--hum--would it cause too much inconvenience?' 

him; 'I--ha--am afraid I am causing inconvenience.  Hum.  Mrs 

General pretty well?' 

so, when we gave you up, she went to bed, dear.' 

his face relaxed, and he said with obvious satisfaction, 'Extremely 

sorry to hear that Mrs General is not well.' 

with something more than her usual interest.  It would seem as 

though he had a changed or worn appearance in her eyes, and he 

perceived and resented it; for he said with renewed peevishness, 

to the fire: 

you to--ha--concentrate your solicitude on me in that--hum--very 

particular manner?' 

to see you again; that's all.' 

think,' said Mr Dorrit, with an accusatory emphasis, 'that I am not 

looking well.' 

'I thought you looked a little tired, love.' 

hum.  I am very much fresher than I was when I went away.' 

As he stood thus, with his brother on the other side, he fell into 

go to bed immediately.' 

bed long ago.  You are very feeble.' 

well, well!  I dare say I am.' 

very careful.' 

brother.  I hope you will be stronger to-morrow.  I am not at all 

pleased with your looks.  Good night, dear fellow.'  After 

dismissing his brother in this gracious way, he fell into a doze 

have stumbled forward upon the logs, but for his daughter's 

restraining hold. 

roused.  'He is less--ha--coherent, and his conversation is more-- 

hum--broken, than I have--ha, hum--ever known.  Has he had any 

illness since I have been gone?' 

'No, father.' 

affectionate, failing Frederick!  Ha.  Even taking into account 

what he was before, he is--hum--sadly broken!' 

time since those days ended.  They were alone, and she helped him 

to do in the prison.  All this happened now, for the first time 

since their accession to wealth.  She was afraid to look at him 

still hovered about the yards on the head of his successor. 

greatest pity for him, he was almost bitter upon him.  He said that 

poor Frederick--ha hum--drivelled.  There was no other word to 

what Amy must have undergone from the excessive tediousness of his 

Society--wandering and babbling on, poor dear estimable creature, 

wandering and babbling on--if it had not been for the relief she 

former satisfaction, that that--ha--superior woman was poorly. 

subsequent reason to recall that night.  She always remembered 

old association, he tried to keep it out of her mind, and perhaps 

and great company that had encompassed him in his absence, and on 

fail to recall that there were two under-currents, side by side, 

pervading all his discourse and all his manner; one showing her how 

her, as if it had been possible that she had neglected him while he 

was away. 

the court that bowed before him, naturally brought him to Mrs 

Merdle.  So naturally indeed, that although there was an unusual 

want of sequence in the greater part of his remarks, he passed to 

her at once, and asked how she was. 

'Home?' asked Mr Dorrit. 

great world.' 

upon, and assented very softly. 

dinner.' 

shall--hum--be delighted.' 

help.  I am your father, not your infirm uncle!'  He checked 

himself, as abruptly as he had broken into this reply, and said, 

'You have not kissed me, Amy.  Good night, my dear!  We must 

marry--ha--we must marry YOU, now.'  With that he went, more slowly 

about him for his Paris purchases, and, after opening their cases 

and carefully surveying them, to put them away under lock and key.  

hoped he had rested well after this fatiguing journey.  He sent 

down his compliments, and begged to inform Mrs General that he had 

he did not come forth from his own rooms until late in the 

arrayed for a drive with Mrs General and his daughter, his 

appearance was scarcely up to his description of himself. 

As the family had no visitors that day, its four members dined 

hand with immense ceremony; and Little Dorrit could not but notice 

dressed, and that his manner towards Mrs General was very 

particular.  The perfect formation of that accomplished lady's 

surface rendered it difficult to displace an atom of its genteel 

glaze, but Little Dorrit thought she descried a slight thaw of 

triumph in a corner of her frosty eye. 

When the first of these slumberings seized him, Mrs General looked 

almost amazed: but, on each recurrence of the symptoms, she told 

started from his sleep. 

(which had no existence out of his own imagination), and after 

brothers,' he said, 'but--ha, hum--broken up altogether.  

Unhappily, declining fast.' 

drooping, but let us hope it is not so bad as that.' 

declining, madam.  A wreck.  A ruin.  Mouldering away before our 

eyes.  Hum.  Good Frederick!' 

General, after heaving a cool sigh for Frederick. 

taste, and--hum--elevate the mind.  Happy, my dear madam, in 

a--hum--husband.' 

Mrs General was a little fluttered; seeming delicately to put the 

word away with her gloves, as if there were no knowing what it 

might lead to. 

qualities.  Ha.  Ambition--hum--purpose, consciousness of--ha-- 

beauty, and native nobility.' 

has--ha--manifested one blemish which has made me--hum--made me 

uneasy, and--ha--I must add, angry; but which I trust may now be 

at an end as to--ha--others.' 

somewhat excited, 'can you allude?  I am at a loss to--' 

loss to imagine.' 

out of which he sprang with spasmodic nimbleness. 

or--hum--I might say--ha--jealousy in Fanny, which has occasionally 

ha--the lady with whom I have now the honour of communing.' 

but too appreciative.  If there have been moments when I have 

imagined that Miss Dorrit has indeed resented the favourable 

opinion Mr Dorrit has formed of my services, I have found, in that 

only too high opinion, my consolation and recompense.' 

services.' 

a slightly interrogative action of her gloves, 'could I impute--' 

merits,' was Mr Dorrit's rejoinder. 

this is not a time or place for the pursuit of the present 

Dorrit is in the adjoining room, and is visible to myself while I 

agitated, and that I find there are moments when weaknesses I 

supposed myself to have subdued, return with redoubled power.  Mr 

Dorrit will allow me to withdraw.' 

with a bend, 'must ever claim my homage and obedience.' 

that amount of trepidation upon her which might have been expected 

in a less remarkable woman.  Mr Dorrit, who had conducted his part 

of the dialogue with a certain majestic and admiring condescension 

--much as some people may be seen to conduct themselves in Church, 

return of that lady to tea, she had touched herself up with a 

little powder and pomatum, and was not without moral enchantment 

likewise: the latter showing itself in much sweet patronage of 

manner towards Miss Dorrit, and in an air of as tender interest in 

Mr Dorrit as was consistent with rigid propriety.  At the close of 

the evening, when she rose to retire, Mr Dorrit took her by the 

hand as if he were going to lead her out into the Piazza of the 

lips.  Having parted from her with what may be conjectured to have 

something remarkable in the wind, he again went to bed. 

early in the afternoon, sent down his best compliments to Mrs 

General, by Mr Tinkler, and begged she would accompany Miss Dorrit 

on an airing without him.  His daughter was dressed for Mrs 

a refulgent condition as to his attire, but looking indefinably 

shrunken and old.  However, as he was plainly determined to be 

angry with her if she so much as asked him how he was, she only 

ventured to kiss his cheek, before accompanying him to Mrs Merdle's 

with an anxious heart. 

admirable preservation, and on the best terms with itself; the 

dinner was very choice; and the company was very select. 

French Count and the usual Italian Marchese--decorative social 

little in appearance.  The table was long, and the dinner was long; 

and a large white cravat, lost sight of her father altogether, 

Merdle had written on it in pencil, 'Pray come and speak to Mr 

Dorrit, I doubt if he is well.' 

chair, and leaning over the table called to her, supposing her to 

be still in her place: 

a profound silence. 

the lock?' 

supposed her to be in her seat, and called out, still leaning over 

Bob is in the lodge, and beg him to come to me.' 

and fetch him.' 

not go. 

narrow stairs without Bob.  Ha.  Send for Bob.  Hum.  Send for 

Bob--best of all the turnkeys--send for Bob!' 

number of faces by which he was surrounded, addressed them: 

welcoming you to the Marshalsea!  Welcome to the Marshalsea!  The 

will find it apparently grow larger after a time--a time, ladies 

This is the Snuggery.  Hum.  Supported by a small subscription of 

the--ha--Collegiate body.  In return for which--hot water--general 

claim to so--ha--honourable a title, I may accept the--hum-- 

conferred distinction.  My child, ladies and gentlemen.  My 

daughter.  Born here!' 

him away, for his own dear sake.  She was between him and the 

wondering faces, turned round upon his breast with her own face 

whiles her low voice was heard tenderly imploring him to go away 

with her. 

always a gentleman.  Poor, no doubt, but--hum--proud.  Always 

proud.  It has become a--hum--not infrequent custom for my--ha-- 

personal admirers--personal admirers solely--to be pleased to 

by offering--ha--little tributes, which usually take the form of-- 

ha--voluntary recognitions of my humble endeavours to--hum--to 

uphold a Tone here--a Tone--I beg it to be understood that I do not 

consider myself compromised.  Ha.  Not compromised.  Ha.  Not a 

beggar.  No; I repudiate the title!  At the same time far be it 

friends are actuated, the slight of scrupling to admit that those 

most acceptable.  In my child's name, if not in my own, I make the 

shall I say my personal dignity?  Ladies and gentlemen, God bless 

you all!' 

into other rooms.  The few who had lingered thus long followed the 

rest, and Little Dorrit and her father were left to the servants 

and themselves.  Dearest and most precious to her, he would come 

Bob; where was Bob, would nobody fetch Bob?  Under pretence of 

that had just set down its load, and got him home. 

sight to the narrow stairs of his London prison; and he would 

from that hour his poor maimed spirit, only remembering the place 

had since groped, and knew of nothing beyond the Marshalsea.  When 

all strangers to be excluded for the night.  When the time for 

the next day, or the next at furthest. 

hand.  But he still protected his brother according to his long 

usage; and would say with some complacency, fifty times a day, when 

he saw him standing by his bed, 'My good Frederick, sit down.  You 

are very feeble indeed.' 

brain, that she wanted to supplant Mrs Bangham, and that she was 

and was so urgent with his daughter to go round to the Marshal and 

the first failure. 

Saving that he once asked 'if Tip had gone outside?' the 

from him.  But the child who had done so much for him and had been 

so poorly repaid, was never out of his mind.  Not that he spared 

was not more troubled on that score than he had usually been.  No; 

tended him, and he had constant need of her, and could not turn 

down her own life to restore him. 

a pompous gold watch that made as great a to-do about its going as 

if nothing else went but itself and Time.  She suffered it to run 

down; but he was still uneasy, and showed that was not what he 

wanted.  At length he roused himself to explain that he wanted 

money to be raised on this watch.  He was quite pleased when she 

pretended to take it away for the purpose, and afterwards had a 

relish for his little tastes of wine and jelly, that he had not had 

before. 

he sent off his sleeve-buttons and finger-rings.  He had an amazing 

satisfaction in entrusting her with these errands, and appeared to 

able to see about him, were gone, his clothes engaged his 

attention; and it is as likely as not that he was kept alive for 

an imaginary pawnbroker's. 

minutes they would slumber together.  Then she would awake; to 

her face, and to see, stealing over the cherished face upon the 

pillow, a deeper shadow than the shadow of the Marshalsea Wall. 

melted one after another.  Quietly, quietly, the ruled and cross- 

zig-zag iron on the wall-top, faded away.  Quietly, quietly, the 

face subsided into a far younger likeness of her own than she had 

ever seen under the grey hair, and sank to rest. 

William, William!  You to go before me; you to go alone; you to go, 

and I to remain!  You, so far superior, so distinguished, so noble; 

have missed!' 

succour. 

stunned so long and now awaking to be broken, he honoured and 

blessed her. 

brother!  All that I have looked upon, with my half-blind and 

her head shall be harmed before Thee.  Thou wilt uphold her here to 

her last hour.  And I know Thou wilt reward her hereafter!' 

burst like that in which it had found its earliest expression; but, 

besides that his little strength would soon have been unequal to 

such strains, he never failed to recall her words, and to reproach 

himself and calm himself.  The only utterance with which he 

lives, that they had fallen into misfortune together, that they had 

kept together through their many years of poverty, that they had 

remained together to that day; and that his brother was gone alone, 

alone! 

clothes upon his bed, and covered him with her own hands.  Then she 

exhaustion and rest, though not of complete release from a 

Sleep through the night! 

figures were within the room; two figures, equally still and 

teeming earth and all that it contains, though soon to lie in it. 

drooped over it; the arms easily and peacefully resting on the 

coverlet; the face bowed down, so that the lips touched the hand 

world; high above its mists and obscurities. 

CHAPTER 20 

A low-lying place and a low-spirited place Calais was, with the 

tide ebbing out towards low water-mark.  There had been no more 

the bar itself, with a shallow break of sea over it, looked like a 

lazy marine monster just risen to the surface, whose form was 

indistinctly shown as it lay asleep.  The meagre lighthouse all in 

white, haunting the seaboard as if it were the ghost of an edifice 

after its late buffeting by the waves.  The long rows of gaunt 

black piles, slimy and wet and weather-worn, with funeral garlands 

of seaweed twisted about them by the late tide, might have 

represented an unsightly marine cemetery.  Every wave-dashed, 

storm-beaten object, was so low and so little, under the broad grey 

sky, in the noise of the wind and sea, and before the curling lines 

and low ditches and low sand-hills and low ramparts and flat 

sea, like the fortifications children make on the sea-shore. 

their comfortless peregrination along the pier; where all the 

French vagabonds and English outlaws in the town (half the 

last free to enter the streets, and to make off in their various 

directions, hotly pursued. 

devoted band.  Having rescued the most defenceless of his 

compatriots from situations of great extremity, he now went his way 

in a suit of grease and a cap of the same material, giving chase at 

'Hi!  Ice-say!  You!  Seer!  Ice-say!  Nice Oatel!' 

Clennam pursued his way, unmolested.  There was a tranquil air in 

countrymen, who had all a straggling air of having at one time 

out a limited round, day after day, which strongly reminded him of 

the Marshalsea.  But, taking no further note of them than was 

sufficient to give birth to the reflection, he sought out a certain 

street and number which he kept in his mind. 

be correct and his discovery, among Mr Casby's loose papers, 

to be a likely place.' 

A dead sort of house, with a dead wall over the way and a dead 

gateway at the side, where a pendant bell-handle produced two dead 

fountain in a grotto, which was dry; and to decorate that with a 

little statue, which was gone. 

outer gateway was, with two printed bills in French and English, 

announcing Furnished Apartments to let, with immediate possession.  

cap, and ear-ring, stood here in a dark doorway, and said with a 

pleasant show of teeth, 'Ice-say!  Seer!  Who?' 

see the English lady.  'Enter then and ascend, if you please,' 

followed her up a dark bare staircase to a back room on the first- 

floor.  Hence, there was a gloomy view of the yard that was dull, 

and of the pedestal of the statue that was gone. 

was the pattern of room always to be found in such a house.  Cool, 

dull, and dark.  Waxed floor very slippery.  A room not large 

clumsy rush-bottomed chairs, two great red velvet arm-chairs 

glass in several pieces pretending to be in one piece, pair of 

gaudy vases of very artificial flowers; between them a Greek 

warrior with his helmet off, sacrificing a clock to the Genius of 

France. 

opened, and a lady entered.  She manifested great surprise on 

some one else. 

my name does not predispose you to an interview; and I ventured to 

mention the name of one I am in search of.' 

remained standing, 'what name was it that you gave?' 

an undesired interest in me and my acquaintances, in me and my 

affairs, Mr Clennam.  I don't know what you mean.' 

the name?  What can you have to do with my knowing or not knowing 

any name?  I know many names and I have forgotten many more.  This 

have heard it.  I am acquainted with no reason for examining 

myself, or for being examined, about it.' 

for pressing the subject.  I admit that I do press it, and I must 

all mine, I do not insinuate that it is in any way yours.' 

deferred, as she seated herself.  'I am at least glad to know that 

your reason, if you please.' 

back.  You will remember meeting him near the river--in the 

Adelphi!' 

know that?' 

'What accident?' 

the meeting.' 

have seen it.  It would have signified nothing if they had.' 

or the favour that I have to ask.' 

handsome face looked bitterly at him, 'that your manner was 

softened, Mr Clennam.' 

contesting it in words.  He then referred to Blandois' 

disappearance, of which it was probable she had heard?  However 

probable it was to him, she had heard of no such thing.  Let him 

look round him (she said) and judge for himself what general 

intelligence was likely to reach the ears of a woman who had been 

suspicions that clouded about his mother's house.  She heard him 

than he had seen in her; still they did not overcome her distant, 

proud, and self-secluded manner.  When he had finished, she said 

nothing but these words: 

the favour is?  Will you be so good as come to that?' 

confidential communication?--with this person--' 

Clennam, changing the form of his position in the hope of making it 

pursuits, habits, usual place of residence.  Can give me some 

the favour I ask, and I ask it in a distress of mind for which I 

hope you will feel some consideration.  If you should have any 

asking what it is.' 

own reflections on the matter than with his appeal.  'Then you knew 

the man before?' 

again on this very night of his disappearance.  In my mother's 

room, in fact.  I left him there.  You will read in this paper all 

that is known of him.' 

steady and attentive face. 

incredulity; for she added in the same unsympathetic tone: 'You 

it seems that there was personal communication between him and your 

mother.  And yet you say you believe her declaration that she knows 

no more of him!' 

the blood into Clennam's cheeks. 

'I will be as open with you as you can desire.  I will confess that 

if I cared for my credit (which I do not), or had a good name to 

preserve (which I have not, for I am utterly indifferent to its 

never passed in at MY door--never sat in colloquy with ME until 

midnight.' 

against him.  Hers was not the nature to spare him, and she had no 

compunction. 

about Italy (where I was, not long ago), and that I hired him 

there, as the suitable instrument of a purpose I happened to have; 

I have no objection to tell you.  In short, it was worth my while, 

for my own pleasure--the gratification of a strong feeling--to pay 

And I dare say that if I had wanted to make such a bargain, and if 

dark, free from all risk, he would have taken any life with as 

of him; and I see it is not very far removed from yours.  Your 

assuming this and that), was vastly different.' 

into communication with him in the unlucky course of business.' 

business hours on that occasion were late.' 

of which he had deeply felt the force already, 'that there was 

something--' 

speak by implication about the man.  He is, I say again without 

where there is occasion for him.  If I had not had occasion for 

him, you would not have seen him and me together.' 

before him, of which there was a half-hidden shadow in his own 

breast, Clennam was silent. 

also.  I have no further occasion for him.' 

meanwhile with a fixed look of suspicion, and lips angrily 

compressed: 

not?  Why don't you ask your dear friend to help you?' 

said: 

out for England, Mr Gowan knows nothing additional about him.  He 

was a chance acquaintance, made abroad.' 

he can make, seeing what a wife he has.  I hate his wife, sir.' 

quivered in her nostrils, and fired the very breath she exhaled; 

her attitude was as calmly and haughtily graceful as if she had 

been in a mood of complete indifference. 

sharer.' 

his opinion upon that subject.' 

Arthur, in spite of his resolutions, 'that would render my 

approaching the subject very probable, Miss Wade.' 

You have seen me, sir, only on common-place occasions, when I dare 

say you have thought me a common-place woman, a little more self- 

been--not to propitiate your opinion, for I set no value on it; but 

paper.  Without any conciliation of him, scarcely addressing him, 

for the justification of her own stubbornness, she said, as she 

gave them to him: 

whether you find me temporarily and cheaply lodging in an empty 

called Harriet again.  The second call produced Harriet, once 

Tattycoram. 

given you up,--I suppose you have, by this time?' 

He wants that Blandois man.' 

Venice--which we all know--tell it to Mr Clennam freely.' 

'I know nothing more about him,' said the girl. 

natural as to be almost convincing, if he had had any previous 

doubts.  He replied, 'I must seek for intelligence elsewhere.' 

at him, and said: 

glanced at Miss Wade; and said 'Mr and Mrs Meagles.' 

the way, let me ask you.  Is it true that you were seen there?' 

sullenly casting down her eyes. 

time we were in London.  I went one afternoon when you left me 

alone.  And I did look in.' 

all your old complainings, tell for so little as that?' 

the girl.  'I saw by the windows that the family were not there.' 

look at it again.' 

As each of the two handsome faces looked at the other, Clennam felt 

pieces. 

another thing.  But is that your truth to me?  Is that your 

fidelity to me?  Is that the common cause I make with you?  You are 

the favour I have shown you.  You are no higher than a spaniel, and 

had better go back to the people who did worse than whip you.' 

provoke me to take their part,' said the girl. 

go back to them.  You know very well that I have thrown them off, 

alone, then, Miss Wade.' 

expected?  I ought to have known it.' 

what you mean.  I know what you mean.  You are reproaching me, 

underhanded, with having nobody but you to look to.  And because I 

You are as bad as they were, every bit.  But I will not be quite 

tamed, and made submissive.  I will say again that I went to look 

at the house, because I had often thought that I should like to see 

them and at times thought they were kind to me.' 

kindly, if she should ever desire to return. 

Nobody knows that better than Miss Wade, though she taunts me 

because she has made me her dependent.  And I know I am so; and I 

know she is overjoyed when she can bring it to my mind.' 

and bitterness; 'but too threadbare to cover what I plainly see in 

this.  My poverty will not bear competition with their money.  

it!' 

each, with a fixed determination, torturing her own breast, and 

humiliation of an abject dependent and serf (but not without 

defiance for all that), made as if she were too low to notice or to 

be noticed. 

increased sense upon him of the gloom of the wall that was dead, 

and of the statue that was gone.  Pondering much on what he had 

seen and heard in that house, as well as on the failure of all his 

efforts to trace the suspicious character who was lost, he returned 

to London and to England by the packet that had taken him over.  On 

reproduced in the next chapter. 

CHAPTER 21 

I have detected what those about me thought they hid from me.  If 

do. 

lady who represented that relative to me, and who took that title 

girls; ten in number, including me.  We all lived together and were 

educated together. 

determinedly those girls patronised me.  I was told I was an 

orphan.  There was no other orphan among us; and I perceived (here 

was the first disadvantage of not being a fool) that they 

conciliated me in an insolent pity, and in a sense of superiority.  

I did not set this down as a discovery, rashly.  I tried them 

often.  I could hardly make them quarrel with me.  When I succeeded 

never knew them wait for me to begin.  They were always forgiving 

people! 

passionate way that she could no more deserve than I can remember 

stormy by my fondness for her.  I was constantly lectured and 

her with her little perfidy and throwing her into tears by showing 

her that I read her heart.  However, I loved her faithfully; and 

one time I went home with her for the holidays. 

tormented my love beyond endurance.  Her plan was, to make them all 

and endearing with them all--and so make me mad with envying them.  

When we were left alone in our bedroom at night, I would reproach 

if, rather than suffer so, I could so hold her in my arms and 

we were both dead. 

much; but I never wanted them to like me, being altogether bound up 

way with her eyes of watching me.  She was an audacious woman, and 

openly looked compassionately at me.  After one of the nights that 

Charlotte (the name of my false young friend) had gone down before 

I stopped where I was, among the leaves, and listened. 

this must not continue.'  I repeat the very words I heard. 

she knows what I make her undergo?'  No; my first memorable 

experience was true to what I knew her to be, and to all my 

experience.  She began sobbing and weeping (to secure the aunt's 

sympathy to herself), and said, 'Dear aunt, she has an unhappy 

temper; other girls at school, besides I, try hard to make it 

better; we all try hard.' 

instead of despicable and false, and kept up the infamous pretence 

by replying, 'But there are reasonable limits, my dear love, to 

constant and useless distress than even so good an effort 

justifies.' 

will walk home alone, night and day!'  When I got home, I told my 

supposed grandmother that, unless I was sent away to finish my 

one of them came back, I would burn my sight away by throwing 

myself into the fire, rather than I would endure to look at their 

plotting faces. 

words and fair pretences; but I penetrated below those assertions 

recognised relation.  I carried the light of that information both 

into my past and into my future.  It showed me many new occasions 

on which people triumphed over me, when they made a pretence of 

treating me with consideration, or doing me a service. 

but the parents wished them to grow up, if possible, under one 

she made a show of behaving to me with great delicacy.  I kept my 

resentment to myself; but I knew very well that it was her way of 

behaved differently to her servant if it had been her fancy. 

I say I did not resent it, nor did I; but I showed her, by not 

gratifying her, that I understood her.  When she pressed me to take 

table, she always sent it to me: but I always declined it, and ate 

of the rejected dishes.  These disappointments of her patronage 

were a sharp retort, and made me feel independent. 

house, a rosy-faced woman always making an obtrusive pretence of 

being gay and good-humoured, who had nursed them both, and who had 

me, might have blinded many in my place; but I saw through them 

she was never absent.  The most crafty of her many subtleties was 

lead them to me and coax them to me.  'Come to good Miss Wade, come 

to dear Miss Wade, come to pretty Miss Wade.  She loves you very 

much.  Miss Wade is a clever lady, who has read heaps of books, and 

can tell you far better and more interesting stories than I know.  

Come and hear Miss Wade!'  How could I engage their attentions, 

when my heart was burning against these ignorant designs?  How 

their arms twining round her neck, instead of mine?  Then she would 

don't be at all cast down about it, ma'am'--exulting over me! 

she had safely plunged me into a black despondent brooding by these 

means, she would call the attention of the children to it, and 

would show them the difference between herself and me.  'Hush!  

Poor Miss Wade is not well.  Don't make a noise, my dears, her head 

come and ask her to lie down.  I hope you have nothing on your 

mind, ma'am.  Don't take on, ma'am, and be sorry!' 

support it no longer, I told her I must go.  I could not bear the 

presence of that woman Dawes. 

you!' 

go. 

superiority she had always so thinly concealed, 'that nothing I 

wholly inadvertent on my part.  Pray tell me what it is.' 

to my Mistress; but I must go. 

hand on mine.  As if that honour would obliterate any remembrance! 

have no influence.' 

'I have an unhappy temper, I suppose.' 

'I did not say that.' 

something very different.  My husband and I have exchanged some 

have not been easy with us.' 

evidently does--quite opposite to my intention.'  (She had not 

us.  It is a difficult topic to enter on; but, from one young woman 

may allow some family circumstances of which no one can be more 

innocent than yourself, to prey upon your spirits.  If so, let us 

woman, whoever she was, and to have that boast of me and advantage 

that house that night. 

one pupil: a girl of fifteen, who was the only daughter.  The 

parents here were elderly people: people of station, and rich.  A 

nephew whom they had brought up was a frequent visitor at the 

allowance was made.  He was on absence from India, where he had a 

post that was soon to grow into a very good one.  In six months we 

were to be married, and were to go to India.  I was to stay in the 

house, and was to be married from the house.  Nobody objected to 

any part of the plan. 

among the rich people as if he had bought me for my looks, and made 

a show of his purchase to justify himself.  They appraised me in 

value was.  I resolved that they should not know.  I was immovable 

approval. 

stoop to propitiate any of them.  He was concerned and even 

shocked, when I added that I wished he would not parade his 

attachment before them; but he said he would sacrifice even the 

honest impulses of his affection to my peace. 

rather than to me.  I have sat alone and unnoticed, half an 

evening, while he conversed with his young cousin, my pupil.  I 

two looked nearer on an equality than he and I.  I have sat, 

divining their thoughts, until I have felt that his young 

appearance made me ridiculous, and have raged against myself for 

ever loving him. 

have made him wholly and gratefully mine to his life's end--I loved 

her pretending to think that it pleased me, but full well knowing 

that it rankled in my breast; for his sake.  While I have sat in 

whether I should not fly from the house at once and never see him 

again--I have loved him. 

wilfully, added to my trials and vexations.  It was her delight to 

expatiate on the style in which we were to live in India, and on 

the establishment we should keep, and the company we should 

entertain when he got his advancement.  My pride rose against this 

barefaced way of pointing out the contrast my married life was to 

present to my then dependent and inferior position.  I suppressed 

upon me, and I repaid her annoyance by affecting humility.  What 

great a change.  Think of a mere governess, her daughter's 

and made them all uneasy, when I answered in this way.  They knew 

that I fully understood her. 

as little as he did for the innumerable distresses and 

at a glance, and he understood me. 

that he accompanied every movement of my mind.  In his coldly easy 

way with all of them, and with me, and with the whole subject, I 

saw it clearly.  In his light protestations of admiration of my 

future husband, in his enthusiasm regarding our engagement and our 

and jesting, and full of mockery--I saw it clearly.  He made me 

feel more and more resentful, and more and more contemptible, by 

always presenting to me everything that surrounded me with some new 

hateful light upon it, while he pretended to exhibit it in its best 

with it, sang with it, played with it, or prayed with it, he made 

it ghastly. 

me, he really condoled with me; that when he soothed me under my 

services, you may say.  They were acceptable to me, because they 

echoed my own mind, and confirmed my own knowledge.  I soon began 

to like the society of your dear friend better than any other. 

growing out of this, I liked this society still better.  Had I not 

No.  Let him know what it was!  I was delighted that he should know 

it; I was delighted that he should feel keenly, and I hoped he did. 

how to address me on equal terms, and how to anatomise the wretched 

people around us. 

nothing; but she suggested from herself, knowing it was only 

necessary to suggest, that it might be better if I were a little 

less companionable with Mr Gowan. 

always answer, she replied, for my meaning nothing wrong.  I 

thanked her, but said I would prefer to answer for myself and to 

myself.  Her other servants would probably be grateful for good 

characters, but I wanted none. 

that it was only necessary for her to make a suggestion to me, to 

have it obeyed?  Did she presume on my birth, or on my hire?  I was 

not bought, body and soul.  She seemed to think that her 

wife. 

with assumed commiseration, that I had an unhappy temper.  On this 

repetition of the old wicked injury, I withheld no longer, but 

exposed to her all I had known of her and seen in her, and all I 

had undergone within myself since I had occupied the despicable 

position of being engaged to her nephew.  I told her that Mr Gowan 

it too long, and that I shook it off too late; but that I would see 

none of them more.  And I never did. 

Your dear friend followed me to my retreat, and was very droll on 

excellent people (in their way the best he had ever met), and 

that he was not worth acceptance by a woman of such endowments, and 

such power of character; but--well, well!-- 

the world, that we both understood mankind, that we both knew there 

was no such thing as romance, that we were both prepared for going 

we both foresaw that whenever we encountered one another again we 

should meet as the best friends on earth.  So he said, and I did 

not contradict him. 

naturally, therefore, could desire nothing better than that she 

curious that I felt it to be one of the few sources of 

entertainment left to me.  I travelled a little: travelled until I 

found myself in her society, and in yours.  Your dear friend, I 

think, was not known to you then, and had not given you any of 

those signal marks of his friendship which he has bestowed upon 

you. 

position there was a singular likeness to my own, and in whose 

against swollen patronage and selfishness, calling themselves 

have described as inherent in my nature.  I often heard it said, 

too, that she had 'an unhappy temper.'  Well understanding what was 

meant by the convenient phrase, and wanting a companion with a 

from her bondage and sense of injustice.  I have no occasion to 

relate that I succeeded. 

CHAPTER 22 

with valuable possessions on the map of the world, had occasion for 

the services of one or two engineers, quick in invention and 

determined in execution: practical men, who could make the men and 

means their ingenuity perceived to be wanted out of the best 

in the adaptation of such materials to their purpose, as in the 

one, had no idea of stowing away a great national object in a 

Circumlocution Office, as strong wine is hidden from the light in 

a cellar until its fire and youth are gone, and the labourers who 

worked in the vineyard and pressed the grapes are dust.  With 

characteristic ignorance, it acted on the most decided and 

energetic notions of How to do it; and never showed the least 

respect for, or gave any quarter to, the great political science, 

latter art and mystery dead, in the person of any enlightened 

subject who practised it. 

which was in itself a most uncivilised and irregular way of 

proceeding.  Being found, they were treated with great confidence 

and honour (which again showed dense political ignorance), and were 

were regarded as men who meant to do it, engaging with other men 

who meant it to be done. 

that time whether he would be absent months or years.  The 

for him of all the details and results of their joint business, had 

necessitated labour within a short compass of time, which had 

his first leisure, and had slipped as quickly back again for his 

farewell interview with Doyce. 

gains and losses, responsibilities and prospects.  Daniel went 

through it all in his patient manner, and admired it all 

ingenious piece of mechanism than he had ever constructed, and 

the brims, as if he were absorbed in the contemplation of some 

wonderful engine. 

can be plainer.  Nothing can be better.' 

it as the business may need from time to time--' His partner 

stopped him. 

as you have done hitherto, and to lighten my mind of a load it is 

much relieved from.' 

depreciate your business qualities.' 

I am better fitted for.  I have perfect confidence in my partner, 

and I am satisfied that he will do what is best.  If I have a 

prejudice connected with money and money figures,' continued Doyce, 

laying that plastic workman's thumb of his on the lapel of his 

partner's coat, 'it is against speculating.  I don't think I have 

any other.  I dare say I entertain that prejudice, only because I 

have never given my mind fully to the subject.' 

Doyce, it is the soundest sense.' 

kind and bright. 

before you came down, I was saying the same thing to Pancks, who 

looked in here.  We both agreed that to travel out of safe 

with an air of confidence.  'Aye, aye, aye!  That's a cautious 

fellow.' 

specimen of caution.' 

the cautious character of Mr Pancks, than was quite intelligible, 

judged by the surface of their conversation. 

wait for no man, my trusty partner, and as I am ready for starting, 

you to grant a request of mine.' 

exception, for his partner's face was quick in suggesting it, 

'except that I will abandon your invention.' 

will have some definite reason, some responsible statement, 

something in the nature of a real answer, from those people.' 

for it, you never will.' 

try.' 

be.' 

to be so soon driven out of the field, where a much older and a 

long.' 

hand, and, casting a farewell look round the counting-house, went 

down-stairs with him.  Doyce was to go to Southampton to join the 

small staff of his fellow-travellers; and a coach was at the gate, 

well furnished and packed, and ready to take him there.  The 

him.  'Good luck to you, Mr Doyce!' said one of the number.  

'Wherever you go, they'll find as they've got a man among 'em) a 

and a man as is able, and if that's not a man, where is a man!' 

This oration from a gruff volunteer in the back-ground, not 

previously suspected of any powers in that way, was received with 

for ever afterwards.  In the midst of the three loud cheers, Daniel 

from sight, as if the concussion of the air had blown it out of 

Bleeding Heart Yard. 

among the workmen, and had done as much towards the cheering as a 

Englishmen, who do so rally one another's blood and spirit when 

they cheer in earnest, that the stir is like the rush of their 

whole history, with all its standards waving at once, from Saxon 

Alfred's downwards.  Mr Baptist had been in a manner whirled away 

condition when Clennam beckoned him to follow up-stairs, and return 

the books and papers to their places. 

which ensues on every separation, foreshadowing the great 

his desk, looking dreamily out at a gleam of sun.  But his 

liberated attention soon reverted to the theme that was foremost in 

his thoughts, and began, for the hundredth time, to dwell upon 

mysterious night when he had seen the man at his mother's.  Again 

the man jostled him in the crooked street, again he followed the 

man and lost him, again he came upon the man in the court-yard 

looking at the house, again he followed the man and stood beside 

him on the door-steps. 

     'Who passes by this road so late? 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine; 

     Who passes by this road so late? 

          Always gay!' 

It was not the first time, by many, that he had recalled the song 

of the child's game, of which the fellow had hummed @ verse while 

they stood side by side; but he was so unconscious of having 

repeated it audibly, that he started to hear the next verse. 

     'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower, 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine; 

     Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower, 

          Always gay!' 

Cavalletto had deferentially suggested the words and tune, 

supposing him to have stopped short for want of more. 

went near home, 'is from a sweet little voice.  A little voice, 

very pretty, very innocent.  Altro!' 

it more to himself than to his companion, and added to himself, 

repeating the man's next words.  'Death of my life, sir, it's my 

character to be impatient!' 

a moment. 

hook nose, pushed his eyes near together, dishevelled his hair, 

this, with a swiftness incredible to one who has not watched an 

Do you know a man of the name of Blandois?' 

song; have you not?' 

reject the name sufficiently, with his head and his right 

forefinger going at once. 

'Was this the man?  You can understand what I read aloud?' 

two hands flat upon the bill as if he had fiercely caught some 

man!  Behold him!' 

making as though he dusted his hands, returned, very much against 

his will: 

closer again to whisper it, 'Assassin!' 

did it make his mother's communication with the man appear.  

of gesticulation, to hear what had brought himself into such foul 

company. 

he had gone away from those antecedents.  How, at the house of 

entertainment called the Break of Day at Chalons on the Saone, he 

had been awakened in his bed at night by the same assassin, then 

assuming the name of Lagnier, though his name had formerly been 

fortunes together; how he held the assassin in such dread and 

upon the bill again, and with a vehemence that would have been 

same assassin!  Here he is!' 

lately seen the assassin in London.  On his remembering it, it 

suggested hope to Clennam that the recognition might be of later 

date than the night of the visit at his mother's; but Cavalletto 

for doubt that it had preceded that occasion. 

here, has wholly disappeared.' 

piously.  'A thousand thanks to Heaven!  Accursed assassin!' 

him, I can never know an hour's peace.' 

excuses!' 

that they looked into each other's eyes.  'I am certain that for 

the little I have been able to do for you, you are the most 

sincerely grateful of men.' 

in the world, and would make me (with far greater reason) as 

grateful to you as you are to me.' 

'I know not where to look,' cried the little man, kissing Arthur's 

instant of time!' 

'Al-tro!' cried Cavalletto.  And was gone with great speed. 

CHAPTER 23 

     respecting her Dreams 

otherwise Giovanni Baptista Cavalletto, vividly before him, Clennam 

entered on a weary day.  It was in vain that he tried to control 

stationary boat on a deep clear river, condemned, whatever 

of the fellow-creature he had drowned lying at the bottom, 

fancies which were gone and succeeded by others as soon as come, 

saw, steady and dark, and not to be stirred from its place, the one 

and that he could not fly from.  The assurance he now had, that 

Blandois, whatever his right name, was one of the worst of 

his mother had been in communication with such a man, would remain 

that she had been submissive to him and afraid of him, he hoped 

might be known to no one beyond himself; yet, knowing it, how could 

he separate it from his old vague fears, and how believe that there 

was nothing evil in such relations? 

knowledge of her indomitable character, enhanced his sense of 

that shame and exposure were impending over her and his father's 

memory, and to be shut out, as by a brazen wall, from the 

advice, energy, activity, money, credit, all his resources 

into stone, she could not have rendered him more completely 

would still admit of no approach, to make a desperate appeal to 

Affery.  If she could be brought to become communicative, and to do 

house, he might shake off the paralysis of which every hour that 

passed over his head made him more acutely sensible.  This was the 

result of his day's anxiety, and this was the decision he put in 

practice when the day closed in. 

door open, and Mr Flintwinch smoking a pipe on the steps.  If 

circumstances had been commonly favourable, Mistress Affery would 

have opened the door to his knock.  Circumstances being uncommonly 

unfavourable, the door stood open, and Mr Flintwinch was smoking 

his pipe on the steps. 

'Good evening,' said Arthur. 

circulated through the whole of his wry figure and came back by his 

wry throat, before coming forth to mingle with the smoke from the 

crooked chimneys and the mists from the crooked river. 

not actively strong; yet he was as tough as an old yew-tree, and as 

crusty as an old jackdaw.  Such a man, coming behind a much younger 

no relenting, might do it pretty surely in that solitary place at 

a late hour. 

drifted over the main one that was always in Clennam's mind, Mr 

it in his own way. 

'You'll be able to take my likeness, the next time you call, 

Arthur, I should think,' said Mr Flintwinch, drily, as he stooped 

to knock the ashes out. 

stared at him unpolitely.  'But my mind runs so much upon this 

matter,' he said, 'that I lose myself.' 

leisure, 'why it should trouble YOU, Arthur.' 

were of the canine race, and snapped at Arthur's hand. 

see my mother's name and residence hawked up and down in such an 

association?' 

'that it need signify much to you.  But I'll tell you what I do 

see, Arthur,' glancing up at the windows; 'I see the light of fire 

and candle in your mother's room!' 

him, 'that if it's advisable (as the proverb says it is) to let 

sleeping dogs lie, it's just as advisable, perhaps, to let missing 

dogs lie.  Let 'em be.  They generally turn up soon enough.' 

went into the dark hall.  Clennam stood there, following him with 

little room at the side, got one after three or four dips, and 

lighted the dim lamp against the wall.  All the while, Clennam was 

lay around them. 

up-stairs?' 

with her.  They came in while I was smoking, and I stayed behind to 

have my smoke out.' 

and repaired to his mother's room, where Mr Casby and Flora had 

from the scorched countenance of Affery, who, with the kitchen 

toasting-fork still in her hand, looked like a sort of allegorical 

general run of such personages in point of significant emblematical 

purpose. 

warm butter of the toast were exuding through the patriarchal 

skull, and with his face as ruddy as if the colouring matter of the 

speak to his mother without postponement. 

those who had anything to say to her apart, to wheel her to her 

desk; where she sat, usually with the back of her chair turned 

had spoken together without the intervention of a third person, it 

for Mrs Clennam to be asked, with a word of apology for the 

and, on her replying in the affirmative, to be wheeled into the 

position described. 

request, and moved her to her desk and seated himself on the stool, 

Mrs Finching merely began to talk louder and faster, as a delicate 

hint that she could overhear nothing, and Mr Casby stroked his long 

white locks with sleepy calmness. 

of that man I saw here.' 

Arthur.' 

spoke in her usual key and in her usual stern voice. 

direct.' 

She asked him, exactly as before, if he were there to tell her what 

it was? 

'And what is it?' 

murder.' 

horror.  Yet she still spoke aloud, when she demanded:-- 

he told you?' 

say the resemblance is not so exact, though, as that your informant 

became known to you through a letter from a correspondent with whom 

known to him through the agency of any such credentials, or indeed 

emphasis, 'Take care how you judge others, then.  I say to you, 

Arthur, for your good, take care how you judge!' 

Her emphasis had been derived from her eyes quite as much as from 

prevailing in the least with her, she now looked it out of his 

heart. 

you?' 

was not my act; it was yours.  How can you consistently ask me such 

occupies your place.' 

as she held forth in a most distracting manner on a chaos of 

subjects, in which mackerel, and Mr F.'s Aunt in a swing, had 

become entangled with cockchafers and the wine trade. 

'That is all you know of him from the fellow-prisoner?' 

But, of course, he gives a better account of himself than of his 

friend; it is needless to ask.  This will supply the rest of them 

he had told her. 

'I beg you to excuse me, Mr Casby--and you, too, Mrs Finching--for 

one other moment with my mother--' 

were still face to face.  She looked at him, as he ran over the 

possibilities of some result he had not intended, and could not 

matter of notoriety, and hurriedly arrived at the conclusion that 

it had best not be talked about; though perhaps he was guided by no 

more distinct reason than that he had taken it for granted that his 

mother would reserve it to herself and her partner. 

communicated.  I think you had better not repeat it.' 

doubts and suspicions and entreaties for explanations, and it is 

you, Arthur, who bring secrets here.  What is it to me, do you 

think, where the man has been, or what he has been?  What can it be 

nothing to me.  Now, let me go.' 

inspired by Flora.  this turning of his intelligence and of his 

whole attempt and design against himself, did even more than his 

with her were idle.  Nothing remained but the appeal to his old 

friend Affery. 

the appeal, seemed one of the least promising of human 

lord), had acquired such a lively conviction of the hazard of 

saying anything under any circumstances, that she had remained all 

symbolical instrument of hers; so that, when a word or two had been 

addressed to her by Flora, or even by the bottle-green patriarch 

like a dumb woman. 

an expedient which Flora might originate.  To whom he therefore 

whispered, 'Could you say you would like to go through the house?' 

time when Clennam would renew his boyhood and be madly in love with 

as rendered precious by its mysterious character, but as preparing 

the way for a tender interview in which he would declare the state 

just as ever Mrs Clennam I am touched to see except for being 

smokier which was to be expected with time and which we must all 

as I am sure I have had to do myself if not exactly smokier 

when papa used to bring me here the least of girls a perfect mass 

of chilblains to be stuck upon a chair with my feet on the rails 

and stare at Arthur--pray excuse me--Mr Clennam--the least of boys 

in the frightfullest of frills and jackets ere yet Mr F. appeared 

a misty shadow on the horizon paying attentions like the well-known 

spectre of some place in Germany beginning with a B is a moral 

lesson inculcating that all the paths in life are similar to the 

make the iron and things gravelled with ashes!' 

existence, Flora hurried on with her purpose. 

said it was a cheerful house for that it was never made to be but 

always highly impressive, fond memory recalls an occasion in youth 

ere yet the judgment was mature when Arthur--confirmed habit--Mr 

Clennam--took me down into an unused kitchen eminent for mouldiness 

and on dry bread in disgrace which at that halcyon period too 

beg to be permitted to revive those scenes and walk through the 

house?' 

Finching's good nature in being there at all, though her visit 

(before Arthur's unexpected arrival) was undoubtedly an act of pure 

was open to her.  Flora rose and looked to Arthur for his escort.  

'Certainly,' said he, aloud; 'and Affery will light us, I dare 

say.' 

when Mr Flintwinch stopped her with 'Why not?  Affery, what's the 

matter with you, woman?  Why not, jade!'  Thus expostulated with, 

into one of her husband's hands, and took the candlestick he 

offered from the other. 

Mrs Finching?' 

properly, or I'll come rolling down the banisters, and tumbling 

over you!' 

intention of leaving them.  Clennam looking back, and seeing him 

Flora reassured his mind by replying promptly, 'Why though not 

exactly proper Arthur and a thing I couldn't think of before a 

younger man or a stranger still I don't mind him if you so 

take me too tight.' 

'Oh my goodness me,' said she.  'You are very obedient indeed 

sure but still at the same time if you would like to be a little 

tighter than that I shouldn't consider it intruding.' 

anxious mind, Clennam descended to the basement of the house; 

heavier, and that when the house was lightest she was too.  

Returning from the dismal kitchen regions, which were as dreary as 

they could be, Mistress Affery passed with the light into his 

father's old room, and then into the old dining-room; always 

to speak to you!' 

it was a likely place to be heavy in.  Arthur, fast subsiding into 

head. 

have it, my woman, you shall have a good one!  Oh!  You shall have 

a sneezer, you shall have a teaser!' 

man so savagely, as to render it clear that in a choice of 

to go.  'Stay here the while, all!  Affery, my woman, move an inch, 

or speak a word in your foolishness, and I'll treble your dose!' 

The moment he was gone, Arthur released Mrs Finching: with some 

difficulty, by reason of that lady misunderstanding his intentions, 

and making arrangements with a view to tightening instead of 

slackening. 

come near me.  He'll see you.  Jeremiah will.  Don't.' 

'if I blow the candle out.' 

full of whisperings and counsellings; because it's full of noises.  

There never was such a house for noises.  I shall die of 'em, if 

Jeremiah don't strangle me first.  As I expect he will.' 

obliged to go about it as I am,' said Affery; 'and you'd feel that 

bursting through not being allowed to speak of 'em.  Here's 

Jeremiah!  You'll get me killed.' 

you would uncover your face and look.' 

even when he is.' 

are as safe with me as if he was fifty miles away.' 

thrown on the secrets of this house.' 

'I tell you, Arthur,' she interrupted, 'noises is the secrets, 

rustlings and stealings about, tremblings, treads overhead and 

treads underneath.' 

sweetheart an't far off, and she's a blabber.'   

reclining against him in a flutter, a very substantial angle of 

greater earnestness than directness of asseveration, that what she 

heard should go no further, but should be kept inviolate, 'if on no 

other account on Arthur's--sensible of intruding in being too 

familiar Doyce and Clennam's.' 

agreeable early remembrances I have, for my mother's sake, for your 

tell me something connected with the coming here of this man, if 

you will.' 

coming!' 

outside, talking.' 

hold of him, "but I have heard it over and over again."  While I 

says it, he stands a looking at me, all of a shake, he do.' 

come a dancing at me sideways, after I had let you out (he always 

woman, and a going to run you up."  So he took and squeezed the 

back of my neck in his hand, till it made me open MY mouth, and 

what he calls running me up, he do.  Oh, he's a wicked one!' 

'Don't I tell you I was sent to bed, Arthur!  Here he is!' 

counsellings, Affery, that you have spoken of.  What are they?' 

away!' 

ruin will come of it.' 

for ever so long.  Go away, go away!' 

expression that night, at the door, when I asked you what was going 

on here.  What do you mean by being in a dream?' 

you was by yourself; much less with your old sweetheart here.' 

protest.  Affery, who had been trembling and struggling the whole 

time, turned a deaf ear to all adjuration, and was bent on forcing 

herself out of the closet. 

here's the very last word I'll say afore I call to him--If ever you 

ought to it, as I told you when you first come home, for you 

life as I have), then do you get the better of 'em afore my face; 

and then do you say to me, Affery tell your dreams!  Maybe, then 

I'll tell 'em!' 

into the places where Jeremiah had left them; and Clennam, stepping 

accidentally extinguished the candle.  Mr Flintwinch looked on as 

he re-lighted it at the lamp in the hall, and preserved a profound 

taciturnity respecting the person who had been holding him in 

was, he took such umbrage at seeing his wife with her apron over 

her head, that he charged at her, and taking her veiled nose 

power of his person into the wring he gave it. 

survey of the house, until it had extended even to his old garret 

bedchamber.  His thoughts were otherwise occupied than with the 

tour of inspection; yet he took particular notice at the time, as 

closeness of the house; that they left the track of their footsteps 

in the dust on the upper floors; and that there was a resistance to 

the opening of one room door, which occasioned Affery to cry out 

that somebody was hiding inside, and to continue to believe so, 

though somebody was sought and not discovered.  When they at last 

her muffled hand, and talking in a low voice to the Patriarch as he 

locks, turning towards them as they came in, imparted an 

inestimable value and inexhaustible love of his species to his 

remark: 

premises--seeing the premises!' 

CHAPTER 24 

That illustrious man and great national ornament, Mr Merdle, 

continued his shining course.  It began to be widely understood 

much money out of it, could not be suffered to remain a commoner.  

A baronetcy was spoken of with confidence; a peerage was frequently 

mentioned.  Rumour had it that Mr Merdle had set his golden face 

a person could be sunk.  For the Barnacles, as a group of 

to them; and that when a soldier, sailor, or lawyer became 

ennobled, they let him in, as it were, by an act of condescension, 

Rumour) had the troubled Decimus his own hereditary part in this 

impression, but he also knew of several Barnacle claims already on 

the file, which came into collision with that of the master spirit. 

was, or was supposed to be, in stately excogitation of the 

occasions, one of those elephantine trots of his through a jungle 

of overgrown sentences, waving Mr Merdle about on his trunk as 

Capital, Prosperity, and all manner of blessings. 

months had passed unnoticed since the two English brothers had been 

rather of the Tite Barnacle class, quite a triumph of 

inconvenience, with a perpetual smell in it of the day before 

yesterday's soup and coach-horses, but extremely dear, as being 

exactly in the centre of the habitable globe.  In this enviable 

abode (and envied it really was by many people), Mrs Sparkler had 

active hostilities had been suspended by the arrival of the Courier 

twelve hours; after which, she had arisen to see about her 

as becoming as Mrs Merdle's.  A gloom was then cast over more than 

intelligence), and the Courier went back again. 

was a hot summer Sunday evening.  The residence in the centre of 

the habitable globe, at all times stuffed and close as if it had an 

incurable cold in its head, was that evening particularly stifling. 

clanging among the unmelodious echoes of the streets, and the 

lighted windows of the churches had ceased to be yellow in the grey 

narrow street over boxes of mignonette and flowers, was tired of 

the view.  Mrs Sparkler, looking at another window where her 

husband stood in the balcony, was tired of that view.  Mrs 

Sparkler, looking at herself in her mourning, was even tired of 

that view: though, naturally, not so tired of that as of the other 

two. 

why don't you say it?' 

nothing to say.'  But, as the repartee did not occur to him, he 

the side of his wife's couch. 

at a sprig in his hand as to be on the verge of the offence in 

it out of window. 

Mrs Sparkler, raising her eyes to him after another minute; 'you 

look so aggravatingly large by this light.  Do sit down.' 

same spot. 

the longest day.  I never did experience such a day.' 

presenting it. 

questions, I entreat you not.  Whose can it be but mine?' 

'Yes, I thought it was yours,' said Mr Sparkler. 

was such a long day as this!'  After another little while, she got 

up slowly, walked about, and came back again. 

'I think you must have got the fidgets.' 

with no non--' 

upon the world, I am certain.' 

few trifles about, and had looked down into the darkening street 

herself among its pillows. 

able to touch you with my fan, that I may impress you very much 

with what I am going to say.  That will do.  Quite close enough.  

Oh, you do look so big!' 

couldn't help it, and said that 'our fellows,' without more 

of Quinbus Flestrin, Junior, or the Young Man Mountain. 

It would interest you, or I would have made a point of telling 

you.' 

state of dreadful depression in which I am this evening.' 

be, a remarkably fine woman with no--' 

accompanied with a flouncing up from the sofa and a flouncing down 

again, that a minute or two elapsed before he felt himself equal to 

saying in explanation: 

in society.' 

recover, in a visiting point of view, the shock of poor dear papa's 

death, and my poor uncle's--though I do not disguise from myself 

that the last was a happy release, for, if you are not presentable 

you had much better die--' 

interrupted. 

speaking of my poor uncle?' 

Mr Sparkler, 'that I felt a little uncomfortable.  Thank you, my 

love.' 

her fan, 'and I had better go to bed.' 

her eyebrows raised with a hopeless expression as if she had 

utterly given up all terrestrial affairs.  At length, without the 

short, sharp manner: 

the very period when I might shine most in society, and should most 

like for very momentous reasons to shine in society--I find myself 

in a situation which to a certain extent disqualifies me for going 

into society.  it's too bad, really!' 

home.' 

'Edmund, you ridiculous creature,' returned Fanny, with great 

indignation; 'do you suppose that a woman in the bloom of youth and 

her inferior?  If you do suppose such a thing, your folly is 

boundless.' 

'Got over!' repeated Fanny, with immeasurable scorn. 

declared with bitterness that it really was too bad, and that 

positively it was enough to make one wish one was dead! 

her sense of personal ill-usage; 'provoking as it is, and cruel as 

it seems, I suppose it must be submitted to.' 

better go to bed!' 

tender and earnest apology.  His apology was accepted; but Mrs 

Sparkler requested him to go round to the other side of the sofa 

and sit in the window-curtain, to tone himself down. 

began as usual to prose and worry, is, that I shall guard against 

going out to my own satisfaction, I must arrange to have some 

people or other always here; for I really cannot, and will not, 

have another such day as this has been.' 

that you'll soon have your sister--' 

alone.' 

danger and said it assentingly, 'No, Oh dear no; she wouldn't do 

here alone.' 

that still character that they require a contrast--require life and 

make one love them of all things; but she will require to be 

roused, on more accounts than one.' 

and grieved very much.  I have done so myself.  I have felt it 

dear papa at the last; which I unhappily was not.' 

little Mouse will have to be roused.  Also, from the effects of 

and which in the meanwhile unsettles us all by keeping poor dear 

papa's affairs from being wound up.  Fortunately, however, the 

are in that state of order that they can wait until my brother 

Edward recovers his health in Sicily, sufficiently to come over, 

be done.' 

made bold to opine. 

turning her eyelids a little in his direction (she held forth, in 

words.  He couldn't have a better nurse to bring him round.  There 

but, as a nurse, she is Perfection.  Best of Amys!' 

had had, biggodd, a long bout of it, my dear girl. 

'If Bout, Edmund,' returned Mrs Sparkler, 'is the slang term for 

indisposition, he has.  If it is not, I am unable to give an 

poor dear papa before his death--or under some other unwholesome 

for it indeed.' 

Mr Sparkler considered it a parallel case to that of some of our 

her eyes again, and refused to have any consciousness of our 

fellows of the West Indies, or of Yellow Jack. 

weeks.  And lastly, she will require to be roused from a low 

Don't ask me what it is, Edmund, because I must decline to tell 

you.' 

Amiable and dear little Twoshoes!  As to the settlement of poor 

papa's affairs, my interest in that is not very selfish.  Papa 

or nothing to expect.  Provided he had made no will that can come 

papa, dear papa.' 

name soon stimulated her to dry her eyes and say: 

thankful to think, and gives one the greatest confidence in his 

the time of poor dear papa's death at all events--that he paid off 

Mrs General instantly, and sent her out of the house.  I applaud 

promptitude, so exactly what I would have done myself!' 

double knock was heard at the door.  A very odd knock.  Low, as if 

Mrs Sparkler.  'Look out.' 

and flattening the unknown below. 

though!' 

On this second thought he went out into the balcony again and had 

another look.  He came back as the door was opened, and announced 

not mistaken, for his governor, with his tile in his hand, was 

introduced immediately afterwards. 

darkness. 

behind the door, picking his lips.  'I thought I'd give you a 

call,' he said.  'I am rather particularly occupied just now; and, 

as I happened to be out for a stroll, I thought I'd give you a 

call.' 

dining? 

particularly.' 

if he were not sure about it.  Something to eat was proposed.  'No, 

thank you,' said Mr Merdle, 'I don't feel inclined for it.  I was 

to have dined out along with Mrs Merdle.  But as I didn't feel 

getting into the carriage, and thought I'd take a stroll instead.' 

looked in at the Club, and got a bottle of wine.' 

Sparkler had offered him, and which he had hitherto been pushing 

now put his hat upon another chair beside him, and, looking down 

I thought I'd give you a call.' 

man.' 

do, Mr Merdle, loss of appetite is a serious thing with you, and 

you must have it seen to.  You must not be ill.' 

well as I want to be.' 

all times a mind that had as little as possible to say for itself 

began to wonder how long the master-mind meant to stay. 

talking.  'I was saying,' she pursued, 'that my brother's illness 

that part of the room which was within his range: 'not that it is 

of any consequence.' 

anything.' 

after taking another gaze into the depths of his hat as if he 

appended to his last remark the confirmatory words, 'Oh dear no.  

No.  Not she.  Not likely.' 

he were going to take up Mrs Merdle and the carriage in his way 

home? 

if he were telling his own fortune--'to take care of herself.  I 

dare say she'll manage to do it.' 

back on her sofa again, shut her eyes and raised her eyebrows in 

her former retirement from mundane affairs. 

myself.  I thought I'd give you a call, you know.' 

penknife?' 

seldom prevail upon herself even to write a letter, to lend to a 

man of such vast business as Mr Merdle.  'Isn't it?'  Mr Merdle 

wedding keepsakes about, with scissors and tweezers and such things 

in them.  You shall have it back to-morrow.' 

on my little table there, and give Mr Merdle the mother of pearl 

penknife.' 

handle, I think I should prefer one with a darker handle.' 

tortoise-shell.' 

his wife said to the master-spirit graciously: 

moment entombed Mrs Sparkler's hand: wrist, bracelet, and all.  

highly meritorious Chelsea Veteran or Greenwich Pensioner. 

never was a woman, not wholly devoid of personal attractions, so 

worn out by idiotic and lumpish people, Fanny passed into the 

balcony for a breath of air.  Waters of vexation filled her eyes; 

and they had the effect of making the famous Mr Merdle, in going 

down the street, appear to leap, and waltz, and gyrate, as if he 

were possessed of several Devils. 

CHAPTER 25 

in full force.  Ferdinand Barnacle was there, and in his most 

could have known on what sights those thoughtful eyes of his had 

rested within an hour or two, and near to whose beds, and under 

what roofs, his composed figure had stood.  But Physician was a 

composed man, who performed neither on his own trumpet, nor on the 

trumpets of other people.  Many wonderful things did he see and 

life among; yet his equality of compassion was no more disturbed 

than the Divine Master's of all healing was.  He went, like the 

rain, among the just and unjust, doing all the good he could, and 

neither proclaiming it in the synagogues nor at the corner of 

streets. 

it may be, can fail to be invested with an interest peculiar to the 

possession of such knowledge, Physician was an attractive man.  

Even the daintier gentlemen and ladies who had no idea of his 

had, by the monstrous impropriety of his proposing to them 'Come 

enormous quantity of diluent. 

hears the wanderings of our minds, and sees the undisguised 

almost natural. 

humanity was as sharp as a razor; yet a razor is not a generally 

have given him a better insight into their tendernesses and 

all the circuits put together, in threescore years and ten.  Bar 

always had a suspicion of this, and perhaps was glad to encourage 

it (for, if the world were really a great Law Court, one would 

think that the last day of Term could not too soon arrive); and so 

man did. 

in it, and consequently he was no loss.  Bar, who picked up all 

sorts of odds and ends about Westminster Hall, much as a raven 

the subject with Mrs Merdle herself; sidling up to that lady, of 

course, with his double eye-glass and his jury droop. 

lately, that there is to be an addition to the titled personages of 

this realm.' 

different ears from ours--in lovely ears?'  He looked expressively 

at Mrs Merdle's nearest ear-ring. 

displeased). 

Merdle, carelessly arranging her stronghold.  'Who is it?' 

'What an admirable witness you would make!' said Bar.  'No jury 

were ever so bad a one; but you would be such a good one!' 

insinuating accents: 

women, a few weeks, or it may be a few days, hence?' 

'Do ask it to-morrow, and tell me the next time you see me what it 

says.' 

but Bar, with all his sharpness, got nothing out of them.  

Physician, on the other hand, taking Mrs Merdle down to her 

carriage and attending on her as she put on her cloak, inquired 

into the symptoms with his usual calm directness. 

I was half disposed to ask you.' 

'To ask me!  Why me?' 

you than in any one.' 

professionally.  You have heard the talk, of course?' 

taciturn and reserved he is.  I assure you I have no idea what 

foundation for it there may be.  I should like it to be true; why 

her Good Night.  He stood for a moment at his own hall door, 

looking sedately at the elegant equipage as it rattled away.  On 

his return up-stairs, the rest of the guests soon dispersed, and he 

was left alone.  Being a great reader of all kinds of literature 

(and never at all apologetic for that weakness), he sat down 

comfortably to read. 

twelve, when his attention was called to it by a ringing at the 

door bell.  A man of plain habits, he had sent his servants to bed 

and must needs go down to open the door.  He went down, and there 

tight to his shoulders.  For a moment, he thought the man had been 

A second look, however, showed him that the man was particularly 

clean, and not otherwise discomposed as to his dress than as it 

answered this description. 

street.' 

the table.' 

and they hurried away together. 

that establishment were looking out for them at the door, and 

running up and down the passages.  'Request everybody else to keep 

back, if you please,' said the physician aloud to the master; 'and 

do you take me straight to the place, my friend,' to the messenger. 

door.  Physician was close upon him, and looked round the door too. 

hastily drained off.  Lying in it, as in a grave or sarcophagus, 

mean, common features.  A sky-light had been opened to release the 

steam with which the room had been filled; but it hung, condensed 

the bath still warm; but the face and figure were clammy to the 

ink. 

an hour.'  This echo of the physician's words ran through the 

passages and little rooms, and through the house while he was yet 

of the bath, and while he was yet dabbling his hands in water; 

redly veining it as the marble was veined, before it mingled into 

one tint. 

money, and pocket-book on the table.  A folded note half buckled up 

in the pocket-book, and half protruding from it, caught his 

observant glance.  He looked at it, touched it, pulled it a little 

to me,' and opened and read it. 

took an equable business-like possession of the deceased, and of 

what had been his property, with no greater disturbance of manner 

or countenance than usually attends the winding-up of a clock.  

Physician was glad to walk out into the night air--was even glad, 

in spite of his great experience, to sit down upon a door-step for 

a little while: feeling sick and faint. 

saw a light in the room where he knew his friend often sat late 

getting up his work.  As the light was never there when Bar was 

of the jury. 

that somebody had come to tell him that somebody else was robbing 

him, or otherwise trying to get the better of him, he came down 

thrown wide open that he might the more freely choke the opposite 

witnesses.  In consequence, he came down, looking rather wild.  

said, 'What's the matter?' 

other's breast.  'And so have I!  I see it in your face.' 

not much in it as to quantity; but it made a great demand on his 

utterance to his regret that he had not himself found a clue to 

the case, and what a case it would have been to have got to the 

bottom of! 

Bar could not at once return to his inveiglements of the most 

enlightened and remarkable jury he had ever seen in that box, with 

go down, and no unhappily abused professional tact and skill 

prevail (this was the way he meant to begin with them); so he said 

self-possession in the air; and the wings of day were fluttering 

the night when Physician knocked at the door. 

his master--that is to say, was fast asleep in the kitchen over a 

couple of candles and a newspaper, demonstrating the great 

accumulation of mathematical odds against the probabilities of a 

house being set on fire by accident When this serving man was 

roused, Physician had still to await the rousing of the Chief 

a flannel gown and list shoes; but with his cravat on, and a Chief 

Butler all over.  It was morning now.  Physician had opened the 

news to break to her.' 

he had looked on at the dinners in that very room. 

and I should wish to leave immediately.' 

Physician, warmly. 

send to you, or any other directions I can give before I leave, 

respecting what you would wish to be done?' 

rejoined Bar in the street, he said no more of his interview with 

had told her she had borne pretty well.  Bar had devoted his 

leisure in the street to the construction of a most ingenious man- 

matter settled in his mind, it was lucid on the late catastrophe, 

and they walked home slowly, discussing it in every bearing.  

Before parting at the Physician's door, they both looked up at the 

the breath and voices of a few early stirrers were peacefully 

all those hundreds and thousands of beggared people who were yet 

over them, what a fearful cry against one miserable soul would go 

up to Heaven! 

rapidity.  At first, he was dead of all the diseases that ever were 

known, and of several bran-new maladies invented with the speed of 

Light to meet the demand of the occasion.  He had concealed a 

dropsy from infancy, he had inherited a large estate of water on 

the chest from his grandfather, he had had an operation performed 

subject to the explosion of important veins in his body after the 

manner of fireworks, he had had something the matter with his 

lungs, he had had something the matter with his heart, he had had 

something the matter with his brain.  Five hundred people who sat 

down to breakfast entirely uninformed on the whole subject, 

personally knew Physician to have said to Mr Merdle, 'You must 

expect to go out, some day, like the snuff of a candle;' and that 

once.'  By about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, something the 

matter with the brain, became the favourite theory against the 

to be 'Pressure.' 

all day but for Bar's having taken the real state of the case into 

Court at half-past nine.  This led to its beginning to be currently 

himself.  Pressure, however, so far from being overthrown by the 

discovery, became a greater favourite than ever.  There was a 

general moralising upon Pressure, in every street.  All the people 

who had tried to make money and had not been able to do it, said, 

There you were!  You no sooner began to devote yourself to the 

yourself to by work, work, work!  You persisted in working, you 

overdid it.  Pressure came on, and you were done for!  This 

slightest danger of overdoing it.  These, one and all, declared, 

as to keep off Pressure, and preserve them, a comfort to their 

friends, for many years. 

appalling whispers to circulate, east, west, north, and south.  At 

whether there might not be a temporary difficulty in 'realising' 

month or so), on the part of the wonderful Bank.  As the whispers 

became louder, which they did from that time every minute, they 

became more threatening.  He had sprung from nothing, by no natural 

growth or process that any one could account for; he had been, 

never had any money of his own, his ventures had been utterly 

progression, as the day declined, the talk rose in sound and 

purpose.  He had left a letter at the Baths addressed to his 

physician, and his physician had got the letter, and the letter 

would be produced at the Inquest on the morrow, and it would fall 

like a thunderbolt upon the multitude he had deluded.  Numbers of 

men in every profession and trade would be blighted by his 

the workhouse; legions of women and children would have their whole 

future desolated by the hand of this mighty scoundrel.  Every 

sharer in the plunder of innumerable homes; every servile 

by edition after edition of the evening papers, swelled into such 

the name of Merdle, coupled with every form of execration. 

had been simply Forgery and Robbery.  He, the uncouth object of 

such wide-spread adulation, the sitter at great men's feasts, the 

roc's egg of great ladies' assemblies, the subduer of 

exclusiveness, the leveller of pride, the patron of patrons, the 

peaceful public benefactors, and upon all the leaders of all the 

Arts and Sciences, with all their works to testify for them, during 

two centuries at least--he, the shining wonder, the new 

constellation to be followed by the wise men bringing gifts, until 

it stopped over a certain carrion at the bottom of a bath and 

that ever cheated the gallows. 

CHAPTER 26 

Pancks rushed into Arthur Clennam's Counting-house.  The Inquest 

was over, the letter was public, the Bank was broken, the other 

The admired piratical ship had blown up, in the midst of a vast 

fleet of ships of all rates, and boats of all sizes; and on the 

to pieces, drowning men clinging to unseaworthy spars and going 

down every minute, spent swimmers floating dead, and sharks. 

were overthrown.  Unopened letters and unsorted papers lay strewn 

his usual place, with his arms crossed on the desk, and his head 

bowed down upon them. 

bowed down upon them; and for some time they remained in these 

attitudes, idle and silent, with the width of the little room 

between them.  Mr Pancks was the first to lift up his head and 

speak. 

than I deserve.' 

What do I myself deserve!' 

helpful, indefatigable old man who has worked his way all through 

I have ruined him--brought him to shame and disgrace--ruined him, 

ruined him!' 

of his head, and tore it in desperation at the spectacle. 

do it; Beast, what did you mean by it!  Catch hold of me somewhere. 

at his tough hair in a most pitiless and cruel manner. 

been how much better for you, and how much better for me!' 

'At me again!' 

'If you had never gone into those accursed calculations, and 

Clennam, 'it would have been how much better for you, Pancks, and 

how much better for me!' 

hair; 'at me again, and again!' 

said all he wanted to say, and more.  He wrung his hand, only 

adding, 'Blind leaders of the blind, Pancks!  Blind leaders of the 

blind!  But Doyce, Doyce, Doyce; my injured partner!'  That brought 

his head down on the desk once more. 

first encroached upon by Pancks. 

the fire.  All in vain.  All gone.  All vanished.' 

depths of his soul. 

it.' 

it's wonderful how many people I've heard of, who were going to 

realise yesterday, of all days in the three hundred and sixty-five, 

if it hadn't been too late!' 

tragic than so many groans: while from head to foot, he was in that 

begrimed, besmeared, neglected state, that he might have been an 

through its want of cleaning. 

with great difficulty. 

wrench that he pulled out several prongs of it.  After looking at 

these with an eye of wild hatred, he put them in his pocket. 

silently dropping down his face, 'must be taken at once.  What 

wretched amends I can make must be made.  I must clear my 

unfortunate partner's reputation.  I must retain nothing for 

myself.  I must resign to our creditors the power of management I 

have so much abused, and I must work out as much of my fault--or 

crime--as is susceptible of being worked out in the rest of my 

days.' 

sooner the business can pass out of my hands, the better for it.  

There are engagements to be met, this week, which would bring the 

for a single day by going on for that space, secretly knowing what 

is to do it.' 

if his steam were turning into water as fast as he dismally blew it 

off.  'Have some legal help.' 

Pentonville.  While he was gone Arthur never raised his head from 

the desk, but remained in that one position. 

back with him.  Mr Rugg had had such ample experience, on the road, 

of Mr Pancks's being at that present in an irrational state of 

gentleman to take himself out of the way.  Mr Pancks, crushed and 

submissive, obeyed. 

Breach of Promise action of Rugg and Bawkins, in which she was 

Plaintiff,' said Mr Rugg.  'He takes too strong and direct an 

getting on, in our profession, with feelings worked upon, sir.' 

allowing your own feelings to be worked upon.  Now, pray don't, 

look 'em in the face.' 

'If the money I have sacrificed had been all my own, Mr Rugg,' 

sighed Mr Clennam, 'I should have cared far less.' 

in my experience, that it's their own money people are most 

particular about.  I have seen people get rid of a good deal of 

other people's money, and bear it very well: very well indeed.' 

stool at the desk and proceeded to business. 

is the usual plain, straightforward, common-sense question.  What 

can we do for ourself?  What can we do for ourself?' 

mistake it in the beginning.  It is, what can I do for my partner, 

how can I best make reparation to him?' 

you are still allowing your feeling to be worked upon.  I don't 

like the term "reparation," sir, except as a lever in the hands of 

worked upon?' 

it should render you unwilling to discharge such business as it 

necessitates, I am sorry for it, and must seek other aid.  But I 

will represent to you at once, that to argue against it with me is 

useless.' 

mine.  Such was my principle in the case of Rugg and Bawkins.  Such 

is my principle in most cases.  ' 

Clennam then proceeded to state to Mr Rugg his fixed resolution.  

integrity, and that in all he meant to do, he was guided above all 

publicly to accept the blame of what he had rashly done, and 

publicly to exonerate his partner from all participation in the 

responsibility of it, lest the successful conduct of that 

attaching to his partner's honour and credit in another country.  

He told Mr Rugg that to clear his partner morally, to the fullest 

against his partner's caution, embarked its resources in the 

it would be to many men; and was therefore the atonement he had 

first to make.  With this view, his intention was to print a 

and, besides circulating it among all who had dealings with the 

this measure (the description of which cost Mr Rugg innumerable wry 

could be known and his partner communicated with, and humbly 

submitting himself to their direction.  If, through their 

consideration for his partner's innocence, the affairs could ever 

be got into such train as that the business could be profitably 

it should revert to his partner, as the only reparation he could 

make to him in money value for the distress and loss he had 

as a faithful clerk. 

done, still the wryness of his face and the uneasiness of his limbs 

so sorely required the propitiation of a Protest, that he made one. 

I will carry out your views, sir; but, under protest.'  Mr Rugg 

then stated, not without prolixity, the heads of his protest.  

been deluded being certain to find excuses and reasons for 

of every individual sufferer persuading himself, to his violent 

indignation, that but for the example of all the other sufferers he 

never would have put himself in the way of suffering.  Because such 

them; and exposing him a solitary target to a straggling cross- 

fire, which might bring him down from half-a-dozen quarters at 

once. 

protest, nothing in it lessened the force, or could lessen the 

account with the papers of the business. 

of people were wildly staring about for somebody alive to heap 

reproaches on; and this notable case, courting publicity, set the 

living somebody so much wanted, on a scaffold.  When people who had 

nothing to do with the case were so sensible of its flagrancy, 

people who lost money by it could scarcely be expected to deal 

and read them all, informed his client within a week that he feared 

there were writs out. 

'The writs will find me here.' 

for him, and mysteriously besought him to step into Happy Cottage.  

There he found Mr Rugg. 

Counting-house this morning if I was you, sir.' 

once.' 

cases, that some insignificant matter pushes itself in front and 

Palace Court jurisdiction--and I have reason to believe that a 

well to keep up appearances.  As your professional adviser, I 

better.' 

should be over.  I will go on, and take my chance.' 

reason.  The other may be taste; but this is reason.  If you should 

be taken on a little one, sir, you would go to the Marshalsea.  

Now, you know what the Marshalsea is.  Very close.  Excessively 

confined.  Whereas in the King's Bench--' Mr Rugg waved his right 

hand freely, as expressing abundance of space. 

any other prison.' 

taste, too, and we may be walking.' 

walked through the Yard to the other end.  The Bleeding Hearts were 

more interested in Arthur since his reverses than formerly; now 

freedom.  Many of them came out to look after him, and to observe 

by it.'  Mrs Plornish and her father stood at the top of the steps 

at their own end, much depressed and shaking their heads. 

at the Counting-house.  But an elderly member of the Jewish 

persuasion, preserved in rum, followed them close, and looked in at 

the glass before Mr Rugg had opened one of the day's letters. 

Clennam, I think this is the gentleman I was mentioning.' 

madder ob bithznithz,' and executed his legal function. 

rubbing his hands. 

clothes.'  Mr Rugg in a light airy way replied in the affirmative, 

and shook hands with him.  He and his attendant then went down- 

stairs, got into the first conveyance they found, and drove to the 

old gates. 

'Where I little thought, Heaven forgive me,' said Clennam to 

himself, 'that I should ever enter thus!' 

might have thought turnkeys would have been.  The elder Mr Chivery 

don't call to mind, sir, as I was ever less glad to see you.'  The 

all; he stood looking at him in a state of indecision so observable 

into the jail. 

feigned to be occupied with the perusal of letters from his pocket. 

gratitude, how the elder Mr Chivery kept the Lodge clear of 

misery as easy to him as he could. 

he felt himself touched upon the shoulder.  It was by Young John; 

and he said, 'You can come now.' 

and said: 

like the room, and here it is for you.' 

(he went away directly) to the feelings which the empty room 

awakened in Clennam's wounded breast, and to the crowding 

associations with the one good and gentle creature who had 

sanctified it.  Her absence in his altered fortunes made it, and 

love and truth, that he turned against the wall to weep, sobbing 

out, as his heart relieved itself, 'O my Little Dorrit!' 

CHAPTER 27 

upon it, was unwontedly quiet.  Arthur Clennam dropped into a 

solitary arm-chair, itself as faded as any debtor in the jail, and 

yielded himself to his thoughts. 

commonly induced, and from which dangerous resting-place so many 

as if he were removed from them into another state of existence.  

Taking into account where he was, the interest that had first 

brought him there when he had been free to keep away, and the 

gentle presence that was equally inseparable from the walls and 

bars about him and from the impalpable remembrances of his later 

that everything his memory turned upon should bring him round again 

fact itself, but because of the reminder it brought with it, how 

much the dear little creature had influenced his better 

resolutions. 

together,' he thought, 'and set something like purpose before my 

sake, without encouragement, without notice, against ignoble 

obstacles that would have turned an army of received heroes and 

heroines?  One weak girl!  When I tried to conquer my misplaced 

energies, had slighted the whisper in my heart, that if my father 

had erred, it was my first duty to conceal the fault and to repair 

me to put me to shame?  Little Dorrit's.'  So always as he sat 

it seemed to him as if he met the reward of having wandered away 

from her, and suffered anything to pass between him and his 

remembrance of her virtues. 

a very little way, without being turned towards him. 

for you?' 

couldn't make you hear.' 

'Half-a-dozen times.' 

its noontide doze, that the inmates were loitering about the shady 

for hours. 

'Your things is come,' said Mr Chivery, 'and my son is going to 

carry 'em up.  I should have sent 'em up but for his wishing to 

carry 'em himself.  Indeed he would have 'em himself, and so I 

couldn't send 'em up.  Mr Clennam, could I say a word to you?' 

about it, and not the least of a gentleman. 

me coming in.  Mr Clennam, don't you take no notice of my son (if 

My son has a 'art, and my son's 'art is in the right place.  Me and 

his mother knows where to find it, and we find it sitiwated 

correct.' 

the door.  He might have been gone ten minutes, when his son 

succeeded him. 

down. 

trouble.' 

with care. 

now, Mr John.' 

first, 'I don't know as I can.  No; I find I can't!'  He then stood 

regarding the prisoner sternly, though with a swelling humour in 

his eyes that looked like pity. 

me these kind services?  There must be some mistake between us.  If 

I have done anything to occasion it I am sorry.' 

forwards in the socket, for which it was rather tight.  'No 

mistake, sir, in the feelings with which my eyes behold you at the 

Clennam--which I am not; and if you weren't under a cloud--which 

you are; and if it wasn't against all rules of the Marshalsea-- 

to anything else I could name.' 

Arthur looked at him for a moment in some wonder, and some little 

away, he sat down with a heavy sigh in the faded chair again. 

cried out, 'I beg your pardon!' 

sunken head.  'Say no more.  I am not worth it.' 

to parties without furniture, that have the room.  It an't much, 

but it's at your service.  Free, I mean.  I could not think of 

nothing.' 

accept the favour.  John was still turning his wrist, and still 

contending with himself in his former divided manner. 

'What is the matter between us?' said Arthur. 

loud and sharp.  'Nothing's the matter.' 

whose--I needn't mention him--he died a great gentleman.  I bought 

it of an individual that he gave it to, and that lived here after 

him.  But the individual wasn't any ways equal to him.  Most 

individuals would find it hard to come up to his level.' 

kept it there. 

intruded upon him when he was over here in London.  On the whole he 

to ask me to sit down and to inquire after father and all other old 

friends.  Leastways humblest acquaintances.  He looked, to me, a 

good deal changed, and I said so when I came back.  I asked him if 

Miss Amy was well--' 

question to such as me,' returned Young John, after appearing to 

take a large invisible pill.  'Since you do put me the question, I 

am sorry I can't answer it.  But the truth is, he looked upon the 

inquiry as a liberty, and said, "What was that to me?" It was then 

before.  However, he spoke very handsome afterwards; very 

handsome.' 

remarked, at about the middle of the pause, 'He both spoke and 

acted very handsome.' 

go without eating and drinking?' 

have no appetite just now.' 

and hours partaking of no refreshment because you have no appetite, 

why then you should and must partake of refreshment without an 

a liberty, please to come and take a cup.  Or I can bring a tray 

here in two minutes.' 

the elder Mr Chivery's entreaty, and the younger Mr Chivery's 

they went out, slided the key into his pocket with great dexterity, 

and led the way to his own residence. 

room to which Clennam had hurried on the day when the enriched 

family had left the prison for ever, and where he had lifted her 

insensible from the floor.  He foresaw where they were going as 

soon as their feet touched the staircase.  The room was so far 

changed that it was papered now, and had been repainted, and was 

far more comfortably furnished; but he could recall it just as he 

had seen it in that single glance, when he raised her from the 

ground and carried her down to the carriage. 

'I recollect it well, Heaven bless her!' 

to look at his visitor, as long as his visitor continued to glance 

about the room.  Finally, he made a start at the teapot, gustily 

rattled a quantity of tea into it from a canister, and set off for 

the common kitchen to fill it with hot water. 

his return to the miserable Marshalsea; it spoke to him so 

her name in a low voice.  He stood at the window, looking over the 

prison-parapet with its grim spiked border, and breathed a 

benediction through the summer haze towards the distant land where 

she was rich and prosperous. 

that he had been outside by bringing with him fresh butter in a 

these were arranged upon the table to his satisfaction, they sat 

down to tea. 

could force nothing upon himself but a cup of tea. 

basket. 

was good enough of itself) seemed to blow a faint simoom of ham 

through the whole Marshalsea. 

again handed the basket. 

It was so like handing green meat into the cage of a dull 

imprisoned bird, and John had so evidently brought the little 

basket as a handful of fresh relief from the stale hot paving- 

stones and bricks of the jail, that Clennam said, with a smile, 'It 

but I cannot even get this down to-day.' 

his own plate, and fell to folding the cabbage-leaf that had 

contained the ham.  When he had folded it into a number of layers, 

began to flatten it between both his hands, and to eye Clennam 

attentively. 

some force, 'that if it's not worth your while to take care of 

else's.' 

for whose.' 

should be capable of the mean action of making me such an answer.  

Mr Clennam, I am surprised that a gentleman who is capable of 

and truly I am astonished!' 

John sat down again, and fell to rolling his green packet on his 

with a fixed look of indignant reproach. 

no more about it.  I shouldn't have given my mind to it again, I 

unfortunate for me, this day!'  (In his agitation Young John 

tree had been made a capture of than a private defendant, such 

mingled streams of feelings broke loose again within me, that 

everything was for the first few minutes swept away before them, 

struggled, and got out of it.  If it was the last word I had to 

of it I came.  I argued that if I had been rude, apologies was due, 

so base as to deny that dodge you do, and thrown me back upon 

myself you have!' 

'What is it?  What do you mean, John?'  But, John, being in that 

state of mind in which nothing would seem to be more impossible to 

a certain class of people than the giving of an answer, went ahead 

blindly. 

audaciousness to think, I am sure, that all was anything but lost.  

that it was possible to be so blest, not after the words that 

But is that a reason why I am to have no memory, why I am to have 

no thoughts, why I am to have no sacred spots, nor anything?' 

'It's all very well to trample on it, sir,' John went on, scouring 

be guilty of the action.  It's all very well to trample on it, but 

it's there.  It may be that it couldn't be trampled upon if it 

wasn't there.  But that doesn't make it gentlemanly, that doesn't 

when he isn't a woman, which among female criminals he's expected 

to be.' 

sense of being wounded in some very tender respect, expressed in 

his burning face and in the agitation of his voice and manner, 

which Arthur must have been cruel to disregard.  He turned his 

thoughts back to the starting-point of this unknown injury; and in 

the meantime Young John, having rolled his green packet pretty 

round, cut it carefully into three pieces, and laid it on a plate 

as if it were some particular delicacy. 

have made some reference to Miss Dorrit.' 

offend you yet, when I say I don't understand it.' 

know and long have known that I felt towards Miss Dorrit, call it 

not the presumption of love, but adoration and sacrifice ?' 

from Mrs Chivery, your mother, that I went to see her once?' 

your affection--' 

Dorrit never did, sir.  I wish to be honourable and true, so far as 

that she ever did, or that she ever led me to believe she did; no, 

nor even that it was ever to be expected in any cool reason that 

times.  As likewise,' added John, 'similarly was her gen-teel 

family.' 

very respectable, in spite of his small stature and his rather weak 

legs, and his very weak hair, and his poetical temperament, that a 

Arthur's hands. 

regard him with a wondering expression of face. 

'Leastways,' said John, stretching his hand across the tea-tray, 

'if too strong a remark, withdrawn!  But, why not, why not?  When 

sake, why not be open, though a turnkey?  Why did I get you the 

room which I knew you'd like best?  Why did I carry up your things? 

since the morning?  On the ground of your own merits?  No.  They're 

very great, I've no doubt at all; but not on the ground of them.  

Another's merits have had their weight, and have had far more 

weight with Me.  Then why not speak free?' 

I have so true a respect for your character, that if I have 

appeared to be less sensible than I really am of the fact that the 

kind services you have rendered me to-day are attributable to my 

be a fault, and I ask your forgiveness.' 

free!' 

that I would wilfully add to my other self-reproaches, that of 

come there, and stood looking at him thoughtfully. 

'Mr Clennam, do you mean to say that you don't know?' 

wall.  'He says, What!' 

spikes, and looked at John. 

him in a doleful maze, 'he appears to mean it!  Do you see this 

window, sir?' 

witnesses of it, from day to day, from night to night, from week to 

week, from month to month.  For how often have I seen Miss Dorrit 

here when she has not seen me!' 

the breast, and backed to his chair, and sat down on it with a pale 

face, holding the arms, and shaking his head at him. 

who has been awakened from sleep, and stupefied by intelligence 

beyond his full comprehension. 

You are completely mistaken.' 

you like, for I don't set up to be a penetrating character, and am 

well aware of my own deficiencies.  But, _I_ mistaken on a point 

that has caused me more smart in my breast than a flight of 

savages' arrows could have done!  _I_ mistaken on a point that 

almost sent me into my grave, as I sometimes wished it would, if 

the grave could only have been made compatible with the tobacco- 

that, even at the present moment, makes me take out my pocket- 

rightly constituted male mind loves 'em great and small.  Don't 

tell me so, don't tell me so!' 

surface, Young John took out his pocket-handkerchief with a genuine 

in a man with a great deal of good in him, when he takes out his 

pocket-handkerchief for the purpose of wiping his eyes.  Having 

dried them, and indulged in the harmless luxury of a sob and a 

sniff, he put it up again. 

could not get many words together to close the subject with.  He 

assured John Chivery when he had returned his handkerchief to his 

pocket, that he did all honour to his disinterestedness and to the 

on his mind, of which he had just relieved it--here John 

lodging. 

dirty old woman was gone whom he found sitting on the stairs 

him than his misery, far. 

child, and his dear child, and to invite her confidence by dwelling 

upon the difference in their respective ages, and to speak of 

him old.  Something reminded him that he had not thought himself 

so, until the roses had floated away upon the river. 

them out and read them.  There seemed to be a sound in them like 

of tenderness, that were not insusceptible of the new meaning.  Now 

to him that night in that very room--that night when he had been 

shown the dawn of her altered fortune, and when other words had 

passed between them which he had been destined to remember in 

humiliation and a prisoner, rushed into his mind. 

Consider the improbability. 

fainter.  There was another and a curious inquiry of his own 

heart's that concurrently became stronger.  In the reluctance he 

had felt to believe that she loved any one; in his desire to set 

had passed away; that he must be steady in saying to himself that 

the time had gone by him, and he was too saddened and old? 

when she had been so consistently and expressively forgotten.  

difference? 

also found Mr and Mrs Plornish knocking at his door.  They brought 

in trade which met with such a quick sale and produced such a slow 

truth that accordin' as the world went round, which round it did 

rewolve undoubted, even the best of gentlemen must take his turn of 

way into what you might call Space.  Wery well then.  What Mr 

up-ards when his turn come, that gentleman's air would be a 

pleasure to look upon being all smooth again, and wery well then! 

her softened state of mind, out of her sex's wit, out of a woman's 

ideas, but it further happened somehow that Mrs Plornish's 

intelligibility displayed itself upon the very subject of Arthur's 

meditations. 

a sweet singer father is; but he couldn't get a note out for the 

children at tea, if you'll credit what I tell you.' 

and looked retrospectively about the room. 

he comes to know of it, I can't conceive nor yet imagine.  He'd 

confidential business of your own.  The persevering manner in which 

he follows up that business, and gives himself no rest from it--it 

really do,' said Mrs Plornish, winding up in the Italian manner, 

'as I say to him, Mooshattonisha padrona.' 

Tuscan sentence with peculiar elegance.  Mr Plornish could not 

conceal his exultation in her accomplishments as a linguist. 

present something is.  It's a thing to be thankful for, indeed, 

that Miss Dorrit is not here to know it.' 

indeed, that Miss Dorrit is far away.  It's to be hoped she is not 

likely to hear of it.  If she had been here to see it, sir, it's 

those words--'not to be doubted, that the sight of you--in 

have touched Miss Dorrit so bad as that.' 

quivering defiance in her friendly emotion. 

it's much to be rejoiced in that Miss Dorrit is not on the spot to 

behold it."  Those were father's words.  Father's own words was, 

"Much to be rejoiced in, Mary, that Miss Dorrit is not on the spot 

to behold it."  I says to father then, I says to him, "Father, you 

are right!" That,' Mrs Plornish concluded, with the air of a very 

I tell you nothing but what did pass betwixt me and father.' 

gravely, 'I know what it is, old gal;' repeating that valuable 

remark several times, as if it appeared to him to include some 

arm. 

Dorrit! 

Granted that she had loved him, and he had known it and had 

suffered himself to love her, what a road to have led her away 

place!  He ought to be much comforted by the reflection that she 

was quit of it forever; that she was, or would soon be, married 

(vague rumours of her father's projects in that direction had 

reached Bleeding Heart Yard, with the news of her sister's 

those perplexed possibilities of a time that was gone. 

doubts had worked themselves out before it; it was the centre of 

the interest of his life; it was the termination of everything that 

was good and pleasant in it; beyond, there was nothing but mere 

waste and darkened sky. 

within those dreary walls, he wore the night out with such 

thoughts.  What time Young John lay wrapt in peaceful slumber, 

after composing and arranging the following monumental inscription 

on his pillow-- 

          STRANGER! 

     RESPECT THE TOMB OF 

     JOHN CHIVERY, JUNIOR, 

     WHO DIED AT AN ADVANCED AGE 

     NOT NECESSARY TO MENTION. 

     HE ENCOUNTERED HIS RIVAL IN A DISTRESSED STATE, 

     AND FELT INCLINED 

     TO HAVE A ROUND WITH HIM; 

     BUT, FOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVED ONE, CONQUERED THOSE FEELINGS 

     OF BITTERNESS, AND BECAME 

     MAGNANIMOUS. 

CHAPTER 28 

Clennam as time went on, and he made no friends among the community 

got together to forget their cares; too retiring and too unhappy to 

join in the poor socialities of the tavern; he kept his own room, 

and was held in distrust.  Some said he was proud; some objected 

that he was a poor-spirited dog who pined under his debts.  The 

whole population were shy of him on these various counts of 

indictment, but especially the last, which involved a species of 

that his only time for walking up and down was when the evening 

when the yard was nearly left to the women and children. 

moped.  After what he had known of the influences of imprisonment 

within the four small walls of the very room he occupied, this 

consciousness made him afraid of himself.  Shrinking from the 

change very sensibly.  Anybody might see that the shadow of the 

wall was dark upon him. 

and when he had been trying to read and had not been able to 

do, Mr Clennam?  I hope I am not unwelcome in calling to see you.' 

good-natured and prepossessing, though overpoweringly gay and free, 

in contrast with the squalid prison. 

which Clennam offered him. 

establishment.' 

glad to know it.  It is quite a relief to me to hear you say it.  

I should have so exceedingly regretted our place having had 

anything to do with your difficulties.' 

responsibility. 

you, because there is no doubt that it is our misfortune to do that 

will be gravelled, why--we can't help it.' 

me.' 

most inoffensive place possible.  You'll say we are a humbug.  I 

won't say we are not; but all that sort of thing is intended to be, 

and must be.  Don't you see?' 

of view that is the essential thing.  Regard our place from the 

capital a Department as you'll find anywhere.' 

express intention that everything shall be left alone.  That is 

form to be kept up that it's for something else, but it's only a 

form.  Why, good Heaven, we are nothing but forms!  Think what a 

lot of our forms you have gone through.  And you have never got any 

nearer to an end?' 

official and effectual.  It's like a limited game of cricket.  A 

field of outsiders are always going in to bowl at the Public 

Service, and we block the balls.' 

backs broken, died off, gave it up, went in for other games. 

'on the circumstance that our place has had nothing to do with your 

because it is undeniable that we are sometimes a most unlucky 

Clennam, I am quite unreserved with you.  As between yourself and 

mistake of not leaving us alone; because I perceived that you were 

saying--some simplicity.' 

if I were you, I wouldn't bother myself.  However, you did bother 

any more.' 

There are no ends of ways of leaving here.  Now, don't come back to 

come back to us.  Upon my honour,' said Ferdinand in a very 

friendly and confiding way, 'I shall be greatly vexed if you don't 

take warning by the past and keep away from us.' 

nobody cares twopence-halfpenny about it.' 

Parliamentary nature of the phrase, and don't be bored by it) tends 

wicked Giant to be charged at full tilt; but only a windmill 

the country wind blows.' 

prospect for all of us.' 

have humbug, we all like humbug, we couldn't get on without humbug. 

you leave it alone.' 

watchwords which they utterly repudiated and disbelieved, Ferdinand 

bearing, or adapted with a more gentlemanly instinct to the 

circumstances of his visit. 

real feeling of thankfulness for his candour and good-humour, 

'whether it is true that our late lamented Merdle is the cause of 

this passing inconvenience?' 

Barnacle. 

was silent. 

clever!  One cannot help admiring the fellow.  Must have been such 

a master of humbug.  Knew people so well--got over them so 

moved to genuine admiration. 

people not to have so much done with them again.' 

really such a verdant hope?  The next man who has as large a 

capacity and as genuine a taste for swindling, will succeed as 

well.  Pardon me, but I think you really have no idea how the human 

bees will swarm to the beating of any old tin kettle; in that fact 

lies the complete manual of governing them.  When they can be got 

to believe that the kettle is made of the precious metals, in that 

there are here and there,' said Ferdinand politely, 'exceptional 

be much better reasons; and I need not go far to find such a case; 

but they don't invalidate the rule.  Good day!  I hope that when I 

have the pleasure of seeing you, next, this passing cloud will have 

know the way out perfectly.  Good day!' 

down-stairs, hummed his way through the Lodge, mounted his horse in 

the front court-yard, and rode off to keep an appointment with his 

noble kinsman, who wanted a little coaching before he could 

triumphantly answer certain infidel Snobs who were going to 

question the Nobs about their statesmanship. 

an elderly Phoebus. 

thing I can do for you to-day, sir?' 

enjoyment in pickling and preserving, or a washerwoman's enjoyment 

of a heavy wash, or a dustman's enjoyment of an overflowing dust- 

business. 

cheerfully, 'to see whether any lingering Detainers are 

accumulating at the gate.  They have fallen in pretty thick, sir; 

as thick as we could have expected.' 

congratulation: rubbing his hands briskly, and rolling his head a 

little. 

expected.  Quite a shower-bath of 'em.  I don't often intrude upon 

offer an observation?' 

you.' 

'now to make, at last and after all, a trifling concession to 

we must do it.' 

to expect that I ever shall.' 

the Bench is almost insignificant, and if the general feeling is 

strong that you ought to be there, why--really--' 

determination to remain here was a matter of taste.' 

an extensive affair of yours; and your remaining here where a man 

It is not in keeping.  I can't tell you, sir, in how many quarters 

I heard it mentioned.  I heard comments made upon it last night in 

a Parlour frequented by what I should call, if I did not look in 

a woman, you'll say: yet still with a feeling for these things, and 

quite set ourselves above public opinion, wouldn't a trifling 

concession to that opinion be-- Come, sir,' said Rugg, 'I will put 

it on the lowest ground of argument, and say, amiable?' 

the question remained unanswered. 

reduced him to a state of indecision, 'it is a principle of mine 

not to consider myself when a client's inclinations are in the 

oblige, I will repeat that I should prefer your being in the Bench. 

with my connection, if you went to the Bench.  Don't let that 

influence you, sir.  I merely state the fact.' 

and dejection, and so accustomed had it become to commune with only 

to shake off a kind of stupor before he could look at Mr Rugg, 

Rugg, without concealing that he was nettled and mortified, 

replied: 

herd it remarked in several companies, and in very good company, 

of an Englishman to remain in the Marshalsea when the glorious 

liberties of his island home admit of his removal to the Bench, I 

to me, and mention it.  Personally,' said Mr Rugg, 'I have no 

opinion on the topic.' 

been 

this place by a gentleman of a high family riding a saddle-horse.  

now empowered to mention to another gentleman, a gentleman of 

military 

intended to remain here, and was on the eve of removal to a 

gentleman, sir?' 

limited function was performed.  Happily,' said Mr Rugg, with 

sarcasm, 'I did not so far travel out of the record as to ask the 

gentleman for his name.' 

wearily. 

honoured by your instructions to mention as much to the gentleman, 

as I pass out?  I am?  Thank you, sir.  I take my leave.'  His 

leave he took accordingly, in dudgeon. 

Clennam's curiosity, in the existing state of his mind, that a 

half-forgetfulness of such a visitor's having been referred to, was 

him.  It appeared to ascend them, not very promptly or 

door, he could not recall his association with the peculiarity of 

its sound, though he thought he had one.  Only a moment was given 

him for consideration.  His door was immediately swung open by a 

many anxieties. 

I am!' 

Cavalletto followed him into the room.  Mr Pancks followed 

occupant had had possession of it.  Mr Pancks, breathing hard, 

sidled near the window, put his hat on the ground, stirred his hair 

the attitude (except that it was now expressive of unwinking 

watchfulness) in which he had sat before the same man in the deeper 

shade of another prison, one hot morning at Marseilles. 

Blandois, otherwise Lagnier, otherwise Rigaud, 'that you want me, 

brother-bird.  Here I am!' 

Glancing round contemptuously at the bedstead, which was turned up 

his hands in his pockets. 

a dreadful suspicion upon my mother's house.  Why have you done it? 

'Hear this noble gentleman!  Listen, all the world, to this 

is possible.' 

commence, hear me!  I received your instructions to find him, 

Rigaud; is it not?' 

great concern if she could have been persuaded that his occasional 

lengthening of an adverb in this way, was the chief fault of his 

English,--'first among my countrymen.  I ask them what news in 

Londra, of foreigners arrived.  Then I go among the French.  Then 

know well the other, and they all tell me.  But!--no person can 

tell me nothing of him, Rigaud.  Fifteen times,' said Cavalletto, 

thrice throwing out his left hand with all its fingers spread, and 

action, 'I ask of him in every place where go the foreigners; and 

nothing.  But!--' At this significant Italian rest on the word 

'But,' his backhanded shake of his right forefinger came into play; 

a very little, and very cautiously. 

is here in Londra, some one tells me of a soldier with white hair-- 

hey?--not hair like this that he carries--white--who lives retired 

upon the word, 'who sometimes in the after-dinner, walks, and 

smokes.  It is necessary, as they say in Italy (and as they know, 

this certain place.  One.  believes it is here, one believes it is 

there.  Eh well!  It is not here, it is not there.  I wait 

patientissamentally.  At last I find it.  Then I watch; then I 

side to side of the back-handed forefinger--'he is also this man 

that you see.' 

had been at the trouble of asserting superiority over him, he even 

then bestowed upon Rigaud a confused bend of his head, after thus 

pointing him out. 

again.  'I waited for a good opportunity.  I writed some words to 

Signor Panco,' an air of novelty came over Mr Pancks with this 

designation, 'to come and help.  I showed him, Rigaud, at his 

window, to Signor Panco, who was often the spy in the day.  I slept 

at night near the door of the house.  At last we entered, only this 

to-day, and now you see him!  As he would not come up in presence 

of the illustrious Advocate,' such was Mr Baptist's honourable 

mention of Mr Rugg, 'we waited down below there, together, and 

Signor Panco guarded the street.' 

impudent and wicked face.  As it met his, the nose came down over 

the moustache and the moustache went up under the nose.  When nose 

jerk the snaps at Arthur, as if they were palpable missiles which 

he jerked into his face. 

mother's house?' 

Heaven, my small boy, but you are a little imprudent!' 

shall be taken there, and be publicly seen.  I want to know, 

moreover, what business you had there when I had a burning desire 

enough of you to know that you are a bully and coward.  I need no 

revival of my spirits from the effects of this wretched place to 

tell you so plain a fact, and one that you know so well.' 

your respectable mother'--and seemed for a minute undecided how to 

act.  His indecision was soon gone.  He sat himself down with a 

threatening swagger, and said: 

without wine.  Come!  Yes or no?' 

producing the money. 

nothing but Porto-Porto.' 

significant finger, that he peremptorily declined to leave his post 

use. 

conflict of feeling on the question of throwing it at his head. 

my character to be waited on!' 

contents when he had done saying it. 

much sooner than it softens this hot wine.  You are mellowing-- 

losing body and colour already.  I salute you!' 

afterwards, so as to display his small, white hand. 

shown yourself more free of speech than body, sir.' 

be.  You know yourself, as we all know you, to be far worse than 

that.' 

regard, we are all alike.  For example: you couldn't for your life 

do?  I also play a game, and words are without power over it.' 

was known--whatever thin disguise he had worn, he dropped; and 

faced it out, with a bare face, as the infamous wretch he was. 

of my Soul!  I'll win it.  You want to know why I played this 

little trick that you have interrupted?  Know then that I had, and 

that I have--do you understand me?  have--a commodity to sell to my 

lady your respectable mother.  I described my precious commodity, 

and fixed my price.  Touching the bargain, your admirable mother 

In fine, your admirable mother vexed me.  To make variety in my 

position, and to amuse myself--what!  a gentleman must be amused at 

would have been well enough pleased to execute.  Ah!  Bah, bah, 

bah, don't look as from high to low at me!  I repeat it.  Well 

enough pleased, excessively enchanted, and with all their hearts 

ravished.  How strongly will you have it?' 

He threw out the lees of his glass on the ground, so that they 

nearly spattered Cavalletto.  This seemed to draw his attention to 

him anew.  He set down his glass and said: 

Cavalletto, and fill!' 

Rigaud, and, seeing no prohibition, got up from the ground, and 

poured out from the bottle into the glass.  The blending, as he did 

so, of his old submission with a sense of something humorous; the 

all to a good-natured, careless, predominant propensity to sit down 

on the ground again: formed a very remarkable combination of 

character. 

lesson in politeness towards a gentleman), and it suggested to all 

have restored her wit to my lady your mother--might, under the 

pressing little suspicion your wisdom has recognised, have 

persuaded her at last to announce, covertly, in the journals, that 

the difficulties of a certain contract would be removed by the 

appearance of a certain important party to it.  Perhaps yes, 

perhaps no.  But that, you have interrupted.  Now, what is it you 

say?  What is it you want?' 

bonds, than when he saw this man before him, and could not 

accompany him to his mother's house.  All the undiscernible 

he could not stir hand or foot. 

will; perhaps,' said Rigaud, pausing in his drink to look out of 

his glass with his horrible smile, 'you would have done better to 

leave me alone?' 

unharmed.  At least you cannot escape from these two witnesses; and 

they can produce you before any public authorities, or before 

hundreds of people!' 

your witnesses!  To the Devil with your produced!  To the Devil 

with yourself!  What!  Do I know what I know, for that?  Have I my 

commodity on sale, for that?  Bah, poor debtor!  You have 

interrupted my little project.  Let it pass.  How then?  What 

you want?  I will produce myself, only too quickly.  Contrabandist! 

wrote, and read aloud, as follows: 

'To MRS CLENNAM. 

'At the apartment of your son. 

here (who has had the goodness to employ spies to seek me, living 

for politic reasons in retirement), that you have had fears for my 

safety. 

constant. 

I foresee it to be possible, under the circumstances, that you will 

not yet have quite definitively arranged the little proposition I 

have had the honour to submit to you.  I name one week from this 

day, for a last final visit on my part; when you will 

unconditionally accept it or reject it, with its train of 

consequences. 

business, in order that you may have leisure to adjust its details 

to our perfect mutual satisfaction. 

having deranged my housekeeping), that my expenses of lodging and 

nourishment at an hotel shall be paid by you. 

'Receive, dear madam, the assurance of my highest and most 

distinguished consideration, 

               'RIGAUD BLANDOIS. 

When he had finished this epistle, Rigaud folded it and tossed it 

with a flourish at Clennam's feet.  'Hola you!  Apropos of 

producing, let somebody produce that at its address, and produce 

the answer here.' 

was at the door to keep watch over Rigaud, now he had found him 

with so much trouble, and that the duty of his post was to sit on 

own ankles,--Signor Panco once more volunteered.  His services 

enough to admit of his squeezing himself out, and immediately shut 

it on him. 

Rigaud, 'and I follow the letter and cancel my week's grace.  You 

wanted me?  You have got me!  How do you like me?' 

helplessness, 'that when I sought you, I was not a prisoner.' 

leisurely, as he took from his pocket a case containing the 

materials for making cigarettes, and employed his facile hands in 

folding a few for present use; 'I care for neither of you.  

Contrabandist!  A light.' 

been something dreadful in the noiseless skill of his cold, white 

another like serpents.  Clennam could not prevent himself from 

shuddering inwardly, as if he had been looking on at a nest of 

those creatures. 

and stones of that place.  It was a prison for men.  But this?  

Bah!  A hospital for imbeciles!' 

face that he looked as though he were smoking with his drooping 

beak of a nose, rather than with his mouth; like a fancy in a weird 

burning end of the first, he said to Clennam: 

One can't drink strong wine all day long, or I would have another 

you on your admiration.' 

fair Gowan.' 

again, as he answered with coolness: 

your politicians, your intriguers, your men of the Exchange?  How 

do you live?  How do you come here?  Have you sold no friend?  Lady 

of mine!  I rather think, yes!' 

Clennam turned away from him towards the window, and sat looking 

out at the wall. 

another lady.  Also handsome.  A strong spirit.  Let us see.  How 

do they call her?  Wade.' 

mark. 

me in the street, and I am not insensible.  I respond.  That 

handsome lady and strong spirit does me the favour to remark, in 

are not more than ordinarily honourable, perhaps?" I announce 

myself, "Madame, a gentleman from the birth, and a gentleman to the 

weak fantasy."  Thereupon she is pleased to compliment.  "The 

so."  For she knows Society.  I accept her congratulations with 

gallantry and politeness.  Politeness and little gallantries are 

is, in effect, that she has seen us much together; that it appears 

to her that I am for the passing time the cat of the house, the 

friend of the family; that her curiosity and her chagrins awaken 

the fancy to be acquainted with their movements, to know the manner 

is cherished, and so on.  She is not rich, but offers such and such 

of my character--consent to accept them.  O yes!  So goes the 

world.  It is the mode.' 

the end of the interview, he kept those glittering eyes of his that 

were too near together, upon him, and evidently saw in the very 

from clause to clause of what he said, that he was saying nothing 

which Clennam did not already know. 

mysteries of letters from old lovers, in her bedchamber on the 

mountain, that her husband might not see them.  No, no.  That was 

not well.  Whoof!  The Gowana was mistaken there.' 

long gone, for this man's presence pollutes the room.' 

an exulting look and snap of his fingers.  'He always has; he 

the room besides that on which Clennam sat, he sang, smiting 

himself on the breast as the gallant personage of the song. 

     'Who passes by this road so late? 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine! 

     Who passes by this road so late? 

          Always gay! 

'Sing the Refrain, pig!  You could sing it once, in another jail.  

Sing it!  Or, by every Saint who was stoned to death, I'll be 

affronted and compromising; and then some people who are not dead 

yet, had better have been stoned along with them!' 

     'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower, 

          Compagnon de la Majolaine! 

     Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower, 

          Always gay!' 

Partly in his old habit of submission, partly because his not doing 

do it as anything else, Cavalletto took up the Refrain this time.  

Rigaud laughed, and fell to smoking with his eyes shut. 

was heard upon the stairs, but the interval seemed to Clennam 

insupportably long.  His step was attended by another step; and 

when Cavalletto opened the door, he admitted Mr Pancks and Mr 

at him and embraced him boisterously. 

ceremony.  'Thank you, no; I don't want any more.'  This was in 

reference to another menace of attention from his recovered friend. 

and missing ones.  It's come true, you see.' 

head in a moralising way as he looked round the room. 

Arthur.' 

and cried: 

the Devil with the Pig-Driver!  Now!  Give me the answer to my 

letter.' 

Mr Flintwinch, 'I'll first hand Mr Arthur a little note that I have 

for him.' 

paper, and contained only these words: 

without more ruin.  Jeremiah Flintwinch is my messenger and 

representative.  Your affectionate M.  C.' 

the back with his feet upon the seat. 

note to its destruction, 'the answer to my letter?' 

and she thinking it as well to send it verbally by me.'  Mr 

Flintwinch screwed this out of himself, unwillingly and rustily.  

to term you unreasonable, and that she agrees.  But without 

prejudicing the appointment that stands for this day week.' 

from his throne, saying, 'Good!  I go to seek an hotel!'  But, 

will; now, I'll have you against yours.  I tell you, my little 

contrabandist as my domestic until this day week.' 

to go; but he added aloud, 'unless you are afraid of him.'  

Cavalletto replied with a very emphatic finger-negative.'No, 

master, I am not afraid of him, when I no more keep it 

secrettementally that he was once my comrade.'  Rigaud took no 

notice of either remark until he had lighted his last cigarette and 

was quite ready for walking. 

'Whoof!  My children, my babies, my little dolls, you are all 

meat, drink, and lodging there; you dare not touch him with a 

And he's always gay!' 

the room closely followed by Cavalletto, whom perhaps he had 

pressed into his service because he tolerably well knew it would 

not be easy to get rid of him.  Mr Flintwinch, after scraping his 

back that he would see this affair out, and stand by it to the end. 

scorned and repudiated, more helpless, altogether more miserable 

and fallen than before, was left alone again. 

CHAPTER 29 

Haggard anxiety and remorse are bad companions to be barred up 

t will not arm a man against misery.  Next morning, Clennam felt 

that his health was sinking, as his spirits had already sunk and 

that the weight under which he bent was bearing him down. 

sickly lamps in the yard, and looking upward for the first wan 

it to him.  Now when the night came, he could not even persuade 

himself to undress. 

prison, and a conviction that he was going to break his heart and 

hatred of the place became so intense that he felt it a labour to 

overpowered him, that he would stand at the window holding his 

he must go mad with the ardour of the desire. 

lengthening intervals.  A desolate calm succeeded; and the middle 

of the week found him settled down in the despondency of low, slow 

fever. 

his nerves, he sought to be left alone, and spared the being seen 

so subdued and weak.  He wrote a note to Mrs Plornish representing 

himself as occupied with his affairs, and bound by the necessity of 

pretence of being engaged in writing, and to answer cheerfully in 

never been revived between them.  Through all these changes of 

unhappiness, however, it had never lost its hold on Clennam's mind. 

It seemed as though the prison's poverty, and shabbiness, and dirt, 

were growing in the sultry atmosphere.  With an aching head and a 

weary heart, Clennam had watched the miserable night out, listening 

to the fall of rain on the yard pavement, thinking of its softer 

put upon his wall, like a bit of the prison's raggedness.  He had 

which commenced the prison morning.  So ill and faint that he was 

washed, he had at length crept to his chair by the open window.  In 

it he sat dozing, while the old woman who arranged his room went 

through her morning's work. 

heard fragments of tunes and songs in the warm wind, which he knew 

had no existence.  Now that he began to doze in exhaustion, he 

heard them again; and voices seemed to address him, and he 

answered, and started. 

painful effort to lift his head for the purpose of inquiring into 

have become quite an old and importunate one when he looked round.  

a wonderful handful of the choicest and most lovely flowers. 

and he put them down and opened his parched hands to them, as cold 

hands are opened to receive the cheering of a fire.  It was not 

had sent them; and opened his door to ask the woman who must have 

put them there, how they had come into her hands.  But she was 

not bear the odour of it: so he crept back to his chair by the open 

window, and put the flowers on the little round table of old. 

playing in the wind, when the door of his room seemed to open to a 

stand there, with a black mantle on it.  It seemed to draw the 

Little Dorrit in her old, worn dress.  It seemed to tremble, and to 

clasp its hands, and to smile, and to burst into tears. 

keep him in his chair, and with her knees upon the floor at his 

feet, and with her lips raised up to kiss him, and with her tears 

dropping on him as the rain from Heaven had dropped upon the 

flowers, Little Dorrit, a living presence, called him by his name. 

Unless you weep with pleasure to see me.  I hope you do.  Your own 

poor child come back!' 

voice, in the light of her eyes, in the touch of her hands, so 

Angelically comforting and true! 

that hand, nursed him as lovingly, and GOD knows as innocently, as 

she had nursed her father in that room when she had been but a 

baby, needing all the care from others that she took of them. 

me?  And in this dress?' 

have always kept it by me, to remind me: though I wanted no 

with me.' 

abandoned, with a basket on her arm as in the bygone days, 

chuckling rapturously. 

brother.  I sent round to Mrs Plornish almost as soon as we 

arrived, that I might hear of you and let you know I had come.  

perceived it in an instant. 

right name always is with you.' 

minute, since I have been here.' 

in it, with a feeling of shame.  He, a broken, bankrupt, sick, 

dishonoured prisoner. 

first; for the prison was so familiar and yet so strange, and it 

brought back so many remembrances of my poor father, and of you 

room for us--my poor old room, you know--and we waited there a 

little.  I brought the flowers to the door, but you didn't hear 

me.' 

She looked something more womanly than when she had gone away, and 

But, otherwise, she was quite unchanged.  The same deep, timid 

earnestness that he had always seen in her, and never without 

the heart, the change was in his perception, not in her. 

noiselessly began, with Maggy's help, to make his room as fresh and 

neat as it could be made, and to sprinkle it with a pleasant- 

with grapes and other fruit, was unpacked, and all its contents 

were quietly put away.  When that was done, a moment's whisper 

despatched Maggy to despatch somebody else to fill the basket 

again; which soon came back replenished with new stores, from which 

a present provision of cooling drink and jelly, and a prospective 

supply of roast chicken and wine and water, were the first 

extracts.  These various arrangements completed, she took out her 

with a quiet reigning in the room, that seemed to diffuse itself 

chair, with Little Dorrit working at his side. 

nimble fingers busy at their old work--though she was not so 

to his face, and, when they drooped again had tears in them--to be 

its inexhaustible wealth of goodness upon him, did not steady 

Clennam's trembling voice or hand, or strengthen him in his 

with his love.  And how dearly he loved her now, what words can 

tell! 

resting-place of his head; then she would gently resume her seat by 

him, and bend over her work again. 

except to wait upon him.  The sun went down and she was still 

there.  She had done her work now, and her hand, faltering on the 

arm of his chair since its last tending of him, was hesitating 

there yet.  He laid his hand upon it, and it clasped him with a 

trembling supplication. 

put it off from hour to hour, but I must say it.' 

She nervously moved her hand towards his lips as if to stop him; 

then it dropped, trembling, into its former place. 

grateful, for it is only because I happened to be with him in his 

illness--that he says I shall be free to stay where I like best, 

and to do what I like best.  He only wishes me to be happy, he 

says.' 

shining above her. 

brother has come home to find my dear father's will, and to take 

possession of his property.  He says, if there is a will, he is 

sure i shall be left rich; and if there is none, that he will make 

me so.' 

he stopped. 

value at all to me but for your sake.  I could not be rich, and you 

can forget, your protection of me when this was my home?  Dear Mr 

Make me as happy as I can be in leaving you here, by saying nothing 

to-night, and letting me go away with the hope that you will think 

of it kindly; and that for my sake--not for yours, for mine, for 

nobody's but mine!--you will give me the greatest joy I can 

experience on earth, the joy of knowing that I have been 

serviceable to you, and that I have paid some little of the great 

say.  I can't visit you here where I have lived so long, I can't 

think of you here where I have seen so much, and be as calm and 

comforting as I ought.  My tears will make their way.  I cannot 

Dorrit, now, in your affliction!  Pray, pray, pray, I beg you and 

all I have, and make it a Blessing to me!' 

his hand and her own. 

softly answered her. 

price, that I could never support their weight, never bear the 

reproach of possessing them.  But with what ardent thankfulness and 

love I say this, I may call Heaven to witness!' 

affliction?' 

you.  If, in the bygone days when this was your home and when this 

you, but as a woman whose true hand would raise me high above 

the opportunity there is no recalling--as I wish I had, O I wish I 

had!--and if something had kept us apart then, when I was 

moderately thriving, and when you were poor; I might have met your 

noble offer of your fortune, dearest girl, with other words than 

these, and still have blushed to touch it.  But, as it is, I must 

never touch it, never!' 

supplicatory hand, than she could have done in any words. 

low as that, and carry you--so dear, so generous, so good--down 

with me.  GOD bless you, GOD reward you!  It is past.'  He took her 

in his arms, as if she had been his daughter. 

me only as I am.  I put this parting kiss upon your cheek, my 

child--who might have been more near to me, who never could have 

been more dear--a ruined man far removed from you, for ever 

separated from you, whose course is run while yours is but 

my humiliation; but I ask to be remembered only as I am.' 

mantle from the wall, and tenderly wrapped it round her. 

common has long gone by.  Do you understand?' 

back any more!  You will surely not desert me so!' 

shut out this dear face, and abandon all hope of its return.  But 

do not come soon, do not come often!  This is now a tainted place, 

brighter and better scenes.  You are not to look back here, my 

happier paths.  Again, GOD bless you in them!  GOD reward you!' 

him into a hospital; do get him into a hospital, Mother!  He'll 

never look like hisself again, if he an't got into a hospital.  And 

then the little woman as was always a spinning at her wheel, she 

the Chicking there for?  and then they can take it out and give it 

to him, and then all be happy!' 

itself out.  Again tenderly wrapping her mantle about her, and 

last visitor to pass out at the Lodge, and the gate jarred heavily 

and hopelessly upon her. 

his room, and he re-entered its dark solitary precincts in 

unutterable misery. 

given at his door.  It was Young John.  He glided in, in his 

come through, and come to you.' 

Miss Dorrit when she came out.  I thought you'd like some one to 

see that she was safe.' 

Dorrit walked all the way, and talked to me so kind, it quite 

knocked me over.  Why do you think she walked instead of riding?' 

him, and never let him want for help and comfort when I am not 

stand by you,' said John Chivery, 'for ever!' 

spirit. 

the door, 'guess what message Miss Dorrit gave me.' 

'"that his Little Dorrit sent him her undying love."  Now it's 

delivered.  Have I been honourable, sir?' 

ploughshares, it is not at all improbable that John would have 

traversed it with the same devotion, for the same purpose. 

CHAPTER 30 

The last day of the appointed week touched the bars of the 

Little Dorrit, its iron stripes were turned by the early-glowing 

sun into stripes of gold.  Far aslant across the city, over its 

struck the long bright rays, bars of the prison of this lower 

world. 

untroubled by any visitors.  But, when the sun was low, three men 

turned in at the gateway and made for the dilapidated house. 

Rigaud was the first, and walked by himself smoking.  Mr Baptist 

was the second, and jogged close after him, looking at no other 

for the liberation of his restive hair; the weather being extremely 

hot.  They all came together at the door-steps. 

Giving him a dark glance in acknowledgment of his answer, Rigaud 

out of his game, and was impatient to begin.  He had hardly 

again and began another.  That was not yet finished when Jeremiah 

up-stairs.  His two attendants followed him, Mr Flintwinch followed 

stocking.  The usual articles were on the little table; the usual 

deadened fire was in the grate; the bed had its usual pall upon it; 

were strung up for an occasion.  From what the room derived it-- 

every one of its small variety of objects being in the fixed spot 

attentively at its mistress, and that, too, with a previous 

knowledge of her face.  Although her unchanging black dress was in 

every plait precisely as of old, and her unchanging attitude was 

rigidly preserved, a very slight additional setting of her features 

and contraction of her gloomy forehead was so powerfully marked, 

that it marked everything about her. 

'Who are these?' she said, wonderingly, as the two attendants 

entered.  'What do these people want here?' 

is it?  Death, madame, I don't know.  You will do well to ask 

them.' 

retorted Rigaud.  'In a word, madame, permit me to present two 

spies of the prisoner's--madmen, but spies.  If you wish them to 

remain here during our little conversation, say the word.  It is 

nothing to me.' 

have I to do with them?' 

chair so heavily that the old room trembled, 'you will do well to 

rascals.' 

and your own.  Go.  And take that other man with you.' 

objection to our both retiring.  We have done all we undertook to 

do for Mr Clennam.  His constant anxiety has been (and it grew 

worse upon him when he became a prisoner), that this agreeable 

gentleman should be brought back here to the place from which he 

Pancks, 'to his ill-looking face, that in my opinion the world 

would be no worse for his slipping out of it altogether.' 

'Your opinion is not asked,' answered Mrs Clennam.  'Go.' 

fault, that is.' 

lead him into a ruinous investment.'  (Mr Pancks still clung to 

figures,' added Mr Pancks, with an anxious countenance, 'that it 

failed, every day of my life, and it comes out--regarded as a 

question of figures--triumphant.  The present is not a time or 

worth from three to five thousand pound.' 

his pocket.  These incontrovertible figures had been the occupation 

were destined to afford him consolation to the end of his days. 

have seen the figures, and you know how they come out.'  Mr 

Baptist, who had not the slightest arithmetical power of 

compensating himself in this way, nodded, with a fine display of 

bright teeth. 

wasn't certain till I saw your teeth.  Ah!  yes, to be sure.  It 

was this officious refugee,' said Jeremiah to Mrs Clennam, 'who 

were here, and who asked me a whole Catechism of questions about Mr 

Blandois.' 

padrone!  I have found him consequentementally.' 

having broken your neck consequentementally.' 

to the window-seat and the stocking that was being mended there, 

here--but unfortunately, though he has so far got the better of 

this fine gentleman as to return him to this place against his 

will, he is ill and in prison--ill and in prison, poor fellow--if 

say, "Affery, tell your dreams!"' 

towed Mr Baptist after him.  The house-door was heard to close upon 

echoing court-yard, and still nobody had added a word.  Mrs Clennam 

and Jeremiah had exchanged a look; and had then looked, and looked 

still, at Affery, who sat mending the stocking with great 

assiduity. 

his hands on his coat-tail as if he were preparing them to do 

something: 'Whatever has to be said among us had better be begun to 

yourself away!' 

beating expected assailants off. 

I'll stay here.  I'll hear all I don't know, and say all I know.  

I will, at last, if I die for it.  I will, I will, I will, I will!' 

the fingers of one hand at his lips, softly described a circle with 

grin to screw himself in the direction of his wife; gasping some 

remark as he advanced, of which, in his choking anger, only the 

words, 'Such a dose!' were audible. 

the air.  'Don't come a bit nearer to me, or I'll rouse the 

neighbourhood!  I'll throw myself out of window.  I'll scream Fire 

shrieks enough to wake the dead!' 

The determined voice of Mrs Clennam echoed 'Stop!' Jeremiah had 

stopped already. 

against me after these many years?' 

say what I know.  I have broke out now, and I can't go back.  I am 

determined to do it.  I will do it, I will, I will, I will!  If 

that's turning against you, yes, I turn against both of you two 

clever ones.  I told Arthur when he first come home to stand up 

no more.  I won't, I won't, I won't!  I'll up for Arthur when he 

has nothing left, and is ill, and in prison, and can't up for 

himself.  I will, I will, I will, I will!' 

sternly, 'that in doing what you are doing now, you are even 

serving Arthur?' 

ever you said a true word in your life, it's when you call me a 

led me, pretty well ever since, such a life of dreaming and 

frightening as never was known, and what do you expect me to be but 

a heap of confusion?  You wanted to make me such, and I am such; 

but I won't submit no longer; no, I won't, I won't, I won't, I 

won't!'  She was still beating the air against all comers. 

of distraction remaining where she is?' 

now.  Flintwinch, it is closing in.' 

wife, and then, as if to pinion himself from falling upon her, 

In this easy attitude, he met Mrs Clennam's set face, with his 

moustache going up and his nose coming down. 

of murder.' 

hands.  Madame, I am a gentleman (I was going to observe), who when 

he says, "I will definitely finish this or that affair at the 

present sitting," does definitely finish it.  I announce to you 

that we are arrived at our last sitting on our little business.  

You do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?' 

are unknown, but to whom money is always acceptable as the means of 

pursuing his pleasures.  You do me the favour to follow, and to 

comprehend?' 

but who, if trifled with, becomes enraged.  Noble natures under 

such circumstances become enraged.  I possess a noble nature.  When 

the lion is awakened--that is to say, when I enrage--the 

satisfaction of my animosity is as acceptable to me as money.  You 

always do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?' 

'Yes,' she answered, somewhat louder than before. 

now arrived at our last sitting.  Allow me to recall the two 

sittings we have held.' 

the way.  The first sitting was limited.  I had the honour of 

making your acquaintance--of presenting my letter; I am a Knight of 

me so much of success, as a master of languages, among your 

compatriots who are as stiff as their own starch is to one another, 

but are ready to relax to a foreign gentleman of polished manners-- 

and of observing one or two little things,' he glanced around the 

room and smiled, 'about this honourable house, to know which was 

necessary to assure me, and to convince me that I had the 

Flintwinch that I would return.  I gracefully departed.' 

for the occasion. 

physically, is a part of the character of Rigaud Blandois.  It was 

also politic, as leaving you with something overhanging you, to 

expect me again with a little anxiety on a day not named.  But your 

bought, will compromise madame whom I highly esteem.  I explain 

myself generally.  I demand--I think it was a thousand pounds.  

Will you correct me?' 

much as a thousand pounds.' 

return once more.  We are not accordant; we differ on that 

occasion.  I am playful; playfulness is a part of my amiable 

character.  Playfully, I become as one slain and hidden.  For, it 

may alone be worth half the sum to madame, to be freed from the 

who knows?  only you and Flintwinch--when it is just ripe.  Thus, 

madame, I am here for the last time.  Listen!  Definitely the 

last.' 

his tone for a fierce one. 

Hotel-note to be paid, according to contract.  Five minutes hence 

we may be at daggers' points.  I'll not leave it till then, or 

you'll cheat me.  Pay it!  Count me the money!' 

to take it, and held forth his hand, repeating noisily, 'Pay it!  

pocket, and told the amount into his hand. 

little way and caught it, chinked it again. 

fresh meat to the tiger.  Say, then, madame.  How much?' 

with it. 

not the present means of complying with such a demand, if I had 

ever so great an inclination.' 

that you have not the inclination?' 

itself to you.' 

inclination, and I know what to do.' 

I assuredly have the inclination to recover.' 

chinked his money.  'I think so!  I believe you there!' 

much, or how little.' 

consider?' 

that I do not know the worst and the fullest extent of.  This is 

the third time of your hinting and threatening.  You must speak 

is better to be torn to pieces at a spring, than to be a mouse at 

the caprice of such a cat.' 

sinister sight of each, crossing that of the other, seemed to make 

said, with the further setting off of his internal smile: 

Flintwinch?' 

to be our determination.  Leave him to his action on it.' 

had fixed herself.  He got off the table, placed a chair near the 

own, which he touched with his hand.  Her face was ever frowning, 

attentive, and settled. 

family history in this little family society,' said Rigaud, with a 

a doctor.  Let me touch your pulse.' 

proceeded to say: 

these the usual changes of your malady, madame?' 

I have known many adventurers; interesting spirits--amiable 

society!  To one of them I owe my knowledge and my proofs--I repeat 

it, estimable lady--proofs--of the ravishing little family history 

I go to commence.  You will be charmed with it.  But, bah!  I 

a house?  But, bah, again.  There are so many houses.  Shall I name 

it the history of this house?' 

elbow; that hand often tapping her arm to beat his words home; his 

legs crossed; his right hand sometimes arranging his hair, 

sometimes smoothing his moustache, sometimes striking his nose, 

always threatening her whatever it did; coarse, insolent, 

rapacious, cruel, and powerful, he pursued his narrative at his 

ease. 

uncle, a rigid old gentleman of strong force of character; the 

nephew, habitually timid, repressed, and under constraint.' 

before my time here; but I've heerd in my dreams that Arthur's 

father was a poor, irresolute, frightened chap, who had had 

and that he had no voice in the choice of his wife even, but his 

uncle chose her.  There she sits!  I heerd it in my dreams, and you 

said it to her own self.' 

upon her, Rigaud kissed his hand to her. 

'Perfectly right, dear Madame Flintwinch.  You have a genius for 

dreaming.' 

'I don't want none of your praises,' returned Affery.  'I don't 

her mouth again, as if she were stopping somebody else's mouth-- 

grimly cold. 

sudden a fine susceptibility and spirituality, is right to a 

the nephew to marry.  Monsieur says to him in effect, "My nephew, 

I introduce to you a lady of strong force of character, like 

myself--a resolved lady, a stern lady, a lady who has a will that 

strength!  Truly, a proud and noble character that I describe in 

the supposed words of Monsieur, the uncle.  Ha, ha, ha!  Death of 

my soul, I love the sweet lady!' 

colour on it, and the brow was more contracted.  'Madame, madame,' 

said Rigaud, tapping her on the arm, as if his cruel hand were 

sounding a musical instrument, 'I perceive I interest you.  I 

perceive I awaken your sympathy.  Let us go on.' 

hidden for a moment with the white hand, before he could go on; he 

enjoyed the effect he made so much. 

and famished out of him--the nephew abases his head, and makes 

response: "My uncle, it is to you to command.  Do as you will!" 

The auspicious nuptials take place; the newly married come home to 

Flintwinch.  Hey, old intriguer?' 

clucking with his tongue. 

full of anger, full of jealousy, full of vengeance, she forms--see 

you, madame!--a scheme of retribution, the weight of which she 

execute upon her enemy.  What superior intelligence!' 

there she sits and you looking at her--that she oughtn't to have 

always had the strength and the power; and that she ought to have 

know what, for she burst out tremendous and stopped you.  You know 

the dream as well as I do.  When you come down-stairs into the 

head.  When you told me I had been dreaming.  When you wouldn't 

believe the noises.'  After this explosion Affery put her apron 

her lord and master approached. 

leaning back in his chair.  'Assuredly, Madame Flintwinch is an 

intriguer?  He said that you were not--?  And you burst out and 

Say then, madame!' 

utmost efforts to keep them still. 

were not-- and you stopped him.  He was going to say that you were 

not--what?  I know already, but I want a little confidence from 

you.  How, then?  You are not what?' 

Arthur's mother!' 

of her passion, and with a bursting, from every rent feature, of 

the smouldering fire so long pent up, she cried out: 'I will tell 

it myself!  I will not hear it from your lips, and with the taint 

seen by the light I stood in.  Not another word.  Hear me!' 

leave Mr Rigaud, Mr Blandois, Mr Beelzebub, to tell it in his own 

way.  What does it signify when he knows all about it?' 

'He does not know me.' 

Mr Flintwinch. 

to this, I will tell it with my own lips, and will express myself 

throughout it.  What!  Have I suffered nothing in this room, no 

contemplate myself in such a glass as that.  Can you see him?  Can 

inducing her to be silent if this man is silenced, I would tell it 

myself, before I would bear the torment of the hearing it from 

him.' 

before him; and sat with his arms folded over against her. 

no light youth of sinful gaiety and pleasure.  Mine were days of 

wholesome repression, punishment, and fear.  The corruption of our 

hearts, the evil of our ways, the curse that is upon us, the 

doers.  When old Mr Gilbert Clennam proposed his orphan nephew to 

my father for my husband, my father impressed upon me that his 

me, that besides the discipline his spirit had undergone, he had 

lived in a starved house, where rioting and gaiety were unknown, 

and where every day was a day of toil and trial like the last.  He 

acknowledged him as one; and that from his school-days to that 

hour, his uncle's roof has been a sanctuary to him from the 

contagion of the irreligious and dissolute.  When, within a 

my father spoke of him, to have sinned against the Lord and 

outraged me by holding a guilty creature in my place, was I to 

doubt that it had been appointed to me to make the discovery, and 

creature of perdition?  Was I to dismiss in a moment--not my own 

wrongs--what was I! but all the rejection of sin, and all the war 

upon the watch on the table. 

now, and were within here then.  I was appointed to find the old 

whose work they were, and why they were worked, lying with this 

have been no discovery.  "Do not forget."  It spoke to me like a 

forget the appointed discovery, do not forget the appointed 

suffering.  I did not forget.  Was it my own wrong I remembered?  

Mine!  I was but a servant and a minister.  What power could I have 

delivered to me!' 

determined woman, since the time she recalled.  More than forty 

eternity could change their nature.  Yet, gone those more than 

still abided by her old impiety--still reversed the order of 

Creation, and breathed her own breath into a clay image of her 

in many countries; but no human eyes have ever seen more daring, 

gross, and shocking images of the Divine nature than we creatures 

of the dust make in our own likenesses, of our own bad passions. 

abode,' she went on in her torrent of indignation and defence; 

'when I accused her, and she fell hiding her face at my feet, was 

upon her?  Those who were appointed of old to go to wicked kings 

and accuse them--were they not ministers and servants?  And had not 

I, unworthy and far-removed from them, sin to denounce?  When she 

pleaded to me her youth, and his wretched and hard life (that was 

her phrase for the virtuous training he had belied), and the 

desecrated ceremony of marriage there had secretly been between 

them, and the terrors of want and shame that had overwhelmed them 

both when I was first appointed to be the instrument of their 

enemy that became my footstool, were they the words of my wrath 

that made her shrink and quiver!  Not unto me the strength be 

ascribed; not unto me the wringing of the expiation!' 

when she said these words she raised her whole arm in the air, as 

though it had been a common action with her. 

implacable?  It may be so, to such as you who know no 

will be known as I know myself, and as Flintwinch knows me, though 

it is only to you and this half-witted woman.' 

suspicions that madame is rather solicitous to be justified to 

herself.' 

great energy and anger. 

me.  He shall believe himself to be my son, and he shall be 

believed by every one to be my son.  To save you from exposure, his 

father shall swear never to see or communicate with you more; 

communicate with either of them more.  That done, and your present 

means, derived from my husband, renounced, I charge myself with 

your support.  You may, with your place of retreat unknown, then 

passed out of all knowledge but mine, you merited a good name."  

That was all.  She had to sacrifice her sinful and shameful 

in secret, and to break her heart in secret; and through such 

present misery (light enough for her, I think!) to purchase her 

redemption from endless misery, if she could.  If, in this, I 

knew herself to be surrounded by insatiable vengeance and 

in my right hand?' 

unsoftening face, looked at the worked letters within. 

the offenders shall not be able to forget.  If the presence of 

Arthur was a daily agony to his mother, that was the just 

the will of the Disposer of all things that she should live so, 

many years.  I devoted myself to reclaim the otherwise predestined 

and lost boy; to give him the reputation of an honest origin; to 

bring him up in fear and trembling, and in a life of practical 

contrition for the sins that were heavy on his head before his 

entrance into this condemned world.  Was that a cruelty?  Was I, 

too, not visited with consequences of the original offence in which 

I had no complicity?  Arthur's father and I lived no further apart, 

house.  He died, and sent this watch back to me, with its Do not 

forget.  I do NOT forget, though I do not read it as he did.  I 

read in it, that I was appointed to do these things.  I have so 

read these three letters since I have had them lying on this table, 

and I did so read them, with equal distinctness, when they were 

thousands of miles away.' 

the use of her hand of which she showed no consciousness whatever, 

bending her eyes upon it as if she were defying it to move her, 

'Come, madame!  Time runs out.  Come, lady of piety, it must be!  

Come straight to the stolen money!' 

head: 'through what fatal error of Flintwinch's, through what 

in these things and trusted with them, through whose and what 

bringing together of the ashes of a burnt paper, you have become 

rest of your power here--' 

in a convenient place that I know of, that same short little 

intriguer, crooked little puppet!  Madame, let us go on.  Time 

presses.  You or I to finish?' 

have myself shown to any one, with your horrible distortion upon 

me.  You, with your practices of infamous foreign prisons and 

money.' 

the money.' 

risen on her disabled feet.  'If Gilbert Clennam, reduced to 

imbecility, at the point of death, and labouring under the delusion 

of some imaginary relenting towards a girl of whom he had heard 

that his nephew had once had a fancy for her which he had crushed 

and withdrawal from all who knew her--if, in that state of 

weakness, he dictated to me, whose life she had darkened with her 

sin, and who had been appointed to know her wickedness from her own 

hand and her own lips, a bequest meant as a recompense to her for 

supposed unmerited suffering; was there no difference between my 

spurning that injustice, and coveting mere money--a thing which 

you, and your comrades in the prisons, may steal from anyone?' 

'If this house was blazing from the roof to the ground,' she 

returned, 'I would stay in it to justify myself against my 

righteous motives being classed with those of stabbers and 

thieves.' 

guineas to the little beauty you slowly hunted to death.  One 

thousand guineas to the youngest daughter her patron might have at 

fifty, or (if he had none) brother's youngest daughter, on her 

thousand guineas.  What!  You will never come to the money?' 

been a player of music, and had not kept, in those days of his 

such-like children of Evil turned their backs on the Light and 

him that he was a man of innocent and laudable tastes who did kind 

actions, and that here was a poor girl with a voice for singing 

ruggedness for those accursed snares which are called the Arts, 

to be a singing girl, carries it, by that Frederick Dorrit's 

to say,' she added quickly, as colour flushed into her face; 'a 

greater than I.  What am I?' 

towards her, and who was now very near her elbow without her 

knowing it, made a specially wry face of objection when she said 

these words, and moreover twitched his gaiters, as if such 

pretensions were equivalent to little barbs in his legs. 

I will say no more of them, and you shall say no more of them, and 

can be kept among us who are here present; lastly, when I 

suppressed that paper, with the knowledge of Arthur's father--' 

her, and drew back her head, looking at him with some rising 

distrust.  'You were often enough between us when he would have had 

me produce it and I would not, to have contradicted me if I had 

made no effort to destroy it, but kept it by me, here in this 

great responsibility), I have seen no new reason, in all the time 

I have been tried here, to bring it to light.  It was a rewarding 

have had no good.'  She added, after a moment, as though she 

have forgotten to relinquish it to her at my death:' and sat 

looking at it. 

'The little paper was in this house on the night when our friend 

the prisoner--jail-comrade of my soul--came home from foreign 

guardian of your appointing, well enough known to our old intriguer 

here.  Shall we coax our old intriguer to tell us when he saw him 

last?' 

it, first of all my dreams.  Jeremiah, if you come a-nigh me now, 

with his own hands give him this paper, along with I don't know 

what more, and he took it away in an iron box--Help!  Murder!  Save 

me from Jere-mi-ah!' 

his arms midway.  After a moment's wrestle with him, Flintwinch 

gave up, and put his hands in his pockets. 

that she dreams comes true.  Ha, ha, ha!  You're so like him, 

Tables, in the little street of the high roofs, by the wharf at 

Antwerp!  Ah, but he was a brave boy to drink.  Ah, but he was a 

brave boy to smoke!  Ah, but he lived in a sweet bachelor- 

apartment--furnished, on the fifth floor, above the wood and 

and the maker of tubs--where I knew him too, and wherewith his 

What does it matter how I took possession of the papers in his iron 

it not so, madame?' 

his hands in his pockets, taking breath, and returning Mrs 

Clennam who suppresses, to present Monsieur Flintwinch who 

intrigues.' 

advanced a step or so in that attitude, still returning Mrs 

Clennam's look, and thus addressed her: 

you needn't take the trouble, because I don't care for it.  I've 

been telling you for how many years that you're one of the most 

opinionated and obstinate of women.  That's what YOU are.  You call 

yourself humble and sinful, but you are the most Bumptious of your 

sex.  That's what YOU are.  I have told you, over and over again 

when we have had a tiff, that you wanted to make everything go down 

swallow up everybody alive, but I wouldn't be swallowed up alive.  

having kept it by you.  But that's the way you cheat yourself.  

my gammon.  And to tell you all the truth while I am about it,' 

forty years--by your taking such high ground even with me, who 

knows better; the effect of it being coolly to put me on low 

ground.  I admire you very much; you are a woman of strong head and 

great talent; but the strongest head, and the greatest talent, 

can't rasp a man for forty years without making him sore.  So I 

own counsel where.  You're an active woman at that time, and if you 

want to get that paper, you can get it.  But, mark.  There comes a 

time when you are struck into what you are now, and then if you 

want to get that paper, you can't get it.  So it lies, long years, 

every day, and when any day may bring him home, and it's impossible 

to say what rummaging he may make about the house, I recommend you 

five thousand times, if you can't get at it, to let me get at it, 

minutes, when he speaks of his father's watch.  You know very well 

and over, Do Not Forget the suppression.  Make restitution!  

burnt after all.  So, before that jumping jade and Jezebel,' Mr 

cellars, where Arthur himself went prowling the very next morning.  

But it's not to be burnt on a Sunday night.  No; you are strict, 

feeling a little out of temper, and not being as strict as 

refresh my memory as to its appearance--fold up one of the many 

have got into Monday morning, and I have, by the light of your 

little exchange like the conjuror, and burn accordingly.  My 

(not that that was much; mine might have died instead, and 

welcome), he speculated unsuccessfully in lunatics, he got into 

difficulty about over-roasting a patient to bring him to reason, 

be damned to him!) he made the acquaintance of this gentleman.  He 

suppose now, was drunk.  When Arthur's mother had been under the 

writing,--mostly letters of confession to you, and Prayers for 

forgiveness.  My brother had handed, from time to time, lots of 

as have them swallowed up alive too; so I kept them in a box, 

about it, I put it into this same box, and I locked the whole up 

with two locks, and I trusted it to my brother to take away and 

keep, till I should write about it.  I did write about it, and 

understand how he gets his knowledge from my papers, and your 

gag himself).  Now, I have only one thing more to say, you hammer- 

headed woman, and that is, that I haven't altogether made up my 

about the codicil.  I think not; and that I should have been quite 

satisfied with knowing I had got the better of you, and that I held 

no more explanation to give you till this time to-morrow night.  So 

a screw, 'keep your eyes open at somebody else, for it's no use 

keeping 'em open at me.' 

going to rise. 

raising the sum you have demanded.  I have not prospered.  What 

assured of your silence?' 

of these papers in another hand.  Put off the time till the 

Marshalsea gate shall be shut for the night, and it will be too 

late to treat.  The prisoner will have read them.' 

as if she would have fallen; then stood firm. 

and so stiffened in it, Rigaud fell back and dropped his voice.  It 

was, to all the three, almost as if a dead woman had risen. 

Frederick, whom I have known across the water, is attached to the 

own hands left a packet at the prison, on my way here, with a 

his sake--to keep it without breaking the seal, in case of its 

being reclaimed before the hour of shutting up to-night--if it 

should not be reclaimed before the ringing of the prison bell, to 

its not bringing me, elsewhere, the price it will bring here, say 

then, madame, have you limited and settled the price the little 

bell to-night, you cannot buy.  I sell, then, to the little girl!' 

tore the door open, took down a hood or shawl, and wrapped it over 

knees to her. 

me.  I'll keep your secret.  Don't go out, you'll fall dead in the 

street.  Only promise me, that, if it's the poor thing that's kept 

here secretly, you'll let me take charge of her and be her nurse.  

Only promise me that, and never be afraid of me.' 

haste, saying in stern amazement: 

Flintwinch--ask HIM.  They can both tell you that she died when 

Arthur went abroad.' 

dropping dust so softly?  Who else comes and goes, and marks the 

walls with long crooked touches when we are all a-bed?  Who else 

holds the door sometimes?  But don't go out--don't go out!  

Mistress, you'll die in the street!' 

said to Rigaud, 'Wait here till I come back!' and ran out of the 

yard and out at the gateway. 

move, and she, wringing her hands, pursued her mistress.  Next, 

his reticent way, speechlessly.  Rigaud, left alone, composed 

himself upon the window-seat of the open window, in the old 

Marseilles-jail attitude.  He laid his cigarettes and fire-box 

ready to his hand, and fell to smoking. 

where is she gone, and how long will she be gone?  No matter!  

Rigaud Lagnier Blandois, my amiable subject, you will get your 

money.  You will enrich yourself.  You have lived a gentleman; you 

character to triumph.  Whoof!' 

In the hour of his triumph, his moustache went up and his nose came 

down, as he ogled a great beam over his head with particular 

satisfaction. 

CHAPTER 31 

The sun had set, and the streets were dim in the dusty twilight, 

immediate neighbourhood of the old house it attracted little 

attention, for there were only a few straggling people to notice 

London Bridge, and passing into the great main road, it became 

surrounded by astonishment. 

hurried head-covering, gaunt and of an unearthly paleness, it 

walker.  More remarkable by being so removed from the crowd it was 

among than if it had been lifted on a pedestal to be seen, the 

figure attracted all eyes.  Saunterers pricked up their attention 

to observe it; busy people, crossing it, slackened their pace and 

turned their heads; companions pausing and standing aside, 

whispered one another to look at this spectral woman who was coming 

by; and the sweep of the figure as it passed seemed to create a 

vortex, drawing the most idle and most curious after it. 

in the air, and the yet more confusing sensation of being afoot, by 

the unexpected changes in half-remembered objects, and the want of 

often drawn of the life from which she was secluded and the 

and observation.  But, having crossed the bridge and gone some 

direction; and it was only then, when she stopped and turned to 

look about her for a promising place of inquiry, that she found 

herself surrounded by an eager glare of faces. 

there arose a shrill cry of ''Cause you're mad!' 

prison.' 

mad if nothing else did, 'cause it's right opposite!' 

as a whooping ensued on this reply, and said: 'Was it the 

Marshalsea you wanted?  I'm going on duty there.  Come across with 

me.' 

before and behind and on either side, and recommending an 

peace, a yellow lamp was already striving with the prison shadows. 

badgered by the boys.  Who did you want, ma'am?' 

might your name be?' 

better be told it is his mother.' 

country at present, the Marshal has given Miss Dorrit one of the 

better come up there, and let me bring Miss Dorrit?' 

up a side staircase into a dwelling-house above.  He showed her 

leaning out of windows communing as much apart as they could with 

friends who were going away, and generally wearing out their 

imprisonment as they best might that summer evening.  The air was 

heavy and hot; the closeness of the place, oppressive; and from 

without there arose a rush of free sounds, like the jarring memory 

of such things in a headache and heartache.  She stood at the 

window, bewildered, looking down into this prison as it were out of 

her start, and Little Dorrit stood before her. 

recovered as--' 

in the face that turned to her. 

'This is not recovery; it is not strength; I don't know what it 

if it was not reclaimed before this place closed to-night.' 

which remained stretched out after receiving it. 

unreal to look upon, as though a picture or statue had been 

animated, Little Dorrit answered 'No.' 

noon, made it too dark to read there, with the dusk deepening 

bright summer evening sky could shine upon her, Little Dorrit 

stood, and read.  After a broken exclamation or so of wonder and of 

terror, she read in silence.  When she had finished, she looked 

round, and her old mistress bowed herself before her. 

all I have read,' said Little Dorrit tremulously. 

Can you forgive me?' 

me; you are too old to kneel to me; I forgive you freely without 

that.' 

that she raised her up, and stood rather shrinking from her, but 

looking at her earnestly. 

grows out of it), the great supplication that I address to your 

merciful and gentle heart, is, that you will not disclose this to 

Arthur until I am dead.  If you think, when you have had time for 

yet alive, then tell him.  But you will not think that; and in such 

case, will you promise me to spare me until I am dead?' 

returned Little Dorrit, 'that I can scarcely give you a steady 

answer.  If I should be quite sure that to be acquainted with it 

will do Mr Clennam no good--' 

consideration.  It is right that he should be the first 

earth, will you do it?' 

Little Dorrit in the light; but the sound of her voice, in saying 

limbs. 

can better bear to be known to you whom I have wronged, than to the 

son of my enemy who wronged me.--For she did wrong me!  She not 

only sinned grievously against the Lord, but she wronged me.  What 

Arthur's father was to me, she made him.  From our marriage day I 

upon your face; may it be the dawn of happier days to both of 

you!), and you will have thought already that he is as merciful and 

you.  Have you not thought so?' 

to be relied upon for being kind and generous and good.' 

over him as a child, in the days of his first remembrance, my 

that the transgressions of the parents are visited on their 

I have sat with him and his father, seeing the weakness of his 

father yearning to unbend to him; and forcing it back, that the 

child might work out his release in bondage and hardship.  I have 

little books, and trying to soften me with his mother's ways that 

hardened me.' 

of words, delivered in a retrospective gloomy voice. 

seen that child grow up; not to be pious in a chosen way (his 

mother's influence lay too heavy on him for that), but still to be 

as I once half-hoped he might--so frail we are, and so do the 

corrupt affections of the flesh war with our trusts and tasks; but 

he always respected me and ordered himself dutifully to me.  He 

never known the meaning of, he has turned away from me and gone his 

deference.  These have been his relations towards me.  Yours have 

been of a much slighter kind, spread over a much shorter time.  

When you have sat at your needle in my room, you have been in fear 

of me, but you have supposed me to have been doing you a kindness; 

you are better informed now, and know me to have done you an 

recompense I can imagine, have him in a moment, however blindly, 

and change me altogether into something he would cast out of his 

am still alive, that I die before his face, and utterly perish away 

from him, like one consumed by lightning and swallowed by an 

earthquake.' 

Not less so, when she added: 

fiercely and lasted so long.  It presented itself to her, with no 

sophistry upon it, in its own plain nature. 

myself been commissioned to lay it low in all time?' 

had moved me, could I have found no justification?  None in the old 

days when the innocent perished with the guilty 2 a thousand to 

even in blood, and yet found favour?' 

of the dead, the friend of all who were afflicted and forlorn, the 

patient Master who shed tears of compassion for our infirmities.  

We cannot but be right if we put all the rest away, and do 

everything in remembrance of Him.  There is no vengeance and no 

infliction of suffering in His life, I am sure.  There can be no 

am certain.' 

early trials to the shining sky, she was not in stronger opposition 

to the black figure in the shade than the life and doctrine on 

low again, and said not a word.  It remained thus, until the first 

warning bell began to ring. 

without having time.  He refuses to make any abatement, because his 

threat is, that if he fails with me, he will come to you.  Will you 

return with me and show him that you already know it?  Will you 

return with me and try to prevail with him?  Will you come and help 

dare not ask it for Arthur's sake!' 

the front court-yard, now all quiet and deserted, gained the 

street. 

and sat at their doors, playing with children and enjoying the 

almost worried itself out, and few but themselves were hurried.  As 

looked as if they had advanced out of the murk that usually 

enshrouded them, and come much nearer.  The smoke that rose into 

beauties of the sunset had not faded from the long light films of 

cloud that lay at peace in the horizon.  From a radiant centre, 

thorns into a glory. 

Clennam hurried on at Little Dorrit's side, unmolested.  They left 

and wound their way down among the silent, empty, cross-streets.  

thunder. 

her back. 

lying smoking in the window; another thundering sound, and it 

the dust, they hid their faces and stood rooted to the spot.  The 

moment and showed them the stars.  As they looked up, wildly crying 

for help, the great pile of chimneys, which was then alone left 

were intent on burying the crushed wretch deeper. 

unrecognisable, they ran back from the gateway into the street, 

had the power to speak one word.  For upwards of three years she 

reclined in a wheeled chair, looking attentively at those about her 

she had so long held was evermore enforced upon her, and except 

that she could move her eyes and faintly express a negative and 

affirmative with her head, she lived and died a statue. 

her old mistress in her arms, to help to carry her into a 

noises was out now; Affery, like greater people, had always been 

from them. 

the time of its fall, there had been fifty, there had been fifteen, 

there had been two.  Rumour finally settled the number at two; the 

foreigner and Mr Flintwinch. 

The diggers dug all through the short night by flaring pipes of 

it as it rose into its zenith, and aslant of it as it declined, and 

on a level with it again as it departed.  Sturdy digging, and 

so much glass, by the great beam that lay upon him, crushing him. 

and shovelling and carrying away went on without intermission by 

a cellar at the moment, or had had time to escape into one, and 

heard to cry, in hollow, subterranean, suffocated notes, 'Here I 

the excavators had been able to open a communication with him 

the digging and shovelling and carrying away went on without 

intermission, until the ruins were all dug out, and the cellars 

opened to the light; and still no Flintwinch, living or dead, all 

right or all wrong, had been turned up by pick or spade. 

the time of the fall; and it began then to be perceived that he had 

been rather busy elsewhere, converting securities into as much 

to his own exclusive account his authority to act for the Firm.  

part that his taking himself off within that period with all he 

could get, was the final satisfactory sum and substance of his 

had never been buried could not be unburied, the diggers gave him 

depths of the earth. 

believing that Flintwinch was lying somewhere among the London 

geological formation.  Nor was their belief much shaken by repeated 

known to be an Englishman, consorted with the Dutchmen on the 

quaint banks of the canals of the Hague and in the drinking-shops 

of Amsterdam, under the style and designation of Mynheer von 

Flyntevynge. 

CHAPTER 32 

descrying no break in the legal sky affording a hope of his 

enlargement, Mr Pancks suffered desperately from self-reproaches.  

If it had not been for those infallible figures which proved that 

in a carriage and pair, and that Mr Pancks, instead of being 

thousand pounds of his own at his immediate disposal, that unhappy 

wall and died, as a last sacrifice to the late Mr Merdle's 

greatness.  Solely supported by his unimpugnable calculations, Mr 

Pancks led an unhappy and restless life; constantly carrying his 

himself on every possible occasion, but entreating every human 

being he could lay hold of to go over them with him, and observe 

what a clear case it was.  Down in Bleeding Heart Yard there was 

his demonstration, and, as figures are catching, a kind of 

of which the whole Yard was light-headed. 

assumed an irritable sound which boded the Patriarch no good; 

likewise, Mr Pancks had on several occasions looked harder at the 

Patriarchal bumps than was quite reconcilable with the fact of his 

not being a painter, or a peruke-maker in search of the living 

model. 

he was wanted or not wanted in the Patriarchal presence, and 

business had gone on in its customary course.  Bleeding Heart Yard 

had been harrowed by Mr Pancks, and cropped by Mr Casby, at the 

dirt of the business as his share; Mr Casby had taken all the 

profits, all the ethereal vapour, and all the moonshine, as his 

share; and, in the form of words which that benevolent beamer 

generally employed on Saturday evenings, when he twirled his fat 

thumbs after striking the week's balance, 'everything had been 

satisfactory to all parties--all parties--satisfactory, sir, to all 

parties.' 

it may, one glowing Saturday evening, on being hailed by the 

the Dock in a highly heated condition. 

have been remiss, sir.' 

was so particularly serene that evening as to be provoking.  

Everybody else within the bills of mortality was hot; but the 

about him; and he made a drink of golden sherry, which shone in a 

large tumbler as if he were drinking the evening sunshine.  this 

bottle-green legs stretched out before him, terminating in his easy 

having in his extensive benevolence made the drink for the human 

species, while he himself wanted nothing but his own milk of human 

kindness. 

hair up with both hands, in a highly portentous manner. 

don't squeeze them.  You don't squeeze them.  Your receipts are not 

not continue to be as satisfactory as I could wish it to be to all 

parties.  All parties.' 

for?' 

must squeeze to pay.'  The Patriarch so much surprised himself by 

this brilliant turn, after Dr Johnson, which he had not in the 

youthful portrait, 'Paid to squeeze, sir, and must squeeze to pay.' 

day.' 

good draught of his mixture.  'Anything more?' 

now in circumstances that are by any means calculated to--to be 

deceived, to inquire for Mr Clennam in jail.  In jail.' 

out, come out; pay his debts, and come out.' 

and smiled at his proprietor in a most hideous manner. 

allow it, can't allow it,' said the Patriarch blandly. 

could not resist the temptation of trying it again, 'and you must 

mention it to pay, mention it to pay.' 

and other people's losses, and to mind your business, mind your 

business.' 

extraordinarily abrupt, short, and loud utterance of the 

eyes in something of a hurry, to look at him.  Mr Pancks, with a 

sniff of corresponding intensity, then added, 'Anything more?' 

Patriarch, finishing his mixture, and rising with an amiable air, 

'to take a little stroll, a little stroll.  Perhaps I shall find 

you here when I come back.  If not, sir, duty, duty; squeeze, 

squeeze, squeeze, on Monday; squeeze on Monday!' 

Patriarchal assumption of the broad-brimmed hat, with a momentary 

also hotter than at first, and breathed harder.  But he suffered Mr 

Casby to go out, without offering any further remark, and then took 

he observed.  'I knew where you were bound to.  Good!'  He then 

own account.  He steered straight for Mrs Plornish's end of 

Bleeding Heart Yard, and arrived there, at the top of the steps, 

hotter than ever. 

come and sit along with father in Happy Cottage--which to his 

relief were not so numerous as they would have been on any other 

night than Saturday, when the connection who so gallantly supported 

the top of the steps Mr Pancks remained until he beheld the 

Patriarch, who always entered the Yard at the other end, slowly 

advancing, beaming, and surrounded by suitors.  Then Mr Pancks 

descended and bore down upon him, with his utmost pressure of steam 

on. 

immediate squeeze instead of postponing that operation until 

Monday.  The population of the Yard were astonished at the meeting, 

for the two powers had never been seen there together, within the 

memory of the oldest Bleeding Heart.  But they were overcome by 

unutterable amazement when Mr Pancks, going close up to the most 

venerable of men and halting in front of the bottle-green 

waistcoat, made a trigger of his right thumb and forefinger, 

if it had been a large marble. 

Pancks further astounded and attracted the Bleeding Hearts by 

have it out with you!' 

all eyes and ears; windows were thrown open, and door-steps were 

thronged. 

game?  What do you go in for?  Benevolence, an't it?  You 

hitting him, but merely to relieve his mind and expend his 

superfluous power in wholesome exercise, aimed a blow at the bumpy 

head, which the bumpy head ducked to avoid.  This singular 

oration. 

are the worst lot of all the lots to be met with.  Speaking as a 

sufferer by both, I don't know that I wouldn't as soon have the 

a philanthropic sneak.  You're a shabby deceiver!' 

(The repetition of the performance at this point was received with 

a burst of laughter.) 

Pancks, I believe.' 

lump of love, this bottle-green smiler, this is your driver!' said 

look for him in Casby, at I don't know how much a year!' 

Mr Pancks.  Mr Pancks has come down into the Yard to-night on 

here's the Winder!' 

and child, but for the long, grey, silken locks, and the broad- 

brimmed hat. 

slow-going benevolent Humming-Top, and when you come about him with 

that I may have all the blame on Monday?  What do you think of his 

having had me over the coals this very evening, because I don't 

squeeze you enough?  What do you think of my being, at the present 

moment, under special orders to squeeze you dry on Monday?' 

your Casby belongs to, is the shabbiest of all the lots.  Setting 

their Grubbers on, at a wretched pittance, to do what they're 

ashamed and afraid to do and pretend not to do, but what they will 

Grubbers nothing but blame, and to give them nothing but credit!  

Why, the worst-looking cheat in all this town who gets the value of 

sign-post of The Casby's Head here!' 

what more you get of these precious Humming-Tops, revolving among 

that very well.' 

members crying, 'No, you are not,' and its politer materials, 'Yes, 

you are.' 

Plodder and Grubber.  That's your humble servant.  There's his 

full-length portrait, painted by himself and presented to you, 

warranted a likeness!  But what's a man to be, with such a man as 

this for his Proprietor?  What can be expected of him?  Did anybody 

ever find boiled mutton and caper-sauce growing in a cocoa-nut?' 

alacrity of their response. 

myself, under Proprietors like this, pleasant qualities.  I've been 

a Grubber from a boy.  What has my life been?  Fag and grind, fag 

and grind, turn the wheel, turn the wheel!  I haven't been 

agreeable to myself, and I haven't been likely to be agreeable to 

anybody else.  If I was a shilling a week less useful in ten years' 

time, this impostor would give me a shilling a week less; if as 

my place at sixpence cheaper.  Bargain and sale, bless you!  Fixed 

principles!  It's a mighty fine sign-post, is The Casby's Head,' 

English Grammar?' 

task this Proprietor has set me, has been never to leave off 

Keep we or do we keep always at it.  Keep ye or do ye or you keep 

always at it.  Let them keep always at it.  Here is your benevolent 

Patriarch of a Casby, and there is his golden rule.  He is 

a little for the better display of him to the Yard; 'as I am not 

to a close by requesting you to get out of this.' 

required so much room to catch an idea in, an so much more room to 

turn it in, that he had not a word to offer in reply.  He appeared 

shot it off again with his former dexterity.  On the preceding 

far impressed his audience, that the Patriarch had to turn and 

stoop for it himself. 

right hand in his coat pocket, whipped out a pair of shears, 

locks that flowed upon his shoulders.  In a paroxysm of animosity 

and rapidity, Mr Pancks then caught the broad-brimmed hat out of 

the astounded Patriarch's hand, cut it down into a mere stewpan, 

and fixed it on the Patriarch's head. 

himself recoiled in consternation.  A bare-polled, goggle-eyed, 

big-headed lumbering personage stood staring at him, not in the 

started out of the earth to ask what was become of Casby.  After 

down his shears, and fled for a place of hiding, where he might lie 

sheltered from the consequences of his crime.  Mr Pancks deemed it 

pursued by nothing but the sound of laughter in Bleeding Heart 

Yard, rippling through the air and making it ring again. 

CHAPTER 33 

The changes of a fevered room are slow and fluctuating; but the 

changes of the fevered world are rapid and irrevocable. 

in their shadows as their child, while she thought for Clennam, 

urged its pressing claims upon her too, and her patience untiringly 

responded to them.  Here was Fanny, proud, fitful, whimsical, 

further advanced in that disqualified state for going into society 

knife, resolved always to want comfort, resolved not to be 

comforted, resolved to be deeply wronged, and resolved that nobody 

weak, proud, tipsy, young old man, shaking from head to foot, 

talking as indistinctly as if some of the money he plumed himself 

alone in any act of his life, and patronising the sister whom he 

selfishly loved (he always had that negative merit, ill-starred and 

Mrs Merdle in gauzy mourning--the original cap whereof had possibly 

been rent to pieces in a fit of grief, but had certainly yielded to 

a highly becoming article from the Parisian market--warring with 

hour in the day.  Here was poor Mr Sparkler, not knowing how to 

that they could do no better than agree that they were both 

remarkably fine women, and that there was no nonsense about either 

upon him frightfully.  Then, too, here was Mrs General, got home 

day, demanding a new Testimonial by way of recommendation to some 

vacant appointment or other.  Of which remarkable gentlewoman it 

face of this earth, so many people were (as the warmth of her 

Testimonials evinced) so perfectly satisfied--or who was so very 

unfortunate in having a large circle of ardent and distinguished 

admirers, who never themselves happened to want her in any 

capacity. 

important persons had been unable to determine whether they should 

to the strength of their own case that they should admit her to 

have been cruelly deceived, they graciously made the admission, and 

continued to know her.  It followed that Mrs Merdle, as a woman of 

his head to the sole of his foot, the moment he was found out in 

his pocket), must be actively championed by her order for her 

order's sake.  She returned this fealty by causing it to be 

well. 

to a more lucrative height.  That patriotic servant accordingly 

perfect Nelson in respect of nailing them to the mast.  On the 

different floors of the genteel little temple of inconvenience to 

in the lists of Society, sworn rivals.  And Little Dorrit, seeing 

all these things as they developed themselves, could not but 

wonder, anxiously, into what back corner of the genteel 

establishment Fanny's children would be poked by-and-by, and who 

would take care of those unborn little victims. 

first seeing Arthur in the Marshalsea and since, confiding her 

especially on one.  To that one, the continued absence of Mr 

Meagles abroad, instead of his comforting presence in the 

Marshalsea, was referable. 

fallen into Rigaud's hands, Little Dorrit had confided the general 

showed Mr Meagles the importance of recovering the original papers; 

in the solicitude she expressed on that head, and adding that he 

would not come over to England 'without making some attempt to 

trace them out.' 

agreeable to him not to know the Meagleses.  He was so considerate 

as to lay no injunctions on his wife in that particular; but he 

mentioned to Mr Meagles that personally they did not appear to him 

if--politely, and without any scene, or anything of that sort--they 

apart.  Poor Mr Meagles, who was already sensible that he did not 

her presence, said 'Good, Henry!  You are my Pet's husband; you 

This arrangement involved the contingent advantage, which perhaps 

Henry Gowan had not foreseen, that both Mr and Mrs Meagles were 

more liberal than before to their daughter, when their 

under the degrading necessity of knowing whence it came. 

great ardour.  He knew from his daughter the various towns which 

to visit these with all discretion and speed, and, in the event of 

finding anywhere that he had left a bill unpaid, and a box or 

and that he pursued his inquiries among people who never knew what 

he said to them.  Still, with an unshaken confidence that the 

English tongue was somehow the mother tongue of the whole world, 

only the people were too stupid to know it, Mr Meagles harangued 

innkeepers in the most voluble manner, entered into loud 

explanations of the most complicated sort, and utterly renounced 

replies in the native language of the respondents, on the ground 

whom Mr Meagles addressed in such idiomatic terms of speech, as 

instantly to extinguish and shut up--which made the matter worse.  

On a balance of the account, however, it may be doubted whether he 

everywhere overwhelmed with injurious accusations.  On no fewer 

than four occasions the police were called in to receive 

denunciations of Mr Meagles as a Knight of Industry, a good-for- 

most ignominious manner escorted to steam-boats and public 

carriages, to be got rid of, talking all the while, like a cheerful 

and fluent Briton as he was, with Mother under his arm. 

clear, shrewd, persevering man.  When he had 'worked round,' as he 

called it, to Paris in his pilgrimage, and had wholly failed in it 

to come to the papers, whether they turn up or no.  Because it is 

where they would be safe from people over in England, and where 

they would yet be accessible to himself, don't you see?' 

talk for a minute or two with Mr Clennam about this man who was no 

who was on his way to see him, had an interest in ascertaining 

something about the man if he could, he had asked her to tell Mr 

Meagles that he had been known to Miss Wade, then living in such a 

street at Calais.  'Oho!' said Mr Meagles. 

rang the cracked bell at the cracked gate, and it jarred open, and 

the peasant-woman stood in the dark doorway, saying, 'Ice-say!  

Seer!  Who?'  In acknowledgment of whose address, Mr Meagles 

murmured to himself that there was some sense about these Calais 

people, who really did know something of what you and themselves 

were up to; and returned, 'Miss Wade, my dear.'  He was then shown 

into the presence of Miss Wade. 

throat; 'I hope you have been pretty well, Miss Wade?' 

Wade asked him to what she was indebted for the honour of seeing 

him again?  Mr Meagles, in the meanwhile, glanced all round the 

room without observing anything in the shape of a box. 

able to throw a light upon a little something that is at present 

dark.  Any unpleasant bygones between us are bygones, I hope.  

Can't be helped now.  You recollect my daughter?  Time changes so!  

A mother!' 

note.  He paused for any expression of interest, but paused in 

vain. 

a cold silence. 

might--' 

nature is not to be calculated upon?' 

However, to come to the point.'  For he was sensible of having 

heard from my friend Clennam, who, you will be sorry to hear, has 

been and still is very ill--' 

London by a violent accident.  Now, don't mistake me!  I know it 

an angry interruption which he saw about to break.  'I am fully 

aware of that.  It was a slight knowledge, I know.  But the 

question is,' Mr Meagles's voice here became comfortable again, 

'did he, on his way to England last time, leave a box of papers, or 

a bundle of papers, or some papers or other in some receptacle or 

here for a short time, until he wanted them?' 

have any unkind feeling towards my daughter; it's impossible.  

Well!  It's her question, too; being one in which a particular 

friend of hers is nearly interested.  So here I am, frankly to say 

that is the question, and to ask, Now, did he?' 

dismissed, to aim their questions at!' 

because it's the plainest question in the world, and might be asked 

of any one.  The documents I refer to were not his own, were 

wrongfully obtained, might at some time or other be troublesome to 

to whom they really belong.  He passed through Calais going to 

then, why he should wish to be able to put his hand upon them 

own sort.  Did he leave them here?  I declare if I knew how to 

the question personally, but there's nothing personal in it.  I 

might put it to any one; I have put it already to many people.  Did 

he leave them here?  Did he leave anything here?' 

question.  He did not leave them here, and I know nothing about 

them.' 

and I hope there is not much harm done.--Tattycoram well, Miss 

Wade?' 

'I can't keep my foot out of it here, it seems.  Perhaps, if I had 

name.  But, when one means to be good-natured and sportive with 

young people, one doesn't think twice.  Her old friend leaves a 

it.' 

out of the dull room, where it shone like a sun, took it to the 

Hotel where he had left Mrs Meagles, and where he made the Report: 

Packet, which sailed in the night; and next to the Marshalsea. 

presented themselves at the wicket towards nightfall.  Miss Dorrit 

and invariably came in the evening.  Mr Clennam was slowly mending; 

and Maggy and Mrs Plornish and Mr Baptist took care of him by 

bell rang.  There was the room the Marshal had lent her, up-stairs, 

that it might be hazardous to Arthur to see him without 

up in the room, looking down through its barred window into the 

jail. 

began to gasp for air.  He was walking up and down the room, 

panting, and making himself worse by laboriously fanning himself 

with her handkerchief, when he turned towards the opening door. 

Why, Mother, look!  Tattycoram!' 

square.  Such a box had Affery Flintwinch seen, in the first of her 

Double's arm.  This, Tattycoram put on the ground at her old 

dear Mistress; here it is!' 

her say she hadn't got it, I was there when he left it, and I took 

it at bedtime and brought it away.  Here it is!' 

did you come over?' 

other end.  When you took a coach at the wharf, I took another 

coach and followed you here.  She never would have given it up 

after what you had said to her about its being wanted; she would 

sooner have sunk it in the sea, or burnt it.  But, here it is!' 

left it, and I knew well that after what you said, and after her 

denying it, she never would have given it up.  But here it is!  

Dear Master, dear Mistress, take me back again, and give me back 

the dear old name!  Let this intercede for me.  Here it is!' 

again. 

more, 'always so unhappy, and so repentant!  I was afraid of her 

through understanding what was bad in me so well.  It was a madness 

when I got into that state, that people were all against me because 

of my first beginning; and the kinder they were to me, the worse 

and that they wanted to make me envy them, when I know--when I even 

knew then--that they never thought of such a thing.  And my 

beautiful young mistress not so happy as she ought to have been, 

and I gone away from her!  Such a brute and a wretch as she must 

as forgiving as you two are?  For I am not so bad as I was,' 

pleaded Tattycoram; 'I am bad enough, but not so bad as I was, 

my own self grown ripe--turning everything the wrong way, and 

twisting all good into evil.  I have had her before me all this 

do, to do that,' cried Tattycoram, in a closing great burst of 

that, after what I have gone through, I hope I shall never be quite 

I'll try very hard.  I won't stop at five-and-twenty, sir, I'll 

count five-and-twenty hundred, five-and-twenty thousand!' 

Dorrit came in, and Mr Meagles with pride and joy produced the box, 

and her gentle face was lighted up with grateful happiness and joy. 

him; he should never know of her loss; in time to come he should 

know all that was of import to himself; but he should never know 

forgotten. 

business--or at least was--and I am going to take my measures 

promptly, in that character.  Had I better see Arthur to-night?' 

is.  But I think it will be better not to see him to-night.' 

But I'll explain what I mean when you come back.' 

yard.  He said gently, 'Tattycoram, come to me a moment, my good 

girl.' 

out of the way to let her go by.  The men--see the poor, shabby 

fellows--pull off their hats to her quite politely, and now she 

glides in at that doorway.  See her, Tattycoram?' 

Tattycoram?' 

and cast it at her, she would have led an irritable and probably an 

useless existence.  Yet I have heard tell, Tattycoram, that her 

service.  Shall I tell you what I consider those eyes of hers, that 

were here just now, to have always looked at, to get that 

expression?' 

antecedent to it, in any origin or station, that will tell against 

us with the Almighty, or with ourselves.' 

prisoners, until she was seen coming back.  She was soon in the 

room, and recommended that Arthur, whom she had left calm and 

composed, should not be visited that night. 

best.  I shall trust my remembrances then, my sweet nurse, in your 

hands, and I well know they couldn't be in better.  I am off again 

to-morrow morning.' 

place has taken my breath away, and I shall never get it back again 

until Arthur is out of this place.' 

put up at a City Hotel.  To-morrow morning, Mother and Tattycoram 

Dr Buchan in the parlour-window, will think them a couple of 

here.  Now, I tell you, my love, it's of no use writing and 

other, at uncertain intervals and distances; we must have Doyce 

because I can't live without breathing freely; and I can't breathe 

freely until Arthur is out of this Marshalsea.  I am stifled at the 

present moment, and have scarcely breath enough to say this much, 

and to carry this precious box down-stairs for you.' 

carrying the box.  Little Dorrit had no conveyance there: which 

joy and gratitude she kissed his hand. 

feeling of what's right, that YOU should do homage to ME--at the 

Marshalsea Gate.' 

'but she's very fond of him, and hides his faults, and thinks that 

good family!' 

he made the most of it, who could blame him? 

CHAPTER 34 

On a healthy autumn day, the Marshalsea prisoner, weak but 

ploughed again, when the summer fruits had ripened and waned, when 

the green perspectives of hops had been laid low by the busy 

and the berries of the mountain ash were crimson among the 

yellowing foliage.  Already in the woods, glimpses of the hardy 

winter that was coming were to be caught through unaccustomed 

openings among the boughs where the prospect shone defined and 

the ocean was no longer to be seen lying asleep in the heat, but 

sails on the horizon, drifting away like autumn-tinted leaves that 

had drifted from the trees. 

Changeless and barren, looking ignorantly at all the seasons with 

its fixed, pinched face of poverty and care, the prison had not a 

touch of any of these beauties on it.  Blossom what would, its 

bricks and bars bore uniformly the same dead crop.  Yet Clennam, 

listening to the voice as it read to him, heard in it all that 

great Nature was doing, heard in it all the soothing songs she 

his youth on hopeful promises, on playful fancies, on the harvests 

of tenderness and humility that lie hidden in the early-fostered 

seeds of the imagination; on the oaks of retreat from blighting 

memories of an old feeling of such things, and echoes of every 

merciful and loving whisper that had ever stolen to him in his 

life. 

that the light was strong upon them. 

the window.  Maggy sat at her needlework in her old place.  The 

light softened, Little Dorrit brought her chair closer to his side. 

Mr Rugg says his letters to him are so full of help, and that 

everybody (now a little anger is past) is so considerate, and 

speaks so well of you, that it will soon be over now.' 

pleasure to me to hear you speak so feelingly, and to--and to see,' 

it, that I cannot say Don't.' 

Little Dorrit?' 

room.' 

here at least twice every day.' 

He might have released the little light hand after fervently 

kissing it again; but that, with a very gentle lingering where it 

and it lay softly on his breast. 

have not forgotten what we said together, when you came back?' 

quite strong to-day, don't you?' 

have got?' 

good for Little Dorrit.' 

and longing to tell you.  You are sure you will not take it?' 

could have broken into tears in a moment, and yet that was happy 

and proud. 

Poor Fanny has lost everything.  She has nothing left but her 

husband's income.  All that papa gave her when she married was lost 

gone.' 

might not be so bad,' he said: 'but I had feared a heavy loss 

there, knowing the connection between her husband and the 

defaulter.' 

sorry for poor Fanny.  My poor brother too!' 

'Had he property in the same hands?' 

fortune is?' 

him, she withdrew her hand, and laid her face down on the spot 

where it had rested. 

are you quite sure you will not share my fortune with me now?' 

her own cheek, she drew the slight hand round his neck, and clasped 

it in its fellow-hand. 

and truth.  I am yours anywhere, everywhere!  I love you dearly!  

I would rather pass my life here with you, and go out daily, 

room where he suffered for so many years!' 

been crying her eyes out long before this.  Maggy was now so 

overjoyed that, after hugging her little mother with all her might, 

to whom to impart her gladness.  Whom should Maggy meet but Flora 

and Mr F.'s Aunt opportunely coming in?  And whom else, as a 

of being past bending by any means short of powerful mechanical 

and her stony reticule was as rigid as if it had been petrified by 

the Gorgon's head, and had got it at that moment inside.  With 

herself by resenting at the point of her umbrella, from time to 

time. 

propose an adjournment to any place to one so far removed by 

Arthur--cannot overcome it more improper now than ever late Doyce 

and Clennam--one last remark I might wish to make one last 

excuse under pretence of three kidney ones the humble place of 

conversation.' 

returned that she was quite at Flora's disposition.  Flora 

accordingly led the way across the road to the pie-shop in 

question: Mr F.'s Aunt stalking across in the rear, and putting 

a better cause. 

conversation, were set before them on three little tin platters, 

civil man poured hot gravy out of a spouted can as if he were 

feeding three lamps, Flora took out her pocket-handkerchief. 

even a pie as far from flaky as the present and so deficient in 

kidney as to be in that respect like a minced nutmeg might not 

prove unacceptable if offered by the hand of true regard such 

that tender relations are in contemplation beg to state that I 

heartily wish well to both and find no fault with either not the 

least, it may be withering to know that ere the hand of Time had 

made me much less slim than formerly and dreadfully red on the 

slightest exertion particularly after eating I well know when it 

takes the form of a rash, it might have been and was not through 

the interruption of parents and mental torpor succeeded until the 

to either and I heartily wish well to both.' 

Little Dorrit took her hand, and thanked her for all her old 

kindness. 

'for you always were the best and dearest little thing that ever 

saving being Conscience itself though I must add much more 

agreeable than mine ever was to me for though not I hope more 

to make one uncomfortable than comfortable and evidently taking a 

greater pleasure in doing it but I am wandering, one hope I wish to 

express ere yet the closing scene draws in and it is that I do 

trust for the sake of old times and old sincerity that Arthur will 

know that I didn't desert him in his misfortunes but that I came 

something warm in a tumbler from the hotel and really very nice 

hours after hours to keep him company over the way without his 

knowing it.' 

great advantage. 

dearest thing that ever was if you'll still excuse the familiarity 

from one who moves in very different circles to let Arthur 

understand that I don't know after all whether it wasn't all 

certainly Mr F. did work a change and the spell being broken 

which various circumstances have combined to prevent of which 

prepared to say that if it had been agreeable to Arthur and had 

brought itself about naturally in the first instance I should not 

have been very glad being of a lively disposition and moped at home 

improved since having been cut down by the hand of the Incendiary 

into something of which I never saw the counterpart in all my life 

this labyrinth, Little Dorrit understood its purpose, and cordially 

accepted the trust. 

'is then perished the column is crumbled and the pyramid is 

call it not weakness call it not folly I must now retire into 

privacy and look upon the ashes of departed joys no more but taking 

humble pretext of our interview will for ever say Adieu!' 

had been elaborating some grievous scheme of injury in her mind 

since her first assumption of that public position on the Marshal's 

Sibyllic apostrophe to the relict of her late nephew. 

replying, 'Bring him for'ard and I'll chuck him out o' winder!' 

Having reiterated this demand an immense number of times, with a 

sustained glare of defiance at Little Dorrit, Mr F.'s Aunt folded 

her arms, and sat down in the corner of the pie-shop parlour; 

been 'brought for'ard,' and the chucking portion of his destiny 

accomplished. 

she had not seen Mr F.'s Aunt so full of life and character for 

weeks; that she would find it necessary to remain there 'hours 

perhaps,' until the inexorable old lady could be softened; and that 

the tumbler already glanced at, which was afterwards replenished.  

in perfect good humour; though occasionally embarrassed by the 

consequences of an idle rumour which circulated among the credulous 

infants of the neighbourhood, to the effect that an old lady had 

sold herself to the pie-shop to be made up, and was then sitting in 

of evening began to fall, occasioned so much interruption to the 

business, that the merchant became very pressing in his proposals 

that Mr F.'s Aunt should be removed.  A conveyance was accordingly 

and Flora, this remarkable woman was at last induced to enter; 

and demanding to have him 'brought for'ard' for the purpose 

forward and never was brought forward, will never be positively 

known. 

The autumn days went on, and Little Dorrit never came to the 

Marshalsea now and went away without seeing him.  No, no, no. 

One morning, as Arthur listened for the light feet that every 

morning ascended winged to his heart, bringing the heavenly 

heard her coming, not alone. 

some one here.  May I bring some one in?' 

'Yes,' and she came in with Mr Meagles.  Sun-browned and jolly Mr 

Meagles looked, and he opened his arms and folded Arthur in them, 

like a sun-browned and jolly father. 

it's over.  Arthur, my dear fellow, confess at once that you 

expected me before.' 

'I did,' said Arthur; 'but Amy told me--' 

'Little Dorrit.  Never any other name.'  (It was she who whispered 

it.) 

further explanation, I was not to expect you until I saw you.' 

hand stoutly; 'and now you shall have any explanation and every 

the Allongers and Marshongers, or I should be ashamed to look you 

in the face this day,--but you were not in company trim at the 

moment, and I had to start off again to catch Doyce.' 

house a-fire.  He has fallen on his legs, has Dan.  Where they 

Circumlocution Office any more.  Let me tell you, Dan has done 

without 'em!' 

you give me!' 

you see Dan.  I assure you Dan is directing works and executing 

a Britannia in the Manger--won't give her children such 

given by other countries.  No, no, Dan!' said Mr Meagles, shaking 

his head again.  'That won't do here!' 

you give me in this news.' 

first burst.  Now, to go back, about catching Doyce.  I caught 

Doyce.  Ran against him among a lot of those dirty brown dogs in 

Arabs and all sorts of incoherent races.  YOU know 'em!  Well!  He 

was coming straight to me, and I was going to him, and so we came 

back together.' 

I should have done if I had been in the diplomatic line--right, 

the present moment, why, my plain answer is--here he is!  And now 

I can breathe again at last!' 

and said the rest for himself. 

thumb, on the palm of his hand, 'and they're soon disposed of.  

in your calculations.  I know what that is.  It affects the whole 

failure, and will avoid it another time.  I have done a similar 

matters right, with the assistance of our friend, when I fell in 

with our friend as he has informed you.  Thirdly.  We two agreed, 

that, after what you had undergone, after your distress of mind, 

and after your illness, it would be a pleasant surprise if we could 

know we always make an allowance for friction, and so I have 

reserved space to close in.  My dear Clennam, I thoroughly confide 

detain you here one half-hour longer.' 

some time at the window with his back towards them, and until his 

little wife that was to be had gone to him and stayed by him. 

to-morrow morning?  Do I know, without being very wise, where you 

father, and will take a ride with me now towards Saint Paul's 

Churchyard, I dare say I know what we want to get there.' 

Meagles lingered behind to say a word to his friend. 

and we will keep away.  It might set Mother thinking about Pet; 

stay there and keep her company.' 

night ended, and the morning came, and Little Dorrit, simply 

dressed as usual and having no one with her but Maggy, came into 

the prison with the sunshine.  The poor room was a happy room that 

morning.  Where in the world was there a room so full of quiet joy! 

shall be gone directly.' 

to burn something for me.' 

own hand, just as it is, my fancy will be gratified.' 

glistening eyes and standing on tiptoe to kiss him, 'if you will 

only humour me when the fire burns up.' 

her waist, and the fire shining, as fire in that same place had 

often shone, in Little Dorrit's eyes.  'Is it bright enough now?' 

paper over the flame.  'You can say (if you don't mind) "I love 

away. 

though many heads were stealthily peeping from the windows. 

good John!  I hope you will live very happy, dear!' 

who had given her the Burial Register for a pillow; full of 

all. 

the very room where Little Dorrit had slumbered after her party, to 

chief clerk to Doyce and Clennam, and afterwards partner in the 

and Maggy on the other, and a back-ground of John Chivery and 

father and other turnkeys who had run round for the moment, 

the least signs of seclusion upon her, notwithstanding her recent 

declaration; but, on the contrary, was wonderfully smart, and 

enjoyed the ceremonies mightily, though in a fluttered way. 

name, and the clerk paused in taking off the good clergyman's 

surplice, and all the witnesses looked on with special interest.  

'For, you see,' said Little Dorrit's old friend, 'this young lady 

our Registers.  Her birth is in what I call the first volume; she 

lay asleep, on this very floor, with her pretty head on what I call 

bride in what I call the third volume.' 

and her husband walked out of the church alone.  They paused for a 

moment on the steps of the portico, looking at the fresh 

perspective of the street in the autumn morning sun's bright rays, 

and then went down. 

down to give a mother's care, in the fulness of time, to Fanny's 

neglected children no less than to their own, and to leave that 

lady going into Society for ever and a day.  Went down to give a 

vexed by the great exactions he made of her in return for the 

riches he might have given her if he had ever had them, and who 

fruits.  They went quietly down into the roaring streets, 

inseparable and blessed; and as they passed along in sunshine and 

shade, the noisy and the eager, and the arrogant and the froward 

and the vain, fretted and chafed, and made their usual uproar. 

THE END. 

