MACMILLAN MASTER GUIDES 

MACMILLAN MASTER GUIDES 

GENERAL EDITOR: JAMES GIBSON 

JANE AUSTEN 

SAMUEL BECKETT 

WILLIAM BLAKE 

ROBERT BOLT 

CHARLOTTE BRONTE 

EMILY BRONTE 

JOHN BUNYAN 

GEOFFREY CHAUCER 

JOSEPH CONRAD 

CHARLES DICKENS 

GEORGE ELIOT 

T. S. ELIOT 

HENRY FIELDING 

E. M. FORSTER 

WILLIAM GOLDING 

OLIVER GOLDSMITH 

THOMAS HARDY 

Emma Norman Page 
Sense and Sensibility Judy Simons 
Persuasion Judy Simons 
Pride and Prejudice Raymond Wilson 
Mansfield Park Richard Wirdnam 

Waiting for Godot Jennifer Birkett 

Songs of Innocence and Songs of 
Experience Alan Tomlinson 

A Man for All Seasons Leonard Smith 

Jane Eyre Robert Miles 

Wuthering Heights Hilda D. Spear 

The Pilgrim's Progress Beatrice Batson 

The Miller's Tale Michael Alexander 
The Pardoner's Tale Geoffrey Lester 
The Wife of Bath's Tale Nicholas Marsh 
The Knight's T,ale 
Anne Samson 
The Prologue to the Canterbury Tales 
Nigel Thomas and Richard Swan 

The Secret Agent Andrew Mayne 

Bleak House Dennis Butts 
Great Expectations Dennis Butts 
Hard Times Norman Page 

Middlemarch Graham Handley 
Silas Marner Graham Handley 
The Mill on the Floss 
Helen Wheeler 

Murder in the Cathedral Paul Lapworth 
Selected Poems Andrew Swarbrick 

Joseph Andrews Trevor Johnson 

Howards End Ian Milligan 
A Passage to India Hilda D. Spear 

The Spire Rosemary Sumner 
Lord of the Flies 
Raymond Wilson 

She Stoops to Conquer Paul Ranger 

The Mayor of Casterbridge Ray Evans 
Tess of the d'Urbervilles James Gibson 
Far from the Madding Crowd Colin 
Temblett-Wood 

MACMILLAN MASTER GUIDES 

GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS 

BEN JONSON 

JOHN KEATS 

RUDYARD KIPLING 

PHILIP LARKIN 

D. H. LAWRENCE 

HARPER LEE 

LAURIE LEE 

CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE 

THE METAPHYSICAL POETS 

THOMAS MIDDLETON and 
WILLIAM ROWLEY 

ARTHUR MILLER 

GEORGE ORWELL 

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 

GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 

RICHARD SHERIDAN 

ALFRED TENNYSON 

EDWARD THOMAS 

ANTHONY TROLLOPE 

JOHN WEBSTER 

VIRGINIA WOOLF 

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH 

Selected Poems John Garrett 

Volpone Michael Stout 

Selected Poems John Garrett 

Kim Leonee Ormond 

The Whitsun Weddings and The Less 
Deceived Andrew Swarbrick 

Sons and Lovers R. P. Draper 

To Kill a Mockingbird Jean Armstrong 

Cider with Rosie Brian Tarbitt 

Doctor Faustus 
David A. Male 

Joan van Emden 

The Changeling Tony Bromham 

The Crucible Leonard Smith 
Death of a Salesman Peter Spalding 

Animal Farm 
Jean Armstrong 

Richard fl Charles Barber 
Othello Tony Bromham 
Hamlet Jean Brooks 
King Lear Francis Casey 
Henry V Peter Davison 
The Winter's Tale Diana Devlin 
Twelfth Night R. P. Draper 
Julius Caesar David Elloway 
Macbeth 
David Elloway 
TheMerchantofVenice 
A. M. Kinghorn 
Measure for Measure Mark Lilly 
Henry IV Part I Helen Morris 
Romeo and Juliet Helen Morris 
A Midsummer Night's Dream Kenneth 
Pickering 
The Tempest Kenneth Pickering 
Coriolanus 
Gordon Williams 
Antony and Cleopatra 
Martin Wine 

St Joan 
Leonee Ormond 

The School for Scandal Paul Ranger 
The Rivals Jeremy Rowe 

In Memoriam Richard Gill 

Selected Poems Gerald Roberts 

Barchester Towers 
K. M. Newton 

The White Devil and The Duchess of 
Malfi 
David A. Male 

To the Lighthouse John Mepham 
Mrs Dal/away Julian Pattison 

The Prelude Books I and fl Helen Wheeler 

MACMILLAN MASTER GUIDES 

MURDER IN THE CATHEDRAL 

BY T. S. ELIOT 

PAUL LAPWORTH 

M 
MACMILLAN 
EDUCATION 

©Paul Lapworth 1988 

All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission 
of this publication may be made without written permission. 

No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied 
or transmitted save with written permission or in accordance 
with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), 
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-4 Alfred Place, 
London WClE 7DP. 

Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to 
this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution 
and civil claims for damages. 

First edition 1988 

Published by 
MACMILLAN EDUCATION LTD 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS 
and London 
Companies and representatives 
throughout the world 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Lapworth, Paul 
Murder in the cathedral, by T. S. Eliot.-
(Macmillan master guides). 
1. Eliot, T. S.-Thomas Stearns. Murder 
in the cathedral 
I. Title II. Eliot, T. S. 
822' .912 
PS3509.L43M8 

ISBN 978-0-333-37205-0 
ISBN 978-1-349-07391-7 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-07391-7 

ISBN 978-0-333-41725-6 Pbk export 

v 

CONTENTS 

General editor's preface 
vii 

Acknowledgements 
viii 

Summary 
IX 

1 Life and background 
1.1 Life 
1 
1.2 Eliot the poetic theorist 
2 
1.3 Place in Eliot's writing 
4 
1.4 The occasion 
6 
1.5 The play's treatment of 
history 
8 

2 Summaries and critical 
Part One 
9 
commentary 
Interlude: the Sermon 
24 
Part Two 
25 

3 What the play is about 
3.1 A process of awareness 
37 
3.2 Medieval martyr and the 
nature of martyrdom 
38 
3.3 Relevance of the hero for 
the 1930s 
40 

3.4 Martyrdom's modern 
significance 
41 
3.5 God enters time 
42 

4 Technical features 
4.1 
Plot and structure 
45 
(a) Exposition and story 
45 
(b) Formal structure 
46 
(c) 
The parts of the 
play 
46 
(d) Linking the parts 
47 
(e) Tragic pattern 
48 

vi 

5 Specimen passage and 
commentary 

6 Critical reception 

7 The modern verse 
drama movement 

Revision questions 

Further reading 

4.2 

4.3 

Characterisation 
48 
(a) Thomas 
50 

(b) The Chorus 
51 
(c) 
The Priests 
52 
(d) Tempters and 
Knights 
53 
Verse drama 
56 
(a) The choice of verse 
56 
(b) Imagery 
60 

(c) 
Dramatic styles 
61 

vii 

GENERAL EDITOR'S PREFACE 

The aim of the Macmillan Master Guides is to help you to appreciate 
the book you are studying by providing information about it and by 
suggesting ways of reading and thinking about it which will lead to a 
fuller understanding. The section on the writer's life and background 
has been designed to illustrate those aspects of the writer's life which 
have influenced the work, and to place it in its personal and literary 
context. The summaries and . critical commentary are of special 
importance in that each brief summary of the action is followed by an 
examination of the significant critical points. The space which might 
have been given to repetitive explanatory notes has been devoted to a 
detailed analysis of the kind of passage which might confront you in 
an examination. Literary criticism is concerned with both the broader 
aspects of the work being studied and with its detail. The ideas which 
meet us in reading a great work of literature, and their relevance to us 
today, are an essential part of our study, and our Guides look at the 
thought of their subject in some detail. But just as essential is the 
craft with which the writer has constructed his work of art, and this 
may be considered under several technical headings -
character-
isation, language, style and stagecraft, for example. 
The authors of these Guides are all teachers and writers of wide 
experience, and they have chosen to write about books they admire 
and know well in the belief that they can communicate their 
admiration to you. But you yourself must read and know intimately 
the book you are studying. No one can do that for you. You should 
see this book as a lamp-post. Use it to shed light, not to lean against. 
If you know your text and know what it is saying about life, and how 
it says it, then you will enjoy it, and there is no better way of passing 
an examination in literature. 

JAMES GIBSON 

viii 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The author and publishers wish to thank the following who have 
kindly given permission for the use of copyright material: Faber 
and Faber Ltd for extracts from Murder in the Cathedral by T. S. 
Eliot; Penguin Books for an extract from King Oedipus, trans-
lated by E. F. Watling. 

The edition used in this Master Guide is Murder in the Cathedral 
by T. S. Eliot, introduction by Nevill Coghill (Educational 
Edition), Faber & Faber, 1965. 

Cover illustration: the painting of the murder of Beckett is 
reproduced by kind permission of the Cathedral Shop, Canter-
bury. 

Every effort has been made to trace all the copyright-holders, but if 
any have been inadvertently overlooked the publishers will be 
pleased to make the necessary arrangement at the first opportun-
ity. 

ix 

SUMMARY 

Murder in the Cathedral is T. S. Eliot's most successful play 
representing his triumphant development from poet into poet-
dramatist, and although The Family Reunion and The Cocktail 
Party in particular amongst his plays are performed from time to 
time, Murder in the Cathedral remains the best and most enduring 
example of the poet's final creative phase. Alone of the plays 
produced in the verse drama movement which flowered in the 
years before and after the Second World War, Murder in the 
Cathedral has established itself in the contemporary theatre with 
frequent revivals on both the professional and amateur stages. 
This Master Guide shows how the play grew out of Eliot's 
theory and practice and how its success gave fresh impetus to the 
search for a modern verse drama. Eliot considered Murder in the 
Cathedral a success as an occasional play but a failure as a model 
for a future verse drama. In content and style the play certainly 
matched its original occasion, the Canterbury Festival of 1935, and 
this Guide explains Eliot's approach to elucidating and rein-
terpreting martyrdom for a modern audience, but it also brings out 
the wider 'truths' the play has offered to readers and onlookers 
then and since; the play is shown to have 'meaning' beyond its 
central religious intention. 
The meaning of the play is shown to be not merely the 
expression of ideas in the poetry but also the effect of the total 
impact of the play. The analysis provided here reveals the subtlety 
and care lavished upon action, structure, characterisation and 
verse, all contributing through dramatic form to the themes of the 
play. Where doubts have been expressed or weaknesses alleged by 
scholars and critics these have been considered both in the 
commentaries and in the account of the critical reception of the 
play. 
Throughout this Guide special attention has been paid to the 
verse effects achieved by Eliot in Murder in the Cathedral, and the 
thematic links of the play to Eliot's poems of the same period are 
also demonstrated. 

1 LIFE AND BACKGROUND 

1.1 
LIFE 

T. S. Eliot (1888-1965) was the most influential poet of the 
twentieth century writing in English. He was an American, born in 
St. Louis, Missouri, of New England stock, but from the age of 
twenty-six he made his home in England. In England he played a 
greater part than any other poet in creating the Modem move-
ment, a deliberate turning away from what was left of the 
influence of Romantic poetry and certainly providing a contrast to 
the last manifestation of that sensitive school of poetry, the 
Georgians. Eliot's changes of style were accompanied by a consi-
derable output of critical works, forcing new views of old authors, 
and reinforcing his poetic revolution. 

St. Louis, Boston and London gave Eliot the urban settings and 
imagery to be found in the early poetry. He created a waste land 
peopled by fugitives lacking assurance and certainty ('Preludes' 
and 'Rhapsody on a Windy Night', 'The Love Song of J. Alfred 
Prufrock' and 'Portrait of a Lady'), and he created poetry out of 
the spoken language of his day. 
Eliot's own university education at Harvard, based on a package 
of courses in different disciplines (still typical of American un-
dergraduate studies today), gave him his diverse academic 
background. The literary and cultural complexity of his earlier 
poetry reflected this background, and it was seen at its most 
effective in his great influential poem, 'The Waste Land'. Eliot's 
childhood at home in St. Louis on the Missouri river and on 

holiday in New England gave him two central images in his later 
poetry, the river and sea in Four Quartets. 
Eliot rediscovered Christian belief after years of spiritual explor-
ation without firm allegiance and turned to the Christianity of the 
Anglican church in the late 1920s. Henceforth all his work was 
overtly Christian, the main poems of this period being 'Ash 
Wednesday' and the Ariel poems ('Journey of the Magi', 'A Song 
for Simeon' and 'Marina'). His declared Christian allegiance 
signalled a deliberate turning to the theatre as the most useful 
method of getting his message across to a wide public. One senses 
that Thomas Becket was an 'Eliot man'. His story was a discovery 
of self, of the interweaving of his earthly nature and his relation-
ship with God. The name of the martyr and its association with 
'doubting Thomas' attracted the poet to a natural identification. 
Two contrasted views of Eliot's acknowledgement of his Chri-
stian faith became evident in the 1930s. One group saw his 
declared religious adherence as a falling away from contemporary 
relevance; others saw the commitment as the source of renewed 
strength. In 1927 Eliot became a British subject, confirming 
fourteen years of assimilation. He was married twice, each time to 
an English wife, the first marriage being made extremely unhappy 
through his wife's mental problems, the second, after the death of 
his first wife, being very happy. Much of the more recent work on 
Eliot's life and writings has been concerned with the creative 
importance of the first marriage. 
The success of Murder in the Cathedral led to a determined 
attempt by Eliot to establish a modern poetic drama, a campaign 
interrupted by the Second World War. Eliot completed the Four 
Quartets during the war, resuming the search for a viable poetic 
drama in The Cocktail Party and two further plays. 
A useful diary of Eliot's life, relating events and works, is T. S. 

Eliot: A Chronology of his Life and Work by Caroline Behr, a 
Macmillan Reference Book. 

1.2 ELIOT THE POETIC THEORIST 

Early in his career Eliot wrote poetry with strong dramatic 
tendencies; later he wrote drama with strong poetic tendencies. 
Eliot's early poetry was characterised by 'dramatic' elements: 

division into scenes, use of emotiona_l situations, events and 
stories, characters reacting to each other, and the intonation and 
style of spoken language. Above all, in 'The Love Song of J. 
Alfred Prufrock', 'Portrait of a Lady', 'Gerontion', and 'The 
Waste Land' the poet's voice was masked by 'dramatic' voices 
which presented characters to us. These characters were limited 
people, negative in outlook, withdrawing from life. One of the 
characters of the 1919 Poems, Sweeney, was to become the focus 
of Eliot's earliest attempt at a drama, Sweeney Agonistes. 
The struggle to escape from a single 'lyric' personality as a poet 
into the wider complexity and variety of masks and voices moved 
Eliot towards dramatic form. But the dramatic aspects of the early 
poetry should not be over-emphasised; as well as approximating to 
drama in its speech and personages it used a dense combination of 
descriptive passages and evocative symbols. The techniques did 
not necessarily signify that the poet would be successful in writing 
acceptable dramatic dialogue. Lines capable of being spoken by 
actors and lines which convey action as well as emotion and 
meaning are the true tests for a dramatist whether he writes prose 
or poetry. 
This problem of spoken dialogue became the prime concern of 
Eliot's theory of poetic drama. Indeed, his qualification for 
developing a modern poetic drama was derived from his revival of 
a living verse for his poems, catching the intonation of contempor-
ary life, using poetic forms associated with impersonation, drama-
tic monologues in the fashion of Browning, the use of dialogue, 
and his exploration of the theory of a poetic drama from his 
earliest creative years. 
Eliot is important then not only for experimenting with a 
modern verse drama but also for prompting discussion of the 
problems of creating such plays in the twentieth century. His 
earlier critical theory reached conclusion in his Selected Essays first 
published in 1932, and Parts II and III of this collection were 
dominated by a discussion of dramatic form, particularly that of 
the Elizabethan and Jacobean playwrights. A second phase of 
critical theorising was completed by another collection, On Poetry 
and Poets, in 1957, just before the production of Eliot's last play, 
The Elder Statesman (1958). 
Here are details of the key essays: 
1. 
'Rhetoric and Poetic Drama' 1919 (in Selected Essays 1932) 

analysed dramatic speech in relation to situation, the character's 
view of himself, and our view of the characters. 
2. 
'The Possibility of a Poetic Drama' 1920 (from The Sacred 

Wood 1920) hinted at the possibility of a public for poetic drama 
despite contemporary problems. Eliot said there was a need to 
discover a new combination of dramatic elements. 
3. 
'A Dialogue on Dramatic Poetry' 1928 (in Selected Essays 
1932) asked whether a poetic drama was possible in the poet's 
time. 
4. 
'Poetry and Drama' 1950 (On Poetry and Poets 1957). This 
discussed the extent of his achievement in Murder in the Cathedral, 
and in particular considered the need for a flexible verse capable 
of presenting both the mundane and the profound. 
5. 
'The Three Voices of Poetry' 1953 (On Poetry and Poets 1957) 
traced the range of poetic voices, from the poet speaking in his 
own 'voice', on to speaking through mouthpieces as in dramatic 
monologues, and finally to the full creation of characters in their 
own right. 
In his poetry and criticism and later in his plays and criticism, 
precept and example for Eliot go hand in hand. In his theorising he 
asked, 'What great poetry is not dramatic?' The drama he created 
was an alternative both to earlier attempts at a modern verse 
drama and to the naturalistic prose of contemporary drama. T. S. 
Eliot is important as a dramatist because no other has persevered 
so long to construct both a theory and a series of poetic plays, and 
because he achieved a clearly successful place in the twentieth-
century commercial theatre. He tried to give drama levels and 
dimensions comparable in language and structure to those of the 
novel, and he argued that naturalistic drama was too limited, 
particularly in its failure to explore spiritual experience. Theatre 
offered Eliot the opportunity to achieve a wider audience than the 
printed page offered. He believed his poetic drama would tap a 
deeper emotional experience and would effectively portray reality 
at more than one level. 

1.3 PLACE IN ELIOT'S WRITING 

The themes and approaches of Eliot's poems and plays are 
interlinked. The themes of the plays are found most explicitly in 

the poems of the 1930s, Ash Wednesday, the Ariel poems, and 
'Burnt Norton'. The 'heroes' of the plays discover a greater reality 
by withdrawing from temporal concerns, but remain positive in 
their commitment to the spiritual. In all the plays Eliot stresses 
that both the saints and the ordinary folk are part of the one 
pattern. The central characters of the plays reveal an interweaving 
of the redeemed and unredeemed into the same interrelated 
experience. Some commentators have criticised the saintly 
example as too dismissive of everyday life, seeing Eliot as the poet 
of loss or deprivation (David Daiches, The Present Age), and 
indeed it is true that martyrdom, the loss of self in a higher 
purpose, characterises his work from 'Prufrock' to The Elder 
Statesman. In projecting this vision Murder in the Cathedral is 
certainly the most triumphant and unequivocal. The religious 
aspect of human experience was not concealed by the surface as in 
The Cocktail Party. Martyrdom and sacrifice of self is the subject-
matter as well as the theme in Murder in the Cathedral. 
Sweeney Agonistes, originally published in separate parts 
(1926-7), embarked on an oblique version of this theme of the 
character separated from those around him by a greater awareness 
of sensitivity, a theme which only disappeared with the writing of 
Eliot's last play, The Elder Statesman. Sweeney Agonistes was 
complete in its incompleteness. Written as 'Fragments' it looked to 
European Expressionism rather than English theatre (see section 7 
on Modern Verse Drama), and was a forerunner of the Theatre of 
the Absurd and of the vaguely menacing Pinteresque world of the 
play without a plot. Neither it nor Eliot's next dramatic novelty, 
the pageant called The Rock for which he wrote the Choruses, 
solved the problems Eliot saw as besetting poetic drama in the 
twentieth century. But the pageant shared some of the solutions 
discovered in Murder in the Cathedral, written as it was by 
invitation for an occasion. What had been established in Eliot's 
poetry became part of the texture of his drama: the mixture of the 
elevated and the ordinary, the contrast of everyday banalities and 
divine intervention into human history. Many found The Rock 
more banal than elevated, but the Choruses with their interesting 
experiments in rhythm were still read long after the pageant was 
embarrassingly set aside. 
The Rock was an essential step in Eliot's theatrical apprentice-
ship. In it he taught himself how to write choral lines in Greek 

fashion and in the style of the English morality play Everyman. 
Eliot found he could combine the elevated mode of the Author-
ised Version with the mocking satirical tones of a contemporary 
voice, a formula matching majesty with mockery. A request for a 
pageant play to raise funds for Church building, then, started Eliot 
off on his quest for a modern poetic drama. The effectiveness of 
The Rock Choruses ensured that the device would become an 
important feature of Murder in the Cathedral, although in the 
latter the effects were more varied and dramatic. 

1.4 THE OCCASION 

The Canterbury Festival had begun in 1928 with John Masefield's 
The Coming of Christ. Canterbury was not only the arch-diocese 
of the country; it was the most ancient Christian shrine in the land, 
sanctified by the 'hooly blisful martir' whose cult was the reason 
for Chaucer's Canterbury Pilgrims' journey. Naturally, plays 
connected with the Saint featured in the Festival productions, 
Tennyson's Becket, for instance, and Binyon's The Young King. 
When George Bell, Bishop of Chicester, invited Eliot to write for 
the 1935 Canterbury Festival the poet still chose the martyr for his 
subject despite a 1932-3 production of Tennyson's play. 
The conditions were congenial to Eliot. He had a Christian 
subject and a Christian audience to be gathered at one of Europe's 
most famous Christian shrines. He had a director with whe>m he 
could work, and he had the chance to further the cause of poetic 
drama. The topic of martyrdom attracted Eliot, as did the nature 
of the event and its significance for a modern audience. That 
significance was brought out through the Choruses, and the 
emotional structure of the play is based on them rather than on 
Thomas's exercise in self-analysis. For that was the point of the 
Festival; the ordinary human response to the exceptional event, 
the martyrdom which repeats and reminds us of Christ's own 
sacrifice. Ritually the play comments afresh on an act whose 
meaning may have been lost in the familiarity of the outward 
story. 
In the week beginning 13 June 1935, in the Chapter House of 
Canterbury Cathedral, Murder in the Cathedral was produced as 
the ideal occasional play. The play was carefully written to order, 

with length, number of characters, theme and completion date all 
determined and accepted. The critic Herbert Howarth saw the 
play as being powerfully attractive to British audiences of the 
1930s. The play was not far removed from much drama enjoyed by 
the nation-wide amateur theatre movement, and the central figure 
was a national and religious hero whose story was taught in every 
school. Another activity possibly contributing to the favourable 
reception accorded to the play was the widespread fashion for 
teaching elocution which created an audience who found choral 
speaking congenial and attractive. 
Eliot himself continued to stress what he saw as the limitations 
of his considerable achievement, in 1959 calling the play 'a period 
piece and something quite out of the ordinary'. This view reflects 
Eliot's concern that the play was 'a dead end' in his attempt to 
create a modern poetic drama, but it should also be emphasised 
that having solved the personal predicament of his faith he was 
now ready to relate the situation to a wider public. 
The modern poetic dramatist Christopher Fry noted that al-
though Eliot's play was written for a specific audience it went on to 
attract much larger ones. It achieved great success in London, was 
transferred to a touring production in England, and proved an 
exciting revelation to the WPA Federal Theater in the USA. To 
Robert Speaight, one of the early Beckets, it meant there was an 
audience for poetic drama 'under certain conditions'. The launch-
ing of that new genre took place at the Mercury in Ladbroke 
Road, London, not a club but a small theatre seating only 136. A 
run there starting in November 1935 lasted for 225 performances 
before going on tour. A second phase of poetic drama was 
introduced when Ashley Dukes revived the Mercury in the years 
1945 to 1948. 
Productions of Murder in the Cathedral continue in both profes-
sional and amateur theatres, on tours and in repertory, and in 
what the critic Francis Fergusson has called 'the limbo of the 
academic theatres all over the world'. It has established itself as a 
twentieth-century classic, the principal survivor of the poetic 
drama it was intended to inaugurate. It has been recorded on LP 
and on film. The Old Vic company brought out the record in a 
production directed by Robert Helpman, commended for its clear 
projection of the story line. There is also an excellent Argo 
recording with Robert Donat as Becket. Eliot himself felt that the 

film version had made the meaning of the martyr's role clearer, 
and perhaps nearer to what might have been achieved had he 
written the play for a London theatre and not for the Canterbury 
Festival. The film was more episodic in its narrative treatment, 
and some criticism stressed its more realistic style. 

1.5 THE PLAY'S TREATMENT OF HISTORY 

The play had the advantage of referring to a well-known, highly 
dramatic story of a confrontation between two powerful personali-
ties, both historically and spiritually significant. The story was 
taught to all as a central 'myth' of the English nation. Although 
Eliot chose not to focus his action upon the conflict of King and 
Chancellor, it broods over the play, putting pressure on Thomas 
and making the spiritual dilemma real by providing it with its 
context in this world; the struggle between Henry and Thomas is 
embedded in the fabric of Eliot's play despite its not being the 
action itself. The three expected temptations are all directly 
related to Henry: the good life enjoyed by those in favoured circles 
of power; alliance with the King by acting as Chancellor again; 
joining the faction against the King. Eliot does not deviate from 
tradition and history at all, but takes the narrative into another 
plane of existence entirely. 
The historical tale becomes an example not just of something 
happening in time but of a sequence leading to a timeless moment. 
In the opening of the play the historical events are interwoven with 
emotional fears expressed by the Chorus, and their reactions 
dominate our response. Later it is the meeting of Becket and the 
Knights that comes from history while the agonies of the Chorus 
become ever more dramatically intrusive. The Sermon is based on 
hints from contemporary records about the address which Thomas 
actually gave, and it explores the central purpose of the play, the 
significance of a martyr in history. The use of an historical subject 
facilitated the invention of a modern verse play partly because an 
audience accepts heightened expression as natural to historical 
settings. 

2 SUMMARIES 

AND 

CRITICAL COMMENTARY 

PART ONE 

First Chorus 'Here let us stand' 

Summary 
(1-50) The first Chorus starts the action, establishes the situation, 
and sets time, place and atmosphere. The women reveal expect-
ancy at Thomas's return, but fear the unpredictable. This Chorus 
creates a sense of waiting, of an interlude, and of the passing of 
time. The apprehensive Chorus approach the Cathedral full of 
premonitions. A confusion between safety and threat fills their 
minds. They experience a compulsion to be present, to 'bear 
witness' to events beyond their control. From the opening ques-
tions the Chorus move into the second paragraph of natural 
images representing the seasonal cycle, but even this is disturbed 
by recollections of martyrs, by hints of Peter's denial of Christ. It 
draws a contrast between personal comfort and the discomfort of 
acknowledging allegiance to God. Thomas's return is associated 
with the disturbance of equilibrium, even a breakdown of the 
natural order. 

Commentary 
The Chorus are expository in the fashion of Greek drama. A story 
known in outline and in detail is hinted at. They are not removed 
from the action, and they register its impact upon the ordinary 
people of the time. The effect is also universalised by identifying 
the audience with the Chorus. We all 'bear witness'. We ask, 

'What does it mean to us?' The Chorus establish an identity and a 
mood. (1-5) The verse underlines movement, a hesitant arrival. 
The lines are broken up into parcels of words suggesting insecurity 
and indecision. (9-12) Eliot creates melodic vocal effects through 
his use of vowel sounds, and these and the length of line are 
carefully modulated. (10-11) A long line with strongly emphasised 
consonants prepares us for the next line in contrast. There is a 
sudden change in the rhythmic effect, short words creating expect-
ation and suspense. The key word is 'wait', and this is repeated 
eleven times in succeeding lines in expectation of a crucial 
entrance. (14) Eliot uses an effective short-hand image of Peter 
denying his Master, thereby indicating a relationship between the 
Chorus and Thomas without explicit statement. Who will deny his 
Master? Will it be Becket or will it be the people? There is to be 
temptation, but only the dramatist is aware at this point. (18-19) 
'Seven years' precisely dates the occasion in 1170. Seasons, 
location and foreboding are now combined with exposition. (23) 
Here we have the first appearance of a reference to 'suffering' (see 
comment on line 208); the people have been subjected to external 
action. (30-5) The Chorus shun awareness and consciousness, and 
a fear of going forward breeds in them a state of immobility ('Fear 
in the Way' was Eliot's first idea for a title). (31) 'death from the 
sea' is an oblique reference to the historical fact of the murderers 
crossing the Channel to kill the Archbishop, showing how Eliot 
always signals his action well ahead. (31-9) A cycle of four seasons 
depicted in disastrous terms. Winter, Spring, Summer and. Au-
tumn are seen as a vicious circle, symbolic of the Wheel from 
which existence a Buddhist would seek release. (42-4) 'Destiny 
waits in the hand of God' affirms the limitations of earthly power 
compared with God. 'A shaft of sunlight' is one of Eliot's favourite 
images of moments of vision, an awareness outside time. (48) 
'Shall the Son of Man be born again?' Nativity and martyrdom are 
one; the identification of Death and Birth if a favourite paradox-
ical theme in Eliot's poetry, particularly in 'The Waste Land' and 
'The Journey of the Magi'. ( 49-50) 'There is no action'. At this 
point in the play they witness without consent; they do not wish 
anything to happen. Already we are pointed towards the focal 
subject of the play, namely, acceptance of the true meaning of 
martyrdom in turn by Thomas, Chorus and audience. 

The Priests 

Summary 
(51-(;9) The Priests are the first individual characters in the play. 
The first is elderly, the second is younger, and the third is more 
thoughtfully aware than the other two. The three Priests also 
speak more wisely than they know at times, but when they are 
present we are brought close to historical reality and to Thomas as 
Archbishop. They are critical of temporal as opposed to religious 
concerns for power. 

Commentary 
(51-2) The First Priest picks up the words of the Chorus (lines 
18-19) creating the impression that time passes. (53-8) The 
Second Priest reminds us of the internationally political aspect of 
the conflict. (59-65) The Third Priest describes the English context 
to the wrangling, and concludes meditatively that political 
manoeuvres solve nothing. By this stage Eliot has provided us, in 
the speeches of the three Priests, with the first three temptations 
later to beset Thomas: 'living and partly living' (in the Arch-
bishop's case at a very pleasant level), choosing between King and 
Pope, and backing one or other of the factions in the country. 
(66-9) Just as the Chorus speak better than they know at times so 
the First Priest notes that men have forgotten their best ally, God. 
In his 'unredeemed' state he makes it sound like a clerical cliche 
instead of the central truth the play shows it to be. 

Messenger 

Summary 
(70--110) The Messenger moves the action forward and performs 
the traditional part of his role in bringing the dimension of other 
scenes to the stage. This version also introduces humour as he 
describes Thomas's triumphant if anxious return, an event which 
occurs more comfortably off-stage. The Messenger has individu-
ality, relishing his news. In the first version of the play he was 
called the Herald. He has two speeches, the first stating the facts, 
the second giving an interpretation. He takes delight in demolish-
ing his earlier picture to leave the Priests glum and full of 

foreboding. Thomas's quoted words prepare us for the expectation 
he has of his own death. 

Commentary 
(78) 'Two proud men' stresses not only the reasons for the 
personal and public struggle with the King but also Thomas's own 
individual spiritual problem. (85-96) Pomp and excitement are 
brought out, but we are also reminded of Christ's entry into 
Jerusalem and the sequel of his death. (92-3) 'Precious relic' is 
another signpost in the play forecasting what is going to happen. 
(97-110) His language, despite his promise (71), tends to be 
orotund if not circumlocutory. His style mirrors his personality, 
and like Polonius in Hamlet he is delighted with the effect he has 
on his listeners. 

The Priests debate the return 

Summary 
(111-43) Again the Priests rehearse the temptations of worldly 
matters, and remind us of Thomas's central weakness, his pride. 
When mankind turns to God only then will self-seeking end. The 
Three Priests are carefully differentiated, and they explore varied 
aspects of the uncertainty. 

Commentary 
(111-24) The First Priest's language is dominated by abstractions 
expressing human obsession with temporal power. He still sees it 
all in past terms, but indicates the problem of Thomas's pride. 
(125-36) The Second Priest returns to the themes of the passing 
seasons, of waiting, and of a leaderless Church. He manages a 
tentative optimism, as yet quite unsupported by any facts. It is 
enough that the Archbishop has returned. There is some consola-
tion to be gained from the assumption of spiritual responsibility. 
(137-43) The Third Priest, the most aware of the trio, puts the 
situation into a philosophical or religious context. The Wheel of 
Fate (see commentary on line 216 'the wheel') image is used to 
convey a sense of inevitability; a new stage has come and they 
must undergo it. All three are troubled by the Church's involve-
ment in power politics. (141-3) 'Until the grinders cease'. This 

phrase, echoing Ecclesiastes xiii. 3-4, adds a prophetic tone to 
the passage and an awareness of impending doom. 

Second Chorus 'Here is no continuing city' 

Summary 
(144-95) The Chorus express the purely human situation into 
which the returning Thomas has intruded. Their suffering lacks 
Thomas's knowledge so that their advice is exactly contrary to 
what he has decided, and they cannot bear the thought of real 
change, the familiar being preferable to the unknown conse-
quences of the Archbishop's return. 

Commentary 
Short lines describe the ordinary daily round; longer flowing lines 
develop fear and foreboding. (144) The first line, expressive of 
uncertainty, ironically recalls Hebrews xiii. 14, which suggests the 
things of this life are unimportant, a wisdom not yet achieved by 
the Chorus. (145 and 150) Contrasted images are used to em-
phasise key points of interpretation: 'Uncertain the profit, certain 
the danger' and 'you come with rejoicing, but you come bringing 
death'. (146-51) The repeated 'late' and 'doom' create a mood of 
lamentation. These lines have the authentic ring of a Greek 
Chorus, such as the Chorus of Theban Elders in Sophocles's King 
Oedipus (Penguin, trans. Watling, 1947): 

With fear my heart is riven, fear of what shall be told. 
0 Healer of Delos, hear! 
Fear is upon us. What wilt thou do? 
Things new, or old as the circling year? 

(152-83) 'We do not wish anything to happen'. For the poet this 
speech describes life without God, 'living and partly living'. It 
exudes normality, the daily round, the yearly cycle, a natural order 
mixing success and disaster in a manner fully expected, and it 
mixes the apprehensions of ordinary folk with humour, 'some not 
able to'. (184-95) The short lines of everyday expectations break 
down, giving way to lengthening lines of increasing agitation, 
combining fear of Thomas's return and awareness of a fate not 

controlled by the usual realities. (192 and 194) Internal rhymes 
increase the air of obsessive concentration on simple nightmares, 
'shades' and 'strain on the brain', with the repeated sonorous 
effect of 'doom' and the pathos of being 'small'. The two kinds of 
verse used in the Choruses have now been introduced: long, 
free-flowing lines and short, more regular lines. 

Thomas's first appearance 

Summary 
(196-217) The Second Priest, already established as the optimist, 
the Archbishop's man, admonishes the Chorus and completes the 
build-up to Thomas's entrance. This priest's colloquial speech 
restores the naturalistic plane, and the humour brings us back to 
earth. His limited, practical mind, his affection and loyalty, all 
prepare us for the everyday world of Thomas's presence in 
England as the returned Archbishop of Canterbury. The priest's 
last lines are overheard by Thomas. 
The style of Thomas's first speech provides a complete contrast. 
After the word 'Peace' Thomas does not address the waiting 
people. The word is a challenge: not an exchange of greetings, but 
a picking up of the Third Priest's awareness. It is an important 
word because it describes a central objective for all of those 
participating in the action. Some patiently suffer (Chorus); 9thers 
mix action and patience by avoidance of the real challenge 
(Priests); some actively intrude (Knights); all three are trying to 
remove disorder and disturbance from their lives. Only at the 
centre is there the unchanging stillness of God; yet it is the 
initiating point of all action (the Wheel). 
The Messenger has prepared us well for Thomas's entrance 
which is no surprise. His words, however, are surprising. The 
action of the play stops while Thomas voices one of the key 
statements in the play, anticipated in the Chorus and about to be 
developed in the Temptations. At the heart of the play lies this 
speech based on double meanings. 

Commentary 
Thomas's speech is non-naturalistic. His words become gnomic 
and full of balanced paradoxes, an oracular delivery appropriate to 
a profounder plane of spiritual mystery and of an awareness 

beyond that of the other characters in the play. The passage is 
quite deliberately confusing and challenging so that it can return in 
a new form in the Temptations. The lines are spoken in Thomas's 
pride so that it is entirely appropriate for the Fourth Tempter to 
cast these sentiments back at him (591-9). It is the context of the 
statement that renders it true or false. It is thus central to the 
whole play's ambiguity and to Thomas's problem (667-8). 

(208) 'Suffer'. Two meanings may be distinguished: (i) to ex-
perience anguish, something unpleasant and painful, torment; (ii) 
to undergo, to have something done to you, to permit or allow 
('suffer the little children to come unto me'). Suffering is seen both 
as pain and as passive acceptance. Action is our doing something; 
suffering is having something done to us. From the two meanings 
we may define four complexities: 

(i) experiencing pain or anguish 
(ii) undergoing something 
(iii) allowing something to happen (submission) 
(iv) consenting to a happening (participation). 

The complexities grow out of the double meanings balanced 
against each other: 
Act 
Suffer 

Agent 
Patient 

Thomas's words at this point span the developing experience of 
the Chorus. What happens to us is one thing; understanding and 
knowledge of what happens to us is another. We are aware of 
experiencing something, but we cannot explain its significance. 
This is a double suffering. The Chorus know (are aware) that they 
are suffering; they do not know (do not understand) the signifi-
cance of what is happening to them. When they understand and 
consent, then action and suffering are one. (209-10) 'Suffering'. 
Mankind has free will with consent to act, to serve selfish needs or 
God's will. The desirable condition of 'suffering' is that of being 
subject to conditions initiated by God. (210-11) 'Patient'. In the 
lyric Section IV of 'East Coker', the image of the patient appears 
in an extended form. A patient is attended by a wounded surgeon 
and a dying nurse in a hospital 'endowed by the ruined million-
aire'. The patient is (i) one undergoing treatment, an action beyond 
himself, and (ii) one enduring and suffering. (211-17) 'Pattern'. 

There are two patterns discernible in the play: (i) the drama itself, 
the murder and its re-enactment in the play as ritual with audience 
participation, and (ii) the order of time (the Wheel) and temporal 
existence informed by God from 'the still point of the turning 
world' ('Burnt Norton') at its centre. (216) 'Wheel'. The Wheel is 
a recurring image in Eliot's poetry, particularly that of his middle 
years. The whirling movement of the Wheel at its periphery 
suggests maximum, frenetic activity and non-awareness. The 
connection with the still centre, God, is not realised. The whirling 
image was explored first in the play on words found in Ash 
Wednesday, V: 

Against the World the unstilted world still whirled 
About the centre of the silent Word. 

The step-by-step transformation of the vocabularly symbolises the 
slow and difficult achievement of peace and understanding con-
trasted with the fretful, agonised activity of the surrounding world. 
Such knowledge is sought and gained, at times tentatively, only 
rarely in triumph. In Eliot's 'Coriolan' poem, 'Triumphal March', 
the knowledge of the still centre contrasts with the grandly 
ridiculous world of flags and trumpets, and it is hinted at again in 
'Difficulties of a Statesman'. 
In 'Burnt Norton' the image is central to the whole poem, and a 
version of the still centre is found in the epigraphs quoted from 
Heraclitus, a Greek philosopher in the fifth century BC who 
stressed the impermanence of living things. The first epigraph may 
be translated: 

Although the central intelligence is common to everybody, 
everyone lives as if he had his own separate wisdom and 
understanding. 

This central theme of 'Burnt Norton' describes much of what 
Murder in the Cathedral is about. We are part of one single design 
common to us all; yet we as 'many' act as if we had only our 
individual concerns unconnected with God. The second epigraph, 
'The way up is the way down', hints at the complexity and unity of 
opposites found in Murder in the Cathedral. Above all, in 'Burnt 

Norton' II the point of resolution of opposites is offered as the 
still point: 

at the still point, there the dance is 
But neither arrest nor movement. 

An ordered pattern originates there at the centre. 
In religious terms the major connection lies between Murder in 
the Cathedral and 'Burnt Norton'. In terms of living in the 1930s 
the connection with the 'Coriolan' fragments is more important 
because the two pieces embody ways of life, public advancement, 
political assertion, the pomp of power, negotiation and manipula-
tion rejected by Thomas in the play. The saint has other object-
ives, as explicitly stated in Four Quartets: 

But to apprehend 
The point of intersection of the timeless 
With time, is an occupation for the saint. 

The Priests and Thomas discuss his return 

Summary 
(218-29) The down-to-earth Second Priest returns us to the 
immediate present. There is a reminder of the time-scale through 
the repetition of 'seven', taking us out of the timeless order 
glimpsed in Thomas's words. The Second Priest admits they could 
have been better prepared, but he means in respect of warming 
rooms for occupation. (230--46) Thomas, assuming his Arch-
bishop's role, for a moment also re-enters time, and gives details of 
his enemies. (247-54) He tells us that the action of the play 
depends on God's will, not on human choice. 

Commentary 
(232) There is a hint of a slight reproof. He appreciates their 
kindness but he has weightier matters on hand. He has only a 
temporary respite. (246) The First Priest's simple query, 'But do 
they follow after?', has a hint of the shadows to come. (247) The 
powerful image of commitment warns us that the moment comes 

precipitately, not as a logical sequence of cause and effect. 
Everything depends upon God willing it. (251-4) Eliot is again 
pointing to the next stage of the action. Thomas refers to the 
figures about to enter as 'shadows', all of them, he believes, ghosts 
of the past. Confidence and pride are conveyed by the simplicity of 
his command, 'All things prepare the event. Watch.' He is not 
expecting any surprises. (253) We are given another dramatic hint. 
What he does now is important, even more so than his death which 
is to follow. 

First Temptation 

Summary 
(255-322) The Temptations begin, and Thomas responds to the 
first three with cocksure mockery and implacable superiority. 
Temptation is at the heart of the play. The First Tempter offers 
enjoyment of the 'good life'. 

Commentary 
(255-75) Ease of living is suggested by the amusement in the 
lightness of the feminine rhymes. A 'good time' appears to be the 
refrain. (268-9) Eliot gives his lyrical moments in both poems and 
plays a wonderful wistfulness and nostalgia. Indulgence in earthly 
pleasures is obliquely but sensuously evoked with a classical air of 
contentment, as in Horace in the country or in a Virgilian bucolic. 
(272) The poet's sense of fun shows in the alliterative linking, the 
slightly overdone 'w' sound. (276--Sl)The 'new season' images 
have a contradictory force, snow on blossoms creating an illusion 
of age in youth. Thomas finds it easy to reject the commonplace 
yearning, and his response closes forcefully with a conclusive 
philosophical comment (276--81). (290) We have a third appear-
ance of the 'Wheel' image, more forceful now, not merely 
indicating the passage of time. (303) To take life easy is the most 
usual temptation when the moment comes for action. (309-10) 
Venial sins, self-indulgence, the life of the flesh, do not involve 
major condemnation and would need but moderate penance. 
There is a hint here of the later stage of a graver sin, spiritual 
pride; Pride is one of the Seven Deadly Sins, a mortal sin. (319) 
Thomas admits that the impossible can still tempt. 

Second Temptation 

Summary 
(327-94) The Second Tempter offers political power, using Church 
authority to achieve earthly ends. 

Commentary 
(323-7, 342) These typically balanced lines are reminiscent of Old 
English poetry, emphatic phrases linked by alliteration. (343-50) 
The rhymed couplets convey the neat rationality of the proposi-
tion, as well as having a sententious doggerel effect. (352-5) The 
Old English alliterative tradition is used in some Tempters' 
speeches. Thomas answers in kind. (355-9) An example of Eliot's 
adaptation of a style or an effect, in this case from Conan Doyle's 
'The Musgrave Ritual'; lines which carry hints of secret rewards. 
(385-94) Thomas finds it easy to reject the Second Temptation. 
After all, he has wielded this power but chose to give it up. It is the 
last temptation from the past, and the next temptation will be 
concerned with future possibilities. 

Third Temptation 

Summary 
(395--473) The devious Third Tempter argues for rebellion against 
royal power. 

Commentary 
His crabwise approach adds humanity to the abstraction as well as 
provoking Thomas's humorous riposte. By contrast the Third 
Tempter makes Thomas's superiority acceptable. Far from seem-
ing aloof and priggish, Thomas in his shrewd awareness of a 
contriver is admirably human, and this sharpness is a characteristic 
typical of a Chancellor and politician as well as of a man concerned 
with his own spiritual welfare; Thomas's saintliness does not mean 
he is unworldy in his assessment of others. This confrontation does 
much for the humanity of Thomas's role, showing his ready wit, 
sharp perceptions and intellectual confidence. He is a man not 
easily overborne. (411-19) The Tempter's devious lines reveal a 
cautious and confusing approach to meaning despite the bluff, 

ordinary, no-nonsense posture mocked by Thomas. The word 
'Circumstance' figures prominently, and conflicting terms muddle 
the effect: 'enmity', 'alliance', 'enmity', 'friendship' and 'accord'. 
( 460) In his various rejections Thomas seems to reserve his 
strongest contempt for factional politics and is dismissive of the 
Tempter's arguments for patriotic nationalism. (472) Thomas 
appropriately uses a biblical image of impotent former power. 

Fourth Temptation 

Summary 
(474-599) The Fourth Tempter is not only a surprise in being there 
at all: his nature and his manner are different, confident and 
self-congratulatory ( 480), mysterious and mocking ( 482). The 
Fourth Tempter argues that Thomas should fulfil his innermost 
desires by seeking martyrdom to gain power over people beyond 
his death. 

Commentary 
The Third Tempter claimed to be a surprise but was not. The real 
surprise comes after the series of three with a fourth visitor 
different in kind. As with Becket, the audience's expectation was 
met by the completion of three, the fourth not being expected. (In 
Jungian theory, quaternities, or sets of four, consist of three of a 
kind, followed by a different, final element, like the three synoptic 
gospels followed by St John, or the Holy Trinity and the Virgin 
Mary.) (474-85) The first exchange establishes the different nature 
of this temptation. Thomas knows the Tempter because he comes 
from within; but being internal he has never been 'met' face to 
face. (485-500) The Fourth Tempter recites the three previous 
temptations, revealing an intimate awareness of Thomas's moral 
choices. The sequence leads logically to a final step (501), 'Fare 
forward to the end', itself a recollection of Thomas's own mocking 
challenge to the Third Tempter. ( 411) For the first time Thomas 
appears to have lost the initiative: 'What is your counsel?', a 
further example of the ways in which this Temptation is different. 
(527-40) The Fourth Tempter projects the vision forward for 
Thomas, his speech dominated by the command to 'Think'. (541) 
The closeness of Thomas and the Tempter is revealed in his little 
exchange. (542-60) The Tempter uses images of loss to reinforce 

Thomas's fear that even his spiritual power is vulnerable to the 
effects of time. (547) Referring to 'the Wheel' the Tempter looks 
forward to his repetition (597) of Thomas's first speech in the play. 
A rhymed sequence once more creates a mocking tone which 
intensifies Thomas's desperation, the would-be martyr diminished 
to a man 'who played a certain part in history'. (561-2) Three 
questions reinforce our sense of Thomas's uncertainty, and in 574 
he realises at last the nature of the last temptation, his innermost 
desires. (589-90) It is Thomas's own phrasing which triggers off 
the Tempter's repetition of Thomas's first speech. (591-9) The 
Tempter's use ofThomas's words reveals to the hero the danger he 
is in. One phrase is omitted: 'for the pattern is the action/And the 
suffering'. The Tempter urges that it is possible to sense the 
pattern, to see what may happen, and see that it does, and this 
urging seems to miss the true perfection of will-power exercised by 
achieving the centre, the unmoving hub of action. The emphasis in 
the Tempter's version seems to stress inevitability, 'fixed in an 
eternal action' and 'That the pattern may subsist'. The shift in 
emphasis is important because with Thomas's awareness on his lips 
the Tempter forces us to ask what we are to take as the meaning. 
Can we believe the event? 
Dramatically and thematically the Tempter's quotation of 
Thomas's earlier statement is effective in bringing us up short but it 
has caused some puzzlement. The Tempter mocks Thomas with the 
idea that his Fate is out of his hands, and that surely it is proper to 
succumb to destiny when it is determined by God. If it is God's 
will, the suggestion goes, how can you do anything other than 
submit to martyrdom? 
Thomas's response is delayed through the Chorus's interven-
tion, but it does come and then it is reinforced by the Sermon: you 
do not seek what is presented to you for acceptance, but once it is 
there and inescapable the martyr responds unequivocally. Divine 
intervention comes spontaneously and suddenly; it is not con-
trived. 

Chorus 
'There is no rest in the house' 

Summary 
(600-64) Thomas remains silent for a few minutes. The Tempters 
have left individually, and the final temptation has been under-

stood but not yet conquered. Visions of Thomas's conflict are 
articulated by other groups, versions of his doubts attuned to their 
own points of view. 
The Chorus are joined by the Priests and Tempters acting as 
minor choruses, and at one stage all three combine. They express 
disillusionment, confusion, doubts and dangers. The drama is 
about to produce its peripeteia, the turning-point when the action, 
after appearing to move in one direction, takes another. It builds 
towards a climax through the sneering chant of the Four Tempters, 
the alarm of the Priests, and the alternating fear and despair of the 
Chorus. 

Commentary 
(600--3) A menacing disorder in nature is brought out in long, 
flowing lines. The sibilants hiss agitation. The description suggests 
the darkness coming over the earth at Christ's crucifixion. 
(604-18) 'man's life is a cheat'. The Tempters mock man's 
ambitions and pretensions, stressing the worthlessness of the 
world's rewards. The detailed references give the play a contem-
porary mood. By the linking of general self-deception to Thomas's 
supposed 'illusion' the Archbishop is declared to be a particular 
example of a more universal malaise, and the data move from the 
particular to convoluted abstractions. (619) The Priests add to the 
agitation, using a seafaring metaphor, warning Thomas not to take 
risks amidst adverse elements. (625-35) All three join in chorus to 
express a sequence of omens presaging death, before the final 
Chorus of Part I. (636-64) The yearnings of apathy in the Chorus 
are still strong, and they still prefer a deprived life, bearable 
despite its unhappiness. The idea of a Godless world, however, is 
unbearable. Life may not have been Paradise, but what faces them 
is Hell, this state being represented in animal images. Evil seems 
to be winning, and mistakenly the Chorus beg Thomas to save 
himself, believing their future is bound up with his earthly fate. 
This stage is consequent upon Thomas's momentary lapse of faith, 
his temporary doubts, and his sinful pride. The Chorus know that 
evil is near, but do not know where true salvation lies. Thomas's 
preoccupation with self has removed the last assertion of good-
ness. (653) Both Chorus and Priests have to learn that safety will 
not be gained by escape, but for the time being the Chorus is 
overwhelmed by a powerful awareness of sin, 'a new terror has 

soiled us', without acknowledging its nature. The threat is con-
veyed in images of predatory animals and of mad creatures like the 
'nodding ape'. Mad laughter is more frightening than growls; it 
mocks the normal laughter of the daily round, 'Living and partly 
living'. There is no escape from evil in the world or from death. 
They have to acknowledge the existence of wickedness in the 
pattern of life, to accept that man is not innocent. They must 
experience the horror of being separated from God, and must 
identify with the suffering world. The Chorus, for once, mirror 
Thomas's own doubts. He has still to sort out the difference 
between illusion and reality. The Fourth Tempter undermines 
Thomas's position and sanctity; the Chorus restores his awareness 
of their need and the part he must play. 
The parallel to Christ's crucifixion is close here, the Chorus's 
fears reflecting the doubts of the disciples, but the 'triumph' of the 
Tempters and Thomas's silence are both temporary. (663--4) This 
is the moment of maximum weakness and indecision, a portrait of 
bewilderment without perception, 'save us, save yourself. 'Save' 
has two meanings: (i) to save himself for the immediate present 
will mean his not saving them, and (ii) to accept his temporal 
destruction for the right reason will be to save himself and them. 

Thomas's summary 

Summary 
(665-707) The proximity of Thomas's response suggests he has 
heard the words of the Chorus, but their conflicts are running 
parallel, he on his plane, they on theirs. We must assume that a 
version of the conflict has been going on silently within him, and 
he emerges from his silence to speak of his solution, which will be 
based on awareness of what God wills. The hitherto parallel paths 
of Archbishop and Chorus are. converging, and Thomas's speech is 
an answer to their need. Compassion will replace ambition, and he 
will act appropriately. Sympathy instead of pride and arrogance 
will release him from the trap sprung by the Fourth Tempter. He 
does anticipate his fate, but he is assured it will come in God's 
time. He must not appoint himself as scapegoat. 

Commentary 
The turning-point of the play has been reached. The Fourth 

Tempter has pointed out that Thomas's predicament is not differ-
ent from that of the Chorus; he knows and does not know when to 
act and when to suffer. But Becket now shows a complete grasp 
of his situation; he will wait for the time to come for him to break 
out of his earthly self to serve God. (671-700) Thomas relinquishes 
the ambitions of the ordinary world to be one with God's 
purposes. Worldly yearnings would otherwise obstruct the way to 
spiritual perfection. 

INTERLUDE: THE SERMON 

Summary 
Time has moved on a few days, from early December to Christmas 
morning 1170. The proximity of St Stephen's Day, the day of the 
first martyr, and the recollection of another Canterbury martyr, 
Archbishop Elphege, prepare the congregation for Thomas's own 
fate, and confirm he has now overcome the Fourth Temptation. 
The Sermon has two phases: 

(i) The first part deals with paradoxes. On Christ's birthday 
we mourn and rejoice. Peace has two aspects, the desire for a 
quiet life in this world, and the peace of identity with God. 
(ii) The second part describes the nature of martyrdom. 
Martyrdom demands human affirmation; martyrs are created 
as part of God's design. 

Commentary 
Eliot now demonstrates the central meaning of the play in a 
dramatically different style. In explanatory prose the significance 
of the whole play is summarised, the straightforwardness of the 
language contrasting with the earlier verse of Part I. Following the 
Sermon, Part II depends less on surprising turns of plot and more 
on theatrical effects such as the procession, the ritualised murder 
and the Knights' Apology, and on a variety of styles in verse and 
language. 
The Text: Luke ii.14. The translation is taken from the Latin 
Vulgate version of the Bible, and this would be the one used by 
Thomas. It has a reference to 'Peace', and one of the more 
important themes of the Sermon. (5--6) 'passion and death' refers 

back to the opening Chorus of the play where Nativity and 
martyrdom are seen as one. (17-21) 'mourn and rejoice' reveals 
opposites combining in a single experience. Paradox is central to 
Eliot's mode of thinking. (22-41) 'Peace'. Thomas defines very 
carefully the difference between temporal and spiritual peace. 
(24-5) 'stricken with War'. This is the most contemporary ref-
erence to the 1930s. The scale of the First World War had made war 
fearful in a new way. ( 42-86) Thomas now relates Christ's Passion 
and Death to the repetition of that act by the martyrs who 
followed. (67) The Sermon confirms that the lesson of the Fourth 
Temptation has been learnt. The real martyr subordinates his will 
to that of God. (81-3) The playwright signposts the next phase of 
the drama. 

PART TWO 

First Chorus 'Does the bird sing in the South?' 

Summary 
(1-27) The second part of the play opens with a lyrical presentation 
of the passing of the seasons which builds up the dramatic tension 
of waiting. Symbols of fertility dominate this passage. The Chorus 
yearns for rebirth, and provides an effective link between the 
explanatory Sermon and the final upward climb to spiritual 
well-being. One year is ending, and a new one is about to start. 

Commentary 
(13-14) The Chorus picks up the words of the Sermon ( 40-1), 'not 
peace as the world gives'. (15) Another contemporary reminder of 
the years leading up to the Second World War. There is a growing 
understanding in the Chorus that renewal comes through God. 
(16) This line in particular stresses the preparation for renewal, for 
life out of death. 
The theme of death bringing renewal is now to be emphasised 
liturgically in the Introits on Saints and Martyrs. The juxtaposition 
of Chorus and Introits reinforces the same thematic point. The 
world is cleansed by death in winter, before rebirth in the spring, 
one of Eliot's strongest recurrent themes. (See 'Journey of the 
Magi', 'I had seen birth and death'.) 

Introits 

Summary 
(28-62) An Introit is a sung opening prayer, particular to individual 
Masses, services celebrating the Eucharist, Holy Communion or 
Last Supper. Introits were sung as the priest approached the altar. 
(Introits are alternating 'versicles' or sentences with lines quoted 
from the 

0Bible, particularly from the Psalms.) These Introits 
indicate the passage of time, the liturgical days between Christmas 
and 29 December, and they also continue the theme of saintliness 
and martyrdom. The first three feasts of the Christian year are 
presented; the fourth day as yet celebrates no saint. The words, 
the banners and the procession establish an air of excited sanctity 
even before the murder. The Priests' lines are a patchwork of 
quotations from the Bible. 

Commentary 
(29) 'Princes moreover did sit'. This Introit was in Eliot's mind at 
the beginning of 1935 in an article 'Notes on the Way', Time and 
Tide, No. 1, 5 January 1935, and he claimed that Becket no doubt 
would have preferred to be remembered with this Introit for 
Boxing Day in mind. It is also clear from this article that Eliot was 
thinking about the dangers posed to the Church from external 
interference. For Eliot the Church offered an acceptable home for 
the true sceptic, in contrast to the extremes of unthinking dedica-
tion represented by political forces of the twentieth century. 
Stephen was falsely accused by the temporal power. He forgave 
those who condemned him, a response clearly relevant to 
Thomas's own position. (41) Herod's murder of children under the 
age of two reminds everyone that we can all be involved in the 
operations of evil, not least the innocent. (53-62) The Priests focus 
on the day which as yet celebrates no saint's feast. (57-62) It is left 
to the Third Priest, as one might expect, to point to the possible 
conversion of an ordinary day into something extraordinary. He 
anticipates the intervention of brutal humanity, 'sordid particu-
lars', into the pattern of history so that the 'eternal design may 
appear'. The lines emphasise the double aspects of happenings, 
the different interpretations that may be placed on events. An 
event in time is not ambiguous in itself, but everything may be 
subject to varied explanations. 

The Knights arrive 

Summary 
(63-93) After the abstractions of the Priests the exchanges revert 
to the dialogue of orthodox drama. The Knights arrive, bent on a 
grim mischief. The Priests try to lessen the tensions and aggression 
by offering hospitality. The Knights refuse the welcome. Thomas 
speaks to his Priests, at first echoing their ominous expectations. 
But he has put his temporal affairs in order. He has not willed his 
fate, but has expected it and accepted it. 

Commentary 
(63-82) The short lines suggest the urgency of the Knights' 
mission. There is a collective menace in the way they pick up key 
words from each other - 'business' and 'King' - and the repetition 
of 'Urgent' builds up tension. (78-9) The Priests' offers of 'Dinner 
before business' and 'roast pork' are both grimly turned around 
and mocked by the Knights. (90) 'business'. This word has already 
been given a threatening undertone (75 and 78). Here and later 
(117) it takes on further echoes, reflecting Thomas's awareness of 
his destiny. Their 'business' may be something beyond their 
comprehension. (91-3) More repetition produces an air of 
menace - 'king', 'alone', 'matter'. 

The Knights' accusation 

Summary 
(94-204) The Knights state their charge against Thomas, that he is 
in revolt against the King. Thomas attempts to placate them, but 
will not give way on the primacy of his religious calling. 

Commentary 
(94--103) The verse begins to rhyme as the Knights intensify their 
anger in preparation for the act of murder. The repetition of the 
accusatory 'you' helps to build a sickening crescendo of hatred. 
Short words of contempt are used: 'tool', 'jack', and 'brat'. 
(104--8) Thomas tries to defend himself as a loyal subject. At first 
he offers only a minor proviso, 'Saving my order'. As they have 
done before, the Knights pick up a key word 'Saving' (109-13) to 
turn it against Thomas. (114--16) The Knights are unconscious of 

the irony of their words, not least for the future significance of 
their act. (117-30) Thomas attempts to calm the Knights with 
measured responses. (121-2) 'The King! God bless him!' has the 
modem ring of a drunken, after-dinner toast and prepares us for 
the style of the Apology (starting at 423). (131) 'Now and here!' It 
is Thomas who pushes the situation towards a climax. Once again 
a phrase is turned for emphasis. The phrase has already appeared 
in a different form, 'now, and here' on the lips of the Third Priest 
(61). It has the effect of signalling the crucial importance of what is 
about to happen. (132-69) Thomas submits to the Knights' 
accusations. Good dramatic lines give actors their manner, move-
ment and gesture. The drama lies partly in the language and partly 
in its rhythm and rhymes. The Knights use strong and implacable 
words like 'Absolve', and their attack is insistently reinforced by 
the clever use of half as well as full rhymes. The feminine rhymes 
have a snarling, contemptuous, lurching effect. (159-67) Thomas 
stresses, even exaggerates, his support for the King's temporal 
power, 'I would wish him three crowns', but he is resolute here 
and in following speeches about his own spiritual domain. (175) 
'If'. History does not confirm that the King did issue definite 
commands. (176-93) This is the crux of the confrontation between 
King and Archbishop, between State and Church. Thomas em-
phasises that God's Church must remain supreme in spiritual 
matters. The repetition of 'seven years' brings out Thomas's own 
remorse that he has allowed political conflict to deprive people of 
spiritual resources. (188-93) Thomas stresses his subordination to 
God. It is not he, Thomas, who puts the King in his place. While 
Thomas himself is not important, God is all-important. (194-204) 
The Knights' threat now becomes formal, preparing us for the 
ritual of the murder. Monosyllabic and fragmented lines reflect the 
impending violence. 

Chorus of anticipation 'I have smelt them' 

Summary 
(205-44) In a succession of choruses Eliot evokes an experience of 
Hell, moving from the physical to the metaphysical or spiritual. 
Eliot had a talent for producing sensuous repulsion in his poetry, 
and the creature images here lack definition, implying a loss of all 
human identity in a ,frightening disorder without pattern; time 

seems to have gone berserk. The lack of the human is finally 
traced to a lack of the divine. The awareness of God's design will 
come in the moment of understanding found by being, however 
briefly and temporarily, at the still point, in this case brought 
about by the death of a martyr. 
The Chorus closely identify with a world labouring under some 
terrible, developing process. The world writhes, heaves, breathes, 
all dominated by a stench of death. The Chorus are forced to 
admit their knowledge of evil, and it pervades the kitchen as well 
as the corridors of power. Corruption is seen as a part of living. 
The Chorus have to acknowledge their guilt, their responsibility, 
their submission to a life which has no spiritual dimensions. It is a 
metaphysical Hell, the Void, where God is manifested as an 
Absence. 

Commentary 
The images present both a state of mind and a state of being. Eliot 
aimed at a horrific sensuality, creating a sense of evil in the minds 
of the audience. In a secular age Eliot felt that a physical 
presentation of a spiritual condition was necessary. The Knights 
stand for the secularist approach which sees the spiritual aspect as 
insanity or mistaken policy. Reptilian images represent formless 
forces, scavenging creatures suggest death, and even the beauty of 
flowers conveys mindlessness. The long, irresolute, wandering 
lines reflect aimless fears and loss of direction, with a focus on the 
subject 'I'. Not all readers have found this Chorus satisfactory, 
feeling that the passage is too extensive and overdone, even 
comically solemn. 
(217) The 'I' in focus represents an admission; this is a turning-
point where the Chorus identify with the situation only observed 
previously. The disordered world has moved closer to them, and 
now they recognise that they are part of it. (222) The change of 
direction is indicated by a question: 'Have I not known?' (223-32) 
The lines shorten into crisp definition, the sense linked by 
repetition of 'in', 'as well as', and 'woven'. (226) A resentful, 
critical tone is emphasised by the alliterative phrasing of 'plotting 
of potentates'. (233-43) The Chorus affirm their 'consent', that 
they are guilty of evil. Powerful verbs dominate the language, 
firstly revealing disintegration, 'torn away' and 'violated', and 
secondly submission, 'subdued', 'united', 'mastered' and 'domina-

ted', and the verbs are made more emphatic by their positioning in 
the lines. (236) This time 'suffering' is acknowledged to be 
consent. (243) A quotation from Shakespeare's Sonnet 129, 
changing the imagery of sin from animal to sexual. For a moment 
the Chorus are disgusted with their physical lives and are prepared 
for their vision of the greater spiritual reality. Once they are 
emptied of all desire they are ready for their timeless moment. 
Surrender to the spiritual must be absolute. (See the description of 
this in their final chant, 640.) 

Thomas accepts 

Summary 
(245-303) Thomas has recognised the torment of the Women 
presented in the preceding Chorus. They will forget the moment in 
time and return to illusions, and only remember that moment of 
truth as if it were a dream. The Priests still do not understand what 
must happen. The Priests and Thomas alternate in dialogue which 
interweaves agitation and acceptance. Thomas now interprets for 
us what is about to happen. He has accepted God's pattern, and so 
the murder will be an act of necessity, a ritual. Destiny is awaited, 
and no demands or pressure need be put on God. Awareness of 
the danger of. sin removes the potential for commission. Pure in 
motive, Thomas can await his fate with confidence; pure in 
purpose, he can influence the lives of ordinary people, here 
represented in the Women of Canterbury. 

Commentary 
(245) 'Peace, and be at peace'. Thomas repeats his first word of 
the play. Humankind, despite its readiness to take the easy way 
out, 'Living and partly living', has a contrary necessity to feel at 
one with the source of creation, with life, with vitality, with God. 
(257) 'Human kind cannot bear much reality, is a view echoed in 
'Burnt Norton' I, 42-3. Full human potential cannot be fulfilled in 
the physical dimension. Life at a public and physical level is an 
attractive but transitory state. (262) The saint 'making perfect his 
will' is a central the'me in Eliot's plays, The Cocktail Party and The 
Confidential Clerk, as well as this one, although in the later plays 
there is a more balanced attention paid both to the saints and those 
who lack the gift of sainthood. The saint's vocation is to make his 

own will coincide with God's purpose. As the Sermon stressed, a 
martyrdom reminds us of Christ's sacrifice, and that is what 
Thomas's death achieves. (271-5) 'A wink of heaven'. Thomas is 
aware that God has entered time and he is therefore prepared for 
martyrdom. The saint does not evade his promised death; he 
welcomes it. Thomas's calm is contrasted with the furious and 
fearful agitation of the Priests still trying to protect him, and with 
the agony of the Chorus. (278-9) The Dies Irae is the most 
powerful of medieval hymns, 'The Day of Wrath' being the first 
words describing the 'Last Judgement', when all will be called to a 
divine account. (279-87) Short lines, chanted compulsively, con-
vey a moment of static sensitivity, the terror of being lost to God, 
of losing the possibility of grace. (292-303) This is the lowest point 
of the Chorus's despair prior to their glimpse of a higher reality. 

Thomas's death 

Summary 
(310-96) The Priests still seek to protect Thomas; he, just as 
positively, refuses to hide. The Knights assert their demands while 
Thomas says he is ready to die. There are mutual exchanges 
alleging treason. Thomas's last assertion of a temporal authority 
puts the Knights in their place as temporal and spiritual inferiors. 
It is one of the few moments in the play when we meet the man of 
history, forceful and authoritative. 

Commentary 
The murder is a beautifully contrived piece of stage-craft. It is 
de-sensationalised, an act of violence in ritual form and is led up to 
with a sense of inevitability which is as important to Eliot's theme 
of 'the time must be right' as it is to his achievement of theatrical 
impact. In the dangerous excitability and aggression of the 
Knights, the panic of the Priests, and the ultimate accompaniment 
of the Dies Irae off-stage, the passage moves with an implacable 
fascination and high emotionalism. 

(310--15) Broken, short lines express the fear and anxiety of the 

Priests as they still try to protect their Archbishop. (316-22) 
Thomas is not passive in the face of destiny. (331-51) His 
command to allow the murderers free access looks backward and 
forward: 'You think me reckless' (332) and 'It is not in time that 

my death shall be known' (349). (347-52) Repeating Christ's 
sacrifice the martyr joins the people of the suffering world, suffers 
on their behalf, and heals them. (353-64) The Knights hammer out 
the doggerel rhythms of 'The Daniel Jazz', the poem by Vachel 
Lindsay which imitates a revivalist hymn. (366-75) Thomas's own 
references are dominated by 'blood'. He emphasises that his death 
is less a political murder than a Christian act. (376-9) The Knights 
make their unacceptable demands with the operative verbs 
strongly placed at the head of each line. 

Chorus's expiation 'Clean the air! clean the sky!' 

Summary 
(397-422) The emotions of the Chorus are intensified while the 
murder is committed, but the lowest point is already past. All the 
pent-up emotion is released following the steady build-up to 
Thomas's death. Intense shame and mortification strike the Chorus 
at Thomas's dying, and they seek repentance, and this yearning 
takes them beyond everyday existence to an all-embracing aware-
ness of their need for grace. 

Commentary 
(400-4) Even at this moment on the way up to spiritual knowledge 
the Chorus do not see it is the way. ( 403) Blood purifies here; it 
does not defile. The rain is a symbol of redemption. (417) 'This is 
out of time'. This is the moment of realisation, the wider dimen-
sion of human destiny but rarely experienced. History is sus-
pended at this moment. The timeless has entered time, and 
consciousness dawns on the Chorus. 

The Knights' apology 

Summary 
(423-580) In powerful contrast the Knights' flat colloquial prose 
emphasises the newly inspired spiritual state of the Chorus. Their 
self-justifications are clearly sophistries, and despite their plausi-
bility they seem fraudulent compared with the assurance of the 
Chorus. We are meant to see through them, yet they draw some 
strength from appealing to presuppositions held by at least some of 

every audience. The Second Knight's argument for the supremacy 
of the national state over any faith or religion, however universal 
its claim, has wide acceptance. The Knights live in the world of 
politics and state interference, of machinations and struggles for 
power. They are still in the world of time; the Chorus has had an 
illumination beyond time. Cocksure insolence is contrasted with 
faith and humility. 
The Knights' names are those of the historical murderers of 
Thomas. 

REGINALD FITZURSE The First Knight calls for a fair hearing, 
and begs the audience to listen to both sides and judge for 
themselves. 
BARON WILLIAM DE TRACI The Third Knight justifies the 
act through a sense of duty. Four plain, patriotic Englishmen 
doing what had to be done. They echo the traditional cry 'King 
Henry - God Bless him!' De Traci argues that they were entirely 
disinterested and stood to gain nothing. 
SIR HUGH DE MORVILLE The Second Knight claims he 
sought 'social justice'. The Archbishop was not an underdog. He 
tried to subordinate Church to State and then the opposite. 
RICHARD BRITO The Fourth Knight argues that Becket chose 
martyrdom quite deliberately and therefore committed suicide. 

Commentary 
The disarming speeches of the Knights are a trick learnt from G. 
B. Shaw's play Saint Joan. In the same fashion the device 
underlines the contemporary relevance for the audience. The 
realistic parody of a politician's pleading turns to menace by the 
end, and intensifies the comment on the argument of political 
necessity under pressure. 
In making their excuses the Knights lower the tension of the 
drama. Comic relief is introduced as well as another level of 
interpretation of Thomas's sacrifice. All they can offer is a 
superficial, worldly lack of understanding. The Knights' flat tones 
replace the choral, incantatory and liturgical rhythms. At best, 
their political platform oratory and after-dinn~ speech-making 
manage a hearty, vigorous bonhomie. The pseudo-intellectual 
analysis makes one think of debate, Parliament, mock-hustings, or 
the law-courts. It is a play within a play, a different world, a 

different language, a different mentality; again it all makes a 
thematic point for the poet. (547) Another genre is suggested by 
Richard Brito's 'court scene' technique which reminds us of the 
stock thriller or murder mystery tradition. He asks 'Who killed the 
Archbishop?' The surprise answer also has the ingenuity of a 
murder solution, but the idea that Thomas was 'responsible' for his 
own death is both a nonsense and a truth. 

The Priests' final interpretation 

Summary 
(581-617) Unlike the Knights, the Priests have been changed by 
Thomas's death, and they see the Church as strengthened by his 
sacrifice. The Third Priest puts forward this positive view; the First 
and Second Priests express regret. 

Commentary 
They speak of the future in terms of discipleship in a world where 
mankind soon forgets. Fantasies and fictions help them forget. 
The reality of events is too painful; the 'hell of make-believe' is 
preferable to them. 

Final Chorus 

Summary 
(618-50) 'Te Deum'. The Chorus concludes the play with willing 
affirmation. God's creation and their hope of redemption are 
accorded an ecstatic celebration. 

Commentary 
The preceding public statements of the Knights increase by 
contrast the sincerity of this coda of praise. Here the message of 
the preceding story is registered. The significance of Thomas's 
sacrifice has been revealed to them; they accept that they parti-
cipate in the world which has connived at his murder. Martyrdom 
has been made meaningful to them as ordinary folk. They have 
renewed their relationship with God. Identification and consent 
replace apathy. Sympathy with the natural and therefore the 
divine order ends the play. 

Some critics have argued that it would have been more dramatic 

if the Chorus had dispersed as the Knights ordered, and that the 
final paean of praise was less effective. But the affirmation of the 
martyrdom's significance on the lips of the Chorus is absolutely 
necessary for Eliot's purpose. Humankind has accepted the reality 
of God in the world, and for the time being the Church is renewed 
by the acknowledgement of sin and our participation in it. 

3 WHAT THE PLAY 

IS ABOUT 

3.1 A PROCESS OF AWARENESS 

In the play we are faced with an heroic denial of the primacy of this 
material world, a stance which culminates in a violent murder. 
Different views of this central event are portrayed in contrast. 
Thomas's own interpretation of his death is that it serves God's 
purpose. The Knights grapple with their own non-comprehension, 
and argue that the death is suicide, the failure to seize the 
opportunities life offers. It is significant that when the time comes 
to react to the murder the Chorus speak the language of the Te 
Deum; the Knights speak in terms of the latest thriller (11.547), a 
form reflected in the ironic title of the play. The Chorus have 
moved from tentative weakness and failure to a consciousness of 
power and a far greater reality. 
At first Becket, himself under temptation, is subject to the 

Wheel (see the Commentary on 1.196-217), only vaguely aware as 
yet of perfection at the still point and of its possibilities. When he 
is face to face with his own pride he realises the limitations 
imposed on him still by his human nature: 

The last temptation is the greatest treason: 
To do the right deed for the wrong reason. 
The natural vigour in the venial sin 
Is the way in which our lives begin. (I. 667-70) 

The play demonstrates how difficult it is for us still in the world to 
be aware of this different order of being. The martyr loses his will 

in that of God (Interlude, 65). Beyond human limitations Thomas 
has glimpsed divine perfection. At the conclusion of the play there 
are three levels of awareness apparent: Thomas who sees deeply 
into his relationship with God and has an understanding of the 
significance of his martyrdom; the Chorus who assent to Thomas's 
sacrifice and are emotionally aware of what has happened; the 
Knights who represent everyday interpretations of life, lacking a 
spiritual dimension of their understanding. 

3.2 MEDIEVAL MARTYR AND THE NATURE OF 

MARTYRDOM 

The clash between Henry II and his former Chancellor, Arch-
bishop Thomas Becket, provides an historical framework for the 
drama. Other dramatists have exploited this story, which has the 
exciting elements of a broken friendship and the irreconcilable 
demands of Church and State. In his play Eliot largely ignores the 
potential force of this worldly action, and uses it primarily to 
provide a context for a study of martyrdom. The study concerns 
Thomas Becket's struggle to achieve Christian humility without 
falling victim to pride. The focus is not what happened in history 
but what meaning the event has for Thomas, for the Women of 
Canterbury, and for us. Thomas has to overcome the desire for 
personal self-assertion in order to subject himself to the will of 
God. He sets aside increasingly complex temptations until con-
fronted by the most insidious one, the attraction of triumphant 
self-gratification which assured to a martyr 'a vision of eternal 
grandeur'. Becket stays as Archbishop of Canterbury to fulfil the 
demands of his role in life, but martyrdom comes as a result of 
acquiescence in what he sees as God's plan, and he has to purify 
his motives before he is fit for that martyrdom. Fear and courage 
do not enter into Thomas's reckoning, for these are the emotions 
of everyday life. The martyr's doom is foreseen by himself, and he 
forges that destiny, but he acts only when he is convinced that the 
sequence of events is divinely inspired. 
Although causes and confrontations may characterise the situa-
tion in which martyrdom occurs, the martyr is not sacrificed to a 
cause. Steadfast to his belief in a higher order of being, the martyr 
repeats the scapegoat death of Christ, thereby bearing witness 

afresh. A few months before the play was first produced Eliot 
quoted 'The Ascent of Mount Carmel' by the medieval mystic Saint 
John of the Cross: 'to follow Christ is to deny self. American critic 
Francis Fergusson attacked this aspect of Eliot's theme, the 
theological viewpoint that sees nothing of a human scale in our 
love for the Divine, that sees no link between Eros (human love) 
and Agape (the love of God for us). The things Thomas loved in 
his youth, as portrayed in the First Temptation, are not seen as 
evidence of God's bounty but as obstructions to a higher un-
derstanding. At its most extreme this view might be seen as 
suggesting that we are in Hell while we live according to this 
world's ways, and that only the saint's total rejection will reveal 
the path to Heaven. But Eliot always argued that his plays were 
aimed not at stressing the isolation of the saint but at exploring the 
significance of the saint for the rest of us. The existence of the saint 
does not invalidate the lives and aspirations of ordinary folk. The 
play does not argue that we must all be saints; it does argue that a 
view of destiny and history must encompass unhappiness, depriva-
tion, misery, death and loss in the mass of suffering humanity as 
well as its pleasures, happiness and triumphs. 
Eliot's Christian viewpoint is that the world is incomplete 
without God. The martyr re-enacts Christ's atonement for a world 
which lacks God. The martyr refuses to compromise and re-
nounces the demands of this world, while the world in its turn 
cannot tolerate one who does not conform. The sacrificed martyr 
does not only witness to his own age. Indeed, the symbolism of the 
Wheel with its 'still point' indicates that Thomas's sacrifice is 'out 
of time'. For Eliot the moving wheel symbolises living in time, 
while at its centre movement disappears into the 'still' centre 
which symbolises God. The two images combine to represent the 
divine intersecting with the human, the point where God enters 
history. Thomas identifies with the 'still' centre: 

I give my life 
To the Law of God above the Law of Man, (II. 343--4) 

The subjective self must become an object within the will of God; 
submission to that other dimension releases the. potential saint 
from his human self and its motivation by this world and its ways: 

It is not in time that my death shall be known; 
It is out of time that my decision is taken. (II. 339-40) 

The saint does not achieve his triumph for himself; he provides an 
opportunity for people to look at themselves anew. Chorus and 
audience are reluctant, but they witness and they accept. 
To link the medieval story to its modern witnesses Eliot imposed 
a contemporary surface upon his twelfth-century content. The 
references mix medieval and modern experience: the Catherine 
Wheel, the pantomime cat, prizes at a children's party, tilt-yard 
skill, mill-stream, watchman, and the strategy of chess. Heaven 
and Hell were real to the medieval mind; Eliot's vision of 
fragmented horrors (II. 397) creates a modern equivalent for the 
twentieth century. 

3.3 RELEVANCE OF THE HERO FOR THE 1930s 

The conflict of Church and State has a significance beyond its 
medieval setting. The demands upon an individual's allegiance, for 
men of both important and lowly positions, have as powerful an 
impact on the modern age as in any past period. In addition to 
exploring matters of conscience the play examines the extent to 
which Church should meddle in matters of State, and vice versa, 
and these elements gave it added popularity in the thirties and 
forties although there is no identifiably propagandist angle. 
Thomas's story of the individual's confrontation of the State as a 
matter of conscience provided a powerful allegory for Europe in 
the thirties when Hitler's Nazi Germany was in the ascendant. 
Hitler had come to power in 1933, and the position of committed 
Christians under an evil regime was highlighted by Eliot for all to 
consider. Audiences at the early touring production found a bold 
hero standing up to political authority and tyranny. Freedom of 
belief was the challenge demonstrated by Thomas, and for this 
element the play was highly regarded in the years prior to and 
during the Second World War. How far should the Church and its 
people accept secular evil when it is embodied in the State itself? It 
is as true now as it was then that the moral compromises a 
government may demand from its citizens may lead to acquies-
cence in evil. 1935 was a fearful year, and the anxious mood of the 

decade was perfectly caught by Eliot in the play. Appeasement of 
the dictators was offered as one response to the worsening 
situation, and was implemented as a policy. A world wearied by 
the huge sacrifices of the 1914-18 War did not want to face a 
renewal of Armageddon, and this shrinking from unpalatable 
realities is powerfully conveyed in the opening Chorus. The play 
closes with an affirmation of responsibility, an awareness and a 
declaration that one cannot opt out. The Chorus are contrite over 
the earlier refusal to halt the drift of 'living and partly living'. 
In the play's confrontation between two attitudes, the demands 
of the flesh and those of the spirit, there was a moral challenge 
beyond religious allegiance. The aspect of inner integrity fasci-
nated contemporary audiences, not least the command to do the 
right thing for the right reason. Further, people were interested in 
problems of destiny and free will. To what extent was individual 
man free to make choices in· an age of universal conflagration and 
oppressive political regimes? The world was growing more in-
secure, threatening and terrible, and the Chorus spoke for ordinary 
people caught up in dangerous predicaments not of their own 
making. 

3.4 MARTYRDOM'S MODERN SIGNIFICANCE 

The nature of martyrdom is remote even from the experience of 
the committed Christian, but the mingling of strength and weak-
ness in an individual is of universal interest, and in his greatness a 
martyr forces decision upon himself and upon others. The whole 
tenor of Thomas's struggle is to move its significance away from 
the personal and the particular to the impersonal and the general, 
from a potential saint obsessed with his own sanctity to the 
acknowledgement of being the agent of destiny. Thomas's inner 
struggle may be the least popular aspect of the theme, but the play 
tells us not to judge the act of martyrdom by external appearances 
but by internal integrity. Thomas's external behaviour puzzles 
witnesses within the play, and his motivation is bewildering or 
even mad according to the man-in-the-street logic of the Knights. 
But doing 'the right deed for the wrong reason' is hardly an 
extraordinary or exceptional experience, and this gives the play a 

wider meaning for the non-believer, countering the proposition 
that you have to be a Christian to enjoy this Christian play. 
Nevertheless one of Eliot's major objectives was the dramatisa-
tion of the place of religion in modern lives. While the popularity 
of the play may be traced partly to the relevance of the Man 
against State confrontation and to the problems of the individual 
conscience, the religious nature of the central experience is 
unmistakable. An awareness of good and evil pervades the play. 
The agony of the Chorus is derived from a sense of growing evil 
and from a need to purge this taint from their being; a sense of 
impending damnation forces them to a decision. Despite the 
location of the original production in a cathedral, Eliot could not 
depend upon there being an accepted body of Christian beliefs in 
his audience, and his use of Christian concepts and symbols is 
restrained, so that there is no fervour or fanaticism in the play but 
rather an earnest assertion. For believer and non-believer alike the 
strength of the play lies in its awareness of doubts, of backsliding, 
of loss of perception and purpose, and of lack of commitment. 
A particular religious or political view does not necessarily make 
a piece of literature good and, above all, in a play it is the dramatic 
form which recommends it to audiences. Structurally the play is 
dominated by Thomas's determination to achieve God's purpose 
whatever the cost and by the Chorus's terrified anticipation of 
changed circumstances. The dramatic link between the two is 
death; Thomas welcomes it while the Chorus fear it. The relation-
ship of Thomas and the Chorus is the key element in the play. 
Thomas restores to their lives meaning which they had lost, and 
through his death they replace their awareness of hell on earth 
with a final sense of fulfilment. His significance is thrust into their 
world, repeating Christ's sacrifice to remind them that God has 
entered history. 

3.5 
GOD ENTERS TIME 

The significance of the one set apart, martyr or saint, in the lives of 
ordinary people is central to Eliot's plays both before and after the 
Second World War. In religious terms Eliot's plays purport to 
show that a synthesis of the worldly and the spiritual can be 
achieved and affirmed. Shared with Four Quartets is the concept 

that we can all experience moments out of time, 'a tremor of bliss, 
a wink of heaven, a whisper'. In such moments we become aware 
of our spiritual natures, and the hero demonstrates this awareness 
to a doubting audience. In this play Eliot charts the acceptance of 
a religious conception of life, the reluctant admission of its place in 
lives less committed than that of the hero. The presentation of 
man's concern for his soul would have been less remarkable in 
earlier centuries, and to many readers or onlookers its survival into 
the twentieth century may seem curious or even irrelevant. 
Each of Eliot's plays combines non-spiritual complacency with 
spiritual quest. The central conflict in each play dramatises the 
uneasy relationship between the two dimensions of reality. It is too 
much to expect the secularised onlooker to enjoy a play which leads 
him to believe he is missing something, and the presentation of the 
saint's solution as the higher way has annoyed those critics who see a 
spiritual interpretation of life as meaningless. Eliot had expressed 
the view in 1935 that contemporary literature was corrupted by 
Secularism, a state of mind in which awareness of 'the primacy of 
the supernatural over the natural life' was impossible. Eliot sought a 
literature 'unconsciously Christian', working through forms accept-
able to modern taste; the abstract path is signposted with concrete 
evidence. The drama is nothing less than the rediscovery of a 
Christian myth which Eliot thought had been mistakenly rewritten 
in historical, political and non-Christian terms. After Murder in the 
Cathedral the role of the saint remains a central element in his plays, 
but it is reduced in overt importance. The prime aim of Eliot's 
drama is the destruction of illusion. In each play the hero starts off 
with an imperfect understanding of his sin or weakness. He 
becomes aware of what besets him and then does something about 
it. He is then able to face his destiny openly and truthfully. 

4 TECHNICAL FEATURES 

4.1 
PLOT AND STRUCTURE 

(a) Exposition and story 

The play describes the final phase of Thomas's life. His past, his 
relationship with the King, and the conflict between Church and 
State are largely sketched into the contributions from the 
Tempters, although the tense opening Choruses do stress the 
struggle between Archbishop and King. The hint of crisis comes 
very early, and despite criticisms of the play which stress a ritual 
and static impression, it solves problems of narrative exposition 
and developing action very economically, while the theme is given 
extensive treatment. For his exposition Eliot was able to assume 
that most people who went to see the play knew the story in its 
basic essentials. 
The story is simple enough. The Archbishop returns from 
France to lead his Church, determined to face the possibility of 
conflict with the King, despite advice to the contrary from his 
attendant Priests and despite the evident fears of the ordinary 
Women of Canterbury. He preaches a Christmas Day sermon on 
martyrdom, and after further vain attempts by his Priests to 
prevent his death he is killed by four drunken Knights. 
Instead of widening the narrative span the dramatist chose to 
concern his action with a very narrow point of decision, an interior 
action with a very powerful impact. The story embodies the theme 
without moralising: Parts I and II are not didactic, and the Sermon 
is only partly so. Eliot relied on minimal stage directions, and the 
whole presentation has a universality beyond its historical setting. 

(b) Formal structure 

The play's dramatic effect is quite different from that of situation 
plays, and its form is important in organising the response of the 
audience; a simple line of action without digression, parallel plot 
or sub-plot is graced with the ceremonial grandeur of a ritual. The 
pattern of the play is one of development, contrast and balance, 
and like a church service the various phases contain the true action 
of the play. Like the Eucharist, Communion or Mass the play 
provides a symbolic pattern of dynamic emotional changes. A 
process of purgation leads to a state in which Thomas may 'make 
perfect his will' and the Chorus may identify with the event. 
The parallels between play and service were increased by the 
inclusion of the Sermon at the midway point, the Cathedral 
setting, and the use of great liturgical passages as links and 
accompaniments. The emotional structure of the play may be 
traced in the Choruses, which move from terror and doubts to 
rapture and a recognition of God's glory. The choices for Thomas 
and for us are seen from different angles throughout the play. 
Thomas's moments of decision in Parts I and II are crucial points 
which cannot be fully presented on stage. In naturalistic terms we 
have to take Thomas's word for his achievement of true martyr-
dom; Thomas discovers the impurity of his motives in Part I, while 
Part II proves that Thomas has virtuously and correctly made his 
submission to destiny. 

( c) The parts of the play 

Part One 
This Part is constructed in the fashion of a Greek agon, or 'verbal 
conflict', consisting largely of duologues with contributions from a 
Chorus with a focus on four Temptations. The most dramatic 
passage presents the surprise Fourth Temptation when Thomas's 
decision is threatened by self-will and pride. The dramatic centre 
of the play starts at 1.665, 'Now is my way clear', the moment of 
peripeteia when the drama makes a fundamental change in direc-
tion. The action of Part I is primarily a matter of mind, the Women 
of Canterbury full of doubts and fears, while Thomas, having 
rejected the past, is tempted by his own forward-looking ambi-
tions. 

Interlude 
The Sermon is a direct, prosaic expos1t1on of the awareness 
Thomas has attained towards the end of Part I, and it makes clear 
the nature of his triumph over the Fourth Tempter. It expresses 
the view that a martyrdom cannot be achieved by man's will alone. 
It therefore establishes the theme of the play by means of a 
different dramatic mode. When the future martyr has subdued his 
own ambitions and will to God's will he becomes a fit instrument 
for God's purpose. In a cool intellectual fashion it links the poetic 
sequences of the Parts on either side. Thomas's telling his congre-
gation that he will not preach to them again prepares the way for 
the events of Part II. 

Part Two 
The action of this Part contrasts with that of Part I, where we have 
an internal, intellectual problem followed by a sequence of action 
and comment. In Part II the focus is murder, and the play 
generates preparatory emotions: apprehension (Chorus), accusa-
tion (Knights), and protection (Priests). The balance of responsi-
bility now becomes important in Thomas's refusal to seek sanctu-
ary. Later, the Knights are to claim that his failure to run amounts 
to 'suicide', thereby ignoring their own independence as agents of 
death. In the end the charge is that Thomas should have compro-
mised between the political and religious demands placed upon 
him; the limited scope of these charges reflects the limitations of 
the earthly, non-spiritual viewpoint. 

Part II expands and embodies the conclusions Thomas himself 
came to in Part I. Action becomes suffering as he foresaw. If 
dramatically it lacks development, theatrically it uses bold strokes: 
priests in procession with banners, the angry intrusion of murder-
ous outsiders, a ritual killing, the great liturgies of Dies Irae and 
Te Deum, and the Knights' Shavian Apology in the fashion of the 
last act of Saint Joan. 

(d) Linking the parts 

Without strict adherence to the Unities of Time and Place the play 
presents a feeling of a concise Unity of Action. Parts I and II are 
respectively concerned with the Return and the Murder, but there 
is a theme common to both Parts, the perception of God's purpose 

working through an individual and through history. In Part I 
Thomas the saint comes painfully to his decision; in Part II the 
time for decision concerns the audience. 
Tension is maintained by concentration upon the two phases of 
Temptation and Murder. In the first the dramatic emphasis 
concerns Thomas's reappearance at Canterbury, followed by a 
sequence of choices culminating in the final unexpected tempta-
tion. The second phase deals with the expected violence, while the 
real action traces the Chorus's fears and then the affirmation of 
their involvement. A second surprise, the Knight's Apology, is 
reserved for the final movement of the play. Each verse sequence 
is thus concluded with a prose summary, Sermon and Apology. The 
humorous tone of the Messenger is balanced by the humour of the 
Knights, and the Four Tempters grow into and are mirrored by the 
Four Knights. The tone of the Apology and of the Herald is not 
the only relief from tension. Other characters besides these 
examples offer moments of humour throughout the play. 

( e) Tragic pattern 

The play has the inner structure of a Greek tragedy, and this was 
traced by Louis Martz in an essay entitled 'The Saint as Tragic 
Hero' (Tragic Themes in Western Literature, ed. Cleanth Brooks). 
He saw the transfiguration, suffering, the wandering phase, the 
assertion that the hero will seek no more, and the achievement of 
peace, acceptance and death in one and the same sanctuary as 
being derived from the similar elements found in Sophocles's 
Oedipus at Co/onus, a play used again by Eliot as the starting-
point for his last drama The Elder Statesman. But the Christian 
triumph in the play takes us beyond tragedy. There is a three-fold 
sequence in Christian self-sacrifice: the Saint first suffers tempta-
tion, pathema; then detects and resists this temptation, poiema; 
and ultimately gains understanding, mathema. The saint derives 
awareness from his trial sufficient to equip himself for martyrdom. 

4.2 
CHARACTERISATION 

Some critics have claimed that the almost total focus on one main 
character brought a concentration more suited to a poem than to a 

play. The other 'lives', it is argued, have no real motivation or 
individuality, subordinated as they are to Thomas, some speaking 
only by virtue of his ventriloquism. This line of argument leads to a 
fundamental rejection of the play as lacking dramatic vitality. To 
answer such criticism it is appropriate to bear in mind one of the 
influences suggested by the form of Part I of the play. In the 
morality play tradition, universal heroes were common, and these 
were often beset by personalised forces from within themselves. 
But all Eliot's characters have more intrinsic interest than some 
critics have allowed. 
The groups in Murder in the Cathedral are partly medieval -
common people, clergy and nobility; they are also reminders of the 
power groups of 1935, with the ordinary folk squeezed by the 
confrontation. The characters therefore represent social patterns, 
each interdependent and in conflict. 
All the characters retain an essentially human aspect: the 
Women of the Chorus bear a burden of age and experience; the 
Priests are terrified and protective; the Tempters-Knights join in a 
hideous fellowship; and we enter the thoughts and heart of 
Thomas at the climax of his life. As people the characters intensify 
Thomas's spiritual dilemma in a convincingly naturalistic way: the 
Priests insist on his being their pastoral leader, while the Women 
react emotionally to his disturbing presence. 
The Women and Thomas are linked but contrasted in their 
response to the assertion of God's purpose, the heroic and 
extraordinary Saint set off against everyday, suffering humanity. 
The twin poles of sensibility are revealed, one aware of the 
spiritual dimension in life, the other unaware and needing en-
lightenment. In spiritual awareness the lowest level is inhabited by 
the Tempters and Knights; the Chorus achieve partial awareness; 
and Thomas attains full understanding. 
The Tempters and Knights are linked in significance: Four 
Tempters tempt Thomas in Part I, while in Part II Four Knights 
tempt the audience to deny the spiritual truth of Thomas's 
sacrifice. The representatives of worldly pleasure and political 
power never understand the central protagonist, and at the close 
of the play are reiterating their normal everyday vision of life to 
their own satisfaction. Indeed the minor characters of the play, 
the Messenger, the Tempters, the Priests, and the Knights, are all 
largely defined by their function relating to the martyrdom, 

leading to it, trying to protect, or carrying out the murder. 
Nevertheless, the characters within each group are carefully 
individuated. 

(a) 
Thomas 

Thomas's earlier life of political power and the fruits of office are 
presented in retrospect as phases of his present spiritual develop-
ment. The playwright's concentration upon Thomas's internal 
debate during his last days brought freshness to what had become 
a legend. The character of the hero disappointed some critics who 
saw the characterisation as 'thin' or too symbolic. The spiritual 
predicament was sometimes appreciated while the personality was 
rejected as 'flat' or even unconvincing. Other views have exagger-
ated Thomas's lack of human commitment, and certainly there is 
little in the play celebratory of the 'good things' of life. Some have 
called Thomas a 'prig', but such critics mistakenly underestimate 
the intensity of Thomas's challenge. Conflicts do not necessarily 
lack force because we have no personal relationships to sustain our 
interest. Thomas's struggle to overcome his spiritual pride may be 
an exceptional human experience, but it is seen in dramatic terms, 
moving through complacency, surprise, humility and courage 
before the final triumph. Further, the dramatic effectiveness of the 
play does not diminish when our attention is transferred from the 
hero's choice to the response of the Chorus. The play is not about 
the loneliness of the hero; it is about the impact of the hero on 
everyday life. There is a risk in allowing any character to explore 
the virtue of his own choices, but Thomas's proud confidence is 
less priggishness than articulate self-awareness. 
Thomas's first temptation involves a rejection of that sensual 
enjoyment of life which in some measure would seem a normal 
human indulgence. The second and third temptations are recog-
nised historical and political possibilities facing Thomas then 
and many people since. But his deliberate setting aside of worldly 
rewards does not endear him to audiences of a materialist persua-
sion. 
Thomas's confident mockery of the intruders dramatically 
builds his confidence and pride to the point where the Fourth 
Temptation becomes personally as well as theatrically real. The 
emotions in Thomas, the Priests and the Knights are real too. If 

the world of everyday cares and ambitions is symbolised by the 
Wheel, then Thomas at the beginning of the action is still subject 
to its movement. Before the action ends he comes to the 'still 
point' at the centre of the Wheel, at one with God. Identification 
with God is a martyr-saint's prerogative, to escape beyond 
ordinary existence and the compromises of 'living and partly 
living'. Love, the gratification of the senses, power, politics and 
the intellectual are superfluous to the single-minded martyr. 
The critic Francis Fergusson sees Thomas as a version of the 
scapegoat of ancient religions, combined with the Sophoclean 
tragic hero and the Christian martyr-saint. He also sees Thomas as 
a sort of stage manager, a director of all the climaxes and stage 
effects central to the play. Thomas is also lecturer, philosopher, 
theologian and teacher, harshly interpreting reality as vanity in 
order to achieve a higher plane of understanding. 
Lastly, it is possible that the author felt some affinity with his 
protagonist through their common Christian name. The poet had 
reaffirmed his Christianity in the Anglican Church only a few years 
before, and his celebration of the saint confirmed his allegiance. 
Both poet and hero experienced an absence from their home 
countries for a number of years, and in both there is a sense of a 
lonely but triumphant struggle. 

(b) 
The Chorus 

This play proves what a useful device the Chorus can be in the 
modern theatre. In subsequent plays Eliot attempted more con-
cealed versions of the Chorus less successfully. The Chorus has 
several functions. It contrasts with Thomas's elevated concerns, 
represents humanity, embodies the theme, acts as commentator 
and observer, creates mood and atmosphere, and sustains much of 
the narrative. The affirmative transfiguration of the Chorus in Part 
II is the true thematic climax of the play. 
The Chorus is Greek in form and function, adding to the 
ritualistic element in the play, but its prominent role as an 
intermediary makes it seem less than stylised. The emotions 
expressed by the Chorus are a barometer of Thomas's progress. In 
the end the Women of Canterbury recognise their weakness as a 
sin, and realise that evil exists but that it may be defeated. Their 
responses parallel Thomas's experience without his awareness and 

courage, but without them Thomas would not work out his own 
crucial decisions. Without Thomas they would put up with tyran-
nical oppression and settle for a quiet life. At the opening we see 
that the Women of Canterbury are reluctant to be involved, 
preferring unobtrusive acceptance of their limited daily round. But 
the saint compels them to a commitment to faith. The early fears 
and vacillations make them more human and not less sympathetic. 
The seasons, the harvests, the problems of everyday life are 
preferable to the grander challenges involved in the conflict of 
Archbishop and King. Ultimately they are brought to a recogni-
tion that they too are an integral part of the design of human and 
divine relationships. Their salvation is achieved by witnessing, by 
nothing more dynamic than being there and saying 'Yes'. 
Thomas's knowledge of the need for God is transferred to them. 
Critics have argued that the Women do not do enough to gain 
this wisdom for themselves, and do not illuminate their experience 
with real understanding. They even use Thomas's own language 
to express their enlightenment at the end. But their joint anonym-
ity enables them to cross the centuries, medieval and modern, 
representative of the ordinary human level of reality, as well as 
acting as observers in the fashion of a Greek Chorus. They 
constitute the touchstone of the play, the past, present and future 
witnesses of the event. We live through their reactions and 
participate in the drama through them. In history they represent 
all humanity faced with an unpalatable and unlooked-for contemp-
orary situation, and in religious terms a development from the 
compromises of accepting second-best to some identification with 
Thomas's vision. The journey is conveyed in six long choruses, and 
their experience is expressed in non-Christian, non-theological 
terms. It seems excessive to ask for even more dramatically from 
the Chorus, as if it were possible to incorporate developments 
more proper to an individual character. 

(c) 
The Priests 

The Priests represent an element more contemporarily medieval 
than the Chorus. They have a role to play in Church affairs, 
subordinate to the Archbishop from whom they gain some un-
derstanding of profounder spiritual levels. Their behaviour 
suggests a pastoral role, and sensing the dangers attendant upon 
the situation they are prepared to take avoiding action. 

At the start the Priests are filled with fear, and view their 
Archbishop's challenging return with caution rather than with 
zeal. They are closest to Thomas, yet even they are striving for 
they know not what. They are slow to respond to Thomas's 
guidance and example, but they come to learn the way forward. 
Characterisation, though limited, nevertheless differentiates the 
three Priests quite clearly. The First Priest is the oldest of the 
three, equable, easy-going and kindly. The Second Priest is more 
assertive and eager, a younger cleric anxious to prove his loyalty. 
The Third Priest is the quietest of the three, meditative, more 
profound in his religious commitment, and it is he who assesses the 
Knights for us. 

(d) Tempters and Knights 

Becket realises his divine destiny at the expense of human identity, 
and the further he moves away by resisting temptation the more 
remote he apparently becomes in the eyes of ordinary people. But 
his temptations give way to ours so that the necessities of this 
world are amusingly and powerfully embodied first by the 
Tempters and subsequently by the Knights. The shared impulse to 
challenge and tempt makes the playing of the two quartets by the 
same actors sensible and meaningful. The Knights recapitulate the 
spirit and logic of the Tempters, and the two groups are linked by 
tone and motivation. The First Tempter has a commitment to life 
at its immediate and physical level, and offering no reasons 
beyond sensual enjoyment and the good things of life he can only 
act as Chairman for the Knights. The Second Tempter offers 
temporal power on behalf of good causes, and has no wish to alter 
the social pattern, being quite willing to make his way within the 
established order; as Knight he justifies the murder as securing 
'social justice'. The Third Tempter argues for rebellion to defeat 
the King's autocracy, and sets out to achieve a radical re-
structuring and subsequent change; as Knight then he is able to 
argue his own individual disinterestedness. The Fourth Tempter is 
different in kind from the others, an egotistical assertion of 
Thomas's own spiritual pride; he will embrace martyrdom to 
achieve spiritual power over mankind for ever. As a Knight he 
argues that Thomas embraced his own fate, and that this consti-
tuted suicide. 

The Tempters 
Thematically the first three Tempters represent a denial of the life 
of the spirit and so they stress Thomas's personal and political 
status. In their eyes the Church is power, not spirit, and the 
Knights continue this pressure on the hero, demanding that he 
accept this world's sovereignty~ The first three Temptations, 
worldly pleasures, alliance with the King, and alliance against the 
King, constitute an exposition of the past, and it has been argued 
that because they retell what has happened already their contribu-
tion lacks dramatic force. Stephen Spender in his Fontana Modern 
Masters book on Eliot has also commented on the ease with which 
Thomas dismisses the first three Temptations, and he sees them 
more as embarrassing ghosts in the fashion of the figures from the 
past in The Elder Statesman. Thomas is haunted by these 'urgings', 
as well as tempted, and this makes the interaction between hero 
and Tempters highly dramatic. 
Drama uses many methods of revealing a character's heart-
searching. Hamlet has a series of soliloquies; Arthur Miller uses 
flashbacks in Death of a Salesman; Eliot creates allegorical imper-
sonations in the medieval fashion to project the four Temptations. 
It is mistaken to make too much of E. Martin Browne's comment 
that we should see the Temptations as 'figments' of Thomas's 
imagination. They are imagined in one sense, but morality play 
figures have a complex life, combining both inner and outer 
characteristics. The Tempters mark the stages of Thomas's purifi-
cation with challenges of great variety and enjoyable vivacity. 

The First Tempter: The favouritism of the King had ensured 
Thomas's full indulgence in the good life, the sweets of office, the 
perquisites of being one of the important people. L'homme moyen 
sensuel comes into his own. The Tempter urges Thomas to take 
what the world offers to those blessed with favour. At worst 
sensuality or at best high living would be attractive to most of the 
audience, but they are also forced to realise that the First Tempter 
is telling Thomas to take the easy way out and not to mind 
responsibilities. Denial is made easy for Thomas because this 
Temptation looks back to a life he has long left behind. 

The Second Tempter: This Temptation is more cunningly pro-
voking to Thomas than is often considered. The renewal of 

friendship with the King and the assumption of the Chancellorship 
would allow Thomas to do a great deal for suffering humanity. It is 
the subtlest of the first three Temptations, since the wielding of 
temporal power is given a Christian twist: 

Rule for the good of the better cause. 

This is a carefully judged challenge, for the Tempter is arguing 
that Thomas has only to give way on a minor point in order to 
achieve virtuous objectives: 

Real power 
Is purchased at price of a certain submission. 

Several twentieth-century problems are hinted at here: the rela-
tionship of the individual to the State, the balance between Church 
and Government power and, above all, the need to undertake 
dubious projects for laudable ends. 

The Third Tempter: The Third Tempter offers another version of 
temporal power, a combination of Church and People to over-
throw tyranny. Thomas still speaks as a loyal subject and con-
demns an alliance of factions against central authority, however 
'popular' the rebellion may be. This, then, is the least engaging of 
the Temptations, since it offers only political manoeuvres in a 
struggle for power. If Thomas has overcome the Temptation of 
worldly power for good he is hardly likely to ally himself with the 
self-interested barons. The machinations of a new coalition lead-
ing to insurrection against the King are rejected by a man who has 
accepted the higher authority of God. 

The Fourth Tempter: The Fourth Temptation is less a shadowy 
assault from external forces, a 'haunting' from the past, than a 
Mephistopheles working through a man's most vulnerable weak-
ness to gain evil possession. Seemingly the would-be martyr 
cannot achieve glory without sin. This Tempter is a terrifying 
mirror image of Thomas himself, a creature relishing the conse-
quences of martyrdom. The Fourth Tempter is the False Thomas. 
Spiritual aspiration confronts him insidiously with a sinful version 
of his own desires. Thomas's celebration of his own superior 

knowledge of suffering and action is revealed as tainted by the 
Tempter's mockery. Spiritual pride is now seen to be a trap. The 
elucidation of this Temptation is found in Thomas's Sermon. 

The Knights 
The Knights have a group identity, a comic burlesque act. Each 
has an individual style rather than differentiation of character. 
They are a gang of murderers, killing out of policy which gives 
them a bloodthirsty drive without personal motivation. They do 
not matter as people, revealing the dedicated brutality of a 
totalitarian state of the 1930s. The deed seems less the murder of a 
man by other men than a symbolic, ritual act, although Eliot does 
give them names in the Apology. Their lack of personality and of 
personal feelings and their subjugation to ideas makes a point 
about the possibility of men losing their humanity. 

One of the great novelties of the play is the introduction of a 
clever satire after the stylised murder. Ashley Dukes of the 
Mercury Theatre warned against allowing the Knights' Apology to 
become comic in an obvious way. They take themselves seriously, 
and for all their unconscious humour they are still instruments of 
evil. 
The Knights, in effect, argue that the Church should sub-
ordinate itself to the secular powers of the State. In advancing their 
various arguments in the Apology the Knights reveal their drama-
tic and thematic link to the Tempters in Part I. It is the audience 
who are being tempted now, asked to accept the worldy viewpoint 
implicit in the Knights' versions of Thomas's death. Ironically, 
despite their belief in their chosen course of action they too serve 
God's purpose; in taking 'action' they 'suffer' an all-powerful 
design. 

4.3 VERSE DRAMA 

(a) The choice of verse 

The prime justification for using verse in drama is that it will 
achieve more than prose. In 1936 Eliot claimed that verse drama 
gave a more complete experience than the 'abstraction' of prose, 
implying that the dialogue of the latter communicated only at a 

simple level. The playwright should not think of poetry as some-
thing added. Verse enabled him to orchestrate the drama like a 
piece of music. Action and plot captivate audiences, but they 
should also be moved by a pattern underlying plot where deeper, 
non-articulated levels of feeling may be tapped. Verse forms, 
rhythms, language and imagery intensify dramatic situation, dialo-
gue and motivation. 
Another poet, Christopher Hassall, noted later in 1948 that 
playwrights had become dissatisfied with the surface of things, and 
so realistic character and action were seen as inadequate pictures. 
Verse and language were to provide the means for deeper 
interpretations of life. Eliot reviewed his 1935 choices in his essay 
'Poetry and Drama' (1951). Obviously in Murder in the Cathedral 
he could not use the language of the twelfth century, either 
Anglo-Saxon or Norman French. The language had to be lively 
enough to concentrate the attention of a modern audience and yet 
convincing enough to take them back to a distant historical event. 
Since he wanted to draw a contemporary moral from the material 
the last effect he wanted was an archaic distancing. Eliot felt he 
had to avoid the Shakespearean echo which had dogged 
nineteenth-century verse dramatists, largely attributable in Eliot's 
view to the use of iambic pentameter blank verse. The basic verse 
form Eliot adopted was that of Everyman, the English morality 
play, which offered the additionally useful effects of alliteration 
and occasional rhyme. The most prominent metre in Eliot's play is 
a four-stress line, building up through similar, parallel units of 
contrasting or balanced phrasing bound together by alliteration (I. 
364-7). 
This effect is a development of one employed by Eliot in his 
earlier poems like 'The Waste Land'. The colloquial and poetic are 
interwoven to create tension between spiritual awareness and 
everyday realities. 
Changes of rhythm prepare listeners for each new kind of 
response or variation in emotion. The First Tempter's lightly 
tripping abstractions contrast with the heavier kind found in 
Thomas's anticipatory 'For a little time the hungry hawk' speech 
(I. 255-9). Couplets with double rhymes produce emphasis, 
derision and aggression. A different kind of emphasis comes from 
the Third Tempter's removal of the definite article from his 
summary of the political situation, giving it the air of an irrefutable 

proposition which is quite spurious. The tetrameters are forceful 
and insistent. 
Long lines precede shorter ones, as in the opening contrast 
between the broad poetic movements of the Chorus's questioning 
of their unease, and the agitated repetitions of the Priests' (I. 42-8, 
51-2). 
The play is enriched by the development of echoes and repeti-
tions which bind and advance interpretative meaning in a challeng-
ing way. The most significant and extended example of the 
technique is found in the Fourth Tempter's parody of Thomas's 
centrally important first speech (I. 207-17 and 591-9). In contrast 
to the Tempter's mockery of Thomas's confident abstractions the 
Chorus use longer lines descriptive of an everyday reality given a 
nightmare quality (I. 600-1). 

The intellectual challenge of the Tempter is intensified by the 
sensuous vividness of the alarm of the Women, by the simple, 
direct language and flatness of tone; a thoughtful formality is 
immediately matched by images from daily life. Yet even the key 
profundities of the 'You know and do not know' passage become a 
refrain that catches the ear because of and in spite of the intricate 
phrasing. The variously exciting modes of verse are interesting in 
themselves, but they are also significantly appropriate to speaker 
and subject matter. Eliot makes verse and imagery serve his 
dramatic purpose. The simple doggerel of the Knights in unison 
presents their united intention and their lack of separate personali-
ties (II. 353-6). 
Like the Old Vice, a farcical attendant upon the Devil in the 
medieval morality plays, the vulgar Knights at times are presented 
humorously in the exaggerated terms of comic variety theatre; at 
other times they assume the spurious bonhomie of the hustings or 
political rally. The colloquial Apology deliberately breaks the 
surface of the play, and this seems to have posed problems for 
some critics. The Apology acts in the fashion of Brechtian 
'alienation', shocking for a purpose, to distance the audience from 
their emotional response to the preceding action. 
Rhyming tetrameters are used to pose Thomas's retorts to the 
Tempters' taunts, and couplets abound (I. 461-4). Thomas re-
sponds to the agonised Chorus with resolute propositions rhymed 
neatly in couplets: 

Now is my way clear, now is the meaning plain; 
Temptation shall not come in this kind again. 
The last temptation is the greatest treason: 
To do the right deed for· the wrong reason. (I. 665-8) 

The verse of the Chorus is the most varied, reflecting its many 
purposes. Free flowing lines of different lengths build atmospheric 
description (I. 9-11). A more insistent rhythm emphasises the 
natures of the daily round (I. 31-3). Beneath the familiar there is 
unease. The longest lines reflect panic, the repetition of powerful 
verbs adding to the terror (II. 422). Passages of powerful emotion 
are counterpointed with liturgy, the Te Deum (II. 618-50) and the 
Dies Irae (II. 279-309), while introits accompany the processional 
opening of Part II. 
In such a variety of effects lay part of Eliot's hope that verse 
would achieve more than prose. He showed too that he could 
differentiate character in verse. The Tempters, for instance, use a 
kind of clipped economy of expression which gives their lines a 
common challenging tone, and yet they are also established as 
individuals. The First Tempter is characterised by flights of lyrical 
poetry; the Second Tempter's emphatic tone derives from an 
insistently rhythmic verse full of alliteration; the Third Tempter's 
favoured 'man to man' approach is helped by colloquial intona-
tion; and the Fourth parodies Thomas's own voice and language. 
Unadorned the verse can be realistically descriptive, as in the 
Messenger's account of the people's welcome to Thomas on his 
return (I. 88-90). Here Eliot is at his most Shakespearean. Other 
passages are suitably realistic, as in the description of merchant 
and labourer (I. 27-8). Homely realism rapidly but smoothly 
gravitates to the elevated questioning of fear and doubt (I. 36--9). 
When the Tempters combine in their own chorus towards the end 
of Part I the short lines of abstractions lead to lists of endeavour 
and effort which are mocked as meaningless (I. 605-10). Ques-
tions give simple happenings a threatening effect in a single long 
line describing rain and wind (I. 626). Long lines also elevate 
humble actions in the final affirmation (II. 625). 

Prose is used to bring the play back to our world, down to earth, 
in the Apology and the Sermon, both of them adopting public 
forms of address, defensive and threatening in the former, in-

timate and interpretative in the latter. A sermon is exactly right in 
terms of the play's setting and hero, and also corresponds usefully 
to the dramatic device of the soliloquy. The prose give audiences' 
ears a pause from the insistent and powerful rhythms of the verse, 
and offers explanations, one true and one false, of the central 
event. 

(b) 
Imagery 

Symbols and images echo throughout the play, and in the Chor-
uses these move from negative caution and fearfulness to positive 
affirmation. The imagery of the Tempters in Part I is medieval, 
while in Part II the Knights bring us into the modern world. The 
varied styles and references involve our consciousness in past, 
present and future, range over childhood, maturity and death, and 
probe both the lower depths of fears and dreams and the heights of 
ecstatic joy. 
Seasonal imagery, mainly wintry, dominates the play, creating 
an atmosphere of foreboding, death, darkness and despair. The 
seasonal setting becomes a metaphor for spiritual deprivation, and 
states of mind match the shrinking senses beset by winter. The 
colours are subdued: 

Evil the wind, and bitter the sea, and grey the sky, grey grey grey. 
(I. 147) 

The surface reflects the anguish beneath. Eliot uses images of 
'unnatural' Nature which featured in his earlier poetry. The 
Chorus are half-hearted in their participation in seasonal change in 
the opening of the play; only at the end are the breadth of 
landscape, the seasonal cycle, and domestic harmony restored to 
their natural order. 
The animal references in the play recall a medieval bestiary, but 
they convey a modern message. Eliot uses them to express 
rejection, horror and evil. The imagery of undersea life as a kind 
of living death again reminds us of earlier Eliot poetry. The 
repetitive addition of the prefix 'jack' to three of the animals, 
'jackal, jackass, jackdaw' creates a feeling of contempt. The 
movements are repulsive - 'twisting' and 'turning'. In this oblique 
fashion Eliot introduces a sense of sin to a partially comprehend-
ing modern audience. 

The most important images aimed at communicating a Christian 
view of life are the linked ideas of the Wheel and the 'still point'. 
The whole concept represents the created world with God at the 
centre. Mankind moves at the circumference, apparently free, but 
the real control and focus of the movement of the Wheel remains 
at the 'still centre', God incarnate. 

(c) 
Dramatic styles 

The description of the play as 'verse drama' is too simple. In the 
Knights we have the melodrama of the murder, a music-hall turn 
in the comic aspects of their Apology, and Shavian farce in their 
shock assumption of modern attitudes. As a religious experience it 
offers the liturgy of the Dies Irae, the Te Deum, introits and 
versicles. In the focus on Thomas we have a 'biblical' presentation 
on the scale of the Book of Job, a mystery play in the story of a 
saint, a derivative from Milton's Samson Agonistes, with a central 
figure beset by Tempters, and a modern morality play reminiscent 
of Everyman, featuring a central protagonist confronted by a 
sequence of allegorical personages. 
The Chorus are not the only reminder of Greek drama. Critics 
have pointed to the Aeschylean nature of the play, a primitive 
tragedy concentrating on a single event and a single hero, both 
observed from different angles of vision while tension and 
suspense steadily increase. The influence of The Rock upon the 
writing of this play may have been underestimated. The pageant 
form had a particularly strong fascination for English audiences 
between the two world wars, and its traditional celebration of key 
episodes in English history reminds us of both The Rock and 
Murder in the Cathedral. 
The idea that the play lacks roots seems absurd; rather, it might 
be seen to have too many. For Eliot, safeguarding a living theatre 
meant tapping established traditions. The strands interwoven into 
the play's texture range over the centuries, and few of them 
presented the kind of life associated with naturalism. Eliot's play is 
not a drama of human relationships, although there is real terror in 
the reactions of Chorus and Priests to portentous events. In part it 
is a symbolic play of ideas in its portrayal of man's struggle with sin 
and temptation, and its plot has the careful organisation and 
balance of a Ben Jonson play. Murder in the Cathedral is a 
theatrical tour de force. 

5 SPECIMEN PASSAGE 

AND 

COMMENTARY 

THOMAS 
Is there no way, in my soul's sickness, 
Does not lead to damnation in pride? 
I well know that these temptations 
Mean present vanity and future torment. 
Can sinful pride be driven out 
Only by more sinful? Can I neither act nor suffer 
Without perdition? 

TEMPTER 
You know and do not know, what it is to act or suffer. 
You know and do not know, that action is suffering-, 
And suffering action. Neither does the agent suffer 
Nor the patient act. But both are fixed 
In an eternal action, an eternal patience 
To which all must consent that it may be willed 
And which all must suffer that they may will it, 
That the pattern may subsist, that the wheel may turn and 
still 
Be forever still. 

CHORUS 

There is no rest in the house. There is no rest in the street. 600 
I hear restless movement of feet. And the air is heavy and 
thick. 
Thick and heavy the sky. And the earth presses up against 
our feet. 

What is the sickly smell, the vapour? The dark green light 
from a cloud on a withered tree? The earth is heaving 
to parturition of issue of hell. What is the sticky dew 
that forms on the back of my hand? 

THE FOUR TEMPTERS 
Man's life is a cheat and a disappointment; 
All things are unreal, 
Unreal or disappointing: 
The Catherine wheel, the pantomime cat, 
The prizes given at the children's party, 
The prize awarded for the English Essay, 
The scholar's degree, the statesman's decoration. 
610 

All things become less real, man passes 
From unreality to unreality. 
This man is obstinate, blind, intent 
On self-destruction, 
Passing from deception to deception, 
From grandeur to grandeur to final illusion, 
Lost in the wonder of his own greatness, 
The enemy of society, enemy of himself. (I. 584--618) 

Thomas has dealt confidently with the first three Temptations, but 
has been surprised by a fourth challenge urging him to follow his 
own desires and seek martyrdom. He has the salutory experience 
of discovering his heartfelt ambitions to be sinful; his ambitions 
must be purged of self. The Fourth Tempter destroys Thomas's 
confidence by adapting the Archbishop's first assertion in mocking 
fashion. The Four Tempters in unison follow up their destructive 
advantage by calling in doubt all ambitions and rewards. 
This passage builds up to one of the great climaxes of the play. It 
demonstrates a variety of verse styles, full of tension and contrasts. 
It shows how the elements of the drama combine: the protagonist, 
the forces acting upon him, and the emotional response of the 
Chorus. A switchback sequence of effects keeps the audience on 
their toes, and four emotions are engendered in rapid succes-
sion - bewilderment, mockery, anxiety, sneering derision. Ab-
stractions dominate the language of Thomas and the Fourth 
Tempter; a sensuous nightmare occupies the Chorus; and this 
contrasts with the worldly catalogue of the Tempters in chorus, 

who return to abstractions when they focus again on Thomas 
alone. 
Agitation in Thomas takes the form of questioning his own 
pride; agitation in the Chorus is seen as an awareness of perverted 
nature. The Tempters probe and intensify the agony. They assert; 
Thomas and the Chorus ask questions. The Chorus's free verse 
lines lengthen to match their mounting distress, particularly their 
last line (603), which is as long as four normal lines. 
The passage shows the poet's skill in adapting the four-stress 
line freely to his varied dramatic purposes. The beat heavily 
reinforces the questioning verbs (1. 584-90), 'Is', 'Does' and 'Can'. 
The four stresses also bring out the obsessive exploration of the 
key words: 

YOU know and do not know, what it is to act or suffer. 
You know and do not know, that action is suffering, 
And suffering action. (1. 591-3) 

The metre fits question, statement and then the dismissive catalo-
gue of the Tempters in chorus: 

The Catherine wheel, the pantomime cat. 
The prizes given at the children's party, 
The pfize awarded for the English Essay, 
The sch6lar's degree, the statesman's decoration. (I. 607-10) 

Thomas's quandary is described in lines 584-90. Must his spirit-
ual ambition lead to sin? It leads into his moments of maximum 
weakness and vulnerability. Lines 591-9 show how the repetition 
of his own words (208-17) intensifies the surprise, and in the 
repetition the tone changes from confidence to confusion, from 
bold resolution to awareness of sinful error. 
The central emphasis here is upon the fixed implacability of 
fate; Thomas has merely to succumb to a pre-ordained destiny. 
Thomas's more positive phrase 'for the pattern is the action/ And 
the suffering' is omitted by the Fourth Tempter. An act under-
taken for human motives lacks moral certainties; an act matching 
God's will resolves problems of good and evil. Thomas is in danger 
of acting to make the Wheel turn to his desires instead of allowing 
God at the 'still centre' to provide the motive power. In lines 600-3 

the lengthening lines convey a steadily intensifying disquiet, and 
the imagery portrays a reversal of the natural order. On this 
occasion the Chorus act as a prologue to a combined sequence 
involving all three groups outside Thomas himself. Lines 604-18 
show the Tempters reflecting criticism of Thomas's rejection of 
worldly rewards; life is celebrated as a disappointment. Thomas 
seeks to rise above the world of transitory satisfactions, and the 
Tempters offer us images of rewards giving less than they prom-
ised. The arbitrary list makes them seem trivial, and the items 
are linked by rhymes and echoes, 'Cathi cat' and repeated 'prizes'. 
The Tempters misinterpret Thomas's silence and wrongly anti-
cipate his succumbing to the Fourth Temptation, 'Lost in the 
wonder of his own greatness'. 
The Tempters' own chorus is followed by the Chorus's growing 
agitation. Thomas's isolation is emphasised by the combination of 
Tempters, Priests and Chorus alternately expressing menace and 
doubt. Thomas alone is prepared for a decision, and at the 
moment the Chorus are still in the situation of begging Thomas to 
save himself, he has a new confidence: 'Now is my way clear'. The 
Chorus sense the danger but cannot find the cause of cure. They 
prefer to go on 'Living and partly living.' 

6 CRITICAL RECEPTION 

Some early reviews were welcoming; others were dismissive. 
Rayner Heppenstall liked several things: the realistic presentation 
of the Devil, the super-Shavian purgative humour, and three or 
four pieces of superb liturgical incantation. The Times Literary 
Supplement considered the play a successful combination and 
stressed its ritualistic aspects without ever admitting it had theat-
rical potential: 'This is his most unified writing. He has admirably 
brought to maturity his long experimenting for a dramatic style, 
the chief merit of which lies in his writing for a chorus.' Others 
thought it was a clever combination but felt it was cold and 
academic. Mark Van Doren considered it 'thin' too, because he 
claimed theology always made for 'thin' drama, but saw the play as 
a masterpiece full of ironies. Ashley Dukes and friends were 
concerned to encourage the growth of a poetic drama, and noted 
the 180 Mercury Theatre performances and the fact that one in 
twenty from the audiences actually bought the text. In fact, most 
of those in favour of the play saw it as the forerunner of a new kind 
of drama. Michael Roberts saw Thomas as the successful mediator 
between sainthood and the audience as Eliot intended. 
Contrary critics tended to look for 'dramatic faults'. John Crowe 
Ransom, for instance, thought Eliot should have done without 
prose, and pointed to the naming of the Knights after their 
namelessness as an error. Michael Sayers led a more formidable 
opposition, dismissing the 'desiccated' poetry, the 'static exhibi-
tion' of the action, and its content which 'repudiates all the 
popular values in life and theatre of our time'. Kenneth Allott, in 
reviewing The Dog Beneath the Skin, comically forecast The 

Family Reunion without realising it by describing Murder in the 
Cathedral as 'country house charades performed by elderly rheu-
matic folk'. The strength of Allott's animosity was surprising 
considering the evident impact of the play upon early audiences. 
More specific charges concerned the supposed 'undramatic' quali-
ties of the play. Horace Gregory described the action as 'abruptly 
frozen in mid-air', while Louis MacNeice felt it was only 'nearly a 
play' because 'it is a foregone conclusion and a foregone conclu-
sion is not dramatic'. These criticisms tend to ignore the play's 
novelty in form and to demand of it qualities which are to be found 
in other kinds of plays. Eliot's Christian stance was unacceptable 
to some critics, although an inability to share an author's belief 
ought not to lead to uncritical rejection of a play. 
Carping criticism continued in the post-war period following 
years of successful production. John Middleton Murry in 1956 was 
one of the few to see no contemporary relevance in the play, 
claiming it was too far from the human condition. Francis Fer-
gusson was similarly critical of Eliot's remoteness from everyday 
life, although the American Federal Theater production proved to 
him that the play could be 'very effective theatrically'. Eric 
Bentley ruefully observed that it was 'almost ostentatiously stage-
worthy', and J. C. Trewin seemed an equally reluctant convert: 'In 
the theatre it can grow upon one.' 

Steadily, however, the play's regular appearance in the national 
repertoire further established its reputation, and Raymond Wil-
liams has pinpointed the nature of its success: 'It has a complete-
ness which springs from the perfect matching of material and 
form.' As a forerunner of a great new dramatic movement it may 
have been a disappointment to Eliot's faithful producer, E. Martin 
Browne, who nevertheless saw it as 'the one acknowledged 
masterpiece to have come out of the modern verse-play revival'. 
The reputation of the play seems stable now, and it is frequently 
revived. The majority view appears to be that Eliot matched form 
to theme and occasion, that he created something unique, and that 
the play is his theatrical masterpiece. Contrary views attacking the 
'faulty' or 'undramatic' form of the play, asserting that it does not 
fit the profiles of established dramatic forms, that because most of 
the conflict in Part I is internalised there is no action, or that the 
use of prose shows that the poet could not keep up the poetry all of 
the time, lack critical force. 

Eliot was only too aware himself of the remoteness from 
contemporary experience of concepts like martyrdom, sin and 
divine grace. The play purports to define these ideas for us afresh, 
and continuing productions show that people are still eager to 
experience the dramatisation of those definitions. 

7 THE MODERN VERSE 

MOVEMENT 

The impetus towards a modern verse drama grew out of two 
approaches to the solution of contemporary problems; one was 
political and the other was religious. Plays with a pre-war political 
message and Eliot's Sweeney Agonistes owed much to European 
expressionism, a movement critical of the existing social order, 
and more concerned to explore psychological states than to 
portray life realistically. Eliot's plays from The Rock onwards and 
the religious verse-plays by other poets looked more to English 
forms as models. 
Modern verse dramatists saw it as their task to theorise about 
the form, to create viable pieces for theatrical production, and to 
encourage an audience for their drama. An intense discussion in 
literary magazines preceded the appearance of Murder in the 
Cathedral. The major problem identified by most poet-dramatists 
was the language; modern verse drama had to have the right sort 
of speech. Others urged either that action was of prime impor-
tance or that it was wrong to worry about there being too much 
imagery or too great a dependence upon blank verse. The main 
drift of the supportive debate was the notion that prose as a 
medium in naturalistic drama limits expression and subtlety. Most 
poet-dramatists agreed that poetry had not to be mere decoration, 
and that it was wrong if the listener dwelt upon the poetry. The 
first important achievement was to make the audience respond to 
the action and to the characters through the poetry. Further, both 
religious and political poet-dramatists saw the medium as capable 
of exploring profounder levels of human experience. 

Eliot was both pioneer and the 'leader' of the movement. His 
contribution was the most substantial and enduring. From Swee-
ney Agonistes to The Elder Statesman Eliot's effort spanned thirty 
years. W. H. Auden proceeded on a parallel path, combining with 
Christopher Isherwood to write several plays, the best known of 
which, The Ascent of F6, was considered one of the progeny of 
Murder in the Cathedral, although it explored political and social 
awareness rather than a religious dilemma. 
Christopher Fry was the only poet-dramatist to equal Eliot's 
output, both pre-war and post-war and, for a time, to match his 
success, notably with his comedies of the late forties like The 
Lady's Not For Burning. Eliot's success in Murder in the Cathedral 
encouraged derivative works inspired by a Christian message, like 
Ronald Duncan's This Way to the Tomb, but Fry's deliberate 
display or pyrotechnic language was a departure from Eliot's 
post-war search for a less 'poetic' verse. The most successful play 
of this later Eliot period was The Cocktail Party. 
Murder in the Cathedral did not solve the general problems of 
writing a modern verse drama (see sections 1.2 and 1.4), but 
neither did its successors, because in the fifties British drama 
changed direction towards a more prosaic realism, exploring 
'kitchen sink' themes and social commitment. But despite changes 
in theatrical fashion both Murder in the Cathedral and The 
Cocktail Party enjoy continued revivals. 

REVISION QUESTIONS 

1. 
Each part of Murder in the Cathedral deals with a different 
kind of action. Which action is more 'real' or more important 
to the play? 
2. 
'The greatest success in Murder in the Cathedral lies in its 
Choruses, where Eliot provided the best poetry.' Discuss. 
3. 
Discuss Eliot's presentation of martyrdom and martyr in 
Murder in the Cathedral. 
4. 
'Who killed the Archbishop?' Discuss the dramatic effective-
ness and significance of the Knights' Apology after the 
murder. 
5. 
Discuss the view that Becket is more successful as a vehicle of 
the author's ideas than as a character. 
6. 
Eliot stated that religious plays had to provide 'ordinary 
dramatic interest'. To what extent does Murder in the Cath-
edral combine both religious and 'ordinary dramatic interest' 
successfully? 
7. 
Eliot claimed that the use of poetry in drama could be 
justified only if it achieved more than prose. What positive 
functions does the poetry have in Murder in the Cathedral? 
8. 
What methods does Eliot use to make the twelfth century 
relevant to the twentieth? 
9. 
Early critics saw Murder in the Cathedral as a modern 
tragedy. In what ways does the play conform to your idea of a 
tragedy? 

10. 
Show how Eliot uses a variety of dramatic techniques in the 
presentation of his themes in Murder in the Cathedral. 

11. 
Discuss the view that Thomas is the only developed character 
in Murder in the Cathedral. 
12. 
Critics have disagreed about the success of Murder in the 
Cathedral as a drama. What is your own view? 

FURTHER READING 

T. S. Eliot 

'The Possibility of a Poetic Drama', The Sacred Wood (1920). 
'A Dialogue on Dramatic Poetry' (1928), Selected Essays (1932). 
'Poetry and Drama' (1951), On Poetry and Poets (1957). 

Critical works 

Browne, E. Martin (1969), The Making of T. S. Eliot's Plays 
(Cambridge University Press, London, pp. 34-89). 
Gardner, Helen (1949), 'The Language of Drama', The Art of T. 
S. Eliot (Cresset, London, pp. 133-9). 
Hinchliffe, A. P. (1985), 'Murder in the Cathedral', T. S. Eliot: 
Plays (Macmillan Casebook, London, pp. 88-117). 
Jones, D. E. (1960), The Plays of T. S. Eliot (Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, London, pp. 50-81). 

Matthiessen, F. 0. (1958), The Achievement of T. S. Eliot (Oxford 

University Press, London, pp. 162-5, 171-4). 

Pickering, K. (1985), 'Murder in the Cathedral', Drama in the 
Cathedral (Churchman, Worthing, pp. 178-95). 
Smith, Carol H. (1963), 'The Rock and Murder in the Cathedral', 
T. S. Eliot's Dramatic Theory and Practice (Oxford University 
Press, London, pp. 76-111). 
Weales, Gerald (1961), 'T. S. Eliot and Christopher Fry', Religion 
in Modern English Drama (University of Pennsylvania Press, 
Philadelphia, pp. 183-225). 

Mastering English Literature 
Richard Gill 

Mastering English Literature will help readers both to enjoy 
English Literature and to be successful in 'O' levels, 'A' levels 
and. other public exams. It is an introduction to the study of 
poetry, novels and drama which helps the reader in four ways -
by providing ways of approaching literature, by giving examples 
and practice exercises, by offering hints on how to write about 
literature, and by the author's own evident enthusiasm for the 
subject. With extracts from more than 200 texts, this is an 
enjoyable account of how to get the maximum satisfaction out 
of reading, whether it be for formal examinations or simply 
for pleasure. 

Work Out English Literature ('A' level) 
S.H. Burton 

This book familiarises 'A' level English Literature candidates 
with every kind of test which they are likely to encounter. 
Suggested answers are worked out step by step and accom-
panied by full author's commentary. The book helps students 
to clarify their aims and establish techniques and standards so 
that they can make appropriate responses to similar questions 
when the examination pressures are on. It opens up fresh ways 
of looking at the full range of set texts, authors and critical 
judgements and motivates students to know more of these 
matters. 

Also fronl l\1acnlillan 

CASEBOOK SERIES 

The Macmillan Casebook series brings together the best of modern 
criticism with a selection of early reviews and comments. Each Casebook 
charts the development of opinion on a play, poem, or novel, or on a 
literary genre, from its first appearance to the present day. 

GENERAL IBEMES 

COMEDY: DEVELOPMENTS IN 
CRITICISM 
D. J. Palmer 

DRAMA CRITICISM: 
DEVELOPMENTS SINCE IBSEN 
A. J. Hinchliffe 

THE ENGLISH NOVEL: 
DEVELOPMENTS IN CRITICISM 
SINCE HENRY JAMES 
Stephen Hazell 

THE LANGUAGE OF LITERATURE 
N. Page 

THE PASTORAL MODE 
Bryan Loughrey 

THE ROMANTIC IMAGINATION 
J. S. Hill 

TRAGEDY: DEVELOPMENTS IN 
CRITICISM 
R. P. Draper 

POETRY 

WILLIAM BLAKE: SONGS OF 
INNOCENCE AND EXPERIENCE 
Margaret Bottrall 

BROWNING: MEN AND WOMEN 
AND OTHER POEMS 
J. R. Watson 

BYRON: CHILDE HAROLD'S 
PILGRIMAGE AND DON JUAN 
John Jump 

CHAUCER: THE CANTERBURY 
TALES 
J. J. Anderson 

COLERIDGE: THE ANCIENT 
MARINER AND OTHER POEMS 
A. R. Jones and W. Tydeman 

DONNE: SONGS AND SONETS 
Julian Lovelock 

T. S. ELIOT: FOUR QUARTETS 
Bernard Bergonzi 

T. S. ELIOT: PRUFROCK, 
GERONTION, ASH WEDNESDAY 
AND OTHER POEMS 
B. C. Southam 

T. S. ELIOT: THE WASTELAND 
C. B. Cox and A. J. Hinchliffe 

ELIZABETHAN POETRY: LYRICAL 

1AND NARRATIVE 
Gerald Hammond 

THOMAS HARDY: POEMS 
J. Gibson and T. Johnson 

GERALD MANLEY HOPKINS: 
POEMS 
Margaret Bottrall 

KEATS: ODES 
G. S. Fraser 

KEATS: THE NARRATIVE POEMS 
J. S. Hill 

MARVELL: POEMS 
Arthur Pollard 

THE METAPHYSICAL POETS 
Gerald Hammond 

MILTON: PARADISE LOST 
A. E. Dyson and Julian Lovelock 

POETRY OF THE FIRST WORLD 
WAR 
Dominic Hibberd 

ALEXANDERPOPE:THERAPEOF 
THE LOCK 
John Dixon Hunt 

SHELLEY: SHORTER POEMS & 
LYRICS 
Patrick Swinden 

SPENSER: THE FAERIE QUEEN 
Peter Bayley 

TENNYSON: IN MEMORIAM 
John Dixon Hunt 

THIRTIES POETS: 'THE AUDEN 
GROUP' 
Ronald Carter 

WORDSWORTH: LYRICAL 
BALLADS 
A. R. Jones and W. Tydeman 

WORDSWORTH: THE PRELUDE 
W. J. Harvey and R. Gravil 

W. B. YEATS: POEMS 1919-1935 
E. Cullingford 

W. B. YEATS: LAST POEMS 
Jon Stallworthy 

IBE NOVEL AND PROSE 

JANE AUSTEN: EMMA 
David Lodge 

JANE AUSTEN: NORTHANGER 
ABBEY AND PERSUASION 
B. C. Southam 

JANE AUSTEN: SENSE AND 
SENSIBILITY, PRIDE AND 
PREJUDICE AND MANSFIELD 
PARK 
B. C. Southam 

CHARLOTTE BRONTE: JANE EYRE 
AND VILLETTE 
Miriam Allott 

EMILY BRONTE·: WUTHERING 
HEIGHTS 
Miriam Allott 

BUNYAN: THE PILGRIM'S 
PROGRESS 
R. Sharrock 

CONRAD: HEART OF DARKNESS, 
NOSTROMO AND UNDER 
WESTERN EYES 
C.B.Cox 

CONRAD: THE SECRET AGENT 
Ian Watt 

CHARLES DICKENS: BLEAK 
HOUSE 
A. E. Dyson 

CHARLES DICKENS: DOMBEY 
AND SON AND LITTLE DORR ITT 
Alan Shelston 

CHARLES DICKENS: HARD TIMES, 
GREAT EXPECTATIONS AND OUR 
MUTUAL FRIEND 
N. Page 

GEORGE ELIOT: MIDDLEMARCH 
Patrick Swinden 

GEORGE ELIOT: THE Ml LL ON 
THE FLOSS AND SI LAS MARNER 
R. P. Draper 

HENRY FIELDING: TOM JONES 
Neil Compton 

E. M. FORSTER: A PASSAGE TO 
INDIA 
Malcolm Bradbury 

HARDY: THE TRAGIC NOVELS 
R. P. Draper 

HENRY JAMES: WASHINGTON 
SQUARE AND THE PORTRAIT OF 
A LADY 
Alan Shelston 

JAMES JOYCE: DUBLINERS AND A 
PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A 
YOUNG MAN 
Morris Beja 

D. H. LAWRENCE: THE RAINBOW 
AND WOMEN IN LOVE 
Colin Clarke 

D. H. LAWRENCE: SONS AND 
LOVERS 
Gamini Salgado 

SWIFT: GULLIVER'S TRAVELS 
Richard Gravil 

THACKERAY: VANITY FAIR 
Arthur Pollard 

TROLLOPE: THE BARSETSHIRE 
NOVELS 
T. Bareham 

VIRGINIA WOOLF: TO THE 
LIGHTHOUSE 
Morris Beja 

DRAMA 

CONGREVE: COMEDIES 
Patrick Lyons 

T. S. ELIOT: PLAYS 
Arnold P. Hinchliffe 

JONSON: EVERY MAN IN HIS 
HUMOUR AND THE ALCHEMIST 
R. V. Holdsworth 

JONSON: VOLPONE 
J. A. Barish 

MARLOWE: DR FAUSTUS 
John Jump 

MARLOWE: TAMBURLAINE. 
EDWARD II AND THE JEW OF 
MALTA 
John Russell Brown 

MEDIEVAL ENGLISH DRAMA 
Peter Happe 

O'CASEY: JUNO AND THE 
PAYCOCK, THE PLOUGH AND THE 
STARS AND THE SHADOW OF A 
GUNMAN 
R. Ayling 

JOHN OSBORNE: LOOK BACK IN 
ANGER 
John Russell Taylor 

WEBSTER: THE WHITE DEVIL AND 
THE DUCHESS OF MALFI 
R. V. Holdsworth 

WILDE: COMEDIES 
W. Tydeman 

SHAKESPEARE 

SHAKESPEARE: ANTONY AND 
CLEOPATRA 
John Russell Brown 

SHAKESPEARE: CORIOLANUS 
B. A. Brockman 

SHAKESPEARE: HAMLET 
John Jump 

SHAKESPEARE: HENRY IV PARTS 
I AND II 
G. K. Hunter 

SHAKESPEARE: HENRY V 
Michael Quinn 

SHAKESPEARE: JULIUS CAESAR 
Peter Ure 

SHAKESPEARE: KING LEAR 
Frank Kermode 

SHAKESPEARE: MACBETH 
John Wain 

SHAKESPEARE: MEASURE FOR 
MEASURE 
G. K. Stead 

SHAKESPEARE: THE MERCHANT 
OF VENICE 
John Wilders 

SHAKESPEARE: A MIDSUMMER 
NIGHT'S DREAM 
A. W. Price 

SHAKESPEARE: MUCH ADO 
ABOUT NOTHING AND AS YOU 
LIKE IT 
John Russell Brown 

SHAKESPEARE: OTHELLO 
John Wain 

SHAKESPEARE: RICHARD II 
N. Brooke 

SHAKESPEARE: THE SONNETS 
Peter Jones 

SHAKESPEARE: THE TEMPEST 
D. J. Palmer 

SHAKESPEARE: TROILUS AND 
CRESSIDA 
Priscilla Martin 

SHAKESPEARE: TWELFTH NIGHT 
D. J. Palmer 

SHAKESPEARE: THE WINTER'S 
TALE 
Kenneth Muir 

MACMILLAN STUDENTS' NOVELS 

General Editor: JAMES GIBSON 

The Macmillan Students' Novels are low-priced, new editions of major 
classics, aimed at the first examination candidate. Each volume contains: 

* 
enough explanation and background material to make the novels 
accessible - and rewarding - to pupils with little or no previous 
knowledge of the author or the literary period; 

* 
detailed notes elucidate matters of vocabulary, interpretation and 
historical background; 

* 
eight pages of plates comprising facsimiles of manuscripts and 
early editions, portraits of the author and photographs of the 
geographical setting of the novels. 

JANE AUSTEN: MANSFIELD PARK 
Editor: Richard Wirdnam 

JANEAUSTEN:NORTHANGER 
ABBEY 
Editor: Raymond Wilson 

JANE AUSTEN: PRIDE AND 
PREJUDICE 
Editor: Raymond Wilson 

JANE AUSTEN: SENSE AND 
SENSIBILITY 
Editor: Raymond Wilson 

JANE AUSTEN: PERSUASION 
Editor: Richard Wirdnam 

CHARLOTTE BRONTE: JANE EYRE 
Editor: F. B. Pinion 

EMILY BRONTE: WUTHERING 
HEIGHTS 
Editor: Graham Handley 

JOSEPH CONRAD: LORD JIM 
Editor: Peter Hollindale 

CHARLES DICKENS: GREAT 
EXPECTATIONS 
Editor: James Gibson 

CHARLES DICKENS: HARD TIMES 
Editor: James Gibson 

CHARLES DICKENS: OLIVER 
TWIST 
Editor: Guy Williams 

CHARLES DICKENS: A TALE OF 
TWO CITIES 
Editor: James Gibson 

GEORGE ELIOT: SILAS MARNER 
Editor: Norman Howlings 

GEORGE ELIOT: THE MILL ON 
THE FLOSS 
Editor: Graham Handley 

D. H. LAWRENCE: SONS AND 
LOVERS 
Editor: James Gibson 

D. H. LAWRENCE: THE RAINBOW 
Editor: James Gibson 

MARK TWAIN: HUCKLEBERRY 
FINN 
Editor: Christopher Parry 

THE MACMILLAN SHAKESPEARE 

General Editor: PETER HOLLINDALE 
Advisory Editor: PHILIP BROCKBANK 

The Macmillan Shakespeare features: 

* clear and uncluttered texts with modernised punctuation and 

spelling wherever possible; 

* full explanatory notes printed on the page facing the relevant text 
for ease of reference; 
* stimulating introductions which concentrate on content, dramatic 
effect, character and imagery, rather than mere dates and sources. 
Above all, The Macmillan Shakespeare treats each play as a work for 
the theatre which can also be enjoyed on the page. 

CORIOLANUS 
Editor: Tony Parr 

THE WINTER'S TALE 
Editor: Christopher Parry 

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 
Editor: Jan McKeith 

RICHARD II 
Editor: Richard Adams 

RICHARD Ill 
Editor: Richard Adams 

HENRY IV, PART I 
Editor: Peter Hollindale 

HENRY IV, PART II 
Editor: Tony Parr 

HENRY V 
Editor: Brian Phythian 

AS YOU LIKE IT 
Editor: Peter Hollindale 

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM 
Editor: Norman Sanders 

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 
Editor: Christopher Parry 

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW 
Editor: Robin Hood 

TWELFTH NIGHT 
Editor: E. A. J. Honigmann 

THE TEMPES7 
Editor: A. C. Spearing 

ROMEO AND JULIET 
Editor: James Gibson 

JULIUS CAESAR 
Editor: D. R. Elloway 

MACBETH 
Editor: D. R. Elloway 

HAMLET 
Editor: Nigel Alexander 

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA 
Editors: Jan McKeith and 
Richard Adams 

OTHELLO 
Editors: Celia Hilton and R. T. Jones 

KING LEAR 
Editor: Philip Edwards 

MACMILLAN SHAKESPEARE VIDEO WORKSHOPS 

DAVID WHITWORTH 

Three unique book and video packages, each examining a particular 
aspect of Shakespeare's work; tragedy, comedy and the Roman plays. 
Designed for all students of Shakespeare, each package assumes no 
previous knowledge of the plays and can serve as a useful introduction 
to Shakespeare for 'O' and 'A' level candidates as well as for students at 
colleges and institutes of further, higher and adult education. 

The material is based on the New Shakespeare Company Workshops at 
the Roundhouse, adapted and extended for television. By combining 
the resources of television and a small theatre company, this exploration 
of Shakespeare's plays offers insights into varied interpretations, 
presentation, styles of acting as well as useful background information. 

While being no substitute for seeing the whole plays in performance, it 
is envisaged that these video cassettes will impart something of the 
original excitement of the theatrical experience, and serve as a welcome 
complement to textual analysis leading to an enriched and broader view 
of the plays. 

Each package consists of: 
* the Macmillan Shakespeare editions of the plays concerned; 
* a video cassette available in VHS or Beta; 
* a leaflet of teacher's notes. 

THE TORTURED MIND 
looks at the four tragedies Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth and King Lear. 

THE COMIC SPIRIT 
examines the comedies Much Ado About Nothing, Twelfth Night, 
A Midsummer Night's Dream, and As You Like It. 

THE ROMAN PLAYS 
Features Julius Caesar, Antony and Cleopatra 
and Coriolanus 

