Table of Contents

 
Title Page
Copyright Page
Introduction
 
The Tragedy of Othello the Moor of Venice
 
FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE
FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE

THE PELICAN SHAKESPEARE GENERAL EDITORS

Edmund Kean (1787-1833) as a diabolical Othello, one of his greatest roles.
He also played a superlatively villainous Iago, and his final performance in

1833 was as Othello to the Iago of his equally famous son Charles.

(Engraving after a drawing by J. W. Gear.)

PENGUIN BOOKS

Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, 

New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. 
Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, 

London W8 5TZ, England 

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, 

Victoria, Australia 

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, 

Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2 

Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, 

Auckland 10, New Zealand

Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England

by Gerald Eades Bentley published in the 

United States of America in Penguin Books 1958 

Revised edition published 1970 

This new edition edited by Russ McDonald published 2001

Copyright © Penguin Books Inc., 1958, 1970

Copyright © Penguin Putnam Inc., 2001 

All rights reserved

Publisher’s Note

IT IS ALMOST half a century since the first volumes of the Pelican
Shakespeare appeared under the general editorship of Alfred Harbage. The
fact that a new edition, rather than simply a revision, has been undertaken
reflects the profound changes textual and critical studies of Shakespeare have
undergone in the past twenty years. For the new Pelican series, the texts of the
plays and poems have been thoroughly revised in accordance with recent
scholarship, and in some cases have been entirely reedited. New introductions
and notes have been provided in all the volumes. But the new Shakespeare is
also designed as a successor to the original series; the previous editions have
been taken into account, and the advice of the previous editors has been
solicited where it was feasible to do so.

Certain textual features of the new Pelican Shakespeare should be

particularly noted. All lines are numbered that contain a word, phrase, or
allusion explained in the glossarial notes. In addition, for convenience, every
tenth line is also numbered, in italics when no annotation is indicated. The
intrusive and often inaccurate place headings inserted by early editors are
omitted (as is becoming standard practice), but for the convenience of those
who miss them, an indication of locale now appears as the first item in the
annotation of each scene.

In the interest of both elegance and utility, each speech prefix is set in a

separate line when the speaker’s lines are in verse, except when those words
form the second half of a verse line. Thus the verse form of the speech is kept
visually intact. What is printed as verse and what is printed as prose has, in
general, the authority of the original texts. Departures from the original texts
in this regard have only the authority of editorial tradition and the judgment of
the Pelican editors; and, in a few instances, are admittedly arbitrary.

The Theatrical World

ECONOMIC REALITIES determined the theatrical world in which
Shakespeare’s plays were written, performed, and received. For centuries in
England, the primary theatrical tradition was nonprofessional. Craft guilds (or
“mysteries”) provided religious drama - mystery plays - as part of the
celebration of religious and civic festivals, and schools and universities staged
classical and neoclassical drama in both Latin and English as part of their
curricula. In these forms, drama was established and socially acceptable.
Professional theater, in contrast, existed on the margins of society. The acting
companies were itinerant; playhouses could be any available space - the great
halls of the aristocracy, town squares, civic halls, inn yards, fair booths, or
open fields - and income was sporadic, dependent on the passing of the hat or
on the bounty of local patrons. The actors, moreover, were considered little
better than vagabonds, constantly in danger of arrest or expulsion.

In the late 1560s and 1570s, however, English professional theater began to

gain respectability. Wealthy aristocrats fond of drama - the Lord Admiral, for
example, or the Lord Chamberlain - took acting companies under their
protection so that the players technically became members of their households
and were no longer subject to arrest as homeless or masterless men.
Permanent theaters were first built at this time as well, allowing the
companies to control and charge for entry to their performances.

Shakespeare’s livelihood, and the stunning artistic explosion in which he

participated, depended on pragmatic and architectural effort. Professional
theater requires ways to restrict access to its offerings; if it does not, and
admission fees cannot be charged, the actors do not get paid, the costumes go
to a pawnbroker, and there is no such thing as a professional, ongoing
theatrical tradition. The answer to that economic need arrived in the late
1560s and 1570s with the creation of the so-called public or amphitheater
playhouse. Recent discoveries indicate that the precursor of the Globe
playhouse in London (where Shakespeare’s mature plays were presented) and
the Rose theater (which presented Christopher Marlowe’s plays and some of
Shakespeare’s earliest ones) was the Red Lion theater of 1567.
Archaeological studies of the foundations of the Rose and Globe theaters have
revealed that the open-air theater of the 1590s and later was probably a
polygonal building with fourteen to twenty or twenty-four sides, multistoried,
from 75 to 100 feet in diameter, with a raised, partly covered “thrust” stage
that projected into a group of standing patrons, or “groundlings,” and a
covered gallery, seating up to 2,500 or more (very crowded) spectators.

These theaters might have been about half full on any given day, though the

audiences were larger on holidays or when a play was advertised, as old and
new were, through printed playbills posted around London. The metropolitan
area’s late-Tudor, early-Stuart population (circa 1590-1620) has been
estimated at about 150,000 to 250,000. It has been supposed that in the mid-
1590s there were about 15,000 spectators per week at the public theaters;
thus, as many as 10 percent of the local population went to the theater
regularly. Consequently, the theaters’ repertories - the plays available for this
experienced and frequent audience - had to change often: in the month
between September 15 and October 15, 1595, for instance, the Lord
Admiral’s Men performed twenty-eight times in eighteen different plays.

Since natural light illuminated the amphitheaters’ stages, performances

began between noon and two o’clock and ran without a break for two or three
hours. They often concluded with a jig, a fencing display, or some other
nondramatic exhibition. Weather conditions determined the season for the
amphitheaters: plays were performed every day (including Sundays,
sometimes, to clerical dismay) except during Lent - the forty days before
Easter - or periods of plague, or sometimes during the summer months when
law courts were not in session and the most affluent members of the audience
were not in London.

To a modern theatergoer, an amphitheater stage like that of the Rose or

Globe would appear an unfamiliar mixture of plainness and elaborate
decoration. Much of the structure was carved or painted, sometimes to imitate
marble; elsewhere, as under the canopy projecting over the stage, to represent
the stars and the zodiac. Appropriate painted canvas pictures (of Jerusalem,
for example, if the play was set in that city) were apparently hung on the wall
behind the acting area, and tragedies were accompanied by black hangings,
presumably something like crepe festoons or bunting. Although these theaters
did not employ what we would call scenery, early modern spectators saw
numerous large props, such as the “bar” at which a prisoner stood during a
trial, the “mossy bank” where lovers reclined, an arbor for amorous
conversation, a chariot, gallows, tables, trees, beds, thrones, writing desks,
and so forth. Audiences might learn a scene’s location from a sign (reading
“Athens,” for example) carried across the stage (as in Bertolt Brecht’s
twentieth-century productions). Equally captivating (and equally irritating to
the theater’s enemies) were the rich costumes and personal props the actors
used: the most valuable items in the surviving theatrical inventories are the
swords, gowns, robes, crowns, and other items worn or carried by the
performers.

Magic appealed to Shakespeare’s audiences as much as it does to us today,

and the theater exploited many deceptive and spectacular devices. A winch in
the loft above the stage, called “the heavens,” could lower and raise actors
playing gods, goddesses, and other supernatural figures to and from the main
acting area, just as one or more trap-doors permitted entrances and exits to
and from the area, called “hell,” beneath the stage. Actors wore elementary
makeup such as wigs, false beards, and face paint, and they employed pig’s
bladders filled with animal blood to make wounds seem more real. They had
rudimentary but effective ways of pretending to behead or hang a person.
Supernumeraries (stagehands or actors not needed in a particular scene) could
make thunder sounds (by shaking a metal sheet or rolling an iron ball down a
chute) and show lightning (by blowing inflammable resin through tubes into a
flame). Elaborate fireworks enhanced the effects of dragons flying through
the air or imitated such celestial phenomena as comets, shooting stars, and
multiple suns. Horses’ hoofbeats, bells (located perhaps in the tower above
the stage), trumpets and drums, clocks, cannon shots and gunshots, and the
like were common sound effects. And the music of viols, cornets, oboes, and
recorders was a regular feature of theatrical performances.

For two relatively brief spans, from the late 1570s to 1590 and from 1599

to 1614, the amphitheaters competed with the so-called private, or indoor,
theaters, which originated as, or later represented themselves as, educational
institutions training boys as singers for church services and court
performances. These indoor theaters had two features that were distinct from
the amphitheaters’: their personnel and their playing spaces. The
amphitheaters’ adult companies included both adult men, who played the
male roles, and boys, who played the female roles; the private, or indoor,
theater companies, on the other hand, were entirely composed of boys aged
about 8 to 16, who were, or could pretend to be, candidates for singers in a
church or a royal boys’ choir. (Until 1660, professional theatrical companies
included no women.) The playing space would appear much more familiar to
modern audiences than the long-vanished amphitheaters; the later indoor
theaters were, in fact, the ancestors of the typical modern theater. They were
enclosed spaces, usually rectangular, with the stage filling one end of the
rectangle and the audience arrayed in seats or benches across (and sometimes
lining) the building’s longer axis. These spaces staged plays less frequently
than the public theaters (perhaps only once a week) and held far fewer
spectators than the amphitheaters: about 200 to 600, as opposed to 2,500 or
more. Fewer patrons mean a smaller gross income, unless each pays more.
Not surprisingly, then, private theaters charged higher prices than the
amphitheaters, probably sixpence, as opposed to a penny for the cheapest

entry.

Protected from the weather, the indoor theaters presented plays later in the

day than the amphitheaters, and used artificial illumination - candles in
sconces or candelabra. But candles melt, and need replacing, snuffing, and
trimming, and these practical requirements may have been part of the reason
the indoor theaters introduced breaks in the performance, the intermission so
dear to the heart of theatergoers and to the pocketbooks of theater
concessionaires ever since. Whether motivated by the need to tend to the
candles or by the entrepreneurs’ wishing to sell oranges and liquor, or both,
the indoor theaters eventually established the modern convention of the
noncontinuous performance. In the early modern “private” theater, musical
performances apparently filled the intermissions, which in Stuart theater
jargon seem to have been called “acts.”

At the end of the first decade of the seventeenth century, the distinction

between public amphitheaters and private indoor companies ceased. For
various cultural, political, and economic reasons, individual companies gained
control of both the public, open-air theaters and the indoor ones, and
companies mixing adult men and boys took over the formerly “private”
theaters. Despite the death of the boys’ companies and of their highly
innovative theaters (for which such luminous playwrights as Ben Jonson,
George Chapman, and John Marston wrote), their playing spaces and
conventions had an immense impact on subsequent plays: not merely for the
intervals (which stressed the artistic and architectonic importance of “acts”),
but also because they introduced political and social satire as a popular
dramatic ingredient, even in tragedy, and a wider range of actorly effects,
encouraged by their more intimate playing spaces.

Even the briefest sketch of the Shakespearean theatrical world would be

incomplete without some comment on the social and cultural dimensions of
theaters and playing in the period. In an intensely hierarchical and status-
conscious society, professional actors and their ventures had hardly any
respectability; as we have indicated, to protect themselves against laws
designed to curb vagabondage and the increase of masterless men, actors
resorted to the near-fiction that they were the servants of noble masters, and
wore their distinctive livery. Hence the company for which Shakespeare wrote
in the 1590s called itself the Lord Chamberlain’s Men and pretended that the
public, money-getting performances were in fact rehearsals for private
performances before that high court official. From 1598, the Privy Council
had licensed theatrical companies, and after 1603, with the accession of King
James I, the companies gained explicit royal protection, just as the Queen’s

Men had for a time under Queen Elizabeth. The Chamberlain’s Men became
the King’s Men, and the other companies were patronized by the other
members of the royal family.

These designations were legal fictions that half-concealed an important

economic and social development, the evolution away from the theater’s
organization on the model of the guild, a self-regulating confraternity of
individual artisans, into a proto-capitalist organization. Shakespeare’s
company became a joint-stock company, where persons who supplied capital
and, in some cases, such as Shakespeare’s, capital and talent, employed
themselves and others in earning a return on that capital. This development
meant that actors and theater companies were outside both the traditional
guild structures, which required some form of civic or royal charter, and the
feudal household organization of master-and-servant. This anomalous,
maverick social and economic condition made theater companies practically
unruly and potentially even dangerous; consequently, numerous official
bodies - including the London metropolitan and ecclesiastical authorities as
well as, occasionally, the royal court itself - tried, without much success, to
control and even to disband them.

Public officials had good reason to want to close the theaters: they were

attractive nuisances - they drew often riotous crowds, they were always noisy,
and they could be politically offensive and socially insubordinate. Until the
Civil War, however, anti-theatrical forces failed to shut down professional
theater, for many reasons - limited surveillance and few police powers,
tensions or outright hostilities among the agencies that sought to check or
channel theatrical activity, and lack of clear policies for control. Another
reason must have been the theaters’ undeniable popularity. Curtailing any
activity enjoyed by such a substantial percentage of the population was
difficult, as various Roman emperors attempting to limit circuses had learned,
and the Tudor-Stuart audience was not merely large, it was socially diverse
and included women. The prevalence of public entertainment in this period
has been underestimated. In fact, fairs, holidays, games, sporting events, the
equivalent of modern parades, freak shows, and street exhibitions all
abounded, but the theater was the most widely and frequently available
entertainment to which people of every class had access. That fact helps
account both for its quantity and for the fear and anger it aroused.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE OF STRATFORD-UPON-AVON,

GENTLEMAN

Many people have said that we know very little about William Shakespeare’s
life - pinheads and postcards are often mentioned as appropriately tiny
surfaces on which to record the available information. More imaginatively
and perhaps more correctly, Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote, “Shakespeare is the
only biographer of Shakespeare. . . . So far from Shakespeare’s being the least
known, he is the one person in all modern history fully known to us.”

In fact, we know more about Shakespeare’s life than we do about almost

any other English writer’s of his era. His last will and testament (dated March
25, 1616) survives, as do numerous legal contracts and court documents
involving Shakespeare as principal or witness, and parish records in Stratford
and London. Shakespeare appears quite often in official records of King
James’s royal court, and of course Shakespeare’s name appears on numerous
title pages and in the written and recorded words of his literary
contemporaries Robert Greene, Henry Chettle, Francis Meres, John Davies of
Hereford, Ben Jonson, and many others. Indeed, if we make due allowance
for the bloating of modern, run-of-the-mill bureaucratic records, more
information has survived over the past four hundred years about William
Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, than is likely to survive
in the next four hundred years about any reader of these words.

What we do not have are entire categories of information - Shakespeare’s

private letters or diaries, drafts and revisions of poems and plays, critical
prefaces or essays, commendatory verse for other writers’ works, or
instructions guiding his fellow actors in their performances, for instance - that
we imagine would help us understand and appreciate his surviving writings.
For all we know, many such data never existed as written records. Many
literary and theatrical critics, not knowing what might once have existed,
more or less cheerfully accept the situation; some even make a theoretical
virtue of it by claiming that such data are irrelevant to understanding and
interpreting the plays and poems.

So, what do we know about William Shakespeare, the man responsible for

thirty-seven or perhaps more plays, more than 150 sonnets, two lengthy
narrative poems, and some shorter poems?

While many families by the name of Shakespeare (or some variant

spelling) can be identified in the English Midlands as far back as the twelfth
century, it seems likely that the dramatist’s grandfather, Richard, moved to
Snitterfield, a town not far from Stratford-upon-Avon, sometime before 1529.
In Snitterfield, Richard Shakespeare leased farmland from the very wealthy
Robert Arden. By 1552, Richard’s son John had moved to a large house on
Henley Street in Stratford-upon-Avon, the house that stands today as “The

Birthplace.” In Stratford, John Shakespeare traded as a glover, dealt in wool,
and lent money at interest; he also served in a variety of civic posts, including
“High Bailiff,” the municipality’s equivalent of mayor. In 1557, he married
Robert Arden’s youngest daughter, Mary. Mary and John had four sons -
William was the oldest - and four daughters, of whom only Joan outlived her
most celebrated sibling. William was baptized (an event entered in the
Stratford parish church records) on April 26, 1564, and it has become
customary, without any good factual support, to suppose he was born on April
23, which happens to be the feast day of Saint George, patron saint of
England, and is also the date on which he died, in 1616. Shakespeare married
Anne Hathaway in 1582, when he was eighteen and she was twenty-six; their
first child was born five months later. It has been generally assumed that the
marriage was enforced and subsequently unhappy, but these are only
assumptions; it has been estimated, for instance, that up to one third of
Elizabethan brides were pregnant when they married. Anne and William
Shakespeare had three children: Susanna, who married a prominent local
physician, John Hall; and the twins Hamnet, who died young in 1596, and
Judith, who married Thomas Quiney - apparently a rather shady individual.
The name Hamnet was unusual but not unique: he and his twin sister were
named for their godparents, Shakespeare’s neighbors Hamnet and Judith
Sadler. Shakespeare’s father died in 1601 (the year of Hamlet), and Mary
Arden Shakespeare died in 1608 (the year of Coriolanus). William
Shakespeare’s last surviving direct descendant was his granddaughter
Elizabeth Hall, who died in 1670.

Between the birth of the twins in 1585 and a clear reference to Shakespeare

as a practicing London dramatist in Robert Greene’s sensationalizing, satiric
pamphlet, Greene’s Groatsworth of Wit (1592), there is no record of where
William Shakespeare was or what he was doing. These seven so-called lost
years have been imaginatively filled by scholars and other students of
Shakespeare: some think he traveled to Italy, or fought in the Low Countries,
or studied law or medicine, or worked as an apprentice actor/writer, and so on
to even more fanciful possibilities. Whatever the biographical facts for those
“lost” years, Greene’s nasty remarks in 1592 testify to professional envy and
to the fact that Shakespeare already had a successful career in London.
Speaking to his fellow playwrights, Greene warns both generally and
specifically:

supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of
you; and being an absolute Johannes Factotum, is in his own conceit
the only Shake-scene in a country.

Clearly, Shakespeare had achieved both success and reputation in London.

In 1596, upon Shakespeare’s application, the College of Arms granted his
father the now-familiar coat of arms he had taken the first steps to obtain
almost twenty years before, and in 1598, John’s son - now permitted to call
himself “gentleman” - took a 10 percent share in the new Globe playhouse. In
1597, he bought a substantial bourgeois house, called New Place, in Stratford
- the garden remains, but Shakespeare’s house, several times rebuilt, was torn
down in 1759 - and over the next few years Shakespeare spent large sums
buying land and making other investments in the town and its environs.
Though he worked in London, his family remained in Stratford, and he seems
always to have considered Stratford the home he would eventually return to.
Something approaching a disinterested appreciation of Shakespeare’s popular
and professional status appears in Francis Meres’s Palladis Tamia (1598), a
not especially imaginative and perhaps therefore persuasive record of literary
reputations. Reviewing contemporary English writers, Meres lists the titles of
many of Shakespeare’s plays, including one not now known, Love’s Labor’s
Won, and praises his “mellifluous & hony-tongued” “sugred Sonnets,” which
were then circulating in manuscript (they were first collected in 1609). Meres
describes Shakespeare as “one of the best” English playwrights of both
comedy and tragedy. In Remains . . . Concerning Britain (1605), William
Camden - a more authoritative source than the imitative Meres - calls
Shakespeare one of the “most pregnant witts of these our times” and joins him
with such writers as Chapman, Daniel, Jonson, Marston, and Spenser. During
the first decades of the seventeenth century, publishers began to attribute
numerous play quartos, including some non-Shakespearean ones, to
Shakespeare, either by name or initials, and we may assume that they deemed

Shakespeare’s name and supposed authorship, true or false, commercially
attractive.

For the next ten years or so, various records show Shakespeare’s dual

career as playwright and man of the theater in London, and as an important
local figure in Stratford. In 1608-9 his acting company - designated the
“King’s Men” soon after King James had succeeded Queen Elizabeth in 1603
- rented, refurbished, and opened a small interior playing space, the
Blackfriars theater, in London, and Shakespeare was once again listed as a
substantial sharer in the group of proprietors of the playhouse. By May 11,
1612, however, he describes himself as a Stratford resident in a London
lawsuit - an indication that he had withdrawn from day-to-day professional
activity and returned to the town where he had always had his main financial
interests. When Shakespeare bought a substantial residential building in
London, the Blackfriars Gatehouse, close to the theater of the same name, on
March 10, 1613, he is recorded as William Shakespeare “of Stratford upon
Avon in the county of Warwick, gentleman,” and he named several London
residents as the building’s trustees. Still, he continued to participate in
theatrical activity: when the new Earl of Rutland needed an allegorical design
to bear as a shield, or impresa, at the celebration of King James’s Accession
Day, March 24, 1613, the earl’s accountant recorded a payment of 44 shillings
to Shakespeare for the device with its motto.

For the last few years of his life, Shakespeare evidently concentrated his

activities in the town of his birth. Most of the final records concern business
transactions in Stratford, ending with the notation of his death on April 23,
1616, and burial in Holy Trinity Church, Stratford-upon-Avon.

THE QUESTION OF AUTHORSHIP

The history of ascribing Shakespeare’s plays (the poems do not come up so
often) to someone else began, as it continues, peculiarly. The earliest
published claim that someone else wrote Shakespeare’s plays appeared in an
1856 article by Delia Bacon in the American journal Putnam’s Monthly -
although an Englishman, Thomas Wilmot, had shared his doubts in private
(even secretive) conversations with friends near the end of the eighteenth
century. Bacon’s was a sad personal history that ended in madness and
poverty, but the year after her article, she published, with great difficulty and
the bemused assistance of Nathaniel Hawthorne (then United States Consul in
Liverpool, England), her Philosophy of the Plays of Shakspere Unfolded. This
huge, ornately written, confusing farrago is almost unreadable; sometimes its

intents, to say nothing of its arguments, disappear entirely beneath near-
raving, ecstatic writing. Tumbled in with much supposed “philosophy” appear
the claims that Francis Bacon (from whom Delia Bacon eventually claimed
descent), Walter Ralegh, and several other contemporaries of Shakespeare’s
had written the plays. The book had little impact except as a ridiculed
curiosity.

Once proposed, however, the issue gained momentum among people whose

conviction was the greater in proportion to their ignorance of sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century English literature, history, and society. Another American
amateur, Catherine P. Ashmead Windle, made the next influential contribution
to the cause when she published Report to the British Museum (1882),
wherein she promised to open “the Cipher of Francis Bacon,” though what
she mostly offers, in the words of S. Schoenbaum, is “demented allegorizing.”
An entire new cottage industry grew from Windle’s suggestion that the texts
contain hidden, cryptographically discoverable ciphers - “clues” - to their
authorship; and today there are not only books devoted to the putative ciphers,
but also pamphlets, journals, and newsletters.

Although Baconians have led the pack of those seeking a substitute

Shakespeare, in “Shakespeare” Identified (1920), J. Thomas Looney became
the first published “Oxfordian” when he proposed Edward de Vere,
seventeenth earl of Oxford, as the secret author of Shakespeare’s plays. Also
for Oxford and his “authorship” there are today dedicated societies, articles,
journals, and books. Less popular candidates - Queen Elizabeth and
Christopher Marlowe among them - have had adherents, but the movement
seems to have divided into two main contending factions, Baconian and
Oxfordian. (For further details on all the candidates for “Shakespeare,” see S.
Schoenbaum, Shakespeare’s Lives, 2nd ed., 1991.)

The Baconians, the Oxfordians, and supporters of other candidates have

one trait in common - they are snobs. Every pro-Bacon or pro-Oxford tract
sooner or later claims that the historical William Shakespeare of Stratford-
upon-Avon could not have written the plays because he could not have had
the training, the university education, the experience, and indeed the
imagination or background their author supposedly possessed. Only a learned
genius like Bacon or an aristocrat like Oxford could have written such fine
plays. (As it happens, lucky male children of the middle class had access to
better education than most aristocrats in Elizabethan England - and Oxford
was not particularly well educated.) Shakespeare received in the Stratford
grammar school a formal education that would daunt many college graduates
today; and popular rival playwrights such as the very learned Ben Jonson and

George Chapman, both of whom also lacked university training, achieved
great artistic success, without being taken as Bacon or Oxford.

Besides snobbery, one other quality characterizes the authorship

controversy: lack of evidence. A great deal of testimony from Shakespeare’s
time shows that Shakespeare wrote Shakespeare’s plays and that his
contemporaries recognized them as distinctive and distinctly superior. (Some
of that contemporary evidence is collected in E. K. Chambers, William
Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems, 2 vols., 1930.) Since that
testimony comes from Shakespeare’s enemies and theatrical competitors as
well as from his co-workers and from the Elizabethan equivalent of literary
journalists, it seems unlikely that, if any of these sources had known he was a
fraud, they would have failed to record that fact.
 

Books About Shakespeare’s Theater

Useful scholarly studies of theatrical life in Shakespeare’s day include: G. E.
Bentley, The Jacobean and Caroline Stage, 7 vols. (1941-68), and the same
author’s The Professions of Dramatist and Player in Shakespeare’s Time,
1590- 1642 (1986); E. K. Chambers, The Elizabethan Stage, 4 vols. (1923);
R. A. Foakes, Illustrations of the English Stage, 1580-1642 (1985); Andrew
Gurr, The Shakespearean Stage, 3rd ed. (1992), and the same author’s Play-
going in Shakespeare’s London, 2nd ed. (1996); Edwin Nungezer, A
Dictionary of Actors (1929); Carol Chillington Rutter, ed., Documents of the
Rose Playhouse (1984).

Books About Shakespeare’s Life

The 
following 
books 
provide 
scholarly, 
documented 
accounts 
of

Shakespeare’s life: G. E. Bentley, Shakespeare: A Biographical Handbook
(1961); E. K. Chambers, William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and
Problems, 2 vols. (1930); S. Schoenbaum, William Shakespeare: A Compact
Documentary Life (1977); and Shakespeare’s Lives, 2nd ed. (1991), by the
same author. Many scholarly editions of Shakespeare’s complete works print
brief compilations of essential dates and events. References to Shakespeare’s
works up to 1700 are collected in C. M. Ingleby et al., The Shakespeare
Allusion-Book, rev. ed., 2 vols. (1932).

The Texts of Shakespeare

AS FAR AS WE KNOW, only one manuscript conceivably in Shakespeare’s
own hand may (and even this is much disputed) exist: a few pages of a play
called Sir Thomas More, which apparently was never performed. What we do
have, as later readers, performers, scholars, students, are printed texts. The
earliest of these survive in two forms: quartos and folios. Quartos (from the
Latin for “four”) are small books, printed on sheets of paper that were then
folded in fours, to make eight double-sided pages. When these were bound
together, the result was a squarish, eminently portable volume that sold for the
relatively small sum of sixpence (translating in modern terms to about $5.00).
In folios, on the other hand, the sheets are folded only once, in half, producing
large, impressive volumes taller than they are wide. This was the format for
important works of philosophy, science, theology, and literature (the major
precedent for a folio Shakespeare was Ben Jonson’s Works, 1616). The
decision to print the works of a popular playwright in folio is an indication of
how far up on the social scale the theatrical profession had come during
Shakespeare’s lifetime. The Shakespeare folio was an expensive book, selling
for between fifteen and eighteen shillings, depending on the binding (in
modern terms, from about $150 to $180). Twenty Shakespeare plays of the
thirty-seven that survive first appeared in quarto, seventeen of which appeared
during Shakespeare’s lifetime; the rest of the plays are found only in folio.

The First Folio was published in 1623, seven years after Shakespeare’s

death, and was authorized by his fellow actors, the co-owners of the King’s
Men. This publication was certainly a mark of the company’s enormous
respect for Shakespeare; but it was also a way of turning the old plays, most
of which were no longer current in the playhouse, into ready money (the folio
includes only Shakespeare’s plays, not his sonnets or other nondramatic
verse). Whatever the motives behind the publication of the folio, the texts it
preserves constitute the basis for almost all later editions of the playwright’s
works. The texts, however, differ from those of the earlier quartos, sometimes
in minor respects but often significantly - most strikingly in the two texts of
King Lear, but also in important ways in Hamlet, Othello, and Troilus and
Cressida. (The variants are recorded in the textual notes to each play in the
new Pelican series.) The differences in these texts represent, in a sense, the
essence of theater: the texts of plays were initially not intended for
publication. They were scripts, designed for the actors to perform - the
principal life of the play at this period was in performance. And it follows that
in Shakespeare’s theater the playwright typically had no say either in how his

play was performed or in the disposition of his text - he was an employee of
the company. The authoritative figures in the theatrical enterprise were the
shareholders in the company, who were for the most part the major actors.
They decided what plays were to be done; they hired the playwright and often
gave him an outline of the play they wanted him to write. Often, too, the play
was a collaboration: the company would retain a group of writers, and parcel
out the scenes among them. The resulting script was then the property of the
company, and the actors would revise it as they saw fit during the course of
putting it on stage. The resulting text belonged to the company. The
playwright had no rights in it once he had been paid. (This system survives
largely intact in the movie industry, and most of the playwrights of
Shakespeare’s time were as anonymous as most screenwriters are today.) The
script could also, of course, continue to change as the tastes of audiences and
the requirements of the actors changed. Many - perhaps most - plays were
revised when they were reintroduced after any substantial absence from the
repertory, or when they were performed by a company different from the one
that originally commissioned the play.

Shakespeare was an exceptional figure in this world because he was not

only a shareholder and actor in his company, but also its leading playwright -
he was literally his own boss. He had, moreover, little interest in the
publication of his plays, and even those that appeared during his lifetime with
the authorization of the company show no signs of any editorial concern on
the part of the author. Theater was, for Shakespeare, a fluid and supremely
responsive medium - the very opposite of the great classic canonical text that
has embodied his works since 1623.

The very fluidity of the original texts, however, has meant that Shakespeare

has always had to be edited. Here is an example of how problematic the
editorial project inevitably is, a passage from the most famous speech in
Romeo and Juliet, Juliet’s balcony soliloquy beginning “O Romeo, Romeo,
wherefore art thou Romeo?” Since the eighteenth century, the standard
modern text has read,

Editors have three early texts of this play to work from, two quarto texts

and the folio. Here is how the First Quarto (1597) reads:

Whats Montagne? It is nor band nor foote, 

Nor arme, nor face, nor any other part. 
Whats in a name ? That which we call a Rofe, 
By any other name would smell as sweet:

Here is the Second Quarto (1599):

Whats Mountague ? it is nor hand nor foote, 

Nor arme nor face, ô be fome other name 
Belonging to a man. 
Whats in a name that which we call a rose, 
By any other word would smell as sweete,

There is in fact no early text that reads as our modern text does - and this is

the most famous speech in the play. Instead, we have three quite different
texts, all of which are clearly some version of the same speech, but none of
which seems to us a final or satisfactory version. The transcendently beautiful
passage in modern editions is an editorial invention: editors have succeeded in
conflating and revising the three versions into something we recognize as
great poetry. Is this what Shakespeare “really” wrote? Who can say? What we
can say is that Shakespeare always had performance, not a book, in mind.

Books About the Shakespeare Texts

The standard study of the printing history of the First Folio is W. W. Greg,
The Shakespeare First Folio (1955). J. K. Walton, The Quarto Copy for the
First Folio of Shakespeare (1971), is a useful survey of the relation of the
quartos to the folio. The second edition of Charlton Hinman’s Norton
Facsimile of the First Folio (1996), with a new introduction by Peter Blayney,
is indispensable. Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor, John Jowett, and William
Montgomery, William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion, keyed to the
Oxford text, gives a comprehensive survey of the editorial situation for all the
plays and poems.
 

THE GENERAL EDITORS

Introduction

WHY HAS OTHELLO always stood slightly apart from the other tragedies
generally acknowledged to be among Shakespeare’s supreme achievements?
Regularly grouped with Hamlet, King Lear, and Macbeth, it is sometimes
described as the most dramatic, the most playable, of the great tragedies, but
such praise often masks a dubious assessment of its artistic status. Even those
who most admire it, however, agree that Othello exhibits distinctive qualities
that separate it from its dramatic kin. First, its title character is different. The
Moor of Venice differs conspicuously from the other tragic heroes, differs
from the English audience for which he was created, differs from the rest of
the cast of Othello. The playwright takes pains to depict Othello as the alien
whose strangeness is both fascinating and threatening. Second, the play’s
subject is unusual for tragedy, neither a struggle for control of the state nor a
study of ancient heroism nor royal biography. Rather, Othello is about love -
its beauty, its fragility, its vulnerability to hate. The passions represented seem
private or perhaps narrow, not historically momentous. Here the battle for
power is domestic, emotional, and personal.

George Bernard Shaw, commenting on Verdi’s operatic version,

mischievously remarked that “instead of Otello being an Italian opera written
in the style of Shakespeare, Othello is a play written by Shakespeare in the
style of Italian opera. It is quite peculiar among his works in this respect . . .
and the plot is a pure farce plot.” Shaw’s flippant analysis is not atypical.
Othello and Othello are distinctive in having earned the condescension, even
scorn, of certain eloquent critics, from Thomas Rymer in the seventeenth
century to F. R. Leavis and T. S. Eliot in the twentieth. Rymer belittled the
play’s pretensions to tragic grandeur, lampooning it as a sign of what happens
when “Maidens of quality . . . run away with Blackamoors.” Eliot pitilessly
complained that in the final, lyrical speech before his suicide Othello was
“thinking about himself,” “endeavouring to escape reality,” and merely
“cheering himself up.”

It is doubtful that such reactions would have surprised the playwright.

Shakespeare must have known that audiences would find his exotic hero
unsettling, and he must have wanted it that way. So many of his dramatic
choices in Othello seem original or surprising that they imply a deliberate
effort to frustrate the expectations of the audience. All tragedy, of course,
depends upon the confounding of expectation, and playwrights from
Aeschylus forward have prized and magnified the ironies of a spectacular
reversal of fortune. But in choosing and adapting a short story about a foolish

captain who murders his wife, a tale first published in Italian by Giraldo
Cinthio in 1565, Shakespeare has repeatedly made the difficult, the original
choice. In the nature of his hero, the presentation of his villain, the addition
and deepening of the minor figures, the pace of the action, the metadramatic
layering, the risky reference to the staples of comedy - in each of these
important respects, as in lesser ones, he has sought the unexpected effect.
Examined in theatrical and historical context, Othello emerges as the product
of an artistic imagination enlarging the boundaries of the theatrical medium,
overturning conventions but using the spectator’s familiarity with those
conventions to intensify the force of their rejection. And placed in the context
of its creator’s career, the play becomes a skeptical review of his own ten-year
commitment to the affirmations of comedy and the benefits of theatrical
illusion.

Discussion of tragedy often begins with a treatment of the hero, and here

such a procedure is especially appropriate because the play seems to demand
immediate attention to its characters. For the twenty-first-century reader or
playgoer, particularly in America, the problem of race is likely to be the
primary consideration. This is a normal response, since every perceiver brings
to every work of art a distinctive set of cultural determinants, an internalized
batch of assumptions, opinions, blind spots, and wishes. That personal
response should not be dismissed, since readers today cannot ignore the
cultural centrality of race and its associated social and moral problems -
slavery, oppression, intolerance, resentment, prejudice, and class conflict.
Present concerns should be supplemented, however, with an awareness of the
theatrical, historical, and cultural conditions obtaining when the play was
written and first performed. To do so is not to suppress our own reactions or
to minimize the play’s relevance to current social or ethical issues. It is,
rather, to understand our own reactions better by examining what the work
might have meant to an earlier, different generation of people. Absorbing the
prominent strain of black and white imagery in the text, our consciousness of
race probably prompts us to think of the title character as an African,
specifically a sub-Saharan African. This is how he is usually played in the
modern theater. To the audience at the Globe, however, Othello’s origins and
appearance were probably less definite.

The Tragedy of Othello the Moor of Venice. It is worth pondering the

distinctive mixture of associations the folio title would have ignited in the
early modern mind. “Othello” is an unusual name, apparently a
Shakespearean coinage (his counterpart in the source is unnamed). It sounds
exotic or at least Mediterranean, deriving perhaps from an existing Italian

name, “Otello,” and (perhaps also) suggesting the North African “Otho” or
“Othoman” or “Ottoman.” Even stranger is the combination of locative nouns
that follows the name, suggesting inconsistency, hybridity, the crossing of
cultures. To begin with “Moor,” the Oxford English Dictionary is of some
help. In the ancient world, a Moor was

to parts of Morocco and Algeria. In later times, one belonging to the
people of mixed Berber and Arab race, Muslim in religion, who
constitute the bulk of the population of North-western Africa, and who
in the 8th c. conquered Spain. In the Middle Ages, and as late as the
17th c., the Moors were commonly supposed to be mostly black or
very swarthy (though the existence of “white Moors” was recognized),
and hence the word was often used for “negro”; cf. BLACKAMOOR.

Was Shakespeare’s Othello black? The question itself demands

interrogation, specifically the word “black.” In twenty-first-century terms, the
answer is “no.” Othello was first acted by Richard Burbage, the principal
tragedian of the King’s Men, who played Richard III and probably Hamlet; he
is unlikely to have resembled what would today be considered an African. But

in early modern terms, the answer could be some form of “yes.” The
Elizabethan ideal of human beauty was what was called “fair,” meaning light
skin and either light brown or blond hair. Its opposite, the brunet, or person
with darker skin or black hair, was known as “black” or “dark.” Desdemona
distinguishes, in her banter with Iago upon landing at Cyprus, between the
“fair” (or blond) woman and the “black” (or dark) woman. Such definitions
are also pertinent to the identity of the “Dark Lady” of Shakespeare’s sonnets,
“a woman colored ill” (Sonnet 144). In other words, Burbage’s physical
appearance may have been sufficiently “dark” or “black” to prompt, or at
least to correspond to, the trait’s development in Shakespeare’s text.

Throughout the first scene Iago and Roderigo trade racist insults about

Othello: “thick-lips,” “lascivious Moor,” “old black ram,” “Barbary horse.”
But since these epithets proceed from hatred, which tends to foster caricature,
they are not reliable guides to appearance. Burbage might have worn cork
makeup to appear swarthy or ostensibly African: at court in 1605, Queen
Anne and her ladies applied burnt cork to their faces and forearms when they
performed in Jonson’s Masque of Blackness. The question of this Moor’s
identity is further muddled by the matter of dress: since the London theater
companies were known for impressive costumes, we might suppose that robes
or other distinctive clothing might have been used to suggest Othello’s
lineage. But it is just as likely, given his profession, that Othello was dressed
as a Venetian general. Or, considering the sketchy evidence about costuming
on the early modern stage, Burbage’s Moor may also have looked something
like a Londoner, in doublet and hose. All of these qualifications and
inconsistencies suggest that we cannot know exactly what Shakespeare’s
audience would have assumed about Othello’s race.

In fact, we cannot know what Shakespeare’s audience thought about the

question of “race” at all. Categories of nationality and ethnicity in
Shakespeare’s England seem to have been more fluid than we are inclined to
think or at least not to have existed in the relatively definite forms that obtain
today. People recognized different racial characteristics and national types, of
course, and these were often the source of prejudice. Queen Elizabeth signed
a proclamation to deport some eighty-nine “Negroes and Blackamoors,” at
least partly because they were taking work away from native-born
Englishmen: the text of the order refers repeatedly to “people of that kind.”
Othello’s “kind” is entangled with the similarly complex matter of social
station. Shakespeare has taken pains to emphasize the Moor’s aristocratic
roots - “I fetch my life and being / From men of royal siege [rank]” (I.2.21-
22) - to insist that in global terms his status is no less exalted than that of

Desdemona and her father. The effectiveness of his effort is illustrated in the
writing of Charles Gildon, a critic who in 1694 published a passionate
refutation of Thomas Rymer’s bigoted analysis:

Gildon’s views on race and intermarriage, probably not what we would expect
from a late-seventeenth-century Englishman, attest to the difficulty of safely
generalizing about early modern audiences’ responses to Othello.

We may confidently declare, however, that a Moor was not an obvious

choice as the hero of a tragedy circa 1604. Many Londoners had seen
Africans in their city, owing to increased commerce with the southern
hemisphere and the West Indies, and Elizabeth received an ambassador and
his retinue from the King of Barbary in 1600 and 1601. This envoy may even
have seen the performances by the Lord Chamberlain’s Men at court during
his stay; more to the point, they (and their principal playwright) may have
seen him. Many Londoners had seen Moors on the stage in the 1590s, notably
in plays by George Peele and Christopher Marlowe, and in the collaborative
Lust’s Dominion (1600). Shakespeare himself had already depicted two. In
Titus Andronicus, Aaron is the wicked accomplice of Tamora, vicious Queen
of the Goths; to the Elizabethan spectator, the darkness of his skin denoted the
impurity of his soul. The physical appearance of the Prince of Morocco in The
Merchant of Venice is not so explicitly described, although Portia sends him
away with a swipe at his “complexion.” As a rule Elizabethan playwrights
employed their Moorish characters as manifestations of the Other, strangers
or aliens whose obvious physical difference raised disturbing questions about
community 
and 
nationhood, 
cultural 
difference, 
and 
unarticulated

assumptions about social organization. In The Merchant of Venice the alien
status of the Moroccan prince is matched by that of his Aragonian counterpart
- in the 1590s Spaniards were often depicted as demonic - and by one of
Shakespeare’s most memorable and troubling outsiders, Shylock the Jew.
These theatrical predecessors can often evoke derision, occasionally scorn,
and sometimes even sympathy and respect from other characters and from the
audience, but none displays the kind of charisma or invites exactly the degree
of admiration that Othello inspires. The meaningful hybridity latent in the
phrase “The Moor of Venice” is reflected in Othello’s status as both stranger

and hero.

This product of Shakespeare’s audacity is one of the most original and

enigmatic characters in world drama. Othello is a man of extremes, an
African prince who has spent his life in “the tented field,” without a
permanent home. Now commissioned to lead the forces of Venice, Othello
protects the republic’s interests from the “Turks,” the barbarians with whom
he himself is identified by his enemies and, probably, by a portion of the
audience. Early-seventeenth-century Europeans thought of Moors, Turks, and
Africans as pagan, but Othello is a Christian, a baptized convert whose
Christianity is an important marker of his assimilation into Venice and the
values of “civilization.” In his marriage to Desdemona, he has traded
independence and the masculine realm of the battlefield for emotional
commitment and feminine companionship. Accustomed to “feats of broils and
battle,” Othello is an alien in this realm of domesticity, and Iago will exploit
his naïveté and diffidence about marriage and women generally. At the
beginning of Act Two, the Venetians’ sophisticated courtesies and badinage
would seem to be predicated on Othello’s absence. As soon as his ship lands
at Cyprus, the verbal register changes drastically, from Cassio’s praise of
Desdemona as “a maid / That paragons description and wild fame” (II.1.61-
62) to Othello’s “O my fair warrior!” (181). The theatrical milieu further
complicates the portrait, in that audiences are asked to reconcile the foreign
and the familiar. At the first performances this manifestation of the Other was
acted by the most famous tragedian in England, and Othello is rarely
produced without a major player to take the title part. The strangeness of the
character may distance us, but at the same time we are attracted by Othello’s
undeniable star quality.

All these incongruities are consistent with the conventions of tragedy. The

tragic figure is usually constructed according to a paradox, as we know from
King Lear - the king who is also a fool - and from Hamlet - the brilliant
student for whom intelligence proves fatal. For centuries tragic playwrights
have created powerful, charismatic men and women whose uncompromising
faith in themselves is coupled with an indomitable will. They are devoted to
their own subjective vision of the world and their place in it, and this
commitment, reinforced by pride or what the Greeks called hubris, bestows
upon them both great strength and great vulnerability. Antigone, with her
unwavering moral resolution, will see her brother buried even at the cost of
her own life. Oedipus will cleanse Thebes by finding and punishing the
murderer within the gates. Tragic figures may be described as idealists,
adhering to an elevated standard of conduct both admirable and impossible to

sustain, and expecting such commitment from those around them. Always
these men and women are absolutists, unwilling to bend their principles. As
Helen Gardner puts it, “the tragic hero usurps the function of the gods and
attempts to remake the world.”1

Othello’s distinctive vision is both a product and a guarantor of his military

career: he is the veteran leader impatient with failure, unwilling to waver
between alternatives, accustomed to seeing things - the pun is unavoidable in
this play - in terms of black and white. Uncertainty has no place in his world;
indeed, to a military man, it is potentially fatal. Thus his rhetorical ploy
before the Senate, “little of this great world can I speak” (I.3.86), is,
ironically, fatally true. Like Hamlet, like Lear, he is an innocent. But the
simplicity of Othello’s construction of reality, his Platonic sense of good and
evil - “men should be what they seem” (III.3.128), and his intuitive, martial
code of action should not obscure his exceptionallyfertile and sensitive
imagination. This imaginative gift is one source of his charisma. It
underwrites his narrative and rhetorical success, in that he knows what will
impress his listeners, from Brabantio and Desdemona in their initial meetings,
to his senatorial judges, to the crowd of onlookers at the tragic conclusion. He
imagines and wills himself into a world of nobility and integrity, an ideal
realm in which officers do not fail in their duty, wives do not misplace love
tokens, evil can be recognized, attacked, and destroyed.

Othello’s heroic status is conveyed chiefly by his rhetoric, a style of speech

aptly called “the Othello music.”2 No one else in the play (or in any other
play) speaks the way Othello does. His language is extravagant and exotic; it
is the vehicle for conveying the narrative of his colorful, romantic past; it is
the source of his personal attraction, the instrument that wins Desdemona’s
heart and assures his triumph over Brabantio before the signory. Although
Othello professes ignorance of the subtleties of oratory - “Rude am I in my
speech” (I.3.81) - that claim is a performative tactic. His defense of his
marriage (I.3.76-170) is poetic, stirring, and rhetorically dazzling, a narrative
of a narrative of narratives. Othello tells the senators (and the audience) the
story of his telling Desdemona the stories of his life, and the romantic,
beguiling style is built with the staples of poetry: colorful imagery (“tented
field,” “deserts idle”); poetic patterns founded on doubled consonants and
vowels (“sold to slavery,” “hills whose heads touch heaven”); repeated words,
often at the beginning of lines (“of most disastrous chances, / Of moving
accidents . . . Of hairbreadth scapes . . . Of being taken by the insolent foe”;
“She gave . . . She swore . . . She wished . . . She thanked . . . She loved”);
seductive rhythms grounded in repetition and formal balance (“Her father

loved me, oft invited me, / Still questioned me the story of my life / From
year to year”); exotic diction (“anthropophagi”). The speech comes to rest on
a pair of gracefully poised lines, a sentence in which the symmetrical rhetoric
captures the sympathy between the lovers and forbids objection: “She loved
me for the dangers I had passed, / And I loved her that she did pity them.”
The Moor belongs in a very small class of extraordinary, distinctive speakers,
including Falstaff, Hamlet, Macbeth, Cleopatra, and perhaps Coriolanus.

Othello’s command of such expressive gifts not only makes him

charismatic but also signifies extraordinary imaginative reach. In first
greeting Desdemona on Cyprus, he sets their joyous reunion in a context of
passion and fatal risk: “If after every tempest come such calms, / May the
winds blow till they have wakened death!” (II.1.184- 85). Such extremity
characterizes the great aria in which Othello imagines Desdemona’s infidelity
as the immediate undoing of his world: “O, now forever / Farewell the
tranquil mind!” (III.3.347-48). The soaring lament draws its poetic energy
from its colorful images, the rhythms of reiterated words, the musical echo of
repeated vowels, and other verbal patterns typical of this famously compelling
voice. Audible through the middle of the third act, this heroic register serves
as the benchmark for measuring the hero’s tragic collapse, as we hear his
language degenerate into the vulgar, misogynist, and even bestial style of
Iago. The poetic extravagance sounds again in the last scene, now shaded
with a cosmic despair: “Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur! / Wash
me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!” (V.2.280-81). Relying on such
flamboyant rhetoric to make his earthly exit, he conjures up “Arabian trees,”
“Their medicinable gum,” and, “in Aleppo once, . . . a malignant and a
turbaned Turk” (V.2.350-53). The powerful beauty of Othello’s language is
Shakespeare’s instrument for delineating the contours of his heroic persona -
courage, integrity, professional confidence, absolute commitment to duty,
sacred faith in his wife. “Perdition catch my soul / But I do love thee! and
when I love thee not, / Chaos is come again” (III.3.90-92): the patterns of
those three lines reveal the connection between the exalted speech and the
radically simplified conception of fidelity and love.

His verbal authority and charisma permit Othello to compete with his

antagonist for theatrical authority. Iago is Shakespeare’s third longest role,
behind Hamlet and Richard III, and except for the eleven-line “scene” in
which a herald reads a proclamation and the few private moments when
Desdemona and Emilia prepare for bed, Iago is onstage in every scene. The
role of Othello, while not so lengthy, still has more lines than any other of
Shakespeare’s tragic heroes except (again) Hamlet. The two major women’s

roles are distinctive and memorable also, and even Cassio appears in all but
three scenes. This enumeration of lines and entrances helps to establish a
major structural principle: Shakespeare has concentrated the audience’s
attention on these major figures, permitting no diversion or escape but
requiring unrelieved scrutiny of this core group of characters. We come to
know them as complex dramatic persons, but through them we are also
allowed access to a realm beyond character. As Verdi put it in a letter written
while he entertained the offer to compose Otello, “It is quite possible that
[Shakespeare] might have come across a Falstaff of some kind; but it’s most
unlikely that he ever met a villain quite so villainous as Iago, and he could
never have met women as angelic as Cordelia, Imogen, or Desdemona, etc.
Yet they are so true.”3 As Verdi perceived, Shakespeare’s Iago and
Desdemona are so theatrically potent because they are carefully observed
persons (“so true”) who at the same time stand symbolically for something
beyond themselves (“villainous” / “angelic”). The composer’s remarks also
identify the antithetical method to which Shakespeare always subscribes, as
well as the form of antithesis specific to this play, the contest between hell
and heaven for the soul of the hero.

The symbolic method is epitomized in the two contestants struggling for

possession of Othello: Iago and Desdemona. When Othello was first
performed, the Tudor morality plays were still attracting English audiences
(although in London they had mostly been superseded by more sophisticated
fare), and those plays feature the temptation of the hero by two competing
angels, the good and bad, or an angel and a devil. No doubt recalling
Christopher Marlowe’s evocation of the morality tradition a decade earlier,
when a good angel and a bad angel counsel Doctor Faustus, Shakespeare
explicitly associates his villain and heroine with this theatrical pattern. The
plot takes the form of a psychomachia, a battle between angelic and demonic
forces for spiritual control of the main character. Othello stands between his
ensign (“ancient”) and his wife; he moves, during the course of the third act,
from Desdemona to Iago, from heaven to hell, from faith to depravity. In
representing this movement the poet develops a network of terms and images
that sustains our awareness of hell and demons, of a spiritually charged
cosmic struggle. The word “heaven” is heard with exceptional frequency
(although in some cases in the folio text it serves as a euphemism for the
censored “God”). “Hell” (or some form of it) sounds more frequently in
Othello than in any other play, and if, as may be the case, Shakespeare’s
actors pronounced the title character’s name as “Ot-Hello,” the demonic noun
reverberates even more frequently and meaningfully.

The horrified onlookers recognize Iago as a demonic figure, a “hellish

villain,” at the play’s end, but from the beginning Shakespeare depicts his
methods as infernal, largely by means of the character’s diction. In one of his
first speeches Iago presents himself as a kind of anti-Creator, negating the
biblical Yahweh’s “I am what I am” in his “I am not what I am” (I.1.64). Iago
ensnares Cassio with the aid of alcohol, personified several times as a “devil”
that poisons the brain, and he intoxicates Othello’s imagination by “pour[ing]
. . . pestilence into his ear” (II.3.344). His sermon to the shamed Cassio is
“Divinity of hell!” (II.3.338). The most striking manifestation of a demonic
nature is Iago’s profound hatred, a negative energy that expresses itself
variously as envy, cynicism, and misogyny. In lecturing Roderigo on the need
for self-restraint, he espouses a doctrine of fierce naturalism, reducing all
human experience to the physical, the mechanistic. As he sings in the
drinking song, “man’s life’s but a span” (II.3.67). Women in general are
animalistic (“wildcats”); Venetian women in particular are deceitful and
sexually voracious. Othello, like all Southern foreigners, is “changeable,” “an
erring barbarian.” To Iago’s ear the “Othello music” is no more than “bombast
circumstance” (padded rhetoric) and “fantastical lies.” Emotion and romantic
sentiment he dismisses as ridiculous. The act of love, entirely without
spiritual dimension, is merely bestial: “a lust of the blood and permission of
the will,” “the beast with two backs.” Reason is the key to sanity and balance,
says the sociopath.

As compelling as Iago is, Shakespeare gives him a worthy counterpart in

Desdemona. Theatrically and tonally, her femininity makes her especially
welcome in a play about soldiers in a military outpost. Her open simplicity
counterbalances Iago’s concealed perversion. This innocence appears in her
candor before the Venetian Senate, when she politely but firmly defies her
father and frankly confesses her physical and emotional attachment to her
husband. It is most apparent in her naive pleading for Cassio. Shakespeare
emphasizes her otherworldly purity by lingering over the bedtime chat
between the two women (IV.3.10-104), a conversation in which Desdemona is
shocked at Emilia’s cavalier sexual code. Her unshakable devotion to her
murderous husband, especially her effort to exonerate him by blaming herself
with her last breath, has left many readers and spectators incredulous. But
such unworldly innocence is a necessary pole in the symbolic structure of the
play. Othello’s “fair warrior” of Act Two becomes his “fair devil” of Act
Three and then “false as hell” in Act Four. In the end, although the victory of
evil is not total - Iago will be punished - the embodiment of good, the
“heavenly true” Desdemona, lies mute and lifeless. The annihilation of such
purity is a source of the play’s tremendous emotional power, the effect that

led Dr. Johnson to declare, “I am glad that I have ended my revisal of this
dreadful scene. It is not to be endured.”4

The clarity of Shakespeare’s dramatic oppositions should not, however,

blind us to the subtlety with which his characters are drawn. Onstage Iago’s
cloven foot is concealed, and Desdemona’s halo a little tarnished. For one or
two fleeting moments we are invited to feel Iago’s pain at Othello’s
professional rejection of him: the hardworking veteran has been passed over
in favor of the college boy. But most of the time his villainy is glaringly
obvious to us and invisible to the rest of the cast. They see something quite
different. “Honest Iago”: Othello uses the epithet ten times, Cassio twice, and
Desdemona once. Each of these references delivers an excruciating ironic
charge, and a precondition of such an ironic effect is that the term be spoken
innocently, without a hint of irony. To those around him, Iago is the blunt,
reliable soldier, the helpful fellow to whom people routinely turn in time of
crisis. Roderigo, Cassio, Desdemona, and Othello all confide in him and seek
his aid. In Act Four, Iago prudently rebuffs Lodovico’s confidential query at
Othello’s rage, as if to preserve his reputation for discretion: “It is not honesty
in me to speak / What I have seen and known” (IV.1.271- 72). The amount of
time we spend alone with Iago, the privileged view we get of his diseased
mind, is calculated to repel us, and morally we are repelled; but such intimacy
nevertheless creates an ironic affinity between villain and audience.
Shakespeare links us to his villain by modifying the method developed for
Richard III, and this theatrical attachment secures an intellectual bond that
ensures complicity.

Shakespeare’s presentation of Desdemona is just as complex and unusual.

Innocent victim though she be, she is also a strong-willed, independent young
woman, one who commands all the forms of courtliness and social repartee.
But while it may pain us to admit it, this heroine is capable of surprising
insensitivity, even hardheadedness. Having resolved to plead for the
dismissed Cassio and to help restore him to Othello’s favor, Desdemona
neglects such vital conditions as context, timing, and reception. Or to put it
less flatteringly, she makes herself into something of a pest. Despite her
husband’s reluctance and his manifest attempts at polite evasion - “Not now,
sweet Desdemon; some other time. . . . No, not tonight” (III.3.55-57) - she
perseveres in demanding to know when Othello will receive Cassio and hear
his apology. That request, as she artlessly observes, is as much a favor to
Othello as it is to Cassio, and yet in the tragic environment such innocent
persistence, as Iago knows, is self-destructive and potentially fatal. Her
oblivious innocence makes itself heard when, after Othello’s brutal

accusations, she unwittingly undermines her own purity of mind with an
unconscious pun: “I cannot say ‘whore.’ / It does abhor me now I speak the
word” (IV.2.161-62). As Iago admits, devils are adept at arranging “heavenly
shows,” and by the same ironic token it seems impossible that a poet with
Shakespeare’s ear, taking the name of his heroine from Cinthio’s
“Disdemona,” failed to note the “demon” lurking in “the divine Desdemona.”

This shading of character extends to the rest of the cast. The good-looking

and fortunate Cassio not only has a weak head for wine, but the veritas
released by the vinum discloses an unlovely vanity and arrogance about his
rank, particularly a sense of entitlement. Even the gullible Roderigo attracts a
moment of sympathy in his ignominious death. Emilia boldly defends
Desdemona at the cost of her own life, but she is tainted by her lie about the
handkerchief. Her defense of female desire and denunciation of masculine
cruelty are exceedingly welcome when they finally come (IV.3), and yet she
declares herself amenable to adultery under the right circumstances. Emilia’s
casual attitude toward infidelity helps also to complicate the character of the
third woman in the cast. Although Iago calls Bianca a “whore,” she seems to
dote wholeheartedly on Cassio, and the significance of her name (bianca =
white) not only complicates our reading of her character but enriches the
imagistic texture of the play. When she protests to Emilia that she is “no
strumpet, but of life as honest / As you that thus abuse me” (V.1.123-24),
there may be some justice to the claim, given that we have just heard Emilia
say she would sell her body for the right price. As the main plot makes clear,
hasty judgments about who is a whore can be fatal.

The struggle for Othello’s soul is swift and horrific, confined to a single

dramatic unit known as the “Temptation Scene” (III.3). In the space of some
450 lines Iago pollutes Othello’s imagination, separates him psychologically
from his wife, and ensnares the hero’s soul. Logic insists that the reversal is
too fast, that Othello’s surrender to jealous vengeance is not prepared, that
such a change of heart in so short a time is impossible. Further, it may strike
us as preposterous, as it did Rymer in the seventeenth century, that the fate of
Desdemona should hang on something as trivial as a handkerchief, albeit a
magical one. These would seem to be pitfalls that any novice in a creative
writing course would have the sense to avoid. So rather than assume that
Shakespeare didn’t notice them, we should recognize that he courted such
improbabilities, that he risked telling the story this way because speed and
incredulity intensify the horrifying effect of the tragic turn. Critics long ago
observed that he conceals the logical impossibilities of his plot by employing
a double time scheme in Othello. The Venetians disembark at Cyprus during

the day on Saturday, and Desdemona dies on Sunday night. By such a
reckoning “a thousand” acts of sexual infidelity would seem unlikely. Yet
Shakespeare condenses Othello’s undoing into a single implausible episode so
as to increase its affective power and enhance its meaning. Speed is an
inevitable result of Othello’s heroic absolutism - “To be once in doubt / Is
once to be resolved” (III.3.179-80) - and the thematic significance of such
swift destruction is incalculable. His refusal to compromise, his courage, and
his decisiveness are the properties that have elevated him to high rank and led
him to Desdemona, but these are the same qualities that destroy him. That is
the nature of tragedy, or to quote Othello, “the pity of it.”

That Iago tempts Othello to self-destruction almost entirely with words,

words artfully arranged and brilliantly delivered, indicates that the villain’s
skills are precisely those of the playwright who created him. Lying may be
regarded as a malicious form of fiction, and Iago’s fictions require an acute
sense of audience and mastery of histrionic and rhetorical techniques. His
manipulation of Roderigo functions as a rehearsal for the more challenging
assault on Othello, and he employs similar strategies in both schemes. In his
endeavor to corrupt Othello’s mind, Iago provokes curiosity by means of
oblique statements (“I like not that,” III.3.35) and provocative questions. He
works his victim psychologically by flattering and then distancing him,
pulling him in and pushing him away. One of his most efficient strategies is
the appeal to stock characters - the cunning Venetian wife, the handsome
seducer - that give Othello an intellectual purchase in the midst of chaos.
Perhaps most impressively, Iago spins compelling stories teeming with vivid,
salacious pictures, to which Othello’s sensitive imagination responds
immediately and ferociously:

IAGO 
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on? 
Behold her topped? 
OTHELLO Death and damnation! O! 
(III.3.395-96)

As his scheme proceeds, Iago distributes his theatrical tactics in ascending

order of effectiveness, and by the time he reaches “Cassio’s dream” (419-26),
that erotic fantasy of refracted pictures and mumbled words, he has reduced
Othello’s own verbal powers to exclamations and monosyllables: “O
monstrous! monstrous!”; “O, blood, blood, blood!” Iago is also the master of
detail, a gift revealed in his ability to create a weapon out of a preposition:

OTHELLO What? what? 
IAGO 

Lie - 
OTHELLO With her? 
IAGO With her, on her; what you will. 
(IV.1.33-34)

Iago supplements his dialogue with a single prop, the handkerchief, but it too
is employed in a theatrical scenario. Cassio and Bianca unwittingly perform
for Othello, with Iago as director of, actor in, and, a few minutes later,
reviewer of the show. Finally, Iago knows his audience: he plays unerringly
upon Othello’s insecurities about his status as a non-Venetian, as a black man
in a white world, as inexperienced in the ways of women.

It has been observed that tragedy when speeded up turns into comedy. By

allowing Othello to succumb so quickly, Shakespeare has risked inviting a
comic response to this deadly action, and a number of critics have accepted
that invitation, notably Shaw with his remarks about the plot as “pure farce.”
That Othello has so often been smirked at or that Othello has evoked
responses proper to comedy is perhaps not surprising. In his furious progress
toward self-destruction Othello sometimes resembles a conventional figure of
Renaissance comedy, in which sexual jealousy was a popular topic. The butt
of the jokes was usually the insecure husband who wrongly mistrusts his wife
and consumes himself with jealousy and doubt; eventually, however, some
providential force dispels the confusion and happily reunites the virtuous wife
and embarrassed husband. Shakespeare’s fellow playwrights had created
variations on this paranoid male, entertaining audiences with farcical stage
business, frenzied language, and the rich theme of self-delusion, of an
imagination run wild. In plays such as George Chapman’s All Fools and John
Marston’s What You Will the foolish husband isolates himself in a realm of
fantasy, dramatizing his misery in seamy images, hectoring his wife with
sarcasm and rhetorical questions, often losing control of language altogether.
Shakespeare himself had created such a buffoon several years earlier in The
Merry Wives of Windsor.

The most colorful of these paranoid husbands appears in Ben Jonson’s

Every Man in His Humour (1598), a play Shakespeare himself had acted in.
We cannot know whether or not his own experience on the comic stage
prompted him to explore the tragic implications of sexual suspicion. Nor can
we say whether he knew such impulses personally, as a biographical reading
of the sonnets would suggest. In either or both cases, Shakespeare deliberately
invokes the language, the imaginative delirium, and the furious motion of the
comic type in his creation of Othello. Here is Jonson’s suspicious husband, a
paranoid merchant whose name, Thorello, must in this context be taken as

significant:

Shakespeare’s identification of Othello with Thorello is one element in a

comprehensive strategy: he has refitted the machinery of comedy to augment
the tragic power of the play. (Romeo and Juliet is another tragedy that makes
use of just such cues; similarly, the multiple versions of the Lear story, before
Shakespeare took it up, end happily.) The dramatist frames the story of
Othello as a comedy gone wrong, a look at what happens after the wedding
banquet, Act Six of one of his romantic comedies. The first act resembles a
comedy in miniature: the setting of the first two scenes, the street, is a
convention not of tragedy but of Roman and Italian comedy. The action
involves an elopement between a man and a young woman, a clever
subordinate who serves the hero, a competitor for the hand of the bride, an

irascible father seeking to undo the marriage, and a public recognition and
sanction of the union. A veteran theatergoer might have noted the parallels
with Much Ado About Nothing (1598), a comedy also derived from Italian
sources: the “Italian” setting, a slandered bride, a conniving, hateful officer,
and an irrational, inexperienced bridegroom. Even the journey to Cyprus, a
dangerous and unstable island, famous as the birthplace of Venus, inverts the
Shakespearean journey to a green world that fosters revelation and emotional
reordering in the romantic comedies.

These comic affinities enrich Shakespeare’s tragic representation by

producing an unsparing critique of comic optimism. The correspondences are
not exact, of course, and most pertain to the opening movement of the
tragedy, but such comic staples invite familiar reactions that the playwright
then foils by driving the narrative in a contrary direction. The resemblances of
setting and character matter less than the meanings to which they contribute
and the responses to which an audience is prompted. Othello is a penetrating
examination of the nature of evil, particularly its destructive capacity in the
realm of love. A precondition of appreciating that portrayal is recognizing
Shakespeare’s challenge to the affirmations that normally attend the comic
ending.

Othello was performed at court on November 2, 1604, perhaps as a new

play, perhaps new only to the new king. A scholarly effort to push
composition of the play as far back as 1602 has reopened the question of its
date, but wherever between 1602 and 1604 we place it, we must acknowledge
that the tragedy appeared at a pivotal moment in Shakespeare’s creative life.
The five years between 1599 and 1604 represent an unsettled period in his
artistic development, a phase that sees a transition from the comedies and
histories that dominated his first decade to the tragedies and romances that
characterized the second. A list of titles from this period, even though their
precise chronology is uncertain, indicates the vast range of tonal emphasis: As
You Like It, Julius Caesar, Henry V, Hamlet, Twelfth Night, Troilus and
Cressida, All’s Well That Ends Well, and Measure for Measure. Most of these
plays display the characteristics of more than one dramatic mode.
Structurally, Henry V is a comedy ending in a marriage, although the price of
its “festive” conclusion is high. Troilus embodies a kind of formal impasse,
poised between comedy and tragedy. In moving from comedy to tragedy, the
playwright was testing permutations of the major dramatic modes, shading the
comedies with potentially tragic insights and drawing upon comic contrasts in
telling a tragic story. Whether Othello was written in the middle of this phase
or even last in the sequence of works, it clearly partakes of and benefits from

what might be called their tonal ambiguity or formal instability. Shakespeare
seems to have been exploring the interdependence of comedy and tragedy,
exploiting the effects of each mode to test their antithetical conceptions of
experience. Tragedy investigates and represents the nature of evil by allowing
glimpses of harmony and comic solution. Thus Shakespeare’s repeated
reference to comic convention sharpens the definition of evil by teasing the
audience with intimations of its opposite.

The evil that haunts Othello is especially engrossing because it is intimately

related to Shakespeare’s own livelihood. In telling a story of deception and
revenge the playwright confronts the dangers of illusion, the malignancy of
the imagination, the threat of theater itself. Imagination is the great
affirmative faculty in most of his comedies, serving Petruchio and Rosalind
and other well-meaning lovers and players as a creative, therapeutic, unifying
force. A Midsummer Night’s Dream is the playwright’s defense of fantasy and,
beyond that, his supreme apology for the stage. In the darkness of the
Athenian wood, imagination is associated with dreams, vision, fantasy, fancy,
fiction, and finally with love. It is a source of joy, of revelation, of access to
the divine. In the last scene of Dream, the benighted Duke Theseus reflects
condescendingly on the uses of imagination and associates it with the lunatic,
the lover, and the poet. Some eight years after composing that derisive
indictment, Shakespeare himself begins to take seriously the pernicious
effects of the faculty that he has been accustomed to celebrate, confronting
and criticizing the imaginative sources of his own art.

The turn to tragedy both results from and helps to nourish Shakespeare’s

growing anxiety about the fraudulence of theatricality and disgust at the ease
with which the creative faculty may be abused. The mature comedies stage
previews of this peril, as in Twelfth Night, where Malvolio confuses erotic
fantasies with facts. But the tragic frame presents the consequences of the
depraved or perverted imagination as fatal, not risible: in Othello creativity
serves murder and revenge. Theseus’s lunatic, lover, and poet all appear in
Othello, albeit in fragmented and burlesqued forms. Narcissism is the only
kind of love Iago displays, but he is both a poet, or maker of fictions, and a
lunatic, a man whose imagination has poisoned him so that he takes pleasure
in the invention and performance of malicious acts. Othello as lover is the key
to the plot, of course, but he is also a spinner of tales whose own responsive
imagination Iago manages to contaminate with filthy images, and by the
fourth act he has descended into a kind of madness. Desdemona, too, is
credited with imaginative insight. Not only does she respond empathetically
to Othello’s exotic tales, but she also “saw Othello’s visage in his mind”

(I.3.252): looking beyond the body to the heart and spirit, she loves so
profoundly that she seems to legitimize Theseus’s scornful remark about the
lover’s seeing “Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt.” The principal players, in
other words, all embody or are associated with some aspect of the
imagination, and they either misuse or are themselves abused by the very
quality that Shakespeare had spent the first decade of his career affirming.

Othello may be read as an allegory of that career, a kind of artistic

biography in which the brief symbiotic marriage of tragedy and comedy (in,
say, Troilus and Cressida and Measure for Measure) comes to an end, and
tragedy smothers comedy. According to this scenario, the part of the angry
father is taken by Sir Philip Sidney, who had warned, in the Apology for
Poetry, against dramatic miscegenation, against mixing the kings of tragedy
and the clowns of comedy. But Shakespeare’s rejection of the mixed form
involves not just decorum but a philosophical metamorphosis. Increasingly
conscious of the strength and ubiquity of evil in the mortal world, the
playwright begins to distrust the representational fidelity of the comic mode
and, artistically speaking, allows the suspicious and darker form to murder it.
The subsequent tragedies, King Lear, Timon of Athens, and Macbeth, are
among Shakespeare’s most dispiriting works, somber expositions of the
duplicity of theater and the danger of illusion as manifested in feigning
daughters, flattering friends, equivocal witches. Comedy has very little place
in these play-worlds. The comic cues and foils that function so ironically in
Othello are striking because, for the next few years, Shakespeare banishes
them from his drama. And then, turning from tragedy to romance, he will
reverse the process, employing the structures and persons of tragedy to
intensify the felicity of the comic or romantic ending.

Tragedy has proven a durable and esteemed form through the centuries

because it raises profound questions, elicits meanings from serious stories,
explores the mysteries of experience. To see Othello as a tale of jealousy as
Rymer and others have done is to mistake a partial manifestation of the play’s
subject for the subject itself. Jealousy is an emotional symptom. The real
subject of Othello is the fragility of love, its inability to survive the corrosive
conditions of a tragic world. Likewise, Iago is not ultimately responsible for
the tragedy: he supplies the weapon, but Othello uses it on himself.
Shakespeare represents and permits the audience to savor the potential joys of
human love - physical, emotional, spiritual - and then depicts the brutal self-
destruction of those possibilities. Looking hard at human experience through
the dark filter of tragedy, the playwright portrays the vulnerability of mortals,
even the most gifted and accomplished, to the forces of hatred and fear within

themselves.

If Othello’s tragedy is the paradoxical self-annihilation of his imaginative

talent, a trait that ought to be beneficent and consolatory, then it is hard not to
see Shakespeare the artist as exploring his own distinctive vulnerability. At
the same time, however, he could not have been unaware of the ironic
triumph that the play itself constitutes, an imaginative tour de force about the
hazards of the imagination. Perhaps it is troubling to read Othello as
Shakespeare’s self-indictment, and yet the corollary to that reading is the
recognition that his self-scrutiny produced a work of art that still disturbs,
moves, and even consoles us.
 

RUSS MCDONALD University of North Carolina at Greensboro

Note on the Text

OTHELLO PRESENTS AN EDITOR with formidable textual problems. The
play was first printed in quarto (Q) by Thomas Walkley in 1622, just a year
before its appearance in the collection known today as the First Folio (F). The
two texts are substantially different. F contains more than 150 lines not found
in Q; Q has some 16 lines absent from F. And this is only the beginning: the
two texts also exhibit more than 1,000 lexical variants. One obvious and
important discrepancy is that Q omits Desdemona’s “Willow Song.” Another
is that F omits virtually all instances of profanity and direct references to the
deity, in keeping with the Parliamentary statute of 1606 forbidding blasphemy
in stage plays. For example, at V.2.219, F gives Emilia the line “Oh heauen!
oh heauenly Powres!” In Q she says, “O God! O heauenly God!” It appears,
then, that the copy text for Q originated either before 1606 or else much later,
when the decree was no longer strictly enforced. But even this is not certain.

The stumbling block in any effort to produce a modern text is that no one

has been able to establish decisively the nature of the manuscripts used in the
preparation of Q and F. Was Q based on an authorial manuscript? Was F? Was
either printed from a theater promptbook? If so, was it F or Q? Might there
have been more than one authorial manuscript, or a scribal and an authorial
manuscript? Was F perhaps printed from Q, with reference to an authorial
manuscript or prompt copy as a source for corrections? Many theories and
diagrams and solutions have been proposed, and none has taken hold. Readers
interested in pursuing the details and the implications of these problems are
urged to consult Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor, John Jowett, and William
Montgomery, William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion (Oxford, 1987),
E.A.J. Honigmann, The Texts of “Othello” and Shakespearian Revision
(1996), the discussions of text in Honigmann’s Arden edition (1997) and
Norman Sanders’s New Cam-bridge edition (1984), and Scott McMillin, “The
Othello Quarto and the ‘Foul-Paper’ Hypothesis,” Shakespeare Quarterly, 51
(2000): 67-85.

Most editors and textual scholars have agreed that F is the superior text,

although Q presents many readings that seem preferable. Many previous
editors, faced with the problem of two different words (F’s “Judean” versus
Q’s “Indian” in Othello’s final speech, for example) and lacking
bibliographical evidence to guide them, often made their textual choice on
grounds of taste. In other words, they usually chose F, the slightly longer
version, as their copy text, but substituted words or phrases from Q on a case-
by-case basis. The present edition uses F as the copy text and attempts to

maintain a relatively strict policy on substitution or emendation. Thus, F’s
reading is retained if it seems at all possible - i.e., if it can be made to make
sense, even if Q’s alternative seems more appealing logically or artistically.
The rationale for this practice is that each of the first two printings, F and Q,
offers a version of the play that was satisfactory to someone - author or actor
or editor or compiler - at about the time the play was written; that F, even with
its weaknesses, is probably the better of these two alternatives; and that to
conflate the two texts by selecting preferable readings gives the modern
reader a version unknown in the early seventeenth century. In cases where F
is clearly corrupt or unintelligible, the Q reading (if available) has been
accepted. The one major exception to such strict fidelity to F involves
censorship: on the grounds that the oaths and references to God were removed
from F in response to censorship, I have restored these words with reference
to Q. In some very rare cases, when the compositors of F seem to have made
an error, the Q reading has been substituted. For example, at II.1.42, F’s
“Arriuancie” is probably a result of eye-skip from “expectancie” in the
previous line; thus, Q’s “arriuance” has been adopted. Stage directions from
the folio are in italics only; those supplied (from Q and from theatrical
necessity) to fill out the performance are placed within brackets.

The text produced here is imperfect, but so must be any text of this play.

Below are listed all cases in which this edition departs from F (except for
typographical errors). The adopted reading is printed in italics, followed by its
source in parentheses: Q is the First Quarto, of 1622; Q2 is the Second
Quarto, of 1630; names are those of previous editors. The rejected folio
reading is given in roman.

The Names of the Actors (printed at the end of the text in F)

I.1 1 Tush (Q) omitted 4 ’Sblood (Q) omitted 28 other (Q) others 32 God (Q)
omitted 65 full (Q) fall; thick-lips (Q) Thicks-lips 85 Zounds (Q) omitted 107
Zounds (Q) omitted 121 odd-even (Malone) odde Euen 152 pains (Q) apines
180 night (Q) might

I.2 34 duke (Q) Dukes 68 darlings (Q) Deareling 84 Where (Q) Whether 87 I
(Q) omitted

I.3 59 ALL (Q) Sen. 106 DUKE (Q) omitted 130 battles (Q) Battle; fortunes
(Q) fortune 141 and (Q) omitted; heads (Q) head 143 other (Q) others 144
anthropophagi (Q) Antropophague 145 Do grow (Q) Grew 147 thence (Q)
hence 155 intentively (Q) instinctiuely 201 Into your favor (Q) omitted 219
ear (Q) eares 230 couch (Pope) Coach 248 did (Q) omitted 263-64 heat - the
young affects / In me defunct - (Capell) heat the yong affects / In my defunct,
270 instruments (Q) Instrument 299 worldly (Q) wordly; matters (Q) matter

326 beam (Theobald) braine 377 a snipe (Q) Snpe 380 H’as (Q) She ha’s

II.1 33 prays (Q) praye 42 arrivance (Q) Arriuancie 65 ingener (Steevens)
Ingeniuer 82 And bring all Cyprus comfort! (Q) omitted 88 me (Q) omitted 93
(Within) A sail, a sail! [A shot.] But hark. A sail! (Collier) But hearke, a Saile.
/ Within. A Saile, a Saile. 94 their (Q) this 213 hither (Q) thither 226 again
(Q) a game 240 has (Q) he’s 258- 59 mutualities (Q) mutabilities 303 rank
(Q) right

II.2 10 Heaven (Q) omitted

II.3 (New scene: Capell) 37 unfortunate (Q) infortunate 56 to put (Q) put to
60 God (Q) heauen 70 God (Q) Heauen 75 Englishman (Q) Englishmen 90
Then (Q) And; auld (Q) awl’d 92 ’Fore God (Q) Why 96 God’s (Q) heau’ns
105 God (Q) omitted 137 (Within) Help! help! (Q) omitted 138 Zounds (Q)
omitted 146 God’s will (Q2) Alas 150 God’s will, lieutenant, hold! (Q) Fie, fie
Lieutenant, 152 Zounds (Q) omitted 196 Zounds, if I (Q) If I once 207
leagued (Pope) league 250 God (Q) Heauen 278 God (Q) omitted 282 Why,
(Q) Why? 320 here (Q) omitted 331 were’t (Q) were 362 hast (Q) hath 365 By
the mass (Q) Introth

III.1 21 hear, mine heare me, mine 25 general’s wife (Q2) Generall 29
CASSIO Do, good my friend (Q) omitted

III.3 52 Yes, faith (Q) I sooth 63 In faith Infaith 74 By’r Lady (Q) Trust me 94
you (Q) he 106 By heaven (Q) Alas 112 In (Q) Of 139 But some (Q) Wherein
147 oft (Q) of 162 By heaven (Q) omitted 175 God (Q) Heauen 180 once (Q)
omitted 202 God (Q) Heauen 204 keep’t (Q) kept 215 I’ faith (Q) Trust me 217
my (Q) your 248 hold (Q) omitted 259 qualities (Q) Quantities 273 of (Q) to
278 O, then (Q) omitted; mocks (Q) mock’d 285 Faith (Q) Why 311 No,
faith; she (Q) No: but she 395 supervisor (Q) super-vision 424 lay (Rowe)
laid 440 that was (Malone) it was 455 feels (Q2) keepes

III.4 54 faith (Q) indeed 75 I’ faith (Q) Indeed 77 God (Q) Heauen 81 Heaven
(Q) omitted 96 I’ faith (Q) Insooth 97 Zounds (Q) Away 170 I’ faith (Q)
Indeed 181 absence now (Capell) Absence: now 186 by my faith (Q) in good
troth

IV.1 32 Faith (Q) Why 36 Zounds (Q) omitted 52 No, forbear (Q) omitted 77
unsuiting (Q) resulting 101 conster (Q) conserue 103 now (Q) omitted 107
power (Q) dowre 110 a (Q) omitted 111 i’ faith (Q) indeed 123 Faith (Q) Why
130 beckons (Q) becomes 160 Faith (Q) omitted 162 Faith (Q) Yes 212 God
(Q) omitted 232 By my troth (Q) Trust me 242 an (Q) omitted

IV.2 30 Nay (Q) May 33 But not the words (Q) omitted 81 Impudent
strumpet! (Q) omitted 141 heaven (Q) heauens 155 them in (Q2) them: or 167

And he does chide with you (Q) omitted 175 daff’st (Collier) dafts 182 Faith
(Q) omitted

IV.3 22 faith (Q) Father 23 thee (Q) omitted 39 sighing (Q2) singing 74 ’Ud’s
pity (Q) why 103 God (Q) Heauen

V.1 1 bulk (Q) Barke 35 Forth (Q) For 91 O heaven (Q) Yes, ’tis 105 out (Q)
omitted

V.2 35 so (Q) omitted 57 Then Lord (Q) O Heauen 84 DESDEMONA O Lord,
Lord, Lord! (Q) omitted 118 O Lord (Q) Alas 128 heard (Q) heare 219 O
God! O heavenly God! (Q) Oh Heauen! oh heauenly Powres! 220 Zounds (Q)
Come 241 here (Q) omitted 292 damnèd (Q) cursed

THE NAMES OF THE ACTORS5

OTHELLO, the Moor [leader of the Venetian armed forces]

BRABANTIO, father to Desdemona

CASSIO, an honorable lieutenant

IAGO, a villain

RODERIGO, a gulled gentleman

DUKE OF VENICE

SENATORS

MONTANO, Governor of Cyprus

GENTLEMEN OF CYPRUS

LODOVICO and GRATIANO, two noble Venetians

SAILORS

CLOWN

DESDEMONA, wife to Othello

EMILIA, wife to Iago

BIANCA, a courtesan

[MESSENGER, HERALD, OFFICERS, VENETIAN GENTLEMEN,
MUSICIANS, ATTENDANTS]
 

[SCENE: Venice and Cyprus]

The Tragedy of Othello the Moor of Venice

I.1 Enter Roderigo and Iago.

RODERIGO 
Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly 
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse 
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.

IAGO 
’Sblood, but you’ll not hear me! 
If ever I did dream of such a matter, 
Abhor me.

RODERIGO 
Thou told’st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.

IAGO 
Despise me if I do not. Three great ones of the city, 
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant, 
Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man, 
I know my price; I am worth no worse a place. 
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes, 
Evades them, with a bombast circumstance 
Horribly stuffed with epithets of war, 
Nonsuits my mediators; for, “Certes,” says he,

I.1 A street in Venice 4 ’Sblood (an oath; originally “by God’s [i.e.,
Christ’s] blood”) 8 great ones influential men 13 bombast
circumstance pompous evasion, roundabout excuses (bombast is
cotton stuffing; see stuffed, l. 14) 15 Nonsuits denies

“I have already chose my officer.” 
And what was he? 
Forsooth, a great arithmetician, 
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine 

(A fellow almost damned in a fair wife) 
That never set a squadron in the field, 
Nor the division of a battle knows 
More than a spinster, unless the bookish theoric, 
Wherein the tonguèd consuls can propose 
As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice 
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th’ election; 
And I (of whom his eyes had seen the proof 
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds 
Christened and heathen) must be beleed and calmed 
By debitor and creditor. This countercaster, 
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be, 
And I - God bless the mark! - his Moorship’s ancient.

RODERIGO 
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

IAGO 
Why, there’s no remedy; ’tis the curse of service. 
Preferment goes by letter and affection, 
And not by old gradation, where each second 
Stood heir to th’ first. Now, sir, be judge yourself, 
Whether I in any just term am affined 
To love the Moor.

18 arithmetician theorist, bean counter 20 almost . . . wife (a
mystifying reference, perhaps a result of error in textual transmission;
although Cassio is unmarried, the line links him with women early in
the play) 22 division of a battle arrangement of troops 23 unless . . .
theoric except hypothetically 24 tonguèd consuls i.e., those who
advise but don’t actually fight 29 beleed and calmed i.e., left behind; a
nautical metaphor for frustration (“belee” = “to place under the lee, or
unfavorably to the wind”) 30 debitor and creditor bookkeeper;
countercaster accountant 32 God . . . mark (an exclamation of
impatience); ancient ensign, standard-bearer (an officer inferior to
lieutenant) 35-36 Preferment . . . gradation i.e., promotion now
depends on favoritism or whom you know, not on the old system of
rising through the ranks 38 affined bound

RODERIGO I would not follow him then.

IAGO 
O, sir, content you; 
I follow him to serve my turn upon him. 

We cannot all be masters, nor all masters 
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark 
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave 
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage, 
Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass, 
For nought but provender, and when he’s old, cashiered. 
Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are 
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, 
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves, 
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords, 
Do well thrive by them, and when they have lined their 
coats, 
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul, 
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir, 
It is as sure as you are Roderigo, 
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago. 
In following him, I follow but myself. 
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, 
But seeming so, for my peculiar end, 
For when my outward action doth demonstrate 
The native act and figure of my heart 
In complement extern, ’tis not long after 
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve 
For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.

44 knee-crooking i.e., constantly bowing 45 doting . . . bondage i.e.,
loving the role of the fawning servant 47 provender provisions,
especially dry food for animals; cashiered dismissed 48 Whip me . . .
knaves (a common early modern construction, the ethical dative,
meaning “As for me, I say whip such men”) 49 trimmed dressed up;
visages masks, appearances 50 yet still 53 Do . . . homage honor
themselves by looking out for themselves 59 peculiar end private
purpose 60-62 my outward . . . complement extern i.e., when my
behavior corresponds to my real feelings 64 daws jackdaws 
(proverbially foolish birds)

RODERIGO 
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe 
If he can carry’t thus!

IAGO Call up her father, 
Rouse him. Make after him, poison his delight, 

Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen, 
And though he in a fertile climate dwell, 
Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy, 
Yet throw such chances of vexation on’t 
As it may lose some color.

RODERIGO 
Here is her father’s house. I’ll call aloud.

IAGO 
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell 
As when, by night and negligence, the fire 
Is spied in populous cities.

RODERIGO 
What, ho, Brabantio! Signor Brabantio, ho!

IAGO 
Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! thieves! 
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags! 
Thieves! thieves! 
[Enter Brabantio] above.

BRABANTIO 
What is the reason of this terrible summons? 
What is the matter there?

RODERIGO 
Signor, is all your family within?

IAGO 
Are your doors locked?

BRABANTIO Why, wherefore ask you this?

65 the thick-lips (a racist slur on Othello’s African heritage); owe own
66 carry’t thus bring it off (i.e., succeed) 71 chances of vexation
possibilities for misery and embarrassment 72 lose some color i.e., his
joy will fade 74 timorous frightening

IAGO 
Zounds, sir, you’re robbed! For shame, put on your 
gown! 
Your heart is burst; you have lost half your soul. 
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram 
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise! 
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell, 

Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. 
Arise, I say!

BRABANTIO What, have you lost your wits?

RODERIGO 
Most reverend signor, do you know my voice?

BRABANTIO 
Not I. What are you?

RODERIGO 
My name is Roderigo.

BRABANTIO The worser welcome! 
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. 
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say 
My daughter is not for thee. And now, in madness, 
Being full of supper and distemp’ring draughts, 
Upon malicious knavery dost thou come 
To start my quiet.

RODERIGO 
Sir, sir, sir -

BRABANTIO But thou must needs be sure 
My spirits and my place have in their power 
To make this bitter to thee.

RODERIGO Patience, good sir.

BRABANTIO 
What tell’st thou me of robbing? This is Venice;

85 Zounds (an oath; originally “by God’s [i.e., Christ’s] wounds”) 87
very now at this very moment 88 tupping copulating with (used
specifically of rams) 89 snorting snoring 98 distemp’ring draughts
intoxicating drinks 100 start my quiet disturb my peace 102 spirits
emotions (i.e., anger)

My house is not a grange.

RODERIGO Most grave Brabantio, 
In simple and pure soul I come to you.

IAGO Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God if the devil bid
you. Because we come to do you service, and you think we are ruffians,
you’ll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse; you’ll have your
nephews neigh to you; you’ll have coursers for cousins, and jennets for

germans.

BRABANTIO 
What profane wretch art thou?

IAGO I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are
making the beast with two backs.

BRABANTIO 
Thou art a villain.

IAGO You are - a senator.

BRABANTIO 
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.

RODERIGO 
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you, 
If’t be your pleasure and most wise consent, 
As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter, 
At this odd-even and dull watch o’ th’ night, 
Transported, with no worse nor better guard 
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, 
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor - 
If this be known to you, and your allowance, 
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. 
But if you know not this, my manners tell me, 
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe

105 grange farmhouse 110 covered . . . horse (another figure for
bestial copulation; Barbary was the home of Berbers, or Moors) 111
nephews (kinsmen generally; here grandsons) 111-12 coursers for
cousins racehorses for relatives 112 jennets for germans small Spanish
horses for near kinsmen 115 beast with two backs (a visual symbol of
sexual intercourse) 121 odd-even and dull watch i.e., in-between and
sleepy hour, perhaps midnight (between evening and morning) 125
allowance approval

That, from the sense of all civility, 
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence. 
Your daughter, if you have not given her leave, 
I say again, hath made a gross revolt, 
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes 
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger 
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself. 

If she be in her chamber, or your house, 
Let loose on me the justice of the state 
For thus deluding you.

BRABANTIO Strike on the tinder, ho! 
Give me a taper! Call up all my people! 
This accident is not unlike my dream. 
Belief of it oppresses me already. 
Light, I say! light! Exit [above].

IAGO Farewell, for I must leave you. 
It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, 
To be producted - as, if I stay, I shall - 
Against the Moor. For I do know the state, 
However this may gall him with some check, 
Cannot with safety cast him; for he’s embarked 
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars, 
Which even now stands in act, that for their souls 
Another of his fathom they have none 
To lead their business; in which regard, 
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains, 
Yet, for necessity of present life, 
I must show out a flag and sign of love, 
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find 
him, 
Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search;

129 from the sense of against 134 extravagant and wheeling i.e., far
from home and rootless, roving 135 Straight straightaway,
immediately 138 tinder tinderbox (for a light) 140 accident occurrence
144 producted produced (i.e., called as a witness) 146 check
reprimand 147 cast dismiss 149 stands in act is imminent; for their
souls i.e., to save their souls 150 fathom deep capacity (i.e., talent) 156
the Sagittary (an inn)

And there will I be with him. So farewell. Exit. 
Enter Brabantio [below, in his nightgown], with 
Servants and Torches.

BRABANTIO 
It is too true an evil. Gone she is, 
And what’s to come of my despisèd time 
Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, 

Where didst thou see her? - O unhappy girl! - 
With the Moor, say’st thou? - Who would be a father?- 
How didst thou know ’twas she? - O, she deceives me 
Past thought! - What said she to you? - Get more tapers! 
Raise all my kindred! - Are they married, think you?

RODERIGO 
Truly I think they are.

BRABANTIO 
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood! 
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds 
By what you see them act. Is there not charms 
By which the property of youth and maidhood 
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo, 
Of some such thing?

RODERIGO Yes, sir, I have indeed.

BRABANTIO 
Call up my brother. - O, would you had had her! - 
Some one way, some another. - Do you know 
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

RODERIGO 
I think I can discover him, if you please 
To get good guard and go along with me.

BRABANTIO 
Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call; 
I may command at most. - Get weapons, ho!

157 s.d. nightgown dressing gown; Torches torchbearers 159 despisèd
time unfortunate life 170 property natural behavior

And raise some special officers of night. - 
On, good Roderigo; I will deserve your pains. Exeunt.

I.2 Enter Othello, Iago, Attendants, with Torches.

IAGO 
Though in the trade of war I have slain men, 
Yet do I hold it very stuff o’ th’ conscience 
To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity 

Sometime to do me service. Nine or ten times 
I had thought t’ have yerked him here under the ribs.

OTHELLO 
’Tis better as it is.

IAGO Nay, but he prated, 
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms 
Against your honor 
That with the little godliness I have 
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir, 
Are you fast married? Be assured of this, 
That the magnifico is much beloved, 
And hath in his effect a voice potential 
As double as the duke’s. He will divorce you, 
Or put upon you what restraint or grievance 
The law, with all his might to enforce it on, 
Will give him cable.

OTHELLO Let him do his spite. 
My services which I have done the signory

180 special . . . night (a famous Venetian nocturnal patrol) 181 deserve
repay

I.2 The street in front of the Sagittary 2 very stuff the essence 5

yerked 
struck or (as with a horse) kicked under the ribs 6 prated babbled 10
did 
full hard forbear i.e., barely tolerated 11 fast securely 12 magnifico
aristocrat (i.e., Brabantio) 13-14 a voice . . . duke’s i.e., an influence
twice as 
great as the duke’s 17 give him cable i.e., allow him freedom 18
signory 
Venetian political establishment

Shall out-tongue his complaints. ’Tis yet to know - 
Which, when I know that boasting is an honor, 
I shall promulgate - I fetch my life and being 
From men of royal siege, and my demerits 
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune 
As this that I have reached. For know, Iago, 
But that I love the gentle Desdemona, 

I would not my unhousèd free condition 
Put into circumscription and confine 
For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come yond? 
Enter Cassio [and Officers] with Torches.

IAGO 
Those are the raisèd father and his friends. 
You were best go in.

OTHELLO Not I; I must be found. 
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul 
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

IAGO 
By Janus, I think no.

OTHELLO 
The servants of the duke? And my lieutenant? 
The goodness of the night upon you, friends! 
What is the news?

CASSIO The duke does greet you, general, 
And he requires your haste-posthaste appearance 
Even on the instant.

OTHELLO What is the matter, think you?

CASSIO 
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.

19 yet to know still not generally known 21 promulgate broadcast,
make known 22 siege seat (i.e., rank or status); demerits merits,
deserts (obsolete form) 23-24 May speak . . . have reached i.e., can
without boasting claim worldly success equal to that of Desdemona’s
family (this that I have reached) 26-27 my unhousèd . . . and confine
i.e., trade the outdoors for domesticity, my independence for limits 29
raisèd roused, alarmed 31 parts abilities; perfect soul clear conscience
32 manifest me i.e., make my case 33 Janus the two-faced Roman god
39 as I may divine i.e., I suppose

It is a business of some heat. The galleys 
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers 
This very night at one another’s heels, 
And many of the consuls, raised and met, 
Are at the duke’s already. You have been hotly called for; 
When being not at your lodging to be found, 

The Senate hath sent about three several quests 
To search you out.

OTHELLO ’Tis well I am found by you. 
I will but spend a word here in the house, 
And go with you. [Exit.]

CASSIO Ancient, what makes he here?

IAGO 
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack. 
If it prove lawful prize, he’s made forever.

CASSIO 
I do not understand.

IAGO He’s married.

CASSIO To who? 
[Enter Othello.]

IAGO 
Marry, to - Come, captain, will you go?

OTHELLO Have with you.

CASSIO 
Here comes another troop to seek for you. 
Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, with Officers and Torches.

IAGO 
It is Brabantio. General, be advised. 
He comes to bad intent.

OTHELLO Holla! stand there!

RODERIGO 
Signor, it is the Moor.

BRABANTIO Down with him, thief! 
[They draw on both sides.]

40 heat intensity or urgency 41 sequent consecutive 46 sent about sent
out; several separate 50 Faith by my faith, in faith (a mild oath);
carrack treasure ship 53 Marry (a mild form of the oath “By the
Virgin Mary”)

IAGO 
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.

OTHELLO 
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. 

Good signor, you shall more command with years 
Than with your weapons.

BRABANTIO 
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter? 
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her! 
For I’ll refer me to all things of sense, 
If she in chains of magic were not bound, 
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, 
So opposite to marriage that she shunned 
The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation, 
Would ever have, t’ incur a general mock, 
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom 
Of such a thing as thou - to fear, not to delight. 
Judge me the world if ’tis not gross in sense 
That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms, 
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals 
That weakens motion. I’ll have’t disputed on; 
’Tis probable, and palpable to thinking. 
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee 
For an abuser of the world, a practicer 
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant. 
Lay hold upon him. If he do resist, 
Subdue him at his peril.

OTHELLO Hold your hands, 
Both you of my inclining and the rest. 
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it 
Without a prompter. Where will you that I go

58 am for you challenge you 59 Keep up i.e., sheathe, put away 69 a
general mock universal laughter 72 gross in sense obvious 75 motion
perception; disputed on brought to law 77 attach arrest

To answer this your charge?

BRABANTIO To prison, till fit time 
Of law and course of direct session 
Call thee to answer.

OTHELLO What if I do obey? 
How may the duke be therewith satisfied, 
Whose messengers are here about my side 

Upon some present business of the state 
To bring me to him?

OFFICER ’Tis true, most worthy signor. 
The duke’s in council, and your noble self 
I am sure is sent for.

BRABANTIO How? The duke in council? 
In this time of the night? Bring him away. 
Mine’s not an idle cause. The duke himself, 
Or any of my brothers of the state, 
Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own; 
For if such actions may have passage free, 
Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be. Exeunt.

I.3 Enter Duke, Senators, and Officers [with lights].

DUKE 
There’s no composition in this news 
That gives them credit.

FIRST SENATOR Indeed they are disproportioned. My letters say a hundred
and seven galleys.

DUKE 
And mine a hundred forty.

SECOND SENATOR And mine two hundred. 
But though they jump not on a just account -

86 direct session regular trial 95 idle inconsequential I.3 The Venetian
Senate Chamber 1 composition consistency; news newly received
information 5 jump agree; just account precise estimate

As in these cases where the aim reports 
’Tis oft with difference - yet do they all confirm 
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

DUKE 
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment. 
I do not so secure me in the error 
But the main article I do approve 
In fearful sense.

SAILOR Within What, ho! what, ho! what, ho! Enter Sailor.

OFFICER 
A messenger from the galleys.

DUKE Now, what’s the business?

SAILOR 
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes. 
So was I bid report here to the state 
By Signor Angelo.

DUKE 
How say you by this change?

FIRST SENATOR This cannot be 
By no assay of reason. ’Tis a pageant 
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider 
Th’ importancy of Cyprus to the Turk, 
And let ourselves again but understand 
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes, 
So may he with more facile question bear it, 
For that it stands not in such warlike brace, 
But altogether lacks th’ abilities 
That Rhodes is dressed in - if we make thought of this, 
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful 
To leave that latest which concerns him first,

6 aim guess 10-12 I do not . . . sense the discrepancies of the reports
aren’t enough to cancel the frightening substance (main article) of
them 14 preparation forces, assembled fleet 18 assay test, effort;
pageant sideshow 19 in false gaze looking the wrong way 23 with . . .
it capture it more easily 24 brace state of defense 28 latest last

Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain 
To wake and wage a danger profitless.

DUKE 
Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.

OFFICER 
Here is more news. 
Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER 
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, 
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes, 
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

FIRST SENATOR 
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?

MESSENGER 
Of thirty sail; and now they do restem 
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance 
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signor Montano, 
Your trusty and most valiant servitor, 
With his free duty recommends you thus 
And prays you to believe him.

DUKE 
’Tis certain then for Cyprus. 
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?

FIRST SENATOR 
He’s now in Florence.

DUKE 
Write from us to him post-posthaste. Dispatch!

FIRST SENATOR 
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor. 
Enter Brabantio, Othello, Cassio, Iago, Roderigo, and 
Officers.

30 wake and wage rouse and risk 33 Ottomites Turkish fleet (Turks
and Ottomites seem to have been identified in the Elizabethan mind);
reverend and gracious (honorific term of address to the assembly) 34
due direct 35 injointed combined (themselves); after fleet a
subordinate or secondary navy 37 restem steer again 38 with frank
appearance openly, without deceit 41 free duty unlimited loyalty;
recommends informs

DUKE 
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you 
Against the general enemy Ottoman. 
[To Brabantio] 
I did not see you. Welcome, gentle signor. 
We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.

BRABANTIO 
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me. 
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of business, 
Hath raised me from my bed; nor doth the general care 
Take hold on me; for my particular grief 

Is of so floodgate and o’erbearing nature 
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows, 
And it is still itself.

DUKE Why, what’s the matter?

BRABANTIO 
My daughter! O, my daughter!

ALL Dead?

BRABANTIO Ay, to me. 
She is abused, stol’n from me, and corrupted 
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks; 
For nature so prepost’rously to err, 
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, 
Sans witchcraft could not.

DUKE 
Whoe’er he be that in this foul proceeding 
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself, 
And you of her, the bloody book of law 
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter 
After your own sense; yea, though our proper son 
Stood in your action.

48 straight straightaway, immediately 53 place position (as senator)
56 of so floodgate so torrential 57 engluts gulps down 60 abused
deceived 61 mountebanks quacks or scam artists (for which Venice was
notorious) 63 deficient feebleminded 67-69 bloody . . . sense i.e., you
may interpret the law in the strictest sense that suits you 69 our proper
my own 70 Stood in your action were the object of your charges

BRABANTIO Humbly I thank your grace. Here is the man - this Moor,
whom now, it seems, Your special mandate for the state affairs Hath hither
brought.

ALL We are very sorry for’t.

DUKE [To Othello] 
What, in your own part, can you say to this?

BRABANTIO 
Nothing, but this is so.

OTHELLO 
Most potent, grave, and reverend signors, 
My very noble and approved good masters, 

That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter, 
It is most true; true I have married her. 
The very head and front of my offending 
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech, 
And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace; 
For since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith 
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used 
Their dearest action in the tented field; 
And little of this great world can I speak 
More than pertains to feats of broils and battle; 
And therefore little shall I grace my cause 
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience, 
I will a round unvarnished tale deliver 
Of my whole course of love - what drugs, what 
charms, 
What conjuration, and what mighty magic 
(For such proceeding I am charged withal) 
I won his daughter.

BRABANTIO A maiden never bold; 
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion

77 approved tested by experience 81 Rude unskilled, unpolished 83
pith strength 84 wasted gone by 85 dearest most valuable 87 broils
strife, hurly-burly 90 round plain 95-96 her motion / Blushed her own
feelings caused her to blush

Blushed at herself; and she - in spite of nature, 
Of years, of country, credit, everything - 
To fall in love with what she feared to look on! 
It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect 
That will confess perfection so could err 
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven 
To find out practices of cunning hell 
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again 
That with some mixtures pow’rful o’er the blood, 
Or with some dram, conjured to this effect, 
He wrought upon her.

DUKE To vouch this is no proof, 
Without more wider and more overt test 
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods 

Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

SENATOR 
But, Othello, speak. 
Did you by indirect and forcèd courses 
Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections? 
Or came it by request, and such fair question 
As soul to soul affordeth?

OTHELLO I do beseech you, 
Send for the lady to the Sagittary 
And let her speak of me before her father. 
If you do find me foul in her report, 
The trust, the office, I do hold of you 
Not only take away, but let your sentence 
Even fall upon my life.

DUKE Fetch Desdemona hither.

97 credit reputation 101-2 must be driven . . . hell i.e., the reasonable
mind must seek diabolical plots 103 vouch claim 104 blood passions,
sexual appetite 105 dram small portion; conjured bewitched,
magically produced (accent on second syllable) 107 more wider . . .
overt more thorough and manifest (i.e., convincing) 108-9 these thin .
. . seeming i.e., these flimsy signs and conclusions drawn from
ordinary appearances 111 forcèd (1) unnatural, (2) coercive 113
question talk, conversation 117 foul ugly (also “dark,” perhaps
Othello’s ironic reference to his own color)

OTHELLO 
Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place. 
[Exit two or three Officers with Iago.] 
And till she come, as truly as to heaven 
I do confess the vices of my blood, 
So justly to your grave ears I’ll present 
How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love, 
And she in mine.

DUKE 
Say it, Othello.

OTHELLO 
Her father loved me, oft invited me, 
Still questioned me the story of my life 
From year to year - the battles, sieges, fortunes 

That I have passed. 
I ran it through, even from my boyish days 
To th’ very moment that he bade me tell it. 
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances, 
Of moving accidents by flood and field; 
Of hairbreadth scapes i’ th’ imminent deadly breach; 
Of being taken by the insolent foe 
And sold to slavery. Of my redemption thence 
And portance in my traveler’s history, 
Wherein of anters vast and deserts idle, 
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch 
heaven, 
It was my hint to speak - such was my process; 
And of the cannibals that each other eat, 
The anthropophagi, and men whose heads 
Do grow beneath their shoulders. These things to hear 
Would Desdemona seriously incline;

129 Still constantly 134 disastrous unlucky (Latin “ill-starred”) 135
accidents by flood and field occurrences on sea and land 136 in . . .
deadly breach gap in a defense inviting immediate disaster 137
insolent (1) arrogant, (2) insulting 139 portance behavior, bearing;
traveler’s history (a minor sub-genre of writing c. 1600, often
containing tall tales) 140 anters caves 142 
hint occasion, opportunity; process drift 144 anthropophagi man-
eaters

But still the house affairs would draw her thence, 
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch, 
She’d come again, and with a greedy ear 
Devour up my discourse. Which I observing, 
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means 
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart 
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate, 
Whereof by parcels she had something heard, 
But not intentively. I did consent, 
And often did beguile her of her tears 
When I did speak of some distressful stroke 
That my youth suffered. My story being done, 
She gave me for my pains a world of kisses. 

She swore in faith ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange; 
’Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful. 
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished 
That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked 
me, 
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her, 
I should but teach him how to tell my story, 
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake. 
She loved me for the dangers I had passed, 
And I loved her that she did pity them. 
This only is the witchcraft I have used. 
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it. 
Enter Desdemona, Iago, Attendants.

DUKE 
I think this tale would win my daughter too. 
Good Brabantio, 
Take up this mangled matter at the best. 
Men do their broken weapons rather use 
Than their bare hands.

151 pliant convenient 153 dilate expand upon 154 by parcels in bits
and pieces 155 intentively i.e., with her full attention 166 hint
opportunity (as at l. 142)

BRABANTIO I pray you hear her speak. 
If she confess that she was half the wooer, 
Destruction on my head if my bad blame 
Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress. 
Do you perceive in all this noble company 
Where most you owe obedience?

DESDEMONA My noble father, 
I do perceive here a divided duty. 
To you I am bound for life and education. 
My life and education both do learn me 
How to respect you: you are the lord of duty; 
I am hitherto your daughter. But here’s my husband; 
And so much duty as my mother showed 
To you, preferring you before her father, 
So much I challenge that I may profess 
Due to the Moor my lord.

BRABANTIO God be with you! I have done. 

Please it your grace, on to the state affairs. 
I had rather to adopt a child than get it. 
Come hither, Moor. 
I here do give thee that with all my heart 
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart 
I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel, 
I am glad at soul I have no other child, 
For thy escape would teach me tyranny, 
To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.

DUKE 
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence 
Which, as a grece or step, may help these lovers

182 education rearing 188 challenge assert the right 191 get beget 194
but thou hast already if you didn’t have it already 195 For your sake
thanks to you 197 escape transgression, escapade 198 clogs weights
(of the kind attached to prisoners; in the seventeenth century they were
made of blocks of wood) 199 like yourself as you should; sentence
brief sermon or maxim (i.e., the following rhymed couplets of advice)
200 grece stairstep

Into your favor. 
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended 
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended. 
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone 
Is the next way to draw new mischief on. 
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes, 
Patience her injury a mock’ry makes. 
The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief; 
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

BRABANTIO 
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile: 
We lose it not so long as we can smile. 
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears 
But the free comfort which from thence he hears; 
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow 
That to pay grief must of poor patience borrow. 
These sentences, to sugar, or to gall, 
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal. 
But words are words. I never yet did hear 

That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear. 
I humbly beseech you proceed to th’ affairs of state.

DUKE The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello,
the fortitude of the place is best known to you; and though we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a more sovereign

202-3 When remedies . . . depended i.e., disappointment is best
mended by facing the unhappy outcome that you feared 206-7 What
cannot . . . mock’ry makes to show patience when one is unfortunate is
to ridicule and thus show superiority to fortune 209 spends a bootless
grief indulges in worthless lamentation 210 So in that case; of Cyprus
us beguile cheat us out of possession of Cyprus 212-15 He bears . . .
borrow i.e., he who can simply take the advice and forget the injury is
lucky, but he who is still sorrowful (who has to borrow from patience
to pay a debt to grief ) has to put up with the lecture and the misery
219 pierced (some editors emend to “pieced” - i.e., “mended”) 222
fortitude defensive strength, fortification 223 substitute governor or
deputy (another instance of replacement in the play) 224 allowed
acknowledged; opinion reputation 224-25 more sovereign mistress of
effects better predictor of outcomes

mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. You must therefore be
content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and
boist’rous expedition.

OTHELLO 
The tyrant custom, most grave senators, 
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war 
My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize 
A natural and prompt alacrity 
I find in hardness; and do undertake 
This present wars against the Ottomites. 
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state, 
I crave fit disposition for my wife, 
Due reference of place, and exhibition, 
With such accommodation and besort 
As levels with her breeding.

DUKE 
Why, at her father’s.

BRABANTIO I will not have it so.

OTHELLO 

Nor I.

DESDEMONA Nor would I there reside, 
To put my father in impatient thoughts 
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke, 
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear, 
And let me find a charter in your voice, 
T’ assist my simpleness.

DUKE 
What would you, Desdemona?

226 slubber stain or darken 227 stubborn untamable 231 thrice-driven
bed of down feather bed winnowed three times to make it supersoft
231-33 agnize . . . hardness i.e., recognize in myself a taste (alacrity)
for hardship or challenge 235 bending to your state i.e., bowing to
your position 236 fit disposition appropriate arrangements 237
reference of place assignment of residence; exhibition allowance 238
besort companions 239 levels with matches 244 prosperous favorable
245 a charter license, authority 246 simpleness inexperience

DESDEMONA 
That I did love the Moor to live with him, 
My downright violence, and storm of fortunes, 
May trumpet to the world. My heart’s subdued 
Even to the very quality of my lord. 
I saw Othello’s visage in his mind, 
And to his honors and his valiant parts 
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate. 
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind, 
A moth of peace, and he go to the war, 
The rites for why I love him are bereft me, 
And I a heavy interim shall support 
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

OTHELLO 
Let her have your voice. 
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not 
To please the palate of my appetite, 
Nor to comply with heat - the young affects 
In me defunct - and proper satisfaction; 
But to be free and bounteous to her mind. 
And heaven defend your good souls that you think 
I will your serious and great business scant 

When she is with me. No, when light-winged toys 
Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness 
My speculative and officed instruments, 
That my disports corrupt and taint my business, 
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm, 
And all indign and base adversities

249 downright violence obvious unconventionality (violence against
propriety); storm of fortunes i.e., the tempestuous results of that
unconventionality 251 quality essential nature 252 I saw . . . his mind
i.e., I looked within Othello, replacing his dark face (visage) with his
mind 253 parts talents, gifts 257 rites ceremonies or perhaps also
“rights,” privileges of marriage 259 dear costly, grievous 263 comply
with heat follow the dictates of passion; young affects youthful desires
268-69 light-winged toys . . . Cupid trivial sports of love 269-70 seel .
. . instruments i.e., blind my vision (speculative and officed
instruments) with the low desires of the body 271 That such that;
disports i.e., sexual pleasures 273 indign shameful

Make head against my estimation!

DUKE 
Be it as you shall privately determine, 
Either for her stay or going. Th’ affair cries haste, 
And speed must answer it.

SENATOR 
You must away tonight.

OTHELLO With all my heart.

DUKE 
At nine i’ th’ morning here we’ll meet again. 
Othello, leave some officer behind, 
And he shall our commission bring to you, 
And such things else of quality and respect 
As doth import you.

OTHELLO So please your grace, my ancient; 
A man he is of honesty and trust. 
To his conveyance I assign my wife, 
With what else needful your good grace shall think 
To be sent after me.

DUKE Let it be so. 

Good night to every one. 
[To Brabantio] And, noble signor, 
If virtue no delighted beauty lack, 
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

SENATOR 
Adieu, brave Moor. Use Desdemona well.

BRABANTIO 
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see: 
She has deceived her father, and may thee. 
Exit [Duke, with Senators, Officers, etc.].

OTHELLO 
My life upon her faith! - Honest Iago, 
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.

274 Make head mount an attack; estimation reputation 283 import
concern 285 conveyance escorting 289 If virtue . . . lack if worthiness
(virtue) has the power to be delightful (delighted) 294 faith fidelity,
faithfulness

I prithee let thy wife attend on her, 
And bring them after in the best advantage. 
Come, Desdemona. I have but an hour 
Of love, of worldly matters and direction, 
To spend with thee. We must obey the time. 
Exit [Othello with Desdemona].

RODERIGO Iago -

IAGO What say’st thou, noble heart?

RODERIGO What will I do, think’st thou?

IAGO Why, go to bed and sleep.

RODERIGO I will incontinently drown myself.

IAGO If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman?

RODERIGO It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a
prescription to die when death is our physician.

IAGO O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years,
and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never found
man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say I would drown myself
for the love of a guinea hen, I would change my humanity with a baboon.

RODERIGO What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it
is not in my virtue to amend it.

IAGO Virtue? a fig! ’Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are
our gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners; so that if we will plant
nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one
gender of herbs or distract it with many -

297 in the best advantage at the most opportune time 299 direction
overseeing business 305 incontinently immediately 309-10 have . . .
physician ancient custom (prescription) leads us to kill ourselves if
doing so will cure our ills 315 guinea hen bird (figuratively, slang
term for a woman; cf. “chick”) 318 virtue power, ability 321 wills
desires (but the term is sexually loaded: in the period its specific sense
of “erotic desire” was supplemented with numerous connotations,
from “penis” to “vagina”) 323 gender kind (cf. “genre”); distract
divide

either to have it sterile with idleness or manured with industry - why, the
power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If the beam of our lives
had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and
baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost’rous conclusions.
But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings or unbitted
lusts; whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.

RODERIGO It cannot be.

IAGO It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be a
man! Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies! I have professed me thy
friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable
toughness. I could never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse.
Follow thou the wars; defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put
money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her
love to the Moor - put money in thy purse - nor he his to her. It was a violent
commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration - put
but money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their wills - fill thy
purse with money. The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be
to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. She must change for youth: when she
is sated with his body, she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore put
money in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a

324-25 sterile . . . industry either unproductive or richly cultivated 325
corrigible authority power to correct 327 poise counterbalance 328
blood and baseness bestial instincts 330 motions impulses; unbitted

uncontrolled, unbridled 331-32 a sect or scion an offshoot or a cutting
334 merely completely (i.e., nothing more than) 337-38 perdurable
unbreakable 338 stead help 339-40 defeat thy favor undo your facial
appearance (i.e., disguise yourself by putting on an usurped
[counterfeit] beard) 344-45 answerable sequestration equivalent
separation 347 locusts carobs, known for their sweet juice 348
coloquintida medicine made from the colocynth, a bitter apple

more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If
sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle
Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy
her. Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! - it is clean out of the
way. Seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned
and go without her.

RODERIGO Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?

IAGO Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I
retell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted; thine hath no
less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him. If thou canst
cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many events
in the womb of time, which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy
money! We will have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.

RODERIGO Where shall we meet i’ th’ morning?

IAGO At my lodging.

RODERIGO I’ll be with thee betimes.

IAGO Go to, farewell. - Do you hear, Roderigo?

RODERIGO I’ll sell all my land. Exit.

IAGO 
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse; 
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane 
If I would time expend with such a snipe 
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,

352 delicate pleasant; Make raise 353 sanctimony holiness (here false
virtue or faithfulness?) 354 erring wandering 356 A pox of i.e., “a
curse on,” “to hell with” (pox=venereal disease) 357 clean out of the
way i.e., out of the question 357-59 Seek thou . . . without her i.e., risk
death in trying to win her rather than die and have no chance 360 fast
faithful 360-61 depend on the issue i.e., wait to see the outcome 364
hearted i.e., lodged deep in my heart 365 conjunctive united 366

cuckold him commit adultery with his wife 368 Traverse i.e., get
moving, onward 372 betimes early 373 Go to (conventional
expression of impatience or agreement - “all right, then” or “you see”)
377 snipe dupe, fool

And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets 
H’as done my office. I know not if ’t be true, 
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind, 
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well; 
The better shall my purpose work on him. 
Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now: 
To get his place, and to plume up my will 
In double knavery - How, how? - Let’s see: - 
After some time, to abuse Othello’s ears 
That he is too familiar with his wife. 
He hath a person and a smooth dispose 
To be suspected - framed to make women false. 
The Moor is of a free and open nature 
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so; 
And will as tenderly be led by th’ nose 
As asses are. 
I have’t! It is engendered! Hell and night 
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light. 
[Exit.]

II.1 Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.

MONTANO 
What from the cape can you discern at sea?

FIRST GENTLEMAN 
Nothing at all: it is a high-wrought flood. 
I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main 
Descry a sail.

380 office business (i.e., sexual) 382 holds me well thinks highly of me
384 proper (1) good-looking, (2) dutiful, responsible 385 place
position, job; plume up my will i.e., pride myself on getting what I
want (to plume is to show self-satisfaction, to preen) 389 dispose
manner 391 free unreserved, unsuspicious

II.1 Cyprus, near the harbor 2 high-wrought flood turbulent sea 3

main sea 4 Descry discern, make out

MONTANO 
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land; 
A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements. 
If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea, 
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, 
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?

SECOND [GENTLEMAN] 
A segregation of the Turkish fleet. 
For do but stand upon the foaming shore, 
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds; 
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous 
mane, 
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear 
And quench the Guards of th’ ever-fixèd pole. 
I never did like molestation view 
On the enchafèd flood.

MONTANO If that the Turkish fleet 
Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned; 
It is impossible to bear it out. 
Enter a [third] Gentleman.

THIRD [GENTLEMAN] 
News, lads! Our wars are done. 
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks 
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice 
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance 
On most part of their fleet.

MONTANO 
How? Is this true? 
THIRD [GENTLEMAN] The ship is here put in,

8 ribs of oak curved frame of a ship’s hull 9 hold the mortise hold their
joints together 10 segregation scattering (i.e., defeat) 12 chidden
billow i.e., driven wave (past tense of “chide,” to scold or compel by
scolding) 13 mane (figuratively the foam of the surge is like a
monster’s mane; with a pun on “main,” sea) 14 burning Bear
constellation Ursa Minor 15 Guards . . . pole two attendant stars,
known as the “guardians” of the polestar 16 molestation turmoil 17

enchafèd furious, enraged 22 designment halts naval plan limps 23
wrack and sufferance devastation and injury

A Veronesa. Michael Cassio, 
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor, Othello, 
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea, 
And is in full commission here for Cyprus. 
MONTANO 
I am glad on’t. ’Tis a worthy governor.

THIRD [GENTLEMAN] 
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort 
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly 
And prays the Moor be safe, for they were parted 
With foul and violent tempest.

MONTANO Pray heavens he be; 
For I have served him, and the man commands 
Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside - ho! - 
As well to see the vessel that’s come in 
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, 
Even till we make the main and th’ aerial blue 
An indistinct regard.

GENTLEMAN Come, let’s do so; 
For every minute is expectancy 
Of more arrivance. 
Enter Cassio.

CASSIO 
Thanks, you the valiant of the warlike isle, 
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens 
Give him defense against the elements, 
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea!

MONTANO 
Is he well shipped?

CASSIO 
His bark is stoutly timbered, and his pilot 
Of very expert and approved allowance;

26 Veronesa (probably a ship supplied by the city of Verona, but
perhaps a particular kind of vessel) 31 of comfort i.e., with relief 39-40
Even till . . . regard until we can’t distinguish the blues of sea and sky

44 approve admire, support

Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, 
Stand in bold cure.

[VOICES] (Within) A sail, a sail, a sail!

CASSIO 
What noise?

GENTLEMAN 
The town is empty; on the brow o’ th’ sea 
Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A sail!”

CASSIO 
My hopes do shape him for the governor. 
[A shot.]

GENTLEMAN 
They do discharge their shot of courtesy: 
Our friends at least.

CASSIO I pray you, sir, go forth 
And give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.

GENTLEMAN 
I shall. Exit.

MONTANO 
But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?

CASSIO 
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid 
That paragons description and wild fame; 
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, 
And in th’ essential vesture of creation 
Does tire the ingener. 
Enter Gentleman. 
How now? Who has put in?

GENTLEMAN 
’Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.

50-51 my hopes . . . bold cure i.e., since I haven’t allowed myself to
hope too much (hopes, not surfeited to death), the chances of my
getting my wish are good (Stand in bold cure) 55 My . . . governor i.e.,
“I hope this is Othello’s ship” 62 paragons . . . fame surpasses the
wildest praise 63 quirks turns of phrase; blazoning descriptive (with

the suggestion of praise) 64-65 essential vesture . . . ingener i.e., her
native excellence wearies the would-be inventor (ingener) of praise

CASSIO 
H’as had most favorable and happy speed: 
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, 
The guttered rocks and congregated sands, 
Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel, 
As having sense of beauty, do omit 
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by 
The divine Desdemona.

MONTANO What is she?

CASSIO 
She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain, 
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago, 
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts 
A sennight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard, 
And swell his sail with thine own pow’rful breath, 
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship, 
Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms, 
Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits, 
And bring all Cyprus comfort! 
Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia [with 
Attendants]. O, behold! 
The riches of the ship is come on shore! 
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees. 
Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven, 
Before, behind thee, and on every hand, 
Enwheel thee round!

DESDEMONA I thank you, valiant Cassio. 
What tidings can you tell me of my lord?

CASSIO 
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught 
But that he’s well and will be shortly here.

67 happy speed good fortune (as well as pace) 69 guttered grooved,
jagged 70 ensteeped submerged 72 mortal deadly 76 footing landing
77 sen-night’s week’s 79-80 That . . . Make love’s quick pants i.e., that
he may experience the rapid breathing of joyous love 81 extincted
extinguished, 

dampened 84 let her have your knees i.e., bow to her

DESDEMONA 
O but I fear! How lost you company?

CASSIO 
The great contention of sea and skies 
Parted our fellowship.

[VOICES] (Within) A sail, a sail! [A shot.]

CASSIO But hark. A sail!

GENTLEMAN 
They give their greeting to the citadel; 
This likewise is a friend.

CASSIO See for the news. 
[Exit Gentleman.] 
Good ancient, you are welcome. 
[To Emilia] Welcome, mistress. - 
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago, 
That I extend my manners. ’Tis my breeding 
That gives me this bold show of courtesy. 
[Kisses Emilia.]

IAGO 
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips 
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me, 
You would have enough.

DESDEMONA Alas, she has no speech!

IAGO 
In faith, too much. 
I find it still when I have leave to sleep. 
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant, 
She puts her tongue a little in her heart 
And chides with thinking.

EMILIA 
You have little cause to say so.

98 extend my manners i.e., as far as Emilia 99 s.d. Kisses Emilia (a
social custom among the Elizabethans) 101 tongue (in the sense of
scolding) 104 still always (i.e., even); have leave am allowed (and
should be able) 106-7 She puts . . . thinking i.e., she scolds me silently

IAGO 

Come on, come on! You are pictures out of door, 
Bells in your parlors, wildcats in your kitchens, 
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended, 
Players in your huswifery, and huswives in your beds.

DESDEMONA 
O, fie upon thee, slanderer!

IAGO 
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk: 
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

EMILIA 
You shall not write my praise.

IAGO No, let me not.

DESDEMONA 
What wouldst write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?

IAGO 
O gentle lady, do not put me to’t, 
For I am nothing if not critical.

DESDEMONA 
Come on, assay. - There’s one gone to the harbor?

IAGO 
Ay, madam.

DESDEMONA 
I am not merry; but I do beguile 
The thing I am by seeming otherwise. - 
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

IAGO 
I am about it; but indeed my invention

110 Bells i.e., noisemakers 111 Saints in your injuries i.e., pretenders
of innocence when harming others 112 Players in your huswifery
actors (i.e., not real workers at your housekeeping); huswives in your
beds i.e., (1) in control of your husbands, (2) hussies, wantons 120
assay try 122 beguile charm away 123 The thing I am i.e., my
nervousness about my husband’s arrival 125 invention idea (i.e., the
praise)

Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze - 
It plucks out brains and all. But my muse labors, 

And thus she is delivered: 
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit - 
The one’s for use, the other useth it.

DESDEMONA 
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?

IAGO 
If she be black, and thereto have a wit, 
She’ll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

DESDEMONA 
Worse and worse!

EMILIA 
How if fair and foolish?

IAGO 
She never yet was foolish that was fair, 
For even her folly helped her to an heir. 
DESDEMONA These are old fond paradoxes to make 
fools laugh i’ th’ alehouse. What miserable praise hast 
thou for her that’s foul and foolish?

IAGO 
There’s none so foul, and foolish thereunto, 
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

DESDEMONA O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what
praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed - one that in the
authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself ?

126 pate head; as birdlime . . . frieze with as much difficulty as getting
birdlime (a sticky white paste used to trap birds) out of frieze (a coarse
woolen cloth) 131 black brunet or dark-complexioned 133 find a white
. . . fit (a complex pun: white=“wight” or “man,” but also the “white”
was the center of a target - i.e., “she’ll find a matching fair-skinned
man who likes her dark skin”) 137 folly sexual looseness (as well as
foolishness) 138 fond foolish 140 foul ugly 143 heavy grievous 146 put
on the vouch win the approval

IAGO 
She that was ever fair, and never proud; 
Had tongue at will, and yet was never loud; 
Never lacked gold, and yet went never gay; 
Fled from her wish, and yet said “Now I may”; 
She that, being angered, her revenge being nigh, 

Bade her wrong stay, and her displeasure fly; 
She that in wisdom never was so frail 
To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail; 
She that could think, and ne’er disclose her mind; 
See suitors following, and not look behind: 
She was a wight (if ever such wights were) -

DESDEMONA To do what?

IAGO 
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

DESDEMONA O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him,
Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most
profane and liberal counselor?

CASSIO He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier
than in the scholar.

IAGO [Aside] He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper! With as little
a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do! I
will gyve thee in thine own courtship. - You say true; ’tis so, indeed! - If such
tricks as these strip you out of your lieu-tenantry, it had been better you had
not kissed your

150 gay extravagantly dressed 151 Fled . . . I may i.e., did not allow
herself to do what she could have 153 Bade her . . . fly i.e., put up with
her trouble and dismissed her anger about it 155 To change . . . tail
i.e., not so foolish (never . . . so frail) as to exchange something
worthless - the cod’s head - for something precious - the salmon’s tail
(cod [scrotum] and tail also have sexual connotations) 158 wight
person 160 suckle take care of; chronicle small beer keep a tally of
trivialities 163-64 profane and liberal lewd and free-talking 165 home
bluntly 167 well said i.e., well done, good work 169- 70 gyve thee
chain you up, entrap you

three fingers so oft - which now again you are most apt to play the sir in. Very
good! well kissed! and excellent courtesy! ’Tis so, indeed. Yet again your
fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster pipes for your sake! [Trumpet
within.] The Moor! I know his trumpet.

CASSIO ’Tis truly so.

DESDEMONA Let’s meet him and receive him.

CASSIO Lo, where he comes. 
Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO 
O my fair warrior!

DESDEMONA My dear Othello!

OTHELLO 
It gives me wonder great as my content 
To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy! 
If after every tempest come such calms, 
May the winds blow till they have wakened death! 
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas 
Olympus-high, and duck again as low 
As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die, 
’Twere now to be most happy, for I fear 
My soul hath her content so absolute 
That not another comfort like to this 
Succeeds in unknown fate.

DESDEMONA The heavens forbid 
But that our loves and comforts should increase 
Even as our days do grow.

OTHELLO Amen to that, sweet powers! 
I cannot speak enough of this content; 
It stops me here; it is too much of joy. 
And this, and this, the greatest discords be 
[They kiss.] 
That e’er our hearts shall make!

174 play the sir in act the courtier 176 clyster pipes tubes for enemas
or vaginal insertions 188 If it were now if it were now my fate 189
happy fortunate 191 comfort satisfaction 196 here (presumably he
indicates his heart)

IAGO [Aside] O, you are well tuned now! 
But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music, 
As honest as I am.

OTHELLO Come, let us to the castle. 
News, friends! Our wars are done; the Turks are 
drowned. 
How does my old acquaintance of this isle? - 
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus; 
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet, 
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote 

In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago, 
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers. 
Bring thou the master to the citadel; 
He is a good one, and his worthiness 
Does challenge much respect. - Come, Desdemona, 
Once more well met at Cyprus. 
Exit Othello and Desdemona 
[with all but Iago and Roderigo].

IAGO [To an Attendant going out] Do thou meet me presently at the harbor.
[To Roderigo] Come hither. If thou be’st valiant (as they say base men being
in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them), list
me. The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell
thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.

RODERIGO With him? Why, ’tis not possible.

IAGO Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what
violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and telling her fantastical
lies. To love him still for prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye
must be fed; and what delight shall she have to

199 set down i.e., loosen, untune 203 well desired sought after,
welcomed 205 out of fashion i.e., as I shouldn’t at this time 207
disembark my coffers bring my luggage ashore (coffers = trunks) 208
master i.e., ship master 210 challenge demand, deserve 216 list listen
to 216-17 watches . . . guard i.e., is on duty with the corps de garde,
the patrol assigned to headquarters 220 thus i.e., on your lips, for
silence 223 discreet discerning

look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there
should be, again to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in
favor, sympathy in years, manners, and beauties; all which the Moor is
defective in. Now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate
tenderness will find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and
abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some
second choice. Now sir, this granted - as it is a most pregnant and unforced
position - who stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does?
A knave very voluble; no further conscionable than in putting on the mere
form of civil and humane seeming for the better compass of his salt and most
hidden loose affection? Why, none! why, none! A slipper and subtle knave, a
finder of occasion, that has an eye can stamp and counterfeit advantages,
though true advantage never present itself; a devilish knave! Besides, the
knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and

green minds look after. A pestilent complete knave! and the woman hath
found him already.

RODERIGO I cannot believe that in her; she’s full of most blessed condition.

IAGO Blessed fig’s-end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had
been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst
thou not see

225 the devil (traditionally represented as dark) 226 act of sport i.e.,
copulation 227 favor appearance, especially of the face 230
conveniences points of agreement (literally, “comings together”) 231
heave the gorge vomit 234 pregnant apparent 236 voluble smooth-
talking (also “inconstant”) 236- 39 no . . . affection i.e., his conscience
requires him to do no more than to assume good manners (form of
civil and humane seeming) in order to succeed sexually
(salt=salacious, sexy) 239 slipper slippery 240 finder of occasion i.e.,
an opportunist 241 stamp . . . advantages invent opportunities by
fraudulent (counterfeit) means 244 green young, naive; look after i.e.,
go for 248 blessed condition holy character 249 fig’s-end (a crude turn
on the preceding phrase; see I.3.319) 251 pudding sausage

her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?

RODERIGO Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.

IAGO Lechery, by this hand! an index and obscure prologue to the history of
lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips that their breaths
embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! When these mutualities so
marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th’
incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me: I have brought you
from Venice. Watch you tonight. For the command, I’ll lay’t upon you. Cassio
knows you not. I’ll not be far from you: do you find some occasion to anger
Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what
other course you please which the time shall more favorably minister.

RODERIGO Well.

IAGO Sir, he’s rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may strike at you.
Provoke him that he may; for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to
mutiny; whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but by the
displanting of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by
the means I shall then have to prefer them; and the impediment most
profitably removed without the which there were no expectation of our
prosperity.

255 an index a table of contents; obscure hidden, secret 258-60

mutualities . . . conclusion polite exchanges (mutualities) initiate a
figurative parade, with hand-kissing as those who lead (marshal the
way) followed immediately (hard at hand ) by the main event (master
and main exercise), the sexual act (incorporate conclusion) 261 Pish
(expression of disgust) 262 Watch you i.e., you join the watch 263
lay’t upon you i.e., arrange for your participation 265 tainting his
discipline belittling his professionalism 269 sudden in choler quick to
anger; haply perhaps 270 Provoke . . . may i.e., do something to ensure
that he will 271 mutiny riot 272 qualification . . . taste (a drinking
metaphor concerning diluted or altered wine; i.e., the disturbed
Cypriots won’t be back to normal until Cassio is fired) 275 prefer
advance

RODERIGO I will do this if you can bring it to any opportunity.

IAGO I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel; I must fetch his
necessaries ashore. Farewell.

RODERIGO Adieu. Exit.

IAGO 
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe’t; 
That she loves him, ’tis apt and of great credit. 
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not, 
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature, 
And I dare think he’ll prove to Desdemona 
A most dear husband. Now I do love her too; 
Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure 
I stand accountant for as great a sin, 
But partly led to diet my revenge, 
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor 
Hath leaped into my seat, the thought whereof 
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards, 
And nothing can or shall content my soul 
Till I am evened with him, wife for wife; 
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor 
At least into a jealousy so strong 
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do, 
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace 
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on, 
I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip, 
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb 
(For I fear Cassio with my nightcap too), 

Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me 
For making him egregiously an ass

284 apt likely; of great credit easily credible 290 accountant
accountable 291 diet feed, nourish 293 leaped into my seat i.e., done
my (sexual) job 300 trace pursue (with a pun on trash earlier in the
line) 301 For his quick hunting i.e., because he goes after what I tell
him to; stand the putting on tolerates my using him as I do 302 on the
hip i.e., where I want him (term from wrestling) 303 rank garb nasty
fashion 306 egregiously exceptionally, spectacularly

And practicing upon his peace and quiet 
Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confused: 
Knavery’s plain face is never seen till used. Exit.

II.2 Enter Othello’s Herald, with a proclamation.

HERALD It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that, upon
certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,
every man put himself into triumph; some to dance, some to make bonfires,
each man to what sport and revels his addition leads him. For, besides these
beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure
should be proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full liberty of feasting
from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the
isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello! Exit.

II.3 Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.

OTHELLO 
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight. 
Let’s teach ourselves that honorable stop, 
Not to outsport discretion.

CASSIO 
Iago hath direction what to do; 
But notwithstanding, with my personal eye 
Will I look to’t.

OTHELLO Iago is most honest.

307 practicing upon plotting against 308 yet so far II.2 Cyprus, a

public area 3 mere perdition total loss 6 addition rank, position 8
offices military storehouses 10 told tolled (with pun on “tell” = count)

II.3 The area in front of the Cyprian castle 3 outsport overrun,

violate

Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest 
Let me have speech with you. 
[To Desdemona] Come, my dear love. 
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue; 
That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you. - 
Good night. 
Exit [Othello with Desdemona and Attendants]. 
Enter Iago.

CASSIO Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.

IAGO Not this hour, lieutenant; ’tis not yet ten o’ th’ clock. Our general cast
us thus early for the love of his Desdemona, who let us not therefore blame.
He hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for Jove.

CASSIO She’s a most exquisite lady.

IAGO And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.

CASSIO Indeed, she’s a most fresh and delicate creature.

IAGO What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.

CASSIO An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.

IAGO And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?

CASSIO She is indeed perfection.

IAGO Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of
wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a
measure to the health of black Othello.

CASSIO Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for
drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.

IAGO O, they are our friends. But one cup! I’ll drink for you.

7 with your earliest at your earliest convenience 14 cast dismissed,
“cast us off” 19 full of game i.e., sexually eager 21-22 a parley to
provocation a signal to a sexual encounter (a military metaphor) 24 an
alarum a call (again, a military signal) 27 stoup tankard, container;
brace pair 28 would . . . measure desire to drink a toast

CASSIO I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified too,
and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity
and dare not task my weakness with any more.

IAGO What, man! ’Tis a night of revels: the gallants desire it.

CASSIO Where are they?

IAGO Here at the door; I pray you call them in.

CASSIO I’ll do’t, but it dislikes me. Exit.

IAGO 
If I can fasten but one cup upon him 
With that which he hath drunk tonight already, 
He’ll be as full of quarrel and offense 
As my young mistress’ dog. Now my sick fool 
Roderigo, 
Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out, 
To Desdemona hath tonight caroused 
Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch. 
Three else of Cyprus - noble swelling spirits, 
That hold their honors in a wary distance, 
The very elements of this warlike isle - 
Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups, 
And they watch too. Now, ’mongst this flock of drunkards 
Am I to put our Cassio in some action 
That may offend the isle. 
Enter Cassio, Montano, and Gentlemen [with Servants 
bringing wine]. 
But here they come. 
If consequence do but approve my dream, 
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

36 craftily qualified carefully diluted; innovation disturbance,
revolution 38 task endanger, overtax 49-50 caroused / Potations pottle-
deep drunk gulps to the bottom of the pottle or cup 51 else others;
swelling proud 52 hold . . . distance are vain and sensitive about their
honor 53 very elements i.e., the proud soldiers represent the essential
defensiveness of the islanders 58 consequence what follows; approve
bear out

CASSIO ’Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.

MONTANO Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a soldier.

IAGO Some wine, ho! 

[Sings.] 
And let me the cannikin clink, clink; 
And let me the cannikin clink. 
A soldier’s a man; 
O man’s life’s but a span, 
Why then, let a soldier drink. 
Some wine, boys!

CASSIO ’Fore God, an excellent song!

IAGO I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting.
Your Dane, your German, and your swagbellied Hollander - Drink, ho! - are
nothing to your English.

CASSIO Is your Englishman so exquisite in his drinking?

IAGO Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not
to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle
can be filled.

CASSIO To the health of our general!

MONTANO I am for it, lieutenant, and I’ll do you justice.

IAGO O sweet England! 
[Sings.] 
King Stephen was and-a worthy peer, 
His breeches cost him but a crown; 
He held them sixpence all too dear, 
With that he called the tailor lown. 
He was a wight of high renown, 
And thou art but of low degree.

60 a rouse a carouse (i.e., a drink) 64 cannikin (diminutive of “can”);
clink i.e., against another in a toast 73 swagbellied with a stomach
draped over the belt 75 exquisite (1) accomplished, (2) extreme 76
with facility easily 77 Almain German (French Allemagne, Germany)
78 gives . . . vomit i.e., causes the Dutchman to throw up 86 lown
rascal, lout

’Tis pride that pulls the country down; 
Then take thine auld cloak about thee. 
Some wine, ho!

CASSIO ’Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

IAGO Will you hear’t again?

CASSIO No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those
things. Well, God’s above all; and there be souls must be saved, and there be
souls must not be saved.

IAGO It’s true, good lieutenant.

CASSIO For mine own part - no offense to the general, nor any man of
quality - I hope to be saved.

IAGO And so do I too, lieutenant.

CASSIO Ay, but, by your leave, not before me. The lieutenant is to be saved
before the ancient. Let’s have no more of this; let’s to our affairs. - God
forgive us our sins! - Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. Do not think,
gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient; this is my right hand, and this is
my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough, and I speak well
enough.

GENTLEMEN Excellent well!

CASSIO Why, very well then. You must not think then that I am drunk. Exit.

MONTANO 
To th’ platform, masters. Come, let’s set the watch. 
[Exeunt some Gentlemen.]

IAGO 
You see this fellow that is gone before. 
He’s a soldier fit to stand by Caesar 
And give direction, and do but see his vice. 
’Tis to his virtue a just equinox, 
The one as long as th’ other. ’Tis pity of him.

90 auld old 96 does those things behaves in that way 101 man of
quality person of high rank or station 114 fellow person (but
sometimes, perhaps here, with a contemptuous undertone); is gone
before just left 117 just equinox precise equivalent

I fear the trust Othello puts him in, 
On some odd time of his infirmity, 
Will shake this island.

MONTANO But is he often thus?

IAGO 
’Tis evermore his prologue to his sleep: 
He’ll watch the horologe a double set 
If drink rock not his cradle.

MONTANO It were well 
The general were put in mind of it. 
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature 
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio 
And looks not on his evils. Is not this true? 
Enter Roderigo.

IAGO [Aside to him] 
How now, Roderigo? 
I pray you after the lieutenant, go! [Exit Roderigo.]

MONTANO 
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor 
Should hazard such a place as his own second 
With one of an engraffed infirmity. 
It were an honest action to say 
So to the Moor.

IAGO Not I, for this fair island! 
I do love Cassio well and would do much 
To cure him of this evil.

[VOICE] (Within) Help! help!

IAGO But hark! What noise? 
Enter Cassio pursuing Roderigo.

CASSIO 
Zounds, you rogue! you rascal!

MONTANO 
What’s the matter, lieutenant?

123-24 watch . . . cradle stay awake twice around the clock unless he
has a drink (i.e., Cassio can’t sleep without drinking first) 133 an
engraffed a built-in

CASSIO A knave teach me my duty? 
I’ll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.

RODERIGO 
Beat me?

CASSIO Dost thou prate, rogue? 
[Strikes Roderigo.]

MONTANO Nay, good lieutenant! 
[Stays Cassio.] 
I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

CASSIO Let me go, sir, 
Or I’ll knock you o’er the mazard.

MONTANO Come, come, you’re 
drunk!

CASSIO Drunk? 
[They fight.]

IAGO [Aside to Roderigo] 
Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny! [Exit Roderigo.] 
Nay, good lieutenant. God’s will, gentlemen! 
[A bell rung.] 
Help, ho! - lieutenant - sir - Montano! 
Help, masters! - Here’s a goodly watch indeed! 
Who’s that which rings the bell? Diablo, ho! 
The town will rise. God’s will, lieutenant, hold! 
You’ll be ashamed forever. 
Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO What is the matter here?

MONTANO 
Zounds, I bleed still. I am hurt to th’ death. 
He dies!

OTHELLO 
Hold for your lives!

IAGO 
Hold, ho! Lieutenant - sir - Montano - gentlemen!

140 twiggen bottle wicker-covered bottle (i.e., Cassio threatens
crisscross stripes on his victim’s skin) 143 mazard head 149 Diablo
devil (an oath) 150 rise i.e., rise up, riot

Have you forgot all place of sense and duty? 
Hold! The general speaks to you. Hold, for shame!

OTHELLO 
Why, how now, ho? From whence ariseth this? 
Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that 
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites? 
For Christian shame put by this barbarous brawl! 
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage 
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion. 

Silence that dreadful bell! It frights the isle 
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters? 
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving, 
Speak. Who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.

IAGO 
I do not know. Friends all, but now, even now, 
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom 
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now - 
As if some planet had unwitted men - 
Swords out, and tilting one at others’ breasts 
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak 
Any beginning to this peevish odds, 
And would in action glorious I had lost 
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!

OTHELLO 
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?

CASSIO 
I pray you pardon me. I cannot speak.

OTHELLO 
Worthy Montano, you were wont to be civil; 
The gravity and stillness of your youth 
The world hath noted, and your name is great

159 Are . . . turned Turks have we become barbarous (proverbial in the
period) 160 hath forbid the Ottomites i.e., to defeat ourselves (which
they could not) 162 carve for his own rage indulge his anger 163
Holds his soul light doesn’t value his own soul (i.e., will die) 165
propriety proper state (i.e., calm) 169 quarter conduct toward; terms
language 172 tilting aiming, thrusting 174 peevish odds headstrong,
childish strife

In mouths of wisest censure. What’s the matter 
That you unlace your reputation thus 
And spend your rich opinion for the name 
Of a night brawler? Give me answer to it.

MONTANO 
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger. 
Your officer, Iago, can inform you, 
While I spare speech, which something now offends me, 

Of all that I do know; nor know I aught 
By me that’s said or done amiss this night, 
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, 
And to defend ourselves it be a sin 
When violence assails us.

OTHELLO Now, by heaven, 
My blood begins my safer guides to rule, 
And passion, having my best judgment collied, 
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir 
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you 
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know 
How this foul rout began, who set it on, 
And he that is approved in this offense, 
Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth, 
Shall lose me. What! in a town of war, 
Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear, 
To manage private and domestic quarrel? 
In night, and on the court and guard of safety? 
’Tis monstrous. Iago, who began’t?

MONTANO 
If partially affined, or leagued in office, 
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,

182 censure judgment 183 unlace undo, remove 184 spend your rich
opinion squander your reputation 188 something now offends me i.e.,
somewhat pains me, is difficult for me 191 self-charity self-protection
194 blood passion (as elsewhere in the play) 195 collied darkened,
obscured (covered with coal dust?) 200 approved in found guilty of
204 manage conduct 207 partially . . . office bound by partiality or
soldierly affiliation

Thou art no soldier.

IAGO Touch me not so near. 
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth 
Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio; 
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth 
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general. 
Montano and myself being in speech, 
There comes a fellow crying out for help 
And Cassio following him with determined sword 

To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman 
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause. 
Myself the crying fellow did pursue, 
Lest by his clamor (as it so fell out) 
The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot, 
Outran my purpose; and I returned then rather 
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords, 
And Cassio high in oath; which till tonight 
I ne’er might say before. When I came back - 
For this was brief - I found them close together 
At blow and thrust, even as again they were 
When you yourself did part them. 
More of this matter cannot I report. 
But men are men; the best sometimes forget. 
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him, 
As men in rage strike those that wish them best, 
Yet surely Cassio I believe received 
From him that fled some strange indignity, 
Which patience could not pass.

OTHELLO I know, Iago, 
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, 
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,

209 Touch charge 217 execute upon take action against 224 high in
oath in a fit of cursing 235 pass i.e., pass over, let go by 236 love i.e.,
affection for your colleague; mince reduce, minimize 237 love respect
and feel affection for

But never more be officer of mine. 
Enter Desdemona, attended. 
Look if my gentle love be not raised up! 
I’ll make thee an example.

DESDEMONA 
What is the matter, dear?

OTHELLO All’s well, sweeting. 
Come away to bed. [To Montano] Sir, for your hurts, 
Myself will be your surgeon. Lead him off. 
[Montano is led off.] 
Iago, look with care about the town 
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted. 

Come, Desdemona, ’tis the soldiers’ life 
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife. 
Exit [with all but Iago and Cassio].

IAGO What, are you hurt, lieutenant?

CASSIO Ay, past all surgery.

IAGO Marry, God forbid!

CASSIO Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my reputation! I
have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My
reputation, Iago, my reputation!

IAGO As I am an honest man, I had thought you had received some bodily
wound. There is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle
and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving.
You have lost no reputation at all unless you repute yourself such a loser.
What, man! there are more ways to recover the general again. You are but
now cast in his mood - a punishment more in policy than in

241 sweeting sweetheart 245 distracted excited, disturbed 256 sense
material reality 258 imposition something imposed from without 261
recover the general i.e., recuperate your standing with Othello 261-62
cast in his mood dismissed owing to his anger 262 in policy i.e., a
strategic punishment

malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious
lion. Sue to him again, and he’s yours.

CASSIO I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk!
and speak parrot! and squabble! swagger! swear! and discourse fustian with
one’s own shadow! O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be
known by, let us call thee devil!

IAGO What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he done to
you?

CASSIO I know not.

IAGO Is’t possible?

CASSIO I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel, but
nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to
steal away their brains! that we should with joy, pleasance, revel, and
applause transform ourselves into beasts!

IAGO Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus recovered?

CASSIO It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil
wrath. One unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly despise
myself.

IAGO Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the
condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this had not befall’n;
but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.

CASSIO I will ask him for my place again: he shall tell me I am a drunkard!
Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such

263-64 beat . . . lion i.e., make an example of you to frighten others
264 imperious powerful; Sue to petition 268 speak parrot babble
idiotically 269 discourse fustian speak bombastic nonsense 278
nothing wherefore not why 281 applause approval (i.e., social
approbation) 285 unperfectness failing 292 Hydra the legendary
multiheaded monster

an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool,
and presently a beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed, and the
ingredient is a devil.

IAGO Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature if it be well used.
Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love
you.

CASSIO I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!

IAGO You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I tell you what
you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general. I may say so in this
respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation,
mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. Confess yourself freely to her;
importune her help to put you in your place again. She is of so free, so kind,
so apt, so blessed a disposition she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do
more than she is requested. This broken joint between you and her husband
entreat her to splinter; and my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this
crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.

CASSIO You advise me well.

IAGO I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

CASSIO I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech the
virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I am desperate of my fortunes if
they check me here.

295 inordinate immoderate 297-98 familiar creature friendly thing
(but with pun on familiar in the sense of an evil spirit) 300 approved

demonstrated, proved 302-3 general’s wife . . . general i.e.,
Desdemona rules her husband 305 parts gifts, abilities 307 free
generous 310-11 entreat her to splinter i.e., ask her to set with a splint
311 lay wager 312 crack of division in 315 protest affirm 318-19
undertake for me take up my plea 319 desperate of my fortunes in
despair about my future; check me stop me

IAGO You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I must to the watch.

CASSIO Good night, honest Iago. Exit Cassio.

IAGO 
And what’s he then that says I play the villain, 
When this advice is free I give and honest, 
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course 
To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy 
Th’ inclining Desdemona to subdue 
In any honest suit; she’s framed as fruitful 
As the free elements. And then for her 
To win the Moor - were’t to renounce his baptism, 
All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin - 
His soul is so enfettered to her love 
That she may make, unmake, do what she list, 
Even as her appetite shall play the god 
With his weak function. How am I then a villain 
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course, 
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell! 
When devils will the blackest sins put on, 
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows, 
As I do now. For whiles this honest fool 
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune, 
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor, 
I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear, 
That she repeals him for her body’s lust; 
And by how much she strives to do him good, 
She shall undo her credit with the Moor. 
So will I turn her virtue into pitch, 
And out of her own goodness make the net

326 Probal plausible 328 subdue convince 329 fruitful generous 331-
32 were’t . . . redeemèd sin i.e., she could make him go as far as to
renounce his faith 333 enfettered bound, enslaved 335-36 Even as . . .
weak function i.e., he is helpless to deny whatever she wants 337

parallel similar, related 338 Divinity theology 339 put on bring about
342 Plies petitions 345 repeals i.e., tries to get him reinstated (literally,
“recalls”)

That shall enmesh them all. 
Enter Roderigo. How, now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts, but
one that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent; I have been tonight
exceedingly well cudgeled; and I think the issue will be - I shall have so much
experience for my pains, and so, with no money at all, and a little more wit,
return again to Venice.

IAGO 
How poor are they that have not patience! 
What wound did ever heal but by degrees? 
Thou know’st we work by wit and not by witchcraft, 
And wit depends on dilatory time. 
Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee, 
And thou by that small hurt hast cashiered Cassio. 
Though other things grow fair against the sun, 
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe. 
Content thyself awhile. By the mass, ’tis morning! 
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short. 
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted. 
Away, I say! Thou shalt know more hereafter. 
Nay, get thee gone! Exit Roderigo. 
Two things are to be done: 
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress - 
I’ll set her on - 
Myself a while to draw the Moor apart 
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find 
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way! 
Dull not device by coldness and delay. Exit.

352 cry pack of dogs 354 cudgeled beaten (with a cudgel); issue
outcome 359 wit cunning, mind 360 dilatory slow-moving, unfolding
362 cashiered dismissed (i.e., got him fired) 363-64 Though . . . ripe
i.e., although it looks as if others are prospering, our plan ( fruits that
blossom first) will soon bear fruit ( first be ripe) 367 billeted assigned
lodging 370 move plead 373 jump just, exactly 375 Dull not device
don’t hold up the scheme

III.1 Enter Cassio, Musicians, and Clown.

CASSIO 
Masters, play here, I will content your pains: 
Something that’s brief; and bid “Good morrow, general.” 
[They play.]

CLOWN Why, masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they
speak i’ th’ nose thus?

MUSICIAN How, sir, how?

CLOWN Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?

MUSICIAN Ay, marry, are they, sir.

CLOWN O, thereby hangs a tail.

MUSICIAN Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

CLOWN Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters,
here’s money for you; and the general so likes your music that he desires you,
for love’s sake, to make no more noise with it.

MUSICIAN Well, sir, we will not.

CLOWN If you have any music that may not be heard, to’t again: but, as they
say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.

MUSICIAN We have none such, sir.

CLOWN Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away. Go, vanish into
air, away! Exit Musicians.

CASSIO Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?

CLOWN No, I hear not your honest friend. I hear you.

CASSIO Prithee keep up thy quillets. There’s a poor piece of gold for thee. If
the gentlewoman that attends the general’s wife be stirring, tell her there’s one
Cassio entreats her a little favor of speech. Wilt thou do this?

III.1 The grounds of the castle 1 content your pains reward you for
your labor 3-4 in Naples . . . thus i.e., why do your musical
instruments whine so (Have they been in Naples, associated with
venereal disease, and caught syphilis, thus causing their noses to fall
off and produce such a sound?) 6 wind instruments (the following
lines initiate a series of puns on wind, or flatulence, and tail) 18 none
such (“Nonesuch” was the name of a popular tune) 23 keep up put
away; quillets quips, jokes 25 be stirring i.e., is moving around, awake

CLOWN She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto

her.

CASSIO 
Do, good my friend. Exit Clown. 
Enter Iago. In happy time, Iago.

IAGO 
You have not been abed then?

CASSIO 
Why, no; the day had broke 
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago, 
To send in to your wife. My suit to her 
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona 
Procure me some access.

IAGO I’ll send her to you presently, 
And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor 
Out of the way, that your converse and business 
May be more free.

CASSIO 
I humbly thank you for’t. Exit [Iago]. 
I never knew 
A Florentine more kind and honest. 
Enter Emilia.

EMILIA 
Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry 
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well. 
The general and his wife are talking of it, 
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies 
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus 
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom 
He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves 
you,

29 happy fortunate (i.e., “good to see you”) 36 devise a mean invent a
way 
40 Florentine . . . honest i.e., even my own countrymen aren’t so
honest (Cassio comes from Florence, Iago from Venice, notorious for
trickery) 44 
stoutly strongly 46 great affinity i.e., is well-connected 46-47 in 
wholesome . . . refuse you i.e., common sense forbids him to reinstate
you

And needs no other suitor but his likings 
To bring you in again. 
CASSIO Yet I beseech you, 
If you think fit, or that it may be done, 
Give me advantage of some brief discourse 
With Desdemon alone. 
EMILIA Pray you come in. 
I will bestow you where you shall have time 
To speak your bosom freely. 
CASSIO I am much bound to you. 
[Exeunt.]

III.2 Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.

OTHELLO 
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot 
And by him do my duties to the Senate. 
That done, I will be walking on the works; 
Repair there to me.

IAGO Well, my good lord, I’ll do’t.

OTHELLO 
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see’t?

GENTLEMEN 
We’ll wait upon your lordship. Exeunt.

III.3 Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia.

DESDEMONA 
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do 
All my abilities in thy behalf.

48 no . . . likings i.e., his own inclination would be sufficient by itself
54 bosom i.e., inmost feelings

III.2 The grounds of the castle 3 works breastworks, fortifications 4

Repair return III.3 The grounds of the castle

EMILIA 
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband 

As if the cause were his.
DESDEMONA 
O, that’s an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio, 
But I will have my lord and you again 
As friendly as you were.

CASSIO Bounteous madam, 
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio, 
He’s never anything but your true servant.

DESDEMONA 
I know’t; I thank you. You do love my lord; 
You have known him long; and be you well assured 
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off 
Than in a politic distance.

CASSIO Ay, but, lady, 
That policy may either last so long, 
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, 
Or breed itself so out of circumstances, 
That, I being absent, and my place supplied, 
My general will forget my love and service.

DESDEMONA 
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here 
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee, 
If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it 
To the last article. My lord shall never rest; 
I’ll watch him tame and talk him out of patience; 
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift; 
I’ll intermingle everything he does 
With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio, 
For thy solicitor shall rather die

12 strangeness aloofness 13 Than . . . distance than wise policy
demands 15 feed . . . diet i.e., have so little to nourish it 16 breed . . .
circumstances i.e., get so far away from the original point 17 place
supplied position filled by someone else 19 doubt suspect, fear 23
watch him tame i.e., keep him awake until he does what I want 24
board a shrift i.e., his dining table will seem a confessional (where he
receives spiritual advice)

Than give thy cause away. 

Enter Othello and Iago [at a distance].

EMILIA 
Madam, here comes my lord.

CASSIO 
Madam, I’ll take my leave.

DESDEMONA 
Why, stay, and hear me speak.

CASSIO 
Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease, 
Unfit for mine own purposes.

DESDEMONA 
Well, do your discretion. Exit Cassio.

IAGO 
Ha! I like not that.

OTHELLO What dost thou say?

IAGO 
Nothing, my lord; or if - I know not what.

OTHELLO 
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

IAGO 
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it, 
That he would steal away so guiltylike, 
Seeing your coming.

OTHELLO I do believe ’twas he.

DESDEMONA 
How now, my lord? 
I have been talking with a suitor here, 
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

OTHELLO 
Who is’t you mean?

DESDEMONA 
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord, 
If I have any grace or power to move you, 
His present reconciliation take.

47 His . . . take immediately restore him to your good graces

For if he be not one that truly loves you, 
That errs in ignorance, and not in cunning, 
I have no judgment in an honest face. 
I prithee call him back.

OTHELLO Went he hence now?

DESDEMONA 
Yes, faith; so humbled 
That he hath left part of his grief with me 
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.

OTHELLO 
Not now, sweet Desdemon; some other time.

DESDEMONA 
But shall’t be shortly?

OTHELLO The sooner, sweet, for you.

DESDEMONA 
Shall’t be tonight at supper?

OTHELLO No, not tonight.

DESDEMONA 
Tomorrow dinner then?

OTHELLO I shall not dine at home; I meet the captains at the citadel.

DESDEMONA 
Why then, tomorrow night, on Tuesday morn, 
On Tuesday noon or night, on Wednesday morn. 
I prithee name the time, but let it not 
Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent; 
And yet his trespass, in our common reason 
(Save that they say the wars must make example 
Out of her best), is not almost a fault 
T’ incur a private check. When shall he come? 
Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul 
What you would ask me that I should deny 
Or stand so mamm’ring on. What? Michael Cassio,

64 in . . . reason i.e., looked at by normal standards 66 not almost
scarcely 67 a private check even a private reprimand 70 mamm’ring
on hesitating about or perhaps stuttering

That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time, 

When I have spoke of you dispraisingly, 
Hath ta’en your part - to have so much to do 
To bring him in? By’r Lady, I could do much -

OTHELLO 
Prithee no more. Let him come when he will! 
I will deny thee nothing.

DESDEMONA Why, this is not a boon; 
’Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves, 
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, 
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit 
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit 
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed, 
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight, 
And fearful to be granted.

OTHELLO I will deny thee nothing! 
Whereon I do beseech thee grant me this, 
To leave me but a little to myself.

DESDEMONA 
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.

OTHELLO 
Farewell, my Desdemona: I’ll come to thee straight.

DESDEMONA 
Emilia, come. - Be as your fancies teach you; 
Whate’er you be, I am obedient. Exit [with Emilia].

OTHELLO 
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul 
But I do love thee! and when I love thee not, 
Chaos is come again.

IAGO 
My noble lord -

74 bring him in i.e., into your favor 76 boon personal favor (i.e., I’m
not asking you to do something for me, but rather for your own good)
79 peculiar particular, special 81 touch test 82-83 full . . . granted i.e.,
something hard to agree to 88 as . . . you i.e., as your whims suggest
90 wretch (a term of affection, but the opposite is also current in the
period) 90-91 Perdition . . . thee i.e., I’ll be damned if I don’t love you

OTHELLO What dost thou say, Iago?

IAGO 
Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady, 
Know of your love?

OTHELLO 
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?

IAGO 
But for a satisfaction of my thought; 
No further harm.

OTHELLO Why of thy thought, Iago?

IAGO 
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

OTHELLO 
O, yes, and went between us very oft.

IAGO 
Indeed?

OTHELLO 
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern’st thou aught in that? 
Is he not honest?

IAGO Honest, my lord?

OTHELLO Honest. Ay, honest.

IAGO 
My lord, for aught I know.

OTHELLO 
What dost thou think?

IAGO Think, my lord?

OTHELLO Think, my lord? 
By heaven, thou echo’st me 
As if there were some monster in thy thought 
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something: 
I heard thee say even now, thou lik’st not that, 
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like? 
And when I told thee he was of my counsel 
In my whole course of wooing, thou cried’st “Indeed?”

100 went between us i.e., served as a go-between 111 of my counsel
my confidant (i.e., knew my plans)

And didst contract and purse thy brow together, 
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain 
Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me, 
Show me thy thought.

IAGO 
My lord, you know I love you.

OTHELLO I think thou dost, 
And, for I know thou’rt full of love and honesty 
And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath, 
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more. 
For such things in a false disloyal knave 
Are tricks of custom, but in a man that’s just 
They’re close dilations, working from the heart 
That passion cannot rule.

IAGO For Michael Cassio, 
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

OTHELLO 
I think so too.

IAGO Men should be what they seem; 
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!

OTHELLO 
Certain, men should be what they seem.

IAGO 
Why then, I think Cassio’s an honest man.

OTHELLO 
Nay, yet there’s more in this. 
I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, 
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts 
The worst of words.

IAGO Good my lord, pardon me: 
Though I am bound to every act of duty, 
I am not bound to that. All slaves are free -

115 conceit fancy or idea (Italian concetto, concept) 120 stops
hesitations, refusals 122 tricks of custom tricks of the trade; just
honest, good 123 close dilations secret swellings (“dilate”=expand) of
emotion that can’t be controlled 127 seem none i.e., not pretend to be
men but be instead the monsters that they are

Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false, 
As where’s that palace whereinto foul things 
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so pure 
But some uncleanly apprehensions 
Keep leets and law days, and in sessions sit 
With meditations lawful?

OTHELLO 
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago, 
If thou but think’st him wronged, and mak’st his ear 
A stranger to thy thoughts.

IAGO I do beseech you - 
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess 
(As I confess it is my nature’s plague 
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy 
Shapes faults that are not) - that your wisdom 
From one that so imperfectly conceits 
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble 
Out of his scattering and unsure observance. 
It were not for your quiet nor your good, 
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom, 
To let you know my thoughts.

OTHELLO What dost thou mean?

IAGO 
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, 
Is the immediate jewel of their souls. 
Who steals my purse steals trash; ’tis something, nothing; 
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands. 
But he that filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him 
And makes me poor indeed.

139-41 uncleanly apprehensions . . . lawful i.e., evil thoughts that do
legal business (leets=courts) alongside honorable ideas 147 jealousy
suspicion 148 your wisdom i.e., you 149-50 From one . . . notice i.e.,
wouldn’t pay any attention to me, who unreliably conjectures about
things 151 scattering . . . observance random and unfounded
observations 156 immediate in-most

OTHELLO 

By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts!

IAGO 
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand, 
Nor shall not whilst ’tis in my custody.

OTHELLO 
Ha!

IAGO O, beware, my lord, of jealousy! 
It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock 
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss 
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger; 
But O, what damnèd minutes tells he o’er 
Who dotes, yet doubts - suspects, yet soundly loves!

OTHELLO 
O misery!

IAGO 
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough; 
But riches fineless is as poor as winter 
To him that ever fears he shall be poor. 
Good God, the souls of all my tribe defend 
From jealousy!

OTHELLO Why, why is this? 
Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy, 
To follow still the changes of the moon 
With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt 
Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat 
When I shall turn the business of my soul 
To such exsufflicate and blowed surmises, 
Matching thy inference. ’Tis not to make me jealous 
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, 
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances;

166-67 doth mock . . . on toys with the prey it is about to consume
167-68 cuckold . . . wronger i.e., a wronged husband doesn’t resent an
adulterous wife if he doesn’t love her 169 tells counts 170 dotes loves
dotingly; soundly profoundly 173 fineless unlimited 178 still always
180 resolved determined to act 182 exsufflicate and blowed surmises
(1) spat out and flyblown (i.e., disgusting) speculations, (2) inflated
and blown abroad (rumored) notions

Where virtue is, these are more virtuous. 
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw 
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt, 
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago; 
I’ll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove; 
And on the proof there is no more but this - 
Away at once with love or jealousy!

IAGO 
I am glad of this; for now I shall have reason 
To show the love and duty that I bear you 
With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound, 
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof. 
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio; 
Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure. 
I would not have your free and noble nature, 
Out of self-bounty, be abused. Look to’t. 
I know our country disposition well: 
In Venice they do let God see the pranks 
They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience 
Is not to leave’t undone, but keep’t unknown.

OTHELLO 
Dost thou say so?

IAGO 
She did deceive her father, marrying you; 
And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks, 
She loved them most.

OTHELLO And so she did.

IAGO Why, go to then! 
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming 
To seel her father’s eyes up close as oak -

188 revolt turning away (i.e., infidelity) 195 franker more candid 198
secure overconfident 200 self-bounty i.e., your own natural generosity
201 our country disposition i.e., the secret habits of Venetian women
(indicated in ll. 202-4) 210 seel . . . up shut; as oak (referring to the
close grain of oak - i.e., completely opaque)

He thought ’twas witchcraft - but I am much to blame. 
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon 

For too much loving you.

OTHELLO I am bound to thee forever.

IAGO 
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.

OTHELLO 
Not a jot, not a jot.

IAGO I’ faith, I fear it has. 
I hope you will consider what is spoke 
Comes from my love. But I do see you’re moved. 
I am to pray you not to strain my speech 
To grosser issues nor to larger reach 
Than to suspicion.

OTHELLO 
I will not.

IAGO Should you do so, my lord, 
My speech should fall into such vile success 
Which my thoughts aimed not. Cassio’s my worthy 
friend - 
My lord, I see you’re moved.

OTHELLO No, not much moved: 
I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.

IAGO 
Long live she so! and long live you to think so!

OTHELLO 
And yet, how nature erring from itself -

IAGO 
Ay, there’s the point! as (to be bold with you) 
Not to affect many proposed matches 
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree, 
Whereto we see in all things nature tends -

217 moved upset 218-19 strain . . . issues constrain me to speak of
potentially ugly outcomes 222 vile success evil result 225 honest
(primarily 
“chaste,” but with the suggestion of “honorable”) 229-30 affect . . .
degree 
care for proposed husbands from her own background

Foh! one may smell in such a will most rank, 
Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural - 
But pardon me - I do not in position 
Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear 
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment, 
May fall to match you with her country forms, 
And happily repent.

OTHELLO Farewell, farewell! 
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more. 
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.

IAGO [Going] 
My lord, I take my leave.

OTHELLO 
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless 
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

IAGO [Returning] 
My lord, I would I might entreat your honor 
To scan this thing no farther: leave it to time. 
Although ’tis fit that Cassio have his place, 
For sure he fills it up with great ability, 
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, 
You shall by that perceive him and his means. 
Note if your lady strain his entertainment 
With any strong or vehement importunity; 
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime 
Let me be thought too busy in my fears 
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am) 
And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.

232 Foh (expression of disgust); in such i.e., in such a headstrong
woman; will sexual appetite (as elsewhere) 233 disproportions lack of
balance 234 in position i.e., in proposing this characterization 236
recoiling yielding 237 fall . . . forms i.e., happen to compare you with
the Venetian men 238 happily perhaps 240 Set on instruct, arrange for
244 entreat your honor request you 245 scan inspect, consider 250
strain his entertainment i.e., insists on discussing his treatment 251
importunity begging, pressure 253 too busy i.e., too meddlesome 254
worthy cause good reason 255 hold her free consider her innocent

OTHELLO 

Fear not my government.

IAGO 
I once more take my leave. Exit.

OTHELLO 
This fellow’s of exceeding honesty, 
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit 
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard, 
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, 
I’d whistle her off and let her down the wind 
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black 
And have not those soft parts of conversation 
That chamberers have, or for I am declined 
Into the vale of years - yet that’s not much - 
She’s gone. I am abused, and my relief 
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage, 
That we can call these delicate creatures ours, 
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad 
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon 
Than keep a corner in the thing I love 
For others’ uses. Yet ’tis the plague of great ones; 
Prerogatived are they less than the base. 
’Tis destiny unshunnable, like death. 
Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us 
When we do quicken. Look where she comes. 
Enter Desdemona and Emilia. 
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself! 
I’ll not believe’t.

256 government behavior, self-control 259 qualities natures; a learned
spirit an informed understanding 260 haggard a wild hawk (beginning
a metaphor of Desdemona as an uncontrolled bird) 261 her jesses the
leather straps for controlling the hawk 262-63 whistle . . . fortune i.e.,
send her away and let her take care of herself 263 Haply perhaps 264
soft . . . conversation refined manners 265 chamberers courtiers 273
great ones prominent people 274 Prerogatived privileged; the base
i.e., those of the lower 
class 276 forkèd plague curse of being a cuckold (i.e., with horns on
the 
forehead) 277 do quicken are born

DESDEMONA How now, my dear Othello? 

Your dinner, and the generous islanders 
By you invited, do attend your presence.

OTHELLO 
I am to blame.

DESDEMONA Why do you speak so faintly? 
Are you not well?

OTHELLO 
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.

DESDEMONA 
Faith, that’s with watching; ’twill away again. 
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour 
It will be well.

OTHELLO Your napkin is too little; 
[He pushes the handkerchief from him, and it falls 
unnoticed.] 
Let it alone. Come, I’ll go in with you.

DESDEMONA 
I am very sorry that you are not well. 
Exit [with Othello].

EMILIA 
I am glad I have found this napkin; 
This was her first remembrance from the Moor. 
My wayward husband hath a hundred times 
Wooed me to steal it; but she so loves the token 
(For he conjured her she should ever keep it) 
That she reserves it evermore about her 
To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta’en out 
And give’t Iago. What he will do with it 
Heaven knows, not I; 
I nothing but to please his fantasy. 
Enter Iago.

280 generous noble 285 watching staying up late (i.e., sleeplessness)
287 napkin handkerchief 288 Let it alone i.e., never mind about the
headache 294 conjured her made her swear (in conjured the accent is
on the second syllable) 296 work ta’en out pattern copied 299 I
nothing . . . fantasy I do nothing but please his whims

IAGO 
How now? What do you here alone?

EMILIA 
Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.

IAGO 
You have a thing for me? It is a common thing -

EMILIA Ha?

IAGO 
To have a foolish wife.

EMILIA 
O, is that all? What will you give me now 
For that same handkerchief?

IAGO What handkerchief?

EMILIA 
What handkerchief! 
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona; 
That which so often you did bid me steal.

IAGO 
Hast stol’n it from her?

EMILIA 
No, faith; she let it drop by negligence, 
And to th’ advantage, I, being here, took’t up. 
Look, here ’tis.

IAGO A good wench! Give it me.

EMILIA 
What will you do with’t, that you have been so earnest 
To have me filch it?

IAGO Why, what is that to you? 
[Snatches it.]

EMILIA 
If it be not for some purpose of import, 
Give’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad 
When she shall lack it.

301 a thing an object (but with sexual connotations in the following
lines) 302 common thing i.e., sexual organ used by everybody 312 to
th’ advantage opportunely 316 import great importance

IAGO 
Be not acknown on’t; I have use for it. 

Go, leave me. Exit Emilia. 
I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin 
And let him find it. Trifles light as air 
Are to the jealous confirmations strong 
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something. 
The Moor already changes with my poison: 
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons, 
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste, 
But with a little act upon the blood 
Burn like the mines of sulphur. 
Enter Othello. I did say so. 
Look where he comes! Not poppy nor mandragora, 
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, 
Shall ever med’cine thee to that sweet sleep 
Which thou owedst yesterday.

OTHELLO Ha! ha! false to me?

IAGO 
Why, how now, general? No more of that!

OTHELLO 
Avaunt! be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack. 
I swear ’tis better to be much abused 
Than but to know’t a little.

IAGO How now, my lord?

OTHELLO 
What sense had I in her stol’n hours of lust? 
I saw’t not, thought it not, it harmed not me; 
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and merry; 
I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips.

319 Be . . . on’t don’t acknowledge it 324 proofs of holy writ biblical
truth 326 conceits ideas, conceptions 327 at . . . distaste initially aren’t
perceived to taste bitter 329 Burn . . . sulphur i.e., are difficult to
extinguish 330 mandragora a narcotic 331 drowsy soporific, sleep-
inducing 332 med’cine i.e., help by drugs 333 owedst owned, enjoyed
335 Avaunt away (a command to a devil); the rack an instrument of
torture 340 free carefree

He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol’n, 
Let him not know’t, and he’s not robbed at all.

IAGO 
I am sorry to hear this.

OTHELLO 
I had been happy if the general camp, 
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body, 
So I had nothing known. O, now forever 
Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content! 
Farewell the plumèd troops, and the big wars 
That makes ambition virtue! O, farewell! 
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, 
The spirit-stirring drum, th’ ear-piercing fife, 
The royal banner, and all quality, 
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! 
And O you mortal engines whose rude throats 
Th’ immortal Jove’s dread clamors counterfeit, 
Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone!

IAGO 
Is’t possible, my lord?

OTHELLO 
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore! 
Be sure of it; give me the ocular proof; 
Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul, 
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog 
Than answer my waked wrath!

IAGO Is’t come to this?

OTHELLO 
Make me to see’t; or at the least so prove it 
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop

342 wanting missing 346 Pioners ditchdiggers, laborers 349 plumèd
troops uniformed (plumèd=feathered) soldiers; big wars mighty
conflicts 350 makes ambition virtue i.e., that justify the desire for glory
354 circumstance surrounding pageantry 355 mortal engines deadly
weapons 355-56 rude . . . counterfeit i.e., noises imitate the thunder
(dread clamors) of the heavens 360 ocular visible 365 probation . . .
loop i.e., proof allows no loophole

To hang a doubt on - or woe upon thy life!

IAGO 

My noble lord -

OTHELLO 
If thou dost slander her and torture me, 
Never pray more; abandon all remorse; 
On horror’s head horrors accumulate, 
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed; 
For nothing canst thou to damnation add 
Greater than that.

IAGO O grace! O heaven forgive me! 
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense? - 
God buy you! take mine office. O wretched fool, 
That lov’st to make thine honesty a vice! 
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world, 
To be direct and honest is not safe. 
I thank you for this profit, and from hence 
I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offense.

OTHELLO 
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.

IAGO 
I should be wise; for honesty’s a fool 
And loses that it works for.

OTHELLO By the world, 
I think my wife be honest, and think she is not; 
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not. 
I’ll have some proof. My name, that was as fresh 
As Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and black 
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives, 
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,

375 God buy you (abbreviation for “God be with you” - i.e., “good-
bye”) 376 That lov’st . . . vice i.e., who holds so dearly to his honesty
as to make it a liability 379 profit beneficial insight 380 sith since 381
shouldst be (1) ought to be, (2) i.e., all right, I believe you are honest
385 just upright, honorable 386 My name (Q reads “Her name,” which
is tidier metaphorically) 387 Dian’s visage the image of Diana,
goddess of chastity

I’ll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!

IAGO 

I see you are eaten up with passion: 
I do repent me that I put it to you. 
You would be satisfied?

OTHELLO Would? Nay, and I will.

IAGO 
And may; but how? how satisfied, my lord? 
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on? 
Behold her topped?

OTHELLO Death and damnation! O!

IAGO 
It were a tedious difficulty, I think, 
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then, 
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster 
More than their own! What then? How then? 
What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction? 
It is impossible you should see this, 
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, 
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross 
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say, 
If imputation and strong circumstances 
Which lead directly to the door of truth 
Will give you satisfaction, you might have’t.

OTHELLO 
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.

IAGO 
I do not like the office.

390 satisfied absolutely certain (with, in the next four lines, sexual
undertones) 392 put it to you proposed it 395 supervisor spectator, one
who looks down upon 396 topped (a visual image for sexual
intercourse; “top” is perhaps a homophone of “tup” [see tupping in
I.1.88]) 398 prospect view, sight to be seen 399 bolster couch (i.e.,
copulate) 403 prime sexually eager 404 salt as wolves in pride
lecherous as wolves in heat; gross indecent, coarse 406 imputation
charge, accusation; circumstances circumstantial evidence 410 office
task

But sith I am entered in this cause so far, 
Pricked to’t by foolish honesty and love, 

I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately, 
And being troubled with a raging tooth, 
I could not sleep. 
There are a kind of men so loose of soul 
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs. 
One of this kind is Cassio. 
In sleep I heard him say “Sweet Desdemona, 
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves!” 
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand, 
Cry “O sweet creature!” then kiss me hard, 
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots 
That grew upon my lips, lay his leg o’er my thigh, 
And sigh, and kiss, and then cry “Cursèd fate 
That gave thee to the Moor.”

OTHELLO 
O monstrous! monstrous!

IAGO Nay, this was but his dream.

OTHELLO 
But this denoted a foregone conclusion: 
’Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

IAGO 
And this may help to thicken other proofs 
That do demonstrate thinly.

OTHELLO I’ll tear her all to pieces!

IAGO 
Nay, yet be wise. Yet we see nothing done; 
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this - 
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief, 
Spotted with strawberries, in your wife’s hand?

412 Pricked spurred (but the obscene meaning of “prick” is also
audible) 413 lay i.e., shared lodgings (sexual undertones are present
here as well) 421 gripe grip 428 foregone conclusion deed already
concluded 429 shrewd doubt piercing suspicion 430 thicken give
substance to

OTHELLO 
I gave her such a one; ’twas my first gift.

IAGO 
I know not that; but such a handkerchief - 

I am sure it was your wife’s - did I today 
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

OTHELLO If it be that -

IAGO 
If it be that, or any that was hers, 
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

OTHELLO 
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives! 
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge. 
Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago: 
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven. 
’Tis gone. 
Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell! 
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne 
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught, 
For ’tis of aspics’ tongues!

IAGO Yet be content.

OTHELLO 
O, blood, blood, blood!

IAGO 
Patience, I say. Your mind may change.

OTHELLO 
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea, 
Whose icy current and compulsive course 
Ne’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on 
To the Propontic and the Hellespont, 
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace, 
Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to humble love,

442 slave i.e., Cassio (the word here means “villain”) 448 hearted
throne i.e., love sits royally in the heart 449 fraught burden, freight
450 aspics’ tongues fangs of asps, venomous snakes 453 Pontic Sea
Black Sea

Till that a capable and wide revenge 
Swallow them up. 
[He kneels.] Now, by yond marble heaven, 
In the due reverence of a sacred vow 
I here engage my words.

IAGO Do not rise yet. 
[Iago kneels.] 
Witness, you ever-burning lights above, 
You elements that clip us round about, 
Witness that here Iago doth give up 
The execution of his wit, hands, heart 
To wronged Othello’s service! Let him command, 
And to obey shall be in me remorse, 
What bloody business ever. 
[They rise.]

OTHELLO I greet thy love, 
Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous, 
And will upon the instant put thee to’t. 
Within these three days let me hear thee say 
That Cassio’s not alive.

IAGO 
My friend is dead; ’tis done at your request. 
But let her live.

OTHELLO 
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her! damn her! 
Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw 
To furnish me with some swift means of death 
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.

IAGO 
I am your own forever. Exeunt.

459 capable all-embracing, capacious 460 marble i.e., shining or
perhaps constant 462 engage pledge, guarantee 464 clip clasp,
embrace 466 execution employment, action 468-69 to . . . ever i.e.,
whatever bloody business I’m required to do I’ll perform it in pity of
Othello 471 put thee to’t i.e., to the test

III.4 Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.

DESDEMONA Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?

CLOWN I dare not say he lies anywhere.

DESDEMONA Why, man?

CLOWN He’s a soldier, and for me to say a soldier lies, ’tis stabbing.

DESDEMONA Go to. Where lodges he?

CLOWN To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.

DESDEMONA Can anything be made of this?

CLOWN I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodging, and say
he lies here or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.

DESDEMONA Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?

CLOWN I will catechize the world for him - that is, make questions, and by
them answer.

DESDEMONA Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my
lord on his behalf and hope all will be well.

CLOWN To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and therefore I will
attempt the doing it. Exit Clown.

DESDEMONA 
Where should I lose the handkerchief, Emilia?

EMILIA 
I know not, madam.

DESDEMONA 
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse

III.4 An area outside the castle 1 sirrah (a form of “sir” used toward
social inferiors or servants) 2 lies lives, stays 5-6 ’tis stabbing i.e., it
puts me in danger 11-12 devise make up 13 lie . . . throat lie deeply or
foully 14- 15 edified by report i.e., instructed (with religious
connotations) by what you hear 16 catechize interrogate, search
(playing on Desdemona’s religious discourse) 19 moved solicited

Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor 
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness 
As jealous creatures are, it were enough 
To put him to ill thinking.

EMILIA Is he not jealous?

DESDEMONA 
Who? he? I think the sun where he was born 
Drew all such humors from him. 
Enter Othello.

EMILIA Look where he comes.

DESDEMONA 

I will not leave him now till Cassio 
Be called to him. - How is’t with you, my lord?

OTHELLO 
Well, my good lady. [Aside] O, hardness to dissemble! - 
How do you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA Well, my good lord.

OTHELLO 
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.

DESDEMONA 
It hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.

OTHELLO 
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart. 
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires 
A sequester from liberty; fasting and prayer, 
Much castigation, exercise devout; 
For here’s a young and sweating devil here 
That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand, 
A frank one.

DESDEMONA You may, indeed, say so; 
For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.

26 crusadoes gold coins (with a figure of the cross, crux); And but i.e.,
if it were not that 31 humors bodily fluids governing temperament 38
argues . . . heart signifies fecundity, sexual abundance, and
licentiousness 40 sequester separation 41 castigation holy correction
44 frank free, open (with sexual sense)

OTHELLO 
A liberal hand! The hearts of old gave hands, 
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

DESDEMONA 
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise!

OTHELLO 
What promise, chuck?

DESDEMONA 
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

OTHELLO 
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me. 
Lend me thy handkerchief.

DESDEMONA Here, my lord.

OTHELLO 
That which I gave you.

DESDEMONA I have it not about me.

OTHELLO 
Not?

DESDEMONA No, faith, my lord.

OTHELLO That’s a fault. 
That handkerchief 
Did an Egyptian to my mother give. 
She was a charmer, and could almost read 
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it, 
’Twould make her amiable and subdue my father 
Entirely to her love; but if she lost it 
Or made a gift of it, my father’s eye 
Should hold her loathèd, and his spirits should hunt 
After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me, 
And bid me, when my fate would have me wived, 
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on’t;

46-47 The hearts . . . hearts i.e., in better days people pledged their
hearts with their hands, but now, in modern symbols of courtship
(heraldry), the two no longer go together 49 chuck (a term of
affection; cf. wretch, III.3.90) 51 salt and sorry rheum painful running
cold 56 Egyptian (probably “gypsy”) 57 charmer sorceress 59 amiable
desirable 63 fancies loves, attractions 65 her i.e., the intended bride

Make it a darling like your precious eye. 
To lose’t or give’t away were such perdition 
As nothing else could match.

DESDEMONA Is’t possible?

OTHELLO 
’Tis true. There’s magic in the web of it. 
A sibyl that had numbered in the world 
The sun to course two hundred compasses, 
In her prophetic fury sewed the work; 
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk; 
And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful 
Conserved of maidens’ hearts.

DESDEMONA I’ faith? Is’t true?

OTHELLO 
Most veritable. Therefore look to’t well.

DESDEMONA 
Then would to God that I had never seen’t!

OTHELLO Ha! Wherefore?

DESDEMONA 
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?

OTHELLO 
Is’t lost? Is’t gone? Speak, is’t out o’ th’ way?

DESDEMONA Heaven bless us!

OTHELLO Say you?

DESDEMONA 
It is not lost. But what an if it were?

OTHELLO How?

DESDEMONA 
I say it is not lost.

OTHELLO Fetch’t, let me see’t!

DESDEMONA 
Why, so I can, but I will not now.

66 darling beloved thing; eye (early modern slang for the vagina, a
sense that may pertain here) 67 perdition loss, disaster 69 web fabric
70 sibyl prophetess 71 sun . . . compasses i.e., two hundred years 74-
75 mummy . . . hearts a drug distilled (Conserved) from mummified
bodies, here from maidens’ hearts 79 startingly by starts, fitfully 83
an if if

This is a trick to put me from my suit: 
Pray you let Cassio be received again.

OTHELLO 
Fetch me the handkerchief! My mind misgives.

DESDEMONA 
Come, come! 
You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.

OTHELLO 
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA A man that all his time 
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love, 
Shared dangers with you -

OTHELLO 
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA 
I’ faith, you are to blame.

OTHELLO Zounds! Exit Othello.

EMILIA Is not this man jealous?

DESDEMONA 
I ne’er saw this before. 
Sure there’s some wonder in this handkerchief; 
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

EMILIA 
’Tis not a year or two shows us a man. 
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food; 
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full, 
They belch us. 
Enter Iago and Cassio. 
Look you - Cassio and my husband!

IAGO 
There is no other way; ’tis she must do’t. 
And lo the happiness! Go and importune her.

87 put me from distract me from 89 misgives feels doubt or regret 91
sufficient thoroughly capable 92 all his time throughout his career 102
’Tis not . . . man i.e., it takes a long time to know a man’s real self (or
perhaps “good men don’t come along very often”) 103 all but nothing
except 107 lo the happiness i.e., and what luck that she is here;
importune ask

DESDEMONA 
How now, good Cassio? What’s the news with you?

CASSIO 
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you 
That by your virtuous means I may again 
Exist, and be a member of his love 
Whom I with all the office of my heart 
Entirely honor. I would not be delayed. 

If my offense be of such mortal kind 
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows, 
Nor purposed merit in futurity, 
Can ransom me into his love again, 
But to know so must be my benefit. 
So shall I clothe me in a forced content, 
And shut myself up in some other course, 
To fortune’s alms.

DESDEMONA Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio! 
My advocation is not now in tune. 
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him, 
Were he in favor as in humor altered. 
So help me every spirit sanctified 
As I have spoken for you all my best 
And stood within the blank of his displeasure 
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient. 
What I can do I will; and more I will 
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.

IAGO 
Is my lord angry?

EMILIA He went hence but now, 
And certainly in strange unquietness.

112 office devoted service 114 mortal i.e., hopeless 118 But . . . benefit
merely to know it will be helpful 119 So in that case; forced content
necessary contentment (i.e., being resigned to it) 120 shut myself up in
limit myself to 121 fortune’s alms the best I can get from fortune 122
advocation 
advocacy 
124 
favor 
appearance; 
humor 
mood,

temperament 127 blank center of a target (also known as the “white”)

IAGO 
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon 
When it hath blown his ranks into the air 
And, like the devil, from his very arm 
Puffed his own brother - and is he angry? 
Something of moment then. I will go meet him. 
There’s matter in’t indeed if he be angry.

DESDEMONA 
I prithee do so. Exit [Iago]. 
Something sure of state, 

Either from Venice or some unhatched practice 
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him, 
Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases 
Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things, 
Though great ones are their object. ’Tis even so; 
For let our finger ache, and it endues 
Our other, healthful members even to a sense 
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods, 
Nor of them look for such observancy 
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia, 
I was, unhandsome warrior as I am, 
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul; 
But now I find I had suborned the witness, 
And he’s indicted falsely.

EMILIA 
Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think, 
And no conception nor no jealous toy 
Concerning you.

137 of moment momentous, significant 139 of state having to do with
politics 140 unhatched practice still-hidden plot 142 puddled
disturbed, muddied 143-44 wrangle . . . object i.e., bicker over or
debate about trivia when they are really concerned with major topics
145 endues introduces 148- 49 observancy . . . bridal i.e., attentiveness
expected on the wedding day 149 Beshrew me (a mild oath, the
equivalent of “I’ll be darned”) 150 unhandsome warrior poor soldier
151 Arraigning his unkindness indicting his abnormal (not according
to kind) behavior toward me 152 suborned the witness bribed the
witness (i.e., herself) to lie 155 conception fantasy, wild idea; toy
whim, foolish fancy

DESDEMONA 
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.

EMILIA 
But jealous souls will not be answered so; 
They are not ever jealous for the cause, 
But jealous for they’re jealous. It is a monster 
Begot upon itself, born on itself.

DESDEMONA 
Heaven keep the monster from Othello’s mind!

EMILIA Lady, amen.

DESDEMONA 
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout: 
If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit 
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

CASSIO 
I humbly thank your ladyship. 
Exit [Desdemona with Emilia]. 
Enter Bianca.

BIANCA 
Save you, friend Cassio!

CASSIO What make you from home? 
How is’t with you, my most fair Bianca? 
I’ faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

BIANCA 
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio. 
What, keep a week away? seven days and nights? 
Eightscore eight hours? and lovers’ absent hours, 
More tedious than the dial eightscore times? 
O weary reck’ning!

CASSIO Pardon me, Bianca: 
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed, 
But I shall in a more continuate time

157 Alas the day (conventional lament - “What a shame”) 160 for
because 161 Begot upon itself self-engendered 165 fit receptive, fit to
listen 168 Save you God save you; What make you from what are you
doing away from 173 Eightscore eight hours one hundred sixty-eight
hours, the number in a week 174 dial clock 177 more continuate less
interrupted, less fretful

Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, 
[Gives her Desdemona’s handkerchief.] 
Take me this work out.

BIANCA O Cassio, whence came this? 
This is some token from a newer friend. 
To the felt absence now I feel a cause. 
Is’t come to this? Well, well.

CASSIO Go to, woman! 
Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth, 
From whence you have them. You are jealous now 
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance. 
No, by my faith, Bianca.

BIANCA Why, whose is it?

CASSIO 
I know not, neither; I found it in my chamber. 
I like the work well; ere it be demanded, 
As like enough it will, I would have it copied. 
Take it and do’t, and leave me for this time.

BIANCA 
Leave you? Wherefore?

CASSIO 
I do attend here on the general 
And think it no addition, nor my wish, 
To have him see me womaned.

BIANCA Why, I pray you?

CASSIO 
Not that I love you not.

BIANCA But that you do not love me! 
I pray you bring me on the way a little, 
And say if I shall see you soon at night.

CASSIO 
’Tis but a little way that I can bring you,

178 Strike off this score pay this bill 179 Take . . . out copy this
embroidery (work = needlework) for me 181 To . . . cause i.e., I can
now explain your absence from me 188 ere it be demanded i.e., before
somebody claims it 193 no addition no bonus - i.e., not beneficial to
my standing 196 bring me go along with me

For I attend here, but I’ll see you soon.

BIANCA 
’Tis very good. I must be circumstanced. 
Exeunt omnes.

IV.1 Enter Othello and Iago.

IAGO 
Will you think so?

OTHELLO Think so, Iago?

IAGO What, 
To kiss in private?

OTHELLO An unauthorized kiss.

IAGO 
Or to be naked with her friend in bed 
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

OTHELLO 
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm? 
It is hypocrisy against the devil. 
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so, 
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.

IAGO 
If they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip. 
But if I give my wife a handkerchief -

OTHELLO 
What then?

IAGO 
Why, then ’tis hers, my lord, and being hers, 
She may, I think, bestow’t on any man.

OTHELLO 
She is protectress of her honor too;

199 attend am waiting 200 circumstanced governed by things as they
are; s.d. omnes all IV.1 An area outside Othello’s quarters 6 hypocrisy
against the devil i.e., apparent evil concealing good (ironic) 7 yet do
so i.e., still allow themselves to be naked in bed 9 venial slip minor sin

May she give that?

IAGO 
Her honor is an essence that’s not seen; 
They have it very oft that have it not. 
But for the handkerchief -

OTHELLO 

By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it! 
Thou said’st - O, it comes o’er my memory 
As doth the raven o’er the infectious house, 
Boding to all! - he had my handkerchief.

IAGO 
Ay, what of that?

OTHELLO That’s not so good now.

IAGO What 
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong? 
Or heard him say - as knaves be such abroad 
Who having, by their own importunate suit, 
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress, 
Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose 
But they must blab -

OTHELLO Hath he said anything?

IAGO 
He hath, my lord; but be you well assured, 
No more than he’ll unswear.

OTHELLO What hath he said?

IAGO 
Faith, that he did - I know not what he did.

OTHELLO What? what?

IAGO 
Lie -

OTHELLO With her?

IAGO With her, on her; what you will.

17 They . . . not many people who seem to have it in fact do not 21
infectious plague-ridden 22 Boding prophesying (ill) 25 knaves . . .
abroad there are men around 26-28 by . . . them i.e., achieved
satisfaction either by insistent wooing or by the irresistible attraction
they exert over a woman 34 what you will (a conventional phrase - “as
you like it” - ending with the sexually charged will)

OTHELLO Lie with her? lie on her? - We say lie on her 
when they belie her. - Lie with her! Zounds, that’s fulsome. - Handkerchief -
confessions - handkerchief ! - 
To confess, and be hanged for his labor - first to be 
hanged, and then to confess! I tremble at it. Nature 

would not invest herself in such shadowing passion 
without some instruction. It is not words that shakes 
me thus. - Pish! Noses, ears, and lips? Is’t possible? - 
Confess? - Handkerchief? - O devil! 
Falls in a trance.

IAGO Work on, 
My medicine works! Thus credulous fools are caught, 
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus, 
All guiltless, meet reproach. - What, ho! my lord! 
My lord, I say! Othello! 
Enter Cassio. How now, Cassio?

CASSIO 
What’s the matter?

IAGO 
My lord is fall’n into an epilepsy. 
This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.

CASSIO 
Rub him about the temples.

IAGO No, forbear. 
The lethargy must have his quiet course. 
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by 
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs. 
Do you withdraw yourself a little while. 
He will recover straight. When he is gone, 
I would on great occasion speak with you. 
[Exit Cassio.]

36 belie slander 36-37 fulsome foul 38-39 To confess . . . confess (“To
confess and be hanged” was a proverbial phrase; Othello uses and then
inverts it) 39-41 Nature . . . instruction nature wouldn’t permit such
strong emotion that produces these images (shadowing passion)
without a basis for it 41 words i.e., words only 45 medicine (1) poison,
(2) medicine 53 lethargy state of unconsciousness; his its 58 great
occasion significant matter

How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?

OTHELLO 
Dost thou mock me?

IAGO I mock you not, by heaven. 

Would you would bear your fortune like a man!

OTHELLO 
A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast.

IAGO 
There’s many a beast then in a populous city, 
And many a civil monster.

OTHELLO 
Did he confess it?

IAGO Good sir, be a man. 
Think every bearded fellow that’s but yoked 
May draw with you. There’s millions now alive 
That nightly lie in those unproper beds 
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better. 
O, ’tis the spite of hell, the fiend’s arch-mock, 
To lip a wanton in a secure couch, 
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know; 
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

OTHELLO 
O, thou art wise! ’Tis certain.

IAGO Stand you awhile apart; 
Confine yourself but in a patient list. 
Whilst you were here, o’erwhelmèd with your grief - 
A passion most unsuiting such a man - 
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away

60 mock me (Othello reads Iago’s hurt your head, l. 59, as a joke about
cuckoldry, wearing horns; also see l. 62) 64 civil civilized,
domesticated 66 yoked married (but also yoked like an ox; the image
introduces a series of puns on marriage, yoking, and horned beasts) 67
draw (1) compare, (2) pull a cart 68 unproper not exclusively their
own 69 peculiar theirs alone; your . . . better i.e., at least you know 71
lip . . . couch kiss a whore in an apparently untainted bed (secure
couch) 72-73 No . . . be i.e., I’d rather know that I’m a cuckold, and
then I can take action against her 75 Confine . . . list stay within the
limits of self-control

And laid good ’scuses upon your ecstasy; 
Bade him anon return, and here speak with me; 
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself 

And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns 
That dwell in every region of his face; 
For I will make him tell the tale anew - 
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when 
He hath, and is again to cope your wife. 
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience! 
Or I shall say you’re all in all in spleen, 
And nothing of a man.

OTHELLO Dost thou hear, Iago? 
I will be found most cunning in my patience; 
But - dost thou hear? - most bloody.

IAGO That’s not amiss; 
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw? 
[Othello retires.] 
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca, 
A huswife that by selling her desires 
Buys herself bread and cloth. It is a creature 
That dotes on Cassio, as ’tis the strumpet’s plague 
To beguile many and be beguiled by one. 
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain 
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes. 
Enter Cassio. 
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad, 
And his unbookish jealousy must conster 
Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behaviors 
Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?

79 ecstasy trance (ec-stasy = out of one’s natural state) 80 anon
shortly 81 encave conceal 82 fleers sneers 86 cope get together with (in
both senses) 88 all in all in spleen flooded entirely with choler (the
humor of the spleen, seat of passionate anger) 94 huswife (not only
“hussy” or “prostitute” but also “a woman who manages her
household with skill and thrift, a domestic economist” [OED]; see the
dispute with Emilia, V.1.123-24) 97 beguile enchant, deceive 101
unbookish naive; conster construe, interpret 102 light cheerful, casual

CASSIO 
The worser that you give me the addition 
Whose want even kills me.

IAGO 
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on’t. 

Now, if this suit lay in Bianca’s power, 
How quickly should you speed!

CASSIO Alas, poor caitiff!

OTHELLO 
Look how he laughs already!

IAGO 
I never knew a woman love man so.

CASSIO 
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i’ faith, she loves me.

OTHELLO 
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.

IAGO 
Do you hear, Cassio?

OTHELLO Now he importunes him 
To tell it o’er. Go to! Well said, well said!

IAGO 
She gives it out that you shall marry her. 
Do you intend it?

CASSIO Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO 
Do ye triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?

CASSIO I marry? What, a customer? Prithee bear some 
charity to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, 
ha, ha!

OTHELLO So, so, so, so! They laugh that wins!

IAGO Faith, the cry goes that you marry her.

104 addition title, rank 105 want lack 108 speed succeed; caitiff
wretch 111 rogue rascal (a term of endearment) 112 denies it faintly
i.e., doesn’t strenuously object to the suggestion 114 Well said i.e.,
well done, good work 118 Roman i.e., victor, associated with triumph
119 customer prostitute, one who sells herself 123 cry rumor

CASSIO Prithee say true.

IAGO I am a very villain else.

OTHELLO Have you scored me? Well.

CASSIO This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is persuaded I will marry

her out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.

OTHELLO Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.

CASSIO She was here even now; she haunts me in every place. I was the
other day talking on the sea bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes
the bauble, and falls me thus about my neck -

OTHELLO Crying “O dear Cassio!” as it were. His gesture imports it.

CASSIO So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so shakes and pulls me!
Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O, I see that
nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

CASSIO Well, I must leave her company. 
Enter Bianca.

IAGO Before me! Look where she comes.

CASSIO ’Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one. What do you
mean by this haunting of me?

BIANCA Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that
same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must
take out the work? A likely piece of work that you should find it in your
chamber and know not who left it there! This is some minx’s token, and I
must take out the work?

126 scored beaten, scored off 130 beckons signals 133 bauble playtoy
140-41 I . . . to (Othello imagines dismembering Cassio; nose could be
a euphemism for “penis”) 144 such another fitchew just such a
(notoriously lecherous) polecat (i.e., prostitute) as we were talking of;
perfumed (alluding to the odor of the polecat) 146 dam mother
(“devil’s dam” was a proverbial phrase) 149 likely piece of work likely
story, fiction 151 minx’s token present from a whore

There! Give it your hobbyhorse. Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no
work on’t.

CASSIO How now, my sweet Bianca? How now? how now?

OTHELLO By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!

BIANCA If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may; if you will not, come
when you are next prepared for.

Exit.

IAGO After her, after her!

CASSIO Faith, I must; she’ll rail in the streets else.

IAGO Will you sup there?

CASSIO Faith, I intend so.

IAGO Well, I may chance to see you; for I would very fain speak with you.

CASSIO Prithee come. Will you?

IAGO Go to! say no more. [Exit Cassio.]

OTHELLO [Comes forward.] How shall I murder him, Iago?

IAGO Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

OTHELLO O Iago!

IAGO And did you see the handkerchief?

OTHELLO Was that mine?

IAGO Yours, by this hand! And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your
wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.

OTHELLO I would have him nine years a-killing! - A fine woman! a fair
woman! a sweet woman!

IAGO Nay, you must forget that.

OTHELLO Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned tonight, for she shall
not live. No, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O,
the world hath not a sweeter creature! She might lie by an emperor’s side and
command him tasks.

152 your hobbyhorse i.e., to whatever slut gave it to you 156 should
i.e., must 158 next prepared for i.e., the next time you are invited
(which will be never) 160 rail complain shrewishly 164 fain eagerly
168 vice i.e., his weakness for women 172 by this hand i.e., I swear by
this hand; prizes values 182 command him tasks give him orders

IAGO Nay, that’s not your way.

OTHELLO Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle!
an admirable musician! O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! Of so
high and plenteous wit and invention -

IAGO She’s the worse for all this.

OTHELLO O, a thousand, a thousand times! And then, of so gentle a
condition!

IAGO Ay, too gentle.

OTHELLO Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of
it, Iago!

IAGO If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend; for if it

touch not you, it comes near nobody.

OTHELLO I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me!

IAGO O, ’tis foul in her.

OTHELLO With mine officer!

IAGO That’s fouler.

OTHELLO Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I’ll not expostulate with
her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again. This night, Iago!

IAGO Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath
contaminated.

OTHELLO Good, good! The justice of it pleases. Very good!

IAGO And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you shall hear more by
midnight.

OTHELLO 
Excellent good! 
[A trumpet.] What trumpet is that same?

187 invention imagination 190 gentle a condition (1) pleasant
temperament, (2) genteel social position 194 patent license 195 touch
not you doesn’t concern you 196 messes pieces of food suitable for
meals (i.e., “to bits”) 201 expostulate converse, dispute 201-2
unprovide my mind i.e., change my determination 207 his undertaker
(1) one who acts as security for another (i.e., “I’ll take care of him”),
(2) one who takes up a challenge (probably not yet in the modern
sense of funeral director)

IAGO 
I warrant something from Venice. 
Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants. 
’Tis Lodovico. 
This comes from the duke. See, your wife’s with him.

LODOVICO 
God save you, worthy general!

OTHELLO With all my heart, sir.

LODOVICO 
The duke and the senators of Venice greet you. 
[Gives him a letter.]

OTHELLO 
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures. 

[Opens the letter and reads.]

DESDEMONA 
And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?

IAGO 
I am very glad to see you, signor. 
Welcome to Cyprus.

LODOVICO 
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?

IAGO Lives, sir.

DESDEMONA 
Cousin, there’s fall’n between him and my lord 
An unkind breach; but you shall make all well.

OTHELLO Are you sure of that?

DESDEMONA My lord?

OTHELLO [Reads.] “This fail you not to do, as you will -”

LODOVICO 
He did not call; he’s busy in the paper. 
Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?

DESDEMONA 
A most unhappy one. I would do much

210 warrant feel sure 212 With all my heart (a reciprocal compliment
to Lodovico’s greeting) 214 instrument i.e., letter

T’ atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

OTHELLO 
Fire and brimstone!

DESDEMONA My lord?

OTHELLO Are you wise?

DESDEMONA 
What, is he angry?

LODOVICO May be the letter moved him; 
For, as I think, they do command him home, 
Deputing Cassio in his government.

DESDEMONA 
By my troth, I am glad on’t.

OTHELLO Indeed?

DESDEMONA My lord?

OTHELLO 
I am glad to see you mad.

DESDEMONA Why, sweet Othello?

OTHELLO Devil! 
[Strikes her.]

DESDEMONA I have not deserved this.

LODOVICO 
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice, 
Though I should swear I saw’t. ’Tis very much. 
Make her amends; she weeps.

OTHELLO O devil, devil! 
If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears, 
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile. 
Out of my sight!

DESDEMONA I will not stay to offend you. [Going]

LODOVICO 
Truly, an obedient lady.

227 atone them reconcile them, make them united (“at one”) 231
Deputing 
. . . government i.e., giving Othello’s office to Cassio 233 glad . . .
mad 
i.e., I am pleased that you are foolish enough to rejoice in this news
(with a 
possible pun on “maid”) 237 very much i.e., too much, unbelievable
239 
teem breed 240 crocodile (notorious for weeping false tears as a
means of ensnaring human victims)

I do beseech your lordship call her back.

OTHELLO 
Mistress!

DESDEMONA My lord?

OTHELLO What would you with her, sir?

LODOVICO 

Who? I, my lord?

OTHELLO 
Ay! You did wish that I would make her turn. 
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on 
And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep; 
And she’s obedient; as you say, obedient, 
Very obedient. - Proceed you in your tears. - 
Concerning this, sir - O well-painted passion! - 
I am commanded home. - Get you away; 
I’ll send for you anon. - Sir, I obey the mandate 
And will return to Venice. - Hence, avaunt! 
[Exit Desdemona.] 
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight 
I do entreat that we may sup together. 
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. - Goats and monkeys! 
Exit.

LODOVICO 
Is this the noble Moor whom our full Senate 
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature 
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue 
The shot of accident nor dart of chance 
Could neither graze nor pierce?

IAGO He is much changed.

246 turn turn back (but with a multiple pun, repeated in the following
lines, on turn as [1] change indiscriminately, [2] pursue sexual
encounters, as in the modern “turn tricks”) 249 obedient (Othello
twists Lodovico’s use of the word in l. 242 to suggest “easy,”
“yielding” - i.e., sexually pliant) 251 well-painted passion artfully
counterfeited sorrow 257 Goats and monkeys (apparently a muttered
reference to the lecherous animals mentioned in III.3.403-4)

LODOVICO 
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?

IAGO 
He’s that he is; I may not breathe my censure. 
What he might be - if what he might he is not - 
I would to heaven he were!

LODOVICO What, strike his wife?

IAGO 

Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew 
That stroke would prove the worst!

LODOVICO Is it his use? 
Or did the letters work upon his blood 
And new create his fault?

IAGO Alas, alas! 
It is not honesty in me to speak 
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him, 
And his own courses will denote him so 
That I may save my speech. Do but go after 
And mark how he continues.

LODOVICO 
I am sorry that I am deceived in him. Exeunt.

IV.2 Enter Othello and Emilia.

OTHELLO 
You have seen nothing then?

EMILIA 
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

OTHELLO 
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

263 safe sound, normal 264 censure opinion, judgment 265-66 What .
. . were i.e., if he’s not insane, then he ought to be (to explain this
behavior) 268 use custom 273 courses modes of action IV.2 A room in
the castle

EMILIA 
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard 
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

OTHELLO 
What, did they never whisper?

EMILIA Never, my lord.

OTHELLO 
Nor send you out o’ th’ way?

EMILIA Never.

OTHELLO 

To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
EMILIA Never, my lord.

OTHELLO That’s strange.

EMILIA 
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, 
Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other, 
Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom. 
If any wretch have put this in your head, 
Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse! 
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true, 
There’s no man happy; the purest of their wives 
Is foul as slander.

OTHELLO Bid her come hither. Go. Exit Emilia. 
She says enough; yet she’s a simple bawd 
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore, 
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets; 
And yet she’ll kneel and pray; I have seen her do’t. 
Enter Desdemona and Emilia.

DESDEMONA 
My lord, what is your will?

12 durst would dare 14 abuse your bosom deceive your heart 16 with
the serpent’s curse i.e., by making him move eternally on the belly (see
Genesis 3:14) 20 simple bawd foolish pimp (Othello figures Emilia as
a brothel keeper protecting her merchandise, the whore) 21 This i.e.,
Desdemona 22 closet lock and key i.e., a closed cabinet 24 what is
your will (Desdemona’s words resemble the greeting of a courtesan
seeking to please her client; see note to wills at I.3.321)

OTHELLO Pray you, chuck, come hither.

DESDEMONA 
What is your pleasure?

OTHELLO Let me see your eyes. 
Look in my face.

DESDEMONA What horrible fancy’s this?

OTHELLO [To Emilia] 
Some of your function, mistress. 
Leave procreants alone and shut the door; 
Cough or cry hem if anybody come. 

Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch! 
Exit Emilia.

DESDEMONA 
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import? 
I understand a fury in your words, 
But not the words.

OTHELLO 
Why, what art thou?

DESDEMONA Your wife, my lord, your true And loyal wife.

OTHELLO Come, swear it, damn thyself; 
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves 
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damned - 
Swear thou art honest.

DESDEMONA Heaven doth truly know it.

OTHELLO 
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

DESDEMONA 
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?

OTHELLO 
Ah, Desdemon! away! away! away!

27 Some . . . mistress i.e., do your job by leaving us alone and
watching the door 28 procreants procreators, copulators 30 mystery
trade 36 being . . . heaven looking like an angel as you do 38 honest
chaste

DESDEMONA 
Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep? 
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord? 
If haply you my father do suspect 
An instrument of this your calling back, 
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him, 
I have lost him too.

OTHELLO Had it pleased heaven 
To try me with affliction, had they rained 
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, 
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips, 
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, 
I should have found in some place of my soul 

A drop of patience. But, alas, to make me 
The fixèd figure for the time of scorn 
To point his slow and moving finger at! 
Yet could I bear that too; well, very well. 
But there where I have garnered up my heart, 
Where either I must live or bear no life, 
The fountain from the which my current runs 
Or else dries up - to be discarded thence, 
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads 
To knot and gender in - turn thy complexion there, 
Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin! 
Ay, here look grim as hell!

DESDEMONA 
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

OTHELLO 
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,

45 An instrument a means 54-55 fixèd . . . at object of ridicule for a
scornful age, which is figured as a clock; the dial moves without
appearing to (slow and moving finger) 57 garnered up stored, put for
safekeeping 59 fountain spring 61 cistern cesspool, filthy sink 62 knot
and gender copulate, reproduce 62-64 turn . . . hell i.e., if you,
Patience, look on that, your cherubic appearance will become as grim
as hell 66 shambles slaughterhouse

That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed, 
Who art so lovely fair, and smell’st so sweet, 
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst never 
been born!

DESDEMONA 
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

OTHELLO 
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book, 
Made to write “whore” upon? What committed? 
Committed? O thou public commoner! 
I should make very forges of my cheeks 
That would to cinders burn up modesty, 
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed? 
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks; 

The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets, 
Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth 
And will not hear’t. What committed? 
Impudent strumpet!

DESDEMONA By heaven, you do me wrong!

OTHELLO 
Are not you a strumpet?

DESDEMONA No, as I am a Christian! 
If to preserve this vessel for my lord 
From any other foul unlawful touch 
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

OTHELLO 
What, not a whore?

DESDEMONA No, as I shall be saved!

67 quicken . . . blowing i.e., that spring to life as soon as they are
deposited; weed i.e., the wild thing she is, as against, in the next lines,
the beautiful flower she appears to be 70 committed (Desdemona’s
neutral sense of the word - i.e., “done” - is corrupted by Othello in ll.
72, 73, 76, and 80 to mean only “commit adultery”) 73 commoner
prostitute, woman used in common 74-75 forges . . . modesty (an
image of blushing) 77 winks closes her eyes in shame (the moon
symbolizes chastity) 78 bawdy wind i.e., indiscriminately lustful,
pleasuring everybody 83 vessel body

OTHELLO Is’t possible?

DESDEMONA 
O, heaven forgive us!

OTHELLO I cry you mercy then. 
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice 
That married with Othello. - [Calling] You, mistress, 
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter 
And keeps the gate of hell! 
Enter Emilia. You, you, ay, you!

We have done our course; there’s money for your pains: 
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel. Exit.

EMILIA

Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? 
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?

DESDEMONA Faith, half asleep.

EMILIA 
Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?

DESDEMONA With who?

EMILIA Why, with my lord, madam.

DESDEMONA 
Who is thy lord?

EMILIA He that is yours, sweet lady.

DESDEMONA 
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia. 
I cannot weep, nor answers have I none 
But what should go by water. Prithee tonight 
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets - remember - 
And call thy husband hither.

EMILIA Here’s a change indeed! 
Exit.

DESDEMONA 
’Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.

88 cry you mercy beg your pardon 91-92 have . . . hell (the brothel
keeper, the infernal counterpart of Saint Peter, welcomes men to hell,
another term for the female genitalia) 93 done our course finished our
business, “had a go” 97 half asleep i.e., dazed 104 go by water be
expressed in tears 107 meet proper (referring to Emilia’s kindness as
opposed to Othello’s brutality?)

How have I been behaved, that he might stick 
The small’st opinion on my least misuse? 
Enter Iago and Emilia.

IAGO 
What is your pleasure, madam? How is’t with you?

DESDEMONA 
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes 
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks: 
He might have chid me so; for, in good faith, 
I am a child to chiding.

IAGO What is the matter, lady?

EMILIA 
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her, 
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her 
That true hearts cannot bear it.

DESDEMONA 
Am I that name, Iago?

IAGO What name, fair lady?

DESDEMONA 
Such as she said my lord did say I was.

EMILIA 
He called her whore. A beggar in his drink 
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.

IAGO 
Why did he so?

DESDEMONA 
I do not know; I am sure I am none such.

IAGO 
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!

EMILIA 
Hath she forsook so many noble matches, 
Her father and her country, and her friends,

109 small’st opinion worst interpretation (i.e., sexual suspicion); least
misuse slightest misconduct 114 a child to chiding unused to being
scolded 115 bewhored her (1) called her “whore,” (2) treated her like a
whore 116 despite abuse 121 callet slut 125 forsook refused; matches
marriages

To be called whore? Would it not make one weep?

DESDEMONA 
It is my wretched fortune.

IAGO Beshrew him for’t! 
How comes this trick upon him?

DESDEMONA Nay, heaven doth know.

EMILIA 
I will be hanged if some eternal villain, 
Some busy and insinuating rogue, 

Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, 
Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else.

IAGO 
Fie, there is no such man! It is impossible.

DESDEMONA 
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!

EMILIA 
A halter pardon him! and hell gnaw his bones! 
Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company? 
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood? 
The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave, 
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. 
O heaven, that such companions thou’dst unfold, 
And put in every honest hand a whip 
To lash the rascals naked through the world 
Even from the east to th’ west!

IAGO Speak within door.

EMILIA 
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was 
That turned your wit the seamy side without 
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

129 trick (1) eccentric behavior, (2) fantasy 130 eternal i.e.,
incorrigible, never-changing 132 cogging, cozening cheating,
deceiving 136 halter noose 140 scurvy disgusting, contemptible 141
companions rogues, base men (like fellow in previous line); unfold
expose 144 within door with greater restraint (i.e., not so loud) 145
squire fellow (used contemptuously) 146 seamy side without wrong
side out

IAGO 
You are a fool. Go to.

DESDEMONA Alas, Iago, 
What shall I do to win my lord again? 
Good friend, go to him; for, by this light of heaven, 
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel: 
If e’er my will did trespass ’gainst his love 
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed, 
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense 
Delighted them in any other form, 

Or that I do not yet, and ever did, 
And ever will (though he do shake me off 
To beggarly divorcement) love him dearly, 
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much, 
And his unkindness may defeat my life, 
But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore.” 
It does abhor me now I speak the word; 
To do the act that might the addition earn 
Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.

IAGO 
I pray you be content. ’Tis but his humor. 
The business of the state does him offense, 
And he does chide with you.

DESDEMONA 
If ’twere no other -

IAGO It is but so, I warrant. 
[Trumpets within.] 
Hark how these instruments summon to supper. 
The messengers of Venice stays the meat:

152 will desire (with explicit sexual meaning; see note to I.3.321) 153
discourse of thought process of thinking 155 Delighted them took
delight; form image, appearance 156 yet still, even now 159 Comfort
forswear let happiness forsake; Unkindness unnaturalness (as
elsewhere), but also “loss of love” 160 defeat destroy 162 abhor
disgust (with pun on “turn into a whore”) 163 addition label (i.e.,
“whore”) 164 vanity temptations, splendor 170 stays the meat await
their meal

Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well. 
Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia. 
Enter Roderigo. 
How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO I do not find that thou deal’st justly with me.

IAGO What in the contrary?

RODERIGO Every day thou daff’st me with some device, Iago, and rather, as
it seems to me now, keep’st from me all conveniency than suppliest me with
the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yet
persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.

IAGO Will you hear me, Roderigo?

RODERIGO Faith, I have heard too much; and your words and performances
are no kin together.

IAGO You charge me most unjustly.

RODERIGO With nought but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means.
The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have
corrupted a votarist. You have told me she hath received them, and returned
me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance; but I find
none.

IAGO Well, go to; very well.

RODERIGO Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor ’tis not very well.
Nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.

IAGO Very well.

RODERIGO I tell you ’tis not very well. I will make myself known to
Desdemona. If she will return me my jewels, I will give over my suit and
repent my unlawful solici-tation;

175 daff ’st . . . device put me off (“daff ”=“doff,” remove) with some
trick 177 conveniency advantage, opportunity 188 votarist nun 189-90
sudden respect immediate attention 192 cannot go to (Roderigo turns
Iago’s cliché [go to] into a sexual phrase - i.e., I can’t get anywhere
with her) 194 fopped made a fool of, duped

if not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.

IAGO You have said now.

RODERIGO Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.

IAGO Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee; and even from this instant do
build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo.
Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I protest I have
dealt most directly in thy affair.

RODERIGO It hath not appeared.

IAGO I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without
wit and judgment. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed which I have
greater reason to believe now than ever - I mean purpose, courage, and valor -
this night show it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take
me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.

RODERIGO Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?

IAGO Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in

Othello’s place.

RODERIGO Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to
Venice.

IAGO O, no; he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the fair
Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident; wherein
none can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.

RODERIGO How do you mean removing him?

199 satisfaction i.e., “my money back” or equivalent punishment 204
mettle spirit, bravery (with pun on “metal,” gold) 208 directly
straightforwardly 216 engines for i.e., weapons to take 218-19
compass possibility 224 Mauritania a North African realm, home of
the Moors 225-26 abode be lingered here stay here be extended 227
determinate effective

IAGO Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place - knocking out his
brains.

RODERIGO And that you would have me to do?

IAGO Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with a
harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his honorable
fortune. If you will watch his going thence, which I will fashion to fall out
between twelve and one, you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to
second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at
it, but go along with me. I will show you such a necessity in his death that you
shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high suppertime, and the
night grows to waste. About it!

RODERIGO I will hear further reason for this.

IAGO And you shall be satisfied. Exeunt.

IV.3 Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and Attendants.

LODOVICO 
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

OTHELLO 
O, pardon me; ’twill do me good to walk.

LODOVICO 
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.

DESDEMONA 

Your honor is most welcome.
OTHELLO Will you walk, sir? 
O, Desdemona -

DESDEMONA My lord?

233 harlotry harlot (i.e., Bianca) 237-38 he . . . us i.e., between the
two of us, we can take care of him IV.3 A room in the castle

OTHELLO Get you to bed on th’ instant; I will be returned forthwith. Dismiss
your attendant there. Look’t be done.

DESDEMONA I will, my lord. 
Exit [Othello, with Lodovico and Attendants].

EMILIA How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.

DESDEMONA 
He says he will return incontinent, 
And hath commanded me to go to bed, 
And bid me to dismiss you.

EMILIA Dismiss me?

DESDEMONA 
It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia, 
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu. 
We must not now displease him.

EMILIA Ay - would you had never seen him!

DESDEMONA 
So would not I. My love doth so approve him 
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns - 
Prithee unpin me - have grace and favor.

EMILIA I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.

DESDEMONA 
All’s one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds! 
If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me 
In one of these same sheets.

EMILIA Come, come! You talk.

DESDEMONA 
My mother had a maid called Barbary. 
She was in love; and he she loved proved mad 
And did forsake her. She had a song of “Willow”; 
An old thing ’twas; but it expressed her fortune, 

And she died singing it. That song tonight

8 forthwith right away 12 incontinent immediately 18 Ay - (so
Honigmann; most editions read “I would . . .”: in the folio “I” can
signify both “I” and “Ay”) 20 stubbornness roughness; checks
complaints, rebukes 23 All’s one it doesn’t matter 24 shroud me i.e.,
wrap my corpse 26 Barbary (variant of “Barbara”) 27 mad wild,
unsteady

Will not go from my mind; I have much to do 
But to go hang my head all at one side 
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee dispatch.

EMILIA 
Shall I go fetch your nightgown?

DESDEMONA No, unpin me here. 
This Lodovico is a proper man.

EMILIA A very handsome man.

DESDEMONA He speaks well.

EMILIA I know a lady in Venice would have walked bare-foot to Palestine
for a touch of his nether lip.

DESDEMONA [Sings.] 
“The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, 
Sing all a green willow; 
Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, 
Sing willow, willow, willow. 
The fresh streams ran by her and murmured her 
moans; 
Sing willow, willow, willow; 
Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones, 
Sing willow, willow, willow.” 
Lay by these. - “Willow, willow.” 
Prithee hie thee; he’ll come anon. 
“Sing all a green willow must be my garland. 
Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve” - 
Nay, that’s not next. Hark! who is’t that knocks?

EMILIA It’s the wind.

DESDEMONA [Sings.] 
“I called my love false love, but what said he then? 

Sing willow, willow, willow: 
If I court more women, you’ll couch with more men.” 
So, get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch.

31-32 I have much to do / But i.e., it’s all I can do not 33 Prithee
dispatch please hurry 35 proper (1) good-looking, (2) well-behaved 41
willow (“weeping” tree identified with unrequited love) 49 hie thee
hurry

Doth that bode weeping?

EMILIA ’Tis neither here nor there.

DESDEMONA 
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men! 
Dost thou in conscience think - tell me, Emilia - 
That there be women do abuse their husbands 
In such gross kind?

EMILIA There be some such, no question.

DESDEMONA 
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA 
Why, would not you?

DESDEMONA No, by this heavenly light!

EMILIA 
Nor I neither by this heavenly light. 
I might do’t as well i’ th’ dark.

DESDEMONA 
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA The world’s a huge thing; it is a great price for a small vice.

DESDEMONA 
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.

EMILIA In troth, I think I should; and undo’t when I had done. Marry, I
would not do such a thing for a joint ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition; but, for all the whole
world - ’Ud’s pity! who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a
monarch? I should venture purgatory for’t.

DESDEMONA 
Beshrew me if I would do such a wrong

61 abuse mistreat (i.e., betray) 62 In such gross kind in this wicked
way - i.e., carnally 70 In troth by my truth - i.e., faith (a mild oath) 72-
73 joint ring ring made in two halves 73 lawn linen fabric 74
exhibition gift 75 ’Ud’s God’s

For the whole world.

EMILIA Why, the wrong is but a wrong i’ th’ world; and having the world for
your labor, ’tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it
right.

DESDEMONA I do not think there is any such woman.

EMILIA Yes, a dozen; and as many to th’ vantage as 
would store the world they played for. 
But I do think it is their husbands’ faults 
If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties 
And pour our treasures into foreign laps; 
Or else break out in peevish jealousies, 
Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us, 
Or scant our former having in despite - 
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, 
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know 
Their wives have sense like them. They see, and smell, 
And have their palates both for sweet and sour, 
As husbands have. What is it that they do 
When they change us for others? Is it sport? 
I think it is. And doth affection breed it? 
I think it doth. Is’t frailty that thus errs? 
It is so too. And have not we affections, 
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? 
Then let them use us well; else let them know, 
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.

DESDEMONA 
Good night, good night. God me such uses send, 
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend! Exeunt.

84 dozen (a hyperbolic understatement); to th’ vantage in addition 85
store populate; played gambled (with sexual undertone) 88 foreign
i.e., strangers’ 89 peevish unreasonable 90 Throwing restraint upon us
limiting our freedom, locking us up 91 scant our former having reduce
our allowance 92 galls resentment 94 sense sensual feelings 98

affection passion, lust 104 uses behavior, habits 105 pick i.e., pick up,
learn

V.1 Enter Iago and Roderigo.

IAGO 
Here, stand behind this bulk; straight will he come. 
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. 
Quick, quick! Fear nothing; I’ll be at thy elbow. 
It makes us, or it mars us - think on that, 
And fix most firm thy resolution.

RODERIGO 
Be near at hand; I may miscarry in’t.

IAGO 
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand. 
[Stands aside.]

RODERIGO 
I have no great devotion to the deed, 
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons. 
’Tis but a man gone. Forth my sword! He dies!

IAGO 
I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, 
And he grows angry. Now whether he kill Cassio, 
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other, 
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo, 
He calls me to a restitution large 
Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him 
As gifts to Desdemona. 
It must not be. If Cassio do remain, 
He hath a daily beauty in his life 
That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor 
May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril. 
No, he must die. But so! I heard him coming. 
Enter Cassio.

V.1 A street in Cyprus 1 bulk stall-like structure projecting from a
shop 11 quat boil, pimple; sense quick 14 Live Roderigo i.e., if
Roderigo lives 16 bobbed swindled

RODERIGO 

I know his gait. ’Tis he. Villain, thou diest! 
[Makes a pass at Cassio.]

CASSIO 
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed 
But that my coat is better than thou know’st. 
I will make proof of thine. 
[Draws, and wounds Roderigo.]

RODERIGO O, I am slain! 
[Iago leaps at Cassio from behind, 
wounds him in the leg, and exits.]

CASSIO 
I am maimed forever. Help, ho! Murder! murder! 
[Falls.] 
Enter Othello.

OTHELLO 
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.

RODERIGO 
O, villain that I am!

OTHELLO It is even so.

CASSIO 
O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!

OTHELLO 
’Tis he. O brave Iago, honest and just, 
That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong! 
Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead, 
And your unblessed fate hies. Strumpet, I come. 
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted. 
Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust’s blood be spotted. Exit Othello. 
Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.

CASSIO 
What, ho? No watch? No passage? Murder! murder!

25 coat i.e., soldier’s undercoat of mail 33 Minion darling, favorite
(here addressed contemptuously to Desdemona) 34 hies comes
quickly 35 Forth of i.e., out of 37 watch night watchmen; passage
traffic, passersby

GRATIANO 
’Tis some mischance. The voice is very direful.

CASSIO O, help!

LODOVICO Hark!

RODERIGO O wretched villain!

LODOVICO 
Two or three groan. ’Tis heavy night. 
These may be counterfeits. Let’s think’t unsafe 
To come into the cry without more help.

RODERIGO 
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.

LODOVICO Hark! 
Enter Iago [with a light].

GRATIANO 
Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

IAGO 
Who’s there? Whose noise is this that cries on murder?

LODOVICO 
We do not know.

IAGO Do not you hear a cry?

CASSIO 
Here, here! For heaven sake, help me!

IAGO What’s the matter?

GRATIANO 
This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.

LODOVICO 
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.

IAGO 
What are you here that cry so grievously?

CASSIO 
Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains! 
Give me some help.

IAGO 
O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?

42 heavy dismal, dark 47 shirt i.e., without his jacket, not fully dressed
48 on of 54 spoiled ruined (i.e., injured)

CASSIO 

I think that one of them is hereabout 
And cannot make away.

IAGO O treacherous villains! 
[To Lodovico and Gratiano] 
What are you there? Come in, and give some help.

RODERIGO 
O, help me there!

CASSIO 
That’s one of them.

IAGO O murd’rous slave! O villain! 
[Stabs Roderigo.]

RODERIGO 
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!

IAGO 
Kill men i’ th’ dark? - Where be these bloody thieves? - 
How silent is this town! - Ho! murder! murder! - 
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?

LODOVICO 
As you shall prove us, praise us.

IAGO Signor Lodovico?

LODOVICO He, sir.

IAGO 
I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.

GRATIANO Cassio?

IAGO How is’t, brother?

CASSIO 
My leg is cut in two.

IAGO Marry, heaven forbid! 
Light, gentlemen. I’ll bind it with my shirt. 
Enter Bianca.

BIANCA 
What is the matter, ho? Who is’t that cried?

58 make away escape 66 prove us, praise us i.e., put us to the test and
you’ll see (praise = appraise)

IAGO 
Who is’t that cried?

BIANCA 
O my dear Cassio! my sweet Cassio! 
O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO 
O notable strumpet! - Cassio, may you suspect 
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?

CASSIO No.

GRATIANO I am sorry to find you thus. I have been to seek you.

IAGO 
Lend me a garter. So. - O for a chair 
To bear him easily hence!

BIANCA 
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO 
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash 
To be a party in this injury. - 
Patience awhile, good Cassio. - Come, come! 
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no? 
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman 
Roderigo? No. - Yes, sure. - O heaven, Roderigo!

GRATIANO What, of Venice?

IAGO 
Even he, sir. Did you know him?

GRATIANO Know him? Ay.

IAGO 
Signor Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon. 
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners 
That so neglected you.

GRATIANO I am glad to see you.

IAGO 
How do you, Cassio? - O, a chair, a chair!

83 garter i.e., for a tourniquet; chair litter (a framework couch for
carrying the wounded) 86 trash i.e., Bianca 94 cry beg 95 accidents
sudden events

GRATIANO Roderigo?

IAGO 

He, he, ’tis he! 
[A litter brought in.] 
O, that’s well said; the chair. 
Some good man bear him carefully from hence. 
I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon. 
[To Bianca] For you, mistress, 
Save you your labor. - He that lies slain here, Cassio, 
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?

CASSIO 
None in the world, nor do I know the man.

IAGO [To Bianca] 
What, look you pale? - O, bear him out o’ th’ air. 
[Cassio and Roderigo are borne off.] 
Stay you, good gentlemen. - Look you pale, mistress? - 
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye? - 
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon. 
Behold her well; I pray you look upon her. 
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak, 
Though tongues were out of use. 
[Enter Emilia.]

EMILIA 
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?

IAGO 
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark 
By Roderigo, and fellows that are scaped. 
He’s almost slain, and Roderigo quite dead.

EMILIA 
Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!

IAGO 
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia, 
Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight. 
[To Bianca]

99 well said i.e., well done 102 Save . . . labor i.e., you needn’t fuss
about him anymore; leave him alone 107 gastness ghastly look, fear

What, do you shake at that?

BIANCA 
He supped at my house; but I therefore shake not.

IAGO 
O did he so? I charge you go with me.

EMILIA 
O, fie upon thee, strumpet!

BIANCA 
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest 
As you that thus abuse me.

EMILIA As I? Fie upon thee!

IAGO 
Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dressed. 
[To Bianca] 
Come, mistress, you must tell’s another tale. 
Emilia, run you to the citadel 
And tell my lord and lady what hath happed. 
[Exit Emilia.] 
Will you go on afore? Exeunt [all but Iago]. 
This is the night 
That either makes me or fordoes me quite. [Exit.]

V.2 Enter Othello [with a light], and Desdemona [asleep] in her bed.

OTHELLO 
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. 
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars! 
It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood, 
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,

122 fie i.e., shame 123 honest chaste 125 dressed bandaged 130
fordoes destroys, undoes

V.2 A bedroom in the castle 1 cause (1) legal matter or “case” (here,

the crime of adultery), (2) principle (i.e., not merely a personal
grievance); my soul (conventional form of self-address)

And smooth as monumental alablaster. 
Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men. 
Put out the light, and then put out the light. 
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, 
I can again thy former light restore, 
Should I repent me; but once put out thy light, 

Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature, 
I know not where is that Promethean heat 
That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy 
rose, 
I cannot give it vital growth again; 
It needs must wither. I’ll smell thee on the tree. 
[He kisses her.] 
O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade 
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more! 
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee, 
And love thee after. One more, and that’s the last! 
So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep, 
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly; 
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.

DESDEMONA 
Who’s there? Othello?

OTHELLO Ay, Desdemona.

DESDEMONA 
Will you come to bed, my lord?

OTHELLO 
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?

DESDEMONA Ay, my lord.

OTHELLO 
If you bethink yourself of any crime

5 alablaster alabaster, white marble (the archaic form retained here for
its sound) 8 flaming minister i.e., the torch or candle that, as minister
or servant, lights the chamber 11 Thou . . . nature i.e., Desdemona
(cunning’st =beautifully made) 12 Promethean heat divine spark
(Prometheus legendarily stole fire from heaven) 13 relume rekindle 21
cruel i.e., unmerciful, but perhaps “painful” or “distressing” 21-22
sorrow’s . . . love (see 
Hebrews 12:6, “whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth”) 26 crime sin

Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, 
Solicit for it straight. 
DESDEMONA 
Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that?

OTHELLO 

Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by. 
I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit. 
No, heavens forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

DESDEMONA 
Talk you of killing?

OTHELLO Ay, I do.

DESDEMONA Then heaven 
Have mercy on me!

OTHELLO Amen, with all my heart!

DESDEMONA 
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

OTHELLO Humh.

DESDEMONA 
And yet I fear you; for you’re fatal then 
When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know not, 
Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.

OTHELLO 
Think on thy sins.

DESDEMONA They are loves I bear to you.

OTHELLO 
Ay, and for that thou diest.

DESDEMONA 
That death’s unnatural that kills for loving. 
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? 
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame. 
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope, 
They do not point on me.

OTHELLO Peace and be still!

28 Solicit i.e., pray for forgiveness 32 forfend forbid 37 fatal ominous,
frightening 40 They . . . you i.e., my only sin is in loving you too much
(more than God) 45 portents omens, usually bad 46 still quiet

DESDEMONA 
I will so. What’s the matter?

OTHELLO 
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee 
Thou gav’st to Cassio.

DESDEMONA No, by my life and soul! 
Send for the man and ask him.

OTHELLO Sweet soul, take heed, 
Take heed of perjury; thou art on thy deathbed.

DESDEMONA 
Ay, but not yet to die.

OTHELLO Presently. 
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, 
For to deny each article with oath 
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception 
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

DESDEMONA 
Then Lord have mercy on me!

OTHELLO I say amen.

DESDEMONA 
And have you mercy too! I never did 
Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio 
But with such general warranty of heaven 
As I might love. I never gave him token.

OTHELLO 
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in’s hand! 
O perjured woman! thou dost stone my heart, 
And makes me call what I intend to do 
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice. 
I saw the handkerchief.

DESDEMONA He found it then. 
I never gave it him. Send for him hither.

51 deathbed (i.e., women were sometimes buried in their wedding
sheets) 52 Presently right away 55 conception belief, or perhaps
“plan,” “intention,” preparing for the metaphor in the next line of
aborted childbirth 56 groan withal i.e., labor to give birth to (but with
the modern sense of “moan in sorrow”) 59 Offend wrong 63 stone my
heart i.e., turn it to stone

Let him confess a truth.

OTHELLO He hath confessed.

DESDEMONA 

What, my lord?

OTHELLO 
That he hath used thee.

DESDEMONA How? unlawfully?

OTHELLO Ay.

DESDEMONA 
He will not say so.

OTHELLO No, his mouth is stopped. 
Honest Iago hath ta’en order for’t.

DESDEMONA 
O, my fear interprets. What, is he dead?

OTHELLO 
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge 
Had stomach for them all.

DESDEMONA 
Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone!

OTHELLO 
Out, strumpet! Weep’st thou for him to my face?

DESDEMONA 
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

OTHELLO 
Down, strumpet!

DESDEMONA 
Kill me tomorrow; let me live tonight!

OTHELLO 
Nay, if you strive -

DESDEMONA 
But half an hour!

OTHELLO Being done, there is no pause.

DESDEMONA 
But while I say one prayer!

72 ta’en order arranged 73 interprets guesses (the worst) 75 stomach
appetite, desire 81 strive struggle 82 Being done i.e., since the case is
over

OTHELLO It is too late. 

Smothers her.

DESDEMONA O Lord, Lord, Lord! 
Emilia at the door.

EMILIA [Calls within.] 
My lord, my lord! What, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO 
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead? 
I that am cruel am yet merciful; 
I would not have thee linger in thy pain. 
So, so.

EMILIA Within 
What, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO Who’s there?

EMILIA [Within] 
O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!

OTHELLO 
Yes, ’tis Emilia. - By and by. - She’s dead. - 
’Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death. 
The noise was high. Ha! no more moving? 
Still as the grave. - Shall she come in? Were’t good? - 
I think she stirs again. No. - What’s best to do? 
If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife. 
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife. 
O, insupportable! O heavy hour! 
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse 
Of sun and moon, and that th’ affrighted globe 
Did yawn at alteration.

EMILIA [Within] I do beseech you 
That I may speak with you, O good my lord!

OTHELLO 
I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia. 
Soft, by and by. - Let me the curtains draw. - 
[Closes the bed curtains.]

92 By and by coming, just a moment (to Emilia) 94 high loud 102
yawn at alteration split open (in an earthquake) at the change brought
on by Desdemona’s death

Where art thou? 
[Opens the door.] 
Enter Emilia. 
What’s the matter with thee now?

EMILIA 
O my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done!

OTHELLO What? Now?

EMILIA But now, my lord.

OTHELLO 
It is the very error of the moon. 
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont 
And makes men mad.

EMILIA 
Cassio, my lord, hath killed a young Venetian 
Called Roderigo.

OTHELLO Roderigo killed? 
And Cassio killed?

EMILIA No, Cassio is not killed.

OTHELLO 
Not Cassio killed? Then murder’s out of tune, 
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

DESDEMONA 
O, falsely, falsely murdered!

EMILIA O Lord! what cry is that?

OTHELLO That? What?

EMILIA 
Out and alas! that was my lady’s voice. 
Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again! 
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!

DESDEMONA 
A guiltless death I die.

EMILIA 
O, who hath done this deed?

109 But just 110 error wandering, errancy, with dire earthly
consequences 111 was wont was formerly accustomed to do

DESDEMONA 

Nobody - I myself. Farewell. 
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell! 
[She dies.]

OTHELLO 
Why, how should she be murdered?

EMILIA Alas, who knows?

OTHELLO 
You heard her say herself, it was not I.

EMILIA 
She said so. I must needs report the truth.

OTHELLO 
She’s like a liar gone to burning hell! 
’Twas I that killed her.

EMILIA O, the more angel she, 
And you the blacker devil!

OTHELLO 
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.

EMILIA 
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.

OTHELLO 
She was false as water.

EMILIA Thou art rash as fire to say 
That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!

OTHELLO 
Cassio did top her. Ask thy husband else. 
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell 
But that I did proceed upon just grounds 
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.

EMILIA My husband?

OTHELLO Thy husband.

EMILIA 
That she was false to wedlock?

126 Commend remember, speak of 135 water (considered unstable or
changing) 137 top (see tupping, I.1.88); else i.e., if you want to know
more (else) 139 But that . . . grounds i.e., if I had acted without
justification

OTHELLO 
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true, 
If heaven would make me such another world 
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite, 
I’d not have sold her for it.

EMILIA 
My husband?

OTHELLO Ay, ’twas he that told me on her first. 
An honest man he is, and hates the slime 
That sticks on filthy deeds.

EMILIA My husband?

OTHELLO 
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.

EMILIA 
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love! 
My husband say she was false?

OTHELLO He, woman. 
I say, thy husband. Dost understand the word? 
My friend, thy husband; honest, honest Iago.

EMILIA 
If he say so, may his pernicious soul 
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to th’ heart. 
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

OTHELLO Ha!

EMILIA Do thy worst. 
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven 
Than thou wast worthy her.

OTHELLO Peace, you were best.

EMILIA 
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm 
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt! 
As ignorant as dirt! thou has done a deed -

145 such another world i.e., another world like this one 146 chrysolite
precious gem 151 iterance repetition 152 made mocks with played
games with 157 half a grain a day i.e., slowly and painfully 158 fond .
. . bargain i.e., devoted to her vows to you 164 to be hurt to endure
pain; gull (common word for a dupe, someone easy to cheat)

I care not for thy sword; I’ll make thee known, 
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! help! ho! help! 
The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder! murder! 
Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago [with others].

MONTANO 
What is the matter? How now, general?

EMILIA 
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well, 
That men must lay their murders on your neck.

GRATIANO 
What is the matter?

EMILIA 
Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man. 
He says thou told’st him that his wife was false. 
I know thou didst not; thou’rt not such a villain. 
Speak, for my heart is full.

IAGO 
I told him what I thought, and told no more 
Than what he found himself was apt and true.

EMILIA 
But did you ever tell him she was false?

IAGO I did.

EMILIA 
You told a lie, an odious damnèd lie! 
Upon my soul, a lie! a wicked lie! 
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?

IAGO 
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.

EMILIA 
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak: 
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed -

ALL 
O heavens forfend!

171 lay . . . neck charge you with murder 184 charm cast a spell on
(i.e., silence)

EMILIA 

And your reports have set the murder on.

OTHELLO 
Nay, stare not, masters. It is true indeed.

GRATIANO 
’Tis a strange truth.

MONTANO 
O monstrous act!

EMILIA Villainy, villainy, villainy! 
I think upon’t - I think I smell’t! - O villainy! 
I thought so then. - I’ll kill myself for grief. - 
O villainy, villainy!

IAGO 
What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.

EMILIA 
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak. 
’Tis proper I obey him, but not now. 
Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home.

OTHELLO 
O! O! O! 
[Falls on the bed.]

EMILIA Nay, lay thee down and roar! 
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent 
That e’er did lift up eye.

OTHELLO O, she was foul! 
[Rises.] 
I scarce did know you, uncle. There lies your niece, 
Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped. 
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

GRATIANO 
Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father’s dead. 
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief 
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now, 
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,

201 lift up eye i.e., to heaven in prayer 204 shows appears 207 Shore
cut 208 turn act

Yea, curse his better angel from his side, 

And fall to reprobance.

OTHELLO 
’Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows 
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame 
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it, 
And she did gratify his amorous works 
With that recognizance and pledge of love 
Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand. 
It was a handkerchief, an antique token 
My father gave my mother.

EMILIA 
O God! O heavenly God!

IAGO 
Zounds, hold your peace!

EMILIA ’Twill out, ’twill out! I peace? 
No, I will speak as liberal as the north. 
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all, 
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.

IAGO 
Be wise, and get you home.

EMILIA I will not. 
[Iago draws and threatens Emilia.]

GRATIANO Fie! 
Your sword upon a woman?

EMILIA 
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak’st of 
I found by fortune, and did give my husband; 
For often with a solemn earnestness - 
More than indeed belonged to such a trifle - 
He begged of me to steal’t.

IAGO Villainous whore!

210 reprobance the state of rejection by God 214 gratify . . . works
reward his sexual acts 215 recognizance token 221 as liberal as the
north as freely as the north wind blows

EMILIA 
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it, 
And I did give’t my husband.

IAGO Filth, thou liest!

EMILIA 
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen. 
O murd’rous coxcomb! what should such a fool 
Do with so good a wife?

OTHELLO Are there no stones in heaven 
But what serves for the thunder? Precious villain! 
[The Moor runs at Iago but is disarmed. 
Iago stabs his wife.]

GRATIANO 
The woman falls. Sure he hath killed his wife.

EMILIA 
Ay, ay. O, lay me by my mistress’ side. [Exit Iago.]

GRATIANO 
He’s gone, but his wife’s killed.

MONTANO 
’Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon, 
Which I have here recovered from the Moor. 
Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass, 
But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain, 
For ’tis a damnèd slave. 
Exit [Montano, with all but Othello and Emilia].

OTHELLO I am not valiant neither; 
But every puny whipster gets my sword. 
But why should honor outlive honesty? 
Let it go all.

EMILIA What did thy song bode, lady?

234 coxcomb jester, fool (i.e., Othello) 235-36 Are there . . . the
thunder i.e., why doesn’t heaven rain down stones on this villain 236
Precious utter 240 a notorious an extraordinary, incredible (i.e., not
the modern “well-known”) 245 puny whipster foolish, insignificant
person (cf. whippersnapper) 246 honor i.e., military achievement;
honesty chastity

Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan, 
And die in music. [Sings.] “Willow, willow, willow.” 
Moor, she was chaste. She loved thee, cruel Moor: 

So come my soul to bliss as I speak true. 
So speaking as I think, alas, I die. 
[She dies.]

OTHELLO 
I have another weapon in this chamber; 
It was a sword of Spain, the ice brook’s temper. 
O, here it is. - Uncle, I must come forth.

GRATIANO [Within] 
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear. 
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

OTHELLO 
Look in upon me then and speak with me, 
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee. 
[Enter Gratiano.]

GRATIANO 
What is the matter?

OTHELLO Behold, I have a weapon; 
A better never did itself sustain 
Upon a soldier’s thigh. I have seen the day 
That with this little arm and this good sword 
I have made my way through more impediments 
Than twenty times your stop. But O vain boast! 
Who can control his fate? ’Tis not so now. 
Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed. 
Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt 
And very seamark of my utmost sail: 
Do you go back dismayed? ’Tis a lost fear. 
Man but a rush against Othello’s breast

248-49 swan . . . music (according to legend, the ordinarily mute swan
sang beautifully just before death) 254 sword . . . temper i.e., Spanish
sword hardened or tempered in freezing water 259 naked unarmed 265
your stop i.e., the obstacle you impose 268 butt target (from archery)
269 seamark . . . sail beacon or destination of my last voyage 270 lost
wasted 271 Man but a rush i.e., use only a reed

And he retires. Where should Othello go? 
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench! 
Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt, 

This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven, 
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl? 
Even like thy chastity. 
O cursèd, cursèd slave! Whip me, ye devils, 
From the possession of this heavenly sight! 
Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur! 
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire! 
Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon! dead! Oh! Oh! 
Enter Lodovico, Cassio [in a litter], Montano, and 
Iago, with Officers.

LODOVICO 
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?

OTHELLO 
That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.

LODOVICO 
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.

OTHELLO 
I look down towards his feet - but that’s a fable. 
If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee. 
[Wounds Iago.]

LODOVICO 
Wrench his sword from him. 
[Othello is disarmed.]

IAGO I bleed, sir, but not killed.

OTHELLO 
I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live, 
For in my sense, ’tis happiness to die.

LODOVICO 
O thou Othello that was once so good, 
Fall’n in the practice of a damnèd slave,

272 retires withdraws, retreats (a military term) 274 compt i.e., final
accounting (Last Judgment) 286 I . . . fable (Othello inspects Iago’s
feet to test the legend that the devil’s feet are cloven) 292 practice plot

What shall be said to thee?

OTHELLO Why, anything: 
An honorable murderer, if you will; 

For nought I did in hate, but all in honor.

LODOVICO 
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy. 
Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?

OTHELLO Ay.

CASSIO 
Dear general, I never gave you cause.

OTHELLO 
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon. 
Will you, I pray, demand that demidevil 
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?

IAGO 
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know. 
From this time forth I never will speak word.

LODOVICO 
What, not to pray?

GRATIANO Torments will ope your lips.

OTHELLO 
Well, thou dost best.

LODOVICO 
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall’n, 
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter 
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, 
And here another. The one of them imports 
The death of Cassio to be undertook 
By Roderigo.

OTHELLO 
O villain!

CASSIO Most heathenish and most gross!

LODOVICO 
Now here’s another discontented paper

297 consent in agree (in planning) 301 demidevil half demon, almost a
devil 313 gross monstrous

Found in his pocket too, and this, it seems, 
Roderigo meant t’ have sent this damnèd villain; 

But that, belike, Iago in the interim 
Came in and satisfied him.

OTHELLO O thou pernicious caitiff ! - 
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief 
That was my wife’s?

CASSIO I found it in my chamber; 
And he himself confessed it but even now 
That there he dropped it for a special purpose 
Which wrought to his desire.

OTHELLO O fool! fool! fool!

CASSIO 
There is besides in Roderigo’s letter, 
How he upbraids Iago that he made him 
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came 
That I was cast; and even but now he spake, 
After long seeming dead - Iago hurt him, 
Iago set him on.

LODOVICO 
You must forsake this room and go with us. 
Your power and your command is taken off, 
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave, 
If there be any cunning cruelty 
That can torment him much and hold him long, 
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest 
Till that the nature of your fault be known 
To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.

OTHELLO 
Soft you! a word or two before you go. 
I have done the state some service, and they know’t. 
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,

318 caitiff villain 326 Brave defy, challenge 327 cast dismissed 334
hold him long i.e., keep him alive through torture 335 close prisoner
rest i.e., remain closely guarded, confined 338 Soft you one moment,
wait

When you shall these unlucky deeds relate, 
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate, 
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak 

Of one that loved not wisely, but too well; 
Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought, 
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand, 
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away 
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes, 
Albeit unusèd to the melting mood, 
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees 
Their medicinable gum. Set you down this. 
And say besides that in Aleppo once, 
Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk 
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state, 
I took by th’ throat the circumcisèd dog 
And smote him - thus. 
[He stabs himself.] 
LODOVICO 
O bloody period!

GRATIANO All that is spoke is marred.

OTHELLO 
I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this, 
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss. 
[He] dies.

CASSIO 
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon; 
For he was great of heart.

LODOVICO [To Iago] O Spartan dog, 
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea! 
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.

341 unlucky unfortunate 342 extenuate soft-pedal (literally, “thin out”)
345 wrought worked up, worked on 346 Perplexed desperate,
bewildered 347 base Judean (perhaps Judas Iscariot, betrayer of
Christ, or Herod, who impulsively killed his wife; Q reads “Indian”)
348 subdued conquered, overcome with grief 351 gum i.e., myrrh 354
traduced betrayed 357 period ending 361 Spartan dog (bloodhound
known for silence) 362 fell merciless, inhuman

This is thy work. The object poisons sight; 
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house, 
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor, 

For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor, 
Remains the censure of this hellish villain, 
The time, the place, the torture. O, enforce it! 
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state 
This heavy act with heavy heart relate. Exeunt.

365 Let it be hid i.e., draw the bed curtains; keep guard 366 seize upon
take legal control of 367 succeed on pass to you (as Desdemona’s
uncle) by inheritance 368 censure judgment, passing sentence

FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE

The distinguished Pelican Shakespeare series, newly revised to be the

premier choice for students, professors, and general readers well into the

21st century

Antony and Cleopatra 
ISBN 0-14-071452-9
 

As You Like It 
ISBN 0-14-071471-5
 

The Comedy of Errors 
ISBN 0-14-071474-X
 

Coriolanus 
ISBN 0-14-071473-1
 

Cymbeline 
ISBN 0-14-071472-3
 

Hamlet 
ISBN 0-14-071454-5
 

Henry IV, Part I 

ISBN 0-14-071456-1
 

Henry IV, Part 2 
ISBN 0-14-071457-X
 

Henry V 
ISBN 0-14-071458-8

Henry VI, Part 1 
ISBN 0-14-071465-0
 

Henry VI, Part 2 
ISBN 0-14-071466-9
 

Henry VI, Part 3 
ISBN 0-14-071467-7
 

Henry VIII 
ISBN 0-14-071475-8
 

Julius Caesar 
ISBN 0-14-071468-5
 

King John 
ISBN 0-14-071459-6
 

King Lear 
ISBN 0-14-071476-6
 

King Lear 
(The Quarto and Folio Texts) 
ISBN 0-14-071490-1

Macbeth 
ISBN 0-14-071478-2

FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE

Measure for Measure 
ISBN 0-14-071479-0
 

The Merchant of Venice 
ISBN 0-14-071462-6
 

The Merry Wives of Windsor 
ISBN 0-14-071464-2
 

A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
ISBN 0-14-071455-3
 

Much Ado About Nothing 
ISBN 0-14-071480-4
 

The Narrative Poems 
ISBN 0-14-071481-2
 

Othello 
ISBN 0-14-071463-4
 

Pericles 
ISBN 0-14-071469-3
 

Richard II 
ISBN 0-14-071482-0

Romeo and Juliet 
ISBN 0-14-071484-7
 

The Sonnets 
ISBN 0-14-071453-7
 

The Taming of the Shrew 
ISBN 0-14-071451-0
 

The Tempest 
ISBN 0-14-071485-5
 

Timon of Athens 
ISBN 0-14-071487-1
 

Titus Andronicus 
ISBN 0-14-071491-X
 

Troilus and Cressida 
ISBN 0-14-071486-3
 

Twelfth Night 
ISBN 0-14-071489-8
 

The Two Gentlemen of Verona 
ISBN 0-14-071461-8
 

The Winter’s Tale 

ISBN 0-14-071488-X

“The Noble Moor,” Proceedings of the British Academy, 41 (1955): 201.

This is the title of G. Wilson Knight’s chapter on the play in The Wheel of

Fire (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1930).

Letter to Countess Clarina Maffei, October 20, 1876, quoted in Julian

Budden, The Operas of Verdi, vol. 3 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1981), p. 317.

The Works of Samuel Johnson, ed. Arthur Sherbo (New Haven: Yale

University Press, 1968), vol. 8, p. 1045.

This list, except for bracketed material, is printed at the end of the folio

text.

