Barbara Pym

OceanofPDF.com

First published 1977 by Macmillan London Ltd

This edition published 2004 by Pan Books an imprint of Pan Macmillan Led Pan Macmillan, 20 New

Wharf Road. London NI 9RR Basingstoke and Oxford Associated companies throughout the world

ISBN 0 330 32648 I

Copyright © Hazel Holt 1977

A QP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

One

Two

Three

Four

Five

Six

Seven

Eight

Nine

Ten

Eleven

Twelve

Thirteen

Fourteen

Fifteen

Sixteen

Seventeen

Eighteen

Nineteen

Twenty

Twenty-one

Twenty-two

Twenty three

Twenty-Four

OceanofPDF.com

One

THAT DAY THE four of them went to the library, though at different times.

The library assistant, if he had noticed them at all, would have seen them as
people who belonged together in some way. They each in turn noticed him;
with his shoulder-length golden hair. Their disparaging comments on its
length, its luxuriance, its general unsuitability—given the job and the
circumstances—were no doubt reflections on the shortcomings of their own
hair. Edwin wore his, which was thin, greying and bald on top, in a sort of
bob—‘even older gentlemen are wearing it longer now’, his barber had told
him—and the style was an easy one which Edwin considered not
unbecoming to a man in his early sixties. Norman, on the other hand, had
always had ‘difficult’ hair, coarse, bristly and now iron-grey, which in his
younger days had refused to lie down flat at the crown and round the
parting. Now he did not have to part it and had adopted a medieval or
pudding-basin style, rather like the American crew-cut of the forties and
fifties. The two women—Letty and Marcia—had hair as different from each
other as it was possible to imagine in the nineteen seventies, when most
women in their sixties had a regular appointment at the hairdresser for the
arrangement of their short white, grey or dyed red curls. Letty had faded
light brown hair, worn rather too long and in quality as soft and wispy as
Edwin’s was. People sometimes said—though less often now—how lucky
she was not to have gone grey, but Letty knew that there were white hairs
interspersed with the brown and that most people would have had a
brightening ‘rinse’ anyway. Marcia’s short, stiff, lifeless hair was
uncompromisingly dyed a harsh dark brown from a bottle in the bathroom
cupboard, which she had used ever since she had noticed the first white
hairs some thirty years earlier. If there were now softer and more becoming
ways of colouring one’s hair, Marcia was unaware of them.

Now, at lunchtime, each went about his or her separate business in the

library. Edwin made use of Crockford’s Clerical Directory and also had
occasion to consult Who’s Who and even Who Was Who, for he was
engaged in serious research into the antecedents and qualifications of a
certain clergyman who had recently been appointed to a living in a parish
he sometimes frequented. Norman had not come to the library for any

literary purpose, for he was not much of a reader, but it was a good place to
sit and a bit nearer than the British Museum which was another of his
lunchtime stamping grounds. Marcia too regarded the library as a good,
free, warm place not too far from the office, where you could sit for a
change of scene in winter. It was also possible to collect leaflets and
pamphlets setting out various services available for the elderly in the
Borough of Camden. Now that she was in her sixties Marcia took every
opportunity to find out what was due to her in the way of free bus travel,
reduced and cheap meals, hairdressing and chiropody, although she never
made use of the information. The library was also a good place to dispose
of unwanted objects which could not in her opinion be classified as rubbish
suitable for the dustbin. These included bottles of a certain kind, but not
milk bottles which she kept in a shed in her garden, certain boxes and paper
bags and various other unclassified articles which could be left in a comer
of the library when nobody was looking. One of the library assistants (a
woman) had her eye on Marcia, but she was unconscious of this as she
deposited a small, battered tartan-patterned cardboard box, which had
contained ‘Killikrankie oatcakes’, at the back of a convenient space on one
of the fiction shelves.
 

Of the four only Letty used the library for her own pleasure and possible

edification. She had always been an unashamed reader of novels, but if she
hoped to find one which reflected her own sort of life she had come to
realize that the position of an unmarried, unattached, ageing woman is of no
interest whatever to the writer of modern fiction. Gone were the days when
she had hopefully filled in her Boots Book Lovers’ library list from novels
reviewed in the Sunday papers, and there had now been a change in her
reading habits. Unable to find what she needed in ‘romantic’ novels, Letty
had turned to biographies of which there was no dearth. And because these
were ‘true’ they were really better than fiction. Not perhaps better than Jane
Austen or Tolstoy, which she had not read anyway, but certainly more
‘worth while’ than the works of any modern novelist.

In the same way, Letty, perhaps because she was the only one of the four

who really liked reading, was also the only one who regularly had lunch out
of the office. The restaurant she usually patronized was called the
Rendezvous but it was not much of a place for romantic meetings. People
who worked in the nearby offices crowded in between twelve and two, ate

their meal as quickly as possible, and then hurried away. The man at Letty’s
table had been there when she sat down. With a brief hostile glance he
handed her the menu, then his coffee had come, he had drunk it, left 5p for
the waitress and gone. His place was taken by a woman who began to study
the menu carefully. She looked up, perhaps about to venture a comment on
price increases, pale, bluish eyes troubled about VAT. Then, discouraged by
Letty’s lack of response, she lowered her glance, decided on macaroni au
gratin with chips and a glass of water. The moment had passed.

indifference she was not unaware of the situation. Somebody had reached
out towards her. They could have spoken and a link might have been forged
between two solitary people. But the other woman, satisfying her first pangs
of hunger, was now bent rather low over her macaroni au gratin. It was too
late for any kind of gesture. Once again Letty had failed to make contact.

Back in the office Edwin, who had a sweet tooth, bit the head off a black

jelly baby. There was nothing racist about his action or his choice, it was
simply that he preferred the pungent liquorice flavour of the black babies to
the more insipid orange, lemon or raspberry of the others. The devouring of
the jelly baby formed the last course of his midday meal which he usually
ate at his desk among papers and index cards.

When Letty came into the room he offered her the bag of jelly babies but

this was only a ritual gesture and he knew that she would refuse. Eating
sweets was self-indulgent, and even though she was now in her sixties there
was no reason why she should not keep her spare, trim figure.

The other occupants of the room, Norman and Marcia, were also eating

their lunch. Norman had a chicken leg and Marcia an untidy sandwich,
bulging with lettuce leaves and slippery slices of tomato. On a mat on the
floor the electric kettle was pouring out steam. Somebody had put it on for a
hot drink and forgotten to switch it off.

Norman wrapped up his bone and placed it neatly in the wastepaper

basket. Edwin lowered an Earl Grey tea bag carefully into a mug and filled
it with boiling water from the kettle. Then he added a slice of lemon from a
small round plastic container.

Marcia opened a tin of instant coffee and made two mugs of the drink for

herself and Norman. There was nothing particularly significant about her
action—it was just a convenient arrangement they had. They both liked
coffee and it was cheaper to buy a large tin and share it between them.

Letty, having had her meal out, did not make herself a drink, but went into
the cloakroom and fetched a glass of water which she placed on a coloured
hand-worked raffia mat on her table. Her place was by the window and she
had covered the window sill with pots of trailing plants, the kind that
proliferated themselves by throwing out miniature replicas which could be
rooted to make new plants. ‘Nature she loved, and next to Nature, Art.’
Edwin had once quoted, even going on to finish the lines about her having
warmed both hands before the fire of life—but not too close, mind you.
Now the fire was sinking, as it was for all of them, but was she, or were any
of them, ready to depart?

Something of this may have been in Norman’s subconscious as he turned

the pages of his newspaper.

‘Hypothermia,’ he read the word slowly. ‘Another old person found dead.

We want to be careful we don’t get hypothermia.’

‘It isn’t a thing you get,’ said Marcia bossily. ‘Not like catching an

infectious disease.’

‘Well, if you were found dead of it, like this old woman here, you could

say you’d got it, couldn’t you?’ said Norman, defending his usage.

Letty’s hand moved over to the radiator and lingered there. ‘It’s a state or

condition, isn’t it,’ she said, ‘when the body gets cold, loses heat or
something like that.’

‘That’s one thing we’ve got in common then,’ said Norman, his snappy

little voice matching his small spare body. ‘The chance of being found dead
of hypothermia.’

up at the library that morning—something about extra heating allowances
for the elderly—but she kept the information to herself.

‘Cheerful, aren’t you,’ said Edwin, ‘but perhaps there’s something in it.

Four people on the verge of retirement, each one of us living alone, and
without any close relative near—that’s us.’

Letty made a murmuring sound, as if unwilling to accept this

classification. And yet it was undeniably true—each one lived alone.
Strangely enough they had been talking about it earlier that morning when
something—again in Norman’s paper—had reminded them that Mother’s
Day was upon them, with the shops full of suitable gifts and the price of
flowers suddenly going up. Not that they ever bought flowers, but the
increase was noted and commented on. Yet it could hardly affect people too

old to have a mother still alive. Indeed, it was sometimes strange to reflect
that each of them had once had a mother. Edwin’s mother had lived to a
respectable age—seventy-five—and had died after a brief illness without
giving any trouble to her son. Marcia’s mother had died in the suburban
house where Marcia now lived alone, in the upstairs front bedroom with the
old cat Snowy beside her. She had been eighty-nine, what some might think
of as a great age but nothing wonderful or to be remarked on. Letty’s
mother had died at the end of the war, then her father had married again.
Shortly after this her father had died and the stepmother had in due course
found another husband, so that Letty now had no connection with the West
Country town where she had been born and brought up. She had
sentimental and not entirely accurate memories of her mother, wandering
round the garden snipping off dead heads, wearing a dress of some floating
material. Only Norman had never known his mother—‘Never had a mum,’
he used to say in his bitter sardonic way. He and his sister had been brought
up by an aunt, and yet it was he who inveighed most fiercely against the
commercializing of what had originally been the old country custom of
Mothering Sunday.

‘Of course you’ve got your church,’ said Norman, addressing Edwin.
‘And there’s Father Gellibrand,’ said Marcia, for they had all heard so

much about Father G., as Edwin called him, and they envied Edwin the
stable background of the church near Clapham Common where he was
Master of Ceremonies (whatever that might be) and on the parochial church
council (the PCC). Edwin would be all right, because although he was a
widower and lived alone he had a married daughter living in Beckenham,
and no doubt she would see to it that her old father wasn’t found dead of
hypothermia.

‘Oh, yes, Father G.’s a real tower of strength,’ Edwin agreed, but after all

the church was open to everybody. He couldn’t understand why neither
Letty nor Marcia seemed to go to church. It was easier to see why Norman
didn’t.

The door opened and a young black girl, provocative, cheeky and

bursting with health, entered the room.

‘Anything for the post?’ she asked.
The four were conscious of the way she looked at them, perhaps seeing

Edwin, large and bald with a pinkish face, Norman, small and wiry with his

bristly grey hair, Marcia with her general look of oddness, Letty, fluffy and
faded, a Home Counties type, still making an effort with her clothes.

‘Post?’ Edwin was the first to speak, echoing her question. ‘Hardly yet,

Eulalia. The post does not have to be collected until half past three, and it is
now’—he consulted his watch—‘two forty-two precisely. Just trying it on,’
he said, when the girl retired, defeated.

‘Hoping to get off early, lazy little so-and-so,’ said Norman.
Marcia closed her eyes wearily as Norman began to go on about ‘the

blacks’. Letty tried to change the subject, for it made her uneasy to criticize
Eulalia or to be guilty of any unkindness towards coloured people. Yet the
girl was irritating and needed to be disciplined, even though there was no
doubt that her exuberant vitality was disturbing, especially to an elderly
woman who felt herself in contrast to be greyer than ever, crushed and dried
up by the weak British sun.

Tea came at last and just before five o’clock the two men packed up what

they were doing and went out of the room together, though they would
separate on leaving the building, Edwin to the Northern Line for Clapham
Common and Norman to the Bakerloo for Kilburn Park.

Letty and Marcia began a more leisurely tidying up. They did not speak

of or break into gossip about the two men, who were accepted as part of the
office furniture and not considered worthy of comment unless they did
something surprisingly out of character. Outside, the pigeons on the roof
were picking at each other, presumably removing insects. Perhaps this is all
that we as human beings can do for each other, Letty thought. It was
common knowledge that Marcia had recently had a serious operation. She
was not a whole woman; some vital part of her had been taken away,
though whether womb or breast was not generally known, Marcia herself
revealing only that she had undergone ‘major surgery’. But Letty did know
that Marcia had had a breast removed, though even she did not know which
one. Edwin and Norman had speculated on the matter and discussed it in
the way men did; they felt that Marcia ought to have told them about it,
seeing that they all worked together so closely. They could only conclude
that the operation had made her even more peculiar than she had been
already.

In the past both Letty and Marcia might have loved and been loved, but

now the feeling that should have been directed towards husband, lover,
child or even grandchild, had no natural outlet; no cat, dog, no bird, even,

shared their lives and neither Edwin nor Norman had inspired love. Marcia
had once had a cat but old Snowy had long since died, ‘passed on’ or ‘been
taken’, however one liked to put it. In such circumstances women may feel
a certain unsentimental tenderness towards each other, expressed in small
gestures of solicitude, not unlike the pigeons picking insects off each other.
Marcia, if she felt the need for such an outlet, was incapable of putting it
into words. It was Letty who said, ‘You look tired—shall I make you a cup
of tea?’ And when Marcia refused the offer, she went on, ‘I hope your train
won’t be too crowded, that you’ll get a seat—it should be better now,
getting on for six o’clock.’ She tried to smile at her, but when she looked at
Marcia she saw that her dark eyes were alarmingly magnified behind her
glasses, like the eyes of some nocturnal tree-climbing animal. A lemur or a
potto, was it? Marcia, glancing sharply at Letty, thought, she’s like an old
sheep, but she means well even if she seems a bit interfering at times.

Norman, speeding northwards on the Stanmore branch of the Bakerloo

line, was going to visit his brother-in-law in hospital. Now that his sister
was dead there was no direct link between him and Ken, and Norman felt
pleasantly virtuous at going to see him. He has no one, he thought, for the
only child of the marriage had emigrated to New Zealand. In fact Ken did
have somebody, a woman friend whom he expected to marry, but she did
not visit on the same day as Norman. ‘Let him come on his own,’ they had
said to each other, ‘for after all he has no one and the visit will be a bit of
company for him.’

Norman had never been in hospital himself but Marcia had dropped

many hints about her experiences and especially about Mr Strong, the
surgeon who had cut her up. Not that Ken’s experience could be compared
with hers but it gave one an idea. Norman was ready to surge through the
swing doors with the crowd into the ward when the signal was given. He
had not brought flowers or fruit, it being understood between them that the
visit was all that was expected or required. Ken was not much of a one for
reading either, though he was quite glad to glance at Norman’s Evening
Standard By profession he was a driving examiner and his present stay in
hospital was the result, not of an accident with a middle-aged woman driver
on test, as was jokingly assumed in the ward, but of a duodenal ulcer
brought about by the worrying nature of life in general, to which the
anxieties of his job must surely have contributed.

patients. Ken seemed a bit low, he thought, but men did not look their best
in bed. There was something very unattractive about the average man’s
pyjamas. The ladies made more of an effort with their pastel-coloured
nighties and frilly bed jackets which Norman had caught glimpses of when
he passed the women’s medical ward on his way up. Ken’s bedside table
held only a box of paper handkerchiefs and a bottle of Lucozade beside the
regulation plastic water jug and glass, but in the recess underneath Norman
could see a metal bowl for vomiting and a curiously shaped ‘vase’ of a grey,
cardboard-like material which he suspected was something to do with
passing urine—waterworks, as he put it The sight of these half-concealed
objects made him feel uneasy and resentful, so that he didn’t quite know
what to say to his brother-in-law.

‘Seems quiet tonight,’ he remarked.
‘The telly’s broken down.’
‘Oh, so that’s it. I thought there was something different.’ Norman

glanced towards the centre table where the great box stood, its face now
grey and silent as its viewers in their beds. It should have been covered with
a cloth, if only for the sake of decency. ‘When did this happen?’

‘Yesterday, and they haven’t done anything about it. You’d think it was

the least they could do, wouldn’t you?’

‘Well, it’ll give you more time for your thoughts,’ said Norman, meaning

to be sarcastic, even a little cruel, for what thoughts could Ken have better
than telly? He could not have known that Ken did indeed have thoughts,
dreams really, of the driving school he and his woman friend planned to set
up together; how he lay thinking of names—something like ‘Reliant’ or
‘Excelsior’ was obviously suitable, then his fancy was suddenly arrested by
the name ‘Dolphin’ and he had a vision of a fleet of cars, turquoise blue or
buttercup yellow, swooping and gliding over the North Circular, never
stalling at the traffic lights as learners so often did in real life. He thought
too about the make of car they would have - nothing foreign or with the
engine at the back—that seemed to be against nature, like a watch with a
square face. He could not reveal any of this to Norman, who disliked the
motor car and couldn’t even drive one. Ken had always felt a sort of pitying
contempt for him, being so unmanly and working as a clerk in an office
with middle-aged women.

bell went and the visit was at an end.

‘Everything all right?’ Norman asked, now eagerly on his feet.
‘The tea’s too strong.’
‘Oh,’ Norman was nonplussed. As if he could do anything about a thing

like that! What did Ken expect? ‘Couldn’t you ask Sister or one of the
nurses to make it weaker or put more milk in it?’

‘You’d still taste the strength, even so. It’s strong to begin with, you see.

Anyway I couldn’t ask Sister or one of the nurses—it’s not their job.’

‘Well, the lady that makes the tea, then.’
‘Catch me doing that,’ said Ken obscurely. ‘But strong tea’s the last thing

I should have with my complaint.’ Norman shook himself like a tetchy little
dog. He hadn’t come here to be involved in this sort of thing, and he
allowed himself to be hustled away by a bossy Irish nurse, with never a
backward glance at the patient in the bed.

Outside, his irritable mood was intensified by the cars that rushed past,

preventing him from crossing the road to the bus stop. Then he had to wait
a long time for a bus and when he reached the square where he lived there
were more cars, parked side by side, overlapping on to the pavement. Some
of them were so large that their hindquarters—rumps, buttocks and bums—
jutted over the kerb and he had to step aside to avoid them. Bugger,’ he
muttered, kicking one of them with a small ineffectual foot. ‘Bugger,
bugger, bugger.’

Nobody heard him. The almond trees were in flower but he did not see

them and was unconscious of their blossom shining in the lamplight. He
entered his front door and went into his bed-sitting room. The evening had
exhausted him and he did not even feel that he had done Ken much good.
 

Edwin had spent a much more satisfactory evening. The attendance at the

sung Mass had been pretty much as usual for a weekday—only seven in the
congregation but the full complement in the sanctuary. Afterwards he and
Father G. had gone to the pub for a drink. They had talked church shop—
whether to order a stronger brand of incense now that the Rosa Mystica was
nearly finished—should they let the young people organize the occasional
Sunday evening service with guitars and that—what would be the reaction
of the congregation if Father G. tried to introduce Series Three?

‘All that standing up to pray,’ Edwin said. People wouldn’t like that.’

gesture, rather a…’ Father G. had been going to say ‘beautiful idea’, but
perhaps, given his particular congregation, it wasn’t quite the word.

Remembering the emptiness of the church at the service they had just

attended, Edwin was also doubtful—not more than half a dozen dotted
among the echoing pews and nobody standing next to anybody to make any
kind of gesture—but he was too kind to spoil Father G.’s vision of a
multitude of worshippers. He often thought regretfully of those days of the
Anglo-Catholic revival in the last century and even the more sympathetic
climate of twenty years ago, where Father G., tall and cadaverous in cloak
and biretta, would have been rather more in place than in the church of the
nineteen seventies where so many of the younger priests went in for jeans
and long hair. One such had been in the pub that evening. Edwin’s heart
sank as he visualized the kind of services at his church. I think perhaps
we’d better keep the evening service as it is,’ he said, thinking dramatically,
over my dead body, seeing himself trampled down by a horde of boys and
girls brandishing guitars…

They parted outside Edwin’s neat semi-detached house in a street not far

from the common. Standing by the hatstand in the hall, Edwin was
reminded of his dead wife, Phyllis. It was the moment of waiting outside
the sitting room door before going in that brought her into his mind. He
could almost hear her voice, a little querulous, asking, ‘Is that you, Edwin?’
As if it could be anybody else! Now he had all the freedom that loneliness
brings—he could go to church as often as he liked, attend meetings that
went on all evening, store stuff for jumble sales in the back room and leave
it there for months. He could go to the pub or the vicarage and stay there till
all hours.

Edwin went upstairs to bed humming a favourite Office Hymn, ‘O Blest

Creator of the Light’. It was tricky, the plainsong tune, and his efforts to get
it right diverted his attention from the words. In any case it would be going
a bit far to regard tonight’s congregation as ‘sunk in sin and whelmed with
strife’, as one line of the hymn put it. People nowadays wouldn’t stand for
that kind of talk. Perhaps that was one reason why so few went to church.

OceanofPDF.com

Two

So OFTEN NOW Letty came upon reminders of her own mortality or,

regarded less poetically, the different stages towards death. Less obvious
than the obituaries in The Times and the Telegraph were what she thought
of as upsetting’ sights. This morning, for instance, a woman, slumped on a
seat on the Underground platform while the rush hour crowds hurried past
her, reminded her so much of a school contemporary that she forced herself
to look back, to make quite sure that it was not Janet Belling. It appeared
not to be, yet it could have been, and even if it wasn’t it was still somebody,
some woman driven to the point where she could find herself in this
situation. Ought one to do anything? While Letty hesitated, a young
woman, wearing a long dusty black skirt and shabby boots, bent over the
slumped figure with a softly spoken enquiry. At once the figure reared itself
up and shouted in a loud, dangerously uncontrolled voice, ‘Fuck off!’ Then
it couldn’t be Janet Belling, Letty thought, her first feeling one of relief;
Janet would never have used such an expression. But fifty years ago nobody
did—things were different now, so that was nothing to go by. In the
meantime, the girl moved away with dignity. She had been braver than
Letty.

That morning was a flag day. Marcia peered at the young woman

standing with her tray and rattling tin outside the station. Something to do
with cancer. Marcia advanced, quietly triumphant, a 10p coin in her hand.

The smiling girl was ready, the flag in the form of a little shield poised to

stab into the lapel of Marcia’s coat.

‘Thank you,’ she said, as the coin clattered down into the tin.
‘A very good cause,’ Marcia murmured, ‘and one very dear to me. You

see, I too have had…’

The girl waited nervously, her smile fading, but like Letty she was

hypnotized by the marmoset eyes behind the thick glasses. And now
promising young men who might have been induced to buy flags were
slinking by into the station, pretending to be in a hurry.

‘I, too,’ Marcia repeated, ‘have had something removed.‘
At that moment an older man, attracted by the sight of the pretty flag-

seller, approached and cut short Marcia’s attempt at conversation, but the

memory of her stay in hospital lasted her all the way to the office.

Marcia had been one of those women, encouraged by her mother, who

had sworn that she would never let the surgeon’s knife touch her body, a
woman’s body being such a private thing. But of course when it came to the
point there was no question of resistance. She smiled as she remembered
Mr Strong, the consultant surgeon who had performed the operation—
mastectomy, hysterectomy, appendectomy, tonsillectomy—you name it, it
was all one to him, his cool competent manner seemed to imply. She
recalled his procession down the ward, surrounded by satellites, her eager
observation and anticipation until the great moment when he arrived at her
bed and she heard him ask, ‘And how’s Miss Ivory this morning?’ in that
almost teasing way. Then she would tell him how she was and he would
listen, occasionally asking a question or turning to Sister for her opinion,
the rather flippant manner replaced by professional concern.

If the surgeon was God, the chaplains were his ministers, a little lower

than the housemen. The good-looking young Roman Catholic had come
first, saying how we all needed a rest at times, though he did not look as if
he could possibly need such a thing, and how being in hospital, unpleasant
though it was in many ways, could sometimes prove to be a blessing in
disguise, for there was no situation that couldn’t be turned to good, and
truly you could say that every cloud had a silver lining … He went on in
this vein with such a flow of Irish charm that it was some time before
Marcia could get in a word to tell him that she was not a Roman Catholic.

‘Ah, then you’ll be a Protestant.’ The violence of the word had a stunning

effect, as it must to anyone used to the vaguer and gentler ‘Anglican’ or
‘Church of England’. ‘Well, it’s nice to have had this chat,’ he conceded.
‘The Protestant chaplain will be along to see you.’

The Anglican chaplain offered her Holy Communion and although she

was not a practising churchwoman Marcia accepted, partly out of
superstition but also because it gave her a kind of distinction in the ward.
Only one other woman received the ministrations of the chaplain. The other
patients criticized his crumpled surplice and wondered why he didn’t get a
nylon or terylene one, and recalled their own vicars refusing to marry
people in their churches or to christen kiddies because their parents didn’t
go to church, and other such instances of unreasonable and unChristian
behaviour.

Of course in hospital, and particularly when the chaplain visited her, the

question of death did come into one’s mind, and Marcia had asked herself
the brutal question, if she were to die, having no close relatives, would it
matter? She could be buried in a pauper’s grave, if such a thing still existed,
though she would leave money enough for a funeral; but her body could be
shovelled into a furnace, she would never know. Might as well be realistic.
Of course she could donate certain organs to assist in research or spare-part
surgery. This last idea had an irresistible appeal, linked as it was with the
thought of Mr Strong, and she meant to fill in the form at the back of the
booklet they had given her when she entered the hospital. But in the end she
never got round to it and anyway her operation had been a success and she
had not died. ‘I shall not die but live’—there had been a poem that came
into her mind at the time. She didn’t read poetry now, or anything else for
that matter, but sometimes she remembered the odd tag.

As she waited on the platform that morning Marcia noticed that

somebody had scrawled in crude capital letters, KILL ASIAN SHIT. She stared
at the inscription and mouthed the words to herself as if considering their
implication. They brought back another hospital memory, of a man who had
wheeled her on the trolley to the operating theatre, bearded and with a
remote, dignified beauty, his head and body swathed in bluish gauze. He
had called her ‘dear’.
 

The three others looked up as Marcia entered the room.
‘Late, aren’t you?’ Norman snapped.
As if it had anything to do with him, Letty thought.
‘There’s been some delay on the Underground this morning,’ she said.
‘Oh, yes,’ Norman agreed. ‘Did you see that on the blackboard at

Holborn station? Trains were delayed “due to a person under the train at
Hammersmith”, it said. A “person”—is that what you have to say now?’

‘Poor soul,’ said Edwin. ‘One does wonder sometimes how these

tragedies occur.’

Letty was silent, remembering her own upsetting experience. That

woman might find herself under a train one day. She had not mentioned it
before but now she did.

‘Dear me,’ said Norman, ‘that looks like a good example of somebody

who’s fallen through the net of the welfare state.’

anyone nowadays to get into that sort of state.’ She glanced down at her
tweed skirt, old but newly cleaned and pressed; at least one could keep up
reasonable standards.

Marcia said nothing, but stared in her disconcerting way.
Norman said almost chirpily, ‘Oh, well, that’s another thing we’ve all got

coming to us, or at least the possibility—falling through the net of the
welfare state.’

‘Don’t keep on about it,’ said Edwin. ‘What with being found dead of

hypothermia, you seem to’ve got it on the brain.’

‘Dead of starvation’s more likely,’ said Norman. He had been to the

supermarket on his way to work and now proceeded to check the items in
his shopping bag—a ‘psychedelic’ plastic carrier, patterned in vivid colours,
hinting at some unexpected aspect of his character—against the printed slip
he had received at the check-out. ‘Crispbread 16, tea 18, cheese 34, butter
beans, the small tin, 12,’ he recited. ‘Bacon 46, but that was the smallest
pack I could find, smoked oyster back, they called it, not really the best
You’d think they’d do it up smaller for people living alone, wouldn’t you.
The woman in front of me spent over twelve pounds—just my luck to get
behind somebody like that at the check-out,’ he droned on.

‘I should put the bacon in a cooler place if I were you,’ said Letty.
‘Yes, I’ll pop it in one of the filing cabinets,’ said Norman. ‘Don’t let me

forget it. You read of elderly people being found dead in the house with no
food—dreadful, isn’t it?’

‘There’s no need for that,’ said Edwin.
‘It is possible to store tins,’ said Marcia, in a remote sort of way.
‘But then you might not have the strength to open them,’ said Norman

with relish. ‘Anyway, I don’t have much storage space.’

Marcia glanced at him thoughtfully. She wondered sometimes about

Norman’s domestic arrangements but of course nobody had ever seen his
bed-sitting room. The four who worked together did not visit each other or
meet after office hours. When she had first come here, Marcia had
experienced a faint stirring of interest in Norman, a feeling that was a good
many degrees cooler than tenderness but which nevertheless occupied her
thoughts briefly. Once at lunchtime she had followed him. At a safe
distance behind, she had watched him as he picked his way through the
fallen leaves and called out angrily after a car which had failed to stop at a

zebra crossing. She found herself entering the British Museum, ascending
wide stone steps and walking through echoing galleries filled with alarming
images and objects in glass cases, until they came to rest in the Egyptian
section by a display of mummified animals and small crocodiles. Here
Norman had mingled with a crowd of school children and Marcia slipped
away. If she had thought of making herself known to him, the time and such
questions as ‘Do you come here often?’ were obviously inappropriate.
Norman had not revealed to any of them that he visited the British Museum,
and even if he had would never have admitted to the contemplation of
mummified crocodiles. No doubt it was a secret thing. As time went on
Marcia’s feeling for Norman waned. Then she went into hospital and Mr
Strong entered her life and filled her thoughts. Now she hardly considered
Norman at all, except as a rather silly little man, so his fussing with his
shopping and his reading out the things he had bought only irritated her.
She did not want to know what he was going to eat—it was of no interest
whatsoever.

G.’s coming in for a bite before the PCC meeting and I’ll do one of my
specials—baked beans on toast with a poached egg on top.’

The women smiled, as they were meant to, but Edwin was known to be a

competent cook and it was not as if they had anything much grander for
their own evening meals, he thought, as he came out of a teashop that sold
bread, carrying a large white loaf wrapped in a paper bag. He had had a
light lunch, snack really, in the teashop whose decor had changed
distressingly, though the food was the same. Edwin and the other regular
patrons felt themselves out of place among so much trendy orange and olive
green and imitation stripped pine. There were hanging lights and shades
patterned with butterflies and over it all soft ‘muzak’, difficult to hear but
insidious. Edwin didn’t like change, and now that Gamage’s had been
pulled down it was a relief to do his lunchtime church crawl, though even
the Church, the dear old C of E, was not immune to change. Sometimes he
would slip in for a prayer or a look round and a read of the parish magazine
if there was one, but mostly he studied the noticeboards to see what was
offered in the way of services and other activities. Today he was attracted
by the announcement of an austerity luncheon in aid of a well-known
charity, but rather surprisingly ‘with wine’—that might be worth a visit.
 

Letty did her shopping on the way home, at a small self-service store run

by Uganda Asians that stayed open till eight o’clock in the evening. She
bought only tinned or packaged foods, feeling a doubt about anything
exposed to the air. In her comfortable bed-sitting room, which had a
washbasin behind a screen and a small electric cooker, she prepared a meal
of rice with the remains of a chicken, then settled herself to listen to the
wireless and continue working on a tapestry chair-seat she was making.

The house belonged to an elderly woman who took in, as the most

refined type of lodgers, two others like herself and a Hungarian refugee,
who had more or less adapted herself to the ways of the house—ones radio
considerately turned down and the bathroom left as one would wish to find
it. It was a comfortable enough life, if a little sterile, perhaps even deprived.
But deprivation implied once having had something to be deprived of, like
Marcia’s breast, to give a practical example, and Letty had never really had
anything much. Yet, she sometimes wondered, might not the experience of
‘not having’ be regarded as something with its own validity?

There was a play on the radio that evening, going backwards into the life

of an old woman. It reminded Letty of the woman she had seen slumped on
the seat on the Underground platform that morning, as if one might
visualize her this time last year, say, then five years ago, ten years, twenty,
thirty, even forty. But this kind of going back was hardly for Letty herself,
who lived very much in the present, holding neatly and firmly on to life,
coping as best she could with whatever it had to offer, little though that
might be. Her curriculum vitae presented the kind of reading of so many
like herself born before 1914, the only child of middle-class parents. She
had arrived in London in the late twenties to take a secretarial course,
staying in a working-girls’ hostel where she had met her friend Marjorie,
the only person she still kept up with from those far-off days. Like most
girls of her generation and upbringing she had expected to marry, and when
the war came there were great opportunities for girls to get a man or form
an attachment, even with a married man, but Marjorie had been the one to
marry, leaving Letty in her usual position of trailing behind her friend. By
the end of the war Letty was over thirty and Marjorie had given up hope for
her. Letty had never had much hope anyway. The immediate post-war years
were fixed in her memory by the clothes she had worn on particular dates—
the New Look brought in by Dior in 1947, the comfortable elegance of the
fifties, and in the early sixties the horror of the mini-skirt, such a cruel

fashion for those no longer young. And only the other day Letty had walked
past the building in Bloomsbury where she and Marjorie had worked in the
thirties—it had been on the first floor of a Georgian house—and found
herself facing a concrete structure. Rather like the building where she now
worked with the other three, but of course she never noticed that.

back at the time of the Silver Jubilee, staying with Marjorie and her fiancé
Brian in the country cottage they had bought for £300. There was a friend
of Brian’s there too, intended for Letty, a handsome but dull young man
called Stephen. On the Saturday evening they went to the pub and sat in the
quiet musty saloon bar with its mahogany furniture and stuffed fish. It felt
damp as if nobody ever used it, as indeed nobody did except timid visitors
like themselves. They all had beer, though the girls didn’t like it much and
it seemed to have no noticeable ‘effect’ on them, except to make them
wonder whether there was a ladies’ cloakroom in such a primitive place. On
the other side, in the public bar, there was light and colour and noise, but
they, the four young people, were outside it all. On Sunday they went to
Matins at the village church. There were bird-droppings on the altar and the
vicar appealed for donations towards the repair of the roof. In 1970 the
church was closed as redundant and the building was eventually pulled
down as being of no architectural or historical interest. In Letty’s dream she
was lying in the long grass with Stephen, or somebody vaguely like him, in
that hot summer of 1935. He was very near to her, but nothing happened.
She did not know what had become of Stephen but Marjorie was a widow
now, as alone as Letty in her bedsitter. All gone, that time, those people …
Letty woke up and lay for some time meditating on the strangeness of life,
slipping away like this.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Three

MARCIA ENTERED HER house, that house which, in the estate agents’

language, was on its way to becoming a ‘twenty-thousand semi’. Houses in
that road were already reaching nearly that figure but Marcia’s house was
not quite like the others. From the outside it looked ordinary enough, with
stained-glass panels in the front door, two large bow windows and a smaller
window over the porch. The outside paint was a conventional dark green
and cream, now in need of re-doing, and the net curtains at the windows
could have done with a wash, some thought. But Miss Ivory went out to
work and she was not the sort of person you could offer to help. Her
neighbours in the more fashionably done-up houses on either side were
newcomers. They sometimes passed the time of day with her but Marcia
had not been into their houses nor they into hers.

Inside, the house was dark with brown-painted doors kept mysteriously

closed. Dust lay everywhere. Marcia went straight through to the kitchen
where she deposited her shopping bag on the newspaper-covered table. She
knew that she ought to start getting a meal. The almoner, or medical social
worker as they called it now, at the hospital had said how important it was
for the working woman to have a good meal when she came home in the
evening, but all Marcia did was to fill the kettle for a cup of tea. Her
energies had already been spent that morning preparing her lunch to eat in
the office. She could not think of any other kind of food now though she
might have a biscuit with her tea ‘Biscuits keep you going,’ they used to say
in the war, but she had never had a big appetite. She had always been thin
and since being in hospital she had become even thinner. Her clothes hung
loosely on her but she didn’t really care how she looked, not like Letty who
was always buying new things and worried if she couldn’t get a cardigan in
the exact shade to match something.

Suddenly a bell rang, shrill and peremptory. Marcia was as if frozen into

her chair. She never had visitors and nobody ever called. Who could it be,
and in the evening? The bell rang again and she got up and went into the
front room where from a side window she could see who was standing on
the doorstep.

It was a young woman, swinging a bunch of car keys in her hand. Marcia

could see a small blue car parked on the opposite side of the road.
Reluctantly she opened the door.

‘Ah, Miss Ivory, isn’t it? I’m Janice Brabner.’
She had a rather pink, open face. Young women nowadays didn’t seem to

bother much with make-up and even Marcia could see that some would
have been improved by it.

‘Some of us at the Centre have been worrying about the lonely ones.’
Could she really have prepared that sentence, for this was what came out.

Marcia gave her no encouragement.

‘I mean, the people who live alone.’
‘Did you think I might be found dead? Was that the idea?’
‘Oh, Miss Ivory, of course we had nothing like that in mind!’
It seemed to be almost an occasion for laughter but Janice Brabner was

sure this couldn’t be right. Doing voluntary work at the Centre wasn’t
exactly funny even if one smiled sometimes at the people one visited, for
some of them were rather sweet. But they could be tragic. Miss Ivory, for
instance, in what category should she be placed? It was known that her
mother had died some years ago, that she now lived alone and that she had
recently left hospital after a major operation. The medical social worker,
whom Janice knew, had dropped a hint, suggested that it might be as well to
keep an eye on her. It was true that she went out to work but nobody
seemed to know much about her — she didn’t speak to neighbours and
nobody had ever been into her house. She did not invite Janice to come in
now and they continued their conversation on the doorstep. Of course one
couldn’t force one’s way into people’s houses, but surely a lonely person
like Miss Ivory would welcome a friendly advance and a chat?
 

‘We just wondered,’ Janice went on, realizing the need for tact and

caution, as she had been instructed, ‘if you’d like to come along to a get-
together at the Centre one evening. It’s next to the town hall, you know.’

‘I don’t think so,’ said Marcia firmly. ‘I go out to work and my evenings

are fully occupied.’

But there was no television aerial on the house, so what did she do in the

evenings? Janice wondered. Still, she had done all she could, sown a seed,
perhaps; that was the main thing.

No sooner was the door closed than Marcia went up to the front bedroom

to watch Janice Brabner go. She saw her unlock her car and then sit in it
with a list in her hand which she appeared to be consulting. Then she drove
away.

Marcia turned back into the room where her mother had died. It had been

left almost untouched since then. Of course the body had been removed and
buried, all that was necessary in that way had been done and the proper
obsequies performed, but after that Marcia had lacked the energy to
rearrange the furniture and Mrs Williams, the woman who came in to clean
at that time, had not encouraged her. ‘You want to remember things as they
were, not go changing them,’ she had said. She did not care for moving
furniture, anyway. The bed had become the place where the cat Snowy slept
until his death, when the black part of his fur had taken on a brownish tinge
and his body had become light, until one day, in the fullness of time, he had
ceased to breathe, a peaceful end. He was twenty years old, one hundred
and forty in human terms. ‘You wouldn’t want to be that old,’ Mrs Williams
had said, as if one had the choice or could do anything about it. After
Snowy’s death and burial in the garden, Mrs Williams had left, the work
having become too much for her, and Marcia made no pretence of doing
anything to the room On the bed cover there was still an old fur ball,
brought up by Snowy in his last days, now dried up like some ancient
mummified relic of long ago.

‘Miss Ivory has funny staring eyes. And she obviously didn’t want to ask

me in,’ said Janice, back at the Centre, basking now in the relief of an
awkward duty done.

‘Oh, you mustn’t let that put you off,’ said an older and more

experienced colleague. ‘A lot of them seem like that at first, but the contact
has been made, that’s the chief thing. And that’s what we have to do —
make contact, by force, if necessary. Believe me, it can be most rewarding.’

Janice wondered about this, but said nothing.

studying a church noticeboard. It offered nothing but the barest essentials
— Holy Communion at eight on Sundays, Matins at eleven, no weekday
services — and when he turned the handle of the door he found that it was
locked. A pity, but that was the way things were now — it wasn’t safe to
leave a church open, what with thefts and vandalism With a slight feeling of

frustration he turned away and began walking along the road until he
reached a side turning which seemed to go in the direction he wanted. Then
he read the name of the road and realized that it was where Marcia lived
and he walked on quickly. It would be embarrassing to meet her, even to
walk past her house, he felt. They were both, in a sense, lonely people but
neither would have expected to meet the other outside office hours. Any
kind of encounter would fill her with a dismay equal to his. In any case,
Edwin always felt that Norman was more Marcia’s friend than he was, more
her cup of tea if anyone was. Was he, Edwin, then Letty’s friend? Well,
hardly that. Something in the idea made him smile and he walked away
along the common, a tall, smiling figure carrying a raincoat, although it was
a warm evening and the sky was cloudless.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Four

WITH THE COMING of spring, merging into the sunshine of early May, there

was a subtle change in the lunchtime occupations of the four in the office.
Edwin went on his usual church crawl, for that season of the year was stiff
with festivals and the churches in the area had a rich and varied programme
to offer, but he also frequented gardening shops and called at travel agents
and collected brochures with the possibility of arranging a late holiday,
everyone else having booked theirs in January. Norman plucked up his
courage to visit the dentist and arrived at the office feeling very sorry for
himself, and with a Thermos of soup which was all he could manage for his
lunch.

Marcia forsook the public library and wandered into a shop full of loud

music, merchandise from foreign parts and badly finished eastern-style
garments for both sexes. She fingered the crude pottery and the garish
flimsy blouses and skirts but did not buy anything. The almost deafening
pop music confused her and she felt that people were staring at her. She
went out into the sunshine, dazed and bewildered. Then she was roused into
alertness by the clang of an ambulance bell and she found herself joining a
knot of people gathered round a slumped figure on the pavement.
Somebody had collapsed with a coronary, a window cleaner had slipped
and fallen—the air was full of excited, confused murmurings, but nobody
quite knew what had happened Marcia attached herself to two women and
tried to find out, but all they could say was, “Poor soul, doesn’t he look
terrible—what a shock for his wife.’ Her thoughts went back to her own
stay in hospital and the excitement when an ambulance came in, for she had
been in a ground-floor ward very near Casualty. It was rather disappointing
now to see the man on the pavement attempting to get up, but the
ambulance men restrained him and bundled him in and Marcia, a smile on
her lips, went back to the office.

Norman and Letty both felt the pull of the open air, Norman to take his

mind off his teeth, and Letty because she had the slightly obsessive or
cranky idea that one ought to get a walk of some kind every day. So they
both made their way, separately and unaware of each other, to Lincoln’s Inn
Fields, the nearest open space to the office.

Norman gravitated towards the girls playing netball and sat down

uneasily. He could not analyse the impulse that had brought him there, an
angry little man whose teeth hurt—angry at the older men who, like
himself, formed the majority of the spectators round the netball pitch, angry
at the semi-nudity of the long-haired boys and girls lying on the grass,
angry at the people sitting on seats eating sandwiches or sucking ice lollies
and cornets and throwing the remains on the ground. As he watched the
netball girls, leaping and cavorting in their play, the word ‘lechery’ came
into his head and something about ‘grinning like a dog’, a phrase in the
psalms, was it; then he thought of the way some dogs did appear to grin,
their tongues lolling out. After a few minutes’ watching he got up and made
his way back to the office, dissatisfied with life. Only the sight of a wrecked
motor car, with one side all bashed in, being towed up Kingsway by a
breakdown van, gave him the kind of lift Marcia had experienced on
hearing the bell of the ambulance, but then he remembered that an
abandoned car had been parked outside the house where he lived for some
days, and the police or the council ought to do something about it, and that
made him angry again.

Letty, with her feelings on the subject of exercise and fresh air, was

prepared to enjoy these amenities.

 One impulse from a vernal wood
May teach you more of man,
Of moral evil and of good,
Than all the sages can.

into the implications of those lines. She walked briskly and did not think of
sitting down, for most of the seats were occupied and those that had space
contained obvious eccentrics, muttering to themselves and eating strange
things. It was better to go on walking, though it was hot and she would have
liked a rest. Letty was not angry when she saw the young people kissing
and cuddling on the grass, even if such behaviour was different from that of
forty years ago when she was a girl. But was it so different? Or could it be
that she had not noticed such things in those days? She passed a building
concerned with Cancer Research and she thought of Marcia. Even Marcia
had once hinted at something in her own life, long ago. No doubt everybody

had once had something in their lives? Certainly it was the kind of thing
people liked to imply, making one suspect that a good deal was being made
out of almost nothing.
 

Back in the office the talk was about holidays. Edwin’s brochures

advertising impossible delights had been spread out on his table for some
weeks now, but it was known that he never did more than leaf through their
pages, for his annual holiday was invariably spent with his daughter and her
family.

‘Greece,’ said Norman, taking up a booklet with a picture of the

Acropolis on the cover. ‘I’ve always had a fancy to go there.’

Marcia looked up, startled. The others were surprised too but did not

show it. What was this? What new aspect of Norman’s life, what never
before expressed longing was to be revealed? His holidays, always taken in
England, were usually characterized by disaster.

‘They say it’s the wonderful light, a special quality it has,’ said Letty,

repeating something she had once heard or read. ‘And the wine-dark sea—
isn’t that how it’s described?’

‘Oh, I don’t care what colour the sea is,’ said Norman. ‘It’s the

swimming that would attract me.’

‘You mean skin diving and that sort of thing?’ said Edwin in

astonishment.

‘Why not?’ Norman was defiant. ‘Lots of people do it, you know. They

find buried treasure and that.’

yours last year,’ he joked. Norman had been on a coach trip to the West
Country when, for some unspecified reason, his only comment had been
‘Never again.’

‘I shouldn’t think you found much buried treasure there.’
‘I can never understand why people have to leave their homes the way

they do,’ said Marcia. ‘When you’re older you don’t really need holidays.’
If Norman really had these secret longings it ought to be enough for him to
go and sit in the British Museum at lunchtime, contemplating the riches of
vanished civilizations, she felt. Marcia herself never went away; her
absences from the office were spent in mysterious ploys of her own.

‘Oh, well, looking at the pictures is probably as far as I’ll get,’ said

Norman. ‘Not like Letty here.’

adventurous of the four of them. She had been on several package tours
abroad with Marjorie, and her postcards of Spain, Italy and Yugoslavia still
brightened the office walls. But this year Marjorie seemed to want to stay at
home and as Letty was going to share her cottage with her when she retired
it seemed quite a good idea for her to get used to living in the country.
During her fortnight Letty would be getting a taste of village life, with
excursions to the surrounding country and picnic lunches when the weather
permitted. ‘Roses round the door and all that,’ as Norman used to say when
Letty’s retirement plans were mentioned. ‘But of course the weather can
spoil things,’ he couldn’t resist adding. ‘Don’t I know!’

OceanofPDF.com

Five

A PHEASANT SAT in the middle of a field, unconcerned as the train drew

into the platform. Letty could see Marjorie’s dusty blue Morris 1000
standing among the larger and sleeker cars parked at the station. Even now,
forty years later, she was reminded of ‘Beelzebub’, Marjorie’s first car
bought for £25 in the nineteen thirties. Did young people still give their old
cars facetious names, Letty wondered. Motoring was a much more serious
business now, hardly fun at all, when the car was an important status
symbol and large sums of money could be paid for particularly desirable
registration numbers.

Marjorie seized Letty’s bag and stuffed it into the boot. As a comfortable

widow living in the country, she seemed far removed from the dashing
young woman that Letty remembered from their earlier days, even if she
still retained some romantic extravagances. Now she seemed rather
excessively interested in the new vicar who had recently been appointed
and Letty saw him for the first time when—surprisingly for Marjorie—she
insisted on taking her to church on Sunday morning. The Reverend David
Lydell (he liked to be called ‘Father’) was a tall dark man in his middle
forties who certainly looked good in his vestments. Nice for Marjorie to
have an interesting new vicar, Letty thought, generously indulgent. Most of
the inhabitants of the village were retired married couples with the ritual
grandchildren. There was a certain amount of formal social life, mostly
consisting of the drinking of sherry at certain times, and one evening
Marjorie invited an elegant retired colonel, who had no conversation, and
his wife, who had a good deal more, and Father Lydell, in for a drink. Seen
at closer quarters and in ‘civilian’ clothes, Father Lydell was disappointing.
He looked sadly ordinary in a ginger-coloured tweed jacket and grey flannel
trousers with something not quite right about the cut of them—too wide or
too narrow, or at least not what one saw people wearing now.

After a decent interval and a couple of glasses each, the colonel and his

wife left, but Father Lydell, obviously with no evening meal of his own in
view, lingered on, so that Marjorie had to ask him to stay to supper.

‘One is at a slight disadvantage,’ he said elliptically, when Marjorie left

the room to prepare the meal and he and Letty were left alone.

‘Oh? In what way?’ Letty was not sure whether he meant the

disadvantage to apply to himself or to the human race in general.

so kind.’

So he called her by her Christian name, and there had been other meals.
‘I think people in a village usually are hospitable,’ said Letty,

diminishing him a little. ‘More so than in London.’

‘Ah, London.. .’ Was the sigh too extravagant?
‘Of course David is here for his health,’ said Marjorie, coming back into

the room and entering eagerly into the conversation.

‘Do you find the country is doing you good?’ Letty asked.
‘I’ve had diarrhoea all this week,’ came the disconcerting reply.
There was a momentary—perhaps no more than a split second’s—pause,

but if the women had been temporarily taken aback, they were by no means
at a loss.

‘Diarrhoea,’ Letty repeated, in a clear, thoughtful tone. She was never

certain how to spell the word, but felt that such a trivial admission was
lacking in proper seriousness so she said no more.

‘Strong drink would do you more good than the eternal parish cups of

tea,’ Marjorie suggested boldly. ‘Brandy, perhaps.’

‘Enterovioform,’ said Letty.
He smiled pityingly. ‘All those English on package tours on the Costa

Brava may find it helpful, but my case is rather different…’

The sentence trailed off, leaving the difference to be imagined.
‘Well, when one is abroad … When we were in Naples, Napoli,’ said

Marjorie, almost roguishly. ‘Do you remember that time in Sorrento,
Letty?’

‘I only remember the lemon groves,’ said Letty, determined to change the

subject.

David Lydell closed his eyes and lay back in his chair, thinking how

agreeable it was to be in the company of gentlewomen. Far more what he
was accustomed to. The rough voices of the village people grated on his
nerves and sometimes they said cruel things. Any attempts he had made to
‘improve’ the church services had met with scorn and hostility and when he
tried to visit the cottages he was forced to look at television programmes
which they hadn’t even the good manners to turn off. He found it shocking
that such people should have no running water or indoor sanitation and yet

be slaves to the box. Even the old women, who might have been the
backbone of the congregation in earlier times, seemed disinclined to attend
church, even if conveyed there and back by car. The only services that drew
congregations of any size were Harvest Festival, Remembrance Sunday and
the Carol Service at Christinas. By contrast, Marjorie and her friend, Miss
Something, a not very interesting person whose name he hadn’t caught,
were highly civilized and he enjoyed eating poulet niçoise and talking about
holidays in France and Italy.

‘Orvieto,’ he murmured. ‘Of course one wants to drink it there,’ and

naturally they agreed with him.

Letty thought him rather tiresome but she did not say as much to

Marjorie. The weather was good and she did not want to raise controversial
subjects over tea in the garden or during leisurely country walks. Besides, if
she was going to share Marjorie’s cottage in her retirement it would be as
well not to be too critical of the vicar, especially as it seemed that he might
often be dropping in. That was one of the country things she would have to
get used to. There were other things too. On their walks she was always the
one to find the dead bird and the dried-up hedgehog’s body or to notice the
mangled rabbit in the middle of the road when they were driving. She
supposed that Marjorie had seen them so often that she no longer found
them upsetting.

On the last day of Letty’s holiday they were to go for a picnic to a nearby

beauty spot. As it was a weekday the place would be less crowded and, best
of all, as Marjorie revealed just before they started out, David Lydell would
be able to accompany them.

‘But won’t he have things to do during the week?’ Letty protested. ‘Even

if there aren’t any services, doesn’t he have to visit the sick and the old
people?’

‘There’s only one sick person at the moment and he’s in hospital, and the

old people don’t want visits from the clergy,’ said Marjorie, making Letty
realize that it was no good thinking that such old-fashioned notions could
be applied in these days of the welfare state or in a village where the health
of every person was known and commented on. ‘I try to get David out into
the countryside as much as I can,’ Marjorie added. ‘He needs to get right
away and relax.’

Letty noted the use of the term ‘countryside’, which seemed to have a

special significance, and bearing David Lydell’s need in mind, she was not

surprised to find herself squashed into the back of the car with the picnic
things and Marjorie’s old sealyham which left stiff white hairs all over
Letty’s neat navy-blue trousers. David and Marjorie in the front made
conversation about village matters which Letty could not join in.

When they arrived at the picnic spot, Marjorie produced two folding

canvas chairs from the boot of the car and these were solemnly put up for
herself and David, Letty having quickly assured them that she would just as
soon sit on the rug—indeed, she preferred it. All the same, she could not
help feeling in some way belittled or diminished, sitting on a lower level
than the others.

After they had eaten cold ham and hard-boiled eggs and drunk white

wine—an unusual touch, this, which Letty could only attribute to the
presence of David Lydell - the three of them fell silent; perhaps, because of
drinking wine in the middle of the day, a natural desire for sleep overcame
them. An awkward arrangement for sleeping—three people, two in the
chairs and Letty down below—but she closed her eyes against her will and
for a short time was unaware of her surroundings.

When she opened her eyes she found herself looking straight up at

Marjorie and David, their canvas chain pushed close together, apparently
locked in an embrace.

Letty immediately looked away and closed her eyes again, wondering if

she had been dreaming.

‘More coffee anyone?’ Marjorie asked in a bright tone. ‘There’s some in

the other thermos. Letty, I think you’ve been asleep.’

she imagined the whole scene, or was this another of the things she was
going to have to get used to when she lived in the country?

No sooner had Letty come back from her holiday than Edwin went on

his. There had been a good deal of discussion in the office as to whether he
should go by coach or by train and the advantages and snags of each
method were endlessly weighed up. In the end the train won. It was more
expensive but it was quicker, and Edwin would get enough motoring with
his son-in-law and daughter and the two children. They would be in easy
reach of Eastbourne, where there were some splendid churches, and he was
looking forward to that. In addition there would be visits to a safari park
and to the stately homes that offered the best attractions; perhaps they
would even go as far afield as the Lions of Longleat, driving on as many

motorways as possible, the men in the front of the car, Edwin’s daughter
and the children in the back. It would be a break for all of them, but soon,
with the children growing up, they might want to go to Spain, and then
what was to be done about Edwin? He wouldn’t like Spain, they decided.
Perhaps he could go on holiday with one of the people from his office; that
might be a solution to the problem.

Edwin hardly gave a thought to his working companions when he was

away from them. It was only Marcia who came into his mind and that was
in a rather curious way, when he was standing at the station bookstall before
his train went, wondering whether he should buy something to read. He had
already slipped down to Portugal Street to get that week’s Church Times but
that might not last him the whole journey. There was a colourful range of
magazines on the counter, some of which displayed the full naked breasts of
young women, enticingly posed. Edwin looked at them dispassionately. He
supposed that his wife Phyllis had once had breasts but he could not
remember that they had been at all like this, so very round and balloon-like.
Then he recalled Marcia and her operation—mastectomy, he believed it was
called, Norman had told him at the time. That meant that she had had a
breast removed, a deprivation for any woman, though he could not imagine
that Marcia had ever been endowed quite so abundantly as the girls on the
magazine covers. Still, one must feel compassion for her even though she
was not at all a lovable person. Perhaps he should have dropped in that
evening he found himself over the other side of the common, passing the
road where she lived. He wondered if she ever went to the church with the
locked door, if the vicar ever called to see her. She had never mentioned it
but no doubt somebody from that church was keeping an eye on her and
knew that she was the kind of person who liked to keep herself to herself
and must not be organized in any way. Although Edwin was not of the
school that regarded the church as an extension of the social services, he
knew very well that it was the attitude of a number of very good people
nowadays, conscientious and well-meaning. It was very likely that Marcia
would not be neglected, so there was no need to worry about her. There was
certainly nothing he could do at this moment, standing on Victoria Station.
So, turning away from the magazines that had reminded him of Marcia, he
bought a copy of Reader’s Digest and dismissed her from his thoughts.

The church people did make a mild effort with Marcia and suggested that

she might like to join a coach trip to Westcliff-on-Sea (‘Much nicer than

Southend, dear’), but she didn’t seem to want to go and of course they
couldn’t force her. Janice Brabner also was concerned that she didn’t seem
to be getting a holiday and made various suggestions, none of which met
with Marcia’s approval. ‘She’s so difficult,’ Janice complained to her friend,
who was a medical social worker. ‘People like that don’t seem to want to be
helped. And yet some of them are so grateful, it’s lovely, really, makes it all
worth while…’ she sighed. Marcia certainly wasn’t like that.

Yet Marcia did have two holiday treats in store, though she had no

intention of revealing to anybody what these were. The first was a visit to
out-patients at the hospital, where she was due for a check-up at Mr
Strong’s clinic. The time indicated on her card was 11.35, a funny sort of
time, giving the impression that the appointments were calculated so
exactly to the nearest five minutes that there would be none of the usual
hanging about. She arrived at the hospital punctually, checked in at the
appointments desk and sat down to wait. If you were too early you could
read a magazine or get a cup of tea or coffee out of the machine and of
course there was always a visit to the toilet Marcia did none of these things
but sat staring in front of her. She had chosen a seat away from the other
people and she was annoyed when a woman moved up next to her and
appeared to want to get into conversation. The people waiting did not talk
to each other; it was like the waiting room in a doctor’s surgery except that
there was something more sacred about the vigil here, each person having
something wrong’. Marcia did not respond when a remark was made about
the weather, but continued to stare straight in front of her, fixing her eyes on
a door that had a notice over it saying ‘Mr D.G. Strong’. Next to it was
another door where the notice said ‘Dr H. Wintergreen’. It was impossible
to tell which of the people sitting in the chairs were waiting for the surgeon
and which for the physician; there did not appear to be any distinguishing
marks, for even though they all seemed to be rather cowed, some even
broken, they were of both sexes and all ages.

‘You waiting to see Dr Wintergreen?’ Marcia’s neighbour persisted.
‘No,’ said Marcia.
‘Oh, then you must be for Mr Strong. Nobody’s gone into that room for

the last half hour, ever since I’ve been here. I’m waiting for Dr
Wintergreen. He’s a lovely doctor, foreign. I think he might be Polish. He’s
got ever such kind eyes, lovely. He always wore a carnation in his
buttonhole when he came round the ward. He grows them himself, he’s got

a big house in Hendon. Digestive disorders, stomach, you know, that’s his
speciality and of course he’s in Harley Street, too. Is Mr Strong in Harley
Street?’

discuss sacred matters with this person.

‘Sometimes they get the Registrar to do the operation,’ the woman went

on. ‘Still, they’ve got to learn haven’t they, how to do it.’

At that moment the nurse called out Marcia’s name and she knew that her

turn had come. She was not so naive as to imagine that Mr Strong’s name
on the door was a guarantee of his presence in the room, so she was not
unduly cast down when, having half undressed and lain down on a couch,
she was examined by a golden-haired boy, a houseman doing his training in
surgery. He prodded her in a highly professional manner, took her blood
pressure and listened with his stethoscope. Of course he did not notice her
new pink underwear but did comment admiringly on the neatness of her
operation scar—Mr Strong’s work, of course—and told her that she was too
thin and ought to eat more. Yet he, just coming up to his twenty-fifth
birthday, hardly knew what to expect of a woman in her sixties. Were they
always as thin as this? Certainly his great aunt, the nearest equivalent he
could think of, was not at all like Miss Ivory, though he had never seen her
without clothes.

‘I think perhaps somebody should keep an eye on you,’ he said kindly,

and Marcia was not at all offended or irritated as she was when the social
workers and the church people implied the same thing, for hospital was
different She was quietly triumphant when she handed her card in at the
appointments desk to arrange for a further check-up at some future date.

Marcia’s second holiday treat was a visit to Mr Strong’s house, or rather

to view at a safe distance the house where he lived. She knew from the
telephone directory that he functioned not only in Harley Street but also at
an address in Dulwich, a district easily reached by her on a 37 bus.

She let a week elapse after her visit to the hospital—spacing out the treats

—before setting out on a fine afternoon to see Mr Strong’s house. The bus
was nearly empty and the conductress kind and helpful. She knew the best
stop for the road Marcia asked for, but when she had punched the ticket she
seemed, like the woman at the hospital, to want to chat. They were lovely
houses in that road—did Marcia know somebody who lived there or—for
this seemed unlikely—was she perhaps going after a job there? It was

dreadful, Marcia felt, the way so many people wanted to know one’s
business and, when she did not respond, to tell one about their own. She had
to listen to quite a long story about husband and kiddies, categories she
knew nothing about, but at last the stop was reached and she got out and
walked along the road in the sunshine.

The house was imposing, as were its neighbours, just the kind of house

that looked worthy of Mr Strong. There were shrubs in the front garden.
Marcia imagined the laburnum trees and the lilacs in May, but now in early
August there wasn’t much to admire. Perhaps there were roses at the back,
for the garden behind the house seemed extensive, but all she could see was
a swing hanging from a massive old tree. Of course Mr Strong was a family
man; he had children, and now they were all away at the seaside. The house
seemed completely deserted which meant that Marcia could stand in the
road gazing, noticing discreetly drawn curtains in a William Morris design.
It went through her mind that there were no net curtains here, they did not
seem to go with Mr Strong. Her thoughts were unformulated, it was enough
just to stand. Afterwards she waited for over half an hour at the bus stop,
unconscious of the delay, time passing and no bus. Eventually she reached
home and made a cup of tea and boiled an egg. The young doctor at the
hospital had told her she ought to eat more and she was sure Mr Strong
would agree with that.

Next day she returned to the office, but when they asked her how she had

spent her leave she was evasive, only saying that the weather had been good
and she’d had a nice break, which was what people always said.
 

The first day of Norman’s leave was brilliantly sunny, the kind of day for

going to the country or the seaside or for walking hand in hand with a lover
in Kew Gardens.

None of these ideas occurred to Norman when he woke up and realized

that he did not have to go to the office that day. As there was plenty of time,
he decided to have a cooked breakfast—bacon and eggs with all the
trimmings, which for him meant tomatoes and fried bread—far more than
his usual plate of cornflakes or All-Bran. And he would have it in his
pyjamas and dressing gown, just like somebody in a Noel Coward play. If
they could see me now! he thought, meaning Edwin, Letty and Marcia.

The dressing gown was a jazzy rayon satin, patterned with a design of

maroon and ‘old gold’ geometrical shapes. Norman had bought it at a sale,

thinking he might look good in it, that it might in some unspecified way
‘do’ something for him. He was willing to bet that Edwin had nothing like
this, probably just an old plaid woollen thing that he’d had since school
days. He was pretty sure that Letty would have something smart, frilly and
all the rest of it, like the ladies he had seen when he’d visited Ken in
hospital, but on Marcia’s dressing gown he did not like to speculate. In a
curious way he found himself sheering away from her and turning his
thoughts to something else. In any case a shout from his landlady—some
complaint about the smell of frying—soon brought him back to earth again.

Most of Norman’s holiday was spent in this idle and profitless way. The

truth was that he didn’t really know what to do with himself when he wasn’t
working. In the last week he had to visit the dentist, to adjust his new plate
and to practise eating with it. The dentist was a Yorkshireman and rather too
jolly for Norman’s liking, and although he was National Health Norman
had to fork out quite a lot of money for a considerable amount of
discomfort. Thank you for nothing! he thought bitterly. When he was
reasonably confident of being able to attempt something more than soup or
macaroni cheese, Norman went back to work. He had a few days leave still
in hand. “You never know when they might come in useful,’ he said, but he
felt that those extra days would never be needed, but would accumulate like
a pile of dead leaves drifting on to the pavement in autumn.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Six

LETTY WAS NOT altogether surprised to get the letter from Marjorie saying

that she was going to marry David Lydell. So much can change in such a
short time especially, it would appear, if one is living in a village, though
Letty didn’t quite see why this should be so.

‘David and I found that we were just two lonely people with so much to

give each other,’ Marjorie wrote.

Letty had not realized that her friend might have been lonely. Her life as

a widow living in the country had always seemed so enviable, so full of
trivial but absorbing doings.

‘The vicarage is so uncomfortable,’ the letter went on. There is a great

deal to be done there. And would you believe it, the estate agent tells me
that I can ask (and get!) £20,000 for the cottage! Of course you will realize
that there is only one slight worry and that is you, dear old Letty. It will
hardly be possible (and I don’t for a moment suppose you would wish it) for
you to come and live with us at the vicarage when you retire. So it’s
occurred to me that you might like to take a room at Holmhurst where I
think there may well be a vacancy shortly (due to death, of course!), only
you must let me know soon because…’ Here the letter went into further
tedious detail, the upshot of it being that Marjorie could ‘get Letty in’
because she knew the woman who ran it. It was not by any means an old
people’s home because of course only selected applicants would be
accepted, on a personal recommendation…

Letty did not bother to read the last part of the letter very carefully.

Marjorie went on with what seemed like girlish enthusiasm, but no doubt a
woman in love, even if she is over sixty, feels no less rapturous than a girl
of nineteen. Skimming over the final page, Letty learned that David was
such a fine person; he had been so lonely and misunderstood in his last
parish and some people in the village hadn’t been too kind. Finally, they
were so much in love that the difference in their ages (‘I am of course some
ten years older than he is’) didn’t make the slightest difference. Letty
reflected that the difference must be nearer twenty years than ten but she
was prepared to accept the fact of their love even if she could not
understand it. Love was a mystery she had never experienced. As a young

woman she had wanted to love, had felt that she ought to, but it had not
come about. This lack in her was something she had grown used to and no
longer thought about, but it was disconcerting, even a little shocking, to find
that Marjorie was by no means beyond it.

Of course there was no question of her living at Holmhurst, a large red-

brick mansion standing in wide lawns which she had often passed when she
went to see Marjorie. She had once noticed an old woman with a lost
expression peering through one of the surrounding hedges and that
impression had remained with her. When her retirement day came, and it
was not far off now, she would no doubt stay in her bed-sitting room for the
time being. One could lead a very pleasant life in London—museums and
art galleries, concerts and theatres—all those things that cultured people in
the country were said to miss and crave for would be at Letty’s disposal Of
course she would have to answer Marjories letter, to offer her
congratulations (for surely that was the word) and to ease her conscience
about the upsetting of the retirement plans, but not necessarily by return of
post.

On her way home Letty noticed a barrow selling flowers near the

Underground station. It occurred to her that she might buy a bunch for her
landlady who had invited all the tenants to coffee that evening—not all-the-
year-round chrysanthemums, but something small and unobtrusive like
anemones or violets; but nothing of that sort was available and one could
not buy the daisy-like flowers, dyed turquoise blue or red-ink pink, which
were being offered as a bargain, so Letty walked on without buying
anything. As she approached the house she was overtaken by Marya, the
Hungarian who also lived there, carrying a bunch of the turquoise-dyed
flowers that Letty had rejected.

‘So pretty,’ she said enthusiastically, ‘and only 10p. You remember, Miss

Embrey has asked us to coffee, so I thought, one takes flowers.’

Letty now realized that Marya had got the better of her, as she often did,

filling the bathroom with her dripping clothes and taking Letty’s Daily
Telegraph in pretended mistake for her own lesser paper.

Miss Embrey lived on the ground floor and her three tenants—Letty,

Marya and Miss Alice Spurgeon—came out of their rooms like animals
emerging from burrows and descended the stairs at half past eight.

How aggressively nice and good her ‘things’ were, Letty thought, as she

accepted a cup of coffee in Miss Embrey’s Crown Derby. And now, it

appeared, she was taking herself and these nice things to a home for
gentlewomen in the country, perhaps the very home that Letty had decided
to reject.

them this information, perhaps because she realized that none of her tenants
had a man to arrange things for her. They were all unmarried women and no
man had ever been known to visit them, not even a relative.

‘Arthur has dealt with everything,’ Miss Embrey stressed, and this

included the house which was to be—indeed had already been—sold, with
the tenants in it, quite a usual practice.

their thoughts into words.

‘A very nice gentleman,’ said Miss Embrey in her mildest manner. ‘He

and his family will occupy the ground floor and basement.’

‘It is a large family?’ Marya asked.
‘I understand a near relative may be sharing the accommodation with

him. It is good to know that the ties of blood and kinship are still respected
in some parts of the world.’

This led Letty to ask tentatively whether their new landlord was perhaps

not English—a foreigner, if one could put it like that, and Miss Embrey was
equally circumspect in her answer, implying that, in a manner of speaking,
he was.

‘What is his name?’ Marya asked.
‘Mr Jacob Olatunde.’ Miss Embrey pronounced the syllables carefully, as

if she had been practising them.

‘He is black, then?’ Again it was Marya, the Hungarian, who dared to ask

the blunt question.

‘Certainly his skin is not what is usually regarded as white, but which of

us, for example, could say that we were white?’ Miss Embrey looked round
at her three tenants—Letty, with a pinkish skin, Marya, a sallow olive, Miss
Spurgeon, parchment—all quite different. ‘As you know, I have lived in
China, so these distinctions of skin colour mean very little to me. Mr
Olatunde comes from Nigeria,’ she declared.

Miss Embrey sat back and folded her hands one over the other, those

pale, useless hands exceptionally spotted with brown, and offered more
coffee.

Only Marya, toadyish with her murmurs of ‘such delicious coffee’,

accepted the offer. Miss Embrey smiled and poured her another cup. It was
not the expensive blend of freshly ground beans that she would have offered
to guests of her own choosing. Nor were the peculiar dyed flowers that
Marya had pressed upon her the sort of decoration she would choose for her
drawing room, so in a sense it was tit for tat.

‘That is clear, then?’ she declared, the chairman closing the meeting. ‘Mr

Olatunde will be your landlord from the Michaelmas quarter day.’

Afterwards there was talk on the stairs as the tenants went back to their

rooms.

‘We must remember that until very recently Nigeria was British,’ said

Miss Spurgeon. It was pink on the map. In some old atlases it still is.’

map any more. That night, as she lay in bed finding it difficult to sleep, the
whole of her life seemed to unroll before her like that of a drowning man …
is said to do, she thought, for of course her experience did not extend to
drowning and it was unlikely that it ever would. Death, when it came,
would present itself in another guise, something more ‘suitable’ for a
person like herself, for where would she ever be likely to be in danger of
death by drowning?
 

‘It never rains but it pours,’ said Norman the next morning when Letty

had told them in the office about the new development in her retirement
plans. ‘First your friend getting married and now this—whatever next?
There’ll be a third thing, just you wait.’

‘Yes, troubles do tend to come in threes, or so people say,’ Edwin

remarked. There was of course an undeniable interest and even unadmitted
pleasure in the contemplation of other people’s misfortunes, and for a
moment Edwin basked in this, shaking his head and speculating on what the
third disaster might be.

‘Don’t tell us you’re getting married too,’ said Norman jauntily. ‘That

might be the third thing.’

Letty had to smile, as she was meant to, at such a fantastic suggestion.

‘No chance of that,’ she said. ‘But I can still go and live in the country if I
want to. There’s a nice house in the village where I could get a room’

‘An old people’s home?’ Norman asked, quick as a flash.
‘Not exactly—you can have your own furniture there.’

‘An old people’s home where you can have your own furniture—your

bits and pieces and treasures,’ Norman went on.

‘Of course you won’t necessarily have to leave your room in London,’

said Edwin. ‘The new landlord may be a very good man. A lot of splendid
West Africans come to our church and they do very well in the sanctuary.
They have a great love of ritual and pageantry.’

This was cold comfort to Letty, for it was these very qualities that she

feared, the noise and exuberance, all those characteristics exemplified by
the black girl in the office which were so different from her own.

‘Oh, she’ll find their way of life so different,’ said Norman, ‘the cooking

smell and that. I know about bedsitters, believe me.’

Marcia had so far contributed nothing to the discussion for there was a

fear in her mind, even if it was not a very strong one, that she might have to
offer Letty a room in her house. After all, Letty had always been kind to
her; she had once offered to make her a cup of tea before going home, and
even though the offer had not been accepted it had not been forgotten. But
this did not mean that Marcia was under any obligation to provide
accommodation for Letty in her retirement For of course it would be
impossible - she couldn’t have anybody else living in her house. Two
women could never share the same kitchen, she told herself, forgetting for
the moment that she never really used the kitchen except to boil a kettle or
make a piece of toast. Then there would be the difficulty of the store
cupboard where Marcia kept her collection of tinned foods, and the special
and rather unusual arrangement she had about milk bottles, not to mention
the use of the bathroom and the arrangement of personal washing—the
difficulties were insuperable. Women alone had to make their own way in
the world and no doubt Letty already knew this. And if she couldn’t cope
there would be somebody like Janice Brabner coming round, asking
personal questions, making stupid suggestions and inviting her to do things
she didn’t want to do. It certainly wasn’t Marcia’s duty to offer a home to
Letty, just because she had a house of her own and lived by herself.
Indignation welled up inside her, and she asked herself, why should I? But
there was no answer to this question because nobody asked it. Nobody had
even thought of it, let alone Letty herself.

‘I’ll wait and see what happens,’ she said sensibly. ‘After all, one doesn’t

want to go looking for new accommodation in August. It’s not a very good
time.’

‘August is a wicked month,’ said Norman, who had seen the phrase

somewhere.

Not wicked so much as awkward, Edwin thought August 15th—Feast of

the Assumption, Solemn Mass 8 p.m. There might not be the full
complement of servers, even with the splendid West Africans, and people
were disinclined to attend an evening Mass at the end of a hot summer day.
You’d have thought Rome would have chosen a more convenient time. But
the Doctrine of the Assumption had been proclaimed about 1950, he
believed, and church life in the Italy of twenty years ago was no doubt
rather different from present-day practice in England in the seventies, even
in a High Anglican church, where most of the population didn’t go to
church anyway and those that did might well be away on holiday. Some
people thought Father G. went rather too far—‘way out’—in observing
some of these so-called obligations, but of course Edwin would be there this
evening, among the two or three gathered together, and that was the main
thing.

‘I may get on very well with Mr Olatunde,’ Letty was saying, in a bright,

brave tone. I certainly shan’t do anything in a hurry.’
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Seven

JANICE ALWAYS HAD to nerve herself before going to see Marcia again. She

wasn’t like the other old ladies she visited, in fact the term ‘old lady’ didn’t
seem to describe her, yet she wasn’t eccentric in a quaint or lovable way
either. But there were always people like this—one had to regard it as a
challenge, to try to get through to Marcia, to understand what went on in
her mind.

Janice decided to choose Saturday morning rather than an evening for her

next visit. People who worked were usually in on Saturday morning and
with some, though not with Marcia, there might be the chance of a cup of
coffee if one chose a suitable time. Still, she did open the door and that was
something.

‘How have things been with you?’ Janice asked, stepping into the hall

uninvited, but one must ‘gain access’, that was very important. ‘Have you
been managing your housework all right?’ The dust on the hall table told its
own story and the floor looked grey and gritty. Real nitty-gritty, Janice
smiled at the fancy. But of course one mustn’t smile—how had she been
coping? She wished Marcia would make some remark, however trite,
instead of staring at her in that unnerving way. There was a shopping basket
on a chair in the hall. This could be a talking point and Janice seized on it
with relief.

‘I see you’ve been shopping.’
‘Yes. Saturday is my shopping day.’
This at least was encouraging, that she had a shopping day, just like any

other woman. But what had she bought? Nothing but tinned food, it
seemed. A word of tactful criticism and friendly advice was needed here.
Fresh vegetables, even if only a cabbage, would be better than processed
peas, and apples or oranges than tinned peaches. She ought to be able to
afford suitable food, but perhaps she didn’t want to eat sensibly, that was
the annoying and irritating thing about the people one went to see. But of
course she had been in hospital; she was still ‘under the doctor, as the
expression was. Didn’t he ever enquire into her diet?

‘I always like to have plenty of tinned foods in the house,’ Marcia said in

a rather grand manner when Janice tried to suggest that fresh food would be

better for her.

‘Oh, yes, of course. Tins are very useful, especially when you can’t get

out or don’t want to go to the shops.’ No point in going on to somebody like
Marcia who obviously wouldn’t be led or advised by anyone. Janice was
getting to know that she was the kind of person one mustn’t interfere with
but just keep an eye on. It would be better not to make any comment on the
housework or lack of it. Some people didn’t like doing housework, anyway.

‘Goodbye, then,’ she said. ‘I’ll pop in again some time.’
When she had gone Marcia took her shopping bag to unpack it in the

kitchen. Every week she bought some tins for her store cupboard and now
she spent some time arranging them. There was a good deal of classifying
and sorting to be done here; the tins could be arranged according to size or
by types of food—meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, soup or miscellaneous. This
last category included such unclassifiable items as tomato puree, stuffed
vine leaves (this was an impulse buy) and tapioca pudding. There was work
to be done here and Marcia enjoyed doing it.

over the long uncut grass to the shed where she kept milk bottles. These
needed to be checked from time to time and occasionally she even went as
far as dusting them. Sometimes she would put out one for the milkman but
she mustn’t let the hoard get too low because if there was a national
emergency of the kind that seemed so frequent nowadays or even another
war, there could well be a shortage of milk bottles and we might find
ourselves back in the situation of ‘No bottle, no milk’, as in the last war. As
she moved among the bottles Marcia was irritated to discover one of an
alien brand among the United Dairy bottles—‘County Dairies’, it said.
Wherever had that come from? She didn’t remember noticing it before and
of course the milkman wouldn’t take it back—they only collected their own
bottles. She stood with it in her hand, frowning at the effort of trying to
remember where it could possibly have come from. Then it dawned on her.
Letty had given her some milk one day at the office. She had been staying
with that friend of hers in the country and had brought back a pint of milk,
had drunk some of it for her lunch, then given the rest to Marcia. So that
was it. Marcia felt suddenly annoyed with Letty for having foisted this alien
bottle on her. She must be made to take it back.

Seeing her coming out of the shed with a milk bottle in her hand, Nigel,

the young man next door, told himself that here was a chance to show

neighbourly friendliness, as his wife Priscilla was always urging him to. .

Would you like me to cut your grass, Miss Ivory?’ he asked, going to the

fence. ‘I’ve got the mower out’ Though really, seeing its length, a scythe
would be more appropriate.

‘No, thank you,’ said Marcia politely, ‘I prefer the grass as it is,’ and

went into the house. She was still feeling annoyed with Letty about the milk
bottle. There was certainly no question of her offering Letty a room in her
house now; that was not at all the sort of person one wanted under the same
roof.
 

That evening Letty crouched in her room, listening. It wasn’t even a

rowdy party, these bursts of hymn-singing and joyful shouts, for Mr
Olatunde, her new landlord, was a priest of a religious sect. ‘Aladura,’ Miss
Embrey had murmured, but the name meant nothing, only the coming and
going in the house and the noise. Now perhaps Letty really did feel like a
drowning man, with the events of her past life unrolling before her, those
particular events which had led her to this. How had it come about that she,
an Englishwoman born in Malvern in 1914 of middle-class English parents,
should find herself in this room in London surrounded by enthusiastic,
shouting, hymn-singing Nigerians? It must surely be because she had not
married. No man had taken her away and immured her in some comfortable
suburb where hymn-singing was confined to Sundays and nobody was fired
with enthusiasm. Why had this not happened? Because she had thought that
love was a necessary ingredient for marriage? Now, having looked around
her for forty years, she was not so sure. All those years wasted, looking for
love! The thought of it was enough to bring about silence in the house and
during the lull she plucked up the courage to go downstairs and tap—too
timidly, she felt—at Mr Olatunde’s door.

‘I wonder if you could make a little less noise?’ she asked. ‘Some of us

find it rather disturbing.’

‘Christianity is disturbing,’ said Mr Olatunde.
It was difficult to know how to answer this. Indeed Letty found it

impossible so Mr Olatunde continued, smiling, ‘You are a Christian lady?’

Letty hesitated. Her first instinct had been to say ‘yes’, for of course one

was a Christian lady, even if one would not have put it quite like that. How
was she to explain to this vital, ebullient black man her own blend of
Christianity—a grey, formal, respectable thing of measured observances

and mild general undemanding kindness to all? ‘I’m sorry,’ she said,
drawing back, ‘I didn’t mean…’ What had she meant? Confronted by these
smiling people she felt she could hardly repeat her complaint about the
noise.

A handsome woman in a long brightly coloured dress and head tie

stepped forward. ‘We are having supper now,’ she said. ‘You will join us?’

Letty was reminded of Norman as a rich spicy smell was wafted towards

her. She thanked the woman politely, saying that she had already eaten.

with a touch of complacency.

‘No, perhaps not.’ Letty withdrew, embarrassed by the crowd of smiling

faces that seemed to be pressing in on her. We are not the same, she thought
hopelessly. She wondered what Edwin and Norman and Marcia would have
done in the circumstances, but came to no conclusions. Other people’s
reactions were unpredictable and while she could imagine Edwin entering
into the religious aspect of the evening and even taking part in the service, it
might well be that Norman and Marcia, usually so set in their isolation,
would in some surprising way have been drawn into the friendly group.
Only Letty remained outside.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Eight

THERE HAD ALREADY been a good deal of talk in the office about Letty’s

situation and what she ought to do about it, and as time went on the
question became more urgent, especially when Marya found a living-in job
as housekeeper to a family in Hampstead, and Miss Spurgeon made
arrangements to go into an old people’s home.

‘You’ll be alone in the house now,’ said Norman gleefully. ‘It’ll seem

strange, won’t it?’ Perhaps this was the third misfortune he had prophesied,
proving that disasters always went in threes.

‘Your new landlord is a clergyman, isn’t he?’ said Marcia.
‘Yes, in a manner of speaking.’ Letty had a vision of Father Lydell

leaning back in Marjorie’s armchair, eyes closed, sipping Orvieto, so very
different from Mr Olatunde. Obviously there were clergymen and
clergymen, she thought ‘I wouldn’t want to hurt his feelings,’ she said, ‘by
anything I said about the people living in the house. He seems to be a very
nice man.’

‘Isn’t there some friend you could live with?’ Edwin suggested. ‘Apart

from the one who’s getting married?’ A woman like Letty must have many
friends, a whole army of nice women like the WRVS or some—though not all
—of the female congregation of his church. Surely there were plenty of
such women? One saw them everywhere.

‘The best thing is to have a relative,’ said Norman. ‘Then they’re bound

to do something for you. After all, blood is thicker than water, however
distant the connection—you can bank on that.’

Letty considered some of her cousins, not seen since childhood, now

living somewhere in the west of England. She could hardly expect any of
them to offer her a home.

‘Have you ever thought of taking a lodger?’ Edwin asked, turning to

Marcia.

‘The money might be useful,’ Norman chipped in, ‘when you’re retired.’
‘Oh, I shan’t need money,’ said Marcia impatiently. ‘There won’t be any

need for me to take in lodgers,’ ‘Unthinkable’ was the word that came to
her at Edwin’s suggestion, the idea of offering a home to Letty, especially
when she remembered that milk bottle. But Letty wouldn’t like it either.

Even now she was protesting, obviously embarrassed for Marcia as well as
for herself.

‘There are organizations and people wanting to help ladies,’ said Edwin

quaintly.

‘There’s a young woman who comes round to see me sometimes—seems

to think I need help.’ Marcia laughed in a mirthless way. ‘It’s the other way
round, if you ask me.’

‘But you have been in hospital,’ Edwin reminded her. ‘I expect that’s

why they like to keep an eye on you.’

‘Oh, yes, but I go to Mr Strong’s clinic for that.’ Marcia smiled. ‘I don’t

need young people telling me not to buy tinned peas.’

‘Well, it’s good to know that people do care,’ said Letty vaguely, feeling

that it might go rather beyond tinned peas. ‘I expect something will turn up
when I retire—after all, I haven’t retired yet.’

‘But you soon will,’ said Norman, ‘and you won’t get much of a pension

from here to add to what the state gives you. And then there’s inflation to be
considered,’ he added unhelpfully.

‘Inflation isn’t exactly the kind of thing you can consider,’ said Letty. ‘It

just comes on you unawares.’

‘You’re telling me,’ said Norman, and delving in his pocket he produced

the checkout payslip from his latest visit to the supermarket. Just listen to
this,’ and he proceeded to read it out. It was the increase in the prices of
tinned soup and butter beans that seemed to anger him most, giving a
strange insight into his daily diet.

Nobody commented or even listened. Marcia thought complacently of

her well-stocked store cupboard and Letty decided she would have an early
lunch and then take a bus to the Oxford Street shops. Only Edwin, perhaps
seeing himself as a person wanting to help ladies, went on thinking about
Letty and her problem.
 

All Saints’ Day, the first of November, fell on a weekday. There was an

evening Mass, quite well attended, and on the next Sunday Edwin was
present at the ceremony of coffee and biscuits after the morning service of
Parish Communion at a church he sometimes went to because he had once
lived in the neighbourhood. It was not his regular church but he had chosen
it especially with Letty in mind.

The making of coffee was in itself a ritual entrusted to various women

members of the congregation, all of whom knew Edwin from his occasional
visits to the church, and as he entered the hall, a bleak room garishly
decorated by members of the youth club, he heard the voice of an old
woman raised in a protest about biscuits.

‘It is quite unnecessary to have biscuits with the coffee,’ she said. ‘A hot

drink is all that anyone needs.’

‘I like to have something to nibble with my coffee,’ protested a little

furry woman in a grey coat. ‘We all know that Mrs Pope is wonderful for
her age but the elderly don’t need much to eat If it had been known
beforehand that the biscuit tin was empty something could have been done
about it—it could have been replenished—biscuits could have been bought’

Into the middle of this controversy Edwin inserted himself with what

seemed like a brutal attack. ‘I believe one of you ladies has a spare room,’
he declared.

There was silence, an awkward silence, Edwin felt, and both the women

began to make excuses like the guests bidden to the marriage feast—the
room was hardly more than a cupboard, it had all the things for the church
bazaar in it, it might be needed for a relative. This last was the trump card
but Edwin persevered. He had not thought out what he would do next, and
he now realized that it might have been better if he had begun by describing
Letty and outlining the nature of her problem, emphasizing her need for a
room, so that consciences might be played upon and hearts touched. But
how should he describe Letty? As a friend? She was hardly that and being a
single woman might arouse gossip. A lady I know? That sounded too arch
and coy. A woman who works in my office? Surely that would be best. The
words woman, work, office, presented a reassuring picture of somebody of
the preferred sex, who would be out all day and might even be a congenial
companion on the occasions when she was in the house.

So Edwin went on, adopting a confidential tone, ‘You see, it’s like this. A

woman who works in my office is in a difficulty. The house where she lives
has been sold with the tenants in it and the new landlord and his family
aren’t quite what she’s been used to, rather noisy, in fact.’

‘Blacks?’ asked Mrs Pope sharply.
‘That’s about the size of it,’ Edwin admitted in a genial way.
‘Mind you, Mr Olatunde is a very good man—a priest, in a manner of

speaking.’

‘How can he be a priest in a manner of speaking?’ asked Mrs Pope. ‘He

must be either a priest or not a priest. There can be no qualification.’

‘He is a priest of an African religious sect,’ Edwin explained. ‘And of

course the services are not quite like ours—there’s a lot of noisy singing
and shouting.’

‘And this woman—lady—she is that, I assume?’
‘Oh, certainly. There would be no difficulty on that score,’ said Edwin

casually, feeling that Letty was in every way superior, if that was the
criterion to be applied.

‘She finds the noise too much where she is living?’
‘Yes, she does, being a very quiet person herself.’ That was something to

be emphasized.

another person in the house.’

Edwin recalled that Mrs Pope lived alone.
‘If one fell downstairs or tripped over a rug and was unable to get up…’
‘You might lie for hours before anyone came,’ said the little furry woman

eagerly.

‘One’s bones are so brittle,’ said Mrs Pope. ‘A fracture could lead to

serious complications.’

Edwin felt that they were getting off the point. He wanted the business to

be settled, with Letty in the room. Of course Mrs Pope was old, but she was
active and independent and he was sure that Letty, being a woman, would
be very helpful in case of illness or accident. Now he could see the whole
pattern emerging, with Letty’s life governed by the soothing rhythm of the
Church’s year. All Saints’ today, then All Souls’; everybody could share in
the commemoration of the saints and the departed. Then would come
Advent followed closely—too closely, it often seemed—by Christmas.
After Christmas came Boxing Day, the Feast of St Stephen, hardly observed
as such unless it happened to be one’s patronal festival; then the Innocents,
St John the Evangelist and Epiphany. The Conversion of St Paul and
Candlemas (where one usually sang one of Keble’s less felicitous hymns)
were followed all too soon by the Sundays before Lent, but the evenings
were drawing out. Ash Wednesday was an important landmark—evening
Mass and the Imposition of Ashes, the black smudge on the forehead, ‘dust
thou art and to dust shalt thou return’—some people didn’t like that,
thought it morbid’ or ‘not very nice’.

the bathroom occasionally. She wouldn’t need a bath every night, would
she?’ Too much washing was bad for the skin, the constant immersion in
hot water dried out the natural oils … Mrs Pope was coming round to the
idea of Letty while Edwin was taking her through the Church’s year, but he
would hardly be able to answer questions about how often she would want a
bath.

Everybody knew about Lent, of course, even if they didn’t do anything

about it, with Palm Sunday ushering in the services of Holy Week—not
what they used to be, certainly, but there was still something left of Maundy
Thursday, Good Friday and Holy Saturday with the ceremonies, the prelude
to Easter Day. Low Sunday always seemed a bit of an anticlimax after all
that had gone before but it wasn’t long before Ascension Day and then Whit
Sunday or Pentecost as it was properly called. After that you had Corpus
Christi, with a procession out of doors if fine, and then Trinity Sunday,
followed by all those long hot summer Sundays, with the green vestments
and the occasional saint’s day … That was how it had always been and how
it would go on in spite of trendy clergy trying to introduce so-called up-to-
date forms of worship, rock and roll and guitars and discussions about the
Third World instead of Evensong. The only difficulty was that Edwin
wasn’t at all sure that Letty ever went to church. She had never mentioned it
when he talked about such things in the office. Still, when she was settled in
Mrs Pope’s back room and when she had retired, there was no knowing
how her life would change.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Nine

So YOU ARE Miss Crowe.’
It was not the most friendly greeting, Letty felt, but there was nothing for

it but to repeat that she was indeed Miss Crowe and to assume that the
woman peering through the barely opened door must be Mrs Pope. And
why should she have expected friendliness when the relationship between
them was to be that of landlady and tenant? Friendliness was by no means
to be taken for granted. Obviously she should have expected little in the
way of warmth, with the taxi taking her what seemed so very far north,
though the postal address was only NW6.

It was not long before Christmas—St Lucy’s Day, Edwin had reminded

her, though the saint seemed to have no particular significance for the
move. Norman, of course, made much of it being the shortest day. ‘Get
there in good time,’ he advised. ‘You don’t want to be wandering about in a
strange district after dark.’

‘One has to be careful,’ Mrs Pope went on, opening the door a little

wider. ‘There are so many impostors these days.’

Letty had to agree, though she felt that Mrs Pope was not the sort of

person to be taken in by an impostor. While Edwin’s impression and
description of her had been merely that of a woman in her eightieth year
who was ‘wonderful for her age’, Letty now saw that she was an imposing
figure with noble almost Roman features and a mass of thick white hair, of
the kind that is sometimes described as ‘abundant, arranged in an elaborate
old-fashioned style.

After the vitality and warmth of Mr Olatunde’s house Mrs Pope’s seemed

bleak and silent, with its heavy dark furniture and ticking grandfather clock,
the kind of tick that would keep one awake until one got used to it. Letty
was shown the kitchen where she could prepare her meals and a cupboard
where she could keep her food. The bathroom and lavatory were indicated
with gestures, being not the kind of rooms into which one would show
people. The lavatory window, Letty saw when she went in, looked out on to
back gardens, with blackened stumps on the frosty earth, and beyond them
the railway, where trains rattled by in a kind of hinterland which marked
their first emergence from the Underground. Not really the kind of district

where one would choose to live, but of course it was only temporary and
‘beggars can’t be choosers’, as Norman lost no time in reminding her.

The room itself was quite pleasant, sparsely furnished, which was a good

thing, and there was a basin with hot and cold water, as Edwin had said.
Letty felt like a governess in a Victorian novel arriving at a new post, but
there would be no children here and no prospect of a romantic attachment to
the widower master of the house or a handsome son of the family. Her own
particular situation had hardly existed in the past, for now it was the
unattached working woman, the single ‘business lady of the advertisements,
who was most likely to arrive in the house of strangers. Letty had often
found herself doing this, arranging her clothes in the drawers and wardrobe
provided and putting out her personal possessions, the things that might
give some clue as to what sort of person she was. There were her books—
anthologies of poetry, though nothing later than Poems of Today. Second
Series—her current library book; her transistor radio, a bowl of hyacinths
nearly in flower, her knitting in a flowered cretonne bag. There were no
photographs, not even of her friend Marjorie or of her old home, her
parents, a cat or a dog.

At least Mrs Pope was leaving her to herself this first evening, Letty

thought, as she prepared a poached egg on toast in the silent kitchen. Later,
as she lay in bed, unable to sleep on her first night in a strange bed that
would soon become as familiar as her own body, she realized that she had
taken action, she had made the move, she had coped. In the sleepless hours
she heard footsteps on the landing and a sudden thump. Supposing Mrs
Pope had a fall? She was an elderly person and heavy—lifting her would be
difficult. Letty hoped she wasn’t going to have to do that kind of coping,
but eventually she fell asleep and heard nothing more.

Next morning in the office there was an air of expectancy, almost of

excitement. They all wanted to know how Letty had got on in her new
room. Edwin had a proprietary attitude towards the move—after all, he was
entitled to it as he had found the room for her, and the others felt that he had
done something pretty good in, as it were, delivering her from Mr Olatunde.
‘I only hope it won’t be a case of frying pan into fire,’ Norman observed.
‘You must watch out that you don’t get landed with an elderly person and
all that entails.’

‘Oh, Mrs Pope is very independent,’ Edwin said quickly. ‘She’s a

member of the parochial church council and a very active one.’

she’s got perfect control over her legs—she might fall, you know.’

‘Yes, that thought came to me in the night,’ said Letty, ‘but it might

happen to anyone. We could all fall.’

Nobody seemed inclined to go into the deeper implications of what Letty

had just said, but Edwin repeated now what he had thought when he first
broached the subject to Mrs Pope. ‘Oh, a woman can deal with these things
easily enough,’ he reminded Norman in a rather sharp tone. ‘There’s no
need to make the kind of fuss you or I would make if we were faced with
such a situation.’

‘Equal opportunities!’ said Norman. ‘That’s one of the things we men

prefer to leave to the ladies. Anyway, what is one’s responsibility in that
kind of thing—answer me that?’

Just the ordinary responsibility of one human being towards another,’

said Letty. ‘I hope I should do whatever was best.’

‘But sometimes it’s unwise to move a person who has fallen,’ Norman

persisted. ‘You could do more harm than good.’

‘You should ring for the ambulance,’ said Marcia, making her first

contribution to the discussion. ‘The ambulance men know what to do. Are
you able to use the kitchen when you want to?’ she went on, still feeling the
very smallest tinge of guilt at not having offered to take in Letty herself, but
of course, as she repeatedly told herself, it would not have done. And once
again she had forgotten to bring that milk bottle to the office.

‘Yes, that seems to work all right I cooked supper and breakfast—there’s

an electric cooker and I’m used to that, and plenty of room for me to keep
my own things.’

‘It’s so important to have plenty of room for tins,’ said Marcia. ‘You

should insist on that. You wouldn’t want to keep everything in the room
where you sleep.’

‘I have to keep everything in the one room,’ said Norman.
‘Well, beggars can’t be choosers, as you’re so fond of reminding us,’ said

Edwin. ‘I only hope this move will turn out to be a good thing,’ he added. ‘I
shall feel responsible for it if anything goes wrong.’

‘You mustn’t feel that,’ Letty reassured him. ‘It’s up to oneself, to adapt

to circumstances.’

‘Up to you to make a go of it,’ said Norman chirpily. ‘That’s the ticket.’

from her ground-floor sitting room. She will walk down to the bus stop or
take the Underground, she thought, as she entered Letty’s room, knowing
that she would not be back before half past six.

Letty had not asked for a key to the room and Mrs Pope felt that she had

a duty to see that everything was in order. It would also be just as well to
judge from her possessions what kind of a person her new lodger was.

The first thing that struck Mrs Pope was tidiness and order. This was a

slight disappointment for she had hoped to find interesting things lying
about in the room. Naturally she would expect somebody recommended by
Mr Braithwaite—she did not think of him as ‘Edwin’—to be respectable,
even a churchwoman, but she was surprised to find that there was no
devotional book on the bedside table, not even a Bible, just a novel from the
Camden library. Mrs Pope would have respected a biography but she was
not interested in novels and did not give the book a second glance. Turning
her attention to the washbasin she noted talcum powder and deodorant, a jar
of skinfood and a tube of Steradent tablets besides toothbrushes and paste
and a new flower-patterned face flannel. The little cupboard over the basin
held only aspirins and vegetable laxative tablets, no exotic drugs of any
kind, though she might well carry tablets in her handbag. The dressing table
had a selection of cosmetics on it, all neatly ranged. Glancing over her
shoulder towards the door, Mrs Pope opened the top drawer. It contained
several neatly folded pairs of stockings or tights, gloves, scarves and a
small leather jewel box. In the jewel box were a small string of pearls,
obviously not real, two or three strings of beads, a few pairs of earrings and
two rings, one gold with a half-hoop of small diamonds (her mother’s
engagement ring?), and the other a cheap butterfly-wing in a silver setting.
Nothing of value or interest there, Mrs Pope decided. The chest of drawers
held underwear, immaculately clean and folded, and jumpers and blouses,
equally neat and clean. The contents of the wardrobe were more or less
what might have been expected from the rest of the room and Mrs Pope did
no more than glance at the hanging dresses, suits and skirts. There was a
trouser suit, too, the kind of thing women of Letty’s age had taken to
wearing, and that too was as respectable and appropriate as the rest of the
garments. Only one item caught Mrs Pope’s eye, a rather gaily patterned
cotton kimono, which seemed not to be in character with the rest of Miss
Crowe’s things. Had it perhaps been a gift from somebody in the mission

field, a relative out there? There were some things one could hardly ask but
no doubt she would see Miss Crowe coming out of the bathroom wearing it
one day. Dissatisfied, Mrs Pope went downstairs again. The most one could
say, and it seemed hardly enough, was that Miss Crowe seemed to be the
ideal lodger or at least nothing could be gleaned to the contrary.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Ten

‘Christmas cames hut once a year;
And when it comes it brings good cheer…’.’

disputed the fact or took exception to his tone, for Christmas is a difficult
time for those who are no longer young and are without close relatives or
dependents, and each one in the office was thinking of the particular trials
and difficulties the so-called festive season would bring with it. Only Edwin
would be spending Christmas in the traditional and accepted way in his role
as father and grandfather. ‘Christmas is a time for the children,’ people
were apt to say, and he was prepared to accept this and go along with it,
though he would much have preferred to spend the festival alone at home,
with no more than a quick drink with Father G. between services to mark
the secular aspect of the occasion.

Norman himself had been invited to eat his Christmas dinner with his

brother-in-law Ken and his lady friend, the woman who was presumably to
replace his dead wife, Norman’s sister. ‘After all, he has nobody,’ they said,
as they had when they allowed Norman to visit Ken in hospital. ‘Might as
well help them get through their turkey,’ was the way Norman regarded the
invitation, and as there was no public transport on that day Ken would call
for him and bring him back by car so there would be no difficulty there. The
hated motor car did occasionally have its uses.

It was the women—Letty and Marcia—who were the real worry, or

posed something of a problem’, as Janice Brabner put it. They had no
relatives they could spend Christmas with and the season had for many
years now been an occasion to be got through as quickly as possible. Letty
had often spent the holiday with her friend in the country but this year
Marjorie had Father Lydell, forever fixed in Letty’s memory as leaning
back in a comfortable chair sipping an appropriate wine, no doubt a
burgundy or even a mulled claret to suit the season, but whatever it was she
felt she would be an intruder this year and in any case no invitation had
been forthcoming. In this lack Letty was conscious of Marjorie’s
embarrassment at having to withhold it, so the season would not be one of

unmixed happiness and relaxation for Marjorie either. In war there are no
victors, as the saying went, and inappropriate though the idea might be
there was still something applicable in it.

Marcia worried less about Christmas as the years went on. When her

mother had been alive it had been a quiet time, marked only by the cooking
of a larger than usual bird—their butcher usually recommended ‘a nice
capon’ as being suitable for two ladies spending Christmas alone—and the
provision of special food as well as titbits from the bird for Snowy, the old
cat. After her mother’s death Snowy had been enough company for Marcia,
and when he had gone there was no special point about Christmas Day and
it tended to merge into the rest of the holiday until it was no different from
any other part of it.
 

‘We must do something about Miss Ivory,’ Nigel and Priscilla were

agreed on that Christmas was the time for ‘doing’ something about old
people or ‘the aged’, as the nobler phrase described them, though that, in
Priscilla’s mind, conjured up pictures of tiny frail oriental ladies rather than
people like Miss Ivory.

‘It’s the loneliness that’s the worst part—or so one hears,’ Priscilla said.

‘The poor souls just long for somebody to talk to.’ One evening she had met
Janice Brabner trying to call on Marcia but getting no answer to her ringing
and knocking. ‘No joy whatsoever,’ as she put it, though ‘joy’ was hardly
the word. Janice was going away for Christmas and was worried about
Marcia, so Priscilla had promised to keep an eye on her, even to ask her in
for a meal, and what more suitable occasion than the turkey on Christmas
Day?

Nigel had been a bit doubtful about this. ‘She isn’t all that old,’ he had

objected. ‘She’s independent enough to go out to work even though she’s so
odd. I suppose it would be kind to ask her but I can’t quite see her fitting in
with your grandparents.’

‘Perhaps she’ll refuse the invitation,’ said Priscilla, ‘but I feel I must ask

her.’

‘She didn’t want me to cut her lawn that time when I offered,’ said Nigel

hopefully.

‘But Christmas is a bit different,’ Priscilla said, and evidently this was

what Marcia felt too for she even managed to smile when she was asked.

Of course the grandparents were terribly nice to her, so thankful were

they not to be the kind of old people who needed to have something ‘done’
about them. Priscilla’s grandmother was so elegantly pink and white, with
her beautifully coiffed hair and neat, pastel-coloured clothes, such a contrast
to Marcia, with that crudely dyed hair and a peculiarly awful dress in a most
unbecoming shade of bright blue. The grandparents led such useful and
busy lives in their retirement in Buckinghamshire—every day for them was
so full and interesting and their stay with Priscilla in London would be
filled with worthwhile activities, visits to theatres and art galleries. What
did Marcia do, or rather what would she do when she retired next year? One
hardly liked to speculate and the question, politely and kindly put, brought
forth the sort of answer that got one nowhere. Nor did Marcia really do
justice to the traditional Christmas fare. The discovery that she didn’t drink
had cast the first slight gloom on the proceedings and the hope that she
would eat well was disappointed by the way she left most of her small
helping on the side of her plate. She murmured something about being a
very small eater but Priscilla thought she might at least have had the
manners to make a show of eating when so much trouble had been taken.
But then that was what Janice had warned her about—these people weren’t
necessarily rewarding, one just had to plod on. Perhaps it would have been
easier if Marcia had been that much older, really ancient.

After lunch they sat round the fire for coffee and chocolates were handed

round. Everyone felt comfortably sleepy and would have liked to flop down
and close their eyes, but the presence of Marcia was inhibiting. It seemed
impossible to drop off with that beady glance fixed on them They were all
relieved when she suddenly got up and said she must go.

‘How will you spend the rest of the holiday?’ Priscilla asked, as if she

were determined to punish herself further. ‘Have you something arranged
for Boxing Day?’

‘Boxing Day?’ Marcia did not seem to understand what was meant by

Boxing Day, but after a pause she declared rather grandly, ‘We who work in
offices do value our leisure time, so we don’t need to make elaborate plans,’
and of course everyone had to respect this, while thankful that they need not
do anything more about her Christmas.

Next day Marcia rose late and spent the morning tidying out a drawer full

of old newspapers and paper bags, something she had been meaning to do
for a long time. Then she checked the contents of her store cupboard but did

not eat anything until the evening when she opened a small tin of pilchards.
It was one left over from Snowy’s store, so it was not really breaking into
her reserves. She had heard or read somewhere that pilchards contained
valuable protein, though this was not the reason why she had opened that
particular tin. She did not even remember that the young doctor at the
hospital had told her that she ought to eat more.

Letty had made up her mind to face Christmas with courage and a kind of

deliberate boldness, a determination to hold the prospect of loneliness at
bay. It wasn’t really as if she minded being alone for she was used to it; it
was rather the idea that people might find out that she had no invitation for
the day and that they would pity her. She endured the newspaper articles
and radio programmes pandering to the collective guilt-feeling of those who
were neither old nor lonely nor fortunate enough to have an odd relative or
neighbour they could invite into their homes at Christmas, telling herself
that at least she needn’t feel guilty at this festive season. Marjorie seemed to
have none of these feelings either, Letty reflected, for she had made no
mention of Letty joining her for Christmas, and had sent her card and
present (bath foam and hand cream done up in a fancy package) particularly
early, so that there could be no misunderstanding on that score. I wouldn’t
have wanted to go there anyway, Letty told herself stoutly, not with David
Lydell there. Even with the heavy load of Christmas services he would no
doubt find plenty of time to be with his fiancee and, remembering the
picnic, Letty did not fancy herself in the role of gooseberry.

Letty therefore prepared to spend Christmas alone, for she understood

that Mrs Pope would be going to stay with her sister who lived in a village
in Berkshire. But at the last minute there was a change of plan, various
telephone calls were made, and in the end Mrs Pope announced that she
was not going away after all. The change of plan was the result of an
argument about heating, Mrs Pope’s sister apparently being too mean to
switch on the storage heaters before January, and the cottage being not only
cold but damp and poky as well.

‘I shall not go, neither now or ever,’ Mrs Pope declared, standing militant

by the telephone in the full dignity of her eighty-odd years.

‘Warmth is so important,’ Letty said, remembering the office

conversations about hypothermia.

‘Have you anything special for your Christmas dinner?’ Mrs Pope then

asked.

festive sharing or pooling of resources, for they had not so far eaten
together, though they had met in the kitchen preparing their individual
breakfasts and suppers. She did not at first like to admit that she had bought
a chicken, for it seemed almost brutish to contemplate eating even the
smallest bird all by herself, but when she realized what was in Mrs Pope’s
mind she had to confess.

‘I have some ham and a Christmas pudding, one I made last year, so it

will be best if we have our meal together,’ Mrs Pope said. ‘It is ridiculous to
think of two women in the same house eating separate Christmas dinners.
Not that I really make any difference in what I eat at Christmas—it’s most
unwise for old people to gorge themselves at any time.’

So Letty had no alternative but to listen to Mrs Pope discoursing on her

favourite topic of the excessive amount of food most people ate. It was not
conducive to an enjoyable meal and Letty could not help feeling that on this
occasion she might have done better if she had stayed in her room in Mr
Olatunde’s house. A jolly Nigerian Christmas would surely have included
her, and not for the first time she began to wonder if she had done the right
thing by moving. Still, Christmas Day had been lived through and was now
nearly over, that was the main thing.

The radio offered a choice of comedy, with a braying studio audience,

which she did not feel in the mood for, or carols, with their sad memories of
childhood and the days that can never come back. So she took up her library
book and sat reading, wondering what sort of a Christmas the others in the
office had spent. Then she remembered that the Kensington sales started the
day after Boxing Day and her spirits suddenly lifted.

Pushing the boat out, aren’t you?’ said Norman, with unusual jollity, as

Ken topped up his glass.

‘Well, I always think a really good meal like the one we’ve just eaten

deserves all the trimmings,’ Ken said.

‘I only hope you’re not going to suffer for it.’ Norman could hardly resist

casting this small gloom on the festivities. After all, the last time he’d seen
Ken he’d been lying prone in the men’s surgical ward, feeling pretty sorry
for himself. But now he seemed to have fallen on his feet all right with this
girlfriend—Joyce her name was, shortened to Joy—who was not only quite
good-looking and an excellent cook but had a bit of money of her own and

had even passed the test of the Institute of Advanced Motorists, whatever
that might mean. So Ken had good reason to push the boat out.

Still, let them get on with it, all lovey-dovey at the kitchen sink doing the

washing-up, Norman thought, sitting by the fire, as they had insisted when
he made a half-hearted offer of help.

‘You put your feet up,’ Joy said. ‘Have a bit of a rest—after all, you’re

one of the world’s workers.’

Norman supposed they all were, come to that, though he and Ken spent

most of their working life sitting down anyway, Ken stuck in the passenger
seat of a car on test and he, Norman, at his desk doing damn all. Still, he
wasn’t averse to a bit of a rest, especially after a good meal, and it was
always nice to see a coal fire and not to have to worry about having the
right coins for the meter.

‘Where exactly does he live?’ Joy was saying, her pink rubber-gloved

hands plunged in the washing-up water.

‘Norman? Oh, he’s got a bedsitter—Kilburn Park way.’
‘On his own all the time, is he? It must be a bit lonely.’
‘Lots of people live on their own,’ Ken pointed out.
‘Still, at Christmas … it does seem sort of sad.’
‘Well, we’re having him here today, aren’t we? I don’t see what more we

can do.’

‘You’ve never thought of sharing?’
‘Sharing? You have to be joking!’
‘Oh, I don’t mean now. But when your wife, when Marigold .. ,’ Joy

brought out the name tentatively for she could never get used to it or
believe that Ken’s wife had really been christened so, ‘when she passed on
and you were left on your own…’

Ken waited in grim silence. Let her put into words what she was

thinking, that he might have asked Norman—the brother-in-law with whom
he hadn’t a thing in common apart from having been married to his sister—
to come and live in his house, was that it? Imagine sharing a house with
Norman! The very idea of it was enough to give him the creeps, and
thinking about how it might be made him smile, even want to laugh, so that
the grim silence was relaxed and he playfully flicked a tea towel at his
intended second wife.

Larking about in the kitchen, Norman thought, hearing the sound of

laughter, but he wasn’t really envious, his attitude being ‘sooner him than

me’. When Ken had deposited him on his doorstep from his brand new
buttercup-yellow motor car, Norman returned to his bed-sitting room—
quite well satisfied with his lot. This Christmas had certainly brought a bit
of good cheer, but today’s jollifications had been enough for him and he
quite looked forward to getting back to the office and hearing how the
others had got on.
 
 

Edwin felt drained and exhausted, but relieved. They’d wanted him to stay
longer, of course, but he’d pleaded various pressing engagements, for after
Christmas Day, with a somewhat inadequate ‘Family Communion’ as the
main service (no High Mass), and Boxing Day with a surfeit of cold turkey
and fractious children, he felt he’d had enough. His son-in-law dropped him
at the station while the family went on to a pantomime where they were to
be joined by the other grandparents and another lot of children. All a very
jolly family party but not exactly his ‘scene’, as Norman might put it.

Taking out his diary, Edwin considered the days after Christmas. Today,

December 27th, was St John the Evangelist and there should be a good
High Mass this evening at St John’s over the other side of the common—it
was their patronal festival, of course, and the priest there was a friend of
Father G.’s. Then there was the day after, December 28th, Holy Innocents—
he’d try to get over to Hammersmith for that. People didn’t seem to realize
what a lot there was going on after Christmas, quite apart from the day
itself.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Eleven

THE FIRST DAY they were back in the office was the second of January.

None of them had really needed New Year’s Day to recover from the
celebrations of the night before because none of them had been to a party,
but there had always been grumblings when in the past they had been
obliged to work on the day. Now, of course, the extended holiday had
seemed a little too long and they were all glad to be back to work.

‘Or what passes for work,’ as Norman remarked, tilting back in his chair

and drumming his fingers on his empty table.

‘It’s always a bit slack at this time,’ Letty said. ‘One tries to get things

done before Christmas.’

‘To clear one’s desk,’ said Marcia importantly, using a phrase from long

ago that had little or no reality in their present situation.

‘And when you get back there’s nothing on it,’ said Norman peevishly.

He was bored now that the first interest of hearing about other people’s
Christmases had evaporated.

Well, this has come in,’ said Edwin, holding up a cyclostyled notice. He

passed it to Norman who read it out.

‘A Memorial Service for a man who retired before we came,’ he said.

‘What’s that got to do with us?’

‘I didn’t know he’d died,’ said Letty. ‘Wasn’t he once chairman?’
It was in The Times, Edwin pointed out. ‘One feels that perhaps this

department ought to be represented.’

‘They couldn’t expect that if nobody knew him,’ said Marcia.
‘I suppose they’d send round a notice in case anybody wanted to go,’

said Letty in her usual tolerant manner. ‘After all, there might be some
who’d worked with him.’

‘But it’s today,’ said Norman indignantly. ‘How could we go today, at

such short notice? What’s going to happen to the work?’

Nobody answered him.
‘Twelve noon,’ Norman read out scornfully. ‘I like that! What do they

think we are?’

‘I think I shall go,’ said Edwin, looking at his watch. ‘I see it’s at the

church used by the university—rather a suitable setting for a Memorial

Service for an agnostic.’

‘I suppose you know the church, you’ve been there before?’ Letty asked.
‘Oh, yes, I know it all right,’ said Edwin casually. ‘Pretty

undenominational, you might say. They have to cater for all sorts there, but
I suppose there’ll be somebody who knows what to do.’

‘Let’s hope so! Unless you feel like taking the service yourself,’ said

Norman sarcastically. He was irritated at Edwin taking what seemed to him
like an unfair advantage, though where the advantage lay he could hardly
have said.
 

The church was still decorated for Christmas, with stiff-looking

poinsettias and sprigs of holly on the window ledges, but an expensive
florist’s arrangement of white chrysanthemums had been placed at the side
of the altar, as if to emphasize the dual purpose of the church’s present
function.

Memorial services were not much in Edwin’s line, particularly not when

they commemorated persons with whom he had little or nothing in
common. It wasn’t as if they were like funerals, of which he had
experienced his fair share—father, mother, wife and various in-law
relatives. And it wasn’t as if this was a proper Requiem Mass, more like a
social gathering, with the smartly dressed women in hats and fur coats and
the dark-suited men in good, heavy overcoats. They seemed very far
removed from the little huddle of mourners Edwin associated with funerals
he had attended. Of course the time of mourning had passed and this service
was being held to celebrate the deceased’s life and achievements, so there
was a difference. Another noticeable difference was the warmth of the
church on this January day. Reassuring wafts of hot air circulated round
Edwin’s feet and he noticed the woman in front of him loosening the collar
of her fur coat.

The hymns chosen were ‘He who would valiant be’, and another with

modern words that might seem to have been specially written so as not to
offend the most militant agnostic or atheist, set to a tune that nobody
seemed to know. There was a reading from Ecclesiastes and a short eulogy,
delivered by a younger colleague of the deceased, quietly triumphant in the
prime of life. Edwin had seen this person once or twice at the office, so he
felt that his presence at the service was justified. After all, he was
representing Norman, Letty and Marcia, and that was entirely fitting.

instead of going out through the church door, seemed to be slipping into a
half open side door into a kind of vestry. Not everyone was doing this, so it
looked as if those who did were in some way favoured and Edwin soon saw
why this was. Inside the vestry he glimpsed a table on which were ranged
glasses of a drink that looked like sherry (it would hardly have been whisky,
he felt). It was easy for Edwin to insinuate himself among the slippers-in
and nobody questioned him; he looked very much the kind of person who
had the right to be there, tall, grey and sombre.

Taking a glass of sherry—there was a choice of medium or dry, sweet

evidently not having been considered appropriate to the occasion—Edwin
looked around him, storing up impressions to tell them back in the office.
His own observations took in the usual paraphernalia of the Anglican
church that made this vestry much like any other of his experience—flower
vases and candlesticks, an untidy pile of hymn books with the covers torn
and no doubt pages missing inside, and a discarded crucifix of elaborate
design, probably condemned by the brass ladies as impossible to clean. A
crisp-looking terylene surplice was suspended from a hook on a cleaner’s
wire hanger and there were red cassocks and a few dusty old black ones
hanging on a rail. But these details would probably not interest Norman,
Letty and Marcia. They would want to know who was at the service and
how they were behaving, what they were saying and doing.

‘Well, at least we’ve given him some kind of a send-off,’ said an elderly

man at Edwin’s side, ‘and I think he’d like to think of us here drinking
sherry.’ He put down his empty glass and took another.

‘People always say that,’ said a woman who had joined them. ‘And it’s

certainly convenient to suppose that anything we do is what they would
have liked. But Matthew never entered a church in his life, so perhaps the
drinking would be all he’d approve of.’

‘I expect he was baptized and attended church when he was young,’

Edwin observed, but the others moved away from him, making him feel
that he had gone too far, not only by this observation but by attending the
service at all. Yet he was undeniably a member of the staff, even if only a
humble one, and had as much right as anyone to be paying his tribute to a
man he had never known personally.

Edwin drained his glass and put it down carefully on the table. He

noticed that it had been covered with a white cloth and wondered idly if it

was of ecclesiastical significance. He decided not to help himself to another
glass although he could easily have done so. It might not be fitting. Also a
thing like that ‘might get back’—you never knew.

Now the problem of lunch presented itself. Edwin had a sandwich in the

office but he was not quite ready to face the others, so decided to go to a
coffee house in Southampton Row, where he sat brooding in a curtained
alcove, drinking strong Brazilian coffee.

A pair of lovers sat opposite him but he did not notice them He was

thinking about his own funeral—he would hardly rate a ‘Memorial
Service’—a proper Requiem, of course, with orange candles and incense
and all the proper ceremonial details. He wondered if Father G. would
outlive him and what hymns he would choose … A clock struck two and he
realized that he ought to be getting back.
 

Norman looked up sourly as Edwin entered the room. Something had

apparently ‘come up’ and Norman was having to deal with it.

staying out three hours,’ Norman commented.

‘Two hours, twelve minutes,’ said Edwin, consulting his watch. ‘You

could have come too if you’d wanted to.’

‘Was it a beautiful service?’ Letty asked. As an infrequent churchgoer

she had the impression that services of this type were always beautiful.

‘I wouldn’t say that exactly,’ said Edwin, hanging up his overcoat on a

peg.

go to his table. ‘What’ve you been up to?’ she asked, but did not expect an
answer.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Twelve

THE ORGANIZATION WHERE Letty and Marcia worked regarded it as a duty

to provide some kind of a retirement party for them, when the time came for
them to give up working. Their status as ageing unskilled women did not
entitle them to an evening party, but it was felt that a lunchtime gathering,
leading only to more than usual drowsiness in the afternoon, would be
entirely appropriate. The other advantage of a lunchtime party was that only
medium Cyprus sherry need be provided, whereas the evening called for
more exotic and expensive drinks, wines and even the occasional carefully
concealed bottle of whisky or gin—‘the hard stuff, as Norman called it, in
his bitterness at being denied access to it. Also at lunchtime sandwiches
could be eaten, so that there was no need to have lunch and it was felt by
some that at a time like this it was ‘better’ to be eating - it gave one
something to do.

Retirement was a serious business, to be regarded with respect, though

the idea of it was incomprehensible to most of the staff. It was a condition
that must be studied and prepared for, certainly—‘researched’ they would
have said—indeed it had already been the subject of a seminar, though the
conclusions reached and the recommendations drawn up had no real
bearing on the retirement of Letty and Marcia, which seemed as inevitable
as the falling of the leaves in autumn, for which no kind of preparation
needed to be made. If the two women feared that the coming of this date
might give some clue to their ages, it was not an occasion for
embarrassment because nobody else had been in the least interested, both of
them having long ago reached ages beyond any kind of speculation. Each
would be given a small golden handshake, but the state would provide for
their basic needs which could not be all that great. Elderly women did not
need much to eat, warmth was more necessary than food, and people like
Letty and Marcia probably had either private means or savings, a nest-egg
in the post office or a building society. It was comforting to think on these
lines, and even if they had nothing extra, the social services were so much
better now, there was no need for anyone to starve or freeze. And if
governments failed in their duty there were always the media—continual
goadings on television programmes, upsetting articles in the Sunday papers

and disturbing pictures in the colour supplements. There was no need to
worry about Miss Crowe and Miss Ivory.

The (acting) deputy assistant director, who had been commanded to make

the presentation speech, wasn’t quite sure what it was that Miss Crowe and
Miss Ivory did or had done during their working lives. The activities of
their department seemed to be shrouded in mystery—something to do with
records or filing, it was thought, nobody knew for certain, but it was
evidently ‘women’s work’, the kind of thing that could easily be replaced
by a computer. The most significant thing about it was that nobody was
replacing them, indeed the whole department was being phased out and
only being kept on until the men working in it reached retirement age. Yet
under the influence of a quick swig of sherry, even this unpromising
material could be used to good effect.

The deputy assistant director stepped into the middle of the room and

began to speak.

‘The point about Miss Crowe and Miss Ivory, whom we are met together

to honour today, is that nobody knows exactly, or has ever known exactly,
what it is that they do,’ he declared boldly. ‘They have been—they are—the
kind of people who work quietly and secretly, doing good by stealth, as it
were. Good, do I hear you ask? Yes, good, I repeat, and good I mean. In
these days of industrial unrest it is people like Miss Ivory and Miss
Crowe’—the names seemed to have got reversed, but presumably it didn’t
matter—‘who are an example to us all. We shall miss them very much, so
much so that nobody has been found to replace them, but we would be the
last to deny them the rewards of a well-earned retirement. It gives me much
pleasure on behalf of the company and staff to present each of these ladies
with a small token of our appreciation of their long and devoted service,
which carries with it our best wishes for their future.’

Letty and Marcia then came forward, each to receive an envelope

containing a cheque and a suitably inscribed card, the presenter
remembered a luncheon engagement and slipped away, glasses were refilled
and a buzz of talk broke out Conversation had to be made and it did not
come very easily once the obvious topics had been exhausted. As the party
went on, people divided most easily into everyday working groups. It was
the most natural thing then for Letty and Marcia to find themselves with
Edwin and Norman, and for the latter to make some comment on the speech

and to suggest that from what had been said he supposed they would spend
their retirement setting the motor industry to rights.

Marcia was glad to be with people she knew. When she met other

members of the staff she was conscious of her breastlessness, feeling that
they must sense her imperfection, her incompleteness. Yet on the other hand
she liked to talk about herself, to bring the conversation round to hospitals
and surgeons, to pronounce in a lowered, reverent tone the name of Mr
Strong. She could even, if it came to that, take some pleasure in saying ‘my
mastectomy—it was the word ‘breast’ and the idea of it that upset her. None
of the speeches and conversations dealing with her retirement had contained
any references to breast (hope springing eternal in the human) or bosom
(sentiments to which every b. returns an echo), as they might well have
done had the deputy assistant director’s speech been more literary.

It was of course generally known that Miss Ivory had undergone a

serious operation, but the dress she was wearing today—a rather bright
hyacinth blue courtelle—was several sizes too big for her skinny figure, so
that very little of her shape was visible. People at the party who did not
know her were fascinated by her strange appearance, that dyed hair and the
peering beady eyes, and she might have provided unusual entertainment if
one had had the courage to attempt a conversation with her. But one never
did have quite that sort of courage when it came to the point. Ageing,
slightly mad and on the threshold of retirement, it was an uneasy
combination and it was no wonder that people shied away from her or made
only the most perfunctory remarks. It was difficult to imagine what her
retirement would be like—impossible and rather gruesome to speculate on
it.

Letty, by contrast, was boringly straightforward. Even her rather nice

green-patterned jersey suit and her newly set mousy hair were perfectly in
character. She had already been classified as a typical English spinster
about to retire to a cottage in the country, where she would be joining with
others like her to engage in church activities, attending meetings of the
Women’s Institute, and doing gardening and needlework. People at the
party therefore talked to her about all these things and Letty’s natural
modesty and politeness prevented her from telling them that she was no
longer going to share a country cottage with a friend but would probably be
spending the rest of her life in London. She knew that she was not a very
interesting person, so she did not go into too much boring detail with the

young people who enquired graciously about her future plans. Even Eulalia,
the black junior, gave her an unexpectedly radiant smile. Another, whose
thick, smooth straight neck rose up like a column of alabaster, the kind of
girl it was impossible to imagine engaging in any of the mundane office
jobs like typing or filing, suggested brightly that she’d be able to watch the
telly in the afternoons, and Letty began to realize that things like this were,
after all, one of the chief joys of retirement. She could not admit to this kind
girl that she hadn’t even got a television set.
 

Inevitably everyone had to get back to work and eventually Letty and

Marcia found themselves in their own office with Edwin and Norman.

The two men seemed pleased with themselves. In their time they had

attended a good many retirement parties and this one apparently came up to
the standard which was measured by the number of times the sherry bottle
went round.

‘Of course sherry’s a bit livery midday,’ said Norman, ‘but it’s better than

nothing. It does have its effect.’ He swayed slightly in a comic manner.

‘I find two glasses quite enough,’ said Letty, ‘and I think my glass must

have been refilled when I wasn’t looking because I feel quite…’ She didn’t
really know how she felt or how to describe it; she was certainly not drunk
but neither tiddly nor tipsy seemed suitably dignified.

Marcia, who had taken nothing but a small glass of orange juice, gave a

tight-lipped smile.

‘At least you won’t have a drinking problem when you retire,’ Norman

teased.

‘I hate the stuff,’ she declared.
Letty found herself thinking about the lonely evenings ahead of her in

Mrs Pope’s silent house. Perhaps it would be as well not to have a bottle of
sherry in her room … She had got on quite well with Mrs Pope so far, when
she was out all day, but would it be the same when she retired? Obviously
the arrangement could only be temporary. One did not relish the idea of
spending the rest of one’s life in a north-west London suburb. There was no
reason why she shouldn’t find a room in a village somewhere near where
Marjorie and her husband would be living—Marjorie had hinted in her last
letter that she would welcome something of the kind, she didn’t want to lose
touch after all these years … Or she might go back to the west of England

where she was born. She told herself, dutifully assuming the suggested
attitude towards retirement, that life was still full of possibilities.

in her shopping bag. There was not much to be taken away—a pair of light
slippers for the days when she needed to change her shoes, a box of paper
handkerchiefs, writing paper and envelopes, a packet of indigestion tablets.
Following Letty’s example, Marcia began to do the same, muttering as she
did so and stuffing the contents into a large carrier bag. Letty knew that
Marcia’s drawer was very full although she had never seen inside it
properly, only caught glimpses of things bulging out when Marcia opened
it. She knew that there was a pair of exercise sandals in which Marcia used
to clump around in the days when she had first bought them, but she was
surprised to see her take out several tins of food—meat, beans and soups.

‘Quite a gourmet feast you’ve got there,’ Norman remarked. ‘If only

we’d known.’

Marcia smiled but said nothing. Norman seemed to be able to get away

with these teasing comments, Letty thought. She had turned aside, not
wanting to see what Marcia was taking out of the drawer. It seemed an
intrusion into Marcia’s private life, something it was better not to know
about.

‘It will seem funny without you both,’ said Edwin awkwardly.
He did not really know what to say now that it had come to the point.

None of them knew, for it was the kind of occasion that seemed to demand
something more than the usual goodbye or goodnight of the end of an
ordinary working day. Perhaps they should have given the women a present
of some kind—but what? He and Norman had discussed it, but decided in
the end that it was altogether too difficult ‘They wouldn’t expect it—it
would only embarrass them,’ they had concluded, ‘and it’s not as if we were
never going to see them again.’ In the circumstances it was much easier to
assume this but without going into too much detail about it. For of course
they would all meet again—Letty and Marcia would revisit the office, ‘pop
in’ some time. There might even be meetings outside the office—a kind of
get-together for lunch or ‘something’… even if it was beyond imagining
what that something might be, at least it made it easier for them all to go on
their separate ways assuming a vague future together.

OceanofPDF.com

Thirteen

‘YOU’LL BE RETIRING,’ Janice Brabner had said. ‘Have you thought at all

what you’re going to do?’

‘Do?’ Marcia stared at her blankly. ‘What do you mean?’
Well…’ Janice faltered but, as she afterwards recounted, pressed on

regardless. ‘You’ll have a good deal of time on your hands, won’t you—
time that you gave to your job?’ Marcia had never revealed what exactly
her job was but Janice guessed that it hadn’t been particularly exciting.
After all, what kind of job could somebody like Marcia do? She wished she
wouldn’t keep staring at her in that unnerving way, as if she had no idea
what was meant by Janice asking what she was going to do when she
retired.

‘A woman can always find plenty to occupy her time,’ Marcia said at

last. ‘It isn’t like a man retiring, you know. I have my house to see to.’

‘Yes, of course.’ And it could do with seeing to, Janice thought. But was

Marcia capable of doing what was necessary? Physically she seemed able to
do housework so that there was no question of getting a home help for her,
even if one could be found, but keeping a house in order needed a certain
attitude of mind and it was here that Marcia seemed to be lacking. Did she
not notice the dust or care about it? Perhaps she needed new spectacles—a
word here might be in order … Janice sighed, as she so often did when
considering Marcia. There seemed to be nothing she could do at the
moment beyond keeping an eye on her and calling in occasionally to see
how she was coping.

The first Monday morning Marcia woke at the usual time and began

getting up and preparing to leave the house before she remembered that it
was the first day of her retirement. ‘Roll on,’ people used to say in those
days when it had seemed an impossibly remote event, as unlikely as
winning the pools or having your number come up on Ernie. Well, now it
had rolled on, it was here. A woman can always find plenty to occupy her
time.

Marcia took down the tray she had used for her early morning tea, but

she left the cup behind on the dressing table where it would remain for
some days, the dregs of milky tea eventually separating into sourness. As

she was not going to the office, she changed the dress she had put on for her
old Saturday morning skirt and a crumpled blouse which needed ironing,
but there was nobody to notice it or to criticize and no doubt the warmth of
her body would soon press out the creases. Downstairs at the sink she was
about to wash up yesterday’s dishes when she was diverted by the sight of a
plastic bag lying on the kitchen table. How had that got there and what had
been in it? So many things seemed to come in plastic bags now that it was
difficult to keep track of them. The main thing was not to throw it away
carelessly, better still to put it away in a safe place, because there was a note
printed on it which read To avoid danger of suffocation keep this wrapper
away from babies and children’. They could have said from middle-aged
and elderly persons too, who might well have an irresistible urge to
suffocate themselves. So Marcia took the bag upstairs into what had been
the spare bedroom where she kept things like cardboard boxes, brown paper
and string, and stuffed it into a drawer already bulging with other plastic
bags, conscientiously kept away from babies and children. It was a very
long time since any such had entered the house, children not for many
years, babies perhaps never.

Marcia spent a long time in the room, tidying and rearranging its

contents. All the plastic bags needed to be taken out of the drawer and
sorted into their different shapes and sizes, classified as it were. It was
something she had been meaning to do for such a long time but somehow
she had never seemed to have a moment. Now, the first day of her
retirement, she had eternity stretching before her. It amused her to
remember Janice Brabner asking in that rather mincing, refined voice of
hers, ‘Have you thought at all what you’re going to do?’

Marcia did wonder for a moment what Edwin and Norman would be doing,
but of course it would be just what they always did, eating whatever lunch
they had brought with them, Edwin with his finicky things and Norman
making himself coffee from the big shared tin she had left behind. Then
Edwin visiting some church to see what was going on there and Norman
perhaps strolling as far as the British Museum to sit in front of the
mummified animals. Or perhaps he wouldn’t get any further than the library
and a look at the papers, and thinking of the library reminded her that she
still hadn’t done anything about that milk bottle which Letty had foisted on

her. If the worst came to the worst she could always leave it at the library,
or any library, as she wouldn’t be going to that particular one any more…

had anything to eat and then only a cup of tea and the remains of one of the
bits of bread she found in the bread bin. She did not notice the greenish
mould fringing the crust, but she wasn’t hungry anyway and only ate half
the slice, putting the remainder back for future consumption. Of course she
would go out shopping some time, perhaps tomorrow, but not today even
though the Indian shop would still be open. There were plenty of bits and
pieces to finish up and she had never been a big eater.

woke up at the usual time, in fact earlier because Mrs Pope was up at six
o’clock and clattering out of the house, no doubt to observe some obscure
saint’s day with a service at the church. Letty would probably have woken
up anyway, so strong was the habit of forty years. And older people are said
to wake up earlier, she thought, so perhaps the habit would never be broken.

in a genuine spirit of enquiry, others with ghoulish curiosity. And naturally
she had made the usual answers—how nice it would be not to have to go to
the office—how she would now have time to do all those things she had
always wanted to do (these ‘things’ were unspecified)—and read all the
books she had never had time to read before—Middlemarch and War and
Peace, perhaps even Dr Zhivago. And really, when it came to retiring, she
could have said, as Marcia had, ‘A woman can always find plenty to occupy
her time’—that was the great thing, being a woman. It was men one felt
sorry for in retirement Of course in one respect she was different from
Marcia, she had no house to see to, only this room in another woman’s
house, and there was a limit to what one could do in it or to it. All the more
opportunity to devote herself to some serious reading, and that would mean
a visit to the library. It would be good to get out on this first morning, to
have an object for a walk.

By the time Letty had decided to go down to the kitchen to get her

breakfast, Mrs Pope had come back from church. She was very brisk and
virtuous. It was a chilly morning but the walk had done her good. There had
been three people at the early service, five if one counted the priest and his
server. Letty did not know what comment to make, for she had always
understood from Edwin that these very early services were rather old-

fashioned now and that an evening Mass was the thing. Still, the thought of
Edwin gave her a conversational opening and she was able to ask Mrs Pope
about his connection with her church.

‘Oh, he’s not a regular member of our congregation—he only comes if

there’s something special going on,’ Mrs Pope said, fiercely scraping a
piece of burnt toast.

‘We’re not nearly high enough for him—no incense, you see.’
‘No incense?’ Again Letty was at a loss.
‘It doesn’t agree with everyone, you know. If you’re at all bronchial …

Do you not get dressed for breakfast, Miss Crowe?’

housecoat, felt that she was being criticized. ‘It’s the first day of my
retirement,’ she explained, feebly, she felt, as if that was enough
justification.

‘But I think you will find it better not to allow yourself to get slack. So

many people go to pieces in retirement—I’ve seen it so often. A man may
be in a responsible position, then he retires…’

‘But I am a woman and I was not at all in a responsible position,’ Letty

reminded her. ‘And this morning I’m going to the library—I shall at last
have time to do some serious reading.’

‘Oh, reading.. ,’ Mrs Pope did not seem to have much use for reading,

and the conversation, if it had been that, languished. Mrs Pope had gone to
church fasting and now prepared to enjoy her bacon and scraped toast,
while Letty went back to her room with a boiled egg and two slices of
crispbread.

Later she dressed, more carefully than Marcia had done on her first day

of retirement. It was an opportunity to wear a new tweed suit which had
been considered too good for the office, and to spend more time than usual
in choosing the jumper and scarf to go with it. So far her day was being
different, but when it came to the next part of it she realized that she would
be going to the library near the office where she had a reader’s ticket, and
that the journey to it would be the one she had taken every day. But now,
two hours later, the train was less crowded and when she got out at her
station people let themselves be carried up on the escalator rather than
walking up.

To reach the library she had to pass the office, and naturally she glanced

up at the grey monolithic building and wondered what Edwin and Norman

were doing up there on the third floor. It was not too difficult to picture
them at coffee time, and at least there would be nobody installed in her and
Marcia’s places, doing their work, since nobody was to replace them. It
seemed to Letty that what cannot now be justified has perhaps never
existed, and it gave her the feeling that she and Marcia had been swept
away as if they had never been. With this sensation of nothingness she
entered the library. The young male assistant with the shoulder-length
golden hair was still in his place, so that at least was reassuring. Confidently
she went over to the sociology shelves, determined to begin on her serious
reading. The idea and the name ‘social studies’ had attracted her and she
was eager to find out what it was all about.
 

‘I wonder what the girls are doing now,’ said Norman.
‘The girls?’ Of course Edwin knew perfectly well whom he meant but he

was not used to talking or thinking of Letty and Marcia in this way.

‘A nice lie-in, then breakfast in bed, elevenses in town and a wander

round the shops—lunch in Dickins & Jones, perhaps, or D. H. Evans. Then
back home well before the rush hour, then I…’ Norman’s imagination failed
at this point and Edwin was not capable of filling in the gaps.

‘That’s quite likely for Letty,’ he said ‘but I can’t see Marcia spending

her day like that.’

‘No, she wouldn’t want to go round the shops,’ said Norman

thoughtfully. ‘Letty was the one who used to go to Oxford Street in the
lunch hour—didn’t even mind waiting for a bus.’

‘No—we sometimes used to meet in the queue when I was going to All

Saints, Margaret Street.’

‘You never persuaded her to join you,’ said Norman sardonically.
Edwin seemed embarrassed, almost as if he had tried and failed, but

Norman did not press the point. ‘It seems funny without them,’ he said.

‘Perhaps they’ll pop in some time,’ Edwin suggested.
‘Yes, they did say they’d pop in.’
‘Not that I can really imagine them doing that—they’d have to come up

in the lift, wouldn’t they, and that’s not quite the same.’

‘Not as if we were on the ground floor and could be seen from the street,’

said Norman, almost wistfully.

‘At least we’ve got a bit more room now,’ Edwin began to arrange his

lunch on what had been Letty’s table, spreading out slices of bread, a tub of

polyunsaturated margarine, cheese and tomatoes. Taking out a packet of
jelly babies he had a sudden and vivid picture of Letty, but why this should
have materialized at this particular moment and with such intensity he could
not have said. Surely nothing to do with the jelly babies?
 

working day, Letty felt. Perhaps it had been the early waking and the longer
than usual evening, beginning with a period between tea and supper which
she did not remember as having existed before. She had made a determined
effort to read one of the books she had brought from the library, but it had
been heavy going.

Obviously it would take some time to acquire the knack of serious

reading and perhaps it would be better to go on with it in the morning when
she was feeling fresher.

Marcia’s day seemed to have gone in a flash, though speed was not a

concept in her life. She had no sense of time passing and was surprised
when darkness came. Her most conscious thought was irritation at the idea
that the do-gooding social worker might call, so she did not put the light on
but sat in darkness, listening to the mindless chatter and atavistic noise of
Radio 1 turned down low. She had no memory of having experienced the
first day of her retirement.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Fourteen

LETTY HAD BEEN retired for a week and had drawn the first payment of her

pension before she found herself coming to the conclusion that sociology
was not quite all that she had hoped for. Perhaps she had chosen the wrong
books, for surely ‘social studies’ must be more interesting than this? She
had imagined herself revelling and wallowing—perhaps these words were
too violent to describe what she had imagined—in her chosen subject, not
frozen with boredom, baffled and bogged down by incomprehensible
jargon, continually looking at her watch to see if it could be time to make a
cup of coffee. It must be that she was too old to learn anything new and that
her brain had become atrophied Had she indeed ever had a brain? Going
back over her past life, she found it difficult to remember anything she had
ever done that required brain work, certainly not the job from which she
had just retired. She seemed to be totally unfitted for academic work, yet
people older than she was were taking courses at the Open University. Mrs
Pope knew a woman in her seventies who was in her second year. But Mrs
Pope, it seemed, always knew somebody who was doing something wholly
admirable, and as time went on Letty found herself avoiding her and
choosing to cook her meals when she knew that Mrs Pope would not be
using the kitchen.

She would crouch in her room listening for sounds, trying to detect the

smell of cooking, though this was often difficult as Mrs Pope seldom had
anything fried except bacon. Letty would find herself pouring a second
glass of sherry while she waited for Mrs Pope to leave the kitchen. But she
still kept to her rules—one did not drink sherry before the evening, just as
one did not read a novel in the morning, this last being a left-over dictum of
a headmistress of forty years ago.

When the sociology books were due to be returned to the library, Letty

took them back, feeling guilty and dissatisfied. But you were supposed to
enjoy retirement, at least the first weeks of it. Have a good rest, do all those
things you’ve always wanted to do, people had said. Why shouldn’t she just
read novels and listen to the radio and knit and think about her clothes? She
wondered what Marcia was doing, how she was getting on. It was a pity she

wasn’t on the telephone for it would have been so much easier to have a
chat or arrange a meeting that way.

though it was not easy to imagine the kind of travelling she would do, alone
on a package tour now that Marjorie was so much occupied with David
Lydell. Listening to a phone-in programme on the radio she had heard a
question about holidays for people on their own, and the answer conjuring
up a picture of a crowd of congenial middle-aged and elderly people of both
sexes with interests in common—botany and archaeology or even ‘wine’
(as opposed to solitary drinking). In the end her courage failed her and she
got no further than studying the brochure, like Norman diving for buried
treasure in Greece. Her attempts at ‘travel’ ended in a weekend visit to a
distant cousin living in the West Country town where she had been born.

The cousin, a woman of about Letty’s age, was friendly and welcoming

and they sat cosily knitting together in the evenings. Letty had long since
accustomed herself to being without a man in her life and, as a result of this
lack, to having no children. The cousin was a widow and did not make
Letty feel in any way inadequate. All the same, it was when she was staying
here that Letty began to realize another way in which she had failed. It was
not something that had previously occurred to her, but looking through the
cousin’s photograph album she saw clearly what it was—she had no
grandchildren.’ That was it. How could she ever have imagined such a
thing, all those years ago?

Returning from her weekend, she thought again of getting in touch with

Marcia. She decided to write her a note, suggesting that they might meet for
lunch or tea in town. It was perhaps a little early to compare notes about
their retirement but at least they could talk about old times at the office.
 

Janice’s next visit to Marcia was some weeks after her retirement—time

for her to have settled down and to have worked out some kind of a pattern
for her days, Janice thought. No doubt she missed the companionship of the
office—‘they’, the retired ones, often mentioned that—and the routine that
even a boring occupation provides. Still, as Marcia herself had said, a
woman can always find plenty to occupy her time and she had her house to
see to. She had a garden, too, and that could have done with a bit of
attention, Janice considered, as she waited on the doorstep and

contemplated the dusty laurels whose overgrown foliage almost concealed
the downstairs front window.

When Marcia reluctantly opened the door to admit her, Janice was

startled by the change in her appearance. It was some seconds before she
realized what the difference was. Since her retirement, Marcia had not
bothered to touch up the roots of her hair which now stood out snowy white
against the stiff, dark brown of the rest. Perhaps she was deliberately letting
the dye grow out so that she might achieve the soft white curls of the
majority of the pensioners visited by Janice, though, knowing Marcia, this
seemed doubtful. She really ought to have the dyed part cut out, creating a
short neat style of the white part, as many elderly people did. Janice
wondered if she could tactfully convey the information about reduced
charges for pensioners at some of the local hairdressers. But why bother to
be all that tactful? You had to be a bit forthright with people like Marcia,
and there was no time like the present.

‘I suppose you do know that you can get your hair done at a reduced

price at Marietta’s if you go between nine and twelve on Mondays and
Tuesdays?’ Janice said, in her sweetest manner. So many of them don’t
know what they’re entitled to, how people are falling over backwards to
help them, was the social workers’ wail.

‘I got a leaflet from the library telling me all that sort of thing,’ said

Marcia impatiently, and Janice felt that she was being dismissed.

‘Don’t forget that you can always come along to the Centre,’ she said,

going out of the front door. ‘We get quite a lot of retired people there and
they seem to like to have a chat with others in the same boat.’ Perhaps that
hadn’t been the happiest way of putting it, and really it was rather comic,
the picture of all these retired people in some kind of boat Sometimes you
almost felt it wouldn’t be a bad idea to shove them off all together
somewhere. Tony, Janice’s husband, used to joke about it but of course old
people were no joking matter, as she kept reminding herself. And Marcia
hadn’t smiled at the idea of the boat, hadn’t even replied to the suggestion
that she might go along to the Centre. Janice sighed.

Marcia watched her getting into her car and driving away. Young people

couldn’t walk a step these days, she thought And what was all that about
hairdressers? Janice’s own hair was streaked all different colours, so she
couldn’t talk. Marcia didn’t like going to the hairdresser, anyway, she
hadn’t been for years. Not like Letty, who went every week. No doubt she

would be taking advantage of the reduced charges for pensioners … Marcia
stood in the hall, a feeling of dissatisfaction creeping over her at the idea of
Letty. It was that business of the milk bottle, chiefly, but there was
something else too. Letty had sent her a postcard, suggesting that they
might meet some time—as if she would want to do that! There was no
knowing what Letty might foist on her, given the chance. She was certainly
going to ignore the card.
 

Letty had expected some kind of an answer from Marcia to her

suggestion of a meeting, but she was not altogether surprised when none
came. One could very quickly grow away from people and that life at the
office, where they had never been close friends, now seemed utterly remote.
Instead, though it was in no way comparable, she received a letter from
Marjorie, announcing that she was coming to London to do some shopping
and asking Letty to have lunch with her.

They met in the restaurant of an Oxford Street store, rather as Norman

had pictured Letty lunching on her first day of retirement. It appeared that
Marjorie had come to London to buy clothes for her trousseau, which
seemed to Letty not only an old-fashioned idea but an inappropriate one for
a woman in her sixties. Yet Marjorie had always been of a romantic nature,
getting the most out of unpromising circumstances. Even Marcia, Letty
recalled, had an ‘interest’ in the surgeon who had performed her operation,
so that a visit to hospital was something to be looked forward to. Only
Letty, it seemed, was without romance in her life, and the prospect of
Marjorie’s marriage was something beyond her imagining. If she had now
got over any disappointment she may have felt at the cancellation of her
retirement plans, she was still not able to enter fully into Marjorie’s rapture.
But she could offer suggestions about clothes and perhaps that was
something.

‘I shall be wearing a blue crêpe dress,’ Marjorie was saying, ‘and I

thought of getting a small, matching hat.’

‘You could wear a wide-brimmed hat,’ Letty said. A woman of their age

could do with a few becoming shadows cast on the face, she thought.

‘Oh, do you think so? Yes, I suppose it’s not like Royalty—people don’t

necessarily expect to see one’s face - or want to,’ Marjorie laughed. ‘And of
course there won’t be crowds of people—it’s going to be very quiet.’

‘Yes, I suppose so.’ The weddings of older people usually were.

‘You don’t mind, do you, Letty?’
‘Mind?’ Letty was surprised at the question.
‘At not being asked to be a bridesmaid, I mean.’
‘Of course not! I never thought of it.’ Older women attending each other

in this way seemed highly unsuitable and she was surprised that Marjorie
had suggested it. In any case, Letty had been a bridesmaid at Marjorie’s first
wedding. She wondered if Marjorie had forgotten this but was too tactful to
remind her of it.

‘And we shan’t even be having any guests—just my brother to give me

away and a friend of David’s, a fellow priest, as best man.’

‘Has he any relations?’
‘Just his mother—he’s an only child.’
‘But his mother won’t be at the wedding?’
Marjorie smiled. ‘Well, she’s in her ninetieth year, so I would hardly

expect it. She is living in a religious community—the nuns have taken her
in.’

‘To end her days? It seems a good arrangement.’ Letty saw that

churchgoing might have some unexpected advantages and wondered if Mrs
Pope had arranged to be taken in by nuns one day.

‘And how are things with you, Letty?’ said Marjorie, when there was a

pause in the conversation. ‘You like your new arrangement—the room in
NW6. Hampstead, is it?’

‘Well, more West Hampstead,’ Letty admitted. If it had been genuine

Hampstead she would have said so.

‘I still think you might have been happier at Holmhurst in the village, as I

suggested. I could still put your name down, you know. There’s sure to be a
vacancy in the near future.’

‘Yes, you said that before—somebody might die—but I suppose that

vacancy has been filled now.’

‘Oh, yes—but somebody else is sure to die—it’s happening all the time,’

said Marjorie brightly.

They had some coffee and Letty said that she thought she would stay

where she was for the time being.

‘Yes, it does seem very satisfactory,’ said Marjorie, who obviously

wanted to find it so. ‘Mrs Pope seems a splendid sort of woman.’

‘Yes, she is wonderful for her age,’ said Letty, repeating what people

always said about her. ‘She’s very active in the parish. I suppose you’ll have

to be that when you’re married.’

‘Oh, I shall enjoy it. To be able to help somebody, don’t you think that’s

the main purpose of life, what everybody…’ Marjorie hesitated and Letty
realized that she did not like to go further, to emphasize the contrast
between her own enviable position, that of being a helpmate to a man, and
Letty’s state of useless retirement.

‘I sometimes think I ought to get another job,’ Letty said, ‘part time,

perhaps.’

unwilling to give up the luxury of having a friend less useful than herself.
‘Enjoy your leisure and all the things you can do now. If only I had time to
do some serious reading, I often think.’

the library, but Marjorie was already on to another subject—a pair of warm
bedroom slippers for her future husband.

Should they go to Austin Reed’s? As they walked out of the restaurant

together, Letty contemplated the ample shape of her friend and wondered
where in all these years she, Letty, had failed.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Fifteen

IT’S NOT THE money,’ Norman was saying. ‘Goodness knows, I don’t

grudge the old dears a lunch.’

Edwin noted that Letty and Marcia, previously ‘the girls’, were now ‘the

old dears’. Neither description seemed entirely suitable, but as he had
nothing better to add he made no comment. ‘We did say we’d keep in
touch,’ he reminded Norman, ‘and they’ve been gone some time now.’

‘Yes, time to’ve settled down—it was best to leave it for a bit. Of course

we could use luncheon vouchers, if we went to the Rendezvous, that is.’

‘Luncheon vouchers? Do you think so? It doesn’t seem very.. ,’ Edwin

hesitated.

‘Gracious, you mean? You don’t imagine it’s going to be a gracious

occasion, do you?’ Norman was at his most sarcastic. ‘That was what I
meant—just the whole idea of it, not the money. I’m quite willing to fork
out 50p for their lunches.’

‘I think you’ll have to fork out a good deal more than 50p,’ said Edwin,

‘though we could use some luncheon vouchers. I’ve got quite a few saved
up and after all they’d never know. You pay at the cash desk at the
Rendezvous, so one of us could do the necessary without them seeing.’

It’s the awkwardness,’ Norman went on. ‘We’ve never had a restaurant

meal with them before. Can you see the four of us sitting at a table?’

‘You’re not suggesting we should have sandwiches in the office? They’d

hardly thank us for that.’

‘But what are we going to talk about, once we’ve asked them how they

are and all that?’

‘Oh, we’ll manage,’ said Edwin, with a confidence he did not altogether

feel, though he was so used to sticky church occasions that a lunch with two
former colleagues should have been well within his powers. And after all, it
had been his idea to invite Letty and Marcia to lunch. His conscience had
been nagging at him and in the end he had written to them—in office time,
of course, as it really counted as ‘work’—extending the invitation. Letty
had replied promptly, saying that she would very much like to see them
again. Marcia’s answer had taken longer to come and her acceptance gave
the impression of conveying a favour, for she was so very busy. Edwin and

Norman wondered what she could be doing that kept her so occupied.
Perhaps she had taken another job, unlikely though this seemed.

‘Anyway, we shall soon know,’ said Edwin, as the time drew near. He

had heard from Mrs Pope at the church (he had gone over for their
dedication festival) that Letty seemed to have settled down well but that she
was inclined to ‘keep herself to herself’, as if this was a bad thing. Nobody
had heard any news of Marcia since her retirement, though Edwin
occasionally passed the end of the road where she lived and had more than
once thought of calling on her unexpectedly. But something, he wasn’t sure
what, had always held him back. The parable of the good Samaritan kept
coming into his mind and making him feel uncomfortable, though it wasn’t
in the least appropriate. There was no question of him ‘passing by on the
other side’ when he didn’t even go anywhere near the house, and for all
they knew, Marcia was perfectly happy.

Of course Edwin did not know that she was, but for some obscure reason

he felt that if anyone was to blame for not having kept in touch it was
Norman.

It had been arranged that Letty and Marcia should come to the office and

that they should all go on to lunch from there. Letty was the first to arrive,
wearing her best tweed suit and carrying a new pair of gloves. ‘So nice not
to have to bother with a shopping bag,’ she said, her eyes taking in not only
Edwin and Norman, who appeared very much the same, but the changes
that had taken place in the room.

‘I see you’ve spread yourselves out a bit,’ she said, noticing that the men

now seemed to occupy all the space that had once accommodated the four
of them Again she experienced the feeling of nothingness, when it was
borne in on her so forcibly that she and Marcia had been phased out in this
way, as if they had never existed. Looking round the room, her eyes lighted
on a spider plant which she had brought one day and not bothered to take
away when she left. It had proliferated; many little offshoots were now
hanging down until they dangled over the radiator. Was there some
significance in this, a proof that she had once existed, that the memory of
her lingered on? At least nature went on, whatever happened to us; she
knew that.

‘Yes, it’s grown, that plant,’ Edwin said. ‘I’ve watered it every week.’
‘You left a bit of yourself behind,’ said Norman, in his chatty way, but

then, as if by mutual consent, they left the subject, each perhaps fearing a

deeper significance. ‘Marcia knows the time we arranged?’ Norman asked
sharply. It’s best to go early to get a table.’

someone at the door now?’

It was Marcia, making something of an entrance because of her strange

appearance.

When she had received the invitation from Edwin she had at first told

herself that it was ‘out of the question’—she could not possibly spare the
time to come up to town for lunch. Then it occurred to her that it would be a
golden opportunity to return the alien milk bottle to Letty, so she wrapped it
in plastic and put it in her shopping bag. Unlike Letty she had brought one
with her, as she intended to go to Sainsbury’s to replenish her supply of
tinned foods.

It took the others a moment or two to recover from the apparition

standing before them. Marcia was thinner than ever and her light-coloured
summer coat hung on her emaciated body. On her feet she wore old fur-
lined sheepskin boots and a pair of much darned stockings, and on her head
an unsuitably jaunty straw hat from which her strangely piebald hair
straggled in elflocks.

Edwin, who was not particularly observant, did realize that she was

wearing an odd assortment of garments but did not think she looked much
different from usual. Norman thought, poor old girl, obviously going round
the bend. Letty, as a clothes-conscious woman, was appalled—that anyone
could get to the stage of caring so little about her appearance, of not even
noticing how she looked, made her profoundly uneasy and almost
conscience-stricken, as if she ought to have done something more about
Marcia in her retirement. But then of course she had suggested a meeting
and Marcia hadn’t answered her letter … And now she was made to feel
ashamed because she felt embarrassed at the idea of sitting in a restaurant
with Marcia.

Luckily the Rendezvous was fairly empty and they found a table in a

secluded corner.

‘This place lives up to its name for once,’ said Norman, making bright

conversation as they studied the menu. ‘It really is a rendezvous for…’ He
did not say ‘friends’, for they were not exactly that, and ‘colleagues’
sounded too formal and slightly ridiculous.

Letty suggested, and the men were grateful to her; but she had not seen it
like this in the days when she used to lunch alone here. It had always
seemed full of solitary people eating lonely meals.

Now, what are we going to eat?’ said Edwin, turning especially to Marcia

who looked most in need of food, or sustenance, one could almost say.

‘You look as if you could do with a square meal,’ said Norman bluntly.

‘What about some soup to start off with and then the roast or chicken?’

middle of the day.’

‘Well, I think the rest of us will want more than that,’ said Edwin

heartily.

‘Yes, it doesn’t seem quite the weather for salads,’ Letty agreed.
‘I should’ve thought you’d be a salad enthusiast,’ said Norman. You’ve

put on a bit of weight, haven’t you.’ His tone was teasing but Letty detected
the hint of malice in it. She knew that he was right, for since her retirement
eating had been one of her main interests and enjoyments. ‘Some elderly
people do enjoy their food,’ Norman went on, hardly improving matters, for
even now Letty did not think of herself as elderly. ‘Others couldn’t care
less.’

‘Now come on, all of you,’ said Edwin, who was conscious of the

hovering waitress. ‘What’s it to be?’

In the end, Letty had the chicken ‘forestière’, Norman the roast pork and

Edwin, whose vegetarianism did not exclude fish, the plaice and chips.
Marcia was not to be ‘tempted’, as Norman put it, and insisted on a small
cheese salad. When it came to drink, the men had lager while Letty was
persuaded to take a glass of white wine. Marcia, of course, had nothing and
made rather a feature of her abstinence, much to the amusement of two
young men at the next table.
 

‘Well now…’ Edwin’s relief at the safe arrival of the food was evident in

his more relaxed manner, for as he had suggested it he regarded himself as
responsible for the success of the enterprise. ‘Everything to your
satisfaction? Wouldn’t you like a roll and butter with your salad?’ he
suggested to Marcia.

‘I never eat bread with my meals,’ she declared.

‘You’ll get so that you can’t eat if you’re not careful,’ Norman

pronounced. ‘Anorexia nervosa, they call it—there was a talk about it on
the radio.’

‘It’s young girls who get anorexia nervosa,’ said Marcia, correcting him

from her superior medical knowledge. ‘I’ve never been a big eater.’

care about Letty’s food, he thought, amused at himself, but one had to play
the host on this occasion.

‘Thank you, it’s quite delicious,’ said Letty politely.
Vegetables and that,’ said Norman, ‘I suppose that’s what “forestière”

means—things from the forest. Though you wouldn’t really get vegetables
in a forest, would you?’

‘This has mushrooms in it,’ said Letty, ‘and you might certainly find

those in a wood or forest.’

‘But you wouldn’t fancy them,’ said Norman, not out of the forest.’
‘Of course now most mushrooms are cultivated,’ Edwin suggested. ‘I

believe it’s quite a lucrative thing to take up in one’s retirement.’

‘Hardly in a bedsitter,’ said Norman. ‘You and Marcia could go in for it,

though, in your houses, if you’ve got a basement or a shed in the garden.’

Marcia looked up at him suspiciously. ‘My shed is used for quite another

purpose,’ she said.

‘Dark secrets,’ said Norman, but Marcia did not seem to be amused.
‘I don’t think Edwin was suggesting that any of us should go in for

mushroom cultivation,’ said Letty, ‘though I believe people make quite a
success of it.’

‘Do you know of anyone who has gone in for it?’ Edwin asked ‘Oh no,’

said Letty hastily.

That seemed to kill off that particular topic of conversation and there was

a short silence which was broken by Edwin asking what they would like to
eat next, ‘sweet, pudding or dessert, as the Americans say’.

‘Nothing more for me, thank you,’ said Marcia firmly. Having messed

her salad about in an unattractive way, she had left most of it on the side of
her plate.

Letty, remembering Norman’s remark about her weight, decided that she

might as well be hung for a sheep as a lamb and make the most of the meal.
She could have a low-calorie supper tonight. ‘I’d like apple pie and ice
cream,’ she said.

‘Aunt Betsy’s apple pie,’ Norman pointed out. I think I’ll have that too.’
Edwin decided to have caramel pudding and tried to persuade Marcia to

change her mind, but he was unsuccessful.

retirement,’ Norman said, ‘what you’re getting up to.’

That way of putting it added a lighter touch and Letty told them about her

efforts to take up social studies and her ignominious failure to get through
the books.

of thing. You want to get a good rest. After all the work you did here you
deserve it.’

Letty wondered again what that work had been that it had left so little

mark on anybody, and added, ‘I seem to fill my time quite pleasantly.’ She
must never give the slightest hint of loneliness or boredom, the sense of
time hanging heavy.

‘What about that friend of yours—the one who was going to marry the

vicar?’ Edwin asked.

‘Oh, she hasn’t married him yet. I had lunch with her the other day.’
‘I suppose there wouldn’t be any hurry,’ said Edwin, unconscious of any

possibility of misunderstanding, which Norman seized on.

‘I should hope not!’ Norman said. ‘And anyway, marry in haste and

repent at leisure.’

‘There surely wouldn’t be any question of that,’ said Edwin.
‘Well, no,’ Letty agreed. ‘The saying doesn’t really apply to people in

their sixties.’

‘It could apply,’ said Norman, ‘why not, indeed? And I think you told us

that the lady is some years older than her intended.’

‘Did I tell you? I don’t remember that.’ Letty hoped she had not been

uncharitable about her friend.

‘And what have you been doing with yourself)’ Edwin turned to Marcia

with an air of kindly enquiry which hardly deserved the fierceness of her
reply.

‘That’s my business,’ she snapped.
‘Been to the hospital again?’ Norman asked, humouring her. ‘Still under

the doctor, aren’t you?’

Marcia mumbled the name of Mr Strong then, raising her voice, began to

complain about the interfering visits of the social worker.

Letty drained the last drops of her wine with a feeling of regret. It had not

been a very large glass. ‘No social worker has ever visited me,’ she said.

‘You haven’t had a major operation, have you,’ said Marcia, rather too

loudly. The same young men at the next table were again amused.

‘Well, that does say something for the National Health Service and the

after-care,’ said Edwin, ‘that they should keep an eye on the people who’ve
been in hospital. I find that very encouraging.’

‘Don’t tell us you’re planning to have a major operation—the same one

as Marcia had,’ Norman joked.

There was a feeling that he had gone a little too far and Edwin hastily

asked if he should order coffee for all of them.

‘Not for me,’ said Marcia, I really must be going. I have a lot of shopping

to do.’

we get the chance of a chat.’

A curious expression, which only Letty appeared to notice, came over

Marcia’s face. It could almost have been said that she softened. Had she
some feeling for Norman, then? But it was only a momentary change, and
while the others were drinking their coffee she was again impatient to go.

‘I suppose you two ought to be getting back to the grindstone,’ said Letty,

when it seemed that the lunch hour could not be prolonged.

‘If you can call it that,’ said Edwin.
It certainly seems like that sometimes,’ said Norman. ‘Roll on

retirement.’

Letty wondered what he would do in his bed-sitting room when he

retired, and had an impulse to talk to him about it, but of course there was
no time for that kind of thing—work, or what passed for work, had to be
done and the two men had already been out of the office longer than usual.
Still, it was a special occasion, not the kind of thing that happened every
day, and if they had been challenged Edwin and Norman would have been
prepared to defend themselves. But nobody questioned them and they
slipped back to their room unnoticed.
 

Marcia hurried into a side street where there was a small branch of

Sainsbury’s. As she delved into her shopping bag, preparing it to receive the
various tins she intended to buy, her hand came upon the wrapped milk
bottle she had forgotten to return to Letty. What a nuisance! For a moment

she wondered if she could catch the others up but although she hurried back
along the street they had gone too far and there was no sign of them. She
turned away, frustrated.

When she reached Sainsbury’s there was a curiously empty look about

the building and nobody was coming out or going in. Had she forgotten that
it might be early closing? But surely that was Saturday? She went nearer
and peered in at the door. A shocking sight met her eyes—the place was
swept and garnished, almost razed to the ground. It was indeed closed, and
forever, as from a date some weeks ago, and nobody had told her. That
branch of Sainsbury’s was abandoned, it was no more, and she could not
buy the tins to take back for her store cupboard. Unreasonably, she blamed
Edwin and Norman for not having informed her of the fact. There was
nothing for it but to go to the library.

up behind her as she browsed among the biographies.

‘This is yours, I think,’ said Marcia in an accusing tone, thrusting the

wrapped milk bottle towards her.

‘A milk bottle?’ Of course Letty did not remember the occasion and

Marcia had to explain it which she did, loudly, so that other people turned
round and the young blonde-haired library assistant seemed about to make
some kind of protest.

Letty, conscious of tension in the air, accepted the bottle without further

question, and Marcia walked away quickly, feeling that although coming up
to town for lunch had been a waste of time, at least it had had a satisfactory
outcome. Letty, encumbered with the bottle and having no shopping bag
with her, left the library without choosing a book and deposited the bottle in
a crate outside the grocers shop near the office. Marcia could perfectly well
have done this herself, she reflected, but obviously her mind did not work
that way. She preferred not to dwell on how it might work, not to speculate.
Although the encounter had been an upsetting one, almost as disturbing as
seeing that woman slumped on the Underground platform, on that morning
which seemed so long ago now.

When she got home, Letty found Mrs Pope standing in the hall with a

leaflet in her hand.

‘Help the Aged,’ she declared. ‘Good, serviceable clothing is needed for

the aged overseas.’

Letty could think of nothing to say.

must let me know the damage and I’ll settle with you.’

amounted to anything—you must let me do this,’ said Edwin quickly, for he
was sometimes haunted by a picture of Norman in his bedsitter while he
himself occupied a whole house.

‘Well, thanks, chum,’ said Norman awkwardly. ‘It wasn’t so bad, really,

was it.’

‘No, it passed off quite well—better than I expected in some ways, but I

don’t like the look of Marcia’

‘You’re telling me! I should say she was going right round the bend. Still,

she is under the doctor, that’s something. And that social worker goes to see
her.’

‘Yes, rather too often, she said. People do seem to be keeping an eye on

her.’

With this they left the subject, but Edwin did say something to the effect

that they must do it again some time, repeat the lunch invitation to Letty
and Marcia. But it was a comfort to feel that this need not be for some time
to come and that for the moment they had done their duty.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Sixteen

ALTHOUGH HE HAD been dead for some years, Marcia still missed the old

cat, Snowy, and one evening she found herself particularly reminded of him
when she came across one of his dishes in the cupboard under the sink. She
was surprised and a little upset to notice that it still had some dried-up
fragments of Kit-e-Kat adhering to it. Had she then not washed it up after
his death? It would seem not. This might not have surprised an observer,
but Marcia regarded herself as a meticulous housekeeper and she had
always been especially careful with Snowy’s dishes, keeping them, in her
own words, ‘spotlessly clean’.

The finding of the dish gave her a desire to visit the cat’s grave which

was somewhere at the bottom of the garden. When Snowy had died, Mr
Smith, who had lived next door before Nigel and Priscilla came, had dug a
grave and Marcia had laid Snowy in it, his body wrapped in a piece of her
old blue ripple-cloth dressing gown which he used to sleep on. In the midst
of life we are in death, she had thought, feeling the significance of the cloth
and its associations. She had not marked the grave in any way, but she
remembered where it was, for when she walked down the path she would
think, Snowy’s grave; but as time went on she forgot the exact spot and
now, in the season of high summer with the weeds flourishing, she could
not find it at all. That part of the garden was so overgrown that she could
hardly tell where the path and flowerbed met. There was a sprawling bush
of catmint, so the grave must be somewhere near there because Snowy had
loved to roll in the plant, but it was quite indiscernible now, though Marcia
parted the covering of leaves and weeds with her hands. Then it occurred to
her that if she were to dig in that bit of the garden, she would surely come
upon the grave, perhaps uncover a fragment of the blue ripple-doth and then
even find the bones.
 

She went to the shed and fetched a spade, but it was very heavy and if

she had ever wielded it in the past, she was certainly unable to now. After
my operation of course, she thought, trying once more to move the earth
and the thick clotting of weeds—dandelions, thistles and bindweed, plants
with strong matted roots.

It was thus that Priscilla saw her, crouched at the bottom of the garden.

What was she doing, trying to dig with that heavy spade? It was worrying
and upsetting, for the old—especially Miss Ivory—were perpetually
nagging at her conscience. Not only was she a neighbour but also what
Janice Brabner called ‘disadvantaged’ and that, whatever it might mean—
Priscilla wasn’t absolutely sure—was certainly something to worry about.
Of course, Nigel had asked Miss Ivory if she wanted her lawn cut but she
had preferred it the way it was and one couldn’t bully the elderly, their
independence was their last remaining treasure and must be respected. All
the same, one could perhaps offer a little gardening assistance, digging, for
example … but not now, when Priscilla had people coming to dinner, the
avocados to prepare and mayonnaise to make. Perhaps it was a fine enough
evening to have drinks outside on the little patio they had made, but the
view of the neglected garden next door would detract from the elegance of
the occasion, and if Miss Ivory was going to go on digging in this
disturbing way something would have to be done about it. But now, to
Priscilla’s relief, she was going back towards the house, dragging the heavy
spade behind her. One had to cling to the hope that she knew what she was
doing.

Back in the kitchen, Marcia couldn’t remember what she had gone out

for, then the sight of the cat’s dish soaking in the sink reminded her. There
had been no trace of the grave and she was not strong enough to go on
digging for it. She supposed she should have something to eat, but it was a
bother to cook anything and she didn’t want to disturb her supply of tins. So
she just made a cup of tea and put plenty of sugar in it, like the tea at the
hospital. ‘Cup of tea, Miss Ivory? Sugar, dear?’ It gave Marcia a warm
feeling to remember those days and that nice woman—Nancy, they called
her—coming round with the tea.

On that same summer evening Letty was helping Mrs Pope and little

furry Mrs Musson to sort out clothes that had been sent in response to the
appeal for aged refugees.

‘What would you think if somebody gave you this?’ said Mrs Pope,

holding up a bright red mini-skirt People have no idea of what is needed.’

‘Some oriental women are very small,’ said Letty doubtfully. ‘So I

suppose they could wear it Of course one doesn’t really know what they
need—it’s so difficult to visualize…’ The horror of the pictures on Mrs
Pope’s television screen seemed so totally unconnected with the heaps of

unsuitable garments piled on the floor of Mrs Musson’s dining room. Mrs
Pope had refused to receive the clothes in her own house. ‘Nobody would
expect a woman in her eighties…’ she maintained, and of course she had a
point there, even if it was not absolutely clear what it was. Letty suspected
that it might be an old deep-rooted fear of ‘fevers and diseases’ that made
her avoid too close contact with other people’s cast-off clothes. As for
nobody expecting a woman in her eighties to house this jumble of old
garments, that really had nothing to do with it, for Mrs Pope did exactly
those things that she wanted to do which made Letty realize that perhaps
getting older had some advantages, few though these might be.

to enter into the life around her in the north-west London suburb where she
now found herself. This meant, as Edwin had imagined her, taking part in
the activities of the church, sitting rather far back, trying to discover what
church-going held for people, apart from habit and convention, wondering
if it would hold anything for her and if so what form this would take. On a
bitter cold evening in March she joined a little group, hardly more than the
two or three gathered together, shuffling round the Stations of the Cross. It
was the third Wednesday in Lent and there had been snow, now hard and
frozen on the ground. The church was icy. The knees of elderly women bent
creakily at each Station, hands had to grasp the edge of a pew to pull the
body up again. ‘From pain to pain, from woe to woe…’ they recited, but
Letty’s thoughts had been on herself and how she should arrange the rest of
her life. Easter was of course better, with daffodils in the church and people
making an effort with their clothes, but Whitsun was bitterly cold, with a
leaden grey sky and the church heating turned off. Did people then only go
for the light and warmth, the coffee after the Sunday morning service and a
friendly word from the vicar?

Once Edwin had come to the service and Letty had greeted him so

warmly that he must have taken fright, for he had not appeared again. ‘Oh,
he goes round to a lot of churches, as it takes his fancy,’ somebody had
pointed out and of course Letty knew that this was true. Not even Father G.
had his undivided allegiance. ‘He’s a widower,’ Mrs Pope had said, ‘but of
course you know that, working with him. And he took a lot of trouble
finding a room for you when that black man bought the house you were
living in. He must think a lot of you—he spoke very warmly.’ For Mrs Pope

this was going far, but the doubtful prospect of Edwin’s warmth’ did
nothing to warm Letty’s cold heart.

Now at least she felt that she was doing something useful, helping to sort

out and pack clothes for aged refugees. She would have preferred
something a little nearer home, people she could have pictured actually
wearing the clothes, even the scarlet miniskirt, but it was not to be.
Everything at all suitable was just bundled into black plastic bags, while the
less suitable was cast aside for jumble.

Mrs Pope and Mrs Musson had to agree, feeling bound to point out that she
cleaned the room every day anyway.

‘I suppose the clothes could have been sent to the church hall?’ Letty

suggested.

her newly acquired experience of parish affairs, did not yet possess the
particular item of esoteric knowledge that would enable her to solve this
problem. All was never as it might seem to be.

‘What a lovely evening,’ Letty said, looking out of the window. ‘All that

laburnum!’
 

Norman, coming back from work, did not notice the laburnums in full

flower in the square garden, but his heart lifted when he saw that an old car,
which had been dumped there for over a week, appeared to have been
removed. He had got on to the police and the council about that, and the
fine summer evening gave him a sense of achievement, an unusual and
agreeable sensation for him. This gave way to a feeling of restlessness, so
that after he had fried bacon and tomatoes and opened a small tin of his
favourite butter beans, it did not seem quite enough to settle down in his
bedsitter with the Evening Standard and the radio. He felt he wanted to go
out, take a bus somewhere to another part of London, any bus, the first one
that came, if one ever did come, he added sardonically.

A bus did come and he got on it and took a ticket to Clapham Common,

realizing after he had done so that Edwin lived in that direction, but of
course it was most unlikely that he would run into him. He was probably at
some fancy service at one of his many churches.

On top of the bus, Norman settled down for the long ride—it cost enough

anyway, he thought. He sat on the front seat, like a visitor to London,

observing the scene around him, sights passing before his eyes—well-
known landmarks, buildings, the river; then gardens and people in them
doing things to lawns and hedges, and in the roads men engaged in the
rituals concerned with the motor car. When he got to a suitable stopping
place he climbed down from the bus and began to walk aimlessly. Now he
was not at all sure why he had come or what he was going to do when he
got there, wherever ‘there’ might be. Turning off the common he came to a
side road, and just as Edwin had done some time ago he realized that he
was looking at the name of the road where Marcia lived. But unlike Edwin
he did not turn away but began to walk down it, though with no clear plan
in his mind. He certainly did not intend to call on her, he didn’t even
remember the number of her house. But wouldn’t it be easy to pick it out,
he asked himself, wouldn’t it stand out as being different from the smartly
tarted-up suburban semi-detached Victorian villas with their pastel-coloured
front doors, carriage lamps, paved patios and car-ports?

Of course he was right. Marcia’s house, with its flaking green and cream

paint, dusty laurels and dingy curtains, was unmistakable. He stood on the
opposite side of the road and gazed in stunned fascination, very much as he
had gazed at the mummified animals in the British Museum. The house
looked deserted, the curtains half drawn, and although it was a warm
evening there was no crack of window open. The garden, as far as Norman
could see, was totally neglected, but a magnificent old laburnum tree was in
full flower. Its branches drooped over a ramshackle little garden shed, and
as he stood there he saw Marcia coming out of the shed with her arms full
of milk bottles. Her hair was quite white and she was wearing an old cotton
dress patterned with large pink flowers. It was such a strange sight that he
was as if rooted to the spot He had a feeling that she had seen him and for
an instant they seemed to stand staring at each other—again it was like the
British Museum encounter with the mummified animals—giving no sign of
mutual recognition. Then Marcia disappeared from view, presumably going
into the back of her house, he thought.

Norman crossed the road with no clear idea of what he should do. Ought

he to go up to the door and ring the bell, make himself known? His instinct
was to run away, but before he could make up his mind he saw that a young
woman was approaching the house from the opposite direction. She walked
purposefully and when she saw Norman, loitering in front of Marcias
house, she said sharply, ‘Going to see somebody here, are you?’

‘Oh no, just taking a walk,’ said Norman quickly.
‘I’ve been watching you,’ Janice went on. ‘Do you know somebody in

this house?’

‘What’s that got to do with you?’ Norman snapped.
‘We have to be on the lookout—everybody has to. There’ve been some

break-ins round here lately.’

‘Charming, I must say!’ Norman burst out. ‘I shouldn’t think Marcia

Ivory’s got much worth stealing.’

‘You know her then? I’m sorry, but you know how it is—one gets so

suspicious.’ Janice smiled. ‘As a matter of fact I was just going to call on
Miss Ivory—I’m a volunteer social worker.’

‘Keeping an eye on her, are you?’
‘That’s it. I pop in every now and then.’
‘That’s good. Well, cheerio, I must be on my way.’ Norman began to

move off.

‘Aren’t you going in to see her now you’re here?’ Janice asked
‘Oh, I have seen her,’ said Norman, some distance away by now. And of

course, in a sense, that was true. That sight of her with the milk bottles
surely counted as seeing and it had been enough. Once seen never forgotten,
he thought. But at least he would be able to tell Edwin that although
Marcia’s house looked a bit grotty, as the modern expression had it, a brisk
young social worker was keeping an eye on her. It didn’t necessarily follow,
though, that he would tell Edwin about this evening—he didn’t want to
have to explain what he had been doing in that part of London, what sudden
impulse had sent him there. It had been just one of those things and Edwin
probably wouldn’t understand that.

In the house Janice was saying in her brightest tone, ‘I see you had a

visitor just now.’

Marcia stared in the disconcerting way she always met any comment or

question.

‘The gentleman I saw in the road’
‘Oh, him!’ Marcia was scornful. ‘That was just somebody I used to work

with. I don’t want anybody like that coming to see me.’

Janice sighed. Better leave the subject of the gentleman visitor, that funny

little man. ‘And how have you been getting on?’ she asked. ‘Been shopping
today, have you?’
 

OceanofPDF.com

Seventeen

WALKING IN THE wood Letty came upon a sheet of wild garlic. ‘Oh, how

lovely!’ she exclaimed.

‘You should have seen the bluebells,’ Marjorie said, with the

enthusiastically proprietary air of the country dweller. ‘They were
wonderful this year, but they’re nearly over now. You should have come a
fortnight ago when they were at their best.’

You didn’t ask me then, Letty thought, for it was only now, when David

was away on a visit to his mother (in her ninetieth year, Letty recalled), that
Marjorie had suggested that she might like a few days in the country.

‘This is almost like old times, isn’t it?’ Marjorie went on.
‘Yes, in a way,’ Letty agreed, taking note of the ‘almost’, ‘but so much

has happened.’

‘Yes, hasn’t it! Who would ever have thought … that first time I met

David, I really had no idea…’ Marjorie proceeded to recall that first
meeting and the subsequent development of her relationship with the man
she was about to marry. Letty allowed her to ramble on while she looked
around the wood, remembering its autumn carpet of beech leaves and
wondering if it could be the kind of place to lie down in and prepare for
death when life became too much to be endured. Had an old person—a
pensioner, of course—ever been found in such a situation? No doubt it
would be difficult to lie undiscovered for long, for this wood was a
favourite walking place for bustling women with dogs. It was not the kind
of fancy she could indulge with Marjorie or even dwell on too much
herself. Danger lay in that direction.

Marjorie still had the idea that Letty might find a room at Holmhurst and

that evening they were to have supper with Miss Doughty, the resident
warden.

Beth Doughty was a smartly dressed woman in her middle forties, with a

rigidly controlled hairstyle, sharp eyes, and heavy make-up which gave her
a curiously old-fashioned look. She poured generous tots of gin, explaining
that in her job you really needed what she rather oddly described as ‘moral
support’. Letty found herself wondering if she really liked old people, but

perhaps efficiency was more important than liking and she certainly gave
the impression of being highly capable.

‘You thought there might be another vacancy soon.’

‘You wouldn’t like living here, not after living in London,’ Beth

declared. ‘Just look at them now—come to the window.’

Letty stood looking out, glass in hand. Three old ladies—an

uncomfortable number, hinting at awkwardness—were walking slowly
round the garden. There was nothing particularly remarkable about them
except their remoteness from any kind of life. Suddenly Letty felt indignant
with Marjorie for supposing that she would be content with this sort of
existence when she herself was going to marry a handsome clergyman. It
was all of a piece with that life of forty years ago, when Letty had always
trailed behind her friend, but there was no need to follow the same pattern
now. As Beth Doughty topped up her glass, she resolved that a room in
Holmhurst was the last thing she’d come to—better to lie down in the wood
under the beech leaves and bracken and wait quietly for death.

‘This is one of Father Lydell’s favourite dishes,’ said Beth, bringing a

covered casserole to the table. ‘Poulet niçoise—I hope you like it.’

‘Oh, yes,’ Letty murmured, remembering the times she had eaten poulet

niçoise at Marjorie’s house. Had David Lydell gone all round the village
sampling the cooking of the unattached women before deciding which one
to settle with? Certainly the dish they were eating this evening was well up
to standard.

and the way Beth had to let us know that she had asked David in to meals—
she made a dead set at him, you know.’

‘And that wine we had—Orvieto, wasn’t it?’
‘Yes—another of David’s favourites. It’s really quite amusing, isn’t it?’
Letty was doubtful about this, for the ridiculous little episode had given

her a glimpse of something deeper that she did not particularly want to
probe.

‘I do wonder how Beth Doughty manages to rise to all that gin,’ Marjorie

went on, ‘so expensive now. Luckily David doesn’t care for spirits.’

‘Well, that’s a blessing, isn’t it,’ Letty agreed, feeling that there was

something obscurely wrong about this juxtaposition of spirits with blessing,
but unable to supply an appropriate modification.

appointment and was not even sure which of the three doctors she would be
seeing, but it did not really matter since none of them was Mr Strong. She
was content to sit for anything up to two hours, not even glancing through
the tattered magazines but just observing the other people waiting. Most of
these, in her opinion, need not have been there at all. She wondered how
many of them, if any, had undergone ‘major surgery’, as she had. The
majority were young, as if they had just come from work, and appeared to
have nothing whatever the matter with them. All they wanted was a
certificate. Wasting the doctor’s time, she thought—no wonder the National
Health Service was in such financial trouble.

When her name was called she was still indignant, and had it been the

young woman doctor or the honey-voiced Middle-Eastern one behind the
desk she would have gone on seething. It was neither of these but the one
she called her ‘own’ doctor, a middle-aged man with a kindly, anxious
expression. This was the doctor who had sent her into hospital in the first
place, who had seen that lump on her breast.

Well, Miss Ivory…’ his hands moved among a sheaf of papers. ‘And

how’s the world treating you?’ Mastectomy, he thought. Odd, difficult; a
glib but accurate diagnosis of this particular patient. ‘How have you been?’

Marcia needed no more encouragement but proceeded to tell him. What

she said was not altogether coherent or even relevant, but the doctor was
given a decided impression that all was not quite as it should be. She
grumbled about the social worker, her neighbours who wanted to mow her
lawn, her inability to locate the grave of her dead cat and the suspicion that
‘somebody’ might have moved it, the difficulty of keeping a check on her
collection of milk bottles, a man she used to work with who had come
spying on her, the closing of a branch of Sainsbury’s near her old office—it
was all jumbled up in a great flood of complaint The doctor was used to
patients going on in this way, so he only half listened while examining her
and taking her blood pressure and wondering what on earth to do with her.
She told him that she was due for another check-up at the hospital soon, so
that rather took things out of his hands. No doubt Strong’s boys would
suggest something. In the meantime he urged her to look after herself and to
get more to eat—she was much too thin.

‘But nobody can say that I don’t keep a good table. You should just see my
store cupboard.’

‘I’m sure you’re an admirable housekeeper,’ said the doctor

diplomatically, ‘but you must promise me that you’ll go home and cook
yourself a really good meal. Not just a cup of tea and a bit of bread and
butter, Miss Ivory. I don’t know what Mr Strong is going to say when he
sees you looking so thin.’

The mention of Mr Strong’s name had the desired effect and Marcia

assured the doctor that she would go back at once and cook something. All
the way home she thought of Mr Strong and the kind of meal the surgeon
would most likely be having this evening—steak, perhaps, or a nice bit of
fish, salmon or halibut, with fresh vegetables from his garden. She was sure
there were vegetables in that garden although she had not been able to see
the back of it when she had gone to look at his house last year. It might be
possible to catch a glimpse of beans and lettuces or cabbages and broccoli
—Marcia’s gardening days were so long past that she had no clear
recollection of what vegetables would be in season. Should she go there
now on a bus and make sure? Perhaps there was a side entrance to the house
which would give her a view of the back garden…

It was beginning to get dark and while she hesitated a bus drew up at the

stop, illuminated like some noble galleon waiting to take her on a voyage of
discovery. Inside the brilliantly lit interior, women who had come from late-
night Thursday shopping in the West End chatted and compared the things
they had bought—wasting their money, Marcia thought, choosing an empty
seat in the front and holding herself aloof from the chattering women.

When she got to the stop for Mr Strong’s house, she realized that even if

she could see the vegetable garden it was now too dark to discern what was
growing there, and anyway she had forgetten why she had wanted to see
them in the first place. And perhaps there wasn’t a vegetable garden, just a
lawn with a herbaceous border or even a tennis court. But it didn’t matter,
she thought, as she approached the house, for now she saw that it, like the
bus, was brilliantly lit up—resembling a great liner in mid-ocean rather than
a galleon, what she imagined the Queen Mary might have been—and that
elegantly dressed people were alighting from cars and walking up the drive.
The Strongs were obviously giving a party.

Marcia stationed herself on the pavement opposite, instinctively choosing

a dark corner under a tree, away from the street lamp. Was it a dinner party
or an evening party? She did not feel capable of guessing what kind of an
evening party, for she could only think of ‘wine and cheese’, which seemed
altogether unworthy of Mr Strong.

about the various consultants when they came on their rounds, and
speculation as to their wives and families. Some of them, of course, had
married other doctors or nurses, women they had met in the course of their
work, but it was always said that Mr Strong had done rather better than that.
It was rumoured that he had married the daughter of a ‘diplomat’ who had a
house in Belgrave Square. Marcia had never quite believed this, not wishing
to speculate overmuch on Mr Strong’s wife anyway, but now, watching the
guests arrive, she was prepared to believe that there might be something in
it. In a kind of dream, she stood watching until there was a gap in the cars
arriving and it seemed that no more would come.

Then suddenly she found herself thinking about Norman and the way she

had seen him standing on the pavement opposite her house when she was
putting milk bottles into her shed. She had resented his being there, resented
what seemed his prying curiosity into her affairs. Could it be that her
standing outside Mr Strong’s house would be seen in the same way?

She looked up at the house and then crossed the road, so that she could

hear voices and laughter coming from a room on the ground floor. Then she
moved slowly on, making her way back to the bus stop. As luck would have
it, the right number bus was just coming up to the stop and she had to run to
catch it.

nearest seat, unable to collect her wits for a moment to ask for her ticket
But after a while she recovered, partly out of self-defence and resentment at
the loud patronizing voice of the conductress’s ‘All right, dear?’

‘Of course I’m all right,’ she said stiffly.
But when she got home she realized that going to the doctor and then on

to Mr Strong’s house had made her more tired than usual. Well, it would
stand to reason … she found herself thinking of the kind of thing Norman
said. And ‘it takes it out of you’—that was another of his expressions.

Sitting down at the kitchen table, she remembered that she had promised

the doctor that she would go home and get herself a good meal but the

thought of having to cook was too much for her. Elderly people didn’t need
much food, anyway—surely the doctor must realize that? A cup of tea, of
course; that was a stimulant, and now that she had discovered tea bags it
was so much less trouble. At the supermarket she had bought a packet of
144 tea bags which she reckoned ought to last her about seven weeks all but
one day. But long before that she would be at the hospital; the card
indicating the date of her appointment at Mr Strong’s out-patients’ clinic
was on the mantelpiece. Not that she needed reminding, especially not after
what she had just seen.

The thought of it impelled her to go to the store cupboard to fetch a

suitable tin of something. There was still a tin of pilchards left over from
Snowy’s larder, but perhaps luncheon meat would be better? It had a little
key to open it, but before she had gone very far the metal tab broke off and
she lacked the strength to manoeuvre it any further. So she abandoned the
half-opened tin on the draining board and contented herself with a couple of
digestive biscuits, which was really all she wanted.
 

‘You didn’t go in then, or make yourself known?’ Edwin asked Norman.
What do you take me for! Can you imagine the sort of reception I’d have

got! She was standing by the shed with a pile of milk bottles in her arms
and she must have seen me.’

‘Yes, and knowing what she’s like I can imagine you wouldn’t want to

intrude,’ Edwin agreed.

‘Intrude!’ Norman gave his bitter little laugh. ‘That’s a nice way of

putting it. I met that social worker and she thought I was casing the joint.’

‘Well, she’s right to be careful—there’s always a risk of that these days,’

Edwin said. ‘I’ll stroll past there one evening and see if there’s anything I
can do.’

But of course Edwin was not at all sure what there would be, if anything.

The idea of being able to ‘do’ something for Marcia was so improbable that
he had only said it to ease his conscience a little. After all, he and Norman
had worked with her and it would no doubt seem to an outsider that they
might be just the people to be in a position to help her or at least to offer
help, to show willing, as Norman might say. This particular evening, being
Corpus Christi, Edwin had a service at his own church, with an open-air
procession, which started at eight o’clock and would probably last for at
least an hour. After that he would go to the pub with Father G. so there

wouldn’t really be time to visit Marcia. Perhaps the weekend would be
better, Saturday afternoon or Sunday before Evensong. Then he wouldn’t
have to stay too long.

‘Of course, I’m not often down that way,’ Norman pointed out. ‘Not

exactly my stamping ground, Clapham.’

‘You’re really nearer to Letty,’ Edwin said.
‘So what? You’re surely not suggesting I should drop in on her?’
For some reason the idea of this caused the two men to break into

laughter, so that what had started out as a serious attempt to deal with a
social problem turned into a kind of joke. But there was no reason why, as
Norman put it, they should fall about laughing at the prospect. It wasn’t all
that funny. Nervous reaction, perhaps, but why nervous, Norman wondered.
Something in the subconscious, Edwin suggested, but that set them off into
more laughter, the idea of Letty and Marcia being somehow mixed up in
their subconsciousnesses. It was not an area they were in the habit of
discussing or even thinking about.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Eighteen

‘MISS IVORY, AREN’T you going to let me in?’
As she stood on the doorstep, Janice wondered whether anyone else had

been to see Marcia during her fortnight in Greece. This seemed unlikely
because it wasn’t as if Marcia was an invalid or unable to cope, even if she
was a bit eccentric. And anyway she was Janice’s special pigeon, if you
could put it like that.

There was a fine display of late summer flowers in the gardens along the

road—dahlias and asters, early chrysanthemums and a second flowering of
roses, and even Marcia’s garden had some tall yellow daisies clustering
round what Nigel and Priscilla called the milk-bottle shed. They had never
been inside it but had often seen Marcia going in and out with the bottles. It
seemed a curiously dotty occupation, but harmless enough—just the kind of
thing Marcia would spend her time doing, but no more to be condemned
than other people’s preoccupation with collecting matchboxes or cigarette
cards. One must respect people as individuals—her acquaintance with
Marcia had taught Janice that, if nothing else. All the same, she felt that she
really must try to persuade Marcia to take a holiday. Not Greece, of course,
or indeed anywhere abroad’—one could hardly imagine Marcia in a
taverna, eating octopus or anything that wasn’t meat and two veg—but a
few days in Bournemouth or a coach tour of the Cotswolds would be just
the thing to set her up for the winter.

‘Miss Ivory!’ Janice rang the bell again and banged on the door. It was

most unlikely that she was out, though perhaps it was just possible. Should
she try the door to see if it was open? Janice did try it and it was locked.
Perhaps if she went round to the back she would be able to get into the
house, though if Marcia had gone out she would surely have locked the
back door as well. If only Nigel and Priscilla were here she could ask them,
but Janice knew that they were in Sardinia, lying on some beach, not even
thinking of their fashionable little house in that up-and-coming district by
the common and their peculiar next-door neighbour. One certainly got
completely away from that kind of thing on holiday, Janice thought, not
without bitterness.

It was then that she noticed several bottles of milk, not on the front step

but in a little wooden container round the side, no doubt an arrangement
made for milk to be left when Marcia went out to work, to keep it out of the
sun or safe from thieves. This sight alarmed her, and she hurried round to
the back door—perhaps Marcia was lying ill in bed, unable even to get
downstairs to take in her milk. If she could get into the back of the house
she could call to her, and if she was in bed Marcia would answer. Or she
might have had a fall and be unable to move or get to the telephone. Did
Marcia have a telephone? Probably not. With neighbours away she could lie
for hours, helpless … Janice knew in theory every kind of situation that
could arise, but when she peered through the glass panel of the back door
she was not prepared for the sight of Marcia sitting at the table, slumped
into unconsciousness, possibly even death.

on the table, as she knocked feebly on the door, calling ‘Miss Ivory’ in a
half-fearful tone, hardly expecting or wishing for an answer. Then she tried
the handle of the door. It opened and she realized that it was perfectly
possible for her to go in.
 

‘Of course she’s not in my parish,’ said Father G., with a hint of

impatience. ‘You know what these parish boundaries are—one road’s in, the
next one isn’t.’

‘I know that,’ said Edwin. ‘I was just going to stroll along that way and I

thought you might like to come too—after all, it’s a nice evening for a walk.
She’s a funny sort of woman, as I told you, we may not even be invited in.’

‘Who is my neighbour?’ Father G. mused, as he and Edwin came to the

road where Marcia lived. ‘Surely one has preached often enough on that
text? Perhaps that’s where we go wrong—obviously it is—when my
reaction to your suggestion is that the person in question isn’t in my parish.’

‘Well, she must be in somebody’s parish,’ Edwin pointed out.
‘She certainly is,’ said Father G. promptly, and he named a well-known

local vicar, ‘but I don’t think he goes in much for parochial visiting. Trendy
Tony,’ he added, unable to resist the uncharitable comment. ‘Rock-and-roll
and extempore prayers.’

‘Of course there’s a social worker who goes to see her regularly, keeps an

eye on her, as the saying is, but when I saw her earlier in the year—we all

had lunch together, you see—I thought perhaps I ought to do something
about her, make more of an effort.’

‘What about this other woman you were telling me about, there was

another who worked with you, wasn’t there? I should have thought…’
Father G. suggested, with the comfortable assumption of so much that could
be left to the women.

‘Yes, in a way you would have thought…’ Edwin smiled. ‘But then you

don’t know Marcia—Miss Ivory. Come to that, who does know her?’

‘Who does know anyone?’ said Father G., hardly contributing to the

solution of the problem of Marcia.

different it looks from the others and that tells its own story.’

Father G. was used to visiting shabby houses, but he had to admit the

contrast between Marcia’s and the other houses in the road. ‘You’d better go
up to the door,’ he said. ‘You know her, and if she’s a difficult woman the
sight of me might put her off. She might refuse to open the door.’

put off by the sight of Father G., in his priestly cloak, standing behind
Edwin. Although she had little use for the Church of England, or indeed for
any organized religion apart from a mild, superstitious veneration for what
she thought of as ‘Catholics’, she could not deny that it sometimes had its
uses. The fact that this respectable-looking stranger—for so Edwin
appeared to her—was accompanied by a clergyman was reassuring. They
would certainly know what was the best thing to do.

‘If you’ve come to see Miss Ivory,’ she said, ‘I’m afraid something’s

happened. She seems to be ill, or…’ She did not like to say ‘dead’. ‘She’s
sitting at the table in her kitchen, not moving—I saw through the window. I
was just going to find help…’

As it happened, Janice could not have met at this moment with two

persons better able to assist her. Edwin had come home one evening some
years ago to find his wife Phyllis unconscious in the kitchen, about to put a
shepherd’s pie in the oven; Father G. was often obliged to enter houses
where people were on the point of death or had already died; indeed he
preferred this type of situation to normal parish visiting, with its awkward
conversation and the inevitable cups of tea and sweet biscuits. Both the men
were prepared to take control.

Janice who was fussing about packing a case of suitable things for hospital
while they waited for the ambulance.

‘It was amazing,’ Janice said afterwards. ‘When I came to look out her

things, there was a drawer full of new Marks and Sparks nighties—not at all
what you’d imagine Miss Ivory wearing, judging by the rest of her clothes.
All brand new and never worn—she must have been saving them up for
something.’

were left alone in the house. They had all been sitting in the kitchen where
Janice had made tea. Edwin felt awkward, now that Marcia had been
removed, as if he had no right to be sitting in her house when he had never
been in it before.

‘It’s a strange relationship, working with women like that,’ he said. ‘The

curious intimacy of the office is very definitely not repeated outside it—one
would not presume…’ He remembered how he and Norman had been
overcome with laughter at the idea of Norman visiting Letty or of any kind
of social contact between the four of them. Visiting Marcia had always
seemed an awesome prospect, hardly even to be contemplated.

‘You never thought of coming to see her, living as near as you do, just a

few steps across the common?’ Father G.’s tone was enquiring rather than
reproachful.

‘I thought of it—once or twice I came near to it—but I never did.’
Father G. finished his tea and stood up, holding the cup in his hand. ‘Do

you think we should…?’

‘Wash up? Oh, I think Mrs Brabner, the social worker, will probably see

to that. I don’t think we should get involved.’

So the men left the house, remembering to lock up behind them. Neither

had commented on the state of the kitchen and hall, the dust and other
evidences of long neglect. Father G. genuinely did not notice such things
and Edwin, with a general impression that all was not quite as it should be,
still preserved the same detachment towards this as towards other aspects of
Marcia’s life. What he did carry away with him was an irrelevant detail, the
sight of a half-opened tin of luncheon meat still on the draining board. It
had always surprised him how ineffectual women were when it came to
opening a perfectly simple tin.

reviving drink when they found themselves some distance away from
Marcia’s house. They had undergone an unexpectedly upsetting experience.
Little had Edwin imagined that a casual stroll across the common in the
direction of Marcia’s house could have such an outcome. Yet what had the
outcome been? Marcia had been found in a distressed condition, but she had
been taken away in an ambulance to hospital where she would receive the
best possible care. There was nothing further that anyone could do. All the
same, the need for a drink was uppermost in his mind, and then supper—the
events of the last hour had delayed the evening meal and it was well known
that an upsetting experience had unexpected results, not necessarily the
most suitable or desirable ones. There was a hollow feeling in his stomach
and he remembered that he had not eaten since lunch.

‘You’ll stay and take pot luck with me?’ he said to Father G., knowing

that there would be little cheer at the vicarage. He at least had the remains
of a casserole in the larder.

‘That’s good of you—I’m quite hungry.’
Edwin poured sherry. Had it been the kind of upsetting experience that

called for brandy? he wondered. On the whole he thought not, for it did not
touch him personally. All the same, he ought to get in touch with Letty, who
would no doubt want to visit Marcia in hospital. Come to that, he supposed
they all ought to; the three of them should cluster round her bed. Again he
found himself wanting to smile, almost to laugh, and if Norman had been
with him at that moment instead of Father G. he felt that the smile might
have turned most regrettably into laughter. It was disconcerting the way this
happened—any idea of the women now seemed to be a subject for comedy.
But with Father G. it was different. In the midst of life he was so
continually in death…

‘Do you think I should visit her in hospital?’ Father G. was asking. ‘I

easily could—the chaplain there is an old friend. She might feel that as I
saw her, found her, as it were…’

‘I don’t know what Marcia would feel. But I’m sure she would like to

have a visit,’ said Edwin uncertainly, for he was not at all sure. How could
anyone be sure about Marcia?

The next morning Edwin had to break the news to Norman.
‘I should’ve thought a loony bin would have been more to the point than

hospital,’ said Norman, in a rough way that might have concealed an

obscure emotion. ‘What are we expected to do—send flowers by Interflora
—have a whip round in the office?’ He was standing by the window and
shook himself like an angry little dog coming out of the water.

‘I’ll get some flowers and take them round—the hospital’s not far from

where I live,’ said Edwin soothingly. ‘And I’ll get in touch with Letty.’

Norman fumbled in his trousers pocket and produced a fifty-pence piece.

‘You’d better say they’re from all of us, the flowers. Here’s something
towards it.’

‘Thank you. I won’t ask to see her, just leave the flowers,’ Edwin said. It

was a relief that the general embarrassment of the situation had not made
them burst out laughing, as he had feared. Perhaps there were some things,
hospitals especially, that were still sacred.

‘I wouldn’t want to go and see her,’ Norman said. ‘I did go when my

brother-in-law, Ken, was in hospital, but then he had nobody and being the
blood-tie and that I felt I had to.’

Edwin was about to point out that a brother-in-law wasn’t exactly a blood

relation but he thought it best to leave the subject, and if they got to talking
about people having nobody it might well be remembered that Marcia also
came into that category.
 

In Mrs Pope’s house the telephone rang just as she and Letty were

settling down to watch television. They quite often did this now, and
although it had started by Mrs Pope suggesting that Letty might like to
watch the news or some improving programme of cultural or scientific
interest, there was now hardly an evening when Letty did not come down to
watch whatever happened to be on the box, whether it was worthy of
attention or not.

‘Oh, bother, who can that be?’ said Mrs Pope, going out into the hall. It’s

for you,’ she said accusingly to Letty. People ought not to ring up at such a
time.’

Letty went apologetically to the telephone. Of course there was really no

suitable time to ring people in the evening now that television had been
invented, for with the choice of three programmes one of them was certain
to be the one somebody was watching. Even the worst had their adherents
and who was to judge what was ‘worst’, the kind of thing that nobody could
possibly want to see?

When Letty came back into the room, Mrs Pope looked up expectantly.

Letty did not have many telephone calls and never seemed to make any. ‘It
was a man’s voice,’ she said encouragingly, ‘so I knew it couldn’t be your
friend in the country.’

‘No, it was Edwin Braithwaite.’
‘Oh, Mr Braithwaite,’ Mrs Pope waited for Letty to go on.
‘He was ringing to tell me that Marcia Ivory who used to work in the

office had been taken into hospital.’

‘Taken into hospital!’ Mrs Pope’s interest was immediately aroused and

Letty had to repeat what Edwin had told her about Marcia’s collapse and the
summoning of the ambulance. This led on to further probing from Mrs Pope
so that in the end Letty found herself having to recount the history of
Marcia’s operation and to supply as many details as she knew.

‘But how did Mr Braithwaite know about it?’ Mrs Pope asked.
‘Apparently he found her, discovered her in a state of collapse in her

kitchen.’

‘That doesn’t sound like him,’ Mrs Pope objected.
‘I think he had a clergyman with him—would it be the vicar, perhaps,

paying a call?’

‘Yes, I suppose it could be that. But don’t you think it more likely that he

and the lady were friends, after all, working together and living so near.. !

Letty found herself unable to comment on this supposition. A

relationship between Edwin and Marcia was really going too far. You ought
to see her, she thought of saying, but a charitable impulse held her back.
One did not make remarks of that kind about a person lying dangerously ill
in hospital. And life was in many ways so fantastic that for all Letty knew
there might indeed be something between Edwin and Marcia. A married
woman—and she must not forget that Mrs Pope was that—might very well
be able to detect subtle shades of meaning in a relationship which would be
lost on the inexperienced Letty. For of course there had been Mr Pope, no
more to Letty than a photograph in Mrs Pope’s sitting room, and it was not
for her to probe beyond that patient-looking face in the silver frame. And
now the television screen was beginning to claim their full attention.

By a coincidence they were taken into a hospital setting, not in a popular

romantic way but as the background for surgical investigation. An operation
was in progress, with commentary and informative pictures.

of course your friend won’t be having anything like this.’

‘Oh, no…’ Letty was apologetic ‘I expect she’ll just be lying there.’
‘If we had colour,’ Mrs Pope went on, ‘we should be able to see exactly

what the sturgeon was doing. There would be real blood, not tomato
ketchup, as I’ve heard they use in these violent films.’

‘I don’t think I should want to see exactly,’ said Letty, turning away from

the black and white close-up of a pulsating heart and concentrating on her
tapestry.

‘We have to see these things, whether we like it or not,’ Mrs Pope

declared, for she had noticed Letty turning away from the screen. ‘No point
in shutting your eyes to them.’

Western on the other channel, but they didn’t have to watch that either.

‘Has Mr Braithwaite got colour?’ Mrs Pope asked.
Letty had to admit that she didn’t know, or even whether Edwin had

television at all He had never mentioned it, in the same way that he had
never given any indication of having any special feeling for Marcia. If
anyone had that, it was Norman, she felt, thoroughly confused.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Nineteen

MARCIA HAD ALWAYS appreciated the drama of an ambulance and even

wanted to ride in one, but when the time came she was hardly in a position
to realize that she was at last achieving this unusual ambition.

‘Unreachable inside a room’ she may have been, yet there was no sense

of that little room becoming an everywhere, in the fantasy of an earlier poet
No fragment of poetry from long ago lingered in Marcia’s mind as she lay
under a red blanket She had been aware of people coming into the house as
she sat at the kitchen table, thinking she heard Edwin’s voice and imagining
herself back in the office, but where was Norman? She was also half
conscious of Janice Brabner fussing around her, seeming to panic a bit.
Marcia tried to tell her that she had half a dozen new nighties, never worn,
tucked away in a drawer upstairs, and also to explain about the card on the
mantelpiece giving her next appointment at out-patients, but she found
herself unable to speak. She tried, but no words came. Then she heard
Janice going on in her silly way about the nighties, ‘all brand new and never
worn’, and that was when she smiled. Of course they were new, specially
chosen for this occasion. Already she had moved away from Janice, and
soon she would be out of the reach of all social workers trying to make her
do things she didn’t want to do, like going down to ‘the Centre’, buying
fresh vegetables and taking a holiday.

The only disappointment was that there was no bell ringing on the

ambulance, as she had sometimes heard that exciting clamour at lunchtime,
when there had been an accident somewhere near the office. It was all very
quiet and efficient, the way the ambulance men lifted her up and laid her
down and called her ‘dear’, and said she wasn’t much of a weight. But
when she found herself at the hospital there seemed to be a crowd of young
doctors round her bed, so they must have thought she was important.
Marcia didn’t recognize any of them from the time before—housemen, she
supposed, doing their six months on the wards, and perhaps one of them
was the Registrar. Two of them examined her, but another couple, who
presumably ought to have been attending, seemed to be talking about some
dance they were going to or had been to, and that seemed wrong. She was
certain that Mr Strong wouldn’t approve of that.

altogether and the young doctors had gone, she found herself wondering
when she was going to see Mr Strong, and then worrying in case she might
not be seeing him at all but some other surgeon or just an ordinary doctor.
She must have spoken his name aloud, for the young round-faced nurse
who was settling her pillows said, ‘Don’t you worry, Miss Ivory, Mr
Strong’ll be round in the morning.’
 

was a loud, bright voice that reminded Marcia rather of Janice, but of
course it couldn’t be Janice. ‘Lovely, aren’t they—Chrysanths, and such an
unusual shade. Shall I read the card for you, dear? You’ll want to know who
they’re from. It says, “Letty, Norman and Edwin, with all good wishes and
hopes for a speedy recover)’”. Isn’t that nice!’ In the nurse’s mind Letty and
Norman were a married couple with a little boy called Edwin, rather an
unusual name, that, as uncommon as the pinky-mauve chrysanthemums.

Marcia smiled but did not comment, and the nurse did not expect her to.

Poor soul, she was hardly up to that. Some hopes for a ‘speedy recovery’!

The woman in the next bed looked at Marcia with interest. It livened

things up a bit when a new patient came in, but Marcia just lay with her
eyes closed so it wouldn’t be much use trying to have a chat with her.
Funny that she should have had those flowers when she looked the kind of
person who wouldn’t get any, and now two more lots had arrived. The nurse
read out the cards again—one from ‘Janice’ (a posy of anemones), and the
other (mixed garden flowers) from ‘Priscilla and Nigel—so sorry to hear
you’re ill—get well soon’. Well, it didn’t look as if that was likely to
happen, judging by her appearance. And when they weighed her she was
only six stone.

There was a stir at the end of the ward—Mr Strong was approaching with

an entourage of young doctors, and Sister wheeling a filing cabinet of case
notes. ‘He’s coming, dear,’ Marcia’s neighbour whispered, but Marcia still
lay with closed eyes, apparently unconscious. All the same, she knew that
he was taller than the young doctors accompanying him and that he was
wearing a green tie.

‘Well, Miss Ivory, we didn’t expect to see you again so soon.’ Mr

Strong’s tone was kindly rather than reproachful, but she couldn’t help
wondering if she had displeased him in some way, for when she opened her

eyes she saw that he was looking down at her, frowning a little. Then he
turned to Sister and said something in a low voice.

properly?’ This time there was a hint of sternness in his voice.

Marcia wanted to tell him that she had never been a big eater but she

found it impossible to get out the words.

‘Never mind—don’t try to talk.’ Mr Strong then turned to one of the

young doctors. ‘Well, Brian, you’ve got her notes—let’s have your
diagnosis.’

Brian, a youth with blond bobbed hair, said something in medical jargon

but apparently Mr Strong was not satisfied because he turned to one of the
other doctors for his opinion. This young man was even more at a loss than
Brian. He mumbled something to the effect that the patient was in ‘a
terminal situation’, a euphemism which fortunately meant nothing to
Marcia who was conscious only of a flood of words. They were having
quite a discussion about her.

‘You’re talking about me,’ she said, almost in a whisper.
‘Yes—you’re certainly the centre of attraction today.’ But Mr Strong said

it so nicely, not in a nasty, sarcastic way, as Norman might have done.
 

If they said “No visitors” then we can’t very well barge in,’ Norman

pointed out, as he and Edwin sat in the office finishing their lunch. Jelly
babies being in short supply, Edwin offered a packet of liquorice allsorts
and Norman selected a brown and black one.

‘I always think of her at coffee time,’ Norman went on, ‘the way she used

to make coffee for me.’

‘She used to make it for herself as well, not just for you,’ Edwin

corrected him.

‘That’s right—spoil my romantic memories,’ said Norman flippantly.

‘Poor old girl—not even allowed visitors. What did the nurse say when you
rang?’

‘She said Miss Ivory was quite comfortable, what they always say.’ His

wife Phyllis, on the point of death, had been ‘comfortable’ and perhaps that
was one way of putting it. ‘They want her to be kept very quiet, no
excitement.’

‘Yes, I suppose seeing us might be that—excitement,’ Norman remarked.

‘Oh, and Sister said how pleased she was with the flowers—such an

unusual shade.’

‘Did Marcia say that?’
‘No, I don’t think she did—that’s what Sister thought. I gathered Marcia

wasn’t talking much herself. She certainly wasn’t when we found her like
that.’

‘She wasn’t much of a talker when she was here,’ Norman mused. ‘I

wonder what they’ll do with her now.’

that,’ said Edwin. I suppose we’ll just have to wait and see. I’ll keep in
touch. By the way, it was a bit awkward. When I called round with the
flowers they asked me if I knew whether she had any relatives, who would
be her next of kin.’

‘She must have given some name when she had her operation. I think

she’s got a distant cousin somewhere, she once said.’

‘Oh, has she?’ Edwin seemed a little embarrassed. I think they wanted

somebody on the spot, as it were, so I had to give myself,’ he admitted. ‘I
said I was her next of kin.’ Saying the words like that seemed to open up
endless possibilities.

‘Sooner you than me!’ said Norman roughly. ‘Goodness knows what you

may have let yourself in for.’

‘Oh, I think it will just be a question of keeping in touch and that sort of

thing. I felt it was the least I could do.’

‘Let’s hope it won’t tum out to be the most,’ said Norman in a dark tone.

know.

‘I don’t think so. Just what Sister said, I gather,’ said Letty.
‘Well, we know what that means. You mark my words.’
Letty had realized by now that Mrs Pope’s words invariably did have to

be marked. ‘I should like to go and see her,’ she said, but uncertainly, for
she did not really want to visit Marcia in hospital, only felt that she ought to
want to.

‘You won’t be able to do that,’ said Mrs Pope.
‘I suppose not, as things are at present. I must think of something to send

her, apart from flowers.’ But what? she wondered, remembering Marcia as
she had last seen her. Toilet water, talcum powder, some really nice soap—

these were the things Letty herself would have liked if she had been in
hospital, but would Marcia? ‘Perhaps a book,’ she said doubtfully.

‘A book?’ Mrs Pope’s tone rang out scornfully. ‘What would she want

with a book if she’s not allowed visitors?’

‘No, perhaps she wouldn’t be able to read,’ Letty admitted. And had

Marcia ever read anyway, ever been seen with a book? Her visits to the
library had been for quite other purposes. She was the kind of person who
would say that she didn’t have time to read—yet hadn’t she once,
surprisingly, quoted a tag of poetry, some left-over fragment of her school
days that had stuck in her memory? Perhaps a book of poetry, then, a
paperback with a pretty cover, nothing modern, of course … Letty toyed
with this idea but in the end she decided on a bottle of lavender water, the
kind of thing that could be dabbed on the brow of a patient not allowed
visitors.

If she’s as bad as I think she is,’ Mrs Pope went on, ‘she won’t notice

whether you send her anything or not. And you are a pensioner—don’t
forget that.’

‘All the same, I do feel I’d like to send her something,’ Letty said,

irritated by Mrs Pope’s attitude. ‘After all, we did work together all those
years.’ Two women working together in an office, she thought, even if they
didn’t become dose friends, would have a special kind of tie linking them -
all the dull routine, the petty grumbles and the shared irritation of the men.

‘I thought it was only two or three years,’ said Mrs Pope. Not a long

time.’

definitely on lavender water.
 

Lavender. Mr Strong detected the scent of it above the hospital smells. It

reminded him of his grandmother, not at all the kind of thing one associated
with Miss Ivory, but on the other hand why should he have been surprised
that Miss Ivory should smell of lavender? The really surprising thing was
that he should have noticed anything at all like that about a patient, but the
scent, that powerful evocator of memory, had caught him unaware, and for
a brief moment he—consultant surgeon at this eminent London teaching
hospital and with a lucrative private practice in Harley Street—was a boy of
seven again.

was coming round, and we wanted to look tidy for Mr Strong, didn’t we?
There was a cool, wet feeling on her forehead. Somebody—Betty or Letty,
was it, on the card?—had sent her this nice lavender water, such a lovely
fresh smell, like a country garden. Miss Ivory had a garden, hadn’t she, and
did she have lavender in her garden? Marcia hadn’t been able to remember
whether she had or not; she only remembered the catmint at the bottom of
the garden and how she hadn’t been able to find Snowy’s grave. All that
time she had watched him growing cold until the fleas left his body, and
now she couldn’t find his grave. It would have been much more to the point
if Nigel from next door had helped her to find that rather than fuss about
cutting her grass which didn’t really need cutting because she preferred it
that way; it kept people out. One afternoon, she couldn’t exactly remember
when, she had caught Norman spying on her, hanging about in the road. She
regretted now that she hadn’t gone up to him and challenged him, asked
him what he thought he was doing, loitering with intent, outside her house.
Another time, when she had first gone to work in the office, she had
followed him one lunchtime all the way to the British Museum, up the steps
and along to that place where they had the mummies, and seen him sitting
looking at the mummified animals with a crowd of school children. She had
gone away, not knowing what to think … After that she had taken to
making him coffee because it seemed silly for them each to get a tin when
the big economy size was so much cheaper … But after that? She was
confused—nothing seemed to have happened after that. She moved her
head restlessly from side to side. She thought she could see the chaplain
coming towards her, the hospital chaplain, or was it the trendy vicar from
the church at the end of the road? They were both young, with that long
hair. No, it was neither; it was Mr Strong’s houseman; his name was Brian.
It was nice the way Mr Strong called all the young doctors by their
Christian names—Brian and Geoffrey and Tom and Martin, and Jennifer,
the only girl among them.

The young doctor bent over Marcia. He didn’t like the look of her at all

—indeed she was the kind of patient one didn’t like the look of at the best
of times. Luckily Mr Strong was still around and it took only a minute to
get him back again. He had been very concerned about Miss Ivory and
would want to be around if anything happened.

just like the colour green? It had a small, close design on it. His rather
bushy eyebrows were drawn together over his grey eyes in a frown. He
always seemed to be frowning—had she done something wrong? Not eaten
enough, perhaps? His eyes seemed to bore into her—the piercing eyes of
the surgeon, did people say that? No, it was rather the surgeon’s hands that
people noticed and commented on, like the hands of a pianist when, at a
concert, people tried to sit where they could see the pianist’s hands. But in a
sense the surgeon was just as much of an artist, that beautiful neat scar …
Marcia remembered what her mother used to say, how she would never let
the surgeon’s knife touch her body. How ridiculous that seemed when one
considered Mr Strong!… Marcia smiled and the frown left his face and he
seemed to be smiling back at her.

The chaplain, on his way to visit Miss Ivory, was told that he was too

late. ‘Miss Ivory’s gone, passed on…’ The words rang in his head like a
television advertisement jingle, but he prayed for the repose of her soul and
nerved himself for the meeting with her next of kin and other relatives. But
the man he eventually saw didn’t seem to be any relation at all, just a
‘friend’ who was stepping into the breach, as it were. Somebody who had
worked in the same office. Rather surprisingly, he held the view that there
was nothing to reproach oneself with for not having been able to prevent
death when, for the Christian, it was so much to be desired. Everything
concerning Miss Ivory was settled with calm efficiency, without
recriminations and certainly without tears, and that was a great relief.

OceanofPDF.com

Twenty

CHAPELS OF REPOSE or Rest, is that what they call them?’ said Norman.

‘The place where the deceased is put,’ he added awkwardly, not quite
accustomed to thinking of Marcia dead.

‘It’s rather nice,’ Letty murmured, ‘to put it like that, the idea of resting.’

When her mother had died the body had remained in the house before the
funeral. Letty could only remember feeling drained of emotion and worried
about practical details, distant relatives suddenly appearing, and the
arrangements for their lunch.

‘Well, here we are all together today, just like we used to be,’ said Edwin,

but the others made no comment, for it was not quite like they used to be.

The three of them were having a cup of coffee in Edwin’s house before

the funeral service at the crematorium, for which he had made all the
arrangements. Marcia’s death had of course brought them closer together,
for they were remembering their past association and perhaps wondering
whether one of them would be the next to go, but not too seriously because
they were all in good health and they had known about Marcia’s operation
and what it could lead to. The most important thing was that they were
seeing Edwin’s house for the first time, never having been invited into it
before. Death has done this, Letty thought, looking around her with a
woman’s critical eye at the old-fashioned embroidered cushion covers and
chair backs—Phyllis’s work on those long evenings when Edwin was at
meetings of the parochial church council? Norman’s reflections were more
of a practical and financial nature—that Edwin could take a lodger or even
two and get quite a nice bit coming in per week for a business gentleman,
perhaps sharing the kitchen. Not that he would fancy sharing with Edwin if
it came to that, which it obviously wouldn’t. The fact that Edwin lived in
this house alone meant that he had no need of extra cash, that he wouldn’t
be dependent on his pension when the time came.

It was a long car ride to the crematorium in the south-east corner of

London, and as time went on conversation between the three of them began
to flow more easily.

‘After all,’ Edwin pointed out, ‘we’re taking Marcia with us, we must

think of it like that, and she wouldn’t be saying much anyway, so we can

talk between ourselves in the ordinary way.’

This invitation to ordinary talk seemed to stun them into silence, then

Letty made a remark about the roses, still beautiful in a garden they
happened to be passing.

‘Little did we think, that time we all had lunch together,’ said Edwin.
Poor old girl—she seemed a bit round the bend then, didn’t she?’ said

Norman.

‘I suppose that must have been the beginning of the end,’ said Letty. ‘She

hardly ate anything, just a bit of salad.’

‘Oh, well, she was never a big eater,’ said Norman, as if he was the only

one to be let into this secret. ‘She often used to say.’

‘Living alone sometimes makes people not bother about meals,’ said

Edwin, almost as if solitude was a state that none of them had experience
of.

‘I always see to it that I get one good meal a day,’ said Letty.
‘Mrs Pope lets you use her kitchen, of course,’ said Edwin. ‘Do you use

your own cooking utensils?’

‘I have a couple of non-stick saucepans and my own omelette pan,’ said

Letty, hurrying over the words, for she felt that the conversation was getting
rather too ordinary now and she did not want to hear about Norman’s frying
pan.

‘Oh, I just shove everything into the frying pan,’ Norman said, as she

knew he would. ‘Omelettes and all. Not that you can really call it an
omelette, the kind of egg thing I make.’

The hearse was gathering speed now, so the car following could step on it

a bit, Norman thought. It was quite clever the way they did it, gradually
increasing the speed. It would be a skilled form of driving, that, and no
doubt the cars were automatic. Ken would know and it might be something
to talk to him about next time they met; conversation was not his strong
point except where it concerned the motor car.

‘Are we nearly there?’ Letty asked. ‘I don’t know this part of London.’
‘I brought Phyllis here,’ said Edwin, in a matter-of-fact way. It’s the

nearest crematorium for where I live.’

‘Oh, yes, of course.’ Letty was momentarily embarrassed but Edwin did

not seem to be affected by the memory of his dead wife, only going on to
say that they had had a service at the church first which had been very well
attended.

think they work to a pretty tight schedule. Oh, there’s Father G.’s car just in
front—he must have nipped past us at the traffic lights.’

‘Crossed on the amber, I shouldn’t wonder,’ said Norman.
‘This must be it,’ said Letty, relieved that the end of the drive seemed to

be in sight. ‘Those gates ahead of us?’

‘Yes, that’s it,’ Edwin confirmed.
‘What we all come to,’ Norman said.

come, neighbours, and all that—and to give you moral support’ Janice was
not sure that she liked the way Priscilla had put it, as if she needed moral
support, but probably she had just meant for the service at the crematorium
which wasn’t an everyday thing. For there was no question of Janice
needing moral support in any other way. The discovery of Miss Ivory’s
slumped body in the kitchen and her subsequent death in hospital, although
unusual, not to say unfortunate, in no way reflected on the social services
and there could be no implication of neglect on Janice’s part. Death was the
end of all things, the culmination of life, and so it was for Marcia Ivory, a
fitting conclusion to her story—something that could be quoted in years to
come as an example of the kind of difficulties encountered by the voluntary
social worker. It was impossible to help some people, to guide them in the
way they should go for their own good, and Miss Ivory had certainly been
one of those. Janice’s thoughts clothed themselves in the language of a
report, for it did appear from what one of the doctors at the hospital had
said that Miss Ivory had quite definitely been in a terminal situation, even
before her last collapse. The only trouble was that there might possibly have
been a lack of liaison, that Miss Ivory might be said to have fallen through
the net, that dreaded phrase…

Letty, noticing Janice and Priscilla in their rather too bright everyday

clothes, realized that she need not have worried about not having anything
suitable for a funeral—obviously younger people didn’t take any notice of
that kind of thing nowadays. Her dark-blue dress and jacket was sober, but
hardly mourning; the saleswoman where she bought it had called the colour
‘French navy’, which seemed to add an old-fashioned touch of frivolity.

The men were of course wearing black ties, for presumably a black tie was
the kind of thing a man always had or could easily obtain.

Requiescat in pace, and may light perpetual shine upon her, Edwin

thought. It had been a good idea to get Father G. to officiate at the brief
service. He could ensure that things were done decently and in order, which
one rather suspected some of these clergy officiating at crematoria, having
to do one funeral after another, didn’t always achieve. He was glad to see
that that social worker and the neighbour had put in an appearance, it was
the least they could do, but undoubtedly it was just as well it had been him
and Father G., rather than them or poor old Norman, who had discovered
Marcia lying like that.

Norman, strangely disturbed by the idea of Marcia lying in her coffin

about to be consigned to the flames, was visited by a frivolous couplet he
had read somewhere:

Dust to dust, ashes to ashes.
Into the grave the great Queen dashes.

which you couldn’t do either and it was a long time since he had shed tears.
He bent his head, as the curtains closed and the coffin slid away, not
wanting to see that last bit.
 

Afterwards they all gathered outside in an awkward little group in the

bright sunshine.

The eternal usefulness of flowers again eased a strained situation. Two
sheaves of flame gladioli and pink and white carnations and two wreaths of
hot-house roses, mauve everlastings and white chrysanthemums were lying
in a space bearing a notice which proclaimed ‘Marcia Joan Ivory’.

‘Priscilla and I thought she’d rather have cut flowers,’ said Janice a little

defiantly, her eyes on the wreaths. ‘Some people do specify that.’

‘Poor old Marcia, she was hardly in a state to specify anything,’ Norman

said. ‘We clubbed together for a wreath—the mauve and white—Letty,
Edwin and I, seeing as how…’

‘Of course, you worked together, didn’t you? said Priscilla, in her best

finishing-school manner. She didn’t quite know how to cope with this odd

little man and the other hardly less odd tall one, and hoped that it would be
possible to get away quickly now that she had done her social duty.

this distant cousin but she was too upset to attend the funeral.’

‘Not having seen her for forty years,’ Norman chipped in.
‘The son came, though,’ said Edwin, ‘so that was something. Apparently

he works in London.’

‘That young person sitting at the back?’ said Letty. She had noticed

somebody of indeterminate sex, with straggling, tow-coloured hair, wearing
a kaftan.

‘Yes, wearing a bead necklace, that’s him.’
The group dispersed. Edwin, Letty and Norman found their way to Father

G., who was waiting rather impatiently by his car. Edwin sat in the front by
Father G. and Letty and Norman squashed into the back with the suitcase
containing his vestments. The two in front kept up an animated
conversation, mostly church shop, but the two in the back were silent.
Norman did not know what to say or even what he felt, except that funerals
were sad occasions anyway, but Letty was overcome by a sense of
desolation, as if by Marcia’s death she was now completely alone. And it
wasn’t even as if they had been close friends.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Twenty-one

LITTLE DID WE think…
It was inevitable that Norman should say something of the kind, Letty

felt, remembering the last time they had eaten a meal together in a
restaurant. Little, indeed, had they thought on that occasion at the
Rendezvous that the next time would be like this. Now of course they had
Father G. with them, so that added something different

‘Well, now..,’ Father G. took up the menu and began to study it. He

presumed that he and Edwin would be sharing the cost of the meal between
them, Letty being a woman, and Norman something a little less than the
kind of man one might expect to treat one to a lunch. He had wondered
when the funeral arrangements were being made what the aftermath was
going to be, seeing that the deceased appeared to have no relative capable
of laying on funeral baked meats. At first he had wondered if Edwin
himself would invite them all back to his house, but he was relieved that he
had evidently decided against it but had chosen a nearby restaurant with a
licence. It was an agreeable change not to be crowded into a suburban
sitting room or ‘lounge’, invariably furnished in appalling taste, forced to
drink sweet sherry or the inevitable cups of tea. Would it be in the least
appropriate, he wondered, to suggest what he really felt like at this moment
—a dry Martini?

‘Something to drink, I feel,’ said Edwin, echoing Father G.’s thought.
Yes, one does feel.. ,’ Letty murmured.
‘It takes it out of you, a day like this,’ Norman said awkwardly. He had

been going to say that what takes it out of you is a funeral but somehow the
word did not come, as if he did not like to think of it, let alone say the word
out loud.

Father G., thus encouraged, felt justified in being brisk and taking action.

He summoned a waiter and ordered drinks—medium sherry for Edwin and
Norman, a dry Martini for himself, and for the lady … Letty’s hesitation,
her slight feeling that perhaps they ought not to be drinking when poor
Marcia had never touched a drop, was taken by Father G. to be womanly
modesty or ignorance of what was available. ‘Why not try a dry Martini?’
he suggested. ‘That will pull you together.’

‘Yes, I do feel as if I needed something like that,’ she agreed, and when

the drink came it did seem to achieve a kind of pulling together. There is
something in it, she thought, the comfort of drink at a time like this. It also
had the effect of making her realize that while poor Marcia was no longer
with them she and the others were very much alive—Edwin, his usual grey
solemn self, Norman, obviously in a state of some emotion, and Father G.,
the efficient bossy clergyman. Looking round the restaurant, she noticed an
arrangement of artificial sweet peas in unnaturally bright colours, a party of
businessmen at a long table, and two smartly dressed women comparing
patterns of curtain material. Conscious of her own aliveness, she allowed
Father G. to persuade her to choose oeufs Florentine, because it sounded
attractive, while he himself had a steak, Edwin grilled plaice, and Norman
cauliflower au gratin. ‘I don’t feel like much,’ Norman added, subtly
making the others feel that they ought not to have felt like much either.

You’ve retired now?’ Father G. asked, making conversation with Letty.

‘That must be…’ he cast about for a word to describe what Letty’s
retirement must be ‘… a great opportunity,’ he brought out, all life being
nothing so much as a great opportunity.

‘Yes, it certainly is!’ The dry Martini had encouraged Letty to a greater

appreciation of her present state. ‘I find I can do all sorts of things now.’

‘We could take that in more ways than one,’ said Norman, with a return

of his usual jaunty manner. ‘It makes us wonder what you get up to.’

‘Nothing, really,’ said Letty, inhibited by the presence of Father G. ‘I just

have more time to do things—reading and other kind of work.’

‘Ah, yes, social work.’ Father G. nodded approvingly.
‘I think Letty is more likely to be on the receiving end of the social

worker’s ministrations,’ said Edwin. ‘After all, she is a retired person, a
senior citizen, you might say.’

Letty felt it a little unfair of Edwin to lump her into this category, when

she had hardly any grey hairs in spite of her age, and Father G. seemed to
draw away from her at this unattractive classification. He did not much care
for the aged, the elderly, or just ‘old people’, whatever you liked to call
them.

‘What about the next course?’ Edwin asked.
‘Do you remember the last time?’ Norman asked suddenly. ‘What we had

then?’

‘I think you and I had apple pie and ice cream,’ Letty said.

and he tried to get Marcia to have some but she wouldn’t.’

There was silence and for a moment nobody could think of anything else

to say. They may all have been aware that at a time of bereavement it is best
not to bottle things up. Marcia’s name had not been mentioned up to now
and perhaps it was fitting that Norman should be the one to bring it out.

‘She always had such a small appetite,’ Letty said at last.
‘Never a big eater,’ Norman’s voice seemed as if it might break on these

words but he controlled himself.

I must ask him round to a meal one evening, Edwin thought, give him a

chance to talk about her if he wants to. He did not much look forward to the
prospect but things like this had to be done and one couldn’t expect always
to enjoy doing one’s Christian duty.

‘What is going to happen to Miss Ivory’s house?’ asked Father G., as if

the mention of property might bring the conversation up to a higher level. I
suppose it will be left to that—er—relative?’

‘The young man in the bead necklace or his mother, I suppose,’ said

Edwin. I believe those were her only relatives.’

‘If it were smartened up a bit it would be quite a desirable property,’

Father G. said, in a condescending estate-agent’s tone.

‘What do you mean, if it was smartened a bit?’ Norman asked

aggressively.

Father G. smiled. ‘Well, you know, it could have done with a lick of paint

—that was my impression. Now, what about some ice cream?’ he asked in a
soothing tone, feeling that ice cream might act like oil on troubled waters
and pacify the angry Norman more effectively than any words of his.
 

‘We finished off with ice cream,’ Letty said. ‘There were so many

different kinds, it was like being a child again. Even Norman said he’d
always liked strawberry ice. I think it cheered him up in a sort of way.’

‘I couldn’t decide whether you’d be hungry or not,’ Mrs Pope said. ‘One

never knows after a funeral.’

Letty was surprised and obscurely comforted to realize that Mrs Pope had

been thinking of her to the extent of wondering whether she would need a
meal. The time—just after five o’clock—was an unpromising one for
anything except a ‘high tea’ and that seemed inappropriate.

‘Edwin seemed to know this restaurant quite near, so that was very

convenient,’ Letty explained.

had eaten. Steak for Father G. had seemed suitable, for after all he had
taken the service and in some way, Mrs Pope commented, the clergy
appeared to relish meat and even to need it. Oeufs Florentine, Letty’s
choice, sounded frivolous and unfeeling, on a par with wearing something
in ‘French navy’ to the funeral. What was it about the French, or the idea of
the French? Surely now that we were a part of the EEC things would be
different, attitudes would change? Or would we be infected by their
supposed frivolity? So Letty just said that she had had ‘an egg dish’.

‘Well, eggs are as nourishing as meat in their way,’ Mrs Pope

pronounced, ‘so you probably won’t feel like another egg now.

comfortable chat about crematoria.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Twenty-two

NORMAN WENT INTO Marcia’s house, using the front door key which had

been handed over to him by the solicitor. He entered ‘the dwelling of Miss
Marcia Joan Ivory, deceased’. That was how he put it to himself and how,
shocked into his usual flippancy, he had discussed with Edwin the
astonishing news that Marcia had left her house to him. The will had
evidently been made just after her operation, at a time when she had been
forced to face up to the future. Her money, such as it was, had been left to
her cousin, with a legacy for the son. ‘He’ll be able to buy himself another
string of beads,’ was Norman’s comment.

‘Norman, the Man of Property,’ Edwin teased, and it seemed to redress

the balance between them, now that Norman also had a house and need no
longer be an object of pity, alone in his bedsitter. Yet it would really have
been more suitable if Marcia had left her house to Letty, also alone in a
bedsitter though she did have the company of Mrs Pope. ‘Are you going to
live in it?’ Edwin asked, remembering the state the house had been in when
he and Father G. had gone in that time. It’ll need a bit doing to it,’ he
couldn’t resist adding. ‘I shouldn’t be surprised if the roof leaked.’

‘Oh, so what!’ said Norman. ‘Who cares about the roof?’
‘Well, water might come in—rain and snow.’
‘We don’t get much snow in London, not south of the river, anyway.’
‘Did you know about this—had you any idea?’
‘What do you think? Of course I hadn’t.’
‘She used to make coffee for you, remember,’ Edwin persisted.
‘That was only because she thought it cheaper to share the large economy

tin, as you’ve already pointed out more than once,’ Norman retorted
angrily.

They had parted slightly annoyed with each other, and the next day

Norman had taken a day off to go and look at the house. He had a few extra
bits of leave still owing to him, so there was no difficulty about that. Who
would ever have thought that one of those extra days would have come in
useful on this sort of occasion? God moves in a mysterious way, his
wonders to perform, and you could certainly call this a wonder.

Marcia had been careful about burglars, especially when she was out all
day. Standing in the hall, Norman noticed the solid Edwardian furniture—
hatstand, table and chairs—rather than the dust over everything, for of
course it would be dusty after all this time, stands to reason, he said to
himself. He wandered from room to room, seeing not himself in possession
but Marcia as she must have been in the time he had known her but never
been invited here. If she had invited him, would things have been any
different? But she never would have invited him—that was the essence of
their relationship. So it had been a relationship, had it? He remembered that
time she had followed him into the BM, and he had been trapped in front of
those animals, gaping at them with a crowd of school kids, stuck there until
it was safe to go. She thought he hadn’t seen her, but he had, and after that
he hadn’t gone to the museum again, just trotted off to the library. Then
there had been the making of the coffee, that Edwin was always going on
about—there hadn’t really been much in that…

Norman ascended the stairs. He came into a room that might have been

her bedroom. It had shabby, rose-flowered wallpaper and a faded patterned
carpet. There was a table by the bed, and on it some books, an anthology of
poetry, which surprised him, and a collection of pamphlets, the sort of thing
you got in the library, giving details of services available for the retired and
elderly. There was an old, rather dirty white candle wick cover over the bed
and the sheets and pillows were still on it, just as they had been. This was
the bed where she had slept, where she had dreamed, and where she had
reached the point of death, though she hadn’t actually died in it. Edwin and
Father G. had found her downstairs, sitting at the kitchen table.

Norman advanced to the dressing table, with its swinging mirror, which

stood in the window. So she had wanted a good light to see her face in, a
cruelly revealing light, showing every line? Yet Marcia hadn’t been one to
look much at herself in the glass, he suspected. She hadn’t seemed to care
much about her appearance at the best of times, even with the dyed hair. At
the end, Sister had said something about her lovely white hair, so perhaps
the dye had grown out by then and somebody had cut off the dark ends. She
had looked quite beautiful, Sister said, so calm and peaceful, but no doubt
they always said that to the relatives, they must have to do quite a lot of
what he thought of as soft-soaping in hospitals—Marcia looking beautiful
—that would be the day! Yet, now that he knew that she had left him the

house, he was prepared to believe that she might have been almost
beautiful.

There was a chest of drawers, presumably containing her clothes and her

bits and pieces. He didn’t particularly want to see those but he was drawn
by curiosity. Tentatively, as if he were violating the sanctity of her secret
office drawer, he opened one of the drawers. To his surprise, it was full of
plastic bags of various sizes, all neatly folded and classified by size and
type. There was something almost admirable about the arrangement,
unexpected and yet just the sort of thing he could imagine Marcia doing.

He closed the drawer and stood in the middle of the room, wondering

what to do. Surely he couldn’t be expected to cope with all her mess, it was
a woman’s job. Letty ought to be here, sorting out the things, deciding what
to do with the clothes. Perhaps he should get in touch with her, that was the
obvious thing, unless the distant cousin could be approached; perhaps as a
relative she had a prior claim. She had been too upset to attend the funeral
but a few perks, like clothes and the odd stick of furniture, might work
wonders on her sensibility.

Thinking about this, Norman moved into another room and stood looking

out of a side window. From here he had a view of well-maintained and
painted houses and neat gardens, the residences of his future neighbours,
should he decide to live in the house himself.
 

‘There’s a man looking out of the window,’ said Priscilla. ‘He’s in Miss

Ivory’s house. Do you suppose it’s all right?’

‘Perhaps we ought to investigate,’ said Janice. She and Priscilla were

sitting on the patio, drinking coffee. It was a marvellously sunny October
day, a real Indian summer. Janice had been going to visit one of her cases in
a nearby street, but the old person had been taken off for a drive by one of
the enthusiastic amateur do-gooders from the church—annoying, the way
social-services wires sometimes got crossed, though it meant that she had
an unexpectedly free morning. So she had dropped in on Priscilla for a
welcome cup of coffee and a gossip. Not exactly gossip, more to speculate
on what might happen to Miss Ivory’s house, what sort of neighbours Nigel
and Priscilla might be getting.

‘It looks like one of those men who were at the funeral,’ Priscilla said

‘You know, the men who worked in that office place.’

What would he be doing in the house?’ Janice asked. ‘He never came to

see Miss Ivory when she was alive.’ Her tone reflected some of the
indignation she felt at the idea that Miss Ivory might have had friends who
were perfectly capable of visiting her but never did. Yet wasn’t it her job,
her justification, her raison d’être, the loneliness of people like Miss Ivory?
You couldn’t have it all ways, as her husband sometimes reminded her. If
the friends and relatives did their stuff, Janice might well be out of a job.

‘Why don’t we go over and see,’ said Priscilla boldly. We can always say

we noticed somebody in the house and wondered if it was all right. After
all, we don’t know him from Adam, do we?’

That social worker and her friend, the woman who lives next door,

Norman thought, as he saw them coming to the house. What do they want?

door an unfriendly crack.

Such an odd little man, thought Priscilla, preparing to assume her coolest

social manner, but Janice got in first.

Rather a pointless thing to say, she realized, as it might appear that she
hadn’t been all that successful. ‘We saw somebody at an upstairs window,’
she went on quickly.

‘Yes, me,’ said Norman. ‘It’s my house now. Miss Ivory left it to me in

her will.’

Norman was prepared for the gasp of unflattering astonishment that met

his announcement. It seemed as if they hardly believed him. The one called
‘Priscilla’ was a tall blonde, wearing velvet trousers, and the other (I’m
Janice Brabner, he mimicked to himself) was shorter and squatter, a real
bossy social-worker type. She was the first one to speak, after he had
dropped his bombshell.

‘Are you sure?’ she said.
‘Sure? Of course I’m sure!’ Norman retorted indignantly.
‘Oh, that is nice,’ said Priscilla. She was not so stupid as to imagine that

gushing social insincerity would get her anywhere with Norman, but it had
occurred to her that if this person was going to be their new neighbour it
would be just as well to get on to good terms with him. All the same she
very much hoped that he wasn’t going to be. What she really wanted was a
young couple of about the same age as herself and Nigel, perhaps with
children, so that they could do mutual baby-sitting when she and Nigel

decided to start a family. The sort of people one could ask to dinner, which
this odd little man, and whatever friends he might have, hardly seemed to
be.

But Janice, with no stake in the future, could afford to be blunter. ‘Are

you going to live here?’ she asked, straight out.

‘I haven’t made up my mind,’ Norman said. ‘I might decide to live here,

and again I might not.’

At this stage the two women moved away, leaving Norman feeling that

he had got the better of them. He did not go into the house again but began
to explore that garden - ‘explore’ was the word, he decided, when you
almost had to hack your way through the undergrowth. There was a garden
shed, the kind of thing that might come in useful, and he saw himself
arranging his tools and his ‘gear’ there. Perhaps Marcia had a lawn mower,
a fork, a spade and a hoe, though it didn’t look as if she had made much use
of them lately. He pushed open the door of the shed. There were certainly
some tools in one corner, but most of the space was taken up with rows of
milk bottles stacked on shelves; there must have been over a hundred of
them.

At this point Norman felt he couldn’t cope any more. The small-scale

stuffiness of his bedsitter seemed suddenly very cosy and attractively safe,
so he decided to go back to it, ‘home’ as it still was. All the same, he was
now a house owner and it was up to him to decide what to do with the
property, whether to live in it himself or to sell it, and houses in that street
were fetching a tidy sum judging by the others he had seen there. The fact
that the decision rested with him, that he had the power to influence the
lives of people like Priscilla and her husband, gave him a quite new,
hitherto unexperienced sensation—a good feeling, like a dog with two tails,
as people sometimes put it—and he walked to the bus stop with his head
held high.

That same evening, on the other side of the common, Edwin returned

from the office, wondering what sort of a day Norman had spent in what he
still thought of as ‘Marcia’s house’. In other circumstances he might have
strolled over there but tonight, being the 18th of October and St Luke’s day,
he was hoping to find an evening Mass somewhere. The lunchtime
churches had yielded nothing, a sad contrast to the days when Father
Thames, and later Father Bode, had attracted a crowd of office workers.
Edwin also thought regretfully of another church where he had often gone

in the past, which would have provided a splendid service, but that church
was no more. A scandal in the early fifties—Edwin remembered it well—
had put an end to the splendid services, the congregation had fallen away
and in the end the church had been closed as redundant. An office block
now stood on the spot where the air had once been filled with incense. It
was a sad story, but the upshot of it was that there would be no St Luke’s
day evening Mass there. Luke, the beloved physician. You would have
thought that the church opposite the hospital where Marcia had died would
be filled with devout consultants—surgeons and physicians—housemen and
nurses, on this day, but not a bit of it. The St Luke’s there was the kind of
church that had only the bare mimimum of Sunday services and nothing on
weekdays. Now that he came to think of it, Edwin had grave suspicions that
Mr Strong, Marcia’s surgeon, was not any kind of churchgoer. Something
he had said, some disparaging remark he had made about the chaplain …
Still, that didn’t solve the problem of the St Luke’s day service and
eventually the idea had to be given up.

Then it occurred to Edwin that he might give Letty a ring. At the funeral

he had got the impression that she was a bit lonely, even living with Mrs
Pope. After all, though it had been a good idea for her to go there as a
lodger, was the company of a woman in her eighties quite enough for Letty?
With this idea in his mind, he went to the telephone and dialled the number,
but it was engaged. He decided to leave it for today and try again tomorrow
or whenever he happened to remember it. After all, there was no hurry.
 

OceanofPDF.com

Twenty three

LETTY HAD AN old-fashioned respect for the clergy which seemed

outmoded in the seventies, when it was continually being brought home to
her that in many ways they were just like other men, or even more so. The
emphasis on humanity, in which we all share, had been the burden of a
sermon she had recently heard at Mrs Pope’s church, as if the preacher were
preparing his congregation for some particularly outrageous piece of
behaviour. In his case it had been no more than the removal of some of the
pews at the back of the church to provide a space where the younger
children could be accommodated during the service, but of course it had
been greeted with indignant opposition by some.

‘He is determined to ride roughshod over us,’ Mrs Pope declared.
Letty, shocked by the violence of Mrs Pope’s concept, had been about to

say a word in the vicar’s favour, when the telephone rang. Had it been a
moment earlier (or later) it would have been Edwin, prompted by a friendly
gesture towards Letty’s supposed loneliness, but as it happened it was
Marjorie, ‘that friend of yours who’s going to marry that clergyman’, as
Mrs Pope sometimes put it. But now, it appeared, Marjorie was not going to
marry him. What Letty gathered from the incoherent outburst was that for
some reason—it was a bad line, and she could not gather exactly what the
reason was—the engagement had been broken off.

‘Beth Doughty,’ Marjorie wailed. ‘And I had no idea…’
For a moment Letty couldn’t remember who Beth Doughty was, then it

came back to her. The warden of Holmhurst, the home for retired
gentlefolk, that was Beth Doughty—the efficient woman with the rigid
hairstyle, who poured such generous gins, who knew the kind of food
David Lydell liked and remembered his passion for Orvieto. There was
something shocking in the idea of two women competing for the love of a
clergyman with the lure of food and wine, but the whole pattern slotted into
place. Humanity in which we all share…

When the telephone was at last laid down, the main point that emerged

was that Letty must go to Marjorie as soon as possible. Not, of course, this
evening—there was no suitable train—but first thing tomorrow morning.

He has broken off the engagement,’ she said. It seems there’s another
woman—the warden of an old people’s home.’

It sounded very bad, put like that, and the involvement, however

indirectly, of ‘old people’ seemed particularly distressing.

‘Really…’ Mrs Pope could think of nothing to say that would adequately

express her feelings. Compared with this, the removal of a few pews from
the back of her own church was as nothing. ‘You will want to go to her, of
course,’ she added, not without a touch of envy.

‘Yes, first thing in the morning,’ said Letty. She felt curiously elated, a

feeling she tried to suppress but it would not go away. She began to plan
what sort of clothes she would take for this unexpected visit to Marjorie.
The weather had been very warm for October, but she must remember that
it was always colder in the country.
 
 

‘His gastric trouble, and then there was his mother being over ninety, and

in a way…’ Marjorie hesitated, ‘the age difference. He was some years
younger than I am, of course.’

Letty murmured sympathetically, for she had known all these things and

now that Marjorie was explaining what had happened, how he had seemed
reluctant to fix the date of the wedding—it had already been put off once
because of his mother’s health—it seemed remarkable to consider that he
had ever agreed to get married at all. And how had Beth Doughty managed
it, for surely that needed to be explained? The other factors would still
apply, and it wasn’t as if she was much younger than Marjorie.

Marjorie didn’t seem to know the answer to this or she was too upset to

discuss the matter further. Letty began to wonder whether Beth Doughty
might not also be rejected in her turn, whether no woman would succeed in
bringing David Lydell to the point of marriage, but she did not say anything
of this.

‘You can’t know what a woman is up to,’ Marjorie said. ‘It’s something

that can never be expected or explained.’

Letty agreed that this was very true and found herself thinking of Marcia

leaving her house to Norman, a perfect example of the unpredictability of
women. And now, with Marcia dead, her action could never be explained.

‘Where will David Lydell go?’ Letty asked.

‘Go? That’s almost the worst part of it—he won’t be going anywhere.

He’ll be staying here.’

‘He’s decided to stay here?’
‘I don’t know about decided—I don’t think he’s considered moving.’
‘Well, I suppose he hasn’t been in the village very long, but in the

circumstances …’ Letty was uncertain of her ground here and felt unable to
go any further. And yet, when one came to think of it, why should David
Lydell leave the district? He had done nothing worse than change his mind
and, as people were always saying, it was better to discover this kind of
mistake sooner rather than later. ‘Where will he live?’ she went on. ‘Surely
not at the old peoples home—at Holmhurst?’

‘I don’t think so—I suppose they’ll move into the vicarage.’
That uncomfortable vicarage, that needed so much doing to it, Letty

remembered. Perhaps it was just what he deserved. ‘But won’t it distress
him to think of you alone here?’ she said.

‘Oh, Letty…’ Marjorie’s smile was indulgent, as if making allowances

for her friend’s unworldliness. ‘Anyway, I have a feeling that I may not be
alone for long.’

‘Really?’ This coy admission made Letty wonder what Marjorie could

possibly mean. Surely it was much too soon for another likely husband to
have appeared in the village?

‘Why, don’t you see.. ,’ Marjorie began to explain and then of course

Letty did see. Now that there was to be no marriage the plans for Letty’s
retirement could be carried out as before, just as if nothing had happened to
change them. She would (naturally) be moving into the country to join
Marjorie as soon as arrangements could be made.

Marjorie met somebody else to marry, what would happen to Letty then? In
the past she had always trailed behind Marjorie, when the two of them were
together, but there was no reason why this should always be the pattern. She
decided that she would think the matter over, not make up her mind
immediately.

‘I suppose you’ve sent back his ring,’ she said, deliberately returning to

the matter of the broken engagement.

‘Oh, goodness no—David wanted me to keep it. I suppose he could

hardly have asked for it back, under the circumstances.’

keep it,’ said Letty.

I’ve always wanted an antique ring,’ Marjorie babbled on, saying how
much more interesting such a ring was than the conventional small diamond
of her first marriage. ‘And when one’s older, one’s hands seem to thicken
and the fingers get fatter, so a larger ring looks better.’ She spread out her
left hand, still wearing the moonstone, appraisingly for Letty to see.
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

Twenty-Four

WONDERS WILL NEVER cease—that’s all I have to say.’ Norman took a

corned-beef sandwich out of a plastic bag.

We’ve certainly had abundant proof of that,’ said Edwin, busy with a tea

bag. I had Mrs Pope on the telephone last night and she told me the whole
story. Letty’s friend rang up to say that the whole thing was off—she wasn’t
going to get married after all. Of course she was very upset—that’s why
Letty went down there.’

‘What could she do? Listen to her friend going on about her loss, I

suppose. Old Letty never strikes me as being much use in a crisis.’

‘Perhaps she can’t do all that much—but the presence of a woman

friend.. ,’ Edwin hesitated, not knowing how to classify the type of comfort
Letty might be capable of providing.

‘Oh, yes, I agree—women certainly have their uses.’
‘Especially if they leave you houses in their wills,’ Edwin said, in a

jocular tone. ‘You must be getting quite used to being a property owner.’

‘I’m going to sell it,’ Norman said. ‘I wouldn’t fancy living in it.’
‘Yes, that’s the best thing—it would be much too big for you,’ Edwin

pointed out, reasonably enough.

‘Oh, I don’t know so much about that,’ said Norman huffily. ‘It’s only an

ordinary semi, you know, just like yours, and you don’t find yours too big. I
don’t necessarily want to end my days in a bedsitter.’

‘No, of course not.’ Edwin’s tone was the soothing one he generally used

to pacify the angry little man.

‘I suppose I’m more likely to end my days in an old people’s home,’ said

Norman, taking up the large economy size of instant coffee. It says “Family
Size” here—funny, really, when it’s mostly used by people in offices.’ He
spooned coffee powder into a mug. ‘Of course you do save a bit—that’s
what Marcia and I thought.’

Edwin made no comment. In his silence he agitated his tea bag with a

spoon; a stream of amber-coloured liquid was released into the boiling
water. Then he added the usual slice of lemon, stirred it and prepared to
drink. Norman’s words, the way he had said ‘Marcia and I’, had made him
wonder whether the two of them could ever have married. Yet it was

impossible to imagine how such an event could have been brought about. If
they had met many years ago, when they were both younger? Apart from
the difficulty of picturing them being younger, they probably wouldn’t have
been attracted to each other at that time, and even now the idea of
‘attraction’ seemed ridiculous when you applied it to Norman and Marcia.
And yet what was it that brought people together, even the most unlikely
people? Edwin had only the haziest memories of his own courtship and
marriage, in the days when he had been a server at the spikiest Anglo-
Catholic church where Phyllis was a member of the congregation. In the
thirties people did get married in a way that they seemed not to now, or at
least not to the same extent, he qualified. Supposing Marcia had not died,
could she and Norman have married and lived in her house? It was
something he felt he could not ask Norman …

But now Norman was breaking into Edwin’s unspoken thoughts and

asking his advice about a matter that seemed to be troubling him

‘All those clothes and things, what am I to do about them?’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Marcia’s clothes and the things in the house. Of course the nephew—the

one in the kaftan and beads—was taking some odds and ends, but he said
his mum didn’t want to be bothered, said I was to do what I liked. I—I ask
you!’ Norman kicked the wastepaper basket with an angry gesture.

‘What about that neighbour and the social worker—the ones who were at

the funeral?’

‘The sexy blonde and the bossy do-gooding bitch?’ Irritation seemed to

add violent colour to Norman’s way of expressing himself. ‘Catch me
asking them!’

‘Well, there must be somebody at the local church … somebody who

could make use of them.’

‘You would suggest that. No doubt your friend Father G. would come to

the rescue.’

‘I’m sure he would,’ said Edwin, on the defensive. ‘Old clothes are

always welcome for jumble sales.’

‘Jumble sales! Thank you very much! So that’s what you think Marcia’s

clothes would be.’

‘Well, you must admit the last time we saw her she did look a bit odd,’

Edwin began, but then he stopped himself. This pointless bickering was
getting them nowhere. Perhaps Norman was remembering Marcia

differently now—a gracious white-haired woman with a sweet expression,
as Sister had described her at the end. ‘Have you thought of asking Letty?’
he asked. ‘I’m sure she would help.’

having a stranger.’
 
 

‘What are we going to do with all these milk bottles?’ Edwin asked.
‘I don’t know,’ said Norman. ‘What would you do—just leave them?’
‘I suppose I’d get rid of them gradually—put out a few for the milkman

every day.’

We could start by putting some out now,’ Letty suggested.
‘Yes, they’re always telling us to rinse and return,’ said Norman.
‘And these are spotlessly clean,’ Edwin pointed out.
‘I wonder if Marcia would be angry to think of us doing this,’ said Letty.

‘She must have had some plan in mind, keeping them all in the shed, so
beautifully washed and arranged.’

The three of them had spent an interesting afternoon in Marcia’s house,

going through her things. Letty had been most surprised at the clothes,
stowed away in wardrobes and drawers, dresses of the thirties and earlier,
now coming back into fashion, some of them obviously belonging to
Marcia’s mother. Things Marcia herself must have worn when she was
young before any of them had known her. And there had also been clothes
she must have bought comparatively recently, most of which seemed
inexplicably unworn. Had she been keeping them for some special occasion
which had never arisen? It was impossible to know now.

kitchen it had been even more surprising to open the store cupboard and
come upon such an array of tinned foods.

‘Whatever can she have bought all this stuff for?’ Edwin exclaimed.
‘Well, you buy tinned stuff, don’t you?’ Norman was immediately on the

defensive. ‘What’s so surprising about it?’

‘But she never seemed to eat anything,’ Letty said.
‘Never a big eater, she used to say,’ Norman reminded them.
‘I suppose she was prudent, like Mrs Thatcher,’ said Edwin. ‘What with

prices going up the way they have been…’

‘And will continue to go up, whatever government is in power,’ Norman

snapped.

‘So beautifully arranged and classified,’ said Letty, with wonder in her

tone. ‘Meat and fish and fruit, and here soups and macaroni cheese and
ravioli…’

—it was a godsend when I had that time with my teeth.’

‘Yes, it would be,’ said Letty, her tone now warm with sympathy.
‘I think Norman had better have this stuff,’ said Edwin. ‘After all, if the

cousin and her son have given you the go-ahead…’

‘Well, I suppose the son might have some—a young man living in a

hippy pad would probably be glad of a few tins. Luckily he doesn’t seem to
know quite how many there are. Why don’t we all take a few for ourselves
now,’ said Norman.

Hesitantly, for it seemed very wrong to be helping themselves to

Marcia’s store cupboard like this, the three of them began making their
selection. In some subtle way this reflected their different characters. Edwin
chose spam and stewing steak, Letty prawns and peach halves, Norman
sardines, soup, butter beans and the macaroni cheese.

Then, in the bottom corner of the cupboard, they came upon a bottle of

sherry, unopened. It was a Cyprus cream sherry, reputedly made from
grapes growing in vineyards which had once belonged to the Queen of
Sheba.

‘Shall we open it?’ Norman asked. ‘Don’t you think she must have meant

it for us, perhaps for this very occasion?’

‘She could hardly have imagined us all here like this,’ Letty said. I mean,

without her.’

‘Perhaps we should do as Norman suggests,’ said Edwin. ‘After all, it

may well have been what Marcia would have wished, given the exceptional
circumstances.’ That was perhaps the best way of putting it, for it wasn’t
quite like every day. And surely, he felt, if anyone could claim to know
what Marcia might have meant or wished, could attempt to probe such a
mystery, it might be Norman?

‘Queen of Sheba,’ said Norman, who had found glasses and was pouring

out generous measures of the golden liquid, ‘I like that! Here’s to us, then.’

‘I suppose you’ll be moving down to the country, Letty, now that your

friend’s not getting married after all,’ Edwin said, the glow of the drink

adding to the pleasure he felt at the improvement in Letty’s prospects. It
seemed to round things off in a most satisfactory way.

‘I haven’t decided,’ she said. ‘I’m not at all sure that I want to live in the

country now.’

‘That’s right,’ said Norman, ‘don’t you do anything you don’t want to do,

or let anybody tell you what you ought to do. Make up your own mind. It’s
your life, after all.’

‘But I thought you loved the country,’ said Edwin, dismay in his tone, for

surely all middle-aged or elderly women loved, or ought to love, the
country?

‘I don’t think I love it exactly,’ said Letty, thinking of the dead birds and

mangled rabbits and the cruel-tongued village people. It was just that it
seemed a suitable arrangement when we made it. Now I feel that I have a
choice.’ She took a long draught of the sweet sherry and experienced a most
agreeable sensation, almost a feeling of power. She felt as Norman had felt
when he discovered that he could influence the lives of other people by
deciding whether to live in Marcia’s house or not. Letty now realized that
both Marjorie and Mrs Pope would be waiting to know what she had
decided to do.

‘But surely you don’t want to stay in London?’ Edwin persisted.
‘I don’t know. I shall have to think about it,’ Letty said. ‘Oh, and that

reminds me,’ she added, ‘Marjorie wondered if you two would like a day in
the country. We could all go down there for lunch.’

She could not help smiling, for from a practical point of view there was

something slightly ludicrous in the picture of them all—Marjorie and Letty
and the two men—squashed up together in the Morris.

Edwin and Norman,’ Marjorie had said, lingering over the names, wouldn’t
it be rather nice to invite them down for a day?’

Any new interest that might take Marjorie’s mind off her disappointment

was to be encouraged, Letty felt, though it was difficult to think of Edwin
and Norman as objects of romantic speculation, and two less country-loving
people could hardly be imagined. But at least it made one realize that life
still held infinite possibilities for change.

OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents

Title page
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
Fourteen
Fifteen
Sixteen
Seventeen
Eighteen
Nineteen
Twenty
Twenty-one
Twenty-two
Twenty three
Twenty-Four

OceanofPDF.com

