Pat Barker

Contents

REGENERATION

Part One

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

FIVE

SIX

SEVEN

Part Two

EIGHT

NINE

TEN

ELEVEN

TWELVE

THIRTEEN

Part Three

FOURTEEN

FIFTEEN

SIXTEEN

Part Four

SEVENTEEN

EIGHTEEN

NINETEEN

TWENTY

TWENTY-ONE

TWENTY-TWO

TWENTY-THREE

Author’s Note

THE EYE IN THE DOOR

Part One

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

FIVE

SIX

SEVEN

EIGHT

NINE

Part Two

TEN

ELEVEN

TWELVE

THIRTEEN

FOURTEEN

FIFTEEN

SIXTEEN

Part Three

SEVENTEEN

EIGHTEEN

NINETEEN

TWENTY

TWENTY-ONE

Author’s Note

THE GHOST ROAD

Part One

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

FIVE

SIX

Part Two

SEVEN

EIGHT

NINE

TEN

ELEVEN

TWELVE

THIRTEEN

Part Three

FOURTEEN

FIFTEEN

SIXTEEN

SEVENTEEN

EIGHTEEN

Author’s Note

Follow Penguin

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

Union Street

Blow Your House Down

Liza’s England (formerly The Century’s Daughter)

The Man Who Wasn’t There

For David,

and in loving memory of Dr John Hawkings

(1922–1987)

REGENERATION

Part One

ONE

Finished with the War
A Soldier’s Declaration

I am making this statement as an act of wilful defiance of military authority, because I
believe the war is being deliberately prolonged by those who have the power to end it.

I am a soldier, convinced that I am acting on behalf of soldiers. I believe that this war,

upon which I entered as a war of defence and liberation, has now become a war of
aggression and conquest. I believe that the purposes for which I and my fellow soldiers
entered upon this war should have been so clearly stated as to have made it impossible to
change them, and that, had this been done, the objects which actuated us would now be
attainable by negotiation.

I have seen and endured the suffering of the troops, and I can no longer be a party to

prolong these sufferings for ends which I believe to be evil and unjust.

I am not protesting against the conduct of the war, but against the political errors and

insincerities for which the fighting men are being sacrificed.

On behalf of those who are suffering now I make this protest against the deception

which is being practised on them; also I believe that I may help to destroy the callous
complacence with which the majority of those at home regard the continuance of agonies
which they do not share, and which they have not sufficient imagination to realize.

S. Sassoon
July 1917

Bryce waited for Rivers to finish reading before he spoke again. ‘The “S”
stands for “Siegfried”. Apparently, he thought that was better left out.’

‘And I’m sure he was right.’ Rivers folded the paper and ran his

fingertips along the edge. ‘So they’re sending him here?’

Bryce smiled. ‘Oh, I think it’s rather more specific than that. They’re

sending him to you.’

Rivers got up and walked across to the window. It was a fine day, and

many of the patients were in the hospital grounds, watching a game of

tennis. He heard the pok-pok of rackets, and a cry of frustration as a ball
smashed into the net. ‘I suppose he is – “shell-shocked”?’

‘According to the Board, yes.’
‘It just occurs to me that a diagnosis of neurasthenia might not be

inconvenient confronted with this.’ He held up the Declaration.

‘Colonel Langdon chaired the Board. He certainly seems to think he is.’
‘Langdon doesn’t believe in shell-shock.’
Bryce shrugged. ‘Perhaps Sassoon was gibbering all over the floor.’
‘ “Funk, old boy.” I know Langdon.’ Rivers came back to his chair and

sat down. ‘He doesn’t sound as if he’s gibbering, does he?’

Bryce said carefully, ‘Does it matter what his mental state is? Surely it’s

better for him to be here than in prison?’

‘Better for him, perhaps. What about the hospital? Can you imagine what

our dear Director of Medical Services is going to say, when he finds out
we’re sheltering “conchies” as well as cowards, shirkers, scrimshankers and
degenerates? We’ll just have to hope there’s no publicity.’

‘There’s going to be, I’m afraid. The Declaration’s going to be read out in

the House of Commons next week.’

‘By?’
‘Lees-Smith.’
Rivers made a dismissive gesture.
‘Yes, well, I know. But it still means the press.’
‘And the minister will say that no disciplinary action has been taken,

because Mr Sassoon is suffering from a severe mental breakdown, and
therefore not responsible for his actions. I’m not sure I’d prefer that to
prison.’

‘I don’t suppose he was offered the choice. Will you take him?’
‘You mean I am being offered a choice?’
‘In view of your case load, yes.’
Rivers took off his glasses and swept his hand down across his eyes. ‘I

suppose they have remembered to send the file?’

Sassoon leant out of the carriage window, still half-expecting to see Graves
come pounding along the platform, looking even more dishevelled than
usual. But further down the train, doors had already begun to slam, and the
platform remained empty.

The whistle blew. Immediately, he saw lines of men with grey muttering

faces clambering up the ladders to face the guns. He blinked them away.

The train began to move. Too late for Robert now. Prisoner arrives

without escort, Sassoon thought, sliding open the carriage door.

By arriving an hour early he’d managed to get a window seat. He began

picking his way across to it through the tangle of feet. An elderly vicar, two
middle-aged men, both looking as if they’d done rather well out of the war,
a young girl and an older woman, obviously travelling together. The train
bumped over a point. Everybody rocked and swayed, and Sassoon,
stumbling, almost fell into the vicar’s lap. He mumbled an apology and sat
down. Admiring glances, and not only from the women. Sassoon turned to
look out of the window, hunching his shoulder against them all.

After a while he stopped pretending to look at the smoking chimneys of

Liverpool’s back streets and closed his eyes. He needed to sleep, but instead
Robert’s face floated in front of him, white and twitching as it had been last
Sunday, almost a week ago now, in the lounge of the Exchange Hotel.

For a moment, looking up to find that khaki-clad figure standing just inside
the door, he thought he was hallucinating again.

‘Robert, what on earth are you doing here?’ He jumped up and ran across

the lounge. ‘Thank God you’ve come.’

‘I got myself passed fit.’
‘Robert, no.’
‘What else could I do? After getting this.’ Graves dug into his tunic

pocket and produced a crumpled piece of paper. ‘A covering letter would
have been nice.’

‘I wrote.’
‘No, you didn’t, Sass. You just sent me this. Couldn’t you at least have

talked about it first?’

‘I thought I’d written.’
They sat down, facing each other across a small table. Cold northern light

streamed in through the high windows, draining Graves’s face of the little
colour it had.

‘Sass, you’ve got to give this up.’
‘Give it up? You don’t think I’ve come this far, do you, just to give in

now?’

‘Look, you’ve made your protest. For what it’s worth, I agree with every

word of it. But you’ve had your say. There’s no point making a martyr of
yourself.’

‘The only way I can get publicity is to make them court-martial me.’
‘They won’t do it.’
‘Oh, yes, they will. It’s just a matter of hanging on.’
‘You’re in no state to stand a court-martial.’ Graves clasped his clenched

fist. ‘If I had Russell here now, I’d shoot him.’

‘It was my idea.’
‘Oh, pull the other one. And even if it was, do you think anybody’s going

to understand it? They’ll just say you’ve got cold feet.’

‘Look, Robert, you think exactly as I do about the war, and you do …

nothing. All right, that’s your choice. But don’t come here lecturing me
about cold feet. This is the hardest thing I’ve ever done.’

Now, on the train going to Craiglockhart, it still seemed the hardest thing.
He shifted in his seat and sighed, looking out over fields of wheat bending
to the wind. He remembered the silvery sound of shaken wheat, the
shimmer of light on the stalks. He’d have given anything to be out there,
away from the stuffiness of the carriage, the itch and constriction of his
uniform.

On that Sunday they’d taken the train to Formby and spent the afternoon
wandering aimlessly along the beach. A dull, wintry-looking sun cast their
shadows far behind them, so that every gesture either of them made was
mimicked and magnified.

‘They won’t let you make a martyr of yourself, Sass. You should have

accepted the Board.’

The discussion had become repetitive. For perhaps the fourth time,

Sassoon said, ‘If I hold out long enough, there’s nothing else they can do.’

‘There’s a lot they can do.’ Graves seemed to come to a decision. ‘As a

matter of fact, I’ve been pulling a few strings on your behalf.’

Sassoon smiled to hide his anger. ‘Good. If you’ve been exercising your

usual tact, that ought to get me at least two years.’

‘They won’t court-martial you.’
In spite of himself, Sassoon began to feel afraid. ‘What, then?’
‘Shut you up in a lunatic asylum for the rest of the war.’
‘And that’s the result of your string-pulling, is it? Thanks.’
‘No, the result of my string-pulling is to get you another Board. You must

take it this time.’

‘You can’t put people in lunatic asylums just like that. You have to have

reasons.’

‘They’ve got reasons.’
‘Yes, the Declaration. Well, that doesn’t prove me insane.’
‘And the hallucinations? The corpses in Piccadilly?’
A long silence. ‘I had rather hoped my letters to you were private.’
‘I had to persuade them to give you another Board.’
‘They won’t court-martial me?’
‘No. Not in any circumstances. And if you go on refusing to be boarded,

they will put you away.’

‘You know, Robert, I wouldn’t believe this from anybody else. Will you

swear it’s true?’

‘Yes.’
‘On the Bible?’
Graves held up an imaginary Bible and raised his right hand. ‘I swear.’
Their shadows stretched out behind them, black on the white sand. For a

moment Sassoon still hesitated. Then, with an odd little gasp, he said, ‘All
right then, I’ll give way.’

In the taxi, going to Craiglockhart, Sassoon began to feel frightened. He
looked out of the window at the crowded pavements of Princes Street,
thinking he was seeing them for the first and last time. He couldn’t imagine
what awaited him at Craiglockhart, but he didn’t for a moment suppose the
inmates were let out.

He glanced up and found the taxi-driver watching him in the mirror. All

the local people must know the name of the hospital, and what it was for.
Sassoon’s hand went up to his chest and began pulling at a loose thread
where his MC ribbon had been.

For conspicuous gallantry during a raid on the enemy’s trenches. He
remained for 1½ hours under rifle and bomb fire collecting and bringing in
our wounded. Owing to his courage and determination, all the killed and
wounded were brought in.

Reading the citation, it seemed to Rivers more extraordinary than ever

that Sassoon should have thrown the medal away. Even the most extreme
pacifist could hardly be ashamed of a medal awarded for saving life. He
took his glasses off and rubbed his eyes. He’d been working on the file for
over an hour, but, although he was now confident he knew all the facts, he
was no closer to an understanding of Sassoon’s state of mind. If anything,
Graves’s evidence to the Board – with its emphasis on hallucinations –
seemed to suggest a full-blown psychosis rather than neurasthenia. And yet
there was no other evidence for that. Misguided the Declaration might well
be, but it was not deluded, illogical or incoherent. Only the throwing away
of the medal still struck him as odd. That surely had been the action of a
man at the end of his tether.

Well, we’ve all been there, he thought. The trouble was, he was finding it

difficult to examine the evidence impartially. He wanted Sassoon to be ill.
Admitting this made him pause. He got up and began pacing the floor of his
room, from door to window and back again. He’d only ever encountered
one similar case, a man who’d refused to go on fighting on religious
grounds. Atrocities took place on both sides, he’d said. There was nothing
to choose between the British and the Germans.

The case had given rise to heated discussions in the MO’s common room

– about the freedom of the individual conscience in wartime, and the role of
the army psychiatrist in ‘treating’ a man who refused to fight. Rivers,
listening to those arguments, had been left in no doubt of the depth and
seriousness of the divisions. The controversy had died down only when the
patient proved to be psychotic. That was the crux of the matter. A man like
Sassoon would always be trouble, but he’d be a lot less trouble if he were
ill.

Rivers was roused from these thoughts by the crunch of tyres on gravel.

He reached the window in time to see a taxi draw up, and a man, who from
his uniform could only be Sassoon, get out. After paying the driver,
Sassoon stood for a moment, looking up at the building. Nobody arriving at
Craiglockhart for the first time could fail to be daunted by the sheer
gloomy, cavernous bulk of the place. Sassoon lingered on the drive for a
full minute after the taxi had driven away, then took a deep breath, squared
his shoulders, and ran up the steps.

Rivers turned away from the window, feeling almost ashamed of having

witnessed that small, private victory over fear.

TWO

Light from the window behind Rivers’s desk fell directly on to Sassoon’s
face. Pale skin, purple shadows under the eyes. Apart from that, no obvious
signs of nervous disorder. No twitches, jerks, blinks, no repeated ducking to
avoid a long-exploded shell. His hands, doing complicated things with cup,
saucer, plate, sandwiches, cake, sugar tongs and spoon, were perfectly
steady. Rivers raised his own cup to his lips and smiled. One of the nice
things about serving afternoon tea to newly arrived patients was that it
made so many neurological tests redundant.

So far he hadn’t looked at Rivers. He sat with his head slightly averted, a

posture that could easily have been taken for arrogance, though Rivers was
more inclined to suspect shyness. The voice was slightly slurred, the flow
of words sometimes hesitant, sometimes rushed. A disguised stammer,
perhaps, but a life-long stammer, Rivers thought, not the recent, self-
conscious stammer of the neurasthenic.

‘While I remember, Captain Graves rang to say he’ll be along some time

after dinner. He sent his apologies for missing the train.’

‘He is still coming?’
‘Yes.’
Sassoon looked relieved. ‘Do you know, I don’t think Graves’s caught a

train in his life? Unless somebody was there to put him on it.’

‘We were rather concerned about you.’
‘In case the lunatic went missing?’
‘I wouldn’t put it quite like that.’
‘I was all right. I wasn’t even surprised, I thought he’d slept in. He’s been

doing a … a lot of rushing round on my behalf recently. You’ve no idea
how much work goes into rigging a Medical Board.’

Rivers pushed his spectacles up on to his forehead and massaged the

inner corners of his eyes. ‘No, I don’t suppose I have. You know this may
sound naïve but … to me … the accusation that a Medical Board has been
rigged is quite a serious one.’

‘I’ve no complaints. I was dealt with in a perfectly fair and reasonable

way. Probably better than I deserved.’

‘What kind of questions did they ask?’
Sassoon smiled. ‘Don’t you know?’
‘I’ve read the report, if that’s what you mean. I’d still like to hear your

version.’

‘Oh: “Did I object to fighting on religious grounds?” I said I didn’t. It

was rather amusing, actually. For a moment I thought they were asking me
whether I objected to going on a crusade. “Did I think I was qualified to
decide when the war should end?” I said I hadn’t thought about my
qualifications.’ He glanced at Rivers. ‘Not true. And then … then Colonel
Langdon asked said “Your friend tells us you’re very good at bombing.
Don’t you still dislike the Germans?” ’

A long silence. The net curtain behind Rivers’s head billowed out in a

glimmering arc, and a gust of cool air passed over their faces.

‘And what did you say to that?’
‘I don’t remember.’ He sounded impatient now. ‘It didn’t matter what I

said.’

‘It matters now.’
‘All right.’ A faint smile. ‘Yes, I am quite good at bombing. No, I do not

still dislike the Germans.’

‘Does that mean you once did?’
Sassoon looked surprised. For the first time something had been said that

contradicted his assumptions. ‘Briefly. April and May of last year, to be
precise.’

A pause. Rivers waited. After a while Sassoon went on, almost

reluctantly. ‘A friend of mine had been killed. For a while I used to go out
on patrol every night, looking for Germans to kill. Or rather I told myself

that’s what I was doing. In the end I didn’t know whether I was trying to
kill them, or just giving them plenty of opportunities to kill me.’

‘ “Mad Jack.” ’
Sassoon looked taken aback. ‘Graves really has talked, hasn’t he?’
‘It’s the kind of thing the Medical Board would need to know.’ Rivers

hesitated. ‘Taking unnecessary risks is one of the first signs of a war
neurosis.’

‘Is it?’ Sassoon looked down at his hands. ‘I didn’t know that.’
‘Nightmares and hallucinations come later.’
‘What’s an “unnecessary risk” anyway? The maddest thing I ever did was

done under orders.’ He looked up, to see if he should continue. ‘We were
told to go and get the regimental badges off a German corpse. They
reckoned he’d been dead two days, so obviously if we got the badges they’d
know which battalion was opposite. Full moon, not a cloud in sight,
absolutely mad, but off we went. Well, we got there – eventually – and what
do we find? He’s been dead a helluva lot longer than two days, and he’s
French anyway.’

‘So what did you do?’
‘Pulled one of his boots off and sent it back to battalion HQ. With quite a

bit of his leg left inside.’

Rivers allowed another silence to open up. ‘I gather we’re not going to

talk about nightmares?’

‘You’re in charge.’
‘Ye-es. But then one of the paradoxes of being an army psychiatrist is

that you don’t actually get very far by ordering your patients to be frank.’

‘I’ll be as frank as you like. I did have nightmares when I first got back

from France. I don’t have them now.’

‘And the hallucinations?’
He found this more difficult. ‘It was just that when I woke up, the

nightmares didn’t always stop. So I used to see …’ A deep breath. ‘Corpses.
Men with half their faces shot off, crawling across the floor.’

‘And you were awake when this happened?’
‘I don’t know. I must’ve been, because I could see the sister.’

‘And was this always at night?’
‘No. It happened once during the day. I’d been to my club for lunch, and

when I came out I sat on a bench, and … I suppose I must’ve nodded off.’
He was forcing himself to go on. ‘When I woke up, the pavement was
covered in corpses. Old ones, new ones, black, green.’ His mouth twisted.
‘People were treading on their faces.’

Rivers took a deep breath. ‘You say you’d just woken up?’
‘Yes. I used to sleep quite a bit during the day, because I was afraid to go

to sleep at night.’

‘When did all this stop?’
‘As soon as I left the hospital. The atmosphere in that place was really

terrible. There was one man who used to boast about killing German
prisoners. You can imagine what living with him was like.’

‘And the nightmares haven’t recurred?’
‘No. I do dream, of course, but not about the war. Sometimes a dream

seems to go on after I’ve woken up, so there’s a a kind of in-between stage.’
He hesitated. ‘I don’t know whether that’s abnormal.’

‘I hope not. It happens to me all the time.’ Rivers sat back in his chair.

‘When you look back now on your time in the hospital, do you think you
were “shell-shocked”?’

‘I don’t know. Somebody who came to see me told my uncle he thought I

was. As against that, I wrote one or two good poems while I was in there.
We-ell …’ He smiled. ‘I was pleased with them.’

‘You don’t think it’s possible to write a good poem in a state of shock?’
‘No, I don’t.’
Rivers nodded. ‘You may be right. Would it be possible for me to see

them?’

‘Yes, of course. I’ll copy them out.’
Rivers said, ‘I’d like to move on now to the … thinking behind the

Declaration. You say your motives aren’t religious?’

‘No, not at all.’
‘Would you describe yourself as a pacifist?’

‘I don’t think so. I can’t possibly say “No war is ever justified”, because I

haven’t thought about it enough. Perhaps some wars are. Perhaps this one
was when it started. I just don’t think our war aims – whatever they may be
– and we don’t know – justify this level of slaughter.’

‘And you say you have thought about your qualifications for saying

that?’

‘Yes. I’m only too well aware of how it sounds. A second-lieutenant, no

less, saying “The war must stop”. On the other hand, I have been there. I’m
at least as well qualified as some of the old men you see sitting around in
clubs, cackling on about “attrition” and “wastage of manpower” and …’
His voice became a vicious parody of an old man’s voice. ‘ “Lost heavily in
that last scrap.” You don’t talk like that if you’ve watched them die.’

‘No intelligent or sensitive person would talk like that anyway.’
A slightly awkward pause. ‘I’m not saying there are no exceptions.’
Rivers laughed. ‘The point is you hate civilians, don’t you? The

“callous”, the “complacent”, the “unimaginative”. Or is “hate” too strong a
word?’

‘No.’
‘So. What you felt for the Germans, rather briefly, in the spring of last

year, you now feel for the overwhelming majority of your fellow-
countrymen?’

‘Yes.’
‘You know, I think you were quite right not to say too much to the

Board.’

‘That wasn’t my idea, it was Graves’s. He was afraid I’d sound too sane.’
‘When you said the Board was “rigged”, what did you mean?’
‘I meant the decision to send me here, or or somewhere similar, had been

taken before I went in.’

‘And this had all been fixed by Captain Graves?’
‘Yes.’ Sassoon leant forward. ‘The point is they weren’t going to court-

martial me. They were just going to lock me up somewhere …’ He looked
round the room. ‘Worse than this.’

Rivers smiled. ‘There are worse places, believe me.’

‘I’m sure there are,’ Sassoon said politely.
‘They were going to certify you, in fact?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘Did anybody on the Board say anything to you about this?’
‘No, because it was –’
‘All fixed beforehand. Yes, I see.’
Sassoon said, ‘May I ask you a question?’
‘Go ahead’
‘Do you think I’m mad?’
‘No, of course you’re not mad. Did you think you were going mad?’
‘It crossed my mind. You know when you’re brought face to face with

the fact that, yes, you did see corpses on the pavement …’

‘Hallucinations in the half-waking state are surprisingly common, you

know. They’re not the same thing as psychotic hallucinations. Children
have them quite frequently.’

Sassoon had started pulling at a loose thread on the breast of his tunic.

Rivers watched him for a while. ‘You must’ve been in agony when you did
that.’

Sassoon lowered his hand. ‘No-o. Agony’s lying in a shell-hole with your

legs shot off. I was upset.’ For a moment he looked almost hostile, then he
relaxed. ‘It was a futile gesture. I’m not particularly proud of it.’

‘You threw it in the Mersey, didn’t you?’
‘Yes. It wasn’t heavy enough to sink, so it just’ – a glint of amusement –

‘bobbed around. There was a ship sailing past, quite a long way out, in the
estuary, and I looked at this little scrap of ribbon floating and I looked at the
ship, and I thought that me trying to stop the war was a bit like trying to
stop the ship would have been. You know, all they’d’ve seen from the deck
was this little figure jumping up and down, waving its arms, and they
wouldn’t’ve known what on earth it was getting so excited about.’

‘So you realized then that it was futile?’
Sassoon lifted his head. ‘It still had to be done. You can’t just acquiesce.’
Rivers hesitated. ‘Look, I think we’ve … we’ve got about as far as we

can get today. You must be very tired.’ He stood up. ‘I’ll see you tomorrow

morning at ten. Oh, and could you ask Captain Graves to see me as soon as
he arrives?’

Sassoon stood up. ‘You said a bit back you didn’t think I was mad.’
‘I’m quite sure you’re not. As a matter of fact I don’t even think you’ve

got a war neurosis.’

Sassoon digested this. ‘What have I got, then?’
‘You seem to have a very powerful anti-war neurosis.’
They looked at each other and laughed. Rivers said, ‘You realize, don’t

you, that it’s my duty to … to try to change that? I can’t pretend to be
neutral.’

Sassoon’s glance took in both their uniforms. ‘No, of course not.’

Rivers made a point of sitting next to Bryce at dinner.

‘Well,’ Bryce said, ‘what did you make of him?’
‘I can’t find anything wrong. He doesn’t show any sign of depression,

he’s not excited –’

‘Physically?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Perhaps he just doesn’t want to be killed.’
‘Oh, I think he’d be most insulted if you suggested that. To be fair, he did

have a job lined up in Cambridge, training cadets – so it isn’t a question of
avoiding being sent back. He could’ve taken that if he’d wanted to save his
skin.’

‘Any trace of … er … religious enthusiasm?’
‘No, I’m afraid not. I was hoping for that too.’
They looked at each other, amused. ‘You know, the curious thing is I

don’t think he’s even a pacifist? It seems to be entirely a matter of horror at
the extent of the slaughter, combined with a feeling of anger that the
government won’t state its war aims and impose some kind of limitation on
the whole thing. That, and an absolutely corrosive hatred of civilians. And
non-combatants in uniform.’

‘What an uncomfortable time you must’ve had.’
‘No-o, I rather gather I was seen as an exception.’

Bryce looked amused. ‘Did you like him?’
‘Yes, very much. And I found him … much more impressive than I

expected.’

Sassoon, at his table under the window, sat in silence. The men on either

side of him stammered so badly that conversation would have been
impossible, even if he had wished for it, but he was content to withdraw
into his own thoughts.

He remembered the day before Arras, staggering from the outpost trench

to the main trench and back again, carrying boxes of trench mortar bombs,
passing the same corpses time after time, until their twisted and blackened
shapes began to seem like old friends. At one point he’d had to pass two
hands sticking up out of a heap of pocked and pitted chalk, like the roots of
an overturned tree. No way of telling if they were British or German hands.
No way of persuading himself it mattered.

‘Do you play golf?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘I asked if you played golf.’
Small blue eyes, nibbled gingery moustache, an RAMC badge. He held

out his hand. ‘Ralph Anderson.’

Sassoon shook hands and introduced himself. ‘Yes, I do.’
‘What’s your handicap?’
Sassoon told him. After all, why not? It seemed an entirely suitable topic

for Bedlam.

‘Ah, then we might have a game.’
‘I’m afraid I haven’t brought my clubs.’
‘Send for them. Some of the best courses in the country round here.’
Sassoon had opened his mouth to reply when a commotion started near

the door. As far as he could tell, somebody seemed to have been sick. At
any rate, a thin, yellow-skinned man was on his feet, choking and gagging.
A couple of VADs ran across to him, clucking, fussing, flapping
ineffectually at his tunic with a napkin, until eventually they had the sense
to get him out of the room. The swing doors closed behind them. A

moment’s silence, and then, as if nothing had happened, the buzz of
conversation rose again.

Rivers stood up and pushed his plate away. ‘I think I’d better go.’
‘Why not wait till you’ve finished?’ Bryce said. ‘You eat little enough as

it is.’

Rivers patted his midriff. ‘Oh, I shan’t fade away just yet.’
Whenever Rivers wanted to get to the top floor without being stopped

half a dozen times on the way, he used the back staircase. Pipes lined the
walls, twisting with the turning of the stair, gurgling from time to time like
lengths of human intestine. It was dark, the air stuffy, and sweat began to
prickle in the roots of his hair. It was a relief to push the swing door open
and come out on to the top corridor, where the air was cool at least, though
he never failed to be depressed by the long narrow passage with its double
row of brown doors and the absence of natural light. ‘Like a trench without
the sky’ had been one patient’s description, and he was afraid it was only
too accurate.

Burns was sitting on his bed, while two VADs helped him off with his

tunic and shirt. His collar bones and ribs were clearly visible beneath the
yellowish skin. The waistband of his breeches gaped.

One of the VADs tugged at it. ‘There’s room for two in there,’ she said,

smiling, coaxing. ‘Have I to get in with you?’ The other VAD’s frozen
expression warned her of Rivers’s presence. ‘I’ll get this sponged down for
you, Captain.’

They hurried past Rivers, bursting into nervous giggles as they reached

the end of the corridor.

Burns’s arms were goose-pimpled, though the room was not cold. The

smell of vomit lingered on his breath. Rivers sat down beside him. He
didn’t know what to say, and thought it better to say nothing. After a while
he felt the bed begin to shake and put his arm round Burns’s shoulders. ‘It
doesn’t get any better, does it?’ he said.

Burns shook his head. After a while Rivers got up, fetched Burns’s coat

from the peg behind the door and wrapped it round his shoulders. ‘Would it
be easier to eat in your own room?’

‘A bit. I wouldn’t have to worry about upsetting other people.’
Yes, Burns would worry about upsetting other people. Perhaps the most

distressing feature of his case was the occasional glimpse of the cheerful
and likeable young man he must once have been.

Rivers looked down at Burns’s forearms, noting that the groove between

radius and ulna was even deeper than it had been a week ago. ‘Would it
help to have a bowl of fruit in your room?’ he asked. ‘So you could just
pick something up when you felt like it?’

‘Yes, that might help.’
Rivers got up and walked across to the window. He’s agreeing to make

me feel useful, he thought. ‘All right, I’ll get them to send something up.’
The shadows of the beech trees had begun to creep across the tennis courts,
which were empty now. Rivers turned from the window. ‘What kind of
night did you have?’

‘Not too good.’
‘Have you made any progress with what we talked about?’
‘Not really.’ He looked up at Rivers. ‘I can’t make myself think about it.’
‘No, well, it’s early days.’
‘You know, the worst thing is …’ – Burns was scanning Rivers’s face –

‘that it’s a … a joke.’

‘Yes.’
After leaving Burns, Rivers went up a further short flight of stairs and

unlocked the door to the tower. Apart from his own bedroom, this was the
only place in Craiglockhart he could hope to be alone for more than a few
minutes. The patients weren’t allowed out here, in case the hundred-foot
drop to the path below should prove too tempting an exit from the war. He
rested his arms on the iron balustrade and looked out towards the hills.

Burns. Rivers had become adept at finding bearable aspects to unbearable

experiences, but Burns defeated him. What had happened to him was so
vile, so disgusting, that Rivers could find no redeeming feature. He’d been
thrown into the air by the explosion of a shell and had landed, head-first, on
a German corpse, whose gas-filled belly had ruptured on impact. Before
Burns lost consciousness, he’d had time to realize that what filled his nose

and mouth was decomposing human flesh. Now, whenever he tried to eat,
that taste and smell recurred. Nightly, he relived the experience, and from
every nightmare he awoke vomiting. Burns on his knees, as Rivers had
often seen him, retching up the last ounce of bile, hardly looked like a
human being at all. His body seemed to have become merely the skin-and-
bone casing for a tormented alimentary canal. His suffering was without
purpose or dignity, and yes, Rivers knew exactly what Burns meant when
he said it was a joke.

Rivers became aware that he was gripping the edge of the parapet and

consciously relaxed his hands. Whenever he spent any time with Burns, he
found himself plagued by questions that in Cambridge, in peacetime, he
might have wanted to pursue, but which in wartime, in an overcrowded
hospital, were no use to him at all. Worse than useless, since they drained
him of energy that rightly belonged to his patients. In a way, all this had
nothing to do with Burns. The sheer extremity of his suffering set him apart
from the rest, but the questions were evoked by almost every case.

He looked down and saw a taxi turn into the drive. Perhaps this was the

errant Captain Graves arriving at last? Yes, there was Sassoon, too
impatient to wait indoors, running down the steps to meet him.

Graves, his mouth slightly open, stared up at the massive yellow-grey
façade of Craiglockhart. ‘My God.’

Sassoon followed the direction of his gaze. ‘That’s what I thought.’
Graves picked up his bag and together they went up the steps, through

the black and white tiled entrance hall on to the main corridor. Sassoon
began to smile. ‘Fine prisoner’s escort you turned out to be.’

‘I know, I’m sorry. God, what a day. Do you know, the train stopped at

every station?’

‘Well, you’re here now. Thank God.’
Graves looked sideways at him. ‘As bad as that?’
‘Hm. So-so.’
‘I don’t suppose you’ve seen anybody yet?’
‘I’ve seen Rivers. Which reminds me, he wants to see you, but I imagine

it’ll be all right if you dump your bag first.’

Graves followed Sassoon up the marble staircase to the first floor.
‘Here we are.’ Sassoon opened a door and stood aside to let Graves enter.

‘The guest room. You’ve even got a lock on your door.’

‘You haven’t?’
‘No. Nor in the bathroom either.’
‘Poor old Sass, you’ll just have to fight the VADs off.’ Graves swung his

bag on to the nearest chair. ‘No, seriously, what’s it like?’

‘Seriously, it’s awful. Come on, the sooner you’ve seen Rivers the sooner

we can talk.’

‘Sassoon asked me to give you this.’

Rivers took the envelope without comment and placed it unopened on his

desk. ‘How did you find him?’

The net curtains breathed in the draught from the open window, and a

scent of lime trees invaded the room. A sweet smell. Graves, to whom all
sweet smells were terrible, wiped the sweat from his upper lip. ‘Calmer. I
think it’s a relief to have things sorted out.’

‘I don’t know how sorted out they are. You do realize, don’t you, that he

can walk out of here at any time?’

‘He won’t do that,’ Graves said definitely. ‘He’ll be all right now. As

long as the pacifists leave him alone.’

‘I had quite a long talk with him this afternoon, but I don’t think I’m

quite clear what happened. I suspect there was a lot going on behind the
scenes?’

Graves smiled. ‘You could say that.’
‘What exactly?’
‘Sassoon sent me a copy of his Declaration. I was in a convalescent home

on the Isle of Wight at the time –’

‘He hadn’t talked to you about it?’
‘No, I haven’t seen him since January. I was absolutely horrified. I could

see at once it wouldn’t do any good, nobody would follow his example.
He’d just destroy himself, for no reason.’ He stopped. When he spoke
again, his voice was very clear and precise. ‘Sassoon’s the best platoon
commander I’ve ever known. The men worship him – if he wanted German
heads on a platter they’d get them. And he loves them. Being separated
from them would kill him. And that’s exactly what a court-martial would’ve
done.’

‘He’s separated from them here.’
‘Yes, but there’s a way back. People can accept a breakdown. There’s no

way back from being a conchie.’

‘So you decided he –’
‘Had to be stopped? Yes. I wrote to the CO, asking him to get Siegfried

another Board. He’d already skipped one. Then I contacted various people I
know and managed to persuade them to treat it as a nervous breakdown.

That left Siegfried. I knew it was no use writing. I had to see him, so I got
myself passed fit and went back to Litherland. He was in a shocking state.
He’d just thrown his MC into the Mersey. Did he tell you that?’

Rivers hesitated. ‘I believe it was in the Board’s report.’
‘Anyway, it took a long time, but he saw sense in the end.’
‘What made him give in, do you think?’
‘He just couldn’t go on denying he was ill.’
Rivers didn’t reply. The silence deepened, like a fall of snow,

accumulating second by second, flake by flake, each flake by itself
inconsiderable, until everything is transformed.

‘No, it wasn’t that.’ Graves’s knobbly, broken-nosed boxer’s face

twitched. ‘I lied to him.’

Rivers’s glasses flashed as he lifted his head. ‘Yes, I thought perhaps you

had.’

‘I swore on the Bible they wouldn’t court-martial him, but I didn’t know

that. I think if he’d held out, they might’ve done.’

‘They might. But you know the advantages of treating this as a nervous

breakdown would have been quite apparent to the authorities, even without
your pointing them out.’

‘The fact remains I lied, and he gave in because he believed the lie. He

wouldn’t have believed it from anybody else.’ He paused. ‘Do you think I
was wrong?’

Rivers said gently, ‘I think you did the best you could for your friend.

Not the best thing for his cause, but then the cause is lost anyway. Did you
find the Board difficult to convince?’

‘Quite. There was one youngish man who was sympathetic. The other

two … Well. I got the impression they didn’t believe in shell-shock at all.
As far as they were concerned, it was just cowardice. I made up my mind
right from the start they weren’t going to think that. I told them about last
year when he took a German trench single-handed and got recommended
for the VC. I’d like to see them do it. And this April. You know, that
bombing expedition of his was fantastic. Everybody I’ve spoken to who
was there thinks he should’ve got the VC for that.’ He paused. ‘I just

wanted them to know what kind of man they were dealing with.’ He smiled.
‘I kept bursting into tears. I think that helped in a way. I could see them
thinking, My God, if this one’s fit for duty what can the other one be like?’

‘And you told them that he had hallucinations?’
‘Yes.’ Graves looked slightly uncomfortable. ‘I had to convince them.

There were a lot of things I didn’t tell them. I didn’t tell them he’d
threatened to kill Lloyd George.’

‘And you persuaded him to say nothing?’
‘Yes. The last thing we needed was Siegfried talking sense about the

war.’

‘Sense? You mean you agree with him?’
‘Well, yes. In theory. In theory the war should stop tomorrow, but it

won’t. It’ll go on till there isn’t a cat or a dog left to enlist.’

‘So you agree with his views, but not his actions? Isn’t that rather an

artificial distinction?’

‘No, I don’t think it is. The way I see it, when you put the uniform on, in

effect you sign a contract. And you don’t back out of a contract merely
because you’ve changed your mind. You can still speak up for your
principles, you can argue against the ones you’re being made to fight for,
but in the end you do the job. And I think that way you gain more respect.
Siegfried isn’t going to change people’s minds like this. It may be in him to
change people’s minds about the war, but this isn’t the way to do it.’

Rivers took his clasped hands away from his mouth. ‘I couldn’t agree

with you more.’

‘What’s infuriating is that basically he knows it better than anybody. He’s

the one who can communicate with the ordinary soldier. It’s just that he got
taken over by Bertrand Russell and Ottoline Morrell. You know, I used to
admire them. I used to think, well, I don’t agree with you, but, on the other
hand, I can see it takes courage …’ He shook his head. ‘Not any more. I
know Russell’s over military age, Ottoline’s a woman, fair enough, neither
of them can understand what he’s been through, but they could see the state
he was in, and they still went ahead. They were quite prepared to destroy
him for the sake of propagating their views. I don’t forgive them for it.’ He

made a visible effort to calm down. ‘Anyway, it’s over now. But I must say
it gave me great pleasure to write to Russell and tell him Sassoon was on
his way here, and he could just bloody well leave him alone in future.’

‘And what about you?’ Rivers asked, after a pause. ‘Do you think they’ll

send you back?’

‘No, I don’t think so. In fact, the battalion doctor told me if he ever found

my lungs in France again, he’d shoot me himself. I’m hoping for Palestine.’
A pause. ‘I’m glad he’s here. At least I can go back to Litherland knowing
he’s safe.’

‘I hope he is.’ Rivers stood up. ‘And now I think I should let you get

back to him. He’ll need company on his first evening.’

After Graves had gone, Rivers sat for a while resting his eyes, then

opened the envelope Graves had given him. Three sheets of paper. On the
top sheet, dated the 22nd April, Sassoon had written in pencil, ‘I wrote
these in hospital ten days after I was wounded.’

Groping along the tunnel in the gloom 
He winked his tiny torch with whitening glare, 
And bumped his helmet, sniffing the hateful air. 
Tins, boxes, bottles, shapes too vague to know,
And once, the foul, hunched mattress from a bed;
And he exploring, fifty feet below
The rosy dusk of battle overhead.
He tripped and clutched the walls; saw someone lie
Humped and asleep, half-covered with a rug;
He stooped and gave the sleeper’s arm a tug.
‘I’m looking for headquarters.’ No reply.
‘Wake up, you sod!’ (For days he’d had no sleep.)
‘I want a guide along this cursed place.’
He aimed a kick at the unanswering heap;
And flashed his beam across that livid face
Horribly glaring up, whose eyes still wore
The agony that died ten days before
Whose bloody fingers clutched a hideous wound.
Gasping, he staggered onward till he found
Dawn’s ghost that filtered down a shafted stair,
To clammy creatures groping underground,
Hearing the boom of shells with muffled sound.
Then with the sweat of horror in his hair,
He climbed with darkness to the twilight air.

THE GENERAL

‘Good morning, good morning!’ the General said
When we met him last week on our way to the line.
Now the soldiers he smiled at are most of ’em dead,
And we’re cursing his staff for incompetent swine.
‘He’s a cheery old card,’ muttered Harry to Jack
As they slogged up to Arras with rifle and pack.

But he did for them both with his plan of attack.

TO THE WARMONGERS

I’m back again from hell
With loathsome thoughts to sell;
Secrets of death to tell;
And horrors from the abyss.
Young faces bleared with blood,
Sucked down into the mud,
You shall hear things like this,
Till the tormented slain
Crawl round and once again,
With limbs that twist awry
Moan out their brutish pain,
As the fighters pass them by.
For you our battles shine
With triumph half-divine;
And the glory of the dead
Kindles in each proud eye.
But a curse is on my head,
That shall not be unsaid,
And the wounds in my heart are red,
For I have watched them die.

Rivers knew so little about poetry that he was almost embarrassed at the

thought of having to comment on these. But then he reminded himself
they’d been given to him as a therapist, not as a literary critic, and from that
point of view they were certainly interesting, particularly the last.

Everything about the poem suggested that Sassoon’s attitude to his war

experience had been the opposite of what one normally encountered. The

typical patient, arriving at Craiglockhart, had usually been devoting
considerable energy to the task of forgetting whatever traumatic events had
precipitated his neurosis. Even if the patient recognized that the attempt was
hopeless, he had usually been encouraged to persist in it by friends,
relatives, even by his previous medical advisers. The horrors he’d
experienced, only partially repressed even by day, returned with redoubled
force to haunt the nights, giving rise to that most characteristic symptom of
war neurosis: the battle nightmare.

Rivers’s treatment sometimes consisted simply of encouraging the patient

to abandon his hopeless attempt to forget, and advising him instead to spend
some part of every day remembering. Neither brooding on the experience,
nor trying to pretend it had never happened. Usually, within a week or two
of the patient’s starting this treatment, the nightmares began to be less
frequent and less terrifying.

Sassoon’s determination to remember might well account for his early

and rapid recovery, though in his case it was motivated less by a desire to
save his own sanity than by a determination to convince civilians that the
war was mad. Writing the poems had obviously been therapeutic, but then
Rivers suspected that writing the Declaration might have been therapeutic
too. He thought that Sassoon’s poetry and his protest sprang from a single
source, and each could be linked to his recovery from that terrible period of
nightmares and hallucinations. If that was true, then persuading Sassoon to
give in and go back would be a much more complicated and risky business
than he had thought, and might well precipitate a relapse.

He sighed and put the poems back in the envelope. Looking at his watch,

he saw that it was time to start his rounds. He’d just reached the foot of the
main staircase when he saw Captain Campbell, bent double and walking
backwards, emerge from the darkened dining room.

‘Campbell?’
Campbell spun round. ‘Ah, Captain Rivers, just the man.’ He came up to

Rivers and, speaking in a discreet whisper that was audible the length and
breadth of the corridor, as Campbell’s discreet whispers tended to be, said,
‘That fella they’ve put in my room.’

‘Sassoon. Yes?’
‘Don’t think he’s a German spy, do you?’
Rivers gave the matter careful consideration. ‘No, I don’t think so. They

never call themselves “Siegfried”.’

Campbell looked astonished. ‘No more they do.’ He nodded, patted

Rivers briskly on the shoulder, and moved off. ‘Just thought I’d mention it,’
he called back.

‘Thank you, Campbell. Much appreciated.’
Rivers stood for a moment at the foot of the stairs, unconsciously shaking

his head.

FOUR

‘I was walking up the drive at home. My wife was on the lawn having tea
with some other ladies, they were all wearing white. As I got closer, my
wife stood up and smiled and waved and then her expression changed and
all the other ladies began to look at each other. I couldn’t understand why,
and then I looked down and saw that I was naked.’

‘What had you been wearing?’
‘Uniform. When I saw how frightened they were, it made me frightened.

I started to run and I was running through bushes. I was being chased by my
father-in-law and two orderlies. Eventually they got me cornered and my
father-in-law came towards me, waving a big stick. It had a snake wound
round it. He was using it as a kind of flail, and the snake was hissing. I
backed away, but they got hold of me and tied me up.’

Rivers detected a slight hesitation. ‘What with?’
A pause. In determinedly casual tones Anderson said, ‘A pair of lady’s

corsets. They fastened them round my arms and tied the laces.’

‘Like a strait-waistcoat?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then?’
‘Then I was carted off to some kind of carriage. I was thrown inside and

the doors banged shut and it was very dark. Like a grave. The first time I
looked it was empty, but then the next time you were there. You were
wearing a post-mortem apron and gloves.’

It was obvious from his tone that he’d finished. Rivers smiled and said,

‘It’s a long time since I’ve worn those.’

‘I haven’t recently worn corsets.’
‘Whose corsets were they?’

‘Just corsets. You want me to say my wife’s, don’t you?’
Rivers was taken back. ‘I want you to say –’
‘Well, I really don’t think they were. I suppose it is possible someone

might find being locked up in a loony bin a fairly emasculating
experience?’

‘I think most people do.’ Though not many said so. ‘I want you to say

what you think.’

No response.
‘You say you woke up vomiting?’
‘Yes.’
‘I wonder why? I mean I can quite see the sight of me in a postmortem

apron might not be to everybody’s taste –’

‘I don’t know.’
‘What was the most frightening thing about the dream?’
‘The snake.’
A long silence.
‘Do you often dream about snakes?’
‘Yes.’
Another long silence. ‘Well, go on, then,’ Anderson exploded at last.

‘That’s what you Freudian Johnnies are on about all the time, isn’t it?
Nudity, snakes, corsets. You might at least try to look grateful, Rivers. It’s a
gift.’

‘I think if I’d made any association at all with the snake – and after all

what possible relevance can my associations have? – it was probably with
the one that’s crawling up your lapel.’

Anderson looked down at the caduceus badge of the RAMC which he

wore on his tunic, and then across at the same badge on Rivers’s tunic.

‘What the er snake might suggest is that medicine is an issue between

yourself and your father-in-law?’

‘No.’
‘Not at all?’
‘No.’

Another long silence. Anderson said, ‘It depends what you mean by an

issue.’

‘A subject on which there is habitual disagreement.’
‘No. Naturally my time in France has left me with a certain level of

distaste for the practice of medicine, but that’ll go in time. There’s no issue.
I have a wife and child to support.’

‘You’re how old?’
‘Thirty-six.’
‘And your little boy?’
Anderson’s expression softened. ‘Five.’
‘School fees coming up?’
‘Yes. I’ll be all right once I’ve had a rest. Basically, I’m paying for last

summer. Do you know, at one point we averaged ten amputations a day?
Every time I was due for leave it was cancelled.’ He looked straight at
Rivers. ‘There’s no doubt what the problem is. Tiredness.’

‘I still find the vomiting puzzling. Especially since you say you feel no

more than a mild disinclination for medicine.’

‘I didn’t say mild, I said temporary.’
‘Ah. What in particular do you find difficult?’
‘I don’t know that there is anything particular.’
A long silence.
Anderson said, ‘I’m going to start timing these silences, Rivers.’
‘It’s already been done. Some of the younger ones had a sweepstake on

it. I’m not supposed to know.’

‘Blood.’
‘And you attribute this to the ten amputations a day?’
‘No, I was all right then. The … er … problem started later. I wasn’t at

Étaples when it happened, I’d been moved forward – the 13th CCS. They
brought in this lad. He was a Frenchman, he’d escaped from the German
lines. Covered in mud. There wasn’t an inch of skin showing anywhere.
And you know it’s not like ordinary mud, it’s five, six inches thick.
Bleeding. Frantic with pain. No English.’ A pause. ‘I missed it. I treated the
minor wounds and missed the major one.’ He gave a short, hissing laugh.

‘Not that the minor ones were all that minor. He started to haemorrhage,
and … there was nothing I could do. I just stood there and watched him
bleed to death.’ His face twisted. ‘It pumped out of him.’

It was a while before either of them stirred. Then Anderson said, ‘If

you’re wondering why that one, I don’t know. I’ve seen many worse
deaths.’

‘Have you told your family?’
‘No. They know I don’t like the idea of going back to medicine, but they

don’t know why.’

‘Have you talked to your wife?’
‘Now and then. You have to think about the practicalities, Rivers. I’ve

devoted all my adult life to medicine. I’ve no private income to tide me
over. And I do have a wife and a child.’

‘Public health might be a possibility.’
‘It doesn’t have much … dash about it, does it?’
‘Is that a consideration?’
Anderson hesitated. ‘Not with me.’
‘Well, we can talk about the practicalities later. You still haven’t told me

when you said enough.’

Anderson smiled. ‘You make it sound like a decision. I don’t know that

lying on the floor in a pool of piss counts as a decision.’ He paused. ‘The
following morning. On the ward. I remember them all looking down at me.
Awkward situation, really. What do you do when the doctor breaks down?’

At intervals, as Rivers was doing his rounds as orderly officer for the day,

he thought about this dream. It was disturbing in many ways. At first he’d
been inclined to see the post-mortem apron as expressing no more than a
lack of faith in him, or, more accurately, in his methods, since obviously any
doctor who spends much time so attired is not meeting with uniform
success on the wards. This lack of faith he knew to be present. Anderson, in
his first interview, had virtually refused treatment, claiming that rest, the
endless pursuit of golf balls, was all that he required. He had some
knowledge of Freud, though derived mainly from secondary or prejudiced
sources, and disliked, or perhaps feared, what he thought he knew. There

was no particular reason why Anderson, who was, after all, a surgeon,
should be well informed about Freudian therapy, but his misconceptions
had resulted in a marked reluctance to reveal his dreams. Yet his dreams
could hardly be ignored, if only because they were currently keeping the
whole of one floor of the hospital awake. His room-mate, Featherstone, had
deteriorated markedly as the result of Anderson’s nightly outbursts. Still,
that was another problem. As soon as Anderson had revealed that extreme
horror of blood, Rivers had begun tentatively to attach another meaning to
the post-mortem apron. If Anderson could see no way out of returning to
the practice of a profession which must inevitably, even in civilian life,
recall the horrors he’d witnessed in France, then perhaps he was desperate
enough to have considered suicide? That might account both for the post-
mortem apron and for the extreme terror he’d felt on waking. At the
moment he didn’t know Anderson well enough to be able to say whether
suicide was a possibility or not, but it would certainly need to be borne in
mind.

The smell of chlorine became stronger as they reached the bottom of the
stairs. Sassoon felt Graves hesitate. ‘Are you all right?’

‘I could do without the smell.’
‘Well, let’s not bother –’
‘No, go on.’
Sassoon pushed the door open. The pool was empty, a green slab

between white walls. They began to undress, putting their clothes on one of
the benches that lined the end wall.

‘What’s your room-mate like?’ Graves asked.
‘All right.’
‘Dotty?’
‘Not visibly. I gather the subject of German spies is best avoided. Oh,

and I’ve found out why there aren’t any locks on the doors. One of them
killed himself three weeks ago.’

Graves caught sight of the scar on Sassoon’s shoulder and stopped to

look at it. It was curiously restful to submit to this scrutiny, which was

prolonged, detailed and impersonal, like one small boy examining the scabs
on another’s knee. ‘Oh, very neat.’

‘Yes, isn’t it? The doctors kept telling me how beautiful it was.’
‘You were lucky, you know. An inch further down –’
‘Not as lucky as you.’ Sassoon glanced at the shrapnel wound on

Graves’s thigh. ‘An inch further up –’

‘If this is leading up to a joke about ladies’ choirs, forget it. I’ve heard

them all.’

Sassoon dived in. A green, silent world, no sound except the bubble of

his escaping breath, no feeling, once the shock of cold was over, except the
tightening of his chest that at last forced him to the surface, air, noise, light,
slopping waves crashing in on him again. He swam to the side and held on.
Graves’s dark head bobbed purposefully along at the other side of the pool.
Sassoon thought, we joke about it, but it happens. There’d been a boy in the
hospital, while he was lying there with that neat little hole in his shoulder.
The boy – he couldn’t have been more than nineteen – had a neat little hole
too. Only his was between the legs. The dressings had been terrible to
witness, and you had to witness them. No treatment in that overcrowded
ward had been private. Twice a day the nurses came in with the creaking
trolley, and the boy’s eyes followed them up the ward.

Sassoon shut the lid on the memory and dived for Graves’s legs. Graves

twisted and fought, his head a black rock splintering white foam. ‘Lay off,’
he gasped at last, pushing Sassoon away. ‘Some of us don’t have the full
complement of lungs.’

The pool was beginning to fill up. After a few more minutes, they

climbed out and started to dress. Head muffled in the folds of his shirt,
Graves said, ‘By the way, I think there’s something I ought to tell you. I’m
afraid I told Rivers about your plan to assassinate Lloyd George.’

Rivers’s round as duty officer ended in the kitchens. Mrs Cooper, her broad
arms splashed with fat from giant frying-pans, greeted him with an
embattled smile. ‘What d’ y’ think of the beef stew last night, then, sir?’

‘I don’t believe I’ve ever tasted anything quite like it.’

Mrs Cooper’s smile broadened. ‘We do the best we can with the materials

available, sir.’ Her expression became grim and confiding. ‘That beef was
walking.’

Rivers got to his room a few minutes after ten and found Sassoon

waiting, his hair damp, smelling of chlorine. ‘I’m sorry I’m late,’ Rivers
said, unlocking the door. ‘I’ve just been pretending to know something
about catering. Come in.’ He waved Sassoon to the chair in front of the
desk, tossed his cap and cane to one side, and was about to unbuckle his
belt when he remembered that the Director of Medical Services was due to
visit the hospital some time that day. He sat down behind the desk and drew
Sassoon’s file towards him. ‘Did you sleep well?’

‘Very well, thank you.’
‘You look rested. I enjoyed meeting Captain Graves.’
‘Yes, I gather you found it quite informative.’
‘Ah.’ Rivers paused in the act of opening the file. ‘You mean he told me

something you’d rather I didn’t know?’

‘No, not necessarily. Just something I might have preferred to tell you

myself.’ A moment’s silence, then Sassoon burst out, ‘What I can’t
understand is how somebody of Graves’s intelligence can can can have such
a shaky grasp of of rhetoric.’

Rivers smiled. ‘You were going to kill Lloyd George rhetorically, were

you?’

‘I wasn’t going to kill him at all. I said I felt like killing him, but it was

no use, because they’d only shut me up in a lunatic asylum, “like Richard
Dadd of glorious memory”. There you are, exact words.’ He looked round
the room. ‘Though as things have turned out –’

‘This is not a lunatic asylum. You are not locked up.’
‘Sorry.’
‘What you’re really saying is that Graves took you too seriously.’
‘It’s not just that. It suits him to attribute everything I’ve done to to to to

… a state of mental breakdown, because then he doesn’t have to ask himself
any awkward questions. Like why he agrees with me about the war and
does nothing about it.’

Rivers waited a few moments. ‘I know Richard Dadd was a painter. What

else did he do?’

A short silence. ‘He murdered his father.’
Rivers was puzzled by the slight awkwardness. He was used to being

adopted as a father figure – he was, after all, thirty years older than the
youngest of his patients – but it was rare for it to happen as quickly as this
in a man of Sassoon’s age. ‘ “Of glorious memory”?’

‘He … er … made a list of old men in power who deserved to die, and

fortunately – or or otherwise – his father’s name headed the list. He carried
him for half a mile through Hyde Park and then drowned him in the
Serpentine in full view of everybody on the banks. The only reason Graves
and I know about him is that we were in trenches with two of his great
nephews, Edmund and Julian.’ The slight smile faded. ‘Now Edmund’s
dead, and Julian’s got a bullet in the throat and can’t speak. The other
brother was killed too. Gallipoli.’

‘Like your brother.’
‘Yes.’
‘Your father’s dead too, isn’t he? How old were you when he died?’
‘Eight. But I hadn’t seen much of him for some time before that. He left

home when I was five.’

‘Do you remember him?’
‘A bit. I remember I used to like being kissed by him because his

moustache tickled. My brothers went to the funeral. I didn’t – apparently I
was too upset. Probably just as well, because they came back terrified. It
was a Jewish funeral, you see, and they couldn’t understand what was going
on. My elder brother said it was two old men in funny hats walking up and
down saying jabber-jabber-jabber.’

‘You must’ve felt you’d lost him twice.’
‘Yes. We did lose him twice.’
Rivers gazed out of the window. ‘What difference would it have made,

do you think, if your father had lived?’

A long silence. ‘Better education.’
‘But you went to Marlborough?’

‘Yes, but I was years behind everybody else. Mother had this theory we

were delicate and our brains shouldn’t be taxed. I don’t think I ever really
caught up. I left Cambridge without taking my degree.’

‘And then?’
Sassoon shook his head. ‘Nothing much. Hunting, cricket. Writing

poems. Not very good poems.’

‘Didn’t you find it all … rather unsatisfying?’
‘Yes, but I couldn’t seem to see a way out. It was like being three

different people, and they all wanted to go different ways.’ A slight smile.
‘The result was I went nowhere.’

Rivers waited.
‘I mean, there was the riding, hunting, cricketing me, and then there was

the … the other side … that was interested in poetry and music, and things
like that. And I didn’t seem able to …’ He laced his fingers. ‘Knot them
together.’

‘And the third?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘You said three.’
‘Did I? I meant two.’
Ah. ‘And then the war. You joined up on the first day?’
‘Yes, in the ranks. I couldn’t wait to get in.’
‘Your superior officers wrote glowing reports for the Board. Did you

know that?’

A flush of pleasure. ‘I think the army’s probably the only place I’ve ever

really belonged.’

‘And you’ve cut yourself off from it.’
‘Yes, because –’
‘I’m not interested in the reasons at the moment. I’m more interested in

the result. The effect on you.’

‘Isolation, I suppose. I can’t talk to anybody.’
‘You talk to me. Or at least, I think you do.’
‘You don’t say stupid things.’
Rivers turned his head away. ‘I’m pleased about that.’

‘Go on, laugh. I don’t mind.’
‘You’d been offered a job in Cambridge, hadn’t you? Teaching cadets.’
Sassoon frowned. ‘Yes.’
‘But you didn’t take it?’
‘No. It was either prison or France.’ He laughed. ‘I didn’t foresee this.’
Rivers watched him staring round the room. ‘You can’t bear to be safe,

can you?’ He waited for a reply. ‘Well, you’ve got twelve weeks of it. At
least. If you go on refusing to serve, you’ll be safe for the rest of the war.’

Two red spots appeared on Sassoon’s cheekbones. ‘Not my choice.’
‘I didn’t say it was.’ Rivers paused. ‘You know you reacted then as if I

were attacking you, and yet all I did was to point out the facts.’ He leant
forward. ‘If you maintain your protest, you can expect to spend the
remainder of the war in a state of Complete. Personal. Safety.’

Sassoon shifted in his seat. ‘I’m not responsible for other people’s

decisions.’

‘You don’t think you might find being safe while other people die rather

difficult?’

A flash of anger. ‘Nobody else in this stinking country seems to find it

difficult. I expect I’ll just learn to live with it. Like everybody else.’

Burns stood at the window of his room. Rain had blurred the landscape,
dissolving sky and hills together in a wash of grey. He loathed wet weather
because then everybody stayed indoors, sitting around the patients’
common room, talking, in strained or facetious tones, about the war the war
the war.

A sharper gust of wind blew rain against the glass. Somehow or other he

was going to have to get out. It wasn’t forbidden, it was even encouraged,
though he himself didn’t go out much. He got his coat and went downstairs.
On the corridor he met one of the nurses from his ward, who looked
surprised to see him wearing his coat, but didn’t ask where he was going.

At the main gates he stopped. Because he’d been inside so long, the

possibilities seemed endless, though they resolved themselves quickly into

two. Into Edinburgh, or away. And that was no choice at all: he knew he
wasn’t up to facing traffic.

For the first few stops the bus was crowded. He sat on the bench seat

close to the door of the bus. People smelling of wet wool jerked and swayed
against him, bumping his knees, and he tensed, not liking the contact or the
smell. But then at every stop more and more people got off until he was
almost alone, except for an old man and the clippie. The lanes were
narrower now; the trees rushed in on either side. A branch rattled along the
windows with a sound like machine-gun fire, and he had to bite his lips to
stop himself crying out.

He got off at the next stop, and stood, looking up and down a country

lane. He didn’t know what to do at first, it was so long since he’d been
anywhere alone. Raindrops dripped from the trees, big, splashy, persistent
drops, finding the warm place between his collar and his neck. He looked
up and down the lane again. Somewhere further along, a wood pigeon
cooed monotonously. He crossed over and began climbing the hill between
the trees.

Up, up, until his way was barred by a fence whose wire twitched in the

wind. A tuft of grey wool had caught on one of the barbs. Burns blinked the
rain out of his eyes. He pressed two strands of wire apart and eased himself
through, catching his sleeve, and breaking into a sweat as he struggled to
free it.

Trembling now, he began to scramble along the edge of the ploughed

field, slipping and stumbling, his mud-encumbered boots like lead weights
pulling on the muscles of his thighs. His body was cold inside the stiff
khaki, except for a burning round the knees where the tight cloth chafed the
skin.

He was walking up the slope of a hill, tensing himself against the wind

that seemed to be trying to scrape him off its side. As he reached the crest, a
fiercer gust snatched his breath. After that he kept his head bent, sometimes
stopping to draw a deeper breath through the steeple of his cupped hands.
Rain beat on to his head, dripping from the peak of his cap, the small bones
of nose and jaw had started to sing. He stopped and looked across the field.

The distance had vanished in a veil of rain. He didn’t know where he was
going, or why, but he thought he ought to take shelter, and began to run
clumsily along the brow of a hill towards a distant clump of trees. The mud
dragged at him, he had to slow to a walk. Every step was a separate effort,
hauling his mud-clogged boots out of the sucking earth. His mind was
incapable of making comparisons, but his aching thighs remembered, and
he listened for the whine of shells.

When at last he reached the trees, he sat down with his back to the

nearest, and for a while did nothing at all, not even wipe away the drops of
rain that gathered on the tip of his nose and dripped into his open mouth.
Then, blinking, he dragged his wet sleeve across his face.

After a while he got to his feet and began stumbling, almost blindly,

between the trees, catching his feet in clumps of bracken. Something
brushed against his cheek, and he raised his hand to push it away. His
fingers touched slime, and he snatched them back. He turned and saw a
dead mole, suspended, apparently, in air, its black fur spiked with blood, its
small pink hands folded on its chest.

Looking up, he saw that the tree he stood under was laden with dead

animals. Bore them like fruit. A whole branch of moles in various stages of
decay, a ferret, a weasel, three magpies, a fox, the fox hanging quite close,
its lips curled back from bloodied teeth.

He started to run, but the trees were against him. Branches clipped his

face, twigs tore at him, roots tripped him. Once he was sent sprawling,
though immediately he was up again, and running, his coat a mess of mud
and dead leaves.

Out in the field, splashing along the flooded furrows, he heard Rivers’s

voice, as distinctly as he sometimes heard it in dreams: If you run now,
you’ll never stop.

He turned and went back, though he knew the voice was only a voice in

his head, and that the real Rivers might equally well have said: Get away
from here. He stood again in front of the tree. Now that he was calmer, he
remembered that he’d seen trees like this before. The animals were not
nailed to it, as they sometimes were, but tied, by wings or paws or tails. He

started to release a magpie, his teeth chattering as a wing came away in his
hand. Then the other magpies, the fox, the weasel, the ferret and the moles.

When all the corpses were on the ground, he arranged them in a circle

round the tree and sat down within it, his back against the trunk. He felt the
roughness of the bark against his knobbly spine. He pressed his hands
between his knees and looked around the circle of his companions. Now
they could dissolve into the earth as they were meant to do. He felt a great
urge to lie down beside them, but his clothes separated him. He got up and
started to get undressed. When he’d finished, he looked down at himself.
His naked body was white as a root. He cupped his genitals in his hands,
not because he was ashamed, but because they looked incongruous, they
didn’t seem to belong with the rest of him. Then he folded his clothes
carefully and put them outside the circle. He sat down again with his back
to the tree and looked up through the tracery of branches at grey and
scudding clouds.

The sky darkened, the air grew colder, but he didn’t mind. It didn’t occur

to him to move. This was the right place. This was where he had wanted to
be.

By late afternoon Burns’s absence was giving cause for concern. The nurse
who’d seen him walk out, wearing his coat, blamed herself for not stopping
him, but nobody else was inclined to blame her. The patients, except for one
or two who were known to be high suicide risks, were free to come and go
as they pleased. Bryce and Rivers consulted together at intervals during the
day, trying to decide at what point they should give in and call the police.

Burns came back at six o’clock, walking up the stairs unobserved,

trailing mud, twigs and dead leaves. He was too tired to think. His legs
ached; he was faint with hunger yet afraid to think of food.

Sister Duffy caught him just as he was opening the door of his room and

bore down upon him, scolding and twittering like the small, dusty brown
bird she so much resembled. She made him get undressed then and there
and seemed to be proposing to towel him down herself, but he vetoed that.
She left him alone but came back a few minutes later, laden with hot-water

bottles and extra blankets, still inclined to scold, though when she saw how
tired he looked, lying back against the pillows, she checked herself and only
said ominously that Dr Rivers had been informed and would be up as soon
as he was free.

I suppose I’m for it, Burns thought, but couldn’t make the thought real.

He folded his arms across his face and almost at once began drifting off to
sleep. He was back in the wood, outside the circle now, but able to see
himself inside it. His skin was tallow-white against the scurfy bark. A shaft
of sunlight filtered through leaves, found one of the magpies, and its
feathers shone sapphire, emerald, amethyst. There was no reason to go
back, he thought. He could stay here for ever.

When he opened his eyes, Rivers was sitting beside the bed. He’d

obviously been there some time, his glasses were in his lap, and one hand
covered his eyes. The room was quite dark.

Rivers seemed to feel Burns watching him, because after a few moments

he looked up and smiled.

‘How long have I been asleep?’
‘About an hour.’
‘I’ve worried everybody, haven’t I?’
‘Never mind that. You’re back, that’s all that matters.’
All the way back to the hospital Burns had kept asking himself why he

was going back. Now, waking up to find Rivers sitting by his bed, unaware
of being observed, tired and patient, he realized he’d come back for this.

FIVE

Rivers started his night round early. Sister Rogers was in her room, drinking
the first of the many cups of coffee that would see her through the night.
‘Second-Lieutenant Prior,’ she said, as soon as she saw him.

‘Yes, I know, and there’s nothing I can do about it.’ Prior was a new

patient, whose nightmares were so bad that his room-mate was getting no
sleep. ‘Has he spoken to anybody yet?’

‘No, and if you speak to him he just stares straight through you.’
It was unlike Sister Rogers to take a dislike to a patient, but there was no

mistaking the animosity in her voice. ‘All right,’ Rivers said, ‘let’s have a
look at him.’

Prior was lying on his bed, reading. He was a thin, fair-haired young man

of twenty-two with high cheekbones, a short, blunt nose and a supercilious
expression. He looked up as Rivers came in, but didn’t close the book.

‘Sister tells me you had a bad night?’
Prior produced an elaborate shrug. Out of the corner of his eye Rivers

saw Sister Rogers’s lips tighten. ‘What did you dream about?’

Prior reached for the notepad and pencil he kept beside his bed and

scrawled in block capitals, ‘I DON’T REMEMBER.’

‘Nothing at all?’
Prior hesitated, then wrote, ‘NO.’
‘Does he talk in his sleep, sister?’
Rivers was looking at Prior as he asked the question, and thought he

detected a flicker of uneasiness.

‘Nothing you can get hold of.’
Prior’s lips curled, but he couldn’t hide the relief.
‘Could you get me a teaspoon, sister?’ Rivers asked.

While she was out of the room, Prior went on staring at Rivers. Rivers,

trying to keep the meeting from becoming a confrontation, looked around
the room. Sister Rogers came back. ‘Thank you. Now I just want to have a
look at the back of your throat.’

Again the pad came out. ‘THERE’S NOTHING PHYSICALY

WRONG.’

‘Two l’s in “physically”, Mr Prior. Open wide.’
Rivers drew the end of the teaspoon, not roughly, but firmly, across the

back of Prior’s throat. Prior choked, his eyes watered, and he tried to push
Rivers’s hand away.

‘There’s no area of analgesia,’ Rivers said to Sister Rogers.
Prior snatched up the pad. ‘IF THAT MEANS IT HURT YES IT DID.’
‘I don’t think it hurt, did it?’ Rivers said. ‘It may have been

uncomfortable.’

‘HOW WOULD YOU KNOW?’
Sister Rogers made a clicking noise with her tongue.
‘Do you think you could give us ten minutes alone, sister?’
‘Yes, of course, doctor.’ She glared at Prior. ‘I’ll be in my room if you

need me.’

After she’d gone, Rivers said, ‘Why do you always write in block

capitals? Because it’s less revealing?’

Prior shook his head. He wrote, ‘CLEARER.’
‘Depends on your handwriting, doesn’t it? I know, if I ever lost my voice,

I’d have to write in capitals. Nobody can read mine.’

Prior offered the pad. Rivers, feeling like a schoolboy playing noughts

and crosses, wrote: ‘Your file still hasn’t arrived.’

‘I SEE WHAT YOU MEAN.’
Rivers said, ‘Your file still hasn’t arrived.’
Another elaborate shrug.
‘Well, I’m afraid it’s rather more serious than that. If it doesn’t show up

soon, we’re going to have to try to get a history together – like this. And
that’s not going to be easy.’

‘WHY?’

‘Why do we have to do it? Because I need to know what’s happened to

you.’

‘I DON’T REMEMBER.’
‘No, not at the moment, perhaps, but the memory will start to come

back.’

A long silence. At last Prior scribbled something, then turned over on his

side to face the wall. Rivers leant across and picked the pad up. Prior had
written: ‘NO MORE WORDS.’

‘I must say it makes Dottyville almost bearable,’ Sassoon said, looking up
and down the station platform. ‘Knowing you don’t have to be vomited
over at every meal. I’d eat out every night if I could afford it.’

‘You’ll have to spend some time in the place, Sass.’ No reply. ‘At least

you’ve got Rivers.’

‘And at least Rivers doesn’t pretend there’s anything wrong with my

nerves.’

Graves started to speak and checked himself. ‘I wish I could say the same

about mine.’

‘What can I say, Robert? Have my bed. You live with a herd of lunatics.

I’ll go back to Liverpool.’

‘I hate it when you talk like that. As if everybody who breaks down is

inferior. We’ve all been’ – Graves held up his thumb and forefinger – ‘that
close.’

‘I know how close I’ve been.’ A short silence, then he burst out, ‘Don’t

you see, Robert, that’s why I hate the place? I’m frightened.’

‘Frightened? You? You’re not frightened.’ He craned round to see

Sassoon’s expression. ‘Are you?’

‘Evidently not.’
They stood in silence for a minute.
‘You ought to be getting back,’ Graves said.
‘Yes, I think you’re right. I don’t want to attract attention to myself.’ He

held out his hand. ‘Well. Give everybody my regards. If they still want
them.’

Graves took the hand and pulled him into a bear hug. ‘Don’t be so bloody

stupid, Siegfried. You know they do.’

Alone and shivering on the pavement, Sassoon thought about taking a

taxi and decided against it. The walk would do him good, and if he hurried
he could probably make it back in time. He threaded his way through the
crowds on Princes Street. Now that Robert was gone, he hated everybody,
giggling girls, portly middle-aged men, women whose eyes settled on his
wound stripe like flies. Only the young soldier home on leave, staggering
out of a pub, dazed and vacant-eyed, escaped his disgust.

Once he’d left the city behind, he began to relax and swing along as he

might have done in France. He remembered the march to Arras behind a
limber whose swaying lantern cast huge shadows of striding legs across a
white-washed wall. Then … No more walls. Ruined buildings. Shelled
roads. ‘From sunlight to the sunless land.’ And for a second he was back
there, Armageddon, Golgotha, there were no words, a place of desolation so
complete no imagination could have invented it. He thought of Rivers, and
what he’d said that morning about finding safety unbearable. Well, Rivers
was wrong, people were more corruptible than that. He was more
corruptible than that. A few days of safety, and all the clear spirit of the
trenches was gone. It was still, after all these weeks, pure joy to go to bed in
white sheets and know that he would wake. The road smelled of hot tar,
moths flickered between the trees, and when at last, turning up the drive
into Craiglockhart, he stopped and threw back his head, the stars burst on
his upturned face like spray.

A nightly bath had become essential to Rivers, a ritual that divided his
meagre spare time from the demands of the hospital. He was already pulling
his tunic off as he crossed the bedroom. Naked, he sat on the edge of the
bath, waiting for it to fill. The hot tap was shiny; the cold, misted over,
dewed with drops of condensed steam. Absent-mindedly, he played with the
drops, making them run together to form larger pools. He was thinking
about Prior, and the effect he was having on his room-mate, Robinson, and
wondering whether it was worse than the effect Anderson was having on

Featherstone. In any event, no single room was available. One solution to
the Prior problem was to move Robinson into a room at present shared by
two patients, although if the overcrowding were not to prove intolerable, the
patients would have to be very carefully selected. He was still running
through possible combinations as he bathed.

By his bed was the current issue of Man, still in its envelope. He hadn’t

managed even to glance through it yet. And suddenly he was furious with
the hospital, and Prior, and overcrowding and the endless permutations of
people sharing that were made necessary by nightmares, sleep-walking, the
need of some patients for night-lights and others for absolute darkness.

His irritation, groping for an object, fastened on Sassoon. Sassoon made

no secret of his belief that anybody who supported the continuation of the
war must be actuated by selfish motives, and yet if Rivers had allowed such
motives to dominate, he’d have wanted the war to end tonight. Let the next
generation cope with the unresolved problem of German militarism, just get
me back to Cambridge and research. He flicked through the journal, but he
was too tired to concentrate, and, after a few minutes, he switched off the
light.

Shortly before dawn he woke. Still dazed from sleep, he put his hand to

his left arm, expecting to feel blood. The dry cloth of his pyjama sleeve told
him he’d been dreaming. He switched on the lamp and lay for a while,
recollecting the details of the dream, then picked up a notepad and pencil
from his bedside table and began to write.

I was in my room at St John’s, sitting at the table in front of the book case. Head was
beside me, his left sleeve rolled up, and his eyes closed. The sleeve was rolled up well
above his elbow, so that the full length of the incision was revealed. The scar was purple.
The tablecloth was spread with various items of equipment: jugs of water, wisps of cotton
wool, bristle brushes, compasses, ice cubes, pins.

My task was to map the area of hypersensitivity to pain on Head’s forearm. He sat with

his eyes closed and his face turned slightly away. Every time I pricked him he cried out
and tried to pull his arm away. I was distressed by this and didn’t want to go on, but I
knew I had to. Head kept on crying out.

The dream changed and I was drawing a map of the protopathic area directly on to his

skin. The pen was as painful as the needle had been. Head opened his eyes and said
something I didn’t catch. It sounded like, ‘Why don’t you try it?’ He was holding an

object out towards me. I looked down to see what it was, and saw that my own left arm
was bare, though I couldn’t recall rolling up my sleeve.

The object in Head’s hand was a scalpel. I began to ask him to repeat what he’d said,

but before I could get the words out, he’d leant forward and brought the scalpel down my
arm, in the region of the elbow. The incision, although about six inches long, was so fine
that at first there was no blood. After a second, small beads of blood began to appear, and
at that point I woke up.

Rivers started to analyse the dream. The manifest content didn’t take long.
Except for the cutting of his arm, the dream was an unusually accurate
reproduction of events that had actually occurred.

Henry Head had been working for some time on the regeneration of

nerves after accidental injury, using as his subjects patients in the public
wards of London hospitals, before concluding that, if any further progress
was to be made, more rigorously controlled tests would have to be done.
Rivers had pointed out that these would have to be carried out on a subject
who was himself a trained observer, since an extremely high degree of
critical awareness would be needed to exclude preconceptions. Head had
volunteered himself as the subject of the proposed experiment, and Rivers
had assisted at the operation in which Head’s radial nerve had been severed
and sutured. Then, together, over a period of five years, they had charted the
progress of regeneration.

During the early stage of recovery, when the primitive, protopathic

sensibility had been restored, but not yet the finely discriminating epicritic
sensibility, many of the experiments had been extremely painful.
Protopathic sensibility seemed to have an ‘all or nothing’ quality. The
threshold of sensation was high, but, once crossed, the sensations were both
abnormally widely diffused and – to use Head’s own word – ‘extreme’. At
times a pinprick would cause severe and prolonged pain. Rivers had often
felt distress at the amount of pain he was causing, but it would not, in life,
have occurred to him to stop the experiment for that reason, any more than
it would have occurred to Head. In the dream, however, the wish to stop the
experiment had been prominent.

The latent content was more difficult. Superficially, the dream seemed to

support Freud’s contention that all dreams were wish fulfilment. Rivers had

wished himself back in Cambridge, doing research, and the dream had
fulfilled the wish. But that was to ignore the fact that the dream had not
been pleasant. The emphasis in the dream had been on the distress he felt at
causing pain, and, on waking, the affect had been one of fear and dread. He
didn’t believe such a dream could be convincingly explained as wish
fulfilment, unless, of course, he wished to torture one of his closest friends.
No doubt some of Freud’s more doctrinaire supporters would have little
difficulty with that idea, particularly since the torture took the form of
pricking him, but Rivers couldn’t accept it. He was more inclined to seek
the meaning of the dream in the conflict his dream self had experienced
between the duty to continue the experiment and the reluctance to cause
further pain.

Rivers was aware, as a constant background to his work, of a conflict

between his belief that the war must be fought to a finish, for the sake of the
succeeding generations, and his horror that such events as those which had
led to Burns’s breakdown should be allowed to continue. This conflict,
though a constant feature of his life, would certainly have been
strengthened by his conversations with Sassoon. He’d been thinking about
Sassoon immediately before he went to sleep. But, on thinking it over,
Rivers couldn’t see that the dream was a likely dramatization of that
conflict. The war was hardly an experiment, and it certainly didn’t rest with
him to decide whether it continued or not.

Recently almost all his dreams had centred on conflicts arising from his

treatment of particular patients. In advising them to remember the traumatic
events that had led to their being sent here, he was, in effect, inflicting pain,
and doing so in pursuit of a treatment that he knew to be still largely
experimental. Only in Burns’s case had he found it impossible to go on
giving this advice, because the suffering involved in Burns’s attempts to
remember was so extreme. ‘Extreme’. The word Head had used to describe
the pain he’d experienced during the protopathic stage of regeneration.
Certainly in Burns’s case, there was a clear conflict between Rivers’s desire
to continue using a method of treatment he believed in, but knew to be

experimental, and his sense that in this particular instance the pain involved
in insisting on the method would be too great.

The dream had not merely posed a problem, it had suggested a solution.

‘Why don’t you try it?’ Henry had said. Rivers felt he’d got there first, that
the dream lagged behind his waking practice: he was already experimenting
on himself. In leading his patients to understand that breakdown was
nothing to be ashamed of, that horror and fear were inevitable responses to
the trauma of war and were better acknowledged than suppressed, that
feelings of tenderness for other men were natural and right, that tears were
an acceptable and helpful part of grieving, he was setting himself against
the whole tenor of their upbringing. They’d been trained to identify
emotional repression as the essence of manliness. Men who broke down, or
cried, or admitted to feeling fear, were sissies, weaklings, failures. Not men.
And yet he himself was a product of the same system, even perhaps a rather
extreme product. Certainly the rigorous repression of emotion and desire
had been the constant theme of his adult life. In advising his young patients
to abandon the attempt at repression and to let themselves feel the pity and
terror their war experience inevitably evoked, he was excavating the ground
he stood on.

The change he demanded of them – and by implication of himself – was

not trivial. Fear, tenderness – these emotions were so despised that they
could be admitted into consciousness only at the cost of redefining what it
meant to be a man. Not that Rivers’s treatment involved any encouragement
of weakness or effeminacy. His patients might be encouraged to
acknowledge their fears, their horror of the war – but they were still
expected to do their duty and return to France. It was Rivers’s conviction
that those who had learned to know themselves, and to accept their
emotions, were less likely to break down again.

In a moment or two an orderly would tap on the door and bring in his tea.

He put the notebook and pencil back on the bedside table. Henry would be
amused by that dream, he thought. If wish fulfilment had been involved at
all, it was surely one of Henry’s wishes that had been fulfilled. At the time
of the nerve regeneration experiments, they’d done a series of control

experiments on the glans penis, and Henry had frequently expressed the
desire for a reciprocal application of ice cubes, bristles, near-boiling water
and pins.

SIX

Prior sat with his arms folded over his chest and his head turned slightly
away. His eyelids looked raw from lack of sleep.

‘When did your voice come back?’ Rivers asked.
‘In the middle of the night. I woke up shouting and suddenly I realized I

could talk. It’s happened before.’

A Northern accent, not ungrammatical, but with the vowel sounds

distinctly flattened, and the faintest trace of sibilance. Hearing Prior’s voice
for the first time had the curious effect of making him look different.
Thinner, more defensive. And, at the same time, a lot tougher. A little,
spitting, sharp-boned alley cat.

‘It comes and goes?’
‘Yes.’
‘What makes it go?’
Another shrug from the repertoire. ‘When I get upset.’
‘And coming here upset you?’
‘I’d have preferred somewhere further south.’
So would I. ‘What did you do before the war?’
‘I was a clerk in a shipping office.’
‘Did you like it?’
‘No. It was boring.’ He looked down at his hands and immediately up

again. ‘What did you do?’

Rivers hesitated. ‘Research. Teaching.’
‘Did you like it?’
‘Yes, very much. Research more than teaching probably, but …’ He

shrugged. ‘I enjoy teaching.’

‘I noticed. “Two l’s in physically, Mr Prior.” ’

‘What an insufferable thing to say.’
‘I thought so.’
‘I’m sorry.’
Prior didn’t know what to say to that. He looked down at his hands and

mumbled, ‘Yes, well.’

‘By the way, your file arrived this morning.’
Prior smiled. ‘So you know all about me, then?’
‘Oh, I wouldn’t say that. What did become clear is that you had a spell in

the 13th Casualty Clearing Station in …’ He looked at the file again.
‘January. Diagnosed neurasthenic.’

Prior hesitated. ‘Ye-es.’
‘Deep reflexes abnormal.’
‘Yes.’
‘But on that occasion no trouble with the voice? Fourteen days later you

were back in the line. Fully recovered?’

‘I’d stopped doing the can-can, if that’s what you mean.’
‘Were there any remaining symptoms?’
‘Headaches.’ He watched Rivers make a note. ‘It’s hardly a reason to

stay out of the trenches, is it? “Not tonight, Wilhelm. I’ve got a headache”?’

‘It might be. It rather depends how bad they were.’ He waited for a reply,

but Prior remained obstinately silent. ‘You were back in the 13th CCS in
April. This time unable to speak.’

‘I’ve told you, I don’t remember.’
‘So the loss of memory applies to the later part of your service in France,

but the early part – the first six months or so – is comparatively clear?’

‘Ye-es.’
Rivers sat back in his chair. ‘Would you like to tell me something about

that early part?’

‘No.’
‘But you do remember it?’
‘Doesn’t mean I want to talk about it.’ He looked round the room. ‘I

don’t see why it has to be like this anyway.’

‘Like what?’

‘All the questions from you, all the answers from me. Why can’t it be

both ways?’

‘Look, Mr Prior, if you went to the doctor with bronchitis and he spent

half the consultation time telling you about his lumbago, you would not be
pleased. Would you?’

‘No, but if I went to my doctor in despair it might help to know he at

least understood the meaning of the word.’

‘Are you in despair?’
Prior sighed, ostentatiously impatient.
‘You know, I talk to a lot of people who are in despair or very close to it,

and my experience is that they don’t care what the doctor feels. That’s the
whole point about despair, isn’t it? That you turn in on yourself.’

‘Well, all I can say is I’d rather talk to a real person than a strip of

empathic wallpaper.’

Rivers smiled. ‘I like that.’
Prior glared at him.
‘If you feel you can’t talk about France, would it help to talk about the

nightmares?’

‘No. I don’t think talking helps. It just churns things up and makes them

seem more real.’

‘But they are real.’
A short silence. Rivers closed Prior’s file. ‘All right. Good morning.’
Prior looked at the clock. ‘It’s only twenty past ten.’
Rivers spread his hands.
‘You can’t refuse to talk to me.’
‘Prior, there are a hundred and sixty-eight patients in this hospital, all of

them wanting to get better, none of them getting the attention he deserves.
Good morning.’

Prior started to get up, then sat down again. ‘You’ve no right to say I

don’t want to get better.’

‘I didn’t say that.’
‘You implied it.’
‘All right. Do you want to get better?’

‘Of course.’
‘But you’re not prepared to co-operate with the treatment.’
‘I don’t agree with the treatment.’
Deep breath. ‘What methods of treatment do you favour?’
‘Dr Sanderson was going to try hypnosis.’
‘He doesn’t mention it in his report.’
‘He was. He told me.’
‘How did you feel about that?’
‘I thought it was a good idea. I mean you’re more or less saying: things

are real, you’ve got to face them, but how can I face them when I don’t
know what they are?’

‘That’s rather an unusual reaction, you know. Generally, when a doctor

suggests hypnosis the patient’s quite nervous, because he feels he’ll be …
putting himself in somebody else’s power. Actually that’s not quite true, but
it does tend to be the fear.’

‘If it’s not true, why don’t you use it?’
‘I do sometimes. In selected cases. As a last resort. In your case, I’d want

to know quite a lot about the part of your war service that you do
remember.’

‘All right. What do you want to know?’
Rivers blinked, surprised by the sudden capitulation. ‘Well, anything you

want to tell me.’

Silence.
‘Perhaps you could start with the day before you went into the CCS for

the first time. Do you remember what you were doing that day?’

Prior smiled. ‘Standing up to my waist in water in a dugout in the middle

of No Man’s Land being bombed to buggery.’

‘Why?’
‘Good question. You should pack this in and join the general staff.’
‘If there wasn’t a reason, there must at least have been a rationale.’
‘There was that, all right.’ Prior adopted a strangled version of the public

school accent. ‘The pride of the British Army requires that absolute
dominance must be maintained in No Man’s Land at all times.’ He dropped

the accent. ‘Which in practice means … Dugout in the middle of No Man’s
Land. Right? Every forty-eight hours two platoons crawl out – night-time,
of course – relieve the poor bastards inside, and provide the Germans with
another forty-eight hours’ target practice. Why it’s thought they need all this
target practice is beyond me. They seem quite accurate enough as it is.’ His
expression changed. ‘It was flooded. You stand the whole time. Most of the
time in pitch darkness because the blast kept blowing the candles out. We
were packed in so tight we couldn’t move. And they just went all out to get
us. One shell after the other. I lost two sentries. Direct hit on the steps.
Couldn’t find a thing.’

‘And you had forty-eight hours of that?’
‘Fifty. The relieving officer wasn’t in a hurry.’
‘And when you came out you went straight to the CCS?’
‘I didn’t go, I was carried.’
A tap on the door. Rivers called out angrily, ‘I’m with a patient.’
A short pause as they listened to footsteps fading down the corridor. Prior

said, ‘I met the relieving officer.’

‘In the clearing station?’
‘No, here. He walked past me on the top corridor. Poor bastard left his

Lewis guns behind. He was lucky not to be court-martialled.’

‘Did you speak?’
‘We nodded. Look, you might like to think it’s one big happy family out

there, but it’s not. They despise each other.’

‘You mean you despise yourself.’
Prior looked pointedly across Rivers’s shoulder. ‘It’s eleven o’clock.’
‘All right. I’ll see you tomorrow.’
‘I thought of going into Edinburgh tomorrow.’
Rivers looked up. ‘At nine.’

‘I can guess what Graves said. What a fine upstanding man I was until I fell
among pacifists. Isn’t that right? Russell used me. Russell wrote the
Declaration.’

‘No, he didn’t say that.’

‘Good. Because it isn’t true.’
‘You don’t think you were influenced by Russell?’
‘No, not particularly. I think I was influenced by my own experience of

the front. I am capable of making up my own mind.’

‘Was this the first time you’d encountered pacifism?’
‘No. Edward Carpenter, before the war.’
‘You read him?’
‘Read him. Wrote to him.’ He smiled slightly. ‘I even made the Great

Pilgrimage to Chesterfield.’

‘You must’ve been impressed to do that.’
Sassoon hesitated. ‘Yes, I …’
Watching him, Rivers perceived that he’d led Sassoon unwittingly on to

rather intimate territory. He was looking for a way of redirecting the
conversation when Sassoon said, ‘I read a book of his. The Intermediate
Sex. I don’t know whether you know it?’

‘Yes. I’ve had patients who swore their entire lives had been changed by

it.’

‘Mine was. At least I don’t know about “changed”. “Saved”, perhaps.’
‘As bad as that?’
‘At one point, yes. I’d got myself into quite a state.’
Rivers waited.
‘I didn’t seem able to feel … well. Any of the things you’re supposed to

feel. It got so bad I used to walk all night sometimes. I used to wait till
everybody else was in bed, and then I’d just … get out and walk. The book
was a life-saver. Because I suddenly saw that … I wasn’t just a freak. That
there was a positive side. Have you read it?’

Rivers clasped his hands behind his head. ‘Yes. A long time ago now.’
‘What did you think?’
‘I found it quite difficult. Obviously you have to admire the man’s

courage, and the way he’s … opened up the debate. But I don’t know that
the concept of an intermediate sex is as helpful as people think it is when
they first encounter it. In the end nobody wants to be neuter. Anyway, the
point is Carpenter’s pacifism doesn’t seem to have made much impression?’

‘I don’t know if I was aware of it even. I didn’t think much about

politics. The next time I encountered pacifism was Robert Ross. I met him,
oh, I suppose two years ago. He’s totally opposed to the war.’

‘And that didn’t influence you either?’
‘No. Obviously it made things easier at a personal level. I mean, frankly,

any middle-aged man who Believed in The War would …’ Sassoon skidded
to a halt. ‘Present company excepted.’

Rivers bowed.
‘I didn’t even bother showing him the Declaration. I knew he wouldn’t

go along with it.’

‘Why wouldn’t he? Out of concern for you?’
‘Ye-es. Yes, that certainly, but … Ross was a close friend of Wilde’s. I

suppose he’s learnt to keep his head below the parapet.’

‘And you haven’t.’
‘I don’t like holes in the ground.’
Rivers began polishing his glasses on his handkerchief. ‘You know, I

realize Ross’s caution probably seems excessive. To you. But I hope you
won’t be in too much of a hurry to dismiss it. There’s nothing more
despicable than using a man’s private life to discredit his views. But it’s
very frequently done, even by people in my profession. People you might
think wouldn’t resort to such tactics. I wouldn’t like to see it happen to
you.’

‘I thought discrediting my views was what you were about?’
Rivers smiled wryly. ‘Let’s just say I’m fussy about the methods.’

Rivers had kept two hours free of appointments in the late afternoon in
order to get on with the backlog of reports. He’d been working for half an
hour when Miss Crowe tapped on the door. ‘Mr Prior says could he have a
word?’

Rivers pulled a face. ‘I’ve seen him once today. Does he say what’s

wrong?’

‘No, this is the father.’
‘I didn’t even know he was coming.’

She started to close the door. ‘I’ll tell him you’re busy, shall I?’
‘No, no, I’ll see him.’
Mr Prior came in. He was a big, thick-set man with a ruddy complexion,

dark hair sleeked back, and a luxuriant, drooping, reddish-brown
moustache. ‘I’m sorry to drop on you like this,’ he said. ‘I thought our Billy
had told you we were coming.’

‘I think he probably mentioned it. If he did, I’m afraid it slipped my

mind.’

Mr Prior looked him shrewdly up and down. ‘Nah. Wasn’t your mind it

slipped.’

‘Well, sit down. How did you find him?’
‘Difficult to tell when they won’t talk, isn’t it?’
‘Isn’t he talking? He was this morning.’
‘Well, he’s not now.’
‘It does come and go.’
‘Oh, I’m sure. Comes when it’s convenient and goes when it isn’t.

What’s supposed to be the matter?’

‘Physically, nothing.’ Two l’s, Rivers thought. ‘I think perhaps there’s

something he’s afraid to talk about, so he solves the problem by making it
impossible for himself to speak. This is … beneath the surface. He doesn’t
know what he’s doing.’

‘If he doesn’t, it’ll be the first time.’
Rivers tried a different tack. ‘I believe he volunteered, didn’t he? The

first week of the war.’

‘He did. Against my advice, not that that’s ever counted for much.’
‘You didn’t want him to go?’
‘No I did not. I told him, time enough to do summat for the Empire when

the Empire’s done summat for you.’

‘It is natural for the young to be idealistic.’
‘Ideals had nowt to do with it. He was desperate to get out of his job.’
‘I think I remember him saying he didn’t like it. He was a clerk in a

shipping office.’

‘That’s right, and getting nowhere. Twenty years wearing the arse of your

breeches out and then, if you’re a good boy and lick all the right places, you
get to be supervisor and then you sit on a bigger stool and watch other
people wear their breeches out. Didn’t suit our Billy. He’s ambitious, you
know, you mightn’t think it to look at him, but he is. His mam drilled that
into him. Schooled him in it. She was determined he was going to get on.’

Rather unexpectedly, Rivers found himself wanting to leap to Billy

Prior’s defence. ‘She seems to have succeeded.’

Mr Prior snorted. ‘She’s made a stool-arsed jack on him, if that’s what

you mean.’

‘You make it sound as if you had no say.’
‘I didn’t. All the years that lad was growing up there was only one time I

put my oar in, and that was when there was this lad at school picking on
him. He was forever coming in crying. And one day I thought, well, I’ve
had enough of this. So the next time he come in blubbing I give him a
backhander and shoved him out the door. There he was, all tears and snot,
yelling his bloody head off. He says, he’s waiting for us, our Dad. I says, go
on, then. You’ve got to toughen ’em up, you know, in our neighbourhood. If
you lie down there’s plenty to walk over you.’

‘What happened?’
‘Got the shit beat out of him. And the next day. And the next. But – and

this is our Billy – when he did finally take a tumble to himself and hit the
little sod he didn’t just hit him, he half bloody murdered him. I had his
father coming round, and all sorts. Not but what he got short shrift.’

He seemed to have no feeling for his son at all, except contempt. ‘You

must be proud of his being an officer?’

‘Must I? I’m not proud. He should’ve stuck with his own. Except he

can’t, can he? That’s what she’s done to him. He’s neither fish nor fowl, and
she’s too bloody daft to see it. But I tell you one person who does see it.’ He
pointed to the ceiling. ‘Oh it’s all very lovey-dovey on the surface but
underneath he doesn’t thank her for it.’ He stood up. ‘Anyway I’d best be
getting back. His nibs’ll have a fit, when he knows I’ve seen you. Wheezing

badly, isn’t he?’ He caught Rivers’s expression. ‘Oh, I see, he wasn’t
wheezing either? Not what you could call a successful visit.’

‘I’m sure it’s done him a lot of good. We often find they don’t settle till

they’ve seen their families.’

Mr Prior nodded, accepting the reassurance without believing it. ‘Any

idea how long he’ll be here?’

‘Twelve weeks. Initially.’
‘Hm. He’d get a damn sight more sympathy from me if he had a bullet up

his arse. Anyway …’ He held out his hand. ‘It’s been nice meeting you. I
don’t know when we’ll be up again.’

Rivers had completed two reports when Miss Crowe put her head round the
door again. ‘Mrs Prior.’

They exchanged glances. Rivers threw down his pen, and said, ‘Show her

in.’

Mrs Prior was a small upright woman, neatly dressed in a dark suit and

mauve blouse. ‘I won’t stay long,’ she said, sitting nervously on the edge of
the chair. She was playing with her wedding ring, pulling and pushing it
over the swollen knuckle. ‘I’d like to apologize for my husband. I thought
he was just stepping outside for a smoke, otherwise I’d’ve stopped him.’

A carefully genteel voice. Fading prettiness. Billy Prior had got his build

and features from her rather than the father. ‘No, I was pleased to see him.
How did you find Billy?’

‘Wheezing. I’ve not seen his chest as tight as that since he was a child.’
‘I didn’t even know he was asthmatic.’
‘No, well, it doesn’t bother him much. Usually. As a child it was terrible.

I used to have to boil kettles in his room. You know, for the steam?’

‘You must be very proud of him.’
Her face softened. ‘I am. Because I know how hard it’s been. I can

truthfully say he never sat an exam without he was bad with his asthma.’

‘Did he like the shipping office?’
Her mouth shaped itself to say ‘yes’, then, ‘No. It was the same docks as

his father and I think that was the mistake. You know, his father was

earning more as a ganger than Billy was as a clerk, and I think myself there
was a little bit of … You see the trouble with my husband, the block had to
chip. Do you know what I mean? He’s never been able to accept that Billy
was different. And I think there might have been a little bit of jealousy as
well, because he has, he’s had a hard life. I don’t deny that. A lot harder
than it need have been, because his mother sent him to work when he was
ten. And no need for it either, she had two sons working, but there it is.
What can you say? He worships her.’ She was silent for a moment,
brooding. ‘You know sometimes I think the less you do for them, the better
you’re thought of.’

‘Would you say Billy and his father were close?’
‘No. And yet, you see, the funny thing is our Billy’s …’ She sought for a

way of erasing the tell-tale ‘our’ from the sentence and, not finding one,
gave a little deprecatory laugh. ‘All for “the common people”, as he calls
them. I said, “You mean your father?” ’ She laughed again. ‘Oh, no, he
didn’t mean his father. I said, “But you know nothing about the common
people. You’ve had nothing to do with them.” Do you know what he turned
round and said? “Whose fault is that?” ’

Miss Crowe tapped on the door. ‘Your husband says he’s going now, Mrs

Prior.’

‘Yes, well, I’ll have to go. You’ll take care of him, won’t you?’
She was close to tears. Rivers said, ‘We’ll do our best.’
‘I’d be grateful if you wouldn’t mention I’ve been to see you. He’s upset

enough about his father.’

After she’d gone, Rivers turned to Miss Crowe. ‘That was amazing. Do

you know, I think they’d have said anything?’

‘You get married couples like that, sir. One sympathetic word and you’re

there till midnight. Captain Broadbent’s waiting to see you.’

Rivers looked at the pile of papers on his desk and sighed. ‘All right,

show him in.’ The frustration boiled over. ‘And do please try not to call him
“captain”. He’s no more a captain than I am.’

‘You are a captain, Captain Rivers.’

Miss Crowe paused at the door to savour the small moment of triumph.

Rivers smiled and said, ‘All right. But at least try not to address him as
“captain”. It really doesn’t help him to have his fantasies confirmed.’

‘I’ll do my best, sir. Though as long as he’s allowed to walk round the

hospital with three stars on his sleeve, I don’t see that my remembering to
call him “mister” is going to make a great deal of difference.’ She smiled
sweetly and withdrew. A moment later she reappeared. ‘Mister Broadbent,
sir.’

‘Come in, Mr Broadbent. Sit down.’
It wasn’t just the stars. There was also the little matter of the medals,

including the Serbian equivalent of the VC awarded to a foreigner for the
first and only time in its long and glorious history. And then there were the
honorary degrees, though at least he hadn’t yet taken to wearing those on
his tunic. However, he was doing very good work with the hospital chamber
orchestra. ‘Well, Broadbent, what can I do for you?’

‘I’ve had some bad news, Dr Rivers,’ Broadbent said in his confiding,

insinuating way. ‘My mother’s been taken ill.’

Rivers didn’t believe Broadbent’s mother was ill. He didn’t believe

Broadbent had a mother. He thought it entirely possible that Broadbent had
been hatched. ‘Oh, I am sorry.’

‘I was hoping for some leave.’
‘You’ll have to ask the CO about that.’
‘I was hoping you might put a word in for me. You see, I don’t think

Major Bryce likes me very much.’

People who’d heard of Broadbent’s exploits, but not met him, were apt to

picture a rather florid, swashbuckling, larger-than-life figure. In reality,
Broadbent was a limp, etiolated youth, with a pallid complexion and a
notably damp handshake, whose constant and bizarre infringements of the
hospital rules took up far far too much time. He was quite right in thinking
Bryce didn’t like him.

‘It’s not a question of liking or not liking,’ Rivers said. ‘Is your mother

very ill?’

‘I’m afraid so, Dr Rivers.’

‘Then I’m sure Major Bryce will be sympathetic. But it is his decision.

Not mine.’

‘I just thought …’ Suddenly Broadbent’s voice hardened. ‘This is

extremely bad for my nerves. You know what happens.’

‘I hope it doesn’t happen this time. Because last time, if you remember,

you had to be locked up. Why don’t you go to see Major Bryce now?’

‘Yes, all right.’ Broadbent stood up, reluctantly, and spat, ‘Thank you,

sir.’

At least he didn’t offer to shake hands.

After dinner a Charlie Chaplin film was shown in the cinema on the first
floor. The whole of the ground floor was deserted. Rivers, taking his
completed reports along to the office to be typed, saw that a lamp had been
left burning in the patients’ common room and went in to switch it off.

Prior was sitting beneath the windows at the far end of the room, looking

out over the tennis courts, his face and hands bluish in the dim light. Rivers
was tempted to withdraw immediately, but then something about the
isolation of the small figure under the huge windows made him pause.
‘Don’t you want to see the film?’

‘I couldn’t stand the smoke.’
He was wheezing very badly. Rivers went across to the window and sat

beside him. Housemartins were weaving to and fro above the tennis courts,
feeding on the myriads of tiny insects that were just visible as a golden
haze. He watched them cut, wheel, dive – how skilful they were at avoiding
collision – and for a moment, under the spell of the flickering birds, the
day’s work and responsibility fell away. But he couldn’t ignore Prior’s
breathing, or the whiteness of the knuckles where his left hand gripped the
chair. He turned and looked at him, noting the drawn, anxious face. ‘It’s
bad, isn’t it?’

‘Bit tight.’
Prior was bent forward to help the expansion of his lungs. Looking at

him now, Rivers could see the straightness of the shoulders, the surprising

breadth of chest in a delicately built man. Once you knew it was obvious.
But why nothing on the file?

‘I gather you met my father,’ Prior gasped. ‘Quite a character.’
‘He seemed to be a man of strong views.’
Prior’s mouth twisted. ‘He’s a bar-room socialist, if that’s what you

mean. Beer and revolution go in, piss comes out.’ He attempted a laugh.
‘My mother was quite concerned. “He’ll be down there effing and
blinding,” she said. “Showing us all up.” ’

‘I liked him.’
‘Oh, yes, he’s very likeable. Outside the house. I’ve seen him use my

mother as a football.’ The next breath screeched. ‘When I was too little to
do anything about it.’

‘You know, I think I ought to have a look at that chest.’
Prior managed a ghostly imitation of his usual manner. ‘Your room or

mine?’

‘The sick bay.’
The walk along the corridor to the lift was painfully slow.
‘I didn’t want you to meet him,’ Prior said, as Rivers pressed the button

for the second floor.

‘No, I know you didn’t. I could hardly refuse.’
‘I’m not blaming you.’
‘Is it a question of blame?’
While the nurses made up the bed, Rivers examined Prior. He’d expected

Prior to be impossible, but in the event he became strictly impersonal,
gazing over Rivers’s shoulder as the stethoscope moved across his chest.
‘All right, put your jacket on.’ Rivers folded the stethoscope. ‘I’m surprised
you got to France at all with that.’

‘They couldn’t afford to be fussy.’ Prior started the long climb into the

bed. ‘I won’t be moved to another hospital, will I?’

‘No, I shouldn’t think so. Four doctors, thirty nurses. I think we might

manage.’

‘Only I don’t want to be moved.’

Rivers helped him to pull up the sheets. ‘I thought you didn’t like it

here?’

‘Yes, well, you can get used to anything, can’t you? Do you think I could

have a towel tied to the bed?’

‘Yes, of course. Anything you want.’
‘Only it helps, you see. Having something to pull on.’
‘What was it like in France? The asthma.’
‘Better than at home.’
A shout of laughter from below. Charlie Chaplin in full swing. Rivers,

following Prior’s gaze, saw the single lamp and the deep shadows, and
sensed, with a premonitory tightening of his diaphragm, the breath-by-
breath agony of the coming night. ‘I’ll see about the towel,’ he said.

He saw Prior settled down for the night. ‘I’ll be along in the morning,’ he

said. Then he went to Sister’s room next door and left orders he was to be
woken at once if Prior got worse.

Sassoon woke to the sound of screams and running footsteps. The screams
stopped and then a moment or two later started again. He peered at his
watch and made out that it was ten past four.

Because of the rubber underlay, a pool of sweat had gathered in the small

of his back. The rubbery smell lingered on his skin, a clinical smell that
made his body unfamiliar to him. In the next bed Campbell snored, a
cacophony of grunts, snorts and whistles. No screams ever woke him. On
the other hand he himself never screamed, and Sassoon had been at
Craiglockhart long enough now to realize how valuable a room-mate that
made him.

Fully awake now, he dragged himself to the bottom of the bed, lifted the

thin curtain and peered out of the window. Wester Hill, blunt-nosed and
brooding, loomed out of the mist. And yesterday, he thought, shivering a
little, his statement had been read in the House of Commons. He wondered
what would happen next. Whether anything would happen. In any event
there was a kind of consolation in knowing it was out of his hands.

He knew he was shivering more with fear than cold, though it was

difficult to name the fear. The place, perhaps. The haunted faces, the
stammers, the stumbling walks, that indefinable look of being ‘mental’.
Craiglockhart frightened him more than the front had ever done.

Upstairs whoever-it-was screamed again. He heard women’s voices and

then, a few minutes afterwards, a man’s voice. Rivers, he thought, but he
couldn’t be sure. Quaking and comfortless, he propped himself up against
the iron bedhead and waited for the dawn.

Prior hauled himself further up the bed as Rivers came in. He closed the
book he’d been reading and put it down on his bedside table. ‘I thought it
was you,’ he said. ‘I can tell your footsteps.’

Rivers got a chair and sat down by the bed. ‘Did you manage to get back

to sleep?’

‘Yes. Did you?’
Silence.
‘I wasn’t being awkward,’ Prior said. ‘That was concern.’
‘I didn’t, but it doesn’t matter. I don’t sleep much after four anyway.’ He

caught the flicker of interest. How quickly Prior pounced on any item of
personal information.

‘Thanks for showing up.’
‘You hated it.’
Prior looked slightly disconcerted, then smiled. ‘I don’t suppose

anybody’d choose to be seen in such a state. I don’t really see why they had
to call you.’

‘They were afraid the fear might bring on another attack. Though in fact

you seem to be breathing more easily.’

Prior took a trial deep breath. ‘Yes, I think I am. Do you know I detect

something in myself. I …’ He stopped. ‘No, I don’t think I want to tell you
what I detect.’

‘Oh, go on. Professional curiosity. I want to see if I’ve detected it.’
Prior smiled faintly. ‘No, you won’t have detected this. I find myself

wanting to impress you. Pathetic, isn’t it?’

‘I don’t think it’s pathetic. We all care what the people around us think,

whether we admit it or not.’ He paused. ‘Though I’m a bit surprised my
opinion matters. I mean, to be quite honest, I didn’t think you liked me very
much.’

‘There’s a limit to how warm you can feel about wallpaper.’
‘Oh, we’re back to that again, are we?’
Prior turned away, hunching his shoulders. ‘No-o.’
Rivers watched him for a while. ‘Why do you think it has to be like

that?’

‘So that I … I’m sorry. So that the patient can fantasize freely. So that the

patient can turn you into whoever he wants you to be. Well, all right. I just
think you might consider the possibility that this patient might want you to
be you.’

‘All right.’
‘All right, what?’
‘All right, I’ll consider it.’
‘I suppose most of them turn you into Daddy, don’t they? Well, I’m a bit

too old to be sitting on Daddy’s knee.’

‘Kicking him on the shins every time you meet him isn’t generally

considered more mature.’

‘I see. A negative transference. Is that what you think we’ve got?’
‘I hope not.’ Rivers couldn’t altogether conceal his surprise. ‘Where did

you learn that term?’

‘I can read.’
‘Well, yes, I know, but its –’
‘Not popular science? No, but then neither is this.’
He reached for the book beside his bed and held it out to Rivers. Rivers

found himself holding a copy of The Todas. He stared for a moment at his
own name on the spine. He told himself there was no reason why Prior
shouldn’t read one of his books, or all of them for that matter. There was no
rational reason for him to feel uneasy. He handed the book back. ‘Wouldn’t
you prefer something lighter? You are ill, after all.’

Prior leant back against his pillows, his eyes gleaming with amusement.

‘Do you know, I knew you were going to say that. Now how did I know
that?’

‘I didn’t realize you were interested in anthropology.’
‘Why shouldn’t I be?’
‘No reason.’
Really, Rivers thought, Prior was cuckoo-backed to the point where

normal conversation became almost impossible. He was flicking through
the book, obviously looking for something in particular. After a minute or

so he held it out again, open at the section on sexual morality. ‘Do they
really go on like that?’

Rivers said, as austerely as he knew how, ‘Their sexual lives are

conducted along rather different lines from ours.’

‘I’ll say. They must be bloody knackered. I couldn’t keep it up, could

you?’

‘I think my age and your asthma might effectively prevent either of us

setting any records.’

‘Ah, yes, but I’m only asthmatic part of the time.’
‘You have to win, don’t you?’
Prior stared intently at him. ‘You know, you do a wonderful imitation of a

stuffed shirt. And you’re not like that at all, really, are you?’

Rivers took his glasses off and swept his hand across his eyes. ‘Mister

Prior.’

‘I know, I know, “Tell me about France.” All right, what do you want to

know? And please don’t say, “Whatever you want to tell me.” ’

‘All right. How did you fit in?’
Prior’s face shut tight. ‘You mean, did I encounter any snobbery?’
‘Yes.’
‘Not more than I have here.’
Their eyes locked. Rivers said, ‘But you did encounter it?’
‘Yes. It’s made perfectly clear when you arrive that some people are more

welcome than others. It helps if you’ve been to the right school. It helps if
you hunt, it helps if your shirts are the right colour. Which is a deep shade
of khaki, by the way.’

In spite of himself Rivers looked down at his shirt.
‘Borderline,’ said Prior.
‘And yours?’
‘Not borderline. Nowhere near. Oh, and then there’s the seat. The Seat.

You know, they sent me on a course once. You have to ride round and round
this bloody ring with your hands clasped behind your head. No saddle. No
stirrups. It was amazing. Do you know, for the first time I realized that
somewhere at the back of their … tiny tiny minds they really do believe the

whole thing’s going to end in one big glorious cavalry charge. “Stormed at
with shot and shell,/Boldly they rode and well,/Into the jaws of death,/Into
the mouth of hell …” And all. That. Rubbish.’

Rivers noticed that Prior’s face lit up as he quoted the poem. ‘Is it

rubbish?’

‘Yes. Oh, all right, I was in love with it once. Shall I tell you something

about that charge? Just as it was about to start an officer saw three men
smoking. He thought that was a bit too casual, so he confiscated their sabres
and sent them into the charge unarmed. Two of them were killed. The one
who survived was flogged the following day. The military mind doesn’t
change much, does it? The same mind now orders men to be punished by
tying them to a limber.’ Prior stretched his arms out. ‘Like this. Field
punishment No. 1. “Crucifixion.” Even at the propaganda level can you
imagine anybody being stupid enough to order this?’

Either the position, or his anger, constricted his breathing. He brought his

arms down sharply and rounded his shoulders. Rivers waited for the spasm
to pass. ‘How was your seat?’

‘Sticky. No, that’s good. It means you don’t come off.’
A short silence. Prior said, ‘You mustn’t make too much of it, you know,

the snobbery. I didn’t. The only thing that really makes me angry is when
people at home say there are no class distinctions at the front. Ball-ocks.
What you wear, what you eat. Where you sleep. What you carry. The men
are pack animals.’ He hesitated. ‘You know the worst thing? What seemed
to me the worst thing? I used to go to this café in Amiens and just across the
road there was a brothel. The men used to queue out on to the street.’ He
looked at Rivers. ‘They get two minutes.’

‘And officers?’
‘I don’t know. Longer than that.’ He looked up. ‘I don’t pay.’
Prior was talking so freely Rivers decided to risk applying pressure.

‘What were you dreaming about last night?’

‘I don’t remember.’
Rivers said gently, ‘You know, one of the distinguishing characteristics of

nightmares is that they are always remembered.’

‘Can’t’ve been a nightmare, then, can it?’
‘When I arrived you were on the floor over there. Trying to get through

the wall.’

‘I’m sure it’s true, if you say so, but I don’t remember. The first thing I

remember is you listening to my chest.’

Rivers got up, replaced his chair against the wall and came back to the

bed. ‘I can’t force you to accept treatment if you don’t want it. You do
remember the nightmares. You remember them enough to walk the floor till
two or three o’clock every morning rather than go to sleep.’

‘I wish the night staff didn’t feel obliged to act as spies.’
‘Now that’s just childish, isn’t it? You know it’s their job.’
Prior refused to look at him.
‘All right. I’ll see you tomorrow.’
‘It isn’t fair to say I don’t want treatment. I’ve asked for treatment and

you’ve refused to give it me.’

Rivers looked blank. ‘Oh, I see. The hypnosis. I didn’t think you were

serious.’

‘Why shouldn’t I be serious? It is used to recover lost memory, isn’t it?’
‘Ye-es.’
‘So why won’t you do it?’
Rivers started to speak, and stopped.
‘I can understand, you know. I’m not stupid.’
‘No, I know you’re not stupid. It’s just that there’s … there’s a certain

amount of technical jargon involved. I was just trying to avoid it. Basically,
people who’ve dealt with a horrible experience by splitting it off from the
rest of their consciousness sometimes have a general tendency to deal with
any kind of unpleasantness in that way, and if they have, the tendency is
likely to be reinforced by hypnosis. In other words you might be removing
one particular symptom – loss of memory – and making the underlying
condition worse.’

‘But you do do it?’
‘If everything else has failed, yes.’
Prior lay back. ‘That’s all I wanted to know.’

‘In your case not everything else has failed or even been tried. For

example, I’d want to write to your CO. We need a clear picture of the last
few days.’ Rivers watched Prior’s expression carefully, but he was giving
nothing away. ‘But I’d have to go to the CO with a precise question. You
understand that, don’t you?’

‘Yes.’
‘There’s no point bothering him with a vague inquiry about an

unspecified period of time.’

‘No, all right.’
‘So we still need you to remember as much as possible by conventional

means. But we can leave it till you’re feeling better.’

‘No, I want to get on with it.’
‘We’ll see how you feel tomorrow.’
After leaving Prior, Rivers walked up the back staircase to the tower and

stood for a few moments, his hands on the balustrade, looking out across
the hills. Prior worried him. The whole business of the demand for hypnosis
worried him. At times he felt almost a sense of foreboding in relation to the
case, though he wasn’t inclined to give it much credence. In his experience,
premonitions of disaster were almost invariably proved false, and the road
to Calvary entered on with the very lightest of hearts.

MR MACPHERSON With regard to the case of Second Lieutenant Sassoon, immediately
he heard of it, he consulted his military advisers, and in response to their inquiries he
received the following telegram: A breach of discipline has been committed, but no
disciplinary action has been taken, since Second Lieutenant Sassoon has been reported by
the Medical Board as not being responsible for his action, as he was suffering from
nervous breakdown. When the military authorities saw the letter referred to, they felt that
there must be something wrong with an extremely gallant officer who had done excellent
work at the front. He hoped hon. members would hesitate long before they made use of a
document written by a young man in such a state of mind, nor did he think their action
would be appreciated by the friends of the officer. (Cheers.)

Rivers folded The Times and smiled. ‘Really, Siegfried, what did you

expect?’

‘I don’t know. Meanwhile …’ Sassoon leant across and pointed to the

front page.

Rivers read. ‘ “Platts. Killed in action on the 28th April, dearly loved

younger son, etc., aged seventeen years and ten months.” ’ He looked up
and found Sassoon watching him.

‘He wasn’t old enough to enlist. And nobody gives a damn.’
‘Of course they do.’
‘Oh, come on, it doesn’t even put them off their sausages! Have you ever

sat in a club room and watched people read the casualty list?’

‘You could say that about the breakfast room here. Sensitivity t-to what’s

going on in France is not best shown by b-bursting into t-tears over the c-
casualty list.’ He saw Sassoon noticing the stammer and made an effort to
speak more calmly. ‘The thing for you to do now is face the fact that you’re
here, and here for at least another eleven weeks. Have you thought what
you’re going to do?’

‘Not really. I’m still out of breath from getting here. Go for walks. Read.’
‘Will you be able to write, do you think?’
‘Oh, yes. I’ll write if I have to sit on the roof to do it.’
‘There’s no prospect of a room of your own.’
‘No, I know that.’
Rivers chose his words carefully. ‘Captain Campbell is an extremely nice

man.’

‘Yes, I’ve noticed. What’s more, his battle plans are saner than Haig’s.’
Rivers ignored that. ‘One thing I could do is put you up for my club, the

Conservative Club. I don’t know whether you’d like that? It’d give you an
alternative base at least.’

‘I would, very much. Thank you.’
‘Though I hope you won’t exclude the possibility of making friends

here.’

Sassoon looked down at the backs of his hands. ‘I thought I might send

for my golf clubs. There seem to be one or two keen golfers about.’

‘Good idea. I’ll see you three times a week. It’d better be evenings rather

than mornings, I think – especially if you’re going to play golf. Tuesdays,
Fridays and Sundays?’

‘Fine.’ He smiled faintly. ‘I’ve got nothing else on.’

‘Eight thirty, shall we say? Immediately after dinner.’
Sassoon nodded. ‘It’s very kind of you.’
‘Oh, I don’t know about that.’ He closed his appointments book and

pulled a sheet of paper towards him. ‘Now I need to ask a few questions
about your physical health. Childhood illnesses, that sort of thing.’

‘All right. Why?’
‘For the admission report.’
‘Oh, I see.’
‘I don’t usually include any … intimate details.’
‘Probably just as well. My intimate details disqualify me from military

service.’

Rivers looked up and smiled. ‘I know.’
After Sassoon had gone, Rivers got a case sheet from the stack on his

side table, paused for a few moments to collect his thoughts, and began to
write:

Patient joined ranks of the Sussex Yeomanry on Aug. 3rd, 1914. Three months later he
had a bad smash while schooling a horse and was laid up for several months. In May
1915 he received a commission in the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He was in France from Nov.
1915 until Aug. 1916, when he was sent home with trench fever. He had received the
Military Cross in June 1916. He was on three months’ sick leave and returned to France
in Feb. 1917. On April 16th, 1917, he was wounded in the right shoulder and was in the
surgical wards of the 4th London for four weeks and then at Lady Brassey’s Convalescent
Home for three weeks. He then understood that he was to be sent to Cambridge to instruct
cadets.

From an early stage of his service in France, he had been horrified by the slaughter and

had come to doubt whether the continuance of the War was justifiable. When on sick
leave in 1916 he was in communication with Bertrand Russell and other pacifists. He had
never previously approved of pacifism and does not think he was influenced by this
communication. During his second visit to France, his doubts about the justifiability of
the War were accentuated; he became perhaps even more doubtful about the way in
which the war was being conducted from a military point of view. When he became fit to
return to duty, in July of this year, he felt he was unable to do so, and that it was his duty
to make some kind of protest. He drew up a statement which he himself regarded as an
act of wilful defiance of military authority (see The Times, July 31st, 1917). In
consequence of this statement he was ordered to attend a Medical Board at Chester about
July 16th, but failed to attend. It was arranged that a second Board should be held at
Liverpool on July 2Oth, which he attended, and he was recommended for admission to
Craiglockhart War Hospital for special treatment for three months.

The patient is a healthy looking man of good physique. There are no physical signs of

any disorder of the Nervous System. He discusses his recent actions and their motives in
a perfectly intelligent and rational way, and there is no evidence of any excitement or
depression. He recognizes that his view of warfare is tinged by his feelings about the
death of friends and of the men who were under his command in France. At the present
time he lays special stress on the hopelessness of any decision in the War as it is now
being conducted, but he left out any reference to this aspect of his opinions in the
statement which he sent to his Commanding Officer and which was read in the House of
Commons. His view differs from that of the ordinary pacifist in that he would no longer
object to the continuance of the War if he saw any reasonable prospect of a rapid
decision.

He had an attack of double pneumonia when 11 years old, and again at 14. He was at

Marlborough College, where he strained his heart at football. He was for four terms at
Clare College, Cambridge, where he read first Law and then History, but did not care for
either subject. He left Cambridge and spent the following years living in the country,
devoting his time chiefly to hunting and cricket. He took no interest in Politics. From
boyhood he has written verses at different times, and during his convalescence from his
riding accident in 1914 he wrote a poem called ‘The Old Hunstman’, which has recently
been published with other poems under that title.

‘I gave Broadbent leave,’ Bryce said. ‘With some trepidation.’
‘Yes, he told me he was going to ask you.’
‘You know what he’s done? Gone off with his room-mate’s new

breeches. Marsden’s furious.’

Ruggles said, ‘You mean this guy’s running round the hospital bare-assed

frightening the VADs?’

‘No, he’s wearing his other breeches. And your idea of what might

frighten a VAD is –’

‘Chivalrous,’ said Ruggles.
‘Naïve,’ said Bryce. ‘In the extreme.’
‘Why is it always your patients, Rivers?’ asked Brock.
The MOs were sitting round a table in Bryce’s room over coffee, as they

did twice a week after dinner. These gatherings were kept deliberately
informal, but they served some of the same purposes as a case conference.
Since everybody had now read The Times report, Bryce had asked Rivers to
say a few words about Sassoon.

Rivers kept it as brief and uncontroversial as possible. While he was

speaking, he noticed that Brock was balancing a pencil between the tips of

his extremely long bluish fingers. Never a good sign. Rivers liked Brock,
but they didn’t invariably see eye to eye.

A moment’s silence, after Rivers had finished speaking. Then Ruggles

asked Bryce if the press had shown any interest. While Bryce was
summarizing a conversation he’d had with the Daily Mail, Rivers watched
Brock, who sat, arms folded across his chest, looking down his long
pinched nose at the table. Brock always looked frozen. Even his voice,
high, thin and reedy, seemed to echo across arctic wastes. When Bryce had
finished, Brock turned to Rivers and said, ‘What are you thinking of doing
with him?’

‘Well, I have been seeing him every day. I’m going to drop that now to

three times a week.’

‘Isn’t that rather a lot? For someone who – according to you – has

nothing wrong with him?’

‘I shan’t be able to persuade him to go back in less than that.’
‘Isn’t there a case for leaving him alone?’
‘No.’
‘I mean, simply by being here he’s discredited. Discredited, disgraced,

apparently lied to by his best friend? I’d’ve thought there was a case for
letting him be.’

‘No, there’s no case,’ Rivers said. ‘He’s a mentally and physically

healthy man. It’s his duty to go back, and it’s my duty to see he does.’

‘And you’ve no doubts about that at all?’
‘I don’t see the problem. I’m not going to give him electric shocks, or or

subcutaneous injections of ether. I’m simply asking him to defend his
position. Which he admits was reached largely on emotional grounds.’

‘Grief at the death of his friends. Horror at the slaughter of everybody

else’s friends. It isn’t clear to me why such emotions have to be ignored.’

‘I’m not saying they should be ignored. Only that they mustn’t be

allowed to dominate.’

‘The protopathic must know its place?’
Rivers looked taken aback. ‘I wouldn’t’ve put it quite like that.’

‘Why not? It’s your word. And Sassoon does seem to be a remarkably

protopathic young man. Doesn’t he? I mean from what you say, it’s “all or
nothing” all the time. Happy warrior one minute. Bitter pacifist the next.’

‘Precisely. He’s completely inconsistent. And that’s all the more reason

to get him to argue the position –’

‘Epicritically.’
‘Rationally.’
Brock raised his hands and sat back in his chair. ‘I hope you don’t mind

my playing devil’s advocate?’

‘Good heavens, no. The whole point of these meetings is to protect the

patient.’

Brock smiled, one of his rare, thin, unexpectedly charming smiles. ‘Is

that what I was doing? I thought I was protecting you.’

Part Two

EIGHT

Prior had lost weight during his time in sick bay. Watching the light fall on
to his face, Rivers noticed how sharp the cheekbones had become.

‘Do you mind if I smoke?’
‘No, go ahead.’ Rivers pushed an ashtray across the desk.
The match flared behind Prior’s cupped hands. ‘First for three weeks,’ he

said. ‘God, I feel dizzy.’

Rivers tried not to say, but said, ‘It’s not really a good idea with asthma,

you know.’

‘You think it might shorten my life? Do you know how long the average

officer lasts in France?’

‘Yes. Three months. You’re not in France.’
Prior dragged on the cigarette and, momentarily, closed his eyes. He

looked a bit like the boys you saw on street corners in the East End. That
same air of knowing the price of everything. Rivers drew the file towards
him. ‘We left you in billets at Beauvois.’

‘Yes. We were there, oh, I think about four days and then we were rushed

back into the line. We attacked the morning of the night we moved up.’

‘Date?’
‘April the 23rd.’
Rivers looked up. It was unusual for Prior to be so accurate.
‘St George’s Day. The CO toasted him in the mess. I remember because

it was so bloody stupid.’

‘You were in the casualty clearing station on the …’ He glanced at the

file. ‘29th. So that leaves us with nine days unaccounted for.’

‘Yes, and I’m afraid I can’t help you with any of them.’
‘Do you remember the attack?’

‘Yes. It was exactly like any other attack.’
Rivers waited. Prior looked so hostile that at first Rivers thought he

would refuse to go on, but then he raised the cigarette to his lips, and said,
‘All right. Your watch is brought back by a runner, having been
synchronized at headquarters.’ A long pause. ‘You wait, you try to calm
down anybody who’s obviously shitting himself or on the verge of throwing
up. You hope you won’t do either of those things yourself. Then you start
the count down: ten, nine, eight … so on. You blow the whistle. You climb
the ladder. Then you double through a gap in the wire, lie flat, wait for
everybody else to get out – those that are left, there’s already quite a heavy
toll – and then you stand up. And you start walking. Not at the double.
Normal walking speed.’ Prior started to smile. ‘In a straight line. Across
open country. In broad daylight. Towards a line of machine-guns.’ He shook
his head. ‘Oh, and of course you’re being shelled all the way.’

‘What did you feel?’
Prior tapped the ash off his cigarette. ‘You always want to know what I

felt.’

‘Well, yes. You’re describing this attack as if it were a – a slightly

ridiculous event in –’

‘Not “slightly”. Slightly, I did not say.’
‘All right, an extremely ridiculous event – in somebody else’s life.’
‘Perhaps that’s how it felt.’
‘Was it?’ He gave Prior time to answer. ‘I think you’re capable of a great

deal of detachment, but you’d have to be inhuman to be as detached as
that.’

‘All right. It felt …’ Prior started to smile again. ‘Sexy.’
Rivers raised a hand to his mouth.
‘You see?’ Prior said, pointing to the hand. ‘You ask me how it felt and

when I tell you, you don’t believe me.’

Rivers lowered his hand. ‘I haven’t said I don’t believe you. I was

waiting for you to go on.’

‘You know those men who lurk around in bushes waiting to jump out on

unsuspecting ladies and – er-um – display their equipment? It felt a bit like

that. A bit like I imagine that feels. I wouldn’t like you to think I had any
personal experience.’

‘And was that your only feeling?’
‘Apart from terror, yes.’ He looked amused. ‘Shall we get back to

“inhuman detachment”?’

‘If you like.’
Prior laughed. ‘I think it suits us both better, don’t you?’
Rivers let him continue. This had been Prior’s attitude throughout the

three weeks they’d spent trying to recover his memories of France. He
seemed to be saying, ‘All right. You can make me dredge up the horrors,
you can make me remember the deaths, but you will never make me feel.’
Rivers tried to break down the detachment, to get to the emotion, but he
knew that, confronted by the same task, he would have tackled it in exactly
the same way as Prior.

‘You keep up a kind of chanting. “Not so fast. Steady on the left!”

Designed to avoid bunching. Whether it works or not depends on the
ground. Where we were, it was absolutely pitted with shell-holes and the
lines got broken up straight away. I looked back …’ He stopped, and
reached for another cigarette. ‘I looked back and the ground was covered
with wounded. Lying on top of each other, writhing. Like fish in a pond
that’s drying out. I wasn’t frightened at all. I just felt this … amazing burst
of exultation. Then I heard a shell coming. And the next thing I knew I was
in the air, fluttering down …’ He waved his fingers in a descending arc. ‘I
know it can’t’ve been like that, but that’s what I remember. When I came to,
I was in a crater with about half a dozen of the men. I couldn’t move. I
thought at first I was paralysed, but then I managed to move my feet. I told
them to get the brandy out of my pocket, and we passed that round. Then a
man appeared on the other side of the crater, right at the rim, and, instead of
crawling down, he put his hands to his sides, like this, and slid down on his
bottom. And suddenly everybody burst out laughing.’

‘You say “came to”? Do you know how long you were unconscious?’
‘No idea.’
‘But you were able to speak?’

‘Yes, I told them to get the brandy.’
‘And then?’
‘Then we waited till dark and made a dash for the line. They saw us just

as we got to our wire. Two men wounded.’

‘There was no talk of sending you to a CCS when you got back?’
‘No, I was organizing other people there.’ He added bitterly, ‘There was

no talk of sending anybody anywhere. Normally you go back after heavy
losses, but we didn’t. They just left us there.’

‘And you don’t remember anything else?’
‘No. And I have tried.’
‘Yes, I’m sure you have.’
A long silence. ‘I suppose you haven’t heard from the CO?’
‘No, I’d tell you if I had.’
Prior sat brooding for a while. ‘Well, I suppose we go on waiting.’ He

leant forward to stub his cigarette out. ‘You know, you once told me I had to
win.’ He shook his head. ‘You’re the one who has to win.’

‘This may come as a shock, Mr Prior, but I had been rather assuming we

were on the same side.’

Prior smiled. ‘This may come as a shock, Dr Rivers, but I had been

rather assuming that we were not.’

Silence. Rivers caught and held a sigh. ‘That does make the relationship

of doctor and patient rather difficult.’

Prior shrugged. Obviously he didn’t think that was his problem. ‘You

think you know what happened, don’t you?’ Rivers said.

‘I’ve told you I don’t remember.’
The antagonism was startling. They might’ve been back at the beginning,

when it had been almost impossible to get a civil word out of him. ‘I’m
sorry, I didn’t make myself clear. I wasn’t suggesting you knew, only that
you might have a theory.’

Prior shook his head. ‘No. No theory.’

A short, dark-haired man sidled round the door, blinking in the sudden
blaze of sunlight. Sassoon, sitting on the bed, looked up from the golf club

he’d been cleaning. ‘Yes?’

‘I’ve b-brought these.’
A stammer. Not as bad as some, but bad enough. Sassoon exerted himself

to be polite. ‘What is it? I can’t see.’

Books. His book. Five copies, no less. ‘My God, a reader.’
‘I wondered if you’d b-be k-kind enough to s-sign them?’
‘Yes, of course.’ Sassoon put the golf club down and reached for his pen.

He could have dispatched the job in a few moments, but he sensed that his
visitor wanted to talk, and he had after all bought five copies. Sassoon was
curious. ‘Why five? Has the War Office put it on a reading list?’

‘They’re f-for m-my f-family.’
Oh, dear. Sassoon transferred himself from bed to table and opened the

first book. ‘What name shall I write?’

‘Susan Owen. M-y m-mother.’
Sassoon began to write. Paused. ‘Are you … quite sure your mother

wants to be told that “Bert’s gone syphilitic?” I had trouble getting them to
print that.’

‘It w-won’t c-come as a sh-shock.’
‘Won’t it?’ One could only speculate on the nature of Mrs Owen’s

previous acquaintance with Bert.

‘I t-tell her everything. In m-my l-letters.’
‘Good heavens,’ Sassoon said lightly, and turned back to the book.
Owen looked down at the back of Sassoon’s neck, where a thin line of

khaki was just visible beneath the purple silk of his dressing gown. ‘Don’t
you?’

Sassoon opened his mouth and shut it again. ‘My brother died at

Gallipoli,’ he said, at last. ‘I think my mother has enough on her plate
without any searing revelations from me.’

‘I s-suppose she m-must b-be c-concerned about your b-being here.’
‘Oh, I don’t think so. On the contrary. I believe the thought of my

insanity is one of her few consolations.’ He glanced up, briefly. ‘Better mad
than a pacifist.’ When Owen continued to look blank, he added, ‘You do
know why I’m here?’

‘Yes.’
‘And what do you think about that?’
‘I agreed with every w-word.’
Sassoon smiled. ‘So did my friend Graves.’ He opened the next book.

‘Who’s this one for?’

Owen, feeding the names, would have given anything to say one sentence

without stammering. No hope of that – he was far too nervous. Everything
about Sassoon intimidated him. His status as a published poet, his height,
his good looks, the clipped aristocratic voice, sometimes quick, sometimes
halting, but always cold, the bored expression, the way he had of not
looking at you when you spoke – shyness, perhaps, but it seemed like
arrogance. Above all, his reputation for courage. Owen had his own reasons
for being sensitive about that.

Sassoon reached the last book. Owen felt the meeting begin to slip away

from him. Rather desperately, he said, ‘I l-liked “The D-Death B-Bed” b-
best.’ And suddenly he relaxed. It didn’t matter what this Sassoon thought
about him, since the real Sassoon was in the poems. He quoted, from
memory, ‘ “He’s young; he hated War, how should he die/When cruel old
campaigners win safe through?/But death replied: ‘I choose him.’ So he
went.” That’s beautiful.’

Sassoon paused in his signing. ‘Yes, I – I was quite pleased with that.’
‘Oh, and “The Redeemer”. “He faced me, reeling in his

weariness,/Shouldering his load of planks, so hard to bear./I say that He was
Christ, who wrought to bless …” ’ He broke off. ‘I’ve been wanting to write
that for three years.’

‘Perhaps you should be glad you didn’t.’
The light faded from Owen’s face. ‘Sorry?’
‘Well, don’t you think it’s rather easily said? “I say that He was Christ”?’
‘You m-mean you d-didn’t m-mean it?’
‘Oh, I meant it. The book isn’t putting one point of view, it’s charting the

– the evolution of a point of view. That’s probably the first poem that even
attempts to look at the war realistically. And that one doesn’t go nearly far

enough.’ He paused. ‘The fact is Christ isn’t on record as having lobbed
many Mills bombs.’

‘No, I s-see what you m-mean. I’ve been thinking about that quite a b-bit

recently.’

Sassoon scarcely heard him. ‘I got so sick of it in the end. All those

Calvaries at crossroads just sitting there waiting to be turned into symbols. I
knew a man once, Potter his name was. You know the miraculous crucifix
stories? “Shells falling all around, but the figure of Our Lord was spared”?
Well, Potter was so infuriated by them he decided to start a one-man
campaign. Whenever he saw an undamaged crucifix, he used it for target
practice. You could hear him for miles. “ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR,
Bastard on the Cross, FIRE!” There weren’t many miraculous crucifixes in
Potter’s section of the front.’ He hesitated. ‘But perhaps I shouldn’t be
saying this? I mean for all I know, you’re –’

‘I don’t know what I am. But I do know I wouldn’t want a f-faith that

couldn’t face the facts.’

Sassoon became aware that Owen was standing at his elbow, almost like

a junior officer. ‘Why don’t you sit down?’ he said, waving him towards the
bed. ‘And tell me your name. I take it this one’s for you?’

‘Yes. Wilfred. Wilfred Owen.’
Sassoon blew on his signature and closed the book. ‘You say you’ve been

thinking about it?’

Owen looked diffident. ‘Yes.’
‘To any effect? I mean, did you reach any conclusions?’
‘Only that if I were going to call myself a Christian, I’d have to call

myself a pacifist as well. I don’t think it’s possible to c-call yourself a C-
Christian and … and j-just leave out the awkward bits.’

‘You’ll never make a bishop.’
‘No, well, I think I can live with that.’
‘And do you call yourself a pacifist?’
A long pause. ‘No. Do you?’
‘No.’
‘It’s funny, you know, I never thought about it at all in France.’

‘No, well, you don’t. Too busy, too tired.’ Sassoon smiled. ‘Too healthy.’
‘It’s not just that, though, is it? Sometimes when you’re alone, in the

trenches, I mean, at night you get the sense of something ancient. As if the
trenches had always been there. You know one trench we held, it had skulls
in the side. You looked back along and … Like mushrooms. And do you
know, it was actually easier to believe they were men from Marlborough’s
army than to to to think they’d been alive two years ago. It’s as if all other
wars had somehow … distilled themselves into this war, and that makes it
something you … almost can’t challenge. It’s like a very deep voice saying,
Run along, little man. Be thankful if you survive.’

For a moment the nape of Sassoon’s neck crawled as it had the first time

Campbell talked about German spies; but this was not madness. ‘I had a
similar experience. Well, I don’t know whether it is similar. I was going up
with the rations one night and I saw the limbers against the skyline, and the
flares going up. What you see every night. Only I seemed to be seeing it
from the future. A hundred years from now they’ll still be ploughing up
skulls. And I seemed to be in that time and looking back. I think I saw our
ghosts.’

Silence. They’d gone further than either of them had intended, and for a

moment they didn’t know how to get back. Gradually, they stirred, they
looked round, at sunlight streaming over beds and chairs, at Sassoon’s razor
glinting on the washstand, its handle smeared with soap. Sassoon looked at
his watch. ‘I’m going to be late for golf.’

Immediately Owen stood up. ‘Well, thanks for these,’ he said, taking the

books. He laughed. ‘Thanks for writing it.’

Sassoon followed him to the door. ‘Did you say you wrote?’
‘I didn’t, but I do.’
‘Poetry?’
‘Yes. Nothing in print yet. Oh, which reminds me. I’m editor of the

Hydra. The hospital magazine? I was wondering if you could let us have
something. It needn’t be –’

‘Yes, I’ll look something out.’ Sassoon opened the door. ‘Give me a few

days. You could bring your poems.’

This was said with such determined courtesy and such transparent lack of

enthusiasm that Owen burst out laughing. ‘No, I –’

‘No, I mean it.’
‘All right.’ Owen was still laughing. ‘They are quite short.’
‘No, well, it doesn’t lend itself to epics, does it?’
‘Oh, they’re not about the war.’ He hesitated. ‘I don’t write about that.’
‘Why ever not?’
‘I s-suppose I’ve always thought of p-poetry as the opposite of all that.

The ugliness.’ Owen was struggling to articulate a point of view he was
abandoning even as he spoke. ‘S-Something to to t-take refuge in.’

Sassoon nodded. ‘Fair enough.’ He added mischievously, ‘Though it

does seem a bit like having a faith that daren’t face the facts.’ He saw
Owen’s expression change. ‘Look, it doesn’t matter what they’re about.
Bring them anyway.’

‘Yes, I will. Thank you.’

Anderson, following Sassoon into the bar of the golf club, knew he owed
him an apology. At the seventeenth hole, afraid he was losing, he’d missed
a vital shot and in the heat of the moment had not merely sworn at Sassoon,
but actually raised the club and threatened to hit him with it. Sassoon had
looked startled, even alarmed, but he’d laughed it off. At the eighteenth
hole, he’d been careful to ask Anderson’s advice about which iron he
should use. Now, he turned to Anderson and said, ‘Usual?’

Anderson nodded. The trouble was, Anderson thought, it looked so much

like bad sportsmanship, whereas in reality the apology was being delayed,
not by any unwillingness on his part to admit he was wrong, but by the
extent of the horror he felt at his own behaviour. He’d behaved like a spoilt
child. So do something about it, he told himself. ‘Sorry about that,’ he said,
nodding towards the course.

‘’S all right.’ Sassoon turned from the bar and smiled. ‘We all have bad

days.’

‘Here’s your half-crown.’

Sassoon grinned and pocketed it. He was thinking, as he turned back to

the bar, that if the club had landed on his head he would have been far more
seriously injured than he’d been at Arras. He conjured Rivers up in his
mind and asked, What was that you were saying about ‘safety’? Nothing
more dangerous than playing golf with lunatics. ‘Lunatic’ was a word
Sassoon would never have dared use to Rivers’s face, so it gave him an
additional pleasure to yell it at his image.

They took their drinks, found a quiet corner, and began their usual

inquest on the game. Under cover of the familiar chat, Anderson watched
Sassoon – a good-looking, rather blank face, big hands curved round his
glass – and. thought how little he knew about him. Or wanted to know. It
was a matter of tacit agreement that they talked about nothing but golf.
Anderson had read the Declaration, but he wouldn’t have dreamt of
discussing Sassoon’s attitude to the war, mainly because some return of
intimacy would then have been required. He might have had to disclose his
own reasons for being at Craiglockhart. His horror of blood. He had a
momentary picture of the way Sassoon’s head would have looked if he’d hit
him, and his hand tightened on the glass. ‘You’re still not taking your time,’
he said. ‘You’re rushing your shots.’

There were other reasons too why he didn’t want to talk about the war.

Inevitably such talk would have strengthened his own doubts, and they
were bad enough already. He even dreamt about the bloody war, not just
nightmares, he was used to those; he’d dreamt he was speaking at a debate
on whether it should go on or not. In his dream he’d spoken in favour of
continuing to the point of German collapse, but Rivers’s analysis had left
him in no doubt as to how far his horror at the whole business went. He felt
safe with Rivers, because he knew Rivers shared the horror, and shared too
the conviction that, in spite of everything, it had to go on.

‘I don’t know whether to spend that half-crown or frame it,’ Sassoon was

saying. ‘I don’t suppose I’ll ever win another.’

That was to make Anderson feel better about losing his temper on the

course. Sassoon was a pleasant companion, there was no doubt about that.
He was friendly, modest. But the Declaration hadn’t been modest. What had

chiefly struck Anderson about that was its arrogance, its totally outrageous
assumption that everybody who disagreed with him was ‘callous’. Do you
think I’m callous? he wanted to ask. Do you think Rivers is callous? But
there was no point getting worked up. Rivers would soon sort him out.

‘I shan’t be seeing you tomorrow, shall I?’ Sassoon was saying. ‘Your

wife’s coming up.’

‘No, I’m afraid she’s had to cancel. So it’s business as usual.’ He took

Sassoon’s empty glass and stood up. ‘You can try to make it five bob, if you
like.’

Prior watched the amber lights winking in his beer. He was sitting in the
shadowy corner of a pub in some sleazy district of Edinburgh. He didn’t
know where he was. He’d walked miles that evening, not admitting even to
himself what he was looking for, and gradually the winding, insidious
streets had led him deeper and deeper into a neighbourhood where washing
hung, grey-white, from stacked balconies, and the smell of steak frying
reminded him of home.

Remembering the smell, his stomach rumbled. He’d had nothing to eat

all evening, except a packet of peanuts. Crumbs of salt still clung to his lips,
stinging the cracks where the skin had dried during his asthma attack. It was
worth it, though, just to sit quietly, to listen to voices that didn’t stammer, to
have his eyes freed from the ache of khaki.

No theory. He’d lied to Rivers about that. It was a point of honour with

him to lie to Rivers at least once during every meeting. He drained his glass
and went out into the night.

A little way down the street was a café. He’d passed it on his way to the

pub and been tempted to go in, but the door had opened and the breath of
hot, damp, dirty, dishwater-smelling air had decided him against it. Now,
though, he was too hungry to care. He went in, noticing how the inner
windows dripped from condensation, how the damp air insinuated itself into
the spaces between his uniform and his skin. A short silence fell. Nobody in
an officer’s uniform was likely to be inconspicuous or welcome here. He
would eat something, fish and chips, quickly and then go.

A group of women was sitting at the next table. Three of them were

young, one older, thirty-five, forty perhaps, with blackened stumps for
teeth. As far as he could make out from the conversation her name was
Lizzie, and the others were Madge, the blonde, pretty one, Betty, who was
dark and thin, and Sarah, who had her back to him. Since they all had a
slightly yellow tinge to their skin, he assumed they were munitions workers.
Munitionettes, as the newspapers liked to call them. Lizzie was keeping the
younger girls entertained with a string of stories.

‘There’s this lass and she’s a bit simple and she lived next door to a pro –

well you know what a pro is.’ Lizzie glanced at him and lowered her voice.
‘So she’s standing at the door this day, and the pro’s coming up the street,
you know, dressed to death. So she says, “Eeh,” she says, “you’re always
lovely dressed.” She says, “You’ve got beautiful clothes.” And she says, “I
love your hats.” So the pro says, “Well, why don’t you get yourself down
the town like I do?” She says, “If a man winks at you, wink back and go
with him and let him have what he wants and charge him 7/6. And go to
R&K Modes and get yourself a hat.” So the next day the pro’s coming up
the street again. “Hello.” “Hello.” She says, “D’ y’ get a hat?” She says,
“Nah.” “Well, did you not do as I telled you?” She says, “Why of course I
did.” She says, “I went down the town and there was a man winked at us
and I winked back. He says, ‘Howay over the Moor.’ ” So she says, “I gans
over the Moor with him,” she says, “and I let him have what he wanted. He
says, ‘How much is that?’ I says, ‘7/6.’ He says, ‘Hadaway and shite,’ and
when I come back he’d gone.” ’

The girls shrieked with laughter. He looked at them again. The one called

Madge was very pretty, but there was no hope of winkling her out of the
group, and he thought he might as well be moving on. As soon as his meal
arrived, he began stuffing limp chips and thickly battered fish into his
mouth, wiping the grease away on the back of his hand.

‘You’ll get hiccups.’
He looked up. It was Sarah, the one who’d been sitting with her back to

him. ‘You’ll have to give us a surprise, then, won’t you?’

‘Drop me key down your back if you like.’

‘That’s nose bleeds, Sarah,’ Betty said.
‘She knows what it is,’ said Lizzie.
Madge said, ‘Hiccups, you’re supposed to drink from the other side of

the cup.’

She and Prior stared at each other across the table.
‘But it’s a con, isn’t it?’ he said. ‘You can’t do it.’
‘ ’Course you can.’
‘Go on, then, let’s see you.’
She dipped her small, straight nose into her cup, lapped, spluttered and

came up laughing and wiping her chin. Betty, obviously jealous, gave her a
dig in the ribs. ‘Hey up you, you’re gonna gerrus slung out.’

The café owner was eyeing them from behind the till, slowly polishing a

glass on a distinctly grubby-looking tea towel. The girls went back to their
tea, bursting into minor explosions of giggles, their shoulders shaking,
while Prior turned back and finished his meal. He was aware of Sarah
beside him. She had very heavy, very thick, dark-brown hair, but all over
the surface, in a kind of halo, were other hairs, auburn, copper, chestnut.
He’d never seen hair like that before. He looked at her, and she turned
around and stared at him, a cool, amused stare from greenish eyes. He said,
‘Would you like a drink?’

She looked at her cup.
‘No, I meant a proper drink.’
‘Pubs round here don’t let women in.’
‘Isn’t there a hotel?’
‘Well, there’s the Cumberland, but …’
The other women looked at each other. Lizzie said, ‘Howay, lasses, I

think our Sarah’s clicked.’

The three of them got up, said a good-natured ‘goodnight’ and tripped

out of the café, only bursting into giggles again after they’d reached the
pavement.

‘Shall we go, then?’ said Prior.
Sarah looked at him. ‘Aye, all right.’
Outside, she turned to him. ‘I still don’t know your name.’

‘Prior,’ he said automatically.
She burst out laughing. ‘Don’t you lot have Christian names?’
‘Billy.’ He wanted to say, and I’m not ‘you lot’.
‘Mine’s Sarah. Sarah Lumb.’ She held out her hand to him in a direct,

almost boyish way. It intrigued him, since nothing else about her was
boyish.

‘Well, Sarah Lumb, lead on.’
Her preferred drink was port and lemon. Prior was startled at the rate she

knocked them back. A flush spread across her cheeks in a different place
from the rouge, so that she looked as if her face had slid out of focus. She
worked in a factory, she said, making detonators. Twelve-hour shifts, six
days a week, but she liked the work, she said, and it was well paid. ‘Fifty
bob a week.’

‘I suppose that’s something.’
‘Too bloody right it is. I was earning ten bob before the war.’
He thought what the detonators she made could do to flesh and bone, and

his mind bulged as a memory threatened to surface. ‘You’re not Scottish,
though, are you?’

‘No, Geordie. Well, what you’d call Geordie.’
‘Did your dad come up looking for work?’
‘No, they’re still down there. I’m in lodgings down the road.’
Ah, he thought.
‘ “Ah,” he thinks.’ She looked at him, amused and direct. ‘I think you’re

a bad lad.’

‘No, I’m not. Nobody bad could be that transparent.’
‘That’s true.’
‘Haven’t you got a boyfriend?’
‘What do you think?’
‘I don’t think you’d be sitting here if you had.’
‘Oh, I might be one of these two-timing lasses, you never know.’ She

looked down into her glass. ‘No, I haven’t got one.’

‘Why not? Can’t all be blind in Scotland.’
‘Perhaps I’m not on the market.’

He didn’t know what to make of her, but then he was out of touch with

women. They seemed to have changed so much during the war, to have
expanded in all kinds of ways, whereas men over the same period had
shrunk into a smaller and smaller space.

‘I did have one,’ she said. ‘Loos.’
Odd, he thought, getting up and going to the bar to buy more drinks, that

one word should be enough. But then why not? Language ran out on you, in
the end, the names were left to say it all. Mons, Loos, Ypres, the Somme.
Arras. He paid and carried the drinks back to their table. He thought that he
didn’t want to hear about the boyfriend, and that he was probably going to
anyway. He was right there.

‘I was in service at the time. It didn’t …’ Her voice became very brisk.

‘It didn’t seem to sink in. Then his mate came to see me. You weren’t
supposed to have followers. “Followers” – that’s how old-fashioned she
was. Especially soldiers. “Oh my deah.” So anyway he come to the front
door and …’ She waved her hand languidly. ‘I sent him away. Then I
nipped down the basement and let him in the back.’ She took a swig of the
port. ‘It was our gas,’ she said, red-lidded. ‘Did you know that?’

‘Yes.’
‘Our own bloody gas. After he’d gone, you know, I couldn’t believe it. I

just walked round and round the table and it was like … You know when
you get a tune stuck in your head? I just kept on thinking, our gas. Anyway
after a bit she come downstairs, and she says, “Where’s tea?” I says, “Well,
you can see for yourself. It’s not ready.” We-ell. First one thing was said and
then another and in the end I did, I let her have it. She says, “You’d be
making a great mistake to throw this job away, you know, Sarah.” I says,
“Oh, aye?” She says, “We don’t say ‘aye’, Sarah, we say ‘yes’.” I says, “All
right,” I says, ‘ “yes’. But ‘aye’ or ‘yes’, it’s still ten bob a week and you
put it where the monkey put the nuts.” Same night I was packing me bags.
No testimonial. And you know what that would’ve meant before the war?’
She looked him up and down. ‘No, I don’t suppose you do. Anyway, I
turned up at home and me Mam says, “I’ve no sympathy, our Sarah,” she
says. “You should have fixed him while you had the chance,” she says.

“And made sure of the pension. Our Cynthia had her wits about her,” she
says. “Why couldn’t you?” And of course our Cynthia’s sat there. Would
you believe in weeds? I thought, aw to hell with this. Anyway, a couple of
days after, I got on talking to Betty – that’s the dark girl you saw me with
just now – and we decided to give this a go.’

‘I’m glad you did.’
She brooded for a while over her empty glass. ‘You know, me Mam says

there’s no such thing as love between men and women. Love for your
bairns, yes. Love for a man? No.’ She turned to him, almost aggressively.
‘What do you think?’

‘I don’t know.’
‘Well, that makes two of us, then, ’cause I’m buggered if I do.’
‘But you loved –’
‘Johnny? I can’t remember what he looked like. Sometimes his face pops

into me mind, like when I’m thinking about something else, but when I
want to see it, I can’t.’ She smiled. ‘That’s the trouble with port and lemon,
isn’t it? Truth pours out.’

He took the hint and bought another.
By the time they left the pub she’d drunk enough to need his arm.
‘Which way’s your lodgings?’
She giggled. ‘Won’t do you any good,’ she said. ‘My landlady’s a

dragon. Fifty times worse than me Mam.’

‘Shall we go for a walk, then? I don’t fancy saying goodnight, just yet, do

you?’

‘All right.’
They turned away from the lighted pavements, into the darkness of a side

street. He put his arm around her, inching his hand further up until his
fingers rested against the curve of her breast. She was tall for a woman, and
they fitted together, shoulder and hip. He hardly had to shorten his stride.
As they walked, she glanced down frequently at her shoes and stockings,
admiring herself. He guessed she more usually wore boots.

They came upon a church with a small churchyard around it. Gravestones

leant together at angles in the shadow of the trees, like people gossiping.

‘Shall we go in there for a bit?’

He opened the gate for her and they went in, into the darkness under the

trees, treading on something soft and crunchy. Pine needles, perhaps. At the
church door they turned and followed the path round, till they came to a
tall, crumbling, ivy-covered wall. There, in the shadows, he pulled her
towards him. He got her jacket and blouse unbuttoned and felt for her
breast. The nipple hardened against his palm, and he laughed under his
breath. She started to say something, but he covered her mouth with his
own, he didn’t want her to talk, he didn’t want her to tell him things. He
would have preferred not even to know her name. Just flesh against flesh in
the darkness and then nothing.

‘I know what you want,’ she said, pulling away from him.
Instantly he let her go. ‘I know what I want. What’s wrong with that?

I’ve never forced anybody.’ He turned away from her and sat on a
tombstone. ‘And I don’t go on about it either.’

‘Then you’re a man in a million.’
‘I know.’
‘Big-headed bugger.’
‘Don’t I even get a cuddle?’ He patted the tombstone. ‘No harm in that.’
She came and sat beside him, and after a while he got his arms around

her again. But he didn’t feel the same way about it. Now, even as he
lowered his head to her breast, he was wondering whether he wanted to
play this particular game. Whether it was worth it. He tugged gently at her
nipple, and felt her thighs loosen. Instantly, his doubts vanished. He pressed
her back on to the tombstone and moved on top of her. Cradling her head on
his left arm, he began the complicated business of raising her skirts, pulling
down her drawers, unbuttoning his breeches, all while trying to maintain
their position on a too-short and sloping tombstone. At the last moment she
cried ‘No-o-o’ and shoved him hard off the tombstone into the long grass.
He sat for a while, his back against the stone, picking bits of lichen off his
tunic. After a while he yawned and said, ‘Short-arsed little buggers, the
Scots.’

She looked down at the tombstone, which did seem rather small. ‘Oh, I

don’t know. Everybody was shorter in them days.’ You could just make out
the word ‘Beloved’, but everything else was covered in lichen or crumbled
away. She traced the word with her fingertip. ‘I wonder what they think.’

‘Down there? Glad to see a bit of life, I should think. Not that they’ve

seen much.’

She didn’t reply. He turned to look at her. Her hair had come down, way

past her shoulders, he was glad she didn’t wear it short, and there was still
that amazing contrast of the dark brown velvety mass and its halo of copper
wire. He was being stupid. She’d let him have it in the end, and the more he
bellyached about it now, the longer he’d have to wait. He said, ‘Come on,
one kiss, and I’ll walk you home.’

‘Hm.’
‘No, I mean it.’
He gave her a teasingly chaste kiss, making sure he was the first to pull

away. Then he helped her dust down her skirt and walked her back to her
lodgings. On the way she insisted they stop in the doorway of a shop, and
she crammed her hair up into her hat, with the help of the few hairpins
she’d managed to retrieve. ‘There’d be eyebrows raised if I went in like
this.’

‘Can I see you again?’
‘You know where I live. Or you will do.’
‘I don’t know your times off.’
‘Sunday.’
‘I’ll come over on Sunday, then, shall I? If I come mid morning, we

could have a bite to eat in Edinburgh and then go somewhere on the tram.’

She looked doubtful, but the thought of being collected from her lodgings

by an officer was too much for her. ‘All right.’

They walked on. She stopped outside the door and raised her face. Oh,

no, he thought. No fumbling on doorsteps. He lowered his head until his
forehead rested against hers. ‘Goodnight, Sarah Lumb.’

‘Goodnight, Billy Prior.’

After a few paces he turned and looked back. She was standing on the

step, watching him walk away. He raised his hand, and she waved slightly.
Then he turned and walked briskly on, looking at his watch and thinking,
Christ. Even if he found a taxi immediately he still couldn’t be back at
Craiglockhart before the main doors were locked. Oh well, he thought, I’ll
just have to face it.

NINE

‘Aren’t you going to start?’

‘I imagine Major Bryce has dealt with the matter?’
‘You could say. He’s confined me to the hospital for a fortnight.’
Rivers made no comment.
‘Don’t you think that’s rather severe?’
‘It wasn’t a simple matter of being late back, was it? Matron says she saw

you in town, and you were not wearing your hospital badge.’

‘I wasn’t wearing the badge because I was looking for a girl. Which – as

you may or may not know – is not made easier by going around with a
badge stuck on your chest saying I AM A LOONY.’

‘I gather you also made some rather disrespectful remarks about Matron.

Everything from the size of her bosom to the state of her hymen. If you
make remarks like that to the CO, what do you think is going to happen?’

Prior didn’t reply, though a muscle throbbed in his jaw. Rivers looked at

the pale, proud, wintry face and thought oh God, it’s going to be another
one of those.

Prior said, ‘Aren’t you going to ask me if I got one?’
‘One what?’
‘Girl. Woman.’ When Rivers didn’t immediately reply, Prior added, ‘Wo-

man?’

‘No, I wasn’t going to ask.’
‘You amaze me. I should’ve thought that was par for the course.’
Rivers waited.
‘Questions. On and on and bloody on.’
‘Would you like to leave it for today?’
‘No.’

‘You’re sure?’
‘Quite sure.’
‘All right. We’d got to the time immediately following the April 23rd

attack. Have you made any progress beyond that?’

‘No.’
‘Nothing at all?’
‘No.’ Prior’s hands were gripping the arms of his chair. ‘I don’t want to

talk about this.’

Rivers decided to humour him. ‘What do you want to talk about?’
‘Something you said earlier on. It’s been bothering me ever since. You

said officers don’t suffer from mutism.’

‘It’s rare.’
‘How many cases?’
‘At Craiglockhart? You, and one other. At Maghull, where I was treating

private soldiers, it was by far the commonest symptom.’

‘Why?’
‘I imagine … Mutism seems to spring from a conflict between wanting to

say something, and knowing that if you do say it the consequences will be
disastrous. So you resolve it by making it physically impossible for yourself
to speak. And for the private soldier the consequences of speaking his mind
are always going to be far worse than they would be for an officer. What
you tend to get in officers is stammering. And it’s not just mutism. All the
physical symptoms: paralysis, blindness, deafness. They’re all common in
private soldiers and rare in officers. It’s almost as if for the … the labouring
classes illness has to be physical. They can’t take their condition seriously
unless there’s a physical symptom. And there are other differences as well.
Officers’ dreams tend to be more elaborate. The men’s dreams are much
more a matter of simple wish fulfilment. You know, they dream they’ve
been sent back to France, but on the day they arrive peace is declared. That
sort of thing.’

‘I think I’d rather have their dreams than mine.’
‘How do you know?’ Rivers said. ‘You don’t remember your dreams.’
‘You still haven’t said why.’

‘I suppose it’s just a matter of officers having a more complex mental

life.’

Prior reacted as if he’d been stung. ‘Are you serious? You honestly

believe that that gaggle of noodle-brained half-wits down there has a
complex mental life? Oh, Rivers.’

‘I’m not saying it’s universally true, only that it’s generally true. Simply

as a result of officers receiving a different and, for the most part, more
prolonged education.’

‘The public schools.’
‘Yes. The public schools.’
Prior raised his head. ‘How do I fit into that?’
‘We-ell, it’s interesting that you were mute and that you’re one of the

very few people in the hospital who doesn’t stammer.’

‘It’s even more interesting that you do.’
Rivers was taken aback. ‘That’s d-different.’
‘How is it different? Other than that you’re on that side of the desk?’ He

saw Rivers hesitate. ‘No, I’m not being awkward. I’m genuinely interested.’

‘It’s usually thought that neurasthenic stammers arise from the same kind

of conflict as mutism, a conflict between wanting to speak and knowing that
w-what you’ve got to say is not acceptable. Lifelong stammerers? Well.
Nobody really knows. It may even be genetic.’

Prior smiled. ‘Now that is lucky, isn’t it? Lucky for you, I mean. Because

if your stammer was the same as theirs – you might actually have to sit
down and work out what it is you’ve spent fifty years trying not to say.’

‘Is that the end of my appointment for the day, Mr Prior?’
Prior smiled.
‘You know one day you’re going to have to accept the fact that you’re in

this hospital because you’re ill. Not me. Not the CO. Not the kitchen porter.
You.’

After Prior had gone, Rivers sat for a while, half amused, half irritated.

Now that his attention had been drawn to his stammer, it would plague him
at intervals throughout the day. Bugger Prior, he thought. To be absolutely
accurate, b-b-b-bugger Prior.

Prior had left slightly early, so Rivers had a few minutes before his next

appointment. He decided to take a turn in the grounds. The grass was
silvery with dew – his footsteps showed up dark along the path he’d come –
but here and there the ground was beginning to steam. He sat on a bench
under the trees, and watched two patients carrying scythes come round the
corner of the building and run down the grassy slope that divided the gravel
drive from the tennis courts. They looked, Rivers thought, almost comically
symbolic: Time and Death invading the Arcadian scene. Nothing symbolic
about the scythes, though. The blades over their shoulders glinted a wicked
blue-grey. You could only wonder at an administration that confiscated cut-
throat razors and then issued the patients with these. They set to work
cutting the long grass by the hedges. There was a great deal of laughter and
clumsiness at first, and not a few false starts, before their bodies bent into
the rhythm of the task. Moths, disturbed from their daytime sleep, flickered
all around them.

One took off his Sam Browne belt and then tunic, shirt and tie, casting

them carelessly aside, and then went back to his scything, his dangling
braces describing wide arcs around him as he swung the blade. His body
was very pale, with a line round the neck, dividing white from reddish
brown. The tunic had landed on the hedge, one sleeve raised as if
beckoning. The other flung down his scythe and did the same. Work went
more quickly now. Soon there was a gratifyingly large area of mown grass
for them to look back on. They stood leaning on the scythes, admiring their
work, and then one of them dived into the cut grass, winnowing his way
through it, obviously excited by it in the way dogs sometimes are. He lay on
his back, panting. The other man came across, said, ‘Silly bugger,’ and
started kicking the grass all over him.

Rivers turned and saw Patterson – the Head of Office Administration –

making his way at a steady pace down the slope to deliver the inevitable
reprimand. King’s regulations. No officer must appear in public with any
garment missing. Patterson spoke to them, then turned away. Slowly, they
reached for their uniforms, pulled khaki shirts and tunics on to sweating
bodies, buckled belts. It had to be done, though it seemed to Rivers that the

scything went more slowly after that, and there was less laughter, which
seemed a pity.

That night Rivers worked late, compiling lists of men to be boarded at the
end of August. This was the most difficult task of any month, since it
involved deciding which patients were fit to return to duty. In theory, the
decision to return a man to service was taken by the Board, but since his
recommendations were rarely, if ever, questioned, in practice his report
determined the outcome. He was beginning to work on the first of these
reports when there was a tap on the door. He called, ‘Come in!’

Prior came into the room.
‘Good evening,’ Rivers said.
‘Good evening. I came to say I’m sorry about this morning.’
The day had been so horrific in so many ways – culminating in a three-

hour meeting of the hospital management committee – that Rivers had to
grope for the memory. He said. ‘That’s all right.’

‘It was stupid. Going on like that.’
‘Oh, I don’t know. We just caught each other at a bad moment.’
Prior lingered a few feet away from the desk. ‘Why don’t you sit down?’

Rivers said.

‘You must be tired.’
‘Tired of paperwork.’
Prior’s glance took in the list of names. ‘The Boards.’
‘The Boards.’ He glanced at Prior. ‘Not you this time.’
‘Not enough progress.’
Rivers didn’t immediately reply. He was watching Prior, noticing the

pallor, the circles round the eyes. He had shadows under the shadows now.
‘You have made progress. You’ve recovered almost all your memory and
you no longer lose your voice.’

‘You must wish I did.’
Rivers smiled. ‘Don’t exaggerate, Mr Prior. We both know if you really

wanted to be offensive, you could do a hundred times better than you did
this morning.’ He waited for a reply. ‘Couldn’t you?’

Prior produced a curious rippling motion – half shrug, half flounce – and

turned away. After a moment he looked sideways at Rivers. ‘I did once
think of asking you if you ever fucked any of your headhunters.’

‘What stopped you?’
‘I thought it was your business.’
Rivers pretended to consider the matter. ‘That’s true.’
‘There’s no point trying to be offensive, is there, if that’s the only

response you get?’

‘You don’t really want to be. You’ve always made a lot of noise about

stepping over the line, but you’ve never actually done it.’ Rivers smiled.
‘Except just now, of course. And that was incredibly indirect.’

A short silence. Prior said, ‘I wish I could go out. No, it’s all right, I’m

not asking. I’m just saying I wish I could. The nightmares get worse when
I’m stuck indoors.’ He waited. ‘This is where you ask about the nightmares
and I say I don’t remember.’

‘I know.’
Prior smiled. ‘You never believed me, did you?’
‘Should I have done?’
‘No.’
‘Do you want to talk about them now?’
‘I can’t. Look, they’re just …’ He laughed. ‘ “Standard issue battle

nightmares. Potty officers for the use of.” Nothing you won’t have heard a
hundred times before.’

‘Except?’
‘Except nothing.’
A long silence.
‘Except that sometimes they get muddled up with sex. So I wake up, and

…’ He risked a glance at Rivers. When he spoke again, his voice was
casual. ‘It makes it really quite impossible to like oneself. I’ve actually
woken up once or twice and wondered whether there was any point going
on.’

And you might well do it, Rivers thought.

‘That’s why I was so furious when they got you up in the middle of the

night.’

Easy to hand out the usual reassurances about the effects on young men

of a celibate life, but not particularly helpful. Prior was becoming
unmistakably depressed. It was doing him no good to wait for his CO’s
letter, which might anyway turn out to contain nothing of any great
moment. ‘We could try hypnosis now, if you liked.’

‘Now?’
‘Yes, why not? It’s the time we’re least likely to be interrupted.’
Prior’s eyes flickered round the room. He licked his lips. ‘It’s odd, isn’t

it? When you said most people were frightened, I didn’t believe you.’

‘What frightens them,’ Rivers said carefully, ‘is the belief that they’re

putting themselves completely in the therapist’s power. That he can make
them do anything, even things they’d normally consider ridiculous or even
immoral. But that isn’t true, you remain yourself throughout. Not that I shall
be trying to make you do anything ridiculous or immoral.’ He smiled. ‘In
spite of being the terror of the South Seas.’

Prior laughed, but his face tightened again immediately.
‘We can leave it, if you like,’ Rivers said gently.
Deep breath. ‘No. I can’t pester you for it and then turn it down.’
‘If it turns out to be …’ Rivers groped for a sufficiently bland word.

‘Distressing, I’ll give you something to make you sleep. I mean, you won’t
have to face up to the full implications tonight.’

‘All right. What do we do?’
‘You relax. Sit back in the chair. That’s right. Shoulders. Come on, like

this. Now your hands. Let the wrists go. Comfortable? I want you to look at
this pen. No, don’t raise your head. Raise your eyes. That’s right. Keep your
eyes fixed on the pen. I’m going to count down from ten. By the time I get
to zero, you’ll be in a light sleep. All right?’

Prior nodded. He looked profoundly sceptical. Like most bloody-minded

people he assumed he would be a poor subject for hypnosis. Rivers thought
he’d be very easy. ‘Ten … Nine … Eight … Seven … Your eyelids are

heavy now. Don’t fight it, let them close. Six … Five … Four … Three …
Two …’

He woke to a dugout smell of wet sandbags and stale farts. He curled his
toes inside his wet boots and felt the creak and sag of chicken wire as he
turned towards the table. The usual jumble: paper, bottles, mugs, the black-
boxed field telephone, a couple of revolvers – all lit by a single candle stuck
to the wood in a pool of its own grease. A barely perceptible thinning of the
darkness around the gas curtain told him it must be nearly dawn. And sure
enough, a few minutes later Sanderson lifted the curtain and shouted,
‘Stand-to!’ The bulky forms on the other bunks stirred, groaned, groped for
revolvers. Soon they were all trying to climb out of the dugout, difficult
because rain and recent near-hits had turned the steps into a muddy slide.
All along the trench men were crawling out of funk holes. He clumped
along the duck-boards to his position, smelling the green, ratty,
decomposing smell, stretching the muscles of his face into a smile
whenever the men looked up. Then an hour of standing, stiff and shivery,
watching dawn grow.

He had first trench watch. He gulped a mug of chlorine-tasting tea, and

then started walking along to the outermost position on their left. A smell of
bacon frying. In the third fire bay he found Sawdon and Towers crouched
over a small fire made out of shredded sandbags and candle ends, coaxing
the flames. He stopped to chat for a few minutes, and Towers, blinking
under the green mushroom helmet, looked up and offered him tea. A quiet
day, he thought, walking on. Not like the last few days, when the
bombardment had gone on for seventy hours, and they’d stood-to five times
expecting a German counter-attack. Damage from that bombardment was
everywhere: crumbling parapets, flooded saps, dugouts with gagged
mouths.

He’d gone, perhaps, three fire bays along when he heard the whoop of a

shell, and, spinning round, saw the scrawl of dusty brown smoke already
drifting away. He thought it’d gone clear over, but then he heard a cry and,
feeling sick in his stomach, he ran back. Logan was there already. It must

have been Logan’s cry he heard, for nothing in that devastation could have
had a voice. A conical black hole, still smoking, had been driven into the
side of the trench. Of the kettle, the frying-pan, the carefully tended fire,
there was no sign, and not much of Sawdon and Towers either, or not much
that was recognizable.

There was a pile of sandbags and shovels close by, stacked against the

parapet by a returning work party. He reached for a shovel. Logan picked
up a sandbag and held it open, and he began shovelling soil, flesh and
splinters of blackened bone into the bag. As he shovelled, he retched. He
felt something jar against his teeth and saw that Logan was offering him a
rum bottle. He forced down bile and rum together. Logan kept his face
averted as the shovelling went on. He was swearing under his breath,
steadily, blasphemously, obscenely, inventively. Somebody came running.
‘Don’t stand there gawping, man,’ Logan said. ‘Go and get some lime.’

They’d almost finished when Prior shifted his position on the

duckboards, glanced down, and found himself staring into an eye.
Delicately, like somebody selecting a particularly choice morsel from a
plate, he put his thumb and forefinger down through the duckboards. His
fingers touched the smooth surface and slid before they managed to get a
hold. He got it out, transferred it to the palm of his hand, and held it out
towards Logan. He could see his hand was shaking, but the shaking didn’t
seem to be anything to do with him. ‘What am I supposed to do with this
gob-stopper?’ He saw Logan blink and knew he was afraid. At last Logan
reached out, grasped his shaking wrist, and tipped the eye into the bag.
‘Williams and me’ll do the rest, sir. You go on back now.’

He shook his head. They spread the lime together, sprinkling it thickly

along the firestep, throwing shovelfuls at a bad patch of wall. When at last
they stood back, beating the white dust from the skirts of their tunics, he
wanted to say something casual, something that would prove he was all
right, but a numbness had spread all over the lower half of his face.

Back in the dugout he watched people’s lips move and was filled with

admiration for them. There was a sense of joy in watching them, of elation
almost. How complex those movements were, how amazing the glimpses of

teeth and tongue, the movement of muscles in the jaw. He ran his tongue
along the edges of his teeth, curved it back, stroked the ridged palate, flexed
his lips, felt the pull of skin and the stretching of muscles in his throat. All
present and correct, but how they combined together to make sounds he had
no idea.

It was Logan who took him to the casualty clearing station. Normally it

would have been his servant, but Logan asked if he could go. They thumped
and splodged along cheerfully enough, or at least Prior was cheerful. He felt
as if nothing could ever touch him again. When a shell whined across, he
didn’t flinch, though he knew the Germans had an accurate fix on both
communication trenches. They marched from stinking mud to dryish
duckboards, and the bare landscape he sensed beyond the tangles of rusty
wire gradually changed to fields. Clumps of brilliant yellow cabbage weed,
whose smell mimics gas so accurately that men tremble, hung over the final
trench.

In the clearing station he sat down, Logan beside him. Lying on the floor

was a young man wounded in the back who seemed hardly to know that
they were there. From time to time he moaned, ‘I’m cold, I’m cold,’ but
when the doctor came in, he shook his head and said there was nothing he
could do. ‘There’s no need for you to stay,’ he said to Logan. ‘He’ll be all
right.’ So they shook hands and parted. He sat down on the bench again and
tried to think back over the events that had brought him there, but found he
could remember very little about them. Two of his men were dead, he
remembered that. Nothing else. Like the speechlessness, it seemed natural.
He sat on the bench, his clasped hands dangling between his legs, and
thought of nothing.

Rivers watched the play of emotions on Prior’s face as he fitted the
recovered memory into his past. He was unprepared for what happened
next.

‘Is that all?’ Prior said.
He seemed to be beside himself with rage.

‘I don’t know about all,’ Rivers said. ‘I’d’ve thought that was a traumatic

experience by any standards.’

Prior almost spat at him. ‘It was nothing.’
He put his head in his hands, at first, it seemed, in bewilderment, but then

after a few moments he began to cry. Rivers waited a while, then walked
round the desk and offered his handkerchief. Instead of taking it, Prior
seized Rivers by the arms, and began butting him in the chest, hard enough
to hurt. This was not an attack, Rivers realized, though it felt like one. It
was the closest Prior could come to asking for physical contact. Rivers was
reminded of a nanny goat on his brother’s farm, being lifted almost off her
feet by the suckling kid. Rivers held Prior’s shoulders, and after a while the
butting stopped. Prior raised his blind and slobbery face. ‘Sorry about that.’

‘That’s all right.’ He waited for Prior to wipe his face, then asked, ‘What

did you think happened?’

‘I didn’t know.’
‘Yes, you did. You thought you knew.’
‘I knew two of my men had been killed. I thought …’ He stopped. ‘I

thought it must’ve been my fault. We were in the same trenches we’d been
in when I first arrived. The line’s terrible there. It winds in and out of brick
stacks. A lot of the trenches face the wrong way. Even in daylight with a
compass and a map you can get lost. At night … I’d been there about a
week, I suppose, when a man took out patrol to see if a particular dugout
was occupied at night. Compasses don’t work, there’s too much metal
about. He’d been crawling round in circles for God knows how long, when
he came upon what he thought was a German wiring party. He ordered his
men to open fire. Well, all hell was let loose. Then after a while somebody
realized there were British voices shouting on both sides. Five men killed.
Eleven injured. I looked at his face as he sat in the dugout and he was …
You could have done that and he wouldn’t’ve blinked. Before I’d always
thought the worst thing would be if you were wounded and left out there,
but when I saw his face I thought, no. This is the worst thing. And then
when I couldn’t remember anything except that two of my men had been

killed, I thought it had to be something like that.’ He looked up. ‘I couldn’t
see what else I’d need to forget.’

‘Then you must be relieved.’
‘Relieved?’
‘You did your duty. You’ve nothing to reproach yourself with. You even

finished cleaning the trench.’

‘I’ve cleaned up dozens of trenches. I don’t see why that would make me

break down.’

‘You’re thinking of breakdown as a reaction to a single traumatic event,

but it’s not like that. It’s more a matter of … erosion. Weeks and months of
stress in a situation where you can’t get away from it.’ He smiled. ‘I’m
sorry to sound so impersonal. I know how you hate being “the patient”.’

‘I don’t mind in the least. I just want to understand why it happened. You

see what I find so difficult is … I don’t think of myself as the kind of
person who breaks down. And yet time and time again I’m brought up hard
against the fact that I did.’

‘I don’t know that there is “a kind of person who breaks down”. I

imagine most of us could if the pressure were bad enough. I know I could.’

Prior gazed round the room in mock amazement. ‘Did the wallpaper

speak?’

Rivers smiled. ‘I’ll tell them to give you a sleeping tablet.’
At the door Prior turned. ‘He had very blue eyes, you know. Towers. We

used to call him the Hun.’

After making sure Prior got his sleeping tablet, Rivers went upstairs to his
own room and began to undress. He tugged at his tie, and as he did so
caught sight of himself in the looking-glass. He pulled down his right lid to
reveal a dingy and blood-shot white. What am I supposed to do with this
gob-stopper? He released the lid. No need to think about that. If he went on
feeling like this, he’d have to see Bryce and arrange to take some leave. It’d
reached the point where he woke up in the morning feeling almost as
exhausted as he had done when he went to bed. He sat on the edge of the
bath and began to take his boots off. Ye will surely say unto me this proverb.

Physician, heal thyself. One of his father’s favourite texts. Sitting, bored
and fidgety, in the family pew, Rivers had never thought it an odd choice,
though now he wondered why it cropped up as frequently as it did. Fathers
remain opaque to their sons, he thought, largely because the sons find it so
hard to believe that there’s anything in the father worth seeing. Until he’s
dead, and it’s too late. Mercifully, doctors are also opaque to their patients.
Unless the patient happens to be Prior.

Rivers finished undressing and got into the bath. He lay back, eyes

closed, feeling the hot water start to unravel the knots in his neck and
shoulders. Not that Prior was the only patient to have found him … Well.
Rather less than opaque. He remembered John Layard, and as always the
memory was painful, because his treatment of Layard had ended in failure.
He told himself there was no real resemblance between Layard and Prior.
What made Prior more difficult was the constant probing. Layard had never
probed. But then Layard hadn’t thought he needed to probe. Layard had
thought he knew.

Lying with his eyes closed like this, Rivers could imagine himself back in

St John’s, hearing Layard’s footsteps coming across the court. What was it
he’d said? ‘I don’t see you as a father, you know.’ Looking up from the rug
in front of the fire. Laughing. ‘More a sort of … male mother.’ He was like
Prior. The same immensely shrewd eyes. X-ray eyes. The same outrageous
frankness.

Why should he remember that? It was because of that ridiculous image of

the nanny goat that had flashed into his mind while Prior was butting him in
the stomach. He disliked the term ‘male mother’. He thought he could
remember disliking it even at the time. He distrusted the implication that
nurturing, even when done by a man, remains female, as if the ability were
in some way borrowed, or even stolen, from women – a sort of moral
equivalent of the couvade. If that were true, then there was really very little
hope.

He could see why Layard might use the term. Layard’s relationship with

his father had been difficult, and he was a young man, without any personal
experience of fathering. Though fathering, like mothering, takes many

forms beyond the biological. Rivers had often been touched by the way in
which young men, some of them not yet twenty, spoke about feeling like
fathers to their men. Though when you looked at what they did. Worrying
about socks, boots, blisters, food, hot drinks. And that perpetually harried
expression of theirs. Rivers had only ever seen that look in one other place:
in the public wards of hospitals, on the faces of women who were bringing
up large families on very low incomes, women who, in their early thirties,
could easily be taken for fifty or more. It was the look of people who are
totally responsible for lives they have no power to save.

One of the paradoxes of the war – one of the many – was that this most

brutal of conflicts should set up a relationship between officers and men
that was … domestic. Caring. As Layard would undoubtedly have said,
maternal. And that wasn’t the only trick the war had played. Mobilization.
The Great Adventure. They’d been mobilized into holes in the ground so
constricted they could hardly move. And the Great Adventure – the real life
equivalent of all the adventure stories they’d devoured as boys – consisted
of crouching in a dugout, waiting to be killed. The war that had promised so
much in the way of ‘manly’ activity had actually delivered ‘feminine’
passivity, and on a scale that their mothers and sisters had scarcely known.
No wonder they broke down.

In bed, he switched off the light and opened the curtains. Rain, silvery in

the moonlight, streaked the glass, blurring the vista of tennis courts and
trees, gathering, at the lower edge of the pane, into a long puddle that
bulged and overflowed. Somebody, on the floor below, screamed. Rivers
pulled the curtains to, and settled down to sleep, wishing, not for the first
time, that he was young enough for France.

TEN

Sarah watched the grey trickle of tea creep up the sides of her cup. The tea-
lady looked at it, doubtfully. ‘That strong enough for you, love?’

‘It’ll do. Long as it’s warm and wet.’
‘My God,’ Betty Hargreave said. ‘Virgin’s pee. I can’t drink that.’
Madge nudged Sarah sharply in the ribs. ‘No, well, it wouldn’t be very

appropriate, would it?’

‘Hey up, you’ll make us spill it.’
They went to the far end of the top trestle table and squeezed on to the

bench. ‘Come on, move your bums along,’ Madge said. ‘Let two little ’uns
in.’

Lizzie collected her Woodbines and matches, and shuffled along. ‘What

happened to your young man, then, Sarah?’

‘Didn’t bloody show up, did he? I was sat an hour on Sunday all dolled

up and nowhere to go.’

‘Aw,’ Lizzie said.
‘Probably just as well,’ said Madge. ‘At least now you know what he was

after.’

‘I knew what he was after. I just want to know why he’s not still after it.’
‘Didn’t get it, then?’ Betty said, bringing her cup to the table.
‘No, he bloody did not.’
‘He was good-looking, though, wasn’t he?’ said Madge.
‘All right, I suppose.’
Betty laughed. ‘Better fish in the sea, eh, Sarah?’
‘Aye, and they can stop there ’n’ all. Not interested.’
A whoop of incredulity. Sarah buried her nose in her cup and then, as

soon as she felt their attention had been withdrawn, looked at the window.

You couldn’t really see what it was like outside because the glass was
frosted, but here and there raindrops clung to the panes, each with its
crescent moon of silver. She wished she was outside and could feel the rain
on her face. It would have been nice to have gone to the seaside yesterday,
she thought. Bugger him, why didn’t he show up?

The others were talking about Lizzie’s husband, who’d thrown her into a

state of shock by announcing, in his last letter, that he was hoping to come
home on leave soon.

‘I haven’t had a wink of sleep since,’ said Lizzie.
‘You’re getting yourself into a state about nothing,’ Betty said. ‘First of

all he mightn’t get it, and second, they sometimes only give them a few
days. Ten to one, he’ll get no further than London.’

‘Aye, and he’ll be pissed as a newt.’
‘Well, better pissed down there than up here.’
‘Don’t you want to see him?’ asked Sarah.
‘I do not. I’ve seen enough of him to last me a lifetime. Aye, I know what

you’re thinking. You think I’m hard, don’t you? Well I am hard and so
would you be.’ Lizzie’s yellow face showed two bright spots of colour on
the cheekbones. ‘Do you know what happened on August 4th 1914?’

Sarah opened her mouth.
‘I’ll tell you what happened. Peace broke out. The only little bit of peace

I’ve ever had. No, I don’t want him back. I don’t want him back on leave. I
don’t want him back when it’s over. As far as I’m concerned the Kaiser can
keep him.’ She lowered her chin, brooding. ‘I’ll tell you what I’m going to
do. I’m going to get meself some false teeth, and I’m going to have a
bloody good time.’

‘Yes, well, you want to,’ said Betty.
‘She’s been on about them teeth as long as I’ve known her,’ said Madge.

‘You want to stop talking about it, and go and do it. You can afford it. All
this won’t last, you know.’ She jerked her thumb at the room full of overall-
clad women. ‘It’s too good to last.’

‘It’s not the money that bothers me.’

‘He’d give you gas,’ said Madge. ‘You’re never going to look anything

while you’ve got them in your mouth. And you’re never going to feel right
either for the simple reason you’re swallowing all the corruption.’

‘Yeh, I know. I will go.’
‘Time, ladies,’ the supervisor said. ‘Time.’
‘Eeh, it never is,’ said Lizzie. ‘Do you know, I’m bloody sure they fix

that clock!’

‘Three hours down,’ said Sarah. ‘Nine to go.’
All over the room yellow-skinned women were dragging themselves to

their feet. As they were going up the stairs, Sarah fell into line beside Betty.
Lizzie had nipped into the toilet to finish her cigarette.

‘You think she’s hard, don’t you?’ said Betty.
‘Well, yes, I do a bit. When you think what he’s going through.’
‘Yes, well. You know when I was a kid we used to live next door to them,

and it was thump thump thump half the bloody night, you’d’ve thought she
was coming through the wall. Oh, and you used to see her in the yard next
morning, and her face’d be all swelled up. “I fell over the coal scuttle,” she
used to say. Well that used to get me Mam. “He knocks you about,” she
says, “and you go round apologizing for it,” she says. “Where’s the justice
in that?” And mind you, she was right, you know.’

Willard lay face down on his bed, naked. His thighs and buttocks were
trenched with purple scars, some just beginning to silver. These injuries had
been sustained when his company was retreating across a graveyard under
heavy fire, and several tombstone fragments had become embedded in his
flesh. ‘You want to try it,’ he said. ‘Lying two months on your belly in a
hospital bed with Requiescat in Pace stuck up your arse.’

This remark was ostensibly addressed to the orderly, so Rivers was able

to ignore it. ‘They’ve healed well,’ he said, moving down the bed.

Willard looked across his shoulder. ‘The flesh wounds have. There’s still

the injury to the spine.’

‘Let’s have you on your back.’

The orderly came forward to help, but Willard waved him away. His

whole upper body was massively powerful, though inevitably running to
flab. By heaving and twisting, he could just manage to drag the wasted legs
over, though they followed the bulk of his body, passively, like slime trails
after a snail. The orderly bent down and straightened his feet.

Rivers waited until Willard was covered up, then nodded to the orderly to

leave. After the door had closed, he said, ‘There was no injury to the spine.’

Willard lay back against the pillows, his jaw stubbornly set.
‘If you believe your spine was damaged, how do you account for the fact

that so many doctors have examined you and told you that it isn’t?’ He
watched Willard’s face closely. ‘Do you think they’re all incompetent? All
of them? Or do you think they’re in some kind of conspiracy to convince
you you can walk when in fact you can’t?’

Willard raised himself on to one elbow. It was extraordinary the

impression he created, that mixture of immobility and power. Like a bull
seal dragging itself across rocks. ‘You think I’m malingering.’

‘I know you’re not.’
‘But you’ve just said I am.’
‘No.’
‘If there’s no injury to the spine, then why can’t I walk?’
‘I think you know why.’
Willard gave a short, hissing laugh. ‘I know what you want me to say. I

can’t walk because I don’t want to go back.’ He glared at Rivers. ‘Well, I
won’t say it. It would be tantamount to an admission of cowardice.’

Rivers picked up his cap and cane. ‘Not in my book.’ He was aware of

Willard watching him. ‘It’s true paralysis occurs because a man wants to
save his life. He doesn’t want to go forward, and take part in some hopeless
attack. But neither is he prepared to run away.’ He smiled. ‘Paralysis is no
use to a coward, Mr Willard. A coward needs his legs.’

Willard didn’t reply, though Rivers thought he detected a slight relaxation

of tension. The bone structure of Willard’s face was strong almost to the
point of brutality, and his eyes were a curious shade of pale blue. There was
a sheen on his hair and skin like the gloss on the coat of an animal. He’d

been something of an athlete before the war, though Rivers suspected he
had never been remarkable for depth of intelligence. ‘Your wife’s coming to
see you this afternoon, isn’t she?’

Willard’s eyes went to the photograph on his washstand. ‘Yes.’
‘Why don’t you get dressed? There’s no reason for you to be in bed. And

if you got dressed you could go out into the grounds. It’d be a lot pleasanter
for your wife.’

Willard thought about it, reluctant to concede anything that might suggest

his illness was not purely physical. ‘Yes, all right.’

‘Good. I’ll send an orderly in to help you with your boots.’

Sassoon arrived at the Conservative Club about ten minutes early. ‘Captain
Rivers isn’t here yet, sir,’ the porter said. ‘But if you’d like to wait in the
morning room, I’m sure he won’t be long. Up the stairs and first right.’

The staircase was of twisting marble, almost too imposing for the size of

the hall, like a Roman nose on an unprepossessing face. As Sassoon
climbed, he passed portraits of Edinburgh worthies of the past, men with
white beards and wing collars, whose gold watch-chains and fobs nestled
on swelling abdomens. His first thought on entering the morning room was
that somebody with a taste for practical jokes had cut the Edinburgh
worthies out of their frames and stuck them in chairs all over the room.
Everywhere saurian heads and necks peered out of wing armchairs, looking
at the young man in the doorway with the automatic approval his uniform
evoked, and then – or was he perhaps being oversensitive? – with a slight
ambivalence, a growing doubt, as they worked out what the blue badge on
his tunic meant. Perhaps it was just oversensitivity, for you saw that same
look of mingled admiration and apprehension, wherever you went. Old men
were often ambivalent about young men in uniform, and rightly so, when
you considered how very ambivalent the young men felt about them.

The chairs, which looked uncomfortable, were very comfortable indeed.

Sassoon, glad to be away from the boiled cabbage and custard smells of the
Craiglockhart dining room, sank back and closed his eyes. Further along, at
a table by the window, two old men were nattering about the war. Both had

sons at the front, it seemed, or was it only one? No, the other was trapped in
England, apparently, on a training course. He listened to the rumble of their
voices and felt a well-practised hatred begin to flow. It needed only a
slighting remark about the courage of the German Army to rouse him to
real fury, and very soon it came. He was aware of something sexual in this
anger. He looked at the cloth straining across their broad backs, at the folds
of beef-pink skin that overlapped their collars, and thought, with
uncharacteristic crudity, When did you two last get it up?

Gordon’s death had woken him up, there was no doubt. That moment

when he’d come down to breakfast, glanced at the casualty lists and seen
Gordon’s name had been a turning point of sorts, though he didn’t yet know
in which direction he would turn. It seemed to him that his first month at
Craiglockhart had been spent in a kind of sleep. Too much steam pudding,
too much putting little balls into holes. Looking round the room, he knew
why he felt sickened by himself, why his fuming against elderly men with
sons at the front no longer satisfied him. It was because he’d given in,
lapsed, pretended to himself that he was still actively protesting whereas in
reality he’d let himself be pacified, sucked into the comforting routine, the
uneventfulness of Craiglockhart life. As Rivers had meant him to be.

He got up and began looking at the pictures that lined the walls. The

portraits here were not of the professional men and civic dignitaries of the
recent past, but of the landed gentry of generations before that, shown, for
the most part, either setting off to, or returning from, the hunt. He was
obviously not destined to get away from memories of Gordon and hunting
today. Walking from picture to picture, he remembered the notebook he’d
taken with him into the trenches on his first tour of duty. It had contained
nothing but bare details of past hunts, where they’d found, how far he’d
run, whether they’d killed. On and on. A terribly meaningless little set of
squiggles it would have seemed to anybody else, but for him it had
contained the Sussex lanes, the mists, the drizzle, the baying of hounds,
clods flying from under the horses’ feet, staggering into the house, bones
aching, reliving the hunt over dinner, and then, after dinner, shadows on the
wall of the old nursery and Gordon’s face in the firelight, the scent of logs,

the warmth, his whole face feeling numbed and swollen in the heat. His
mind switched to his last few hours in France when, already wounded in the
shoulder, he’d careered along a German trench, slinging Mills bombs to left
and right, shouting, ‘View halloa!’ That was the moment, he thought. That
was when the old Sassoon had cracked wide open and something new had
stepped out of the shell. Bless you, my dear, Eddie Marsh had written, when
he told him about it. Never take it more seriously than that. But Eddie had
missed the point. Hunting had always been serious. Every bit as serious as
war.

‘Sorry I’m late,’ Rivers said, coming up behind him. ‘I meant to be here

when you arrived.’

‘That’s all right. These old codgers’ve been keeping me amused.’ He

glanced round quickly. ‘I mean the ones on the wall.’

‘It is rather a geriatric gathering, isn’t it?’ Rivers sat down. ‘Would you

like a drink?’ He raised his arm and a white-jacketed, elderly waiter came
tottering across. ‘Gin and tonic for me, I think. What’ll you have,
Siegfried?’

‘The same, please.’
Rivers’s inspection of the menu was confined to identifying which

particular variety of poached fish was currently on offer. Sassoon gave the
matter more thought. Rivers watched him as he pored over the menu and
thought how much easier his life would have been if they’d sent Siegfried
somewhere else. It wasn’t simply the discomfort of having to express views
he was no longer sure he held – though, as a scientist, he did find that
acutely uncomfortable. No, it was more than that. Every case posed implicit
questions about the individual costs of the war, and never more so than in
the run up to a round of Medical Boards, when the MOs had to decide
which men were fit to return to duty. This would have been easier if he
could have believed, as Lewis Yealland, for example, believed, that men
who broke down were degenerates whose weakness would have caused
them to break down, eventually, even in civilian life, but Rivers could see
no evidence of that. The vast majority of his patients had no record of any
mental trouble. And as soon as you accepted that the man’s breakdown was

a consequence of his war experience rather than of his own innate
weakness, then inevitably the war became the issue. And the therapy was a
test, not only of the genuineness of the individual’s symptoms, but also of
the validity of the demands the war was making on him. Rivers had
survived partly by suppressing his awareness of this. But then along came
Sassoon and made the justifiability of the war a matter for constant, open
debate, and that suppression was no longer possible. At times it seemed to
Rivers that all his other patients were the anvil and that Sassoon was the
hammer. Inevitably there were times when he resented this. As a civilian,
Rivers’s life had consisted of asking questions, and devising methods by
which truthful answers could be obtained, but there are limits to how many
fundamental questions you want to ask in a working day that starts before
eight am and doesn’t end till midnight. All very well for Sassoon. He spent
his days playing golf.

None of this prevented him from watching Sassoon’s continued poring

over the menu with affection as well as amusement.

Sassoon looked up. ‘Am I taking too long?’
‘No, take as long as you like.’
‘It’s almost pre-war standard, isn’t it?’
‘I hope you’re not going to protest?’
‘No. You can rely on me to be inconsistent.’
Rivers was not afraid of Sassoon’s noticing any change in him.

Siegfried’s introversion was remarkable, even by the normal standards of
unhappy young men. His love for his men cut through that self-absorption,
but Rivers sometimes wondered whether anything else did. And yet he had
so many good qualities. It was rare to find a man in whom courage was the
dominating characteristic, as malice or laziness or greed might be the ruling
characteristic of lesser men.

The dining room was almost empty. They were shown to a table for two

by a window that overlooked the club’s small, walled garden. A scent of
roses, drenched from the morning’s rain, drifted in through the open
window.

The waiter was very young, sixteen perhaps. Red hair, big freckles

splodged over a pale skin, knobbly, pink-knuckled hand clasping the
carving knife. With his other hand he lifted the domed lid from the platter to
reveal a joint of very red beef. Sassoon smiled. ‘That looks nice.’

The boy carved three slices. As he bent to get the warmed plate from the

shelf below, it was possible to see the nape of his neck, defenceless under
the stiff collar.

‘Is that all right, sir?’
‘One more, perhaps?’
The boy was looking at Sassoon with undisguised hero-worship. Not

surprisingly, Rivers thought. He’s dragging out the weeks in this dreary job
waiting for his turn to go out. At least they no longer allowed boys of his
age to lie their way in. He noticed Sassoon smiling to himself.

‘What’s amusing you?’
‘I was thinking about Campbell. Not our Campbell. A much less

engaging man, and … er … allegedly sane. He gave lectures – still does, I
believe – on “The Spirit of the Bayonet”. You know, “Stick him in the
kidneys, it’ll go in like a hot knife through butter.” “What’s the good of six
inches of steel sticking out the back of a man’s neck? Three inches’ll do
him. When he croaks, go and find another.” And so on. And you know, the
men sit there laughing and cheering and making obscene gestures. They
hate it.’ He smiled. ‘I was reminded because that boy was doing so well
with the carving knife.’

‘Yes, I noticed.’
‘Very much the sort of man you’d pick as your servant.’
Rivers said mischievously, ‘Not bad-looking either.’
‘I’m afraid that has to take second place. You look for skill with the

bayonet first because he’s always on your left in the attack.’

They ate in silence for a while. Rivers said, ‘Have you heard from the

friend you were going to write to about Gordon?’

‘Yes. It’s true apparently, he did die instantly. His father said he had, but

they don’t always tell parents the truth. I’ve written too many letters like
that myself.’

‘It must be some consolation to know he didn’t suffer.’
Sassoon’s expression hardened. ‘I was glad to have it confirmed.’ An

awkward silence. ‘I had some more bad news this morning. Do you
remember me talking to you about Julian Dadd? Shot in the throat, two
brothers killed? Well, his mental state has worsened apparently. He’s in a –
what I suppose I ought to call a mental hospital. Given present company.
The awful thing is he’s got some crazy idea he didn’t do well enough.
Nobody else thinks so, but apparently there’s no arguing with him. He was
one of my heroes, you know. I remember looking at him one evening. We’d
just come in from inspecting the men’s billets – which were lousy as usual,
and – he cared. He really cared. And I looked at him and I thought, I want
to be like you.’ He laughed, mocking his hero-worship, but not disowning
it. ‘Anyway, I suppose I’ve succeeded, haven’t I? Since we’re both in the
loony-bin.’

The provocation was deliberate. When Rivers didn’t rise to it, Sassoon

said, ‘It makes it quite difficult to go on, you know. When things like this
keep happening to people you know and and … love. To go on with the
protest, I mean.’

Silence.
Sassoon leant forward. ‘Wake up, Rivers. I thought you’d pounce on

that.’

‘Did you?’
A pause. ‘No, I suppose not.’
Rivers dragged his hand down across his eyes. ‘I don’t feel much like

pouncing.’

Rivers left the club an hour later. He’d left Siegfried with Ralph Sampson,
the Astronomer Royal of Scotland, whom they’d bumped into after lunch.
At first Sassoon had been almost too overawed to speak, but Sampson had
soon put paid to that. Rivers had left him chatting away quite happily.
Lunch itself had been rather depressing. At one point Siegfried had said,
‘I’m beginning to feel used up.’ You could understand it. He’d suffered
repeated bereavements in the last two years, as first one contemporary then

another died. In some ways the experience of these young men paralleled
the experience of the very old. They looked back on intense memories and
felt lonely because there was nobody left alive who’d been there. That habit
of Siegfried’s of looking back, the inability to envisage any kind of future,
seemed to be getting worse.

Not an easy case, Rivers thought. Not in the usual sense a case at all. He

had no idea what the outcome would be, though he thought he could get
Siegfried to give in. His love for his men. The need he had to prove his
courage. By any rational standard, he’d already proved it, over and over
again, but then the need wasn’t altogether rational. Given the strength of
that need, it was amazing he’d managed to tolerate being cooped up with
‘wash-outs’ and ‘degenerates’ even as long as he had. Putting those forces
together and getting him back to France was a task of approximately the
same order of difficulty as flicking a stag beetle on to its back. The trouble
was Rivers respected Sassoon too much to manipulate him. He had to be
convinced that going back was the right thing to do.

At the foot of the Craiglockhart drive, Rivers saw Willard and Mrs

Willard. For some extraordinary reason Willard had got his wife to push
him as far as the gates, despite the downward slope which he must have
seen would make the return journey difficult. Now they were marooned.

Rivers greeted Willard, waited for an introduction to his wife, and, when

it failed to come, introduced himself. Mrs Willard was extremely young,
attractive in the small-breasted, slim-hipped way of modern girls. As they
chatted about the deceptive nature of slopes and the awkwardness of
wheelchairs, Rivers became aware of Willard’s hands clenched on the arms
of the chair. He felt Willard’s fury at being stranded like this, impotent.
Good. The more furious he was the better.

Rivers said to Mrs Willard, ‘Here, I’ll give you a hand.’
With two of them pushing they made steady progress, though there was

one nasty moment near the top, when they struck a muddy patch. But then
the wheels bit, and they reached level ground at a cracking pace.

‘There you are,’ Mrs Willard said, bending over her husband, breathless

and laughing. ‘Made it.’

Willard’s face would have curdled milk.
‘Why don’t you come in and have a cup of tea?’ Rivers suggested.
Mrs Willard looked to her husband for guidance. When none came, she

said, ‘Yes, that would be lovely.’

‘My door’s on the left as you go in. I’ll just go ahead and arrange things.

You’ll be all right now?’

‘Perfectly, thank you,’ said Willard.
Rivers went into the hall, smiling, only to have the smile wiped off his

face by the sight of Matron standing immediately inside the entrance. She’d
observed the entire incident and evidently disapproved. ‘You could have
sent an orderly down to push the chair, Captain Rivers.’

Rivers opened his mouth, and shut it again. He reminded himself, not for

the first time, that it was absolutely necessary for Matron to win some of
their battles.

ELEVEN

Sassoon was trying to decipher a letter from H. G. Wells when Owen
knocked on his door.

‘As far as I can make out, he says he’s coming to see Rivers.’
Owen looked suitably impressed. ‘He must be really worried about you.’
‘Oh, it’s not me he wants to talk about, it’s his new book.’ Sassoon

smiled. ‘You don’t know many writers, do you?’

‘Not many.’
And I, Sassoon thought, am showing off. Which at least was better than

moaning about Gordon’s death to somebody who had more than enough
problems of his own. ‘I don’t suppose he’ll come. They all talk about it, but
in the end it’s just too far. I sometimes wonder whether that’s why they put
me here. Whether it was a case of being sent to Rivers or just sent as far
away as possible.’

‘Probably Rivers. He gets all the awkward ones.’ Owen stopped in some

confusion. ‘Not that you’re –’

‘Oh, I think I count as awkward. By any standard.’ He handed a sheet of

paper across. ‘For the Hydra.’

‘May I read it?’
‘That’s the general idea.’
Owen read, folded the paper and nodded.
To forestall possible effusions, Sassoon said quickly, ‘I’m not satisfied

with the last three lines, but they’ll have to do.’

‘I tried yesterday, but you were out.’
‘I’d be with Rivers.’ He smiled. ‘Do you ever feel like strangling Brock?’
‘No, I get on rather well with him.’

‘I get on with Rivers. It’s just … He picked up something I said at

lunchtime about not being able to imagine the future. He doesn’t often
press, but my God when he does …’

‘Why did he want you to talk about that?’
‘Part of the great campaign to get me back to France. He wants me to put

the protest in a longer perspective. You know, “What did you do in the
Great War, Siegfried?” Well, I spent three very comfortable years in a
loony-bin eating steamed pudding and playing golf. While other people –
some of them rather close friends – got blown to smithereens. He wants me
to admit I won’t be able to bear it. What’s more, he’s probably right.’

‘Think of the poems you could write.’
‘Not war poems.’
Owen’s expression darkened. ‘There are other subjects.’
‘Yes, of course.’
A slightly awkward pause. ‘The trouble is he just knows more than I do.

You know, he’s very good … He tries to behave as if we’re equal. But in the
end he’s a Gold Medallist of the Royal Society, and I left Cambridge
without taking a degree. And now and again it shows.’

‘That doesn’t mean he’s right.’
‘No, but it does make it very difficult for me to keep my end up in a

discussion.’

‘Did you talk about after the war?’
‘No. I can’t, I’ve no plans. Do you know what you’re going to do?’
‘I’m going to keep pigs.’
‘Pigs?’
‘Yes. People think pigs are dirty, you know, but they’re not. They’re very

clean animals, given half the chance. And it would combine so well with
poetry, you see. Actually much better than teaching, because if you’re
teaching properly you’re using the same part of your mind. But pig-keeping
…’

‘Perhaps we should go into partnership. It’d shut Rivers up.’
Owen, belatedly aware of being laughed at, blushed and didn’t reply.

‘No, well, I don’t suppose I’d be much use with the pigs, but I may be

able to help with the poems.’ He nodded at Owen’s tunic.

Owen extracted a sheaf of papers. ‘I told you they were all short but

actually there is one long one. Antaeus and and Hercules.’ He handed the
papers over. ‘Do you know the legend? Antaeus is too strong for Hercules
as long as he keeps his feet on mother Earth. But as soon as Hercules lifts
him –’

‘He’s helpless. Yes, it rings a bell.’ Sassoon started to read. After a few

seconds he looked up. ‘Why don’t you get yourself a book? There’s nothing
worse than being watched by the Onlie Begetter.’

‘Sorry.’ Owen got up and pretended to look at the books on Sassoon’s

shelf.

At last Sassoon looked up. ‘It’s very good. Why Antaeus?’
‘Oh, it’s something Brock’s keen on. He thinks we – the patients – are

like Antaeus in the sense that we’ve been ungrounded by the war. And the
way back to health is to re-establish the link between oneself and the earth,
but understanding “earth” to mean society as well as nature. That’s why we
do surveys and things like that.’

‘I thought all the dashing around was to keep your mind off it?’
‘No, that’s part of the treatment. Ergotherapy.’
‘Well, it’s an interesting idea. Though I don’t know that being stuck in a

dugout ever made me feel I was losing contact with the earth.’

Owen smiled. ‘No, nor me. It does work, though.’
Sassoon picked up the next sheet. Craning his neck, Owen could just see

the title of the poem. ‘That’s in your style,’ he said.

‘Yes. I … er … noticed.’
‘No good?’
‘Starts and ends well. What happened in the middle?’
‘That’s quite old, that bit. I wrote that two years ago.’
‘They do say if you leave something in a drawer long enough it’ll either

rot or ripen.’

‘The bit at the end … About “dirt”. Those are the actual words.’

‘Yes, and they could do with changing. I’ve just cut: “You sod” out of a

poem. Those were my actual words.’

‘So it’s no good?’
Sassoon hesitated. ‘It’s not much good at the moment. I suppose the thing

is, are you interested enough to go on?’

‘Ye-es. I have to start somewhere. And I think you’re right. It’s mad not

to write about the war when it’s –’

‘Such an experience.’
They looked at each other and burst out laughing.
‘My only doubt is … The the fact that you admire somebody very much

doesn’t automatically mean they’re a good model. I mean, I admire Wilde,
but if I started trying to be witty and elegant and incisive, I’d probably fall
flat on my face.’

‘Yes, I see that. Well not that. I mean I see the point. But I do think I can

take something from you.’

‘Fair enough.’ Sassoon went back to his reading. ‘I think you’re probably

right,’ he said, after a while. ‘If I do nothing else, I might help you get rid of
some of this mush.’

‘Some of the sonnets are quite early.’
‘Puberty?’ A long pause. Early sonnets fell like snow. ‘Oh, now this is

good. “Song of Songs.” ’

‘That’s last week.’
‘Is it? Now you see what I mean about me not being necessarily the right

model? I couldn’t do this. And yet of it’s kind it’s absolutely perfect.’

Owen sat down. He looked as if his knees had buckled.
‘I think that should go in the Hydra.’
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘a. It’s not good enough, b. Editors shouldn’t publish their own work.’
‘a. I’m a better judge of that than you are. At the moment. b. Rubbish.

And c.’ Sassoon leant across and snatched his own poem back. ‘If you don’t
publish that, you can’t have this.’

Owen seemed to be contemplating a counter-attack.

‘d. I’m bigger than you are.’
‘All right, I’ll print it.’ He took Sassoon’s poem back. ‘Anonymously.’
‘Cheat.’ Sassoon was shuffling Owen’s papers together. ‘Look, why

don’t you have a go at …’ He peered at the title. ‘ “The Dead-Beat”? Work
at it till you think you’ve made some progress, then bring it back and we’ll
have a go at it together. It’s not too traumatic, is it? That memory.’

‘Good heavens, no.’
‘How long do you spend on it? Not that one, I mean generally?’
‘Fifteen minutes.’ He saw Sassoon’s expression change. ‘That’s every

day.’

‘Good God, man, that’s no use. You’ve got to sweat your guts out. Look,

it’s like drill. You don’t wait till you feel like doing it.’

‘Well, it’s certainly a new approach to the Muse. “Number from the left!

Form fours! Right turn!” ’

‘It works. I’ll see you – shall we say Thursday? After dinner.’ He opened

the door and stood aside to let Owen past. ‘And I shall expect to find both
poems in the Hydra.’

TWELVE

After Prior had been waiting for perhaps five minutes, the lodging house
door opened and Sarah stood there. ‘You’ve got a nerve,’ she said,
beginning to close the door.

Prior put a finger in the crack. ‘I’m here now.’
‘Which is more than you were last week. Go on, shift.’
‘I couldn’t come last week. I was so late back they kept me in.’
‘Bit strict, aren’t they? Your parents.’
Too late, he remembered the lies he’d told. He pointed to the blue badge

on his tunic. ‘Not parents. The CO.’

The door stopped shutting.
‘I know it sounds stupid, but it is the truth.’
‘Oh, all right, I believe you.’ Her eyes fell on the badge. ‘And if you’re

getting yourself upset about that, don’t bother. I knew anyway.’

‘How did you know?’ What had he been doing? Drooling?
‘You don’t think you’re the only one takes it off, do you? They all do.

Betty says she had a young man once, she never saw him wearing it. Mind
you, knowing Betty, I shouldn’t think she saw him wearing much at all.’

By day, the yellowness of her skin astonished him. It said a lot for her

that she was still attractive, that she managed to wear it like a rather dashing
accessory.

‘There is just one thing,’ she said, coming out into the porch. ‘If I do go

out with you, I want one thing clear at the start. I think you must’ve got a
very wrong impression of me the other night. Knocking all that port back.’
She raised her eyes to his face. ‘I don’t usually drink much at all.’

‘I know that. You were gone too quick for somebody that was used to it.’
‘Right, then. Long as you know. I’ll get me jacket.’

He waited, looking up and down the hot street. A trickle of sweat had

started in his armpits. From deep inside the house came a woman’s voice
raised in anger.

‘Me landlady,’ Sarah said, coming back. ‘Belgian, married a Scot, the

poor sod. I don’t think he knew what he was getting. Still, she only charges
a shilling for the laundry, and when you think the sheets come off the bed
bright yellow you can’t complain about that.’

He felt at home with her, with this precise delineation of the cost of

everything, which was not materialistic or grasping, but simply a
recognition of the boundaries and limitations of life. ‘I thought we’d get out
of Edinburgh,’ he said. ‘It’s too hot.’

Most of Edinburgh was using this last weekend in August to escape the

city, not deterred by a sallow tinge to the sky that suggested the hot, sticky
weather might break into thunder before the day was out. The train was
packed, but he managed to get her a seat, and stood near by. She smiled up
at him, but in this rackety, sweating box it was impossible to talk. He
looked at the other passengers. A trio of girls out on a spree, a young
mother with a struggling toddler tugging at her blouse, a middle-aged
couple whose bodies sagged together. Something about that stale intimacy
sharpened his sense of the strangeness, the separateness of Sarah’s body. He
was so physically aware of her that when the knee of his breeches brushed
against her skirt he felt as if the contact had been skin on skin.

A ganglion of rails, the train juddering over points, and then they were

slowing, and people were beginning to stir and clutch bags, and jam the
aisles. ‘Let’s wait,’ he said.

Sarah pressed against him, briefly, to let the woman and her child past,

and then he sat beside her as the train emptied. After a while she reached
down and touched his hand.

They took their time walking to the sea. At first he was disappointed, it

was so crowded. Men with trousers rolled up to show knobbly legs,
handkerchiefs knotted over sweating scalps, women with skirts tucked up to
reveal voluminous bloomers, small children screaming as the damp sand
was towelled off their legs. Everywhere people swirling their tongues round

ice-cream cones, biting into candy-floss, licking rock, sucking fingers,
determined to squeeze the last ounce of pleasure from the day. In his khaki,
Prior moved among them like a ghost. Only Sarah connected him to the
jostling crowd, and he put his hand around her, clasping her tightly, though
at that moment he felt no stirring of desire. He said, ‘You wouldn’t think
there was a war on, would you?’

They walked down to the water’s edge. He felt quite callous towards her

now, even as he drew her towards him and matched his stride to hers. She
belonged with the pleasure-seeking crowds. He both envied and despised
her, and was quite coldly determined to get her. They owed him something,
all of them, and she should pay. He glanced at her. ‘Shall we walk along?’

Their linked shadows, dumpy and deformed, stretched across the sand.

After a while they came to an outcrop of rock, and, clambering over it,
found they’d left the crowded part of the beach behind. Sarah took off her
jacket and then, with a great fuss and pleas not to look, her shoes and
stockings as well. She paddled at the water’s edge, where the waves seethed
between her toes.

‘I don’t suppose you’re allowed to take anything off?’ she said, looking

back at him, teasing.

‘Not a thing.’
‘Not even your boots?’
‘No, but I can wade. I always paddle with me boots on.’
He didn’t expect her to understand, or if she did, to admit it, but she

turned on him at once. ‘Boots have a way of springing a leak.’

‘Not mine.’
‘Oh, you’d be different, I suppose?’
Until now the air had been so still it scarcely moved against the skin. But

now small gusts began to whip up the sand, stinging patches of bare skin.
Prior looked back the way they’d come. The sun was past its height. Even
the little mounds of worm-casts had each its individual shadow, but what
chiefly struck him was the yellowing of the light. It was now positively
sulphurous, thick with heat. They seemed to be trapped, fixed, in some

element thicker than air. Black figures, like insects, swarmed across the
beach, making for the shelter of the town.

Sarah, too, had turned to look back. He said quickly, ‘No, don’t let’s go

back. It’ll blow over.’

‘You think that’s gunna blow over?’
Reluctantly he said, ‘Do you want to go back?’
‘We’d be drenched before we got there. Anyway, I like storms.’
They stood looking out to sea, while the yellow light deepened. There

was no difference now between his skin colour and hers. Suddenly Sarah
clutched her head. ‘What’s happening?’

He could hardly believe what he saw. The coppery wires on the surface

of her hair were standing straight up, in a way he had never believed any
human hair could do. He pulled his cap off, and winced at the tingling in his
scalp.

‘What is it?’ Sarah said.
‘Electricity.’
She burst out laughing.
‘No, I mean it.’
Lightning flickered once, illuminating her yellow skin.
‘Come on,’ Prior said.
He snatched her hand and started to run with her towards the shelter of

some bushes. Scrambling up the last slope, he staggered, and would have
fallen if he hadn’t grabbed a clump of marram grass. He felt a sharp pain,
and, bringing his hand up, saw a smear of blood on the palm. Sarah pushed
him from behind. They stumbled down the other side of the slope, just as a
sudden fierce thickening of rain blinded them, and the first rumblings of
thunder came.

A dense thicket of buckthorn offered the only possible shelter. Prior

stamped down the nettles and thistles that thronged the gaps, and then held
the thorns back for Sarah to crawl inside. He followed her in. They
crouched down, the rain scarcely reaching them through the thick roof of
thorn, though the wind rocked and beat the bush. Prior looked round. The

ground was dry, and very bare, the thorn too thick to allow anything else to
grow.

Sarah was feeling her hair. ‘Is it all right?’
‘It’s going down.’
‘So’s yours.’
He grinned. ‘ ’S not surprising. Storm took me mind right off it.’
She laughed, but refused to reply. Prior was remembering childhood

games, making dens. An interior like this, so dark, so private, so easily
defended, would have been a real find. Mixed with this distinctly childish
excitement another excitement was growing. He no longer felt hostile to
her, as he’d done back there in the crowd. They seemed to have walked
away from all that. It was ages since he’d made love. He felt as he
sometimes did coming out of the line, listening to the others talk and
sometimes joining in, what they were going to do and how many times they
were going to do it, though as far as he knew everybody else’s experience
was like his own. The first time was almost always a disappointment. Either
stuck at half mast or firing before you reached the target. He didn’t want to
think about Sarah like this.

Sarah rolled over on to her elbow and looked at him. ‘This is nice.’
He lay beside her. A few splashes of rain found his upturned face. After a

while he touched her hand and felt her fingertips curl round his. Through
the thickness in his throat, he said, ‘I’m not pushing, but if you wanted to,
I’d make sure it was all right.’

After a while he felt her fingers creep across his chest, insinuating

themselves between the buttons of his tunic. He kissed her, moving from
her lips to her breasts, not looking at her, not opening his eyes, learning her
with his tongue, flicking the nipples hard, probing the whorled darkness of
her navel, and then on down, down, across the smooth marble of her belly
into the coarse and springy turf. His nostrils filled with the scent of rock
pools at low tide. He slipped his hands underneath her, and lifted her, until
her whole pelvis became a cup from which he drank.

Afterwards they lay in silence, enjoying the peace, until footsteps walking
along the coastal path warned them that the storm was over. The buckthorn
scattered raindrops over them, as they crawled out on to the grass.

They beat sand and twigs from each other’s clothes, then started to walk

back along the coastal path.

‘What we need is something to warm us up,’ Prior said.
‘We can’t go anywhere looking like this.’
They stopped on the outskirts of the town, and tried more seriously to set

themselves to rights. They went to a pub, and leant back against the wooden
seat, nudging each other under the table, drunk with their love-making and
the storm and the sense of having secrets.

‘I can feel your voice through the wood,’ Sarah said.
Abruptly, the joy died. Prior became quite suddenly depressed. He

pushed his half-finished meal away.

‘What is it?’
‘Oh, I was remembering a man in my platoon.’ He looked at her. ‘Do you

know, he sent the same letter to his wife every week for two years.’

Sarah felt a chill come over her. She didn’t know why she was being told

this. ‘Why?’

‘Why not?’
‘How do you know he did?’
‘Because I had to censor it. I censored it every week. We read all their

letters.’

He could see her not liking this, but she kept her voice light. ‘Who reads

yours?’

‘Nobody.’ He looked at her again. ‘They rely on our sense of honour. Oh,

we’re supposed to leave them open so the CO can read them if he wants to,
but it would be thought frightfully bad form if he did.’ Prior had slipped into
his mock public school voice, very familiar to Rivers.

Sarah took it at face value. ‘You lot make me sick,’ she said, pushing her

own plate away. ‘I suppose nobody else’s got a sense of honour?’

He preferred her like this. On the beach, she was only too clearly

beginning to think that something had happened that mattered. He wasn’t

going to admit that. A few grains of sand in the pubic hair, a mingling of
smells. Nothing that a prolonged soak in the tub wouldn’t wash away.
‘Come on,’ he said, putting down a tip. ‘We’d better be getting back.’

THIRTEEN

Burns paced up and down the waiting room. Rivers had told him he
intended to recommend an unconditional discharge, and though he hadn’t
actually said the Board would accept the recommendation, this had been
very strongly implied. So there was nothing to worry about, though when
the orderly came and asked him to step inside, his stomach knotted and his
hands started to tremble. The Sam Browne belt, bunching the loose fabric
round his waist, made him look rather like a scarecrow tied together with
string. He got himself into the room somehow, and managed a salute. He
couldn’t see their faces to begin with, since they sat with their backs to the
tall windows, but after Bryce had told him to sit down, his eyes started to
become accustomed to the light.

There was a great deal of light, it seemed to him, floods of silver-grey

light filtered through white curtains that stirred in the breeze, and the
insistent buzzing of an insect, trapped. He fastened his eyes on Rivers, who
managed to smile at him without moving a muscle of his face.

Major Paget, the third, external member of the Board, was obviously

startled by Burns’s appearance, but he asked a few questions for form’s
sake. Rivers scarcely listened either to the questions or to the answers. The
buzzing continued. He scanned the high windows, trying to locate the
insect. The noise was unreasonably disturbing.

Paget said, ‘How often do you vomit now?’
Rivers got up and went across to the window. He found a bumble bee,

between the curtain and the window, batting itself against the glass, fetched
a file from the desk and, using it as a barrier, guided the insect into the open
air. He watched it fly away. Directly below him, Anderson and Sassoon
were setting off for their daily round of golf. Their voices drifted up to him.

Rivers turned back into the room to find everybody, Burns included, staring
at him in some surprise. He smiled faintly and went back to his seat.

‘This is getting to be a habit, isn’t it?’

Prior, hands twined round the iron bars of the bedhead, smiled without

opening his eyes. ‘Not one I enjoy.’

He hadn’t regained the weight he’d lost during his last stay in sick bay.

The ribs showed clearly through the stretched skin. ‘You were lucky to get
back. When did it start?’

‘On the train. It was jam-packed. Everybody smoking.’
‘Lucky the young woman with you kept her head.’
‘Poor Sarah. I don’t think she’s ever had anybody pass out on her before.’
‘You realize you won’t have the sick bay to yourself this time?’ Rivers

indicated the other bed. ‘Mr Willard.’

‘The legless wonder. Yes, we’ve met.’
‘Don’t you have any sympathy for anybody else?’
‘Are you suggesting I have any for myself?’ He watched Rivers fold the

stethoscope. ‘You know what you were saying about the greater mental
complexity of officers? How long do you think it’ll take you to convince
that particular specimen of complexity that it hasn’t actually got a broken
spine?’

‘How’s your voice, Mr Prior?’
Prior took a moment to register the direct hit. ‘Fine. Problem over, I

think. I miss it. I used to enjoy my little Trappist times.’

‘Oh, I can believe that. I’ve often thought how nice it would be to retreat

into total silence now and again.’

‘What do you mean “how nice it would be”? You do it all the time.’
‘I’ve arranged for a consultant to come and see you. A Dr Eaglesham.

He’ll be in some time this week.’

‘Why?’
‘I need a measurement of your vital capacity.’
‘Demonstrations twice nightly.’

‘The other vital capacity. Try to get some rest now. Sister Duffy tells me

you had a bad night.’

Rivers had got to the door before Prior called him back. ‘Why do you

need it?’

‘This is the second time this has happened in six weeks. I don’t think we

can let you go in front of a Medical Board without drawing their attention
to your physical condition.’

‘If you’re thinking of wangling permanent home service, I don’t want it.’
‘I’m not thinking of “wangling” anything.’ Rivers looked down at Prior

and his expression softened. ‘Look, if this is what happens when you’re
exposed to cigarette smoke on a train, how would you cope with gas?’

‘Well, obviously, I’m affected at lower concentrations than anybody else.

But then so what? I can be the battalion canary.’ A pause. ‘I’m not the only
one with asthma.’

‘No, I’m sure you’re not. I’m told there are cases of active TB in the

trenches. It doesn’t mean it’s a good idea.’

‘I want to go back.’
A long silence.
‘You can’t talk to anybody here,’ Prior said. ‘Everybody’s either lost

somebody, or knows somebody who has. They don’t want the truth. It’s like
letters of condolence. “Dear Mrs Bloggs, Your son had the side of his head
blown off by a shell and took five hours to die. We did manage to give him
a decent Christian burial. Unfortunately that particular stretch of ground
came under heavy bombardment the day after, so George has been back to
see us five or six times since then.” They don’t want that. They want to be
told that George – or Johnny – or whatever his name was, died a quick
death and was given a decent send off.’ He said deliberately, ‘Yesterday, at
the seaside, I felt as if I came from another planet.’

‘You can talk to people here.’
‘It’s the last thing this lot want to talk about. The point is, I’m better.’
‘That’s for the Board to decide.’
‘You mean, you.’

‘No-o. The Board. How are the nights? I mean apart from the asthma? I

know last night was bad.’

‘I just refuse to play this game. I haven’t enough breath to answer

questions you already know the answers to.’

‘What’s your subjective estimate of your nights?’
‘Better.’
‘Good. That was Sister Duffy’s impression too.’
‘Oh well, then …’ Prior glowered. ‘There’s another reason I want to go

back. Rather a nasty, selfish little reason, but since you clearly think I’m a
nasty selfish little person that won’t come as a surprise. When all this is
over, people who didn’t go to France, or didn’t do well in France – people
of my generation, I mean – aren’t going to count for anything. This is the
Club to end all Clubs.’

‘And you want to belong.’
‘Yes.’
‘You already do.’
‘I broke down.’
‘And that’s why you want to go back? You’re ambitious, aren’t you?’
Prior didn’t answer.
‘No reason why you shouldn’t be. What do you want to do?’
‘Politics.’ He started back-tracking immediately. ‘Of course, it’s probably

useless. You can’t get anywhere in this shitting country without an Oxford
or Cambridge degree.’

‘Rubbish.’
‘Easily said.’
‘Not easily said at all. I didn’t go to either.’
Prior looked surprised.
‘I got typhoid in my last year at school. We couldn’t afford Cambridge

without the scholarship. No, you can certainly get on without. And things’ll
be freer after the war. If only because hundreds of thousands of young men
have been thrown into contact with the working classes in a way they’ve
never been before. That has to have some impact.’

‘Careful, Rivers. You’re beginning to sound like a Bolshevik.’

‘I’m just trying to give you some faith in your own abilities. And by the

way, I do not think you are a nasty selfish little person.’

Prior scowled ferociously, probably to hide his pleasure.
‘I’ll try to be here when Dr Eaglesham comes. Meanwhile, do you think

you could try to get on with Willard?’

Rivers had just started shaving when the VAD banged on his door. She
gasped something about ‘Captain Anderson’ and ‘blood’, and, dreading
what he would find, Rivers hurried downstairs to Anderson’s room. He
found Anderson huddled in a foetal position, in the corner by the window,
teeth chattering, a dark stain spreading across the front of his pyjamas. His
room-mate, Featherstone, stood by the washstand, razor in hand, looking at
him with more irritation than sympathy.

‘What happened?’ Rivers asked.
‘I don’t know, he just started screaming.’
Rivers knelt beside Anderson and quickly checked that he wasn’t injured.

‘Was he asleep?’

‘No, he was waiting for the basin.’
Rivers looked at Featherstone. A thin trickle of blood was dribbling

down his wet chin. Ah. Rivers stood up, and patted him on the arm. ‘Bleed
elsewhere, Featherstone, there’s a good chap.’

Featherstone – not in the best of tempers – strode out of the room. Rivers

went across to the basin, rinsed his flannel out, wiped the bowl, gave the
slightly blood-stained towel to the VAD and held the door open for her to
leave. ‘There,’ he said, looking across at Anderson. ‘All gone.’

Slowly Anderson relaxed, becoming in the process aware of the stain

between his legs. Rivers fetched his dressing gown and threw it across to
him. ‘You’d better wrap this round you, you’ll be chilly once the sweating’s
stopped.’ He went back to the washstand. ‘Do you mind if I borrow your
flannel?’

He wiped the remaining shaving soap from his face, and checked to see

he hadn’t cut himself when the VAD banged on his door. That would not
have been helpful. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Anderson pull the

coverlet up to hide the wet patch in the bed. When Rivers next looked
round, he was sitting on the bed, swinging his legs and doing his best to
look casual. Rivers sat down, far enough away for Anderson not to have to
worry about the smell. ‘Still as bad as that?’

‘I suppose it’s as bad as it looks.’
And this was the man who was going to return to medicine. ‘You know,

we’re going to have to start talking about what you realistically want to do.’

‘We’ve been through all that.’
‘I can get you a month’s extension in October. After that –’
‘That’s all right. I can’t stay here for ever.’
Rivers hesitated. ‘Is there any sign of your wife managing to get up?’
Mrs Anderson’s visit had been much talked of, but had still not occurred.
‘No. It’s difficult with a child.’
Others managed. Rivers left Anderson to get dressed and went back to

his own room to finish shaving. Now that the surge of excitement had worn
off, he felt tired and unwell. Quite unfit for work, though the day would
have to be got through somehow.

Willard was his first patient. He was following a regime which involved

early-morning exercises in the pool, and was wheeled into the room, wet-
haired and smelling of chlorine. He started at once. ‘I can’t share a room
with that man.’

Rivers went on kneading Willard’s calf muscles.
‘Prior.’
‘You’re not sharing a room with him, are you? You just happen to be in

the sick bay at the same time.’

‘In effect I’m sharing a room.’
‘That feels quite a bit firmer. Does it feel firmer to you?’
Willard felt his calf. ‘A bit. He wakes up screaming. It’s intolerable.’
‘No, well, I don’t suppose he likes it much either.’
Willard hesitated. ‘It’s not just that.’ He bent towards Rivers. ‘He’s one

of those.’

Rivers looked and felt stunned. ‘I really don’t think he is, you know. You

mustn’t take everything Prior says seriously. He likes to tease.’

‘He is. You can always tell.’
‘Press against the palm of my hand.’
‘I don’t suppose you’d consider moving him?’
‘No. And again. He’s ill, Mr Willard. He needs the sick bay. If anybody

moves out, it’ll be you.’

Willard was followed by an unscheduled appointment with Featherstone,

also demanding a change of room, though with more reason. Nobody could
be expected to share with Anderson, he said. The nightmares and vomiting
were too bad, and the loss of sleep was beginning to affect his nerves. All of
this was true. Rivers listened and sympathized and promised Featherstone a
change of room as soon as the September Boards had introduced some
leeway into the system. At the moment the hospital was so crowded there
was no hope of a room change for anybody.

Next, Lansdowne, an RAMC captain, whose long-standing

claustrophobia had been uncovered by his inability to enter dugouts. A
particularly testing session. Lansdowne was always demanding, though
Rivers didn’t mind that, since he felt he was making progress. Then
Fothersgill, Sassoon’s new room-mate, a fanatical Theosophist. He spoke
throughout in mock medieval English – lots of ‘Yea verilys’ and ‘forsooths’
– as if his brief exposure to French horrors had frightened him into a sort of
terminal facetiousness. He was forty-three, but with his iron-grey hair,
monocle and stiff manners he seemed far older. He didn’t take long.
Basically, he was suffering from being too old for the war, a complaint with
which Rivers had a little more sympathy every day.

Then a meeting of the Hospital Management Committee. Fletcher, one of

the two patient representatives, was a highly efficient, conscientious man
whose stay in France had ended when he’d developed paranoid delusions
that the quartermaster was deliberately and systematically depriving the
men of food. This delusion he had now transferred to the hospital steward.
The meeting went well enough until the standard of hospital catering came
under discussion, and then Fletcher’s delusions came to the fore. Tempers
became heated, and the meeting closed on an acrimonious note. It was an
unfortunate incident, since it would certainly fuel the administration’s view

that patients should take no part in the running of the hospital. Bryce,
supported by Rivers, believed that patient participation was essential, even
if this meant that Craiglockhart committee meetings sometimes developed a
flavour all of their own.

After lunch, Rivers went along to Bryce’s room to discuss Broadbent.

Broadbent had been to see his sick mother twice in recent months. Towards
the end of the second visit a telegram arrived from Broadbent, saying that
his mother had passed on, and asking permission to stay for the funeral.
Naturally, permission had been granted. In due course Broadbent came
back, wearing a black armband, and – rather less explicably – the red tabs
of a staff officer. The red tabs disappeared overnight, but the black armband
remained. For some days after that Broadbent sat around the patients’
common room, pink-eyed and sorrowful, being consoled by the VADs. This
happy state of affairs came to a close when Mrs Broadbent arrived,
demanding to know why she never heard from her son. Broadbent was now
upstairs, in a locked room. It was not easy to see how a court-martial could
be avoided.

The rest of the afternoon was spent on a succession of young men.

Rivers, by now feeling quite ill, was carried through it only by his
perception that some at least were showing signs of improvement. One
young man in particular, who’d broken down after finding the mutilated
body of his friend, had become dramatically better in the last few weeks.

After dinner, Rivers decided to abandon the paperwork he ought to have

been doing and have an early night. No bath tonight, he decided, he was too
tired. He got between the sheets and stretched out his legs, thinking he’d
never been so glad to be in a bed in his life. After a while he pushed the
window further open and lay listening to the rain, a soft hushing sound that
seemed to fill the room. Soon, still listening, he drifted off to sleep.

He was woken at two am by a pain in his chest. At first he tried to

convince himself it was indigestion, but the leaping and pounding of his
heart soon suggested other, more worrying possibilities. He pulled himself
up, and concentrated on breathing slowly and quietly.

The wind had risen while he was asleep, and rain pelted the glass. All

over the hospital, he knew, men would be lying awake, listening to the rain
and the wind, thinking of their battalions sinking deeper into the mud. Bad
weather was bad for the nerves. Tomorrow would not be an easy day.

An hour later he would have given anything for tomorrow to arrive. He

was getting all the familiar symptoms. Sweating, a constant need to urinate,
breathlessness, the sense of blood not flowing but squeezing through veins.
The slightest movement caused his heart to pound. He was relieved when
dawn came and it was possible to summon the orderly.

Bryce arrived shortly afterwards, brisk and sympathetic. He produced a

stethoscope, and told Rivers to take his pyjama jacket off. The stethoscope
moved across his chest. He sat up, leant forward and felt the same
procession of cold rings across his back. ‘What do you think’s wrong?’
Bryce asked, putting the stethoscope away.

‘War neurosis,’ Rivers said promptly. ‘I already stammer and I’m starting

to twitch.’

Bryce waited for Rivers to settle back against the pillows. ‘I suppose

we’ve all got one of those. Your heartbeat’s irregular.’

‘Psychosomatic.’
‘And, as we keep telling the patients, psychosomatic symptoms are

REAL. I think you should take some leave.’

Rivers shook his head. ‘No, I –’
‘That wasn’t a suggestion.’
‘Oh. I’ve got the September reports to do. If I do nothing else, I’ve got to

do those.’

Bryce had started to smile. ‘There’s never going to be a convenient time,

is there? Three weeks starting this weekend.’

A mutinous silence.
‘That gives you time to do the reports, provided you don’t see patients.

All right?’ Bryce patted the coverlet and stood up. ‘I’ll tell Miss Crowe to
put a notice up.’

Rivers was going on leave. He hadn’t been down to dinner for the past few
days, but he was there tonight, Sassoon saw, looking rather better than he’d
done recently, though still very tired. The MO’s table was the noisiest in the
room. Even at this distance you could distinguish Brock’s high, reedy voice,
MacIntyre’s broad Glaswegian, Bryce’s Edinburgh, Ruggles’s American,
and Rivers, who, when he got excited in a discussion, as he often did,
sounded rather like a soda-water syphon going off. Nobody, listening to him
now, would have thought him capable of those endless silences.

Fothersgill, his long nose twitching fastidiously, had started to complain

about the soup. ‘Nay, verily,’ he said. ‘A man knoweth not what manner of
thing he eateth.’ He laughed as he said it, the laugh of a man who takes
small discomforts very seriously indeed. Sassoon, marooned between two
particularly bad stammerers, felt no need to take part in the conversation.
Instead, he twisted round in his seat and looked for Owen, remembering the
last poem he’d been shown. ‘Out there, we’ve walked quite friendly up to
Death;/Sat down and eaten with him, cool and bland –/Pardoned his
spilling mess-tins in our hand …’ Precisely, Sassoon thought. And now we
complain about the soup. Or rather, they do.

After dinner he went straight to Owen’s room. ‘Do you mind?’ he said.

‘I’m on the run from Theosophy.’

Owen was already clearing papers from the chair. ‘No, come in.’
‘I can’t stay in the same room with him.’
‘You should ask Rivers for a change.’
‘Too late. He goes tomorrow. Anyway, I wouldn’t want to bother him.

Have you got anything for me?’

‘This.’
Sassoon took the sheet and read the whole poem through twice, then

returned to the first two lines.

What minute-bells for these who die so fast?
– Only the monstrous/solemn anger of our guns.

‘I thought “passing” bells,’ Owen said.
‘Hm. Though if you lose “minute” you realize how weak “fast” is. “Only

the monstrous anger …” ’

‘ “Solemn’?”
‘ “Only the solemn anger of our guns.” Owen, for God’s sake, this is War

Office propaganda.’

‘No, it’s not.’
‘Read that line.’
Owen read. ‘Well, it certainly isn’t meant to be.’
‘I suppose what you’ve got to decide is who are “these”? The British

dead? Because if they’re British, then our guns is …’

Owen shook his head. ‘All the dead.’
‘Let’s start there.’ Sassoon crossed out ‘our’ and pencilled in ‘the’.

‘You’re sure that’s what you want? It isn’t a minor change.’

‘No, I know. If it’s “the”, it’s got to be “monstrous”.’
‘Agreed.’ Sassoon crossed out ‘solemn’. ‘So:

What passing-bells for these who die … so fast?
– Only the monstrous anger of the guns.

‘Well, there’s nothing wrong with the second line.’
‘ “In herds”?’
‘Better.’
They worked on the poem for half an hour. The wind had been rising all

evening, and the thin curtain billowed in the draught. At one point Sassoon
looked up and said, ‘What’s that noise?’

‘The wind.’ Owen was trying to find the precise word for the sound of

shells, and the wind was a distraction he’d been trying to ignore.

‘No, that.’
Owen listened. ‘I can’t hear anything.’
‘That tapping.’
Owen listened again. ‘No.’
‘Must be imagining things.’ Sassoon listened again, then said, ‘They

don’t wail. They hiss.’

‘No, these are going right over.’
‘That’s right. They hiss.’ He looked at Owen. ‘I hear hissing.’
‘You hear tapping.’

The wind went on rising all evening. By the time Sassoon left Owen’s

room, it was wailing round the building, moaning down chimneys, snapping
branches off trees with a crack like rifle fire. All over the decayed hydro,
badly fitting windows rattled and thumped, and Sassoon, passing several of
his ‘fellow breakdowns’ in the corridor, thought they looked even more
‘mental’ than usual.

His own room was empty. He got into bed and lay reading while he

waited for Fothersgill to return from his bridge session. As soon as he
entered the room, Sassoon rolled over and pretended to be asleep. A
tuneless whistling ensued, punctuated by grunts as Fothersgill bent over his
shaving mirror and tweezed hairs out of his nostrils.

At last the light was out. Sassoon lay on his back, listening to the roar of

wind and rain. Again he heard tapping, a distinct, purposeful sound, quite
unlike the random buffeting of the wind. On such a night it was impossible
not to think of the battalion. He listened to the surge and rumble of the
storm, and his mind filled with memories of his last few weeks in France.
He saw his platoon again, and ran through their names – not a particularly
difficult feat, since no fewer than eight of them had been called Jones. He
recalled his horror at their physique. Many of them were almost incapable
of lifting their equipment, let alone of carrying it mile after mile along
shelled roads. He’d ended one march pushing two of them in front of him,
while a third stumbled along behind, clinging to his belt. None of the three
had been more than five feet tall. You put them alongside an officer –
almost any officer – and they seemed to be almost a different order of
being. And as for their training. One man had arrived in France not
knowing how to load a rifle. He saw them now, his little band, sitting on
bales of straw in a sun-chinked barn, while he knelt to inspect their raw and
blistered feet, and wondered how many of them were still alive.

The windows banged and rattled, and again, in a brief lull, he thought he

heard tapping. There were no trees close enough to touch the glass. He
supposed there might be rats, but then whoever heard of rats tapping? He
tossed and turned, thinking how stupid it was not to be able to sleep here, in

safety and comfort, when in France he’d been able to sleep anywhere. If he
could sleep on a firestep in drenching rain, surely he could sleep now …

He woke to find Orme standing immediately inside the door. He wasn’t

surprised, he assumed Orme had come to rouse him for his watch. What did
surprise him, a little, was that he seemed to be in bed. Orme was wearing
that very pale coat of his. Once, in ‘C’ company mess, the CO had said,
‘Correct me if I’m wrong, Orme, but I have always assumed that the colour
of the British Army uniform is khaki. Not … beige.’ ‘Beige’ was said in
such Lady Bracknellish tones that Sassoon had wanted to laugh. He wanted
to laugh now, but his chest muscles didn’t seem to work. After a while he
remembered that Orme was dead.

This clearly didn’t worry Orme, who continued to stand quietly by the

door, but Sassoon began to think it ought to worry him. Perhaps if he turned
his head it would be all right. He stared at the window’s pale square of light,
and when he looked back Orme had gone.

Fothersgill was awake. ‘Did you see anybody come in?’ Sassoon asked.
‘No, nobody’s been in.’ He turned over and within a few minutes was

snoring again.

Sassoon waited for the rhythm to be firmly established, then got out of

bed and walked across to the window. The storm had blown itself out,
though twigs, leaves and even one or two larger branches, scattered across
the tennis courts, bore witness to its power. The palms of his hands were
sweating and his mouth was dry.

He needed to talk to Rivers, though he’d have to be careful what he said,

since Rivers was a thorough-going rationalist who wouldn’t take kindly to
tales of the supernatural, and might even decide the symptoms of a war
neurosis were manifesting themselves at last. Perhaps they were. Perhaps
this was the kind of hallucination he’d had in the 4th London, but no, he
didn’t believe that. His nocturnal visitors there had come trailing gore,
pointing to amputations and head wounds, rather like the statues of
medieval saints pointing to the instruments of their martyrdom. This had
been so restrained. Dignified. And it hadn’t followed on from a nightmare
either. He thought back, wanting to be sure, because he knew this was the

first question Rivers would ask. No, no nightmare. Only that tapping at the
window before he went to sleep.

He got dressed and sat on the bed. At last eight o’clock came, and the

hospital became noisy as the shifts changed. Sassoon ran downstairs. He
felt certain Rivers would go to his office to check the post before he left,
and there might just be time for a few words. But when he tapped on the
door, a passing orderly said, ‘Captain Rivers’s gone, sir. He left on the six
o’clock train.’

So that was that. Sassoon went slowly upstairs, unable to account for his

sense of loss. After all, he’d known Rivers was going. And he was only
going for three weeks. Fothersgill was still asleep. Sassoon collected his
washbag and went along to the bathroom. He felt almost dazed. As usual he
turned to lock the door, and as usual remembered there were no locks. At
times like this the lack of privacy was almost intolerable. He filled the
basin, and splashed his face and neck. Birds, sounding a little stunned as if
they too needed to recover from the night, were beginning, cautiously, to
sing. He looked at his face in the glass. In this half-light, against white tiles,
it looked scarcely less ghostly than Orme’s. A memory tweaked the edges
of his mind. Another glass, on the top landing at home, a dark, oval mirror
framing the face of a small, pale child. Himself. Five years old, perhaps.
Now why did he remember that? Birds had been singing, then, too.
Sparrows, twittering in the ivy. A day of shouts and banged doors and tears
in rooms he was not allowed to enter. The day his father left home. Or the
day he died? No, the day he left. Sassoon smiled, amused at the link he’d
discovered, and then stopped smiling. He’d joked once or twice to Rivers
about his being his father confessor, but only now, faced with this second
abandonment, did he realize how completely Rivers had come to take his
father’s place. Well, that didn’t matter, did it? After all, if it came to
substitute fathers, he might do a lot worse. No, it was all right. Slowly, he
lathered his face and began to shave.

Part Three

FOURTEEN

‘Hymn No. 373.’

With a rustling of paper the maroon-backed hymn books blossomed into

white. The congregation struggled to its feet. Children at the front under the
watchful eye of Sunday-school teachers, the rest, middle-aged or elderly
men, and women. A preliminary wheeze from the organ, then:

God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform …

Since the Somme, this seemed to have become the nation’s most popular
hymn. Rivers had lost count of the number of times he’d heard it sung. He
lifted his eyes to the flag-draped altar, and then to the east window. A
crucifixion. The Virgin and St John on either side, the Holy Ghost
descending, God the Father beaming benignly down. Beneath it, and much
smaller, Abraham’s sacrifice of his son. Behind Abraham was the ram
caught in a thicket by his horns and struggling to escape, by far the best
thing in the window. You could see the fear. Whereas Abraham, if he
regretted having to sacrifice his son at all, was certainly hiding it well and
Isaac, bound on a makeshift altar, positively smirked.

Obvious choices for the east window: the two bloody bargains on which

a civilization claims to be based. The bargain, Rivers thought, looking at
Abraham and Isaac. The one on which all patriarchal societies are founded.
If you, who are young and strong, will obey me, who am old and weak,
even to the extent of being prepared to sacrifice your life, then in the course
of time you will peacefully inherit, and be able to exact the same obedience
from your sons. Only we’re breaking the bargain, Rivers thought. All over
northern France, at this very moment, in trenches and dugouts and flooded

shell-holes, the inheritors were dying, not one by one, while old men, and
women of all ages, gathered together and sang hymns.

Blind unbelief is sure to err,
And scan His works in vain;
He is His own interpreter
And He will make it plain. Amen.

The congregation, having renounced reason, looked rather the happier for

it, and sat down to await the sermon. Charles leant towards Rivers and
whispered, ‘He doesn’t usually go on very long.’

That whisper brought back the Sunday mornings of their childhood when

they’d drive to church in a pony and trap, and spent the sermon looking up
the naughty bits in the Old Testament, a task made easier by the grubby
fingerprints of those who had gone before. He remembered Michal’s bride-
price: an hundred foreskins of the Philistines. As an anthropologist, he still
found that fascinating. He remembered the smell of hassocks, and fastened
his eyes on the flag-draped altar. They would never come back, those times.

The vicar had reached the top of the pulpit steps. A faint light flashed on

his glasses as he made the sign of the cross. ‘In the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost …’

Charles was busy with a great rehousing of the hens. They were to be
transferred from deep litter in the barn to the new coops in Two-acre Field.
This was best done after dusk when the hens were drowsy and less likely to
rebel. The brothers lingered over tea in the living room, and then went out
across the black, sodden, dismal mud of the yard towards the large, low
barn. Rivers was wearing a pair of old cord breeches kept up with one of his
brother’s belts, visible proof that Bertha’s strictures on his loss of weight
were justified. ‘It isn’t as if,’ she said at every mealtime, piling his plate
high, ‘you had it to lose.’ ‘He’s all right, Bertha, leave him alone,’ Charles
always said, though it made no difference. Rivers still staggered away from
the table feeling that he’d been force-fed.

Charles carried the hens easily, his arms binding the wings fast to his

sides. Rivers, less expert, picked up two birds and set off after him. His

fingers dug through the fluffiness into the surprisingly hard quills, and
touched clammy flesh. The blood-red combs jiggled as he walked, amber
eyes looked up with a kind of bright vacuity. As he tried to nudge the
farmyard gate open with his elbow, one of them got its wings free and
flapped frantically until he managed to subdue it again. God, I hate hens, he
thought.

The chicken farm had been his idea, after Charles came back from the

East with malaria. Work in the open air, Rivers had advised. He was paying
for it now. As he left the shelter of the hedge and set off across Two-acre
Field, a great gust of ‘open air’ almost lifted him off his feet. He felt
responsible for the farm idea, and it wasn’t paying. At the moment they
were only just breaking even. Mainly it was the effect of the war. Feed was
scarce and expensive, male help impossible to get. The last land girl had
stayed only long enough to work out the distance to the nearest town,
before discovering that some domestic crisis required her immediate return
home. But even without the war it might not have been easy. Hens had a
curious way of not thriving. They seemed to be subject to a truly
phenomenal range of diseases and to take a perverse pleasure in working
their way down the list.

It was almost completely dark now, a few faint stars pricking through the

clear sky. One hen, weaker than the rest, was being picked on by the others.
Its chest was bare of feathers and raw where they’d pecked at it.

‘I’ll have to get that one out and wring its neck,’ Charles said.
‘Can’t you just isolate her and then put her back in?’
‘No. Once they start they never stop.’
They turned and walked back. McTavish, the farm cat, a black, battered

torn, met them at the corner of the yard and preceded them across it. A
notably morose cat, McTavish, a defect of temperament Rivers attributed to
his being perpetually surrounded by forbidden flesh. He was fond of
McTavish and slipped him titbits from his plate whenever he thought Bertha
wasn’t looking.

They moved hens for an hour; slow, tedious work and then, as real

darkness set in, went back to the house. Bertha had been baking. An

earthenware pot full of bread dough stood by the kitchen range, and the
whole firelit room was full of the smell of warm yeast. ‘You’ll be all right,
won’t you?’ Bertha said, driving a hat pin neatly into her hat, and craning
towards the mirror to make sure it was on straight. She and Charles were
using Rivers as a chicken-sitter while they enjoyed a rare night out.

‘Don’t fuss, Bertha,’ Charles said.
‘There’s two loaves in the oven. They’ll be done at ten past eight. Turn

them out, tap the base. If it sounds hollow, they’re done. Do you think you
can manage that?’

‘He’s not a complete idiot, Bertha,’ Charles called in from the hall.
Bertha looked doubtful. ‘All right, then. Are we off?’
Charles came in wearing his hat and coat.
Rivers said, ‘I’ll see if I can get those accounts finished, Charles.’
‘I wish you would,’ Bertha murmured as she went past.
Once they’d gone, Rivers sat in the rocking chair by the fire, and

concentrated on not dozing off. He hadn’t dared not eat at dinner, and the
unaccustomed heavy meal and the firelight were making his eyelids droop.
Last spring when he’d been here, boxes of chicks had been put to warm
before the fire, and then the room had been full of the pecking and
scratching of tiny beaks and feet. He remembered them struggling out of the
eggs, how exhausted, wet and miserable they looked, and yet curiously
powerful, little Atlases struggling to hold up the world. Now the same
chicks were scruffy, bedraggled things running in the coops, and the only
sound in the room was the roar of flame.

He stretched out his legs and looked at the account book on the edge of

the kitchen table. He had letters he ought to write, the most urgent being
one to David Burns, who’d invited him to spend the last few days of his
leave at the family’s holiday cottage on the Suffolk coast. As far as Rivers
could make out, Burns’s parents wanted to talk about his future, and
although Rivers was not particularly anxious to do this – he found it
difficult to envisage any future for Burns – he thought it his duty to accept.
And then there was a half-completed letter to Sassoon, but the accounts
would have to come first. Ten past eight. He got the loaves from the oven,

tipped them out, and tapped the bases. Since he’d never done this before, he
had no way of knowing whether this particular sound was ‘hollow’ or not.
He decided they looked done, and set them to cool on the tray. Then he
fetched the shoe box in which Charles stored his receipts and set to work on
finishing the accounts. At intervals as he worked he looked up. The wind
which had been blowing a gale all day was beginning to die down. Once he
heard an owl hoot from the copse at the other side of Two-acre Field, a
cold, shivery sound that made him glad of the fire and the smell of warm
bread.

When he’d finished, he took the oil lamp and went along to the front

room, intending to have another go at finishing his letter to Siegfried. He
put the lamp down on the desk. Ranged at intervals around the walls, big
heavy pieces of furniture squatted on their own shadows. Most of them he
remembered from his childhood home: Knowles Bank. They were too big
to fit into his sisters’ cottage, he had no need of them, and so Charles and
Bertha had inherited them all. Their presence here in different places, at
different angles to the walls and to each other, gave him an odd feeling of
slipping back into an out-of-focus version of his childhood.

A cold, unused room. All the farm paperwork was done in the kitchen.

He decided to take his letter along and finish it there, but then lingered,
fingering the leather of the desk top and looking at the picture that hung
above the empty grate. At Knowles Bank it had hung in the same position,
above the fireplace, in his father’s study. As a picture it could hardly have
been more appropriate to his father’s dual role as priest and speech
therapist, since it showed the Apostles at Pentecost immediately after they
had received the gift of tongues. There they sat, each under his own
personal flame, rendered in an instant fluent, persuasive and articulate, not
merely in their own language but in all known tongues. Rivers remembered
the bishop’s sermon one Pentecost when he’d explained that the gift of
tongues as bestowed upon the Apostles had absolutely nothing to do with
‘the gift of tongues’ as bestowed regularly every Sunday on uneducated
riff-raff in various tin-roofed chapels about the diocese. The gift of
Pentecost had made the Apostles comprehensible in all known languages.

And there they sat still, looking, Rivers couldn’t help thinking, most
unchristianly smug about it all.

He’d sat with other boys – his father’s pupils – underneath that picture

for many a long hour, stumbling over the consonants of his own language,
remembering to hold down the back of his tongue, project his breath in an
even flow, etc., etc. Sometimes his father would walk with him up and
down the room, since he believed the measured pace helped to regulate the
flow of breath. Rivers hadn’t been the star pupil in those classes, not by any
means. If anything he’d made rather less progress than the rest, in spite of –
or because of? – having his teacher with him all the time. The house was
full of stammering boys, any age from ten to nineteen, and at least it meant
he was not the only one. It had had another advantage too, he remembered.
While the boys were there, the Reverend Charles Dodgson stayed away. Mr
Dodgson didn’t like boys. As soon as they left at Christmas or in the
summer holidays, he arrived, taking lessons every evening after dinner.
Rivers, from long exposure to other people’s speech impediments, could
sum up the main features of a stammer almost as quickly as his father.
Dodgson found m difficult, and p in consonant combinations, particularly in
the middle of words, but his arch enemy was hard c.

During the day there were boating trips on the river. Dodgson and the

four Rivers children, himself, Charles, Ethel and – Dodgson’s favourite –
Katharine. He’d never enjoyed those trips much, and neither, he thought,
had Charles, though probably that was no more than the slight pique of two
Victorian schoolboys, finding themselves, for the first time in their lives,
not of the preferred sex. Afterwards, during those apparently endless
summer evenings, there would be croquet on the lawn, Rivers’s father and
Dodgson playing, the children watching. There was a photograph of them
on the desk, doing just that, he and Charles leaning back against the garden
roller, no doubt getting grass stains on their white shirts, the two little girls,
his sisters, under the shade of the beech tree. If he tried hard, he could recall
the feel of the roller against his shoulder blades, the heat of the sun on the
back of his neck.

He had one other memory of Dodgson. One evening he’d crept close to

the open window of his father’s study, sat down with his back to the wall
and listened to the lesson in progress. Why he’d done this he couldn’t now
remember, except that it hadn’t felt like eavesdropping, since he knew
nothing private was likely to be said. Perhaps he’d just wanted to hear
Dodgson put through the same routine he and the other boys were put
through. Perhaps he’d wanted to see him cut down to size. Dodgson had
just embarked on the sentence about the careful cat catching the mouse – a
simple enough tale, but already, in Dodgson’s mouth, threatening to become
an epic. Rivers listened to his father’s advice, the same advice, basically,
that he got, though conveyed without that peculiar note of fraught patience.
He thought suddenly, this is nonsense. It doesn’t help to remember to keep
your tongue down, it doesn’t help to think about the flow of breath. So he’d
thought, sweeping away his father’s life work in a single minute as twelve-
year-old boys are apt to do. He’d raised his head very cautiously above the
window sill, and seen his father sitting behind the desk – this desk – his
back to the window, clean pink neck showing above clean white collar,
broad shoulders straining the cloth of his jacket. He stared at the back of his
neck, at the neck of the man whom he had, in a way, just killed, and he
didn’t feel sad or guilty about it at all. He felt glad.

Later that summer he’d given a talk to the speech therapy group on

monkeys. M was to him what c was to Dodgson, but he was interested in
monkeys, and still more interested in Darwin’s theory of evolution, which
by this time had achieved acceptance in some circles. Knowles Bank was
not among them. His father had been furious, not because Rivers had
stumbled over every single m without exception – though indeed he had –
but because he’d dared suggest that Genesis was no more than the creation
myth of a Bronze Age people. Dinner that night was a strained occasion.
Father angry, mother upset, Charles covertly sympathetic, sisters goggle-
eyed and making the most of it, Rivers himself outwardly subdued,
inwardly triumphant. For the first time in his life, he’d forced his father to
listen to what he had to say, and not merely to the way he’d said it.

And yet, Rivers thought, running his hands across the scarred leather of

the desk top, the relationship between father and son is never simple, and
never over. Death certainly doesn’t end it. In the past year he’d thought
more about his father than he’d done since he was a child. Only recently it
had occurred to him that if some twelve-year-old boy had crept up to his
window at Craiglockhart, as he’d done to his father’s window at Knowles
Bank, he’d have seen a man sitting at a desk with his back to the window,
listening to some patient, with a stammer far worse than Dodgson’s, try and
fail to reach the end of a sentence. Only that boy would not have been his
son.

The unfinished letter to Siegfried lay on the desk. He’d got as far as a

comment on the weather, and there the letter had ground to a halt. What he
did so easily in conversation, always nudging Siegfried gently in the same
direction, and yet always avoiding any suggestion of pressure, was a feat he
apparently could not perform on paper. Perhaps he was just too tired. He
told himself the letter could wait till morning.

He picked up the lamp, pushed aside the heavy dark red curtains and

opened the window. A big dizzy moth flew in, with pale wings and a fat,
furry body, and began bumping against the ceiling. He leant out of the
window, smelling roses he couldn’t see. The wind had fallen completely
now, giving way to a breathless hush. Faintly, over dark hedges and starlit
fields, came the soft thud-thud of the guns. When he’d first arrived,
suffering from the usual medley of physical and neurasthenic symptoms –
headaches, dry mouth, pounding heart – he’d confused that sound with the
throbbing of blood in his head. Then one night, lying sleepless, he’d heard
the water jug vibrating in the bowl, and realized what it was that he kept
hearing. Siegfried must have heard it in June when he was at home
convalescing from his wound.

Perhaps he’d better write tonight after all. He closed the window, and sat

down at the desk. The moth’s huge shadow, flickering over the walls and
ceiling, darkened the page, as, drawing the pad towards him, he tore off the
sheet and started again. My dear Siegfried …

‘What draft is this?’

‘Lost count,’ Owen said. ‘You did tell me to sweat my guts out.’
‘Did I really? What an inelegant expression. “What passing-bells for

these who die as cattle?” I see we got to the slaughterhouse in the end.’
Sassoon read through the poem. When he’d finished, he didn’t immediately
comment.

‘It’s better, isn’t it?’
‘Better? It’s transformed.’ He read it again. ‘Though when you look at

the sense … You do realize you’ve completely contradicted yourself, don’t
you? You start by saying there is no consolation, and then you say there is.’

‘Not consolation. Pride in the sacrifice.’
‘Isn’t that consolation?’
‘If it is, it’s justifiable. There’s a point beyond which –’
‘I don’t see that.’
‘There’s a point beyond which you can’t press the meaninglessness. Even

if the courage is being abused, it’s still …’

Owen leapt up, went to the drawer of his washstand and produced the

typescript Sassoon had lent him. He began leafing quickly but carefully
through it. Sassoon, watching, thought, he’s getting better. No stammer.
Quick, decisive movements. The self-confidence to contradict his hero. And
the poem had been a revelation.

‘Look, you do exactly the same thing,’ Owen said, coming across with

the sheet he wanted.

O my brave brown companions, when your souls
Flock silently away, and the eyeless dead
Shame the wild beast of battle on the ridge,
Death will stand grieving in that field of war
Since your unvanquished hardihood is spent.
And through some mooned Valhalla there will pass
Battalions and battalions, scarred from hell;
The unreturning army that was youth;
The legions who have suffered and are dust.

‘What’s that if not pride in the sacrifice?’

‘Grief? All right, point taken. I just don’t like the idea of … making it out

to be less of a horror than it really is.’ He looked down at the page. ‘I think
you should publish this.’

‘You mean in the Hydra?’
‘No, I mean in the Nation. Give me a fair copy and I’ll see what I can do.

You’ll need a different title, though. “Anthem for …” ’ He thought for a
moment, crossed one word out, substituted another. ‘There you are,’ he
said, handing the page back, smiling. ‘ “Anthem for Doomed Youth.” ’

The main corridor of the hospital stretched the whole length of the building,
with wards opening off on either side. From one of these came an
unpleasant smell which Madge said was gangrene, though Sarah didn’t
believe she knew. Ward Fourteen was overcrowded, the beds packed close
together, men sitting up and staring with interest at the two girls hesitating
just inside the door. Most of them looked reasonably well and cheerful. The
trouble was that with their cropped heads and hospital blue uniforms, they
also looked exactly alike.

‘I won’t recognize him,’ Madge said in a frantic whisper.
‘Go on,’ Sarah said, giving her a shove.
They started to walk up the ward. Madge stared from bed to bed with a

dazed look. She really mightn’t recognize him at this rate, Sarah thought,
but then a voice cried, ‘Madge!’ A dark-haired man with a gingery
moustache was sitting up, waving and looking delighted to see her. Madge
walked forward cautiously, located the bandaged left arm, checked to see
that the swelling beneath the counterpane was the right length and breadth
to consist of two legs. He looked all right. He planted a smacking kiss on
Madge’s lips, and Sarah looked away in embarrassment, only to realize she
was herself the object of amused appreciation from all parts of the ward.

‘Eh, look, I’ve brought you these,’ Madge said. ‘How are you?’
‘I’m all right. Went right through,’ he said. ‘Just here.’ He pointed to his

biceps. ‘No gangrene, no nothing.’

‘You were lucky.’

‘I’ll say. I’m gunna be in here two weeks they reckon, and then I’ll have

a bit of leave before I go back.’

‘This is Sarah,’ Madge said.
‘Pleased to meet you.’
They shook hands. Madge was now sitting by the bed, beginning,

cautiously, to bask in the admiration of her restored lover and to plan what
they would do on his leave. After this had been going on for a while, Sarah
began to feel distinctly green and hairy. ‘I’ll just have a walk round the
grounds,’ she said. ‘It’s a bit hot in here.’

‘Yeh, all right,’ Madge said.
‘I’ll see you at the main entrance, then. Half an hour?’
They hardly noticed her go. None of these men was badly wounded, and

several of them whistled and clicked their tongues as she walked past. The
whole atmosphere of the ward was happy. The general air of relief at being
out of it was what chiefly came across, though she supposed there must be
other wards where the wounds were not so slight.

Outside, in the corridor, she looked up and down, realizing she didn’t

know in which direction the exit lay. She was surrounded by notices
directing people to the pharmacy, the path lab, the X-ray department,
everywhere except the way out. She tried walking to her left, but her way
was blocked by a large notice saying: THEATRES. NO UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL BEYOND

THIS POINT. She turned right, and shortly afterwards came to a corridor she
thought she recognized, and began to walk along it, but the feeling of
familiarity soon vanished. The building was enormous, and seemed to have
no plan, no structure to it, at all. To add to the sense of unreality most of the
notices referred to its civilian use before the war. Maternity, she read, and
then the swing doors banged open to reveal beds full of people who were
most unlikely ever to give birth.

Obviously she ought to stop and ask somebody, but then everybody

seemed to be in such a hurry, and so grim-faced. At last she found a door
that led out to the grounds at the back of the hospital, where the tall
chimney of an incinerator dribbled brownish-yellow smoke. Here, a huge

tent had been erected and this served as another ward. She glanced into the
interior, which was golden in the sunlight filtered through the roof, but the
atmosphere was close, stifling, a humming darkness in which the
clumsiness of bandages and the itch of healing skin must be almost
intolerable.

A constant traffic of nurses and orderlies passed between the tent and the

main building, and, feeling herself to be in the way, Sarah looked around
for somewhere she could find temporary refuge and not bother anybody.
There was a conservatory along the side of the hospital, facing east so that
at the moment it caught the full warmth of the sun. Shadowy figures sat
inside, and the door was open so she thought she might perhaps sit there.

Once across the threshold she became aware of a silence, a silence

caused, she suspected, by her entrance. She was still dazzled by the
brightness of the light outside and the relative dimness of the interior, and
so she had to blink several times before she saw them, a row of figures in
wheelchairs, but figures that were no longer the size and shape of adult
men. Trouser legs sewn short; empty sleeves pinned to jackets. One man
had lost all his limbs, and his face was so drained, so pale, he seemed to
have left his blood in France as well. The blue of the hospital uniform
looked garish against his skin. They’d been pushed out here to get the sun,
but not right outside, and not at the front of the hospital where their
mutilations might have been seen by passers-by. They stared at her, but not
as the men had stared on the other ward, smiling, trying to catch her eye.
This was a totally blank stare. If it contained anything at all, it was fear.
Fear of her looking at the empty trouser legs. Fear of her not looking at
them. She stood there, unable to go forward, and unable, for a few crucial
moments, to turn back, until a nurse bustled up to her and said, ‘Who is it
you want to see?’

‘I’m just waiting for a friend. It’s all right, I’ll wait outside.’
She backed out, walking away in the sunlight, feeling their eyes on her,

thinking that perhaps if she’d been prepared, if she’d managed to smile, to
look normal, it might have been better. But no, she thought, there was
nothing she could have done that would have made it better. Simply by

being there, by being that inconsequential, infinitely powerful creature: a
pretty girl, she had made everything worse. Her sense of her own
helplessness, her being forced to play the role of Medusa when she meant
no harm, merged with the anger she was beginning to feel at their being
hidden away like that. If the country demanded that price, then it should
bloody well be prepared to look at the result. She strode on through the
heat, not caring where she was going, furious with herself, the war …
Everything.

Prior took off his clothes, put on the white hospital gown and sat on the bed
to await the arrival of the doctor. This was his second visit. The first time
he’d seen Eaglesham, the consultant, a big, kindly, grizzled bear of a man
who’d said very little but whom he’d trusted at once. He’d raised his
eyebrows when Prior blew into the Vitalograph or whatever the machine
was called, but he hadn’t said what he thought, and Prior had not wanted to
ask. It wasn’t going to be Eaglesham today, though. A much younger man
with a sallow skin and slick dark hair was popping in and out of the other
cubicles. Prior looked down at his thin white legs. He didn’t see why he had
to take all his clothes off. Were they trying to cater for some unforeseen
medical emergency in which his lungs had slipped into his pelvis? He didn’t
like the way the gown fastened at the back. He didn’t mind displaying his
wares, if he liked the other person and the time seemed right, but he did like
the illusion at least that the act was voluntary. He could hear the doctor’s
voice in the cubicle next door, talking to a man who couldn’t complete a
sentence without coughing. At last the curtains were pushed aside and the
doctor came in, followed by a nurse, clasping a beige file to her bosom.
Prior slipped off the robe and stood up to be examined.

‘Second-Lieutenant Prior.’
‘Mister’ he wanted to say. He said, ‘Yes.’
‘I see there’s some question whether you’re fit to go back. I mean apart

from the state of your nerves.’

Prior said nothing at all.
The doctor waited. ‘Well, let’s have a look at you.’

He moved the stethoscope all over Prior’s chest, pressing so hard that at

times the stethoscope left overlapping rings on the skin that flushed and
faded to white. He thinks I’m shirking, Prior thought, and the idea made
him go cold.

‘How are your nerves?’ the doctor said.
‘Better.’
‘Shell explosion, was it?’
‘Not exactly.’
Not one word of what he’d told Rivers would he repeat to this man.
‘Do you think you’re fit?’
‘I’m not a doctor.’
The doctor smiled. Contemptuously, it seemed to Prior. ‘Keen to get

back, are we?’

Prior closed his eyes. He had a picture of himself driving his knee into

the man’s groin, and the picture was so vivid that for a moment he thought
he might have done it, but then he opened his eyes and there was the sallow
face, still smiling. He stared at him.

The doctor nodded, almost as if Prior had replied, and then slowly, to

avoid any suggestion of backing off, turned and made a brief note on the
file. It’s all bluff, Prior thought. It’s what Eaglesham says that matters.

He was in a torment as he got back into his uniform, reckoning his

chances, despising himself for reckoning them. He didn’t thank Rivers for
any of this. I haven’t lied to any of them, he thought. I haven’t made things
out to be worse than they really are. He finished lacing his puttees and stood
up. The nurse came back with a card. ‘If you tell them at the appointments
desk, three weeks.’

‘Yes, all right. Thank you.’
He took the card, but walking down the long corridor afterwards he was

tempted not to make the appointment. In the end he did, then put the card
away and strode out into the hospital grounds as fast as he could. He
thought he might buy himself something from the barrow at the entrance,
fruit or sweets, any little treat that might make him feel better. Less
contaminated.

He saw her before she saw him, and called out, ‘Sarah.’ She turned and

smiled. He’d thought about her a lot while he’d been in the sick bay,
remembering that time on the beach. Illness, once the worst was over,
always made him randy. What he’d forgotten, he thought now, looking at
the yellow face beneath the aureole of extraordinary hair, was how much he
liked her.

‘What are you doing here?’ she asked, obviously delighted.
‘Having my chest examined.’
‘Are you all right?’
‘Fine – thanks to you. What are you doing here?’
‘I’m with Madge. Her fiancé’s been wounded.’
‘Is he all right?’
‘Yes, I think so.’ Her face darkened. ‘I’ve just seen some that aren’t all

right. There’s a sort of conservatory round the back. They’re all sat in there.
Where the rest of us don’t have to see them.’

‘Bad?’
She nodded. ‘You know I used to wonder how I’d go on if Johnny came

back like that. You always tell yourself it’d make no difference. Easy said,
isn’t it?’

He sensed the anger and responded to it immediately. She might not

know much about the war, but what she did know she faced honestly. He
admired her for that. ‘Look, do you have to wait for Madge?’ he asked. ‘I
mean, how long do you think she’ll be?’

‘Ages, I should think. She was virtually in bed with him when I left.’
‘Well, can’t you tell her you’re going? She can walk back by herself all

right, can’t she? It’s broad daylight.’

She looked at him consideringly. ‘Yes, all right.’ She started to move

away. ‘I won’t be a minute.’

Left alone, Prior bought two bunches of chrysanthemums, bronze and

white, from the barrow near the entrance. They weren’t the flowers he
would have chosen, but he wanted to give her something. He stood craning
his head for the first sight of her. When she arrived, smiling and out of
breath, he handed her the flowers, and then, on a sudden impulse, leant

across and kissed her. The flowers, crushed between them, released their
bitter, autumnal smell.

They were burning leaves on Hampstead Heath where Rivers walked with
Ruth Head on the second day of his visit. Acrid smoke drifted across their
path and below them London lay in a blue haze. They stopped by one of the
ponds, and watched a coot cleave the smooth water. ‘You see over there
behind those houses?’ Ruth said. ‘That’s the RFC hospital. And then over
there – just in that dip there – that’s the Big Gun.’

‘I’m glad you and Henry don’t take refuge in the kitchen every night.

Everybody else seems to.’

‘Can you imagine Henry cowering under the kitchen table?’
They smiled at each other and walked on.
‘Actually the air raids are my guilty secret,’ Ruth said.
‘You mean you’d rather be under the table?’
‘Oh no, quite the opposite. I enjoy them. It’s a terrible thing to say, isn’t

it? All that damage. People killed. And yet every time the siren goes, I feel
this immense sense of exhilaration. I’d really like to go out and run about in
it.’ She laughed, self-deprecatingly. ‘I don’t of course. But I get this feeling
that the … the crust of everything is starting to crack. Don’t you feel that?’

‘Yes. I’m just not sure we’re going to like what’s under the crust.’
They started to walk towards Spaniard’s Road. Rivers said, ‘You know

last night I got the distinct impression that Henry was plotting something.’

‘About you? If he is, it’ll be something to your advantage.’
‘You mean you know and you’re not going to tell me?’
Ruth laughed. ‘That’s right.’
By Spaniard’s Road, men in blue hospital uniforms sat in wheelchairs,

waiting for someone to come and push them away. Ruth was silent for a
while after they’d walked past. ‘You know there was something I didn’t say
last night.’ She looked up at him. ‘I think Sassoon’s absolutely right.’

‘Oh dear, I was hoping I might be able to introduce you. But if you’re

going to be a bad moral influence –’

‘Seriously.’

‘All right, seriously. Suppose he is right? Does that mean it’s a good idea

to let him go ahead and destroy himself?’

‘Surely it has to be his choice?’
‘It is his choice.’
Ruth smiled and shook her head.
‘Look,’ Rivers said, ‘I wear the uniform, I take the pay, I do the job. I’m

not going to apologize for that.’

‘I’m not suggesting you should. All the same,’ she said, turning to look at

him, ‘you’re tearing yourself in pieces as well as him.’

They walked in silence for a while. Rivers said, ‘Is that what Henry

thinks?’

Ruth laughed. ‘Of course not. You want perception, you go to a novelist,

not a psychiatrist.’

‘I’m sure you’re right.’
‘No, you’re not. You don’t believe a word of it.’
‘At any rate, I’m too cowed to disagree.’
That evening, left alone with Henry after dinner, Rivers watched him

massage the triangle of skin between the thumb and forefinger of his left
hand. ‘Does that still bother you?’

‘A bit. Cold weather. Do you know, I don’t think I’d have the courage to

do that now.’

‘No, I look back sometimes, and … I’m amazed. What are you doing

these days?’

‘Gross injuries to the spinal cord. We’ve got a lot of interesting material.’

Head’s mouth twisted. ‘As we call the poor sods.’

Rivers shook his head. He’d seen Head too often on the wards to believe

him capable of that particular kind of research-orientated callousness.

‘It’s an interesting atmosphere,’ Head said. ‘Dealing with physical

trauma and war neurosis in the same hospital. You’d like it.’

‘I’m sure I would.’ A trace of bitterness. ‘I’d like London.’
‘There’s a job going if you want it.’
‘You mean there’s a vacancy?’

‘No, I mean there’s a job for you if you want it. I’ve been asked to sound

you out. Psychologist with the Royal Flying Corps. At the Central Hospital,
Hampstead.’

‘Ah. I wondered why Ruth was so keen on the Heath.’
‘I imagine you’d find it interesting? Apparently there are some quite

striking differences between the rate of breakdown in pilots and in other
branches of the service.’

‘It sounds marvellous.’ He raised his hands and let them drop. ‘I just

don’t see how I can.’

‘Why not? You’d be closer to your family, your friends, your research

contacts, you’d be able to get back to Cambridge at weekends. And … I
don’t suppose it matters, but we’d be able to work together again.’

Rivers buried his face in his hands. ‘O-o-o-oh. “Get thee behind me,

Satan.” ’

‘I am behind you. I was thinking of giving you a shove.’
‘I couldn’t leave Bryce.’
Head looked incredulous. ‘You mean, your CO?’
‘He’s in a difficult situation. We’re in for a general inspection, and … it

all goes back a long way. Bryce is determined this time he’s not going to
play their game. He’s not going to parade the patients, or polish the bottoms
of the frying-pans, or pretend to be anything other than just an extremely
busy, overcrowded and I think bloody good hospital.’

‘What do they want?’
‘They want a barracks. It’s got all the makings of a really nasty

confrontation. I think Bryce may have to go.’

‘Well, I hate to sound harsh, but wouldn’t that rather solve the problem?

Your problem, I mean.’

‘If it happened. Meanwhile, I think I can be … of some use to him.’
‘When is this inspection?’
‘End of the month.’
‘We’d need to know about the job … Well. Three weeks?’
‘I’ll think about it.’

‘Good. And don’t be too altruistic, will you? You’re isolated up there, it’s

not good for you.’

‘I don’t know about isolated. I never have a minute to myself.’
‘Precisely. Come on, let’s find Ruth.’

FIFTEEN

Aldeburgh was the end of the line, but. the train, as if reluctant to accept
this, produced, as Rivers stepped down on to the platform, an amazing burst
of steam. He stood, looking up and down, as the train’s hissing subsided
into grunts, and the steam cleared. Burns had promised to meet him, but his
memory wasn’t good, and, faced with the empty platform, Rivers was glad
he had the address. But then, just as Rivers was resigning himself to finding
the house on his own, Burns appeared, a tall, emaciated figure wearing a
coat of stiff herringbone tweed that reached almost to the ground. He’d
obviously been running, and was out of breath. ‘Hello,’ he said. Rivers tried
to judge whether Burns looked better or worse. It was hard to tell. His face
in the light of the naphtha flares was as expressionless as beaten bronze.

‘How are you?’ they asked simultaneously, and then laughed.
Rivers decided he should be the one to answer. ‘A lot better, thanks.’
‘Good,’ Burns said. ‘It’s walking distance,’ he added across his shoulder,

already striding off. ‘We don’t need a taxi.’

They came out of the station and began walking downhill, through the

quiet cold fringes of the town, past the church, through streets of huddled
houses, and out on to the front.

The sea was calm, almost inaudible, a toothless mouth mumbling pebbles

in the darkness. Instead of walking along the path, Burns struck out across
the shingle and Rivers followed, to where the tide had laid bare a thin strip
of sand. The crunch and slither of shingle under their feet blotted out all
other sounds. Rivers turned, and saw the bones of Burns’s face gleaming in
the moonlight. He wondered what he made of the tangles of barbed wire
that ran along the beach, with only two narrow channels left for fishing

boats and for the lifeboat to come and go. But Burns seemed not to see the
wire.

They stood together at the water’s edge, two black shadows on the pale

shingle, and small waves creamed over at their feet. Then the moon came
out from behind a bank of dark cloud, and the fishermen’s huts, the boats
lined up in two short rows behind the wire, and the heaped nets, cast
shadows behind them almost as sharply edged as day.

They returned to the path and began walking along the terrace of houses,

which here and there had gaps. Many of the houses were shuttered and had
sandbags piled against the front doors. ‘The sea’s been known to pay visits,’
Burns said, following the direction of Rivers’s gaze. ‘I was here once when
it flooded.’ Evidently sandbags brought back no other memories.

‘This is it,’ he said a few minutes later, stopping in front of a tall but

extremely narrow house. At this end of the foreshore the sea was much
closer, turning and turning in the darkness. Rivers looked out and caught a
glint of white. ‘What’s along there?’

‘The marshes. More shingle. I’ll show you tomorrow.’
They groped their way into the hall, closing the door carefully behind

them before Burns switched on the light. His face, deeply shadowed from
the unshaded bulb, peered anxiously at Rivers. ‘I expect you’d like to go
upstairs,’ he said. ‘I think I’ve given you a towel …’ He looked like a child
trying to remember what it was that grown-ups said to newly arrived guests.
He also looked, for the first time, deranged.

Rivers followed him up the narrow stairs and into a small bedroom.

Burns pointed out the bathroom and then went downstairs. Rivers put his
bag down, bounced on the bed to test the mattress, and looked round. The
walls were covered with paper of an indeterminate and confusing pattern,
the background colour faded to the yellow of an old bruise. Everything
smelled of the sea, as if the furniture had soaked it in. It reminded him of
childhood holidays in Brighton. He splashed his face in the bowl, then,
turning off the light, opened the shutters. His room overlooked the sea. The
wind was rising, and with each gust the coils of wire twitched as if they
were alive.

No sign of Burns’s parents. Rivers had mistakenly assumed he was being

invited to meet them, since a large part of Burns’s letter had dealt with their
anxieties about his future. But apparently not. This was probably their
room. The house was so narrow there couldn’t be more than one, or at the
most, two small rooms on each floor.

The evening passed pleasantly enough. No mention of Burns’s illness, no
mention of the war. These were evidently taboo topics, but they talked
about a great range of other things. Whatever else the war had done to
Burns, it had certainly deepened his love for his native county. Suffolk
flowers, birds, churches, he was knowledgeable about them all. More
recently, he’d become interested in the preservation of country crafts. ‘Old
Clegg’, who was apparently something of a local character, had promised to
teach him flint-knapping, and he seemed to be looking forward to that.
Even before the war he’d been very much a countryman in his interests,
rather like Siegfried in a way, though without Siegfried’s passion for
hunting.

When the conversation turned to other matters, Burns was very much the

bright sixth former, idealistic, intolerant, naïve, inclined to offer sweeping
generalizations as fact, attractive in the freshness of his vision as such boys
often are. Rivers thought how misleading it was to say that the war had
‘matured’ these young men. It wasn’t true of his patients, and it certainly
wasn’t true of Burns, in whom a prematurely aged man and a fossilized
schoolboy seemed to exist side by side. It did give him a curiously ageless
quality, but ‘maturity’ was hardly the word. Still, he was better than he’d
been at Craiglockhart, so perhaps his conviction that if he could only get
back to Suffolk and forget the war he would be all right had been proved
correct. But then why am I here? Rivers thought. Despite Burns’s reluctance
to mention his illness, Rivers didn’t believe he’d been invited to Suffolk to
talk about church architecture. But it would be quite wrong to force the
pace. Whatever was bothering him, he would raise the matter in his own
time.

Rivers woke the following morning to find the beach shrouded in mist. He
leant on the window sill, and watched the fishing boats return. The pebbles
on the beach were wet, though not from rain or tide. The mist clung to them
like sweat, and the air tasted of iron. Everything was so quiet. When a gull
flew in from the sea and passed immediately overhead, he heard the creak
of its wings.

Burns was already up, in the kitchen by the sound of things, but not,

Rivers thought, preparing breakfast. Nothing in the way of dinner or supper
had appeared the night before, and Rivers had hesitated, on his first
evening, to go into the kitchen and forage for food, though he suspected that
might be the only way of getting any.

He washed, dressed, shaved, and went downstairs. By this time the mist

on the beach had begun to thin, but it was cold for the time of year, and the
sight of a fire in the first floor living room was welcome. He went down a
further flight of stairs into the kitchen and found Burns at the kitchen table
with a pot of tea.

‘There’s some cereal,’ he said, pointing.
He sounded shy again, though last night he’d begun to talk quite freely

by the end of the evening, just as Rivers, caught between the roar of the fire
and the roar of the sea, had started nodding off to sleep. ‘I’m sorry I had to
go to bed so early,’ Rivers said, reaching for the cereal packet.

‘ ’S all right.’ Visibly, he remembered what it was he was supposed to

ask next. ‘Did you have a good night?’

‘Fine.’ Rivers bit the reciprocal question back. He’d heard part of Burns’s

night. Obviously, however hard Burns tried to thrust memories of the war
behind him, the nightmare followed.

The doorbell rang, and Burns got up to answer it. ‘This is Mrs Burril’s

day for sorting me out,’ he said.

Mrs Burril was a remarkably silent person, but she managed, without

words, to make it clear their presence was superfluous.

Burns said, ‘I thought we might go for a walk.’
The mist had thinned but not cleared. It moved in slow, cold currents

over the marshes, where drainage ditches and sump holes reflected a steely

light at the sky. Reeds whispered, with a noise like the palms of hands being
rubbed together. It was difficult to breathe, difficult even to move, and they
spoke in low voices when they spoke at all.

They walked along a narrow raised path that divided the marshes from

the river. Small yachts rode at anchor, the breeze just strong enough to make
their rigging rattle, not a loud sound, but persistent and rather disturbing,
like an irregular heart beat. Nothing else here could disturb. The estuary lay
flat and peaceful under a shrunken, silver sun, and nothing moved, except
the reeds, until a flight of ducks whistled past.

Rivers had begun to realize how remarkable the area was. A strip of land,

at times no more than a hundred yards wide, divided the estuary from the
North Sea. Walking out along this strip, away from the town, into the
bleached shingle distances, you became aware of two separate sounds: the
roar and suck of waves on shingle, and the lulling sound of the river among
its reeds. If you moved to the left, the crunch and chop of boots on shingle
cut out the gentler river sounds. If to the right, the tapping of rigging and
the lapping of water dominated, though you could still hear that the sea was
there.

They turned and looked back at the huddled town. ‘You know, I love this

place,’ Burns said. ‘I wouldn’t like you to think I’d left London just because
of the raids. Actually it wasn’t the raids, it was the regular meal-times. You
know, everybody sitting down to eat. Waiting for food to be put in front of
them. And father going on about the war. He’s a great believer in the war,
my father.’

‘Will they be coming to Suffolk at all?’
‘No, I shouldn’t think so. They’re both very busy in London.’ They

turned and walked on. ‘It’s best we don’t see too much of each other at the
moment. I am not a sight for sore eyes.’

A squat, circular building had begun to loom up out of the mist. It looked

rather like a Martello tower, Rivers thought, but he hadn’t known they’d
been built as far north as this.

‘This is the most northerly,’ Burns said, slithering down the slope on to

the beach. Rivers followed him across the shingle and down into the dank

high moat that surrounded the tower. In its shadow, all water sounds,
whether hissing waves or lapping water, abruptly ceased. Ferns grew from
the high walls of the moat; and the tower, where the lookout turret had
crumbled away, was thronged with bindweed, but the overall impression
was of a dead place.

The sea must flood the moat at high tide, for all kinds of debris had been

washed up and left. Driftwood, the torn-off wing of a gull, bits of blue and
green glass. A child would have loved it, picking over these pieces.

‘We used to play here,’ Burns said. ‘Daring each other, you know. Who

could go all the way up?’

There was a door, but it had planks nailed across it. Rivers peered

through a crack and saw stone steps going down.

‘Strictly forbidden. They were always afraid we’d get trapped in the

cellars.’

‘I suppose they flood, don’t they? At high tide?’
‘Yes. There’s all kinds of stories told about it. People chained up and left

to drown. I think we rather liked that. We used to sit down there and pretend
we could see ghosts.’

‘It feels like a place where people have died. I mean, violent deaths.’
‘You feel that, do you? Yes. I expect that’s why we liked it. Bloodthirsty

little horrors, boys.’

Rivers wasn’t sorry when they climbed the bank of shingle and stood on

the beach in the strengthening sunlight again.

‘Do you feel up to a longish walk?’ Burns asked.
‘Yes.’
‘All right. We can follow that path.’
They walked four or five miles inland, and came out into a wood where

great golden tongues of fungus lapped the trees, and a mulch of dead leaves
squelched underfoot. Rather to Rivers’s surprise they stopped at a pub on
the way back, though no food was available. Burns could drink apparently,
and did, becoming in the process quite flushed and talkative, though
nothing was said about his illness.

They arrived back in the late afternoon with every bone and muscle

aching. Mrs Burril had obviously built up the fire before she left, and it was
rescuable, just about. Rivers knelt in front of it, sticking strips of cereal
packet through the bars, and blowing when he got a flame. ‘Have you any
newspapers?’

‘No,’ Burns said.
No, Rivers thought, silly question. Once the fire was burning well, Rivers

went out and bought cakes and biscuits for tea, which he served in front of
the fire, tucking in himself and not looking to see whether Burns ate or not.
He ate, sitting on the hearth rug, his wind-reddened arms clasped about his
knees, and the firelight playing on his face.

After the plates were cleared away, Rivers asked if he might work for a

couple of hours. He was writing a paper on the Repression of War
Experience which he was due to give to the British Medical Association in
December, and he knew, once he got back to Craiglockhart, there would be
very little time. He worked at the table in the window, with his back to the
room. He began by reading through what he’d written so far on the evil
effects that followed from patients trying to suppress their memories of war
experience, and was about to start writing when it occurred to him he was in
the same room as a man who was doing just that.

Why do I go along with it? he thought. One answer, the easy answer, was

that he was no longer Burns’s doctor. It was up to Burns now how he chose
to manage his illness. But then he’d gone along with the suppression in
Craiglockhart too. Whenever he’d tried to apply to Burns the same methods
of treatment he used with everybody else, and used, for the most part,
successfully, his nerve had failed him. He’d told himself this was because
of the peculiar nature of Burns’s experience, the utter lack of any redeeming
feature the mind could grasp and hold on to while it steadied itself to face
the full horror. But was Burns’s experience really worse than that of others?
Worse than Jenkins’s, crawling between the dismembered pieces of his
friend’s body to collect personal belongings to send back to the family?
Worse than Prior’s? What shall I do with this gob-stopper?

Corpses were everywhere in the trenches. Used to strengthen parapets, to

prop up sagging doorways, to fill in gaps in the duckboards. Many of his
patients treading on a dead body had been startled by the release of gas.
Surely what had happened to Burns was merely an unusually disgusting
version of a common experience. And I’ve let him, Rivers thought – no,
that was unfair, that was completely unfair – I’ve let myself turn it into …
some kind of myth. And that was unforgivable. He wasn’t dealing with
Jonah in the belly of the whale, still less with Christ in the belly of the
earth, he was dealing with David Burns, who’d got his head stuck in the
belly of a dead German soldier, and somehow had to be helped to live with
the memory.

He turned and looked at Burns, who was still sitting on the hearth rug,

though now he’d found himself a book and was reading, his tongue
protruding slightly between his teeth. As he felt Rivers’s gaze, he looked up
and smiled. Twenty-two. He should be worrying about the Tripos and
screwing up his courage to ask a girl to the May ball. And yet even now
Rivers was nervous of raising the subject of his illness. Burns’s instinctive
reaction had been to get back to this house, to forget. And there had been
some improvement under this regime, by day at least, though evidently not
by night. If he wants to talk, he’ll talk, Rivers thought, and turned back to
his paper.

That evening, rather to Rivers’s surprise, they went to the pub. He was

surprised because he’d been assuming Burns was isolated here, but
apparently all the locals knew him. They’d watched him growing up,
summer by summer. The family had been staying here when war broke out.
Burns had joined up along with most of the local lads. They all remembered
him in his uniform, in the first days and weeks of the war, and perhaps that
mattered a great deal. In London, Burns said, on his first trip out in civilian
clothes, he’d been handed two white feathers.

Here, as soon as they pushed the bar door open, he was hailed by several

people, and by one man in particular: ‘Old Clegg’. Clegg had rheumy blue
eyes, whose overflow had dried to a scurfy crust at his temples; three brown
but very strong teeth; unidentifiable stains on his abdomen, and other stains,

only too identifiable, further down. His conversation was so encrusted with
salty Suffolk sayings that Rivers suspected him of deliberate self-parody.
That, or leg-pulling. Once he’d discovered Rivers was interested in folklore,
he was well away. Rivers spent a thoroughly enjoyable evening being
initiated into the folklore of rural Suffolk. By closing time, he was
convinced Clegg was possibly the most unreliable informant he’d ever had.
For sheer imaginative flights of fancy none of the Melanesians came
anywhere near him. ‘That man is a complete fraud,’ he said as they left the
pub.

But Burns disagreed. ‘He’s not a fraud, he’s a rogue. Anyway as long as

he teaches me flint-knapping, I don’t care.’

Next morning the weather had changed. At dawn there was a strip of clear
blue on the horizon, fading to yellow, but the sky darkened rapidly, until, by
mid morning, the clouds humped, liver-coloured, and the sea was dark as
iron. The wind had risen during the night, sweeping away the last remnants
of mist. At first it came in little gusts, lifting the thin carpet in the hall,
swirling dust in corners, then in blasts that made waves on the surface of the
estuary, rocking the yachts until the rattle of their rigging became a frenzy,
while on the beach great waves swelled like the muscles of an enormous
animal, rising to crests that hung and seethed along their full length, before
toppling over in thunder and bursts of spray.

Rivers worked on his paper all morning, looking up now and then to find

the window mizzled with rain. Burns slept late, having had another bad and
very noisy night. He appeared just before noon, pink eyed and twitching,
and announced he was going to the White Horse to see Clegg and arrange a
definite time for his flint-knapping session. Clegg was proving rather
difficult to pin down.

‘Git him up agin’ a gorse bush, bor,’ Rivers said, in a passable imitation

of Clegg’s voice. ‘He ont back away then.’

‘That’s girls in kissing season, Rivers.’
‘Is it? Well, I shouldn’t go kissing Clegg. I doubt if flint-knapping’s

worth it.’

He was immersed in his paper again before Burns left the house.
He came back an hour later, looking rather pleased with himself.

‘Thursday.’

‘Good.’
‘I thought we might go for a walk.’
Rivers looked at the rain-spattered glass.
‘It’s died down a bit,’ Burns said, not altogether convincingly.
‘All right, I could do with a break.’
The sea was racing in fast. The fishermen’s huts were empty, the boats

hauled up high above the last stretch of shingle, with the fishing nets in dark
heaps behind them. Either they’d not been out today or they’d turned back
early, for Rivers had seen none of them come in. Even the seabirds seemed
to be grounded, huddled in the lee of the boats, watching the town with
unblinking amber eyes.

Faced with this sea, the land seemed fragile. Was fragile. To the north,

cliffs were scoured away, to the south, notice boards were buried up to their
necks in shingle. And the little Moot Hall that had once stood at the centre
of the town was now on the edge of the sea.

They walked as far as Thorpeness, then turned back, not talking much,

since the wind snatched the breath from their mouths. The sea had covered
the thin strip of sand, so they had to walk along the steep shelf of shingle, a
lopsided business that set the back as well as the legs aching.

It took them two hours, there and back, and Rivers was looking forward

to the fire and – if he could contrive it – toasted tea cakes for tea. Breakfast,
lunch and dinner, he could do without, but afternoon tea mattered. His boot
squelched on something soft. Looking down, he saw the place was littered
with cods’ heads, thirty or more, with blood-stained gills and staring eyes. It
gave him no more than a slight frisson. Obviously the fishermen gutted
their catch and threw the offal away. But Burns had stopped dead in his
tracks and was staring at the heads, with his mouth working. As Rivers
watched, he jerked his head back, the same movement that had been so
common when he first arrived at Craiglockhart.

‘It’s all right,’ he said, when Rivers went back for him. But it was

obviously very far from all right.

They got back to the house. Rivers made tea, though Burns didn’t

manage to eat anything.

After tea they went out and piled sandbags against the doors, struggling

with the heavy bags through driving rain and then struggling again to close
the storm shutters. The air was full of spray and blown spume.

‘We should’ve done that earlier,’ Burns said, wiping the rain from his

face and blinking in the firelight. He was very concerned to pretend
everything was normal. He sat on the hearth rug, in his favourite position,
while the wind buffeted and slogged the house, and talked about his drink
with Clegg and various items of local gossip. But he jumped from topic to
topic, assuming the connections would be obvious when very often they
were not. His mood, once he’d got over the shock of seeing the cods’ heads,
seemed to be almost elated. He said more than once that he loved storms,
and he seemed, at times, to be listening to something other than the roar of
wind and sea.

Closing his eyes, Rivers could imagine the town entirely given over to

the storm, bobbing on the tide of darkness like a blown eggshell, without
substance or power to protect. Burns’s conversation became more and more
disconnected, the jerking of his head more pronounced. Piling up sandbags,
followed by the nearest thing to a bombardment nature could contrive, was
not what Rivers would have prescribed. He was prepared to sit up with
Burns, if he wanted to stay up, but Burns started talking about bed rather
earlier than usual. Probably he took bromides. Rivers would have liked to
advise him to stop, since they certainly wouldn’t help the nightmares, but he
was determined to let Burns be the first to raise the subject of his illness.

The evening ended with nothing to the point having been said. Rivers

went to bed and undressed in the darkness, listening to the wind howl, and
imagined Burns in the room above, also listening. He read for a while,
thinking he might be too tense to go to sleep, but the fresh air and the
struggle with the wind along the beach to Thorpeness had tired him out. His
eyelids started to droop and he switched off the light. The whole house

creaked and groaned, riding the storm like a ship, but he enjoyed that. He’d
always found it possible to sleep deeply on board ship, though on land sleep
often eluded him.

He was woken by what he immediately took to be the explosion of a bomb.
Less than a minute later, while he was still groping for the light switch, he
heard a second boom and this time managed to identify it as the sound of a
maroon. The lifeboat, no doubt. He was getting out of bed to go to the
window when he remembered that he probably ought not to open the
shutters, for he could hear from the whistling of wind and lashing of rain
that the storm had by no means blown itself out. His heart was pounding,
unreasonably, since there was nothing to be afraid of. He supposed it was
having come straight from London with its incessant talk of air raids that
had made him identify the sound so positively as a bomb.

He lay back and a moment or two later heard footsteps padding past the

door of his room. Obviously Burns too had been woken up. Probably he
was going downstairs to make himself a cup of tea, perhaps even to sit up
the rest of the night.

The more Rivers thought about Burns sitting alone in the kitchen, the

more he thought he ought to get up. The sounds of the storm had now been
joined by running footsteps. He wouldn’t find it easy to sleep again anyway.

The kitchen was empty, and didn’t seem to have been disturbed since last

night. He told himself that he’d been mistaken, and Burns was still in bed.
By now rather anxious, perhaps unreasonably so, he went upstairs and
peered into Burns’s room. The bedclothes had been pushed back, and the
bed was empty.

He had no idea what he should do. For all he knew midnight walks – or

rather three am walks – were a habit of Burns’s when the nights were
particularly bad. Surely he wouldn’t go out in this. Rivers heard shouts,
followed by more running footsteps. Obviously other people were out in it.
Quickly, he returned to his own room, pulled on socks, boots and coat, and
went out into the storm.

A small group of figures had gathered round the lifeboat, three of them

holding storm lanterns. The overlapping circles of light shone on yellow
oilskins glistening with wet, as the men struggled to clear the shingle from
the planks that were used to launch the boat. Silver rain slanted down into
the lighted area, while beyond, pale banks of shingle faded into the
darkness.

A knot of bystanders had gathered by the hut, separate from the labouring

figures around the boat. Convinced that Burns must be among them, Rivers
ran across to join them, but when he looked from face to face Burns was not
there. A woman he thought to be familiar, but couldn’t immediately
identify, pointed to the marshes south of the town.

As he turned and began walking quickly towards the marshes, he was

dimly aware of the boat hitting the sea, and of the waves surging up around
her. He left the shelter of the last houses, and the wind, roaring across the
marshes, almost knocked him off his feet. He dropped down from the path
and walked along beside the river where he was slightly sheltered, though
the wind still howled and the yacht rigging thrummed, a sound like no other
he had ever heard. He could see fairly clearly most of the time. Once, the
moon freed itself from the tatters of black cloud, and then his own shadow
and the shadow of the tower were thrown across the gleaming mud.

Looking at the tower, Rivers thought again how squat and unimpressive

it was, and yet how menacing. A resemblance that had merely nagged at
him before returned to his mind with greater force. This waste of mud, these
sump holes reflecting a dim light at the sky, even that tower. It was like
France. Like the battlefields. A resemblance greater by night than by day,
perhaps, because here, by day, you could see things grow, and there nothing
grew.

– They were always afraid we’d get trapped in the cellars.
– I suppose they flood, don’t they? At high tide?
Rivers climbed on to the path, trying to work out where the tide was and

whether it was rising or falling, but he could hear only the crash of breaking
waves and feel the drizzle of blown spume on his face. In spite of his mud-
clogged boots and aching thighs, he started to run. As he neared the tower, a

stronger blast of wind sent him staggering off the path. He was slithering
and floundering through mud, calling Burns’s name, though the sound was
snatched from his mouth and carried off into the whistling darkness.

He slid down on to the beach. An outgoing wave sucked shingle after it,

but the entrance to the moat was clear. He hesitated, peering into the
darkness, afraid that an unusually powerful wave might trap him in there.
He called ‘David’, but he knew he couldn’t be heard and would have to go
down, into the black darkness, if he were ever to find him.

He groped his way into the moat, steadying himself against the wall. It

was so wet, so cold, so evil-smelling, that he thought perhaps the tide had
already reached its height and was now falling. At first he could see
nothing, but then the moon came out from behind a bank of cloud, and he
saw Burns huddled against the moat wall. Rivers called ‘David’ and
realized he was shouting when there was no need. Even the howl of the
storm sounded subdued in the shelter of the moat. He touched Burns’s arm.
He neither moved nor blinked. He was staring up at the tower, which
gleamed white, like the bones of a skull.

‘Come on, David.’
His body felt like a stone. Rivers got hold of him and held him, coaxing,

rocking. He looked up at the tower that loomed squat and menacing above
them, and thought, Nothing justifies this. Nothing nothing nothing. Burns’s
body remained rigid in his arms. Rivers was aware that if it came to a fight
he might not win. Burns was terribly emaciated, but he was also thirty years
younger. His surrender, when it came, was almost shocking. Suddenly his
body had the rag-doll floppiness of the newborn. He collapsed against
Rivers and started to shake, and from there it was possible to half lead, half
push him out of the moat and up on to the relative safety of the path.

At the kitchen table, wrapped in a blanket, Burns said, ‘I couldn’t seem to
get out of the dream. I woke up, I knew I was awake, I could move and yet
… it was still there. My face was dripping. I could taste it.’ He tried to
laugh. ‘And then the bloody maroon went off.’

There were no electric lights. The power lines must be down. They were

talking by the light of an oil lamp that smoked and smelled, and left wisps
of black smoke like question marks on the air.

‘I think we can do without this now,’ Rivers said, walking across to the

window and pulling the curtains back. He opened the windows and shutters.
The storm had almost blown itself out. A weak light seeped into the room,
falling on Burns’s red eyes and exhausted face.

‘Why don’t you go to bed? I’ll bring you a hot-water bottle if you’ve got

such a thing.’

Rivers saw him settled into bed. Then he went out to the butchers in the

High Street, which he’d already noticed was surprisingly well stocked,
bought bacon, sausages, kidneys, eggs, took them home and fried them. As
he was spooning hot fat over the eggs, he remembered his reaction when he
was looking up at the tower. Nothing can justify this, he’d thought. Nothing
nothing nothing. He was rather glad not to be faced with the task of
explaining that statement to Siegfried.

He sat down at the table and began to eat. He was still chasing the last

dribble of egg yolk with a triangle of toast when Mrs Burril came in. She
looked at the plates. ‘Cracked, did you?’ Two unpacked bags later she
added, ‘Thought you might.’

‘Is the boat back?’
‘Not yet. I keep busy.’
Rivers went upstairs to check on Burns and found him still asleep. The

room was full of books, stacked up on tables and chairs, spilling over on to
the floor. Church architecture, country crafts, ornithology, botany and – a
slight surprise – theology. He wondered whether this was an expression of
faith, or a quest for faith, or simply an obsession with the absence of God.

One of the reasons the books had to be stacked on tables and chairs was

that the bookcase was already full of other books: boys’ annuals, the
adventure stories of Henty, Scouting for Boys. Games too: Ludo and Snakes
and Ladders, a bat for beach cricket, collections of pebbles and shells, a
strip of bladderwrack. All these things must have been brought here, or
collected here, summer by summer, and then outgrown, but never thrown

away, so that the room had become a sort of palimpsest of the young life it
contained. He looked at Burns’s sleeping face, and then tiptoed downstairs.

The lifeboat came back later that morning. Rivers looked out of the living
room window and saw it beached at the water’s edge, in that narrow space
between the coils of tangled and rusting wire. He went out to watch.

The men were laying down the flat wooden skids over which the boat

would be winched slowly back into place. A small group of villagers,
mainly relatives of the crew, had gathered and were talking in low voices.
The sea was choppy, but with none of the menace of the previous night. A
light drizzle had begun to fall, matting the surface hairs on the men’s
jerseys and woollen caps.

When he got back, he found Burns stirring, though not yet up.
‘Are they back?’ he asked.
‘Yes, they’re hauling her up now.’
Burns got out of bed and came across to the window. The drizzle had

become a downpour. The lifeboat, now halfway up the beach, was obscured
by sheets of smoking rain.

‘Be a load off Mrs Burril’s mind. She’s got two sons in the crew.’
‘Yes. She said.’
‘You mean she spoke?’
‘We had quite a chat. I didn’t know the lifeboat was such a family

matter.’

‘Oh, yes. You see it on the memorial in the church. Not a good idea,

really. From the woman’s point of view.’ A long pause. Then Burns added,
‘You get the same thing in a battalion. Brothers joining up together.’

Rivers went very still. This was the first time Burns had volunteered any

information at all about France. Even in Craiglockhart, where he couldn’t
altogether avoid talking about it, the bare facts of his war service had had to
be prised out of him.

‘You know, you’ll be writing letters and suddenly you realize you’ve

written the same name twice.’

Rivers said carefully, ‘That must be one of the worst jobs.’

‘You get used to it. I did it for eighty per cent of the company once.’
A long silence. Rivers was beginning to think he’d dried up, but then he

said, ‘That was the day before the Somme. They got out there, and there
was this bloody great dyke in the way. You couldn’t see it from the trench
because there were bramble bushes round it. And it wasn’t on the map.
Everybody bunched up, trying to get across it. German machine-gunners
had a field day. And the few who did manage to get across were cut to
pieces on the wire. General came round the following day. He said, “My
God, did we really order men to attack across that?” Apparently we were
intended to be a diversion from the main action. Further south.’

Slowly, Burns began to talk. He’d been promoted captain at the age of

twenty-one, and this promotion coincided with the run-up to the Somme
campaign. In addition to all the other strains, he’d been aware of a
widespread, though unvoiced, opinion in the company that he was too
young for the command, though in length of service he had been senior.

The story was one Rivers was well used to hearing: healthy fear had

given way to indifference, and this in turn had given way to a constant,
overwhelming fear, and the increasing realization that breakdown was
imminent. ‘I used to go out on patrol every night,’ Burns said. ‘You tell
yourself you’re setting a good example, or some such rubbish, but actually
it’s nothing of the kind. You can’t let yourself know you want to be
wounded, because officers aren’t supposed to think like that. And, you see,
next to a battle, a patrol is the best chance of getting a good wound. In the
trenches, it’s shrapnel or head injuries. On patrol, if you’re lucky, it’s a nice
neat little hole in the arm or leg. I’ve seen men cry with a wound like that.’
He laughed. ‘Cry for joy. Anyway, it wasn’t my luck. Bullets went round
me, I swear they did.’ A pause. ‘It was going to happen anyway, wasn’t it?’

‘The breakdown? Oh yes. You mustn’t attribute breaking down to that

one incident.’

‘I went on for three days afterwards.’
‘Yes, I know.’
They talked for over an hour. Near the end, after they’d been sitting in

silence for a while, Burns said quietly, ‘Do you know what Christ died of?’

Rivers looked surprised, but answered readily enough. ‘Suffocation.

Ultimately the position makes it impossible to go on inflating the lungs. A
terrible death.’

‘That’s what I find so horrifying. Somebody had to imagine that death. I

mean, just in order to invent it as a method of execution. You know that
thing in the Bible? “The imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth”?
I used to wonder why pick on that? Why his imagination? But it’s
absolutely right.’

Rivers, going downstairs to make the tea, thought that a curious thing had

happened during that conversation. For the first time, Burns had been able
to put the decomposing corpse into some kind of perspective. True, he
hadn’t managed to talk about it, but at least it hadn’t prevented him, as it so
often had in the past, from talking about other, more bearable aspects of his
war experience. Yet, at the same time, Rivers’s own sense of the horror of
the event seemed actually to have increased. It was different in kind from
other such experiences, he thought, if only because of the complete
disintegration of personality it had produced. He was very fond of Burns,
but he could discern in him no trace of the qualities he must have possessed
in order to be given that exceptionally early command. Not that one could
despair of recovery. Rivers knew only too well how often the early stages of
change or cure may mimic deterioration. Cut a chrysalis open, and you will
find a rotting caterpillar. What you will never find is that mythical creature,
half caterpillar, half butterfly, a fit emblem of the human soul, for those
whose cast of mind leads them to seek such emblems. No, the process of
transformation consists almost entirely of decay. Burns was young, after all.
If today really marked a change, a willingness to face his experiences in
France, then his condition might improve. In a few years’ time it might
even be possible to think of him resuming his education, perhaps pursuing
that unexpected interest in theology. Though it was difficult to see him as an
undergraduate. He had missed his chance of being ordinary.

SIXTEEN

Rivers arrived back at Craiglockhart in the late afternoon of yet another
stormy day. This autumn seemed to have a store of such days, slapping
them down remorselessly, one after the other, like a fortuneteller with a
deadly pack of cards. The trees had already shed their leaves. They blew
across the tennis courts and, when Rivers pushed open the swing doors,
accompanied him into the hall.

Where a football match seemed to be in progress. A knot of struggling

backs and thighs gradually unravelled, as they became aware of him
standing there. On the black and white tiled floor lay a mud-brown, pork-
pie hat, evidently belonging to a visitor. Rivers looked round the group and
found Sassoon. ‘Careful with that hat, Sassoon,’ he said, and passed
through on his way to his office.

Behind him, a much subdued Sassoon picked up the hat, punched it into

some semblance of its former shape, and restored it to the peg. The other
footballers slunk away.

Bryce was standing at the window of his room, looking out over the leaf-
littered tennis courts. Pausing in the doorway, Rivers thought he looked
older, but then he turned, and seemed as full of energy as ever.

‘Did you get my letter?’ Rivers asked.
‘I did.’
‘I’ve said I’ll wait and see how things turn out.’
‘Take it, for God’s sake. It’s quite obvious how things are going to turn

out. I don’t expect to be here next month.’ He smiled. ‘Of course they might
appoint you.’

Rivers shook his head. ‘No, they won’t do that. I’m too identified with

you.’

‘Will you take it?’
‘I don’t know. Probably.’
More than probably, Rivers thought, returning to his own room. The

thought of Craiglockhart without Bryce was intolerable. He sat behind his
desk, and looked round the large, overfamiliar room. Whenever he’d come
back before, he’d had an almost physical sense of the yoke settling on to his
shoulders, beginning to chafe almost before he was into the building. Not
this time. He looked at his crowded appointments book and actually
managed to feel some affection for it. The offer of a job in London, with its
prospect of more frequent contact with other anthropologists, had had the
paradoxical effect of making him realize how much he enjoyed his work
here. It had become of equal importance to him, and he’d begun to think of
ways in which the two interests could combine. The condensation and
displacement one encountered in the dreams of patients here – might not
these mechanisms also be at work in the myth and ritual of primitive
people? At any rate it was an idea worth exploring. But these new
combinations only occurred because he no longer thought of his work here
as an interruption of his ‘real’ work. Far from it, he thought, spreading his
hands across his desk. The work he did in this room was the work he was
meant to do, and, as always, this recognition brought peace.

‘… we actually drove past your place.’

‘You should’ve called in,’ Sassoon said. ‘Mother wouldn’t’ve stood on

ceremony where you were concerned. She regards you as the Saviour of the
Family Name. From the Disgrace of Pacifism.’

‘Prematurely, perhaps?’
No answer.
‘Have you been able to think … ?’
‘I haven’t been able to think at all. Look, Rivers, I’ve never asked you for

anything. I’ve never asked or expected to be treated any differently from
anybody else.’

‘I should hope not,’ Rivers said. ‘I don’t know what the grounds would

be.’

Sassoon came to an abrupt halt. ‘All right.’
‘No, what were you going to say?’
‘I was going to point out that the man in my room is driving me stark,

staring mad, but it doesn’t matter.’

‘That could be grounds for a room change. If true. For you as for

anybody else. What does he do? Does he sleep badly?’

‘Snores like a newborn baby, if newborn babies snore.’
‘So what does he do?’
‘Preaches the consolations of Theosophy in his own inimitable brand of

pseudo-medieval English.’

‘I can see that might be irritating. Give me an example.’
‘Friend of mine, Ralph Greaves. He’s … Is! Was a good pianist. He’s just

had one arm amputated, and the other’s almost useless. Do you know what
Fothersgill said? “It will assist his spiritual development.” ’

‘Perhaps it would have been wiser not to tell him?’
Silence.
‘After all, you must’ve had some idea of the kind of response you were

likely to get?’

‘I can’t keep it in all the time.’
‘Look, he’s due to be boarded soon. Surely you can put up with the

inconvenience for another … what, ten days?’

‘We had a row this morning. I pointed out the casualties for September

were 102,000 – official figures. He said, “Yes, Sassoon, the Celestial
Surgeon is at work upon humanity.” ’

Rivers sighed. He was thinking that Sassoon’s insistence of hammering

home the bitter reality was probably not doing Fothersgill much good
either. ‘What does he think about you? Do you know?’

‘I have a disturbed aura. Apparently.’
‘Really?’
‘Indigo. I’m glad somebody finds it amusing.’
‘I was just thinking how useful it would be. Instant diagnosis.’

‘I’ve woken him up once or twice.’
‘Nightmares?’
‘Not exactly.’
Sassoon was avoiding his eye, but then he often did at the beginning of

interviews. ‘Do you want to tell me about it?’

‘Oh, it was nothing. I just … saw something I couldn’t possibly have

seen.’

He thinks I’ll despise him for being irrational, Rivers thought. ‘I did once

see … well, not see … hear something I couldn’t explain. It was on one of
the Solomon Islands. On this particular island, the people believe the souls
of the dead go to a bay at the other side – the spirits come up to the house in
canoes and carry the dead person’s soul away. So you have a kind of wake,
and on this particular night we were all crowded together, gathered round
the corpse, waiting for the sound of paddles. The whole village was there,
all these dark brown intently listening faces. And we listened too and asked
questions in whispers. The atmosphere was unbelievable. And then a
moment came when they heard the paddles. You saw this expression of
mingled joy and grief spread over all their faces, and of course we heard
nothing. Until the moment when the spirits were actually in the room,
taking the soul away, and then the whole house was suddenly filled with
whistling sounds. I could see all the faces. Nobody was making those
sounds, and yet we all heard them. You see, the rational explanation for that
is that we’d allowed ourselves to be dragged into an experience of mass
hypnosis, and I don’t for a moment deny that that’s possible. But what we’d
been told to expect was the swish of paddles. Nobody’d said anything about
whistling. That doesn’t mean that there isn’t a rational explanation. Only I
don’t think that particular rational explanation fits all the facts.’

After Rivers had finished there was a pause. Then Sassoon said, with

great difficulty, ‘What happened to me started with a noise.’

‘What sort of noise?’
‘Tapping. It started in Owen’s room and then when I went back to my

own room it started again. Owen didn’t hear it. It didn’t bother me
particularly, I just went off to sleep and … when I woke up, somebody was

standing just inside the door. I knew who it was. I couldn’t see the face, but
I recognized his coat.’ He paused. ‘Orme. Nice lad. Died six months ago.’

‘You said “once or twice”. The same man?’
‘No. Various people.’ A long silence. ‘I know this must sound like the the

kind of thing I was seeing in London, but it isn’t. It’s … nothing like that. In
London they were clutching holes in their heads and waving their stumps
around. These are … very quiet. Very restrained.’ He smiled. ‘Obviously
you get a better class of hallucination round here.’

‘What do you feel when you see them?’
Sassoon shrugged. ‘I don’t feel anything. At the time.’
‘You’re not frightened?’
‘No. That’s why I said they weren’t nightmares.’
‘Afterwards?’
‘Guilt.’
‘Do they look reproachful?’
Sassoon thought about it. ‘No. They just look puzzled. They can’t

understand why I’m here.’

A long silence. After a while, Sassoon roused himself. ‘I wrote about it.

I’m sorry, I know you hate this.’

Rivers took the sheet of paper: ‘I don’t hate it. I just feel inadequate.’

When I’m asleep, dreaming and drowsed and warm,
They come, the homeless ones, the noiseless dead.
While the dim charging breakers of the storm
Rumble and drone and bellow overhead,
Out of the gloom they gather about my bed.
They whisper to my heart; their thoughts are mine.

‘Why are you here with all your watches ended?
‘From Ypres to Frise we sought you in the line.’
In bitter safety I awake, unfriended;
And while the dawn begins with slashing rain
I think of the Battalion in the mud.
‘When are you going back to them again?
‘Are they not still your brothers through our blood?’

Sassoon, who’d got up and walked across to the window, turned round

when a movement from Rivers seemed to indicate he’d finished. ‘It’s all

right,’ he said. ‘Don’t feel you have to say something.’

But Rivers was not capable of saying anything. He’d taken off his glasses

and was dabbing the skin round his eyes. Sassoon didn’t know what to do.
He pretended to look out of the window again. At last Rivers put his glasses
on again and said, ‘Does the question have an answer?’

‘Oh, yes. I’m going back.’
A long indrawn breath. ‘Have you told anybody else yet?’
‘No, I wanted you to be the first.’
‘Your pacifist friends won’t be pleased.’
‘No, I know. I’m not looking forward to that.’ He was looking at Rivers

with an extraordinary mixture of love and hostility. ‘You are, though, aren’t
you? You’re pleased.’

‘Oh, yes. I’m pleased.’

Part Four

SEVENTEEN

Ada Lumb arrived on the nine o’clock train. Sarah met her at the station,
and they spent the morning looking round the shops. Or rather Sarah looked
round the shops, while her mother, by a mixture of bullying, wheedling,
cajoling, questions, speculations, wild surmises and sudden, bitter silences,
extracted the whole story of Sarah’s relationship with Billy Prior. By
twelve, Sarah was glad to rest her feet, if not her ears, in a café, where they
sat at a table for two by the window and ordered ham and chips. The
alternative was steak and kidney pie, but Ada was having none of that. ‘You
can’t trust anything with pastry wrapped round it,’ she said. ‘What they find
to put in it, God knows. You’ve only got to look in the butchers to see there
is nowt.’

Sarah was not deceived. She knew once the waitress was out of earshot

she was in for a dollop of advice on rather more serious matters. She wiped
a hole in the condensation on the window. Outside the people were moving
shadows, the pavements of Princes Street jumped and streamed with rain.
‘Just in time,’ she said.

‘I suppose you let him in?’
‘What?’
‘You don’t say “what”, Sarah. You say “pardon”.’
‘What?’
‘I said, I suppose you let him in?’
‘Isn’t that my business, Mam?’
‘Would be if you were gunna cope with the consequences.’
‘There aren’t going to be any consequences.’
‘You think you know it all, don’t you? Well, let me tell you something,

something you don’t know. In every one of them factories there’s a bloke

with a pin. Every tenth one gets a pin stuck in it. Not every other one, they
know we’re not fools. Every tenth.’

‘Nice work, if you can get it.’
‘Easier than bringing up the kid.’ Ada speared a chip. ‘The point is you

gotta put a value on yourself. You don’t, they won’t. You’re never gunna get
engaged till you learn to keep your knees together. Yeh, you can laugh, but
men don’t value what’s dished out free. Mebbe they shouldn’t be like that,
mebbe they should all be different. But they are like that and your not
gunna change them.’

The waitress came to remove their plates. ‘Anything else, madam?’
Ada switched to her genteel voice. ‘Yes, we’d like to see the menu,

please.’ She waited till the waitress had gone, then leant forward to deliver
the knock-out blow. ‘No man likes to think he’s sliding in on another man’s
leavings.’

Sarah collapsed in giggles. ‘Mam.’
‘Aye, well, you can laugh.’ She looked round the café, then down at the

table, smoothing the white table cloth with brown-spotted hands. ‘Nice,
isn’t it?’

Sarah stopped giggling. ‘Yeh, Mam, it’s nice.’
‘I wish you worked somewhere like this.’
‘Mam, the wages are rubbish. That girl didn’t live at home, she wouldn’t

eat.’

‘She’s not bright yellow, though, is she?’
‘She not bright anything. She looks anaemic to me.’
‘But you meet nice people, Sarah. I mean I know some of the women you

work with, and I’m not saying they’re not good sorts – some of them – but
you got to admit, Sarah, they’re rough.’

‘I’m rough.’
‘You could’ve been a lady’s maid if you’d stuck in. That’s what gets me

about you, you can put it on as well as anybody when you like, but it’s too
much bloody bother.’

The waitress returned with the menu.
‘I don’t think I could eat anything else, Mam.’

Ada looked disappointed. ‘Aw, go on. It’s not often I get a chance to spoil

you.’

‘All right, then. I’ll have the tapioca, please.’
Sarah ate in silence for a while, aware of her mother watching her. At

last, she said, ‘Trouble is, Mam, the block chipped and you don’t like it.’

Ada shook her head. It was true all the same, Sarah thought. Ada, ox-

jawed, determined, ruthless, had struggled to bring up her two girls alone,
and yet, when it came to teaching the girls, she’d tried to encourage all the
opposite qualities. Prettiness, pliability – at least the appearance of it – all
the arts of pleasing. This was how women got on in the world, and Ada had
made sure her daughters knew it. As little girls, Cynthia and Sarah had gone
to the tin-roofed chapel at the end of the road, but as soon as their bodices
revealed curves rather than straight lines, Ada had called them to her and
announced their conversion to Anglo-Catholicism. The Church of St
Edmund, King and Martyr, served a very nice neighbourhood. There,
Cynthia had obediently ogled the young men in the choir, while Sarah,
missing the point completely, had fallen in love with the Virgin Mary. Ada’s
ambition was to see her daughters go down that aisle in white, on the arm of
some young man with a steady income. If, subsequently, early widowhood
left them with the income and not the man, then they were indeed blessed.
Whether Ada was a widow or not, Sarah didn’t know. It had never been
made clear whether her father had departed this life, the town, or merely his
marriage. Certainly black bombazine figured prominently in Ada’s
wardrobe, but then it was a material that conferred an air of awesome
respectability at minimal cost. A dispiriting way to bring girls up, Sarah
thought; to make marriage the sole end of female existence, and yet deny
that love between men and women was possible. Ada did deny it. In her
world, men loved women as the fox loves the hare. And women loved men
as the tapeworm loves the gut. Nor did this view of life generate much
sympathy for other women. Ada despised the hares, those who ‘got caught’.
If a girl came into the shop crying, she might sell her Dr Lawson’s Cure, the
Sovereign Remedy for Female Blockages and Obstructions (ninepence a
bottle, and totally useless), but her sympathy ended there. The business of

her life was scratching a living together; her recreation was reading
romances, which she devoured three or four at a time, sitting in her rocking
chair by the fire, sucking mint humbugs and laughing till her ribs ached.

‘How’s the tea hut going, Mam?’ Sarah asked, pushing her plate away.
‘Fine. I’m up there every day now.’
Ada had taken to selling tea to soldiers, young conscripts who did their

six weeks’ training in one of the local parks before being shipped out to
France. The hut, which in peace time had been the boating lake ticket
office, she’d turned into a small café.

‘How much do you charge?’
‘Fivepence.’
‘My God.’
Ada shrugged. ‘No competition.’
‘You’re a war profiteer you are, Mam. In a small way.’
‘Wouldn’t be small if I could get me hands on some money. You could do

soup and all sorts, specially with the winter coming on. But it’s the same
old story. You need money to make money.’

Ada paid the bill, counting out the coppers with those thin, lined hands

that Sarah could never see without pain.

‘You know Billy?’ Sarah asked suddenly.
‘No, I don’t, Sarah. I’ve not had the pleasure of an introduction.’
‘Well if you’ll just listen. If he gets slung out the hospital this time, he’ll

have a bit of leave, and we thought we might … We thought we might drop
in on you.’

‘Really?’
‘Is that all you can say?’
‘What am I supposed to say? Look, Sarah, he’s an officer. What do you

think he wants you for?’

‘How should I know? Breath of fresh air, perhaps.’
‘Bloody gale.’
‘If he does come, you will be all right with him, won’t you?’
‘If he’s all right with me, I’ll be all right with him.’ Ada slipped a penny

under the saucer. ‘But you’re a bloody fool.’

‘Why am I?’
‘You know why. Next time he starts waving his old doo-lally around, you

think about that pin.’

Sassoon arrived late to find Graves sitting by himself in the bar. ‘Sorry I’m
late.’

‘That’s all right. Owen was keeping me amused, but then he had to go.

Somebody coming to see the printer.’

‘Yes, that’s right. I’d forgotten that.’
‘Good game?’
‘Not bad.’ Sassoon detected, or thought he detected, a slight chill. ‘It’s

the only thing that keeps me sane.’

‘Last time you wrote you were complaining about playing golf with

lunatics.’

‘Ssh, keep your voice down. One of them’s just behind you.’
Graves turned round. ‘Seems fairly normal to me.’
‘Oh, Anderson’s all right. Throws a temper tantrum whenever he looks

like losing half a crown.’

‘You’ve been known to do that yourself.’
‘Only because you were fooling around with a niblick instead of playing

properly.’ He raised a hand to summon the waiter. ‘Have you had time to
look at the. menu?’

‘I’ve had time to memorize it, Siegfried.’
At the table Graves said, ‘What do you find to talk to Owen about? He

says he doesn’t play golf. And I don’t suppose for a moment he hunts.’

‘How acute your social perceptions are, Robert. No, I shouldn’t think

he’d been on a horse in his life before he joined the army. Poetry, mainly.’

‘Oh, he writes, does he?’
‘No need to say it like that. He’s quite good. Matter of fact, I’ve got one

here.’ He tapped his breast pocket. ‘I’ll show you after lunch.’

‘He struck me as being a bit shaky.’
‘Did he? I don’t think he is.’
‘I’m just telling you how he struck me.’

‘He can’t be all that shaky. They’re throwing him out at the end of the

month. He was probably just overawed at meeting another Published Poet.’

A slight pause.
‘Aren’t you due to be boarded soon?’
‘The end of the month.’
‘Have you decided what you’re going to do?’
‘I’ve told Rivers I’ll go back, provided the War Office gives me a written

guarantee that I’ll be sent back to France.’

‘I wouldn’t have thought you were in much of a position to bargain.’
‘Rivers seems to think he can wangle it. He didn’t say “wangle” of

course.’

‘So it’s all over? Thank God.’
‘I’ve told him I won’t withdraw anything. And I’ve told him it’s got to be

France. I’m not going to let them put me behind a desk filling in forms for
the rest of the war.’

‘Yes, I think that’s right.’
‘Trouble is I don’t trust them. Even Rivers. I mean, on the one hand he

says there’s nothing wrong with me and they’ll pass me for general service
overseas – there’s nothing else they can do – and then in the next breath he
tells me I’ve got a very powerful “anti-war complex”. I don’t even know
what it means.’

‘I’ll tell you what it means. It means you’re obsessed. Do you know, you

never talk about the future any more? Yes, I know what you’re going to say.
How can you? Sass, we sat on a hill in France and we talked about the
future. We made plans. The night before the Somme, we made plans. You
couldn’t do that now. A few shells, a few corpses, and you’ve lost heart.’

‘How many corpses?’
‘The point is …’
‘The point is 102,000 last month alone. You’re right, I am obsessed. I

never forget it for a second, and neither should you. Robert, if you had any
real courage you wouldn’t acquiesce the way you do.’

Graves flushed with anger. ‘I’m sorry you think that. I should hate to

think I’m a coward. I believe in keeping my word. You agreed to serve,

Siegfried. Nobody’s asking you to change your opinions, or even to keep
quiet about them, but you agreed to serve, and if you want the respect of the
kind of people you’re trying to influence – the Bobbies and the Tommies –
you’ve got to be seen to keep your word. They won’t understand if you turn
round in the middle of the war and say “I’m sorry, I’ve changed my mind.”
To them, that’s just bad form. They’ll say you’re not behaving like a
gentleman – and that’s the worst thing they can say about anybody.’

‘Look, Robert, the people who’re keeping this war going don’t give a

damn about the “Bobbies” and the “Tommies”. And they don’t let
“gentlemanly behaviour” stand in the way either when it comes to
feathering their own nests.’ He made a gesture of despair. ‘And as for “bad
form” and “gentlemanly behaviour” – that’s just suicidal stupidity.’

Over coffee, the conversation changed tack.
‘There’s something I didn’t tell you in June,’ Graves said. ‘Do you

remember Peter?’

‘I never met him.’
‘No, but you remember him? You remember about him? Well, he was

arrested. Soliciting outside the local barracks. Actually not very far away
from the school.’

‘Oh, Robert, I’m sorry. Why didn’t you tell me?’
‘How could I? You were in no state to think about anybody else.’
‘This was in July, was it?’
‘Same post I got your Declaration in.’ Graves smiled. ‘It was quite a

morning.’

‘Yes, I can imagine.’
Graves hesitated. ‘It’s only fair to tell you that … since that happened my

affections have been running in more normal channels. I’ve been writing to
a girl called Nancy Nicholson. I really think you’ll like her. She’s great fun.
The … the only reason I’m telling you this is … I’d hate you to have any
misconceptions. About me. I’d hate you to think I was homosexual even in
thought. Even if it went no further.’

It was difficult to know what to say. ‘I’m very pleased for you, Robert.

About Miss Nicholson, I mean.’

‘Good, that’s all right, then.’
‘What happened to Peter?’
‘You’re not going to believe this. They’re sending him to Rivers.’
This was a bigger, and nastier, shock than Sassoon knew how to account

for. ‘Why?’

‘What do you mean, “Why?”? To be cured, of course.’
Sassoon smiled faintly. ‘Yes. Of course.’

The munitions factory at night looked like hell, Sarah thought, as she toiled
down the muddy lane towards it, and saw the red smouldering fires
reflected from a bank of low cloud, like an artificial sunset. At the gate she
fell in with the other girls all walking in the same direction, all subdued,
with that clogged, dull look of people who’d just switched to night shift and
hadn’t yet managed to adjust.

In the cloakroom, donning ankle-length green overalls, pulling on caps,

dragging at a final cigarette, were thirty or forty women. Smells of sweat,
lily-of-the-valley, setting lotion. After a while conversations sprang up, the
women appeared more normal, even jolly for a time, until the supervisor
appeared in the doorway, jabbing her finger at the clock.

‘Your mam get off all right, then?’ Lizzie asked, as they were walking

down the stairs to the basement workroom.

‘Got the seven o’clock. She’ll be back by midnight, so it’s not so bad.’
‘How did it go?’
Sarah pulled a face. ‘All right. You know, I swore I wasn’t gunna tell her

about Billy, but she winkled it all out of me.’

‘Well, she is your mam. She’s bound to be worried.’
‘Hm. All I could get out of her was: “What does he see in you?” ’S a nice

thing to say to your daughter, isn’t it? I says, “A breath of fresh air.” As far
as I can make out they’re all disappearing up their own arseholes up there.’

‘Long as it’s only their own,’ Lizzie said.
‘They’re not all like that,’ Sarah said.
‘Biggest part are,’ said Madge. ‘Place I used to work before the war, the

son were like that. Oh, and when they found out you should’ve heard

Missus. She stomped and she shrieked. Chandelier were going like that, I
thought bugger were coming down. But you know he had no sisters, so he
never met lasses that way. Goes to school, no lasses. Goes to university – no
lasses. Time he finally claps eyes on me, it’s too late, isn’t it? It’s gelled.
And even the ones that aren’t like that, they take one look at the Missus and
bugger off round the Club.’ Madge strutted along the basement corridor
with a finger held below her nose, saying in a strangled, public school
accent, ‘ “I shall be dining at the Club tonight, m’dear. Don’t bother to wait
up.” Then he staggers in at two o’clock and flops out on bed in dressing
room. Beats me how they breed.’

Raucous laughter from the other women as they spilled into the work

room and sat down at the benches. The supervisor, a round-faced,
bespectacled, crop-haired lady in a severely tailored suit, bore down upon
them. ‘Do you girls ever intend to start work?’

They watched her walk away. ‘Eeh, I hope a man never tries to shove

anything up her flue,’ Lizzie said. ‘Be cruelty to moths.’

Sarah pulled the first belt towards her and started to work. No reason at

all why they couldn’t talk, since the task here required no concentration. It
was intended as a break from the very demanding work on detonators, and
from other jobs too, where masks had to be worn. Rather badly fitting
masks. On more than one occasion Sarah had pulled hers away from her
face and shaken out the yellow dust that had collected inside it. She
remembered her mother’s strictures on her appearance, the broad hints
she’d dropped about handing in her notice and going home to help with the
tea hut. But I like it here, Sarah thought. And then she corrected herself.
You like it now because Billy’s here. You mightn’t be so keen when he’s
gone.

She turned, cautiously, to avoid attracting the supervisor’s attention, and

looked round. The women sat at small tables, each table forming a pool of
light under a low-hanging bulb. Apart from the work surfaces, the room
was badly lit and so vast that its far end disappeared into shadow. All the
women were yellow-skinned, and all, whatever their colouring, had a frizz
of ginger hair peeping out from under the green cap. We don’t look human,

Sarah thought, not knowing whether to be dismayed or amused. They
looked like machines, whose sole function was to make other machines.

Sarah’s eyes fell on the next table, where the girls were close enough to

be identified. After a while she looked puzzled and leant across the table to
whisper to Lizzie. ‘Where’s Betty?’

‘You may well ask,’ Lizzie said. She sniffed and remained silent,

enjoying the moment of power.

‘I am asking.’
Lizzie glanced round quickly. ‘You know she’s missed four times?’
All the girls nodded.
‘Tried everything,’ Lizzie said. ‘She was supping Dr Lawson’s Cure as if

it was lemonade.’

‘It is,’ said Sarah.
‘Well, she must’ve got desperate, because she stuck summat up herself to

bring it on. You know them wire coat hangers?’

Nods all round.
‘One of them. She straightened the curved bit and –’
‘We get the picture,’ Sarah said.
‘Yell, well it’s worse than that. Silly little cow shoved it in her bladder.’
‘Aw no.’ Madge turned away as if she were going to vomit.
‘She was in agony. And you know she kept begging them not to send her

to the hospital, because like she knew she hadn’t come all right. But
anyway the girl she’s lodging with got that frightened she went and fetched
the landlady. Well of course she took one look. She more or less says,
“Sorry, love, you’re not dying here.” Took her in. And the irony of it is
she’s still pregnant. She looks awful.’

‘You mean you’ve been to see her?’ Sarah asked.
‘Why aye. Went last night. You know, her face is all …’ Lizzie dragged

her cheeks down. ‘Oh, and she says the doctor didn’t half railroad her. She
was crying her eyes out, poor lass. He says, “You should be ashamed of
yourself,” he says. “It’s not just an inconvenience you’ve got in there,” he
says. “It’s a human being.” ’

Sarah and Madge were eager to know more, but the supervisor had

noticed the pause in Lizzie’s work and came striding towards them, though
when she reached the table she found only silence and bowed heads and
feverishly working fingers flicking machine-gun bullets into place inside
the glittering belts.

On the night before a Board, Rivers took longer than usual over his rounds,
since he knew the patients whose turn it was to be boarded would be feeling
particularly tense. He was worried about Pugh, who had somehow managed
to convince himself, in spite of repeated reassurances to the contrary, that he
was to be sent back to France.

Sassoon, Rivers left till last, and found him lying on the bed in his new

room, wrapped in his British warm coat. It was needed. The room was
immediately beneath the tower and so cold that, in winter, patients who’d
sweated their way through a succession of nightmares often woke to find
the bedclothes stiff with frost. Siegfried seemed to like it, though, and at
least now he had the privacy he needed to work. Rivers took the only
available chair, and stretched out his legs towards the empty grate. ‘Well,
how do you feel about tomorrow?’

‘All right. Still nothing from the War Office?’
‘No, I’m afraid not. You’ll just have to trust us.’
‘Us? You’re sure you don’t mean “them”?’
‘You know I’ll go on doing anything I can for you.’
‘Oh, I know that. But the fact is once they’ve got me out of here they can

do what they like. Pen-pushing in Bognor, here I come.’

Rivers hesitated. ‘You sound rather down.’
‘No-o. Missing Robert. Don’t know why, we came quite close to

quarrelling.’

‘About the war?’
‘I don’t know what about. Except he was in a peculiar mood.’ Sassoon

stopped, then visibly decided to continue. ‘He had a bit of bad news
recently.’

Rivers was aware of more going on in this conversation than he could

identify. Sassoon had been distinctly reserved with him recently. He’d
noticed it yesterday evening particularly, but he’d put it down to pre-Board
nerves, and the worry of not hearing from the War Office. ‘From France?’

‘Oh, no, something quite different. I did ask if he’d mind my telling you,

so I’m not breaking a confidence. Friend of his – a boy he knew at school
and was very fond of – in an entirely honourable, platonic Robert-like way
– got arrested for soliciting. Outside a barracks, actually not very far away
from the school. As far as I can make out, Robert feels …’ Sassoon came to
a halt. ‘Well. Rather as you might feel if you were … walking down a
pleasant country road and suddenly a precipice opened at your feet. That’s
how he sees it. Devastated. Because, you see, this … this abominable thing
must’ve been there all the time, and he didn’t see it. He’s very anxious to
make it clear that … he has no such disgusting feelings himself. We-ell.’

‘So you were left feeling … ?’
‘Like a precipice on a country road.’
‘Yes.’
Sassoon looked straight at Rivers. ‘Apparently he’s being – the boy –

sent to some psychiatrist or other.’

‘Which school was this?’
‘Charterhouse.’
‘Ah.’ Rivers looked up and found Sassoon’s gaze on him.
‘To be cured.’ A slight pause. ‘I suppose cured is the right word?’
Rivers said cautiously, ‘Surely it’s better for him to be sent to this

psychiatrist than to go to prison?’ In spite of himself he started to smile.
‘Though I can see you might not think so.’

‘He wouldn’t have got prison!’
‘Oh, I think he might. The number of custodial sentences is rising. I think

any psychiatrist in London would tell you that.’

Sassoon looked downcast. ‘I thought things were getting better.’
‘I think they were. Before the war. Slightly. But it’s not very likely, is it,

that any movement towards greater tolerance would persist in wartime?
After all, in war, you’ve got this enormous emphasis on love between men

– comradeship – and everybody approves. But at the same time there’s
always this little niggle of anxiety. Is it the right kind of love? Well, one of
the ways you make sure it’s the right kind is to make it crystal clear what
the penalties for the other kind are.’ He looked at Sassoon. ‘One of the
reasons I’m so glad you’ve decided to go back. It’s not just police activity.
It’s the whole atmosphere at the moment. There’s an MP called Pemberton
Billing. I don’t know whether you’ve heard of him?’

Sassoon shook his head. ‘I don’t think so.’
‘Well, he’s going around London claiming to know of the existence of a

German Black Book containing the names of 47,000 eminent people whose
private lives make their loyalty to their country suspect.’

‘Relax, Rivers. I’m not eminent.’
‘No, but you’re a friend of Robert Ross, and you’ve publicly advocated a

negotiated peace. That’s enough! You’re vulnerable, Siegfried. There’s no
point pretending you’re not.’

‘And what am I supposed to do about it? Toe the line, tailor my opinions

–’

‘Not your opinions. I think you told me once that Robert Ross opposes

the war? In private.’

‘I wouldn’t want to criticize Ross. I think I know him well enough to

understand the impact those trials had on him. But what you’re really
saying is, if I can’t conform in one area of life, then I have to conform in the
others. Not just the surface things, everything. Even against my conscience.
Well, I can’t live like that.’ He paused, then added, ‘Nobody should live like
that.’

‘You spend far too much time tilting at windmills, Siegfried. In ways

which do you a great deal of damage – which I happen to care about – and
don’t do anybody else any good at all.’ He hesitated, then said it anyway.
‘It’s time you grew up. Started living in the real world.’

Prior was not making a good impression. Getting a few simple facts out of
him was like extracting wisdom teeth. At first Rivers thought Prior was
simply being awkward – always a fairly safe assumption with Prior – but
then he noted the tension in his jaw and realized the extent of the internal
conflict that was going on. Prior had said he wanted nothing more than to
get back to France as soon as possible, to get away from what he called ‘the
shame’ of home service, and Rivers had no doubt that was true. But it was
not the whole truth. He also wanted to save his life, and, in insisting on the
importance of the asthmatic attacks, Rivers had, perhaps cruelly, held out
the hope that he might be permitted to live. Small wonder, then, that Prior
answered questions in monosyllables and finally, when asked whether he
felt physically fit for service, said nothing at all, simply stared at Huntley,
unable either to claim that he was ill or to deny it. Watching him, Rivers
was filled with the most enormous compassion for his dilemma. Poor little
blighter, he thought. Poor all of them.

Outside in the waiting room Sassoon looked at his watch. They were

running almost an hour late and he wasn’t even next. Pugh was next. Pugh
was a Welshman with prominent green eyes and the worst twitch Sassoon
had ever seen, even in Craiglockhart, that living museum of tics and
twitches. Pugh’s consisted of a violent sideways movement of the head,
accompanied by a sound midway between a gasp and a scream. He did this
approximately every thirty-five seconds. Like everybody else in the
hospital, Sassoon’s reflexes were conditioned by the facts of trench warfare.
It was almost impossible for him not to dodge whatever it was Pugh was
dodging. Something Owen had told him about Pugh was hovering round the
fringes of his mind. Yes, that was it. Some kind of freak accident, a hand

grenade bouncing off the wire. Pugh had been picking bits of his platoon off
his gas cape for an hour.

Sassoon looked at his watch again. Even allowing for the fact that

nobody in their right mind could take long to decide whether Pugh was fit
for duty, he couldn’t hope to be out of the place before six. He was
supposed to have tea with the Sampsons at four thirty. Even if he left now
and caught a tram immediately, he still wouldn’t be on time. It was too bad.
People who were prepared to die had at least the right not to be kept
waiting. He closed his eyes again. He was so tired he really thought if it
wasn’t for Pugh and that dreadful jerking, he might have managed to nod
off. He’d hardly slept at all last night.

In his breast pocket was a letter from Joe Cotterill, the Battalion

Quartermaster. Sassoon knew it almost off by heart. Joe’s journey to
Polygon Wood with the rations, the ground as full of holes as a pepperpot
lid, nothing but mud and dead trees as far as the eye could see. They’d spent
the night in a shell-hole, lost, under heavy fire. Several of the ration party
had been killed. But, said Joe, the battalion got their rations. Reading that,
Sassoon had wanted to rush back to France at once, but then, right at the
end of the letter, Joe had said: Buck up and get out of there. Go to
Parliament. Surely they can’t keep you there against your will? The trouble
was, Sassoon thought, sighing and looking at his watch, that Joe’s
anonymous ‘they’ was his Rivers.

Thorpe arrived. ‘D-d-d-do w-w-w-wwe kn-kn-know w-whwhat’s t-t-t-t-

taking s-s-so l-l-long?’ he asked after a while.

Sassoon shook his head. Pugh shook his head too, though whether in

answer to the question it was difficult to tell. And suddenly Sassoon had
had enough. ‘And I for one don’t intend to stay and find out.’

He had a fleeting impression of Thorpe and Pugh with their mouths open,

and then he was striding out of the room, down the corridor, through the
swing doors and away.

‘Pugh next, I think?’ said Bryce.

‘Hang on, old chap,’ Huntley said. ‘Got to pump ship.’

The door closed behind him. Bryce said, ‘Where do you suppose he finds

these nautical expressions?’ Receiving no reply, he turned to Rivers.

‘Why we had to take an hour over that I shall never know.’
‘Prior didn’t help himself much, did he?’
Rivers didn’t answer.
‘And at least you got what you wanted. In the end.’
The major came back, buttoning his breeches. ‘All right, all right,’ he

said, as if he’d been waiting for them. ‘Let’s get on.’

Pugh was quick and distressing. Since the orderly had gone off to have

dinner, Rivers himself went into the waiting room to summon Sassoon.
Thorpe was sitting there alone. ‘Have you seen Sassoon?’

‘He’s …’ Thorpe went into one of his paroxysms. ‘G-g-g-g-g-gone.’
‘G-g-?’ Deep breath. ‘Where has he gone?’
Thorpe economized with a shrug. Rivers walked along to the patients’

common room and looked for Sassoon there, and instead found Prior,
sitting at the piano picking out a few notes. Prior looked up. Rivers,
thinking it was a long time to wait till the result was officially announced,
stuck his thumb in the air and smiled.

‘All right, Thorpe,’ he said, going back to the ante-room. ‘You’d better

come in.’

Rivers came out of Thorpe’s Board to find Sassoon still missing and Sister
Duffy hovering in the corridor, wanting to talk about Prior. ‘Crying his eyes
out,’ she said. ‘I thought he’d got permanent home service?’

‘He did.’
Rivers went up to Prior’s room and found him sitting on the bed, not

crying now, though rather swollen about the eyes.

‘I suppose I’m expected to be grateful?’
‘No.’
‘Good. Because I’m not.’
Rivers tried to suppress a smile.
‘I told you I didn’t want it.’

‘It’s not a question of what you want, is it? It’s a question of whether

you’re fit.’

‘I was all right. It never stopped me doing anything the others did.’
‘Now that’s not quite true, is it? You told me yourself you were excused

running through the gas huts, because on the one occasion you tried it, you
collapsed. Your participation, in gas-training exercises was restricted to
listening to lectures. Wasn’t it?’

No response.
‘It’s all very well to joke about being the battalion canary, but it’s true,

isn’t it? You would be overcome by gas at much lower concentrations than
most people, and that could be very dangerous. And not just for you.’

Prior turned away.
Rivers sighed. ‘You realize the other man who got permanent home

service is throwing a party tonight?’

‘Good for him. I hope it’s a good party.’
‘Why do you hate it so much?’
Silence. After a while, Prior said, ‘I suppose I’m not your patient any

more, am I?’

‘No.’
‘So I don’t have to put up with this?
It was on the tip of Rivers’s tongue to point out that the relief was

mutual, but he looked at the swollen eyes and restrained himself. ‘What
don’t you have to put up with?’

‘The blank wall. The silences. The pretending.’
‘Look. At the moment you hate me because I’ve been instrumental in

getting you something you’re ashamed of wanting. I can’t do much about
the hatred, but I do think you should look at the shame. Because it’s not
really anything to be ashamed of, is it? Wanting to stay alive? You’d be a
very strange sort of animal if you didn’t.’

Prior shook his head. ‘You don’t understand.’
‘Tell me, then.’
‘I’ll never know now, will I? About myself …’
‘But you do know. You were a perfectly satisfactory officer, until –’

‘Until the strain got to me and I stopped being a perfectly satisfactory

officer. Where does that leave me?’

‘With the whole of your life ahead of you and other challenges to face.’
‘If you were a patient here, don’t you think you’d feel ashamed?’
‘Probably. Because I’ve been brought up the same way as everybody

else. But I hope I’d have the sense, or – whatever it is – the intelligence to
see how unjustified it was.’

Prior was shaking his head. ‘Not possible. The hoop’s there, you jump

through it. If you question it, you’ve failed. If it’s taken away from you,
you’ve failed.’

‘No, I don’t see that. If it’s taken away, it’s out of your hands. You didn’t

ask for permanent home service. You were given it, on the basis of
Eaglesham’s report. Not my report. There’s nothing in your psychological
state to prevent your going back.’

Prior didn’t answer. Rivers said gently, ‘Everybody who survives feels

guilty. Don’t let it spoil everything.’

‘It’s not that. Well, partly. It’s just that I’ve never let the asthma stop me.

I was ordered to stay out of those gas huts, I was quite prepared to go
through them. Even as a – a child I was determined it wasn’t going to stop
me. I could do anything the others did, and not only that, I could beat them.
I’m not suggesting this is peculiar to me, I – I think most asthmatics are like
that. My mother was always pulling the other way. Trying to keep me in. I
shouldn’t criticize the poor woman, I think she probably saved my life, but
she did use it. She wanted me in the house away from all the nasty rough
boys. And then suddenly here you are …’ He raised his hands. ‘Doing
exactly the same thing.’ He looked at Rivers, a cool, amused, mocking,
affectionate, highly intelligent stare. ‘Probably why I never wanted you to
be Daddy. I’d got you lined up for a worse fate.’

Rivers, remembering the nanny goat, smiled. He was rather glad Prior

didn’t have access to his thoughts.

‘Thanks for putting up with me.’
This was muttered so gracelessly Rivers wasn’t sure he’d heard correctly.
‘I was an absolute pig.’

‘Never.’
Prior hesitated. ‘Would you mind if I looked you up after the war?’
‘Mind? I’d be delighted. Though I don’t see why you have to wait till

after the war. You can always write to me here. If – if I’ve moved on, they’ll
know where I am.’

‘Thanks. I will write.’
At the door Rivers turned. ‘If I don’t see you again before you go, good

luck.’

It was an effort to talk at dinner, partly tiredness, partly Sassoon’s empty
place. By now it was clear he’d deliberately skipped the Board. He’d left
the Sampsons at six o’clock, but hadn’t yet returned to the hospital. It was
possible he was having dinner at the Club, putting off the moment when
he’d have to face Rivers, but he was impetuous enough, and perhaps
desperate enough, to take the train for London and launch himself into some
further crackpot scheme to stop the war. Rivers knew the full extent of the
dilemma that would face him if Sassoon had deserted and did make another
public protest. He would be asked to take part in declaring him insane; they
would never court-martial him. Not now. The casualty lists were too terrible
to admit of any public debate on the continuation of the war.

Rivers roused himself to take part in the conversation to find Major

Huntley riding one of his hobby horses again. Racial degeneration, this
time. The falling birth rate. The need to keep up what he called ‘the supply
of heroes’. Did Rivers know that private soldiers were on average five
inches shorter than their officers? And yet it was often the better type of
woman who chose to limit the size of her family, while her feckless sisters
bred the Empire to destruction. Rivers listened as politely as he could to the
major’s theories on how the women of Britain might be brought back to a
proper sense of their duties, but it was a relief when dinner was over, and he
could plead pressure of work and escape to his own room.

He’d left a message with Sister Duffy that Sassoon was to be sent to him

as soon as he got back, no matter how late that might be. It was very late
indeed. He came in, looking penitent and sheepish.

Rivers said, ‘Sit down.’
Sassoon sat, folded his large hands in his lap, and waited. His demeanour

was very much that of a keen, and basically decent, head boy who knows
he’s let the headmaster down rather badly, and is probably in for ‘a bit of a
wigging’, but expects it to be all right in the end. Nothing could have been
more calculated to drive Rivers to fury. ‘I’m sure you have a perfectly
satisfactory explanation.’

‘I was late for tea with Sampson.’
Rivers closed his eyes. ‘That’s it?’
‘Yes.’
‘It would have been quite impossible for you to telephone Sampson, and

tell him that you were going to be late?’

‘It didn’t seem … courteous. It –’
‘And what about the courtesy due to Major Bryce? Major Huntley? Don’t

you think you at least owed them an explanation before you walked out?’

Silence.
‘Why, Siegfried?’
‘I couldn’t face it.’
‘Now that does surprise me. Juvenile behaviour I might have expected

from you, but never cowardice.’

‘I’m not offering excuses.’
‘You’re not offering anything. Certainly not reasons.’
‘I’m not sure there are any. I was fed up with being kept waiting. I

thought if I was going to die, at least other people could make the effort to
be on time. It was …’ A deep breath. ‘Petulance.’

‘So you can’t suggest a reason?’
‘I’ve told you, there aren’t any.’
‘I don’t believe you.’
‘Look, I’ll apologize. I’ll grovel if you like.’
‘I’m not interested in your grovelling. I’d rather you told the truth.’
Sassoon wriggled in his chair. ‘All right. I’ve had this idea floating

around in my mind, for … oh, for five or six weeks. I thought if I could get

myself passed fit and then go to London, I could see somebody like …
Charles Mercier.’

‘Dr Mercier?’
‘Yes.’
‘Why on earth would you want to see him?’
‘For a second opinion. He’s all right, isn’t he?’
‘Oh, yes, you couldn’t do better. Except that … if you’d just been passed

fit by the Board – why would you need to see Mercier?’

‘So they couldn’t say I’d had a relapse, if I went on with the protest.’
Rivers sat back in his chair. ‘Oh, I see.’
Silence.
‘And had you definitely decided to do that?’
‘I hadn’t definitely decided anything. If you want the reason I walked

out, that’s probably it. It suddenly struck me that in a few hours’ time I’d be
packing and I had no idea where I was going. And then at the back of my
mind there was the idea that if I went to Mercier I’d be …’

Rivers waited.
‘Doing the dirty on you.’
‘You could’ve had a second opinion at any time. I’d no idea you wanted

it. People whose psychiatrists tell them they’re completely sane don’t
usually ask for second opinions.’

‘That is what they’d do, though, isn’t it? Say I’d had a relapse?’
‘Yes. Probably. I take it you’ve definitely decided not to go back?’
‘No, I want to go back.’
Rivers slumped in his chair. ‘Thank God. I don’t pretend to understand,

but thank God.’ After a while he added, ‘You know the real irony in all
this? This morning I had a letter from the War Office. Not exactly an
undertaking to send you back, but … signs of progress.’

‘And now I’ve gone and ruined it all by having tea with an astronomer.’
‘Oh, I don’t suppose you have. I’ll write to them tonight.’
Sassoon looked at the clock.
‘Well, we don’t want him hearing it from Huntley, do we? By the way,

late as it is, I think Major Bryce would still like to see you.’

Sassoon took the hint and stood up. ‘What do you think he’ll do?’
‘No idea. Roast you, I hope.’

Prior had never broken into a house before. Not that he was exactly
breaking into this one, he reminded himself, though it felt like it, standing
cold and shivering in the back yard, in a recess between what must be, he
supposed, the coalhouse and the shithouse. He wrapped his coat more
tightly round him and craned his neck to see the sky. Light cloud, no moon,
stars pricking through, a snap of frost.

He was waiting for the signal of the lamp at Sarah’s window, but she was

a long time coming, and there was a chill inside him that had nothing to do
with the cold. The darkness, the nervousness, the repeated unnecessary
swallowing … He was back in France, waiting to go out on patrol.

He remembered the feel of No Man’s Land, the vast, unimaginable space.

By day, seen through a periscope, this immensity shrank to a small, pock-
marked stretch of ground, snarled with wire. You never got used to the
discrepancy. Part of its power to compel the imagination lay precisely in
that. It was the difference between seeing a mouth ulcer and probing it with
your tongue. He told himself he was never going back, he was free, but the
word ‘free’ rang hollow. Hurry up, Sarah, he thought.

He was beginning to wonder whether she’d met her landlady on the

stairs, when a light appeared at the window. Immediately, he started to
climb, clambering from the rusting washer on to the sloping roof of the
scullery. Nothing difficult about the climb, the only hazard was the poor
state of the tiles. He shuffled along, trying not to make too much noise,
though if they did hear they’d probably think it was a cat.

Sarah’s room was on the first floor. As he reached the main wall, he

stood up, cautiously, and hooked his fingertips into the crack between two
bricks. Sarah’s window was perhaps three feet away, but there was a

convenient drainpipe. He swung his left foot out, got a toe-hold on the
drainpipe – fortunately in a better state of repair than the roof – and
launched himself at the dark hole. He landed safely, though not quietly,
colliding with Sarah, who’d come back to see why he was taking so long.
They froze, listening for any response. When none came, they looked at
each other, and smiled.

Sarah was carrying an oil lamp. She set it down on the table by the bed,

and went to draw the curtains. He was glad to have the night shut out, with
its memories of fear and worried sentries whispering. She turned back into
the room.

They looked at each other, not finding anything to say. The bed, though

only a single, seemed very big. Their imminent nakedness made them shy
of each other. In all the weeks of love-making, they’d never once been able
to undress. Prior was touched by Sarah’s shyness, and a little ashamed of
his own.

With an air of unconcern, he started to look round the room. Apart from

the bed, there was a bedside table, a chair, a chest of drawers, and a
washbasin, squeezed into the corner beside the window. A camisole hung
from the back of the chair, and a pair of stays lay on the floor beside it.
Sarah, seeing the direction of his gaze, kicked them under the chair.

‘It’s all right,’ he said. ‘I’m not tidy.’
The sound of his voice released them from nervousness. Prior sat on the

bed, and patted it for her to come and sit beside him.

‘We’d better not talk much,’ she said. ‘I told them I’d be late back, but if

they hear voices they’ll all be in.’

He couldn’t have talked much anyway; his breath caught in his throat.

They stared at each other. He reached up and unpinned her hair, shaking it
out at the sides of her head. Then they lay down side by side, still gazing at
each other. At this distance, her eyes merged into a single eye, fringed by
lashes like prehistoric vegetation, a mysterious, scarcely human pool. They
lay like that for ten or fifteen minutes, neither of them wanting to hurry,
amazed at the time that lay ahead.

After a while Prior rolled over on to his back and looked at the

photograph on the bedside table, moving the lamp so he could see better. A
wedding group. Cynthia’s wedding, he thought, and that rather fat, pasty-
faced soldier, smiling sheepishly at the centre of the group, must now be
dead. People in group photographs look either idiotic or insane, their faces
frozen in anticipation of the flash. Not Sarah’s mother. Even in sepia, her
eyes jetted sparks. And that jaw. It would’ve been remarkable on a man.
‘Your mother looks like my doctor,’ he said. He looked at the photograph
again. ‘She’s not smiling much, is she?’

‘She was smiling at the memorial service.’ She looked at the photograph.

‘I love her, you know.’

‘Of cou …’ He stopped. Why ‘of course’? He didn’t love his father.
‘I’m glad you’re not going back.’
Without warning, Prior saw again the shovel, the sack, the scattered lime.

The eyeball lay in the palm of his hand. ‘Yes,’ he said.

She would never know, because he would never tell her. Somehow if

she’d known the worst parts, she couldn’t have gone on being a haven for
him. He was groping for an idea that he couldn’t quite grasp. Men said they
didn’t tell their women about France because they didn’t want to worry
them. But it was more than that. He needed her ignorance to hide in. Yet, at
the same time, he wanted to know and be known as deeply as possible. And
the two desires were irreconcilable.

‘Do you think your mam’ll like me?’
They’d arranged to spend part of his leave together.
‘Not as much as she would if you were going back.’
‘Tell her about me lungs. That’ll cheer her up.’ He felt he knew Ada

already.

Sarah rolled over and started to undress him. He pretended to struggle,

but she pushed him back on to the bed, and he lay there, shaking with
laughter, as she got into a tangle over his puttees. At last she gave up, rested
her head on his knees, giggling. ‘They’re like stays.’

‘Don’t tell the War Office. You’ll have a lot of worried men.’
They stopped laughing and looked at each other.

‘I love you,’ he said.
‘Oh, there’s no need to say that.’
‘Yes, there is. It’s true.’
She took her time thinking about it. At last she said on an indrawn breath,

‘Good. I love you too.’

Owen and Sassoon sat in a corner of the lounge at the Conservative Club.
They had the room to themselves, except for one other member, and he was
half hidden behind the Scotsman. After the waiter had served the brandies
and departed, Sassoon produced a book from his pocket. ‘I’d like to read
you something. Do you mind?’

‘No, go ahead. Anybody I know?’
‘Alymer Strong. Given to me by the author. He brought me a copy of

Lady Margaret’s book and – er – happened to mention he wrote himself.
Like a fool, I made encouraging noises.’

‘Not always disastrous. Why am I being read it?’
‘You’ll see. There’s a sort of dedication. In one of the poems.’

Siegfried, thy fathers warr’d
With many a kestrel, mimicking the dove.

Owen looked blank. ‘What does it mean?’
‘What a philistine question. I hope this isn’t the future pig-keeper

speaking. I believe it to be a reference to the persecution of the Jews.’

‘But you’re not a Jew.’
‘I am, actually. Or rather my “fathers” were.’
‘I didn’t know that.’ Owen contemplated the fact through a haze of

burgundy. ‘That’s why you’re called Siegfried?’

‘No-o, I’m called Siegfried because my mother liked Wagner. And the

only thing I have in common with orthodox Jews is that I do profoundly
thank God I was born a man and not a woman. If I were a woman, I’d be
called Brünnhilde.’

‘This is our last evening and I feel as if I’ve just met you.’
‘You know all the important things.’

They looked at each other. Then a rustling of the Scotsman’s pages

returned their attention to the book. Sassoon began reading extracts, and
Owen, who was drunk and afraid of becoming too serious, laughed till he
choked. Sassoon had begun by declaiming the verse solemnly, but when he
came to:

Can it be I have become 
This gourd, this gothic vaccu-um?

he burst out laughing. ‘Oh, I love that. You might like this better.’

What cassock’d misanthrope,
Hawking peace-canticles for glory-gain,
Hymns from his rostrum’d height th’ epopt of Hate?

The what of hate?’
‘Epopt.’
‘No such word.’
‘There is, you know. It’s the heroic form of epogee.’
‘Can I see?’ Owen read the poem. ‘This man’s against the war.’
‘Oh, yes.’ Sassoon’s lips twitched. ‘And particularly devastated by the

role the Christian Church is playing in it. The parallels are worrying,
Owen.’

‘I’m worried.’ He made to hand the book back. ‘It’s incredible, isn’t it?’
‘No, look inside.’
Owen looked at the flyleaf and read: Owen. From S.S. Edinburgh. Oct.

26th 1917. Underneath Sassoon had written:

When Captain Cook first sniffed the wattle,
And Love columbus’d Aristotle.

‘That’s absolutely typical,’ Owen said.
‘It does rather encapsulate his style, doesn’t it?’
‘You know what I mean. The only slightly demonstrative thing you’ve

ever done and you do it in a way which makes it impossible to take
seriously.’

‘Do you think it’s a good idea to be serious tonight?’

‘For God’s sake, I’m only going to Scarborough. You’ll be in France

before I will.’

‘I hope so.’
‘No news from the War Office?’
‘No. And Rivers dropped a bombshell this morning. He’s leaving.’
‘Is he?’
‘I don’t look forward to Craiglockhart without either of you. I did

mention you to Rivers, you know.’

‘What did he say?’
‘That you were an extremely gallant and conscientious young officer …’
‘Oooh.’
‘ “Oooh”. Who needed no one to teach him his duty. Unlike dot dot dot.

And there were no grounds at all that he could see for keeping you at the
hospital a moment longer. I think he was a bit put out about being asked to
overrule Brock.’

‘I’m not surprised. You shouldn’t have done it. Look, I could do a lot

with another month. I hate leaving. But the fact is I’d be taking up a bed
some other poor blighter needs far more than I do.’

‘As I shall be doing.’
‘I didn’t mean that.’
‘No, but it’s true.’ He glanced at his watch. ‘I’d better be off. Under the

new regime I believe the penalty for staying out late is public crucifixion.’

In the hall Sassoon produced an envelope from his breast pocket. ‘This is

a letter of introduction to Robert Ross. It’s sealed because there’s something
else inside, but that doesn’t mean you can’t read it.’

Owen tried to think of something to say and failed.
‘Take care.’
‘And you.’
Sassoon patted him on the shoulder, and was gone. Nothing else, not

even ‘goodbye’. Perhaps it was better that way, Owen thought, going back
to the lounge. Better for Siegfried, anyway. Their empty brandy glasses
stood together on the table, in the pool of light cast by the standard lamp,

but the unseen listener had gone. The Scotsman, neatly folded, lay on a
table by the door.

Owen sat down, got out the letter of introduction, but didn’t immediately

open it. The ticking of the clock was very loud in the empty room. He lay
back in the chair and closed his eyes. He was afraid to measure his sense of
loss.

TWENTY

Rivers was due to leave Craiglockhart on 14 November, having fulfilled his
promise to Bryce to see the new CO in. He was leaving in what he
considered a totally undeserved blaze of glory. Willard was walking at last.
Rivers could understand the VADs, the orderlies, the secretaries and the
kitchen staff regarding this ‘cure’ as a great medical feat, but it was a little
dismaying to find that even some of the senior nursing staff seemed to
agree.

Willard himself was exasperating. All Rivers’s efforts to inculcate insight

into his condition, to enable him to understand why he’d been in the
wheelchair and how the same outcome might be avoided in future, were
met with a stare of glassy-eyed, quivering respect. Whenever Rivers came
anywhere near him, Willard positively leapt to the salute. He knew his
spinal cord had been broken. He knew Rivers had reconnected the severed
ends. Needless to say the other MOs were unimpressed. Indeed, after
observing Rivers acknowledge one particularly sizzling salute, Brock was
heard to murmur: ‘And for my next trick I shall walk on water.’

The last evening round was distressing both for Rivers and the patients.

He left Sassoon till last and then, remembering that he’d spent the day with
Lady Ottoline Morrell and had, presumably, been exposed to a great dose of
pacifist propaganda, went along to his room.

Sassoon was sitting on the floor, hands clasped around his knees, staring

into the fire.

‘How was Lady Ottoline?’ Rivers said, taking the only chair. ‘In full

cry?’

‘Not really. The war was hardly mentioned.’
‘Oh?’

‘No, we talked about Carpenter mainly. Homosexuality. Or rather I

talked. She listened.’

Poor Lady Ottoline. ‘The war didn’t come up at all?’
‘Not today. Last night it did. I think we both knew there was no point

going over that again. Do you know what she asked me? Did I realize that
going back would involve killing Germans?’ He brought his anger under
control. ‘Pacifists can be amazingly brutal.’

That brief flash of anger was the only emotion Sassoon had shown since

skipping the Board. He seemed at times to be almost unaware of his
surroundings, as if he could get through this interim period between one
Board and the next only by shutting down all awareness of where he was or
what was happening. And yet he was writing, and he seemed to think he
was writing well. All the anger and grief now went into the poetry. He’d
given up hope of influencing events. Or perhaps he’d just given up hope. At
the back of Rivers’s mind was the fear that Craiglockhart had done to
Sassoon what the Somme and Arras had failed to do. And if that were so, he
couldn’t escape responsibility.

Sassoon roused himself. ‘You’re off first thing, aren’t you?’
‘Yes. The six o’clock.’
‘So this is goodbye, then.’
‘Only for a fortnight. I’ll be back for the Board. Meanwhile …’ He stood

up. ‘Keep your head down?’

Rivers stayed overnight with the Heads and then moved into his new
lodgings in Holford Road, a short walk from the RFC hospital. The floor
below was occupied by a family of Belgian refugees whose demands for
better food and apparent indifference to rationing irritated the landlady, Mrs
Irving, beyond measure. She was inclined to stop Rivers on the stairs and
complain about them at considerable length. The other lodgers were
apparently more easily satisfied, and gave no grounds for complaint.

The nights were disturbed by air raids, though less by German action

than by the guns on the Heath that boomed out with a sound like bombs
falling. Everybody congregated in the basement during these raids, the

Belgian refugees, Mrs Irving, her unmarried daughter who worked at the
hospital, all the other lodgers, and the two young girls who lived in the
attics and between them did the whole work of the house. As far as he could
make out, they sat around, or under, the table, venturing out to the kitchen
to make endless cups of cocoa. He was invited to join these parties, but
always declined, saying that the air raids didn’t bother him much and he
needed his sleep.

He managed to sleep through some of the raids, but on other nights, the

guns made sleep impossible. He was not particularly well, but he didn’t
want to take more sick leave, and he had no routine leave due to him. He
spent a lot of the time with the Heads, who turned up one night and swept
him off to the theatre to see the Russian ballet. They came out, still dazed
with swirling light and colour, to find another raid in progress. In Leicester
Square they stopped and looked up at the sky, and there was a Zeppelin
floating like a strange, silver fish. Rumour had it they were piloted by
women. It seemed incredible to Rivers that anybody should believe this, but
he soon discovered that most people did. Mrs Irving knew it for a fact.

As soon as he started work at the hospital he became busy and, as Head

had predicted, fascinated by the differences in severity of breakdown
between the different branches of the RFC. Pilots, though they did indeed
break down, did so less frequently and usually less severely than the men
who manned observation balloons. They, floating helplessly above the
battlefields, unable either to avoid attack or to defend themselves
effectively against it, showed the highest incidence of breakdown of any
service. Even including infantry officers. This reinforced Rivers’s view that
it was prolonged strain, immobility and helplessness that did the damage,
and not the sudden shocks or bizarre horrors that the patients themselves
were inclined to point to as the explanation for their condition. That would
help to account for the greater prevalence of anxiety neuroses and hysterical
disorders in women in peacetime, since their relatively more confined lives
gave them fewer opportunities of reacting to stress in active and
constructive ways. Any explanation of war neurosis must account for the
fact that this apparently intensely masculine life of war and danger and

hardship produced in men the same disorders that women suffered from in
peace.

So he had plenty to think about, and before long it was clear he would

have plenty to do. Many of his old Craiglockhart patients who were living
in London or the south of England had already written to ask if they could
come to see him. That, by itself, would supply him with a great deal of
work.

He was due back at Craiglockhart on the 25th of November. On the 24th

he’d accepted an invitation to visit Queen Square. The invitation had been
issued several times before and he’d always found a reason for refusing, but
now that he was one of the small number of physicians in London dealing
with the psycho-neuroses of war, he judged it rather more expedient than
pleasant that he should accept. And so, at half past nine on the 24th
November, he walked up the steps of the National Hospital. His night had
been even more disturbed by the guns than usual, and he was feeling
distinctly unwell. If he’d been able to cancel or postpone this visit without
giving offence, he would certainly have done so. He gave his name to the
receptionist. Dr Yealland was expecting him, she said. Go up.

He took the lift to the third floor. He pushed through the swing doors on

to a long, empty, shining corridor, which, as he began to walk down it,
seemed to elongate. He began to be afraid he was really ill. This deserted
corridor in a hospital he knew to be overcrowded had something eerie about
it. Uncanny. Almost the feeling his patients described, talking about their
experience of the front, of No Man’s Land, that landscape apparently
devoid of life that actually contained millions of men.

The swing doors at the far end of the corridor flapped open. At first

Rivers was pleased, expecting to be received by some bustling nurse or
VAD, but instead a creature – it hardly resembled a man – crawled through
the door and began moving towards him. The figure made remarkably rapid
progress for somebody so bent, so apparently deformed. His head was
twisted to one side, and drawn back, the spine bent so that the chest was
parallel with the legs, which themselves were bent at the knees. In addition
one arm, the left, was pulled away from the body and contracted. The right

hand clung to the rail, not sliding along it, but brought forward step by step,
making repeated slapping sounds on the wood.

As they converged, the man turned his head, insofar as he was able to

turn it, and stared up at Rivers. Probably this was dictated by no more than
the curiosity patients always feel at the appearance of a doctor on wards
where nothing else ever happens, but it seemed to Rivers that his expression
was both sombre and malevolent. He had to drag his own gaze away. At
that moment a VAD came out of a side ward and said in that bracingly jolly
way of theirs, ‘Nearly ten o’clock. Let’s have you in bed.’

The morning round. Rivers wondered if he was in for that.
He was. Yealland came out of his room, flanked by two junior doctors,

shook hands briskly and said that he thought the best general introduction
was perhaps simply a ward round.

The party consisted of Yealland, the two junior doctors who were being

put through their paces, a ward sister, who made no contribution and was
invited to make none, and a couple of orderlies who hovered in the
background in case they were required to lift. Yealland was an impressive
figure. In conversation he did not merely meet your eye, but stared so
intently that you felt your skull had become transparent. His speech was
extremely precise. Something in this steady, unrelenting projection of
authority made Rivers want to laugh, but he didn’t think he’d have wanted
to laugh if he’d been a junior doctor or a patient.

They did the post-treatment ward first. The bulk of the conversation was

between Yealland and the two junior doctors, with occasional asides to
Rivers. Contact with patients was restricted to a brisk, cheerful,
authoritative greeting. No questions were asked about their psychological
state. Many of them, Rivers thought, showed signs of depression, but in
every case the removal of the physical symptom was described as a cure.
Most of these patients would be out within a week, Yealland said. Rivers
asked questions about the relapse rate, the suicide rate, and received the
expected reply. Nobody knew.

The admissions ward was next. An immensely long ward, lined with

white-covered beds packed close together. On both sides windows reached

from floor to ceiling, and the room was flooded with cold northern light.
The patients, many displaying bizarre contractures of their limbs, sat, if
they were capable of sitting, upright in their beds, as near to attention as
they could get. Rivers’s corridor acquaintance was just inside the room,
lying face down on his bed, buttocks in the air, presumably the only
position he was capable of maintaining. It couldn’t be said he added to the
desired impression of tidiness, but the nurses had done their best. The little
procession came to a halt by his bed.

Yealland’s previous performance had been perfunctory. Rivers suspected

he lost interest in the patients once the miracle had been worked. Now,
though, he turned to Rivers with real zest. ‘This one’s fairly typical,’ he
said, and nodded to the ginger-haired doctor.

A shell had exploded close to the patient, who had been buried up to the

neck and had remained in that position for some time under continued
heavy fire. For two or three days after being dug out he’d been dazed,
though he did have a vague recollection of the explosion. Six weeks later
he’d been sent to England, to a hospital in Eastbourne where he’d been
treated with physical exercises. During this time the abnormal flexure of the
spine had grown worse.

The sheets were pulled back. It was not possible to bend the trunk

passively, the doctor said, demonstrating. The patient couldn’t eat from a
table and, as they could all see, he couldn’t lie straight in bed. He
complained of considerable pain in the head, which was worse at night.
And when he woke up there were coloured lights dancing in front of his
eyes. Some right hemianalgesia was present. There was tenderness –
probing – from the sixth dorsal spine down to the lumbar region. Free, but
not excessive, perspiration of the feet. A mark made on the sole of the foot
lasted an abnormally long time.

‘And?’ Yealland said.
The young man looked frightened, a fear Rivers remembered only too

clearly. The missing fact came to him just in time. ‘No sign of organic
disease,’ he finished triumphantly.

‘Good. So at least we may be encouraged to believe the patient is in the

right hospital?’

‘Yes, sir.’
Yealland walked to the head of the bed. ‘You will receive treatment this

afternoon,’ he said. ‘I shall begin by making your back straight. This will be
done by the application of electricity to your spine and back. You have
power to raise your head, indeed you can even extend it. I am sure you
understand the pain is due to the position you assume. The muscles are in
too great a stretch and there is no relief, because even when you rest the
same position is maintained. The electricity may be strong, but it will be the
means of restoring your lost powers – the power to straighten your back.’

It was extraordinary. If Yealland had appeared authoritative before, it was

nothing compared with the almost God-like tone he now assumed. The
patient was looking distinctly alarmed. ‘Will it hurt?’ he asked.

Yealland said: ‘I realize you did not intend to ask that question and so I

will overlook it. I am sure you understand the principles of the treatment,
which are …’ He paused, as if expecting the patient to supply them.
‘Attention, first and foremost; tongue, last and least; questions, never. I
shall see you this afternoon.’

And so on round the ward. Yealland stopped in some triumph by the last

bed. ‘Now this is interesting.’

Rivers had been aware of this patient ever since they entered the ward.

He sat up very straight in bed, and followed their progress with an air of
brooding antagonism.

‘Callan,’ Yealland said. ‘Mons, the Marne, Aisne, first and second Ypres,

Hill 60, Neuve-Chapelle, Loos, Armentières, the Somme and Arras.’ He
looked at Callan. ‘Have I missed any?’

Callan obviously heard the question, but made no response. His eyes

flicked from Yealland to Rivers, whom he looked up and down
dispassionately. Yealland leant closer to Rivers and murmured, ‘Very
negative attitude.’ He nodded to the junior doctor to begin.

Callan had broken down in April. He’d been employed behind the lines

on transport at the time, perhaps because his nervous state was already

giving cause for concern. While feeding the horses, he had suddenly fallen
down, and had remained unconscious for a period of five hours. When he
came round, he was shaking all over and was unable to speak. He hadn’t
spoken at all since then. He attributed his loss of speech to heatstroke.

‘Methods of treatment?’ Yealland asked.
The patient had been strapped to a chair for periods of twenty minutes at

a time, and very strong electric current applied to his neck and throat. Hot
plates had been applied repeatedly to the back of the throat, and lighted
cigarettes to the tongue.

‘I’m sorry?’ Rivers said. ‘What was that?’
‘Lighted cigarettes to the tongue. Sir.’
‘None of it persevered with,’ Yealland said. ‘It’s the worst possible basis

for treatment because the electricity’s been tried and he knows – or thinks
he knows – that it doesn’t work.’ He walked to the head of the bed. ‘Do you
wish to be cured? Nod if you do.’

Callan smiled.
‘You appear to me to be very indifferent to your condition, but

indifference will not do in such times as these. I have seen many patients
suffering from similar conditions, and not a few in whom the disorder has
existed for a much longer time. It has been my experience with these cases
to find two kinds of patients, those who want to recover and those who do
not want to recover. I understand your condition thoroughly and it makes no
difference to me which group you belong to. You must recover your speech
at once.’

As they were leaving the ward, Yealland drew him aside. ‘Do you have

time to witness a treatment?’

‘Yes. I’d very much like to.’ Apart from anything else he was curious to

know how strong ‘strong’ was when describing an electric current. It was a
matter on which published papers were apt to be reticent. ‘Would it be
possible for me to see the man we’ve just left?’

‘Yes. Though it won’t be quick. And I can’t interrupt the treatment.’
‘That’s all right. I’ve no afternoon appointments. I’d like to see him

because of the the previous failed treatments.’

‘Oh, quite right. He’s the interesting one. The others are just routine.’
They were walking down to the MOs’ dining room for lunch.
‘You do only one session?’ Rivers asked.
‘Yes. The patient has to know when he enters the electrical room that

there’s no way out except by a full recovery.’ Yealland hesitated. ‘I
normally do treatments alone.’

‘I’ll be as unobtrusive as I can.’
Yealland nodded. ‘Good. The last thing these patients need is a

sympathetic audience.’

TWENTY-ONE

After lunch they went straight to the electrical room. Rivers sat on a hard
chair in the corner, prepared to stay as long as necessary. The only other
furniture was a small desk under the tall window, with a stack of buff-
coloured files on it, the battery and the patient’s chair, rather like a dentist’s
chair, except for the straps on the arms and around the foot rest. Yealland,
who’d been emptying his bladder in preparation for a long session, came in,
rubbing his hands. He nodded cheerfully to Rivers, but didn’t speak. Then,
rather to Rivers’s surprise, he began pulling down the blinds. The blinds
were the thick, efficient blinds of wartime, and after he’d finished not a
chink of light from the dank, November day could get into the room. Rivers
now expected him to turn on the overhead lights, but he didn’t. Instead, he
left the room in darkness, except for a small circle of light round the battery.
This light was reflected off his white coat and up on to his face.

Callan was brought in. He looked indifferent, or defiant, though once he

was settled in the chair his eyes shifted from side to side in a way that
suggested fear.

‘I am going to lock the door,’ Yealland said. He returned to stand before

the patient, ostentatiously dropping the key into his top pocket. ‘You must
talk before you leave me.’

All very well, Rivers thought. But Yealland had locked himself in as well

as the patient. There could be no backing down.

Yealland put the pad electrode on the lumbar spines and began attaching

the long pharyngeal electrode. ‘You will not leave me,’ he said, ‘until you
are talking as well as you ever did. No, not a minute before.’

The straps on the chair were left unfastened. Yealland inserted a tongue

depressor. Callan neither co-operated nor struggled, but simply sat with his

mouth wide open and his head thrown back. Then the electrode was applied
to the back of his throat. He was thrown back with such force that the leads
were ripped out of the battery. Yealland removed the electrode. ‘Remember
you must behave as becomes the hero I expect you to be,’ Yealland said. ‘A
man who has been through so many battles should have a better control of
himself.’ He fastened the straps round Callan’s wrists and feet. ‘Remember
you must talk before you leave me.’

Callan was white and shaking, but it was impossible to tell how much

pain he was in, since obviously he could no more scream than he could
speak. Yealland applied the electrode again, continuously, but evidently
with a weaker current since Callan was not thrown back. ‘Nod to me when
you are ready to attempt to speak.’

It took an hour. Rivers during all that time scarcely moved. His empathy

with the man in the chair kept him still, since Callan himself never moved,
except once to flex the fingers of his strapped hands. At last he nodded.
Immediately the electrode was removed, and after a great deal of effort
Callan managed to say ‘ah’ in a sort of breathy whisper.

Yealland said, ‘Do you realize that there is already an improvement? Do

you appreciate that a result has already been achieved? Small as it may
seem to you, if you will consider rationally for yourself, you will believe
me when I tell you that you will be talking before long.’

The electrode was applied again. Yealland started going through the

sounds of the alphabet: ah, bah, cah, dah, etc., encouraging Callan to repeat
the sounds after him, though only ‘ah’ was repeated. Whenever Callan said
‘ah’ on request, the electrode was momentarily removed. Whenever he
substituted ‘ah’ for other sounds, the current was reapplied.

They had now been in the room an hour and a half. Callan was obviously

exhausted. Despite the almost continuous application of the electric current
he was actually beginning to drop off to sleep. Yealland evidently sensed he
was losing his patient’s attention and unstrapped him. ‘Walk up and down,’
he said.

Callan did as he was bid, and Yealland walked beside him, encouraging

him to repeat the sounds of the alphabet, though, again, only ‘ah’ was

produced and that in a hoarse whisper, very far back in the throat. Callan
stumbled as he walked, and Yealland supported him. Up and down they
went, up and down, in and out of the circle of light around the battery.

Rebellion came at last. Callan wrenched his arm out of Yealland’s grasp

and ran to the door. Evidently he’d forgotten it was locked, though he
remembered at once and turned on Yealland.

Yealland said, ‘Such an idea as leaving me now is most ridiculous. You

cannot leave the room. The door is locked and the key is in my pocket. You
will leave me when you are cured, remember, not before. I have no doubt
you are tired and discouraged, but that is not my fault; the reason is that you
do not understand your condition as I do, and the time you have already
spent with me is not long in comparison with the time I am prepared to stay
with you. Do you understand me?’

Callan looked at Yealland. For a second the thought of striking him was

clearly visible, but then Callan seemed to admit defeat. He pointed to the
battery and then to his mouth, miming: Get on with it.

‘No,’ Yealland said. ‘The time for more electrical treatment has not yet

come; if it had, I should give it to you. Suggestions are not wanted from
you; they are not needed. When the time comes for more electricity, you
will be given it whether you want it or not.’ He paused. Then added with
great emphasis: ‘You must speak, but I shall not listen to anything you have
to say.’

They walked up and down again, Callan still repeating ‘ah’, but making

no other sound. The ‘ah’ was produced by an almost superhuman effort, the
muscles of the neck in spasm, the head raised in a series of jerks. Even the
torso and the arms were involved in the immense effort of pushing this
sound across his lips. Rivers had to stop himself trying to make the sound
for him. He was himself very tense; all the worst memories of his stammer
came crowding into his mind.

Yealland said, ‘You are now ready for the next stage of treatment, which

consists of the administration of strong shocks to the outside of the neck.
These will be transmitted to your voice box and you will soon be able to say
anything you like in a whisper.’

Callan was again placed in the chair and again strapped in. The key

electrode was applied in short bursts to his neck in the region of the larynx,
Yealland repeating ‘ah, bah, cah, dah’, etc. in time with the shocks. On the
third repetition of the alphabet, Callan suddenly said ‘ba’. Instead of
attempting the next sound, he went on repeating ‘ba’, not loudly, but
venomously. ‘Bah, bah’, and then, unmistakably ‘Baaaa! Baaaaa! Baaaaaa!’

Yealland actually looked gratified. He said, ‘Are you not glad you have

made such progress?’

Callan started to cry. For a while there was no other sound in the room

than his sobbing. Then he wiped his eyes on the back of his hand and
mimed a request for water.

‘Yes, you will have water soon. Just as soon as you can utter a word.’
Callan pushed Yealland aside and ran to the door, rattling the handle,

beating on the wood with his clenched fists. Rivers couldn’t bear to go on
watching. He looked down at the backs of his clasped hands.

Yealland said, ‘You will leave this room when you are speaking normally.

I know you do not want the treatment suspended now you are making such
progress. You are a noble fellow and these ideas which come into your
mind and make you want to leave me do not represent your true self. I
know you are anxious to be cured and are happy to have recovered to such
an extent; now you are tired and cannot think properly, but you must make
every effort to think in the manner characteristic of your true self: a hero of
Mons.’

Perhaps Callan remembered, as Yealland apparently did not, that Mons

had been a defeat. At any rate he went back to the chair.

‘You must utter a sound,’ Yealland said. ‘I do not care what the nature of

the sound is. You will understand me when I say I shall be able to train any
sound into the production of vowel sounds, then into letter sounds, and
finally into words and sentences. Utter a sound when you take a deep
breath, and as soon as I touch your throat.’

Callan, although he appeared to be co-operating, could make no

expiratory sound.

Yealland appeared to lose patience. He clamped his hands down on to

Callan’s wrists and said, ‘This has gone on long enough. I may have to use
a stronger current. I do not want to hurt you, but if necessary I must.’

Rivers couldn’t tell whether the anger was acted or real, but there was no

doubt about the strength of the current being applied to the neck in shock
after shock. But it worked. Soon Callan was repeating ‘ah’ at a normal
pitch, then other sounds, then words. At this point Yealland stopped the use
of electricity, and Callan sagged forward in the chair. He looked as if he
were going to fall, but the straps held him in place. ‘Go on repeating the
days,’ Yealland said.

‘S-s-s-sunday. M-m-m-m-m-monday. T-t-t-t-Tuesday …’
Saturday came at last.
Yealland said, ‘Remember there is no way out, except by the return of

your proper voice and by that door. I have one key, you have the other.
When you can talk properly, I shall open the door and you can go back to
the ward.’

And so it went on, through the alphabet, the days of the week, the months

of the year – the shocks sometimes mild, sometimes extremely strong –
until he was speaking normally. As soon as he could say words clearly at a
normal pitch, he developed a spasm or tremor – not unlike paralysis agitans
– in his left arm. Yealland applied a roller electrode to the arm. The tremor
then reappeared in the right arm, then the left leg, and finally the right leg,
each appearance being treated with the application of the electrode. Finally
the cure was pronounced complete. Callan was permitted to stand up. ‘Are
you not pleased to be cured?’ Yealland asked.

Callan smiled.
‘I do not like your smile,’ Yealland said. ‘I find it most objectionable. Sit

down.’

Callan sat.
‘This will not take a moment,’ Yealland said. ‘Smile.’
Callan smiled and the key electrode was applied to the side of his mouth.

When he was finally permitted to stand up again, he no longer smiled.

‘Are you not pleased to be cured?’ Yealland repeated.

‘Yes, sir.’
‘Nothing else?’
A fractional hesitation. Then Callan realized what was required and came

smartly to the salute. ‘Thank you, sir.’

TWENTY-TWO

That evening after dinner Rivers tried to work on a paper he was due to give
to the Royal Society of Medicine in December. As he read through what
he’d written, he became aware that he was being haunted by images. The
man in the corridor at Queen Square, Yealland’s hands, Callan’s open
mouth, the two figures, doctor and patient, walking up and down, in and out
of the circle of light round the battery. It was unusual for Rivers to visualize
as intensely as this, indeed to visualize at all, but then the whole experience,
from beginning to end, had had something … hallucinatory about it.

Rivers left the typewriter and went to sit in his armchair by the fire. As

soon as he abandoned the attempt to concentrate on the paper, he knew he
was ill. He was sweating, his heart pounded, pulses all over his body
throbbed, and he felt again that extraordinary sensation of blood squeezing
through his veins. He thought he might have a slight temperature, but he
never, as a matter of principle, took his own temperature or measured his
pulse. There were depths of neuroticism to which he was not prepared to
sink.

His confrontation with Yealland had exhausted him, for, however polite

they had each been to each other, it had been a confrontation. He was too
tired to go on working, but he knew if he went to bed in this state he
wouldn’t sleep, even if there was no disturbance from the guns. He decided
to take a turn on the Heath, fetched his greatcoat from the peg and crept
downstairs. Mrs Irving was a pleasant enough woman, but she was also a
very lonely woman, and inclined to air her grievances about the excessive
demands of Belgian refugees. He reached the bottom of the stairs, listened a
moment, then quietly let himself out of the house.

He felt his way along the dark street. Shuttered windows, like blind eyes,

watched from either side. It was something new this darkness, like the deep
darkness of the countryside. Even on the Heath, where normally London
was spread out before you in a blaze of light, there was only darkness, and
again darkness. Starlight lay on the pond, waking a dull gleam, like metal.
Nothing else. He started to walk round the edge, trying to empty his mind
of Queen Square, but the images floated before him like specks in the eye.
Again and again he saw Callan’s face, heard his voice repeating simple
words, a grotesque parody of Adam naming created things. He felt pursued.
There they were, the two of them, Yealland and his patient, walking up and
down inside his head. Uninvited. If this was what habitual visualizers
experienced, he could only say he found it most unpleasant.

He stopped and looked at the pond. He was aware of rustling, dragging

footsteps. Somebody bumped into him and muttered something, but he
moved away. By the time he got back to his lodgings he felt much better,
well enough to greet Mrs Irving in the hall and compliment her on a more
than adequate dinner.

Back in his own rooms he went straight to bed. The sheets felt cold, so

cold he again wondered if he was running a temperature, but at least the
palpitations and the breathlessness had gone. He thought he might manage
to sleep if the Zeppelins and the guns allowed it, and indeed he did fall
asleep almost as soon as he turned off the light.

He was walking down the corridor at Queen Square, an immensely long

corridor which elongated as he walked along it, like a strip of elastic at full
stretch. The swing doors at the far end opened and shut, flap-flapping an
unnaturally long time, like the wings of an ominous bird. Clinging to the
rail, the deformed man watched him approach. The eyes swivelled to follow
him. The mouth opened and out of it came the words: I am making this
protest on behalf of my fellow-soldiers because I believe the war is being
deliberately prolonged by those who have the power to end it.

The words echoed along the white corridor. Abruptly the dream changed.

He was in the electrical room, a pharyngeal electrode in his hand, a man’s
open mouth in front of him. He saw the moist, pink interior, the delicately

quivering uvula, the yellowish, grainy surface of the tongue, and the tonsils,
like great swollen, blue-purple eggs. He slipped the tongue depressor in,
and tried to apply the electrode, but the electrode, for some reason,
wouldn’t fit. He tried to force it. The man struggled and bucked beneath
him, and, looking down, he saw that the object he was holding was a
horse’s bit. He’d already done a lot of damage. The corners of the man’s
mouth were raw, flecked with blood and foam, but still he went on, trying to
force the bit into the mouth, until a cry from the patient woke him. He sat
up, heart pounding, and realized he had himself cried out. For a second the
dream was so real that he went on seeing the chair, the battery, the tortured
mouth. Then, nothing. Gradually, his heart beat returned to normal, though
when he got out of bed and went across to sit by the window the small
effort made it pound again.

No raid tonight. It was ironic that on this one quiet night he should have

woken himself up with a nightmare. As with all nightmares, the horror
lingered. He was still inclined to accuse himself. That, he thought – self-
reproach – had been the dominant affect. At first he was inclined to connect
it with the quasi-sexual imagery of the dream, for the dream action had
been both an accurate representation of Yealland’s treatment and
uncomfortably like an oral rape. He didn’t feel, however, that the
underlying conflict had been sexual.

The manifest content came from his visit to Queen Square, and was

present with relatively little transformation. There was no doubt that the
visit had been rife with opportunities for conflict. From the beginning he’d
felt a tension between, on the one hand, his sympathy for the patients, his
doubts about the quality of the treatment they were receiving, and on the
other, the social and professional demands on him to be reasonably polite.
As the day had gone on, this conflict had certainly deepened. Over lunch
Yealland had told him about an officer patient of his who stammered badly,
and whom Yealland had cured in – as usual – one session. Rivers – to his
own amusement and exasperation – had responded to the story by
beginning to stammer rather badly. And whenever he’d hesitated over a
word, he’d sensed Yealland calculating the voltage. All nonsense of course.

He’d been more amused by the situation than anything else, but
nevertheless the worsening of his stammer did point to an underlying
conflict that might well find expression in a dream.

The man in the corridor with the spinal contracture seemed to represent

Sassoon, since he’d quoted the Declaration, though it was difficult to
imagine anybody more physically unlike Sassoon than that deformed,
pseudo-dwarf. And the expression of antagonism – that certainly didn’t
correspond with anything in the real Sassoon’s attitude towards him. But
then there was no reason why it should. The dream action is the creation of
the dreamer. The mood of this dream, a mood so powerful he could still not
shake it off, was one of the most painful self-accusation. The man’s
expression need reflect no more than his feeling that Sassoon, perhaps, had
grounds for antagonism.

He hadn’t been able to see the face of the second patient, and had no

clear sense of who it was. The obvious candidate was Callan, since it was
Callan he’d watched being treated. And Callan had been working with
horses when he became mute, which might account for the bit. And yet he
was fairly certain the dream patient had not been Callan.

On the wards he’d been struck by a slight facial resemblance between

Callan and Prior, who had also been mute when he arrived at Craiglockhart.
He remembered an incident shortly after Prior’s arrival when he’d dragged
a teaspoon across the back of his throat, hoping that the choking reflex
would trigger the return of speech. This did sometimes happen. He’d seen
more than one patient recover his voice in that way. But he’d tried it while
in a state of acute irritation with Prior, and the choking had occasioned a
momentary spasm of satisfaction. Very slight, but enough to make him feel,
in retrospect, discontented with his own behaviour. Mute patients did arouse
exasperation, particularly, as with both Prior and Callan, when their
satisfaction with their condition was hardly at all disguised. Perhaps the
dream patient was a composite figure, part Callan, part Prior, the
combination suggested by his application of a teaspoon to Prior’s throat and
Yealland’s application of an electrode to Callan’s.

But there was no comparison in the amount of pain inflicted. On the face

of it he seemed to be congratulating himself on dealing with patients more
humanely than Yealland, but then why the mood of self-accusation? In the
dream he stood in Yealland’s place. The dream seemed to be saying, in
dream language, don’t flatter yourself. There is no distinction.

A horse’s bit. Not an electrode, not a teaspoon. A bit. An instrument of

control. Obviously he and Yealland were both in the business of controlling
people. Each of them fitted young men back into the role of warrior, a role
they had – however unconsciously – rejected. He’d found himself
wondering once or twice recently what possible meaning the restoration of
mental health could have in relation to his work. Normally a cure implies
that the patient will no longer engage in behaviour that is clearly self-
destructive. But in present circumstances, recovery meant the resumption of
activities that were not merely self-destructive but positively suicidal. But
then in a war nobody is a free agent. He and Yealland were both locked in,
every bit as much as their patients were.

Bits. The scold’s bridle used to silence recalcitrant women in the Middle

Ages. More recently, on American slaves. And yet on the ward, listening to
the list of Callan’s battles, he’d felt that nothing Callan could say could
have been more powerful than his silence. Later, in the electrical room, as
Callan began slowly to repeat the alphabet, walking up and down with
Yealland, in and out of the circle of light, Rivers had felt that he was
witnessing the silencing of a human being. Indeed, Yealland had come very
close to saying just that. ‘You must speak, but I shall not listen to anything
you have to say.’

Silencing, then. The task of silencing somebody, with himself in

Yealland’s place and an unidentified patient in the chair. It was possible to
escape still, to pretend the dream accusation was general. Just as Yealland
silenced the unconscious protest of his patients by removing the paralysis,
the deafness, the blindness, the muteness that stood between them and the
war, so, in an infinitely more gentle way, he silenced his patients; for the
stammerings, the nightmares, the tremors, the memory lapses, of officers
were just as much unwitting protest as the grosser maladies of the men.

But he didn’t believe in the general accusation. He didn’t believe this was

what the dream was saying. Dreams were detailed, concrete, specific: the
voice of the protopathic heard at last, as one by one the higher centres of the
brain closed down. And he knew who the patient in the chair was. Not
Callan, not Prior. Only one man was being silenced in the way the dream
indicated. He told himself that the accusation was unjust. It was Sassoon’s
decision to abandon the protest, not his. But that didn’t work. He knew the
extent of his own influence.

He went on sitting by the window as dawn grew over the Heath, and felt

that he was having to appeal against conviction in a courtroom where he
himself had been both judge and jury.

TWENTY-THREE

Head’s room was very quiet. The tall windows that overlooked the square
were shrouded in white net. Outside was a day of moving clouds and fitful
sunlight, and whenever the sun shone, the naked branches of plane trees
patterned the floor. So Head’s patients must sit, hour after hour, with those
bright, rather prominent eyes fixed on them, while elsewhere in the house
doors banged and a telephone started to ring. But there the normality of the
‘consultation’ ended, for Head would never, not even under the most
extreme provocation, have told a patient that he was talking a load of self-
indulgent rubbish. Rivers opened his mouth to protest and was waved into
silence.

‘All right,’ Head swept on. ‘He’s muddle-headed, immature, liable to fits

of enthusiasm, inconsistent. All of that. But … And he virtually had no
father and he’s put you in his father’s place. But, he’s also’ – ticking off on
his fingers – ‘brave, capable of resisting any amount of pressure – the mere
fact he protested at all in the present climate tells us that – and above all –
no, let me finish – he has integrity. Everything you’ve told me about him
suggests he was always going to go back, as soon as he knew the protest
was useless, simply because there’s no way he can honourably stay in
Craiglockhart taking up a bed he doesn’t need.’

Rivers smiled. ‘What are friends for if not letting you off the hook?’
‘Well, let me get you off the other hook while I’m about it. You and

Yealland doing essentially the same thing. Good God, man, if you really
believe that it’s the first sign of dementia. I can’t imagine anybody less like
Yealland – methods, attitudes, values – everything. The whole attitude to
the patient. And in spite of all this self-laceration, I can’t help thinking you
know that. Who would you rather be sent to if you were the patient?’

‘You.’
Head smiled. ‘No. I don’t say I do a bad job, but I’m not as good with

these particular patients as you are.’

‘I suppose I’m worried about him.’
‘Yes. Well …’
‘I think what bothers me more than anything else is this total inability to

think about after the war. You see, I think he’s made up his mind to get
killed.’

‘All the more reason for you to get it clear whose decision it was that he

went back.’ A pause. ‘You know after dinner the other night Ruth was
saying how much she thought you’d changed.’

Rivers was looking out of the window.
‘Do you think you have?’
‘I’m probably the last person to know. I can’t imagine going back to the

same way of life. But …’ He raised his hands. ‘I’ve been there before. And
…’ A little, self-deprecating laugh. ‘Nothing happened.’

‘When was this?’
‘After my second trip to the Solomons.’
Head waited.
‘I don’t know whether you’ve ever had the … the experience of having

your life changed by a quite trivial incident. You know, nothing dramatic
like the death of a parent, or the birth of a child. Something so trivial you
almost can’t see why it had the effect it had. It happened to me on that trip. I
was on the Southern Cross – that’s the mission boat – and there was a group
of islanders there – recent converts. You can always tell if they’re recent,
because the women still have bare breasts. And I thought I’d go through my
usual routine, so I started asking questions. The first question was, what
would you do with it if you earned or found a guinea? Would you share it,
and if so who would you share it with? It gets their attention because to
them it’s a lot of money, and you can uncover all kinds of things about
kinship structure and economic arrangements, and so on. Anyway at the end
of this – we were all sitting cross-legged on the deck, miles from anywhere
– they decided they’d turn the tables on me, and ask me the same questions.

Starting with: What would I do with a guinea? Who would I share it with? I
explained I was unmarried and that I wouldn’t necessarily feel obliged to
share it with anybody. They were incredulous. How could anybody live like
that? And so it went on, question after question. And it was one of those
situations, you know, where one person starts laughing and everybody joins
in and in the end the laughter just feeds off itself. They were rolling round
the deck by the time I’d finished. And suddenly I realized that anything I
told them would have got the same response. I could’ve talked about sex,
repression, guilt, fear – the whole sorry caboodle – and it would’ve got
exactly the same response. They wouldn’t’ve felt a twinge of disgust or
disapproval or … sympathy or anything, because it would all have been too
bizarre. And I suddenly saw that their reactions to my society were neither
more nor less valid than mine to theirs. And do you know that was a
moment of the most amazing freedom. I lay back and I closed my eyes and
I felt as if a ton weight had been lifted.’

‘Sexual freedom?’
‘That too. But it was it was more than that. It was … the Great White

God de-throned, I suppose. Because we did, we quite unselfconsciously
assumed we were the measure of all things. That was how we approached
them. And suddenly I saw not only that we weren’t the measure of all
things, but that there was no measure.’

‘And yet you say nothing changed?’
‘Nothing changed in England. And I don’t know why. I think partly just

the sheer force of other people’s expectations. You know you’re walking
around with a mask on, and you desperately want to take it off and you
can’t because everybody else thinks it’s your face.’

‘And now?’
‘I don’t know. I think perhaps the patients’ve … have done for me what I

couldn’t do for myself.’ He smiled. ‘You see healing does go on, even if not
in the expected direction.’

Rivers’s return to Craiglockhart on this occasion was quieter than any
previous return had been. There were no boisterous young men playing

football with a visitor’s hat; indeed, the whole building seemed quieter,
though Brock, whom Rivers sat next to at dinner, said that the change in
regime had not been as striking as had been intended. The wearing of Sam
Browne belts was strictly enjoined and offenders relentlessly pursued, but,
aside from that, the attempt to run a psychiatric hospital on parade ground
lines had been briefly and vociferously tried, then rapidly and quietly
abandoned.

After dinner Rivers set out to see the patients who were due to be

Boarded the following day. Anderson had at last received a visit from his
wife, though it didn’t seem to have cheered him up much. The conflict
between himself and his family, as to whether he should return to medicine
or not, was deepening as the time came for him to leave Craiglockhart. The
nightmares were still very bad, but in any case the haemophobia alone
prevented any hospital service whether in Britain or France. Rivers hoped
that he would be given a desk job in London, which would also enable
Rivers to go on seeing him. At the same time he was a little doubtful even
about that. Anderson had moved from a position of being sceptical and even
uncooperative to a state of deep attachment, in which there was a danger of
dependency. He left Anderson’s room shaking his head.

Sassoon was sitting by the fire in almost the same position he’d been in

when Rivers left.

‘What have you been doing with yourself?’ Rivers asked.
‘Trying to keep my head down.’
‘Successfully?’
‘I think so.’
‘Have you managed to write?’
‘Finished the book. It’s called Counter-Attack.’
‘Very appropriate.’
‘You shall have the first copy.’
Rivers looked round the room, which seemed cold and bleak in spite of

the small fire. ‘Do you hear from Owen at all?’

‘Constantly. He … er … writes distinctly effusive letters. You know …’

He hesitated. ‘I knew about the hero-worship, but I’m beginning to think it

was rather more than that.’

Rivers watched the firelight flicker on Sassoon’s hair and face. He said,

‘It happens.’

‘I just hope I was kind enough.’
‘I’m sure you were.’
‘I don’t suppose you’ve heard from the War Office?’
‘On the contrary. I had dinner with Hope the other night, and I have an

informal assurance that no obstacles will be put in your way. It’s not a
guarantee, but it’s the best I can do.’

Sassoon took a deep breath. ‘All right. Back to the sausage machine.’
‘It doesn’t mean you don’t have to be careful with the Board.’
Sassoon smiled. ‘I shall say as little as possible.’

The Board was chaired by the new CO, Colonel Balfour Graham. The
previous evening Rivers and Brock had discussed the likely effects of this
on the conduct of the Board, but had not been able to reach any firm
conclusion. Balfour Graham hadn’t had time to get to know most of the
patients. Either he’d be content simply to move things along as smoothly as
possible or, at worst, he might feel obliged to assert his authority by asking
both patient and MO more questions than was usual. The third member of
the Board was Major Huntley, still – if his conversation over breakfast was
anything to go by – obsessed by rose growing and racial degeneracy.

Anderson came first. Balfour Graham expressed some surprise that

Rivers was not recommending a general discharge.

‘He still wants to serve his country,’ Rivers said. ‘And there’s absolutely

no reason why he shouldn’t be able to do so. In an administrative capacity. I
rather think he may be given a desk job in the War Office.’

‘Are we doing the War Office or the patient a favour?’ Balfour Graham

asked.

‘He’s an able man. It might be quite good for them to have somebody

with extensive experience of France.’

‘Lord, yes,’ said Huntley.

‘It merely occurred to me that it might be convenient for Anderson to be

able to postpone the moment when he has to face the prospect of civilian
medicine.’

‘That too,’ said Rivers.
The actual interview with Anderson was reasonably quick. Indeed, the

whole morning went quickly. They stopped for lunch – over which Rivers
professed great interest in mildew and blackspot – and then sat down rather
wearily but on time for the next ten. Rivers hardly knew at this stage
whether he felt reassured or not. Balfour Graham was quick, courteous,
efficient – and shrewd. Huntley’s interventions, though rare, were rather
unpredictable, and seemed to depend entirely on whether he liked the
patient. He took to Willard at once, and was scandalized when Rivers made
some comment deploring Willard’s lack of insight. ‘What’s he want insight
for? He’s supposed to be killing the buggers, Rivers, not psychoanalysing
them.’

Sassoon was last but one. ‘A slightly unusual case,’ Rivers began,

dismissively. ‘In the sense that I’m recommending him for general service
overseas.’

‘More than slightly unusual, surely?’ Balfour Graham asked with a faint

smile. ‘I don’t think it’s ever been done before. Has it?’

‘I couldn’t make any other recommendation. He’s completely fit,

mentally and physically, he wants to go back to France, and … I have been
given an assurance by the War Office that no obstacles will be placed in his
way.’

‘Why should they be?’ asked Huntley.
Balfour Graham said, ‘This is the young man who believes the war is

being fought for the wrong reasons, and that we should explore Germany’s
offer of a negotiated peace. Do you think –’

‘Those were his views,’ Rivers said, ‘while he was still suffering from

exhaustion and the after-effects of a shoulder wound. Fortunately a brother
officer intervened and he was sent here. Really no more was required than a
brief period of rest and reflection. He now feels very strongly that it’s his
duty to go back.’

‘He was dealt with very leniently, it seems to me,’ Huntley said.
‘He has a good record. MC. Recommended for the DSO.’
‘Ah,’ Huntley said.
‘I do see what you mean by unusual,’ Balfour Graham said.
‘The point is he wants to go back.’
‘Right, let’s see him.’
Sassoon came in and saluted. Rivers watched the other two. Balfour

Graham acknowledged the salute pleasantly enough. Major Huntley
positively beamed. Rivers took Sassoon through the recent past, framing his
questions to require no more than a simple yes or no. Sassoon’s manner was
excellent. Exactly the right mixture of confidence and deference. Rivers
turned to Balfour Graham.

Balfour Graham was shuffling about among his papers. Suddenly, he

looked up. ‘No nightmares?’

‘No, sir.’
Sassoon’s expression didn’t change, but Rivers sensed he was lying.
‘Never?’
‘Not since I left the 4th London, sir.’
‘That was in … April?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Balfour Graham looked at Rivers. Rivers looked at the ceiling.
‘Major Huntley?’
Major Huntley leaned forward. ‘Rivers tells us you’ve changed your

mind about the war. Is that right?’

A startled glance. ‘No, sir.’
Balfour Graham and Huntley looked at each other.
‘You haven’t changed your views?’ Balfour Graham asked.
‘No, sir.’ Sassoon’s gaze was fixed unwaveringly on Rivers. ‘I believe

exactly what I believed in July. Only if possible more strongly.’

A tense silence.
‘I see,’ Balfour Graham said.
‘Wasn’t there something in The Times?’ Huntley asked. ‘I seem to …’

He reached across for the file. Rivers leant forward, pinning it to the table

with his elbow. ‘But you do now feel quite certain it’s your duty to go
back?’

‘Yes, sir.’
‘And you have no doubts about that?’
‘None whatsoever.’
‘Well,’ Balfour Graham said as the door closed behind Sassoon, ‘I

suppose you are sure about this, Rivers? He’s not going to go back and
foment rebellion in the ranks?’

‘No, he won’t do that. He won’t do anything to lower the morale of his

men.’

‘I hope you’re right. He was lying about the nightmares, you know.’
‘Yes, I gathered that.’
‘I suppose he thinks that might be a reason for keeping him here. The

point is do we see a reason for keeping him here? Huntley?’

Major Huntley seemed to return from a great distance. ‘Spanish Jews.’
Balfour Graham looked blank.
‘Father’s side. Spanish Jews.’
‘You know the family?’ Rivers asked.
‘Good lord, yes. Mother was a Thornycroft.’ He shook his head. ‘Ah

well. Hybrid vigour.’

Rivers was across the rose garden several paces ahead of Balfour

Graham. ‘So you think he’s fit?’

‘ ’Course he’s fit. Good God, man, how often do you see a physique like

that, even in the so-called upper classes?’

They were back to eugenics again, but for once Rivers had no desire to

interrupt.

After dinner Sassoon came to say goodbye. He’d been told the result of the
Board and had spent the intervening time packing. Rivers hadn’t expected
him to linger. Apart from Owen, he’d made no friends at Craiglockhart, not
even Anderson, though they’d spent a large part of every day together. And
he’d never bothered to disguise his hatred of the place.

‘What are you going to do?’ Rivers asked.
‘Oh, I’ll have a couple of days in London, then go home, I suppose.’
‘Time for a consultation with Dr Mercier? No, I mean it.’
‘I know you mean it. You old fox. Then Garsington, try to explain myself

to the pacifists.’ He pulled a face. ‘I don’t look forward to that.’

‘Blame me. They will.’
‘I shall do no such thing.’
‘It’s a possible way of telling the story, you know.’
‘Yes, I know. But it’s not the way I’d tell it. Was it difficult, the Board?’
‘No, surprisingly easy. Major Huntley thinks you have a great future as a

rose bush. Hybrid vigour.’

‘Ah, I see. Dad’s lot.’
‘I must say the sheer force of your refusal to recant came as rather a

shock.’

Sassoon looked away. ‘I couldn’t lie.’
‘You managed all right about the nightmares.’
Silence.
‘How long has that been going on?’
‘Since you left. I’ll be all right once I’m out of this place.’
Sassoon didn’t want to talk about the nightmares. He was feeling

distinctly cheerful. Exactly the same feeling he had had on board ship going
to France, watching England slide away into the mist. No doubts, no
scruples, no agonizing, just a straightforward, headlong retreat towards the
front.

Rivers seemed to read his thoughts. ‘Don’t take unnecessary risks.’
‘No, of course not,’ Sassoon said. Though he thought he might.
He stood up, visibly anxious to be off. Rivers followed him to the door

and then out into the entrance hall. Balfour Graham and Huntley were there,
deep in conversation. It was going to be a very public farewell.

‘I’ll keep in touch,’ Sassoon said.
‘Yes. Try and see me before you leave England.’
They shook hands. Then Sassoon, glancing sideways at the colonel and

the major, smiled a distinctly conspiratorial smile and came smartly to the

salute. ‘Thank you, sir.’

For a moment, it was Callan standing there. Then the electrical room at

Queen Square faded, and Rivers was back at Craiglockhart, on the black
and white tiled floor, alone.

He returned to his desk, and drew a stack of files towards him. He was

writing brief notes on the patients who’d been Boarded that day, but this he
could do almost automatically. His thoughts wandered as he wrote. He
wasted no time wondering how he would feel if Siegfried were to be
maimed or killed, because this was a possibility with any patient who
returned to France. He’d faced that already, many times. If anything, he was
amused by the irony of the situation, that he, who was in the business of
changing people, should himself have been changed and by somebody who
was clearly unaware of having done it.

It was a far deeper change, though, than merely coming to believe that a

negotiated peace might be possible, and desirable. That at least it ought to
be explored. He remembered telling Head how he had tried to change his
life when he came back from Melanesia for the second time and how that
attempt had failed. He’d gone on being reticent, introverted, reclusive. Of
course it had been a very introverted, self-conscious attempt, and perhaps
that was why it hadn’t worked. Here in this building, where he had no time
to be introverted or self-conscious, where he hardly had a moment to
himself at all, the changes had taken place without his knowing. That was
not Siegfried. That was all of them. Burns and Prior and Pugh and a
hundred others. As a young man he’d been both by temperament and
conviction deeply conservative, and not merely in politics. Now, in middle
age, the sheer extent of the mess seemed to be forcing him into conflict with
the authorities over a very wide range of issues … medical, military.
Whatever. A society that devours its own young deserves no automatic or
unquestioning allegiance. Perhaps the rebellion of the old might count for
rather more than the rebellion of the young. Certainly poor Siegfried’s
rebellion hadn’t counted for much, though he reminded himself that he
couldn’t know that. It had been a completely honest action and such actions

are seeds carried on the wind. Nobody can tell where, or in what
circumstances, they will bear fruit.

How on earth was Siegfried going to manage in France? His opposition

to the war had not changed. If anything it had hardened. And to go back to
fight, believing as he did, would be to encounter internal divisions far
deeper than anything he’d experienced before. Siegfried’s ‘solution’ was to
tell himself that he was going back only to look after some men, but that
formula would not survive the realities of France. However devoted to his
men’s welfare a platoon commander might be, in the end he is there to kill,
and to train other people to kill. Poetry and pacifism are a strange
preparation for that role. Though Siegfried had performed it before, and
with conspicuous success. But then his hatred of the war had not been as
fully fledged, as articulate, as it was now.

It was a dilemma with one very obvious way out. Rivers knew, though he

had never voiced his knowledge, that Sassoon was going back with the
intention of being killed. Partly, no doubt, this was youthful self-
dramatization. I’ll show them. They’ll be sorry. But underneath that, Rivers
felt there was a genuine and very deep desire for death.

And if death were to be denied? Then he might well break down. A real

breakdown, this time.

Rivers saw that he had reached Sassoon’s file. He read through the

admission report and the notes that followed it. There was nothing more he
wanted to say that he could say. He drew the final page towards him and
wrote: Nov. 26, 1917. Discharged to duty.

Author’s Note

Fact and fiction are so interwoven in this book that it may help the reader to
know what is historical and what is not. Siegfried Sassoon (1886–1967) did,
in July 1917, protest against the continuation of the war. Robert Graves
persuaded him to attend a Medical Board and he was sent to Craiglockhart
War Hospital, where he came under the care of Dr W. H. R. Rivers, FRS
(1864–1922), the distinguished neurologist and social anthropologist, who
then held the rank of captain in the RAMC. During Sassoon’s stay he
formed a friendship with one of Dr Brock’s patients, Wilfred Owen (1893–
1918), though it is probably fair to say that this friendship played a more
central role in Owen’s life, then and later, than it did in Sassoon’s.

Rivers’s methods of treating his patients are described in ‘The Repression

of War Experience’ (Lancet, 2 Feb. 1918) and in his posthumously
published book Conflict and Dream (London, Kegan Paul, 1923), in which
Sassoon makes a brief appearance as ‘Patient B’.

Dr Lewis Yealland’s rather different methods of treating his patients are

described in detail in his book: Hysterical Disorders of Warfare (London,
Macmillan, 1918).

There is an interesting discussion of Rivers’s pre-war work with Henry

Head on nerve regeneration, and the concept of protopathic and epicritic
innervation which evolved from it, in ‘The Dog Beneath the Skin’ by
Jonathan Miller (Listener, 20 July 1972).

The amendments suggested by Sassoon to the early draft of ‘Anthem for

Doomed Youth’ appear in Sassoon’s handwriting on the MSS. See Wilfred
Owen: The Complete Poems and Fragments, Vol. II, edited by Jon
Stallworthy (Chatto & Windus, The Hogarth Press and Oxford University
Press, 1983). Two modern texts which contain stimulating discussions of

‘shell-shock’ are No Man’s Land: Combat and Identity in World War I by
Eric Leed (Cambridge University Press, 1979) and The Female Malady by
Elaine Showalter (Virago Press, 1987).

Julian Dadd, whose psychiatric illness caused Sassoon some concern

during his stay at Craiglockhart, subsequently went on to make a complete
recovery.

I’m grateful for help received from the staff of the following libraries:

Sheffield Public Library, Newcastle University Medical Library, Cambridge
University Library, Napier Polytechnic Library, Edinburgh (formerly
Craiglockhart War Hospital), The Oxford University English Faculty
Library, the Imperial War Museum, and St John’s College, Cambridge,
where the Deputy Librarian M. Pratt did much to make my visit interesting
and enjoyable.

THE EYE IN THE DOOR

The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde

– R. L. Stevenson

Part One

ONE

In formal beds beside the Serpentine, early tulips stood in tight-lipped rows.
Billy Prior spent several moments setting up an enfilade, then, releasing his
companion’s arm, seized an imaginary machine-gun and blasted the heads
off the whole bloody lot of them.

Myra stared in amazement. ‘You barmy bugger.’
He shook his head sadly. ‘Five months in a loony bin last year.’
‘Go on.’
She didn’t believe him, of course. Smiling, he came back and offered her

his arm. They had been wandering along beside the lake for an hour, but
now the afternoon was waning. A coppery light, more like autumn than
spring, slanted across the grass, turning the thorned twigs of rose bushes
into strips of live electric filament that glowed, reddish, in the dusk.

Prior, always self-conscious, was aware of approving glances following

them as they passed. They made a romantic picture, he supposed. The girl,
young and pretty, clinging to the arm of a man in uniform, a man, moreover,
wearing a greatcoat so grotesquely stained and battered it had obviously
seen a good deal of active service. As indeed it had, and was about to see
more, if only he could persuade the silly bitch to lie on it.

‘You’re cold,’ he said tenderly, unbuttoning the greatcoat. ‘Put your hand

in here. You know, we’d be warmer under the trees. We’d be out of the
wind.’

She paused, doubtfully, for by the lake it was still light, whereas the

avenue of trees he was pointing to smoked darkness. ‘All right,’ she said at
last.

They set off across the grass, their shadows stretching ahead of them,

black, attenuated figures that reached the trees and began to climb before

they were anywhere near. In the darkness they leant against the trunk of one
of the trees and started to kiss. After a while she moaned, and her thighs
slackened, and he pressed her back against the fissured bark. His open
greatcoat shielded them both. Her hands slid round him, underneath his
tunic, and grasped his buttocks, pulling him hard against her. She was
tugging at his waistband and buttons and he helped her unfasten them,
giving her free play with his cock and balls. His hands were slowly inching
up her skirt. Already he’d found the place where the rough stockings gave
way to smooth skin. ‘Shall we lie down?’

Her hands came up to form a barrier. ‘What, in this?’
‘You’ll be warm enough.’
‘I bloody won’t. I’m nithered now.’ To emphasize the point she pressed

her hands into her armpits and rocked herself.

‘All right,’ he said, his voice hardening. ‘Let’s go back to the flat.’ He’d

wanted to avoid doing that, because he knew his landlady would be in, and
watching.

She didn’t look at him. ‘No, I think I’d better be getting back.’
‘I’ll take you.’
‘No, I’d rather say goodbye here, if you don’t mind. Me mother-in-law

lives five doors down.’

‘You were keen enough the other night.’
Myra smiled placatingly. ‘Look, I had a woman come nosying round.

The voluntary police, you know? They can come into your house, or
anything, they don’t have to ask. And this one’s a right old cow. I knew her
before the war. She was all for women’s rights. I says, “What about my
rights? Aren’t I a woman?” But there’s no point arguing with ’em. They can
get your money stopped. And anyway it isn’t right, is it? With Eddie at the
Front?’

Prior said in a clipped, authoritative voice, ‘He was at the Front on Friday

night.’ He heard the note of self-righteousness, and saw himself, fumbling
with the fly buttons of middle-class morality. Good God, no. He’d rather tie
a knot in it than have to live with that image. ‘Come on,’ he said. ‘I’ll walk
you to the station.’

He strode towards Lancaster Gate, not caring if she followed or not. She

came trotting breathlessly along beside him. ‘We can still be friends, can’t
we?’

He felt her gaze on his face.
‘Can’t we?’
He stopped and turned to face her. ‘Myra, you’re the sort of girl who

ends up in a ditch with her stockings round her neck.’

He walked on more slowly. After a while, her hand came creeping

through his arm, and, after a moment’s hesitation, he left it there.

‘Have you got a girl?’ she said.
A brief struggle. ‘Yes.’
She nodded, satisfied. ‘Thought you had. Lying little git, aren’t you?

Friday night, you said you hadn’t.’

‘We both said a bellyful on Friday night.’
At the underground station he bought her ticket, and she reached up and

kissed his cheek as if nothing had happened. Well, he thought, nothing had
happened. On the other side of the barrier she turned, and looked as if she
might be regretting the evening they’d planned, but then she gave a little
wave, stepped out on to the moving staircase and was carried smoothly
away.

Outside the station he hesitated. The rest of the evening stretched in front

of him and he didn’t know what to do. He thought about going for a drink,
but rejected the idea. If he started drinking as early as this and in this mood,
he’d end up drunk, and he couldn’t afford to do that; he had to be clear-
headed for the prison tomorrow. He drifted aimlessly along.

It was just beginning to be busy, people hurrying to restaurants and bars,

doing their best to forget the shortages, the skimped clothes, the grey bread.
All winter, it seemed to Prior, an increasingly frenetic quality had been
creeping into London life. Easily justified, of course. Soldiers home on
leave had to be given a good time; they mustn’t be allowed to remember
what they were going back to, and this gave everybody else a magnificent
excuse for never thinking about it at all.

Though this week it had been difficult to avoid thinking. Haig’s April

13th Order of the Day had appeared in full in every newspaper. He knew it
off by heart. Everybody did.

There is no other course open to us but to fight it out. Every position must be held to the
last man: there must be no retirement. With our backs to the wall, and believing in the
justice of our cause, each one of us must fight on to the end.

Whatever effect the Order had on the morale of the army, it had produced
panic among civilians. Some women, apparently, were planning in all
seriousness how they should kill themselves and their children when the
Germans arrived. Those atrocity stories from the first months of the war had
done the trick. Rather too well. Nuns with their breasts cut off. Priests hung
upside-down and used as clappers to ring their own bells. Not that there
hadn’t been atrocities, but prisoners of war were always the main victims,
and the guilt was more evenly distributed than the press liked to think.

There were times – and tonight was one of them – when Prior was made

physically sick by the sight and sound and smell of civilians. He
remembered the stench that comes off a battalion of men marching back
from the line, the thick yellow stench, and he thought how preferable it was
to this. He knew he had to get off the streets, away from the chattering
crowds and the whiffs of perfume that assaulted his nostrils whenever a
woman walked past.

Back in the park, under the trees, he began to relax. Perhaps it was his

own need that coloured his perceptions, but it seemed to him that the park
on this spring evening was alive with desire. Silhouetted against the sunset,
a soldier and his girl meandered along, leaning against each other so heavily
that if either had withdrawn the other would have fallen. It made him think
of himself and Sarah on the beach in Scotland, and he turned away sharply.
No point thinking about that. It would be six weeks at least before he could
hope to see her again. Further along towards Marble Arch the figures were
solitary. Army boots tramped and slurred along the paths or, in the deepest
shadow, jetted sparks.

He sat on a bench and lit a cigarette, still trying to decide what to do with

the stump of his evening. He needed sex, and he needed it badly. Tossing

off was no use, because … because it was no use. Prostitutes were out
because he didn’t pay. He remembered telling Rivers, who’d been his
doctor at Craiglockhart War Hospital, the ‘loony bin’ where he’d spent five
months of the previous year, about a brothel in Amiens, how the men, the
private soldiers, queued out on to the pavement and were allowed two
minutes each. ‘How long do officers get?’ Rivers had asked. ‘I don’t know,’
Prior had said. ‘Longer than that.’ And then, spitting the words, ‘I don’t
pay.’ No doubt Rivers had thought it rather silly, a young man’s ridiculous
pride in his sexual prowess, his ability to ‘get it’ free. But it was nothing to
do with that. Prior didn’t pay because once, some years ago, he had been
paid, and he knew exactly how the payer looks to the one he’s paying.

‘Got a light?’
Automatically, Prior began tapping his pockets. At first he hardly

registered the existence of the speaker, except as an unwelcome interruption
to his thoughts, but then, as he produced the matches, some unconsciously
registered nervousness in the other man’s voice made him look up. He had
been going to offer the box, but now he changed his mind, took out a match
and struck it himself. The rasp and flare sounded very loud. He cupped his
hands to shield the flame, and held it out as the other bent towards it. An
officer’s peaked cap, dark eyes, a thin moustache defining a full mouth, the
face rounded, though not fat. Prior was sure he knew him, though he
couldn’t remember where he’d seen him before. When the cigarette was lit,
he didn’t immediately move off, but sat further along the bench, looking
vaguely around him, the rather prominent Adam’s apple jerking in his
throat. His left leg was stretched out awkwardly in front of him, presumably
the explanation of the wound stripe on his sleeve.

Prior could see the problem. This wasn’t exactly the right area, though it

bordered upon it, and his own behaviour, though interesting, had not been
definitely inviting. He was tempted to tease. Instead he moved closer and
said, ‘Have you anywhere to go?’

‘Yes.’ The man looked up. ‘It’s not far.’

The square contained tall, narrow, dark houses, ranged round a fenced-off
lawn with spindly trees. The lawn and the surrounding flowerbeds were
rank with weeds. Further along, on the right, a bomb had knocked out three
houses and partially demolished a fourth, leaving a huge gap. They walked
along, not talking much. As they approached the gap, the pavement became
gritty beneath their feet, pallid with the white dust that flowed so copiously
from stricken houses and never seemed to clear, no matter how carefully the
ruin was fenced off. Prior was aware of a distinct sideways pull towards the
breach. He’d felt this before, walking past other bombed sites. He had no
idea whether this sideways tug was felt by everybody, or whether it was
peculiar to him, some affinity with places where the established order has
been violently assailed.

They stopped in front of No. 27. The windows were shuttered. A cat,

hunched and defensive, crouched on the basement steps, growling over
something it had found.

Prior’s companion was having trouble with the lock. ‘Part of the

damage,’ he said over his shoulder, pulling a face. He jabbed the door with
his shoulder, then seized the knob and pulled it towards him. ‘It works if
you pull, I keep forgetting that.’

‘Not too often, I hope,’ said Prior.
His companion turned and smiled, and for a moment there was a renewed

pull of sexual tension between them. He took off his cap and greatcoat, and
held out his hand for Prior’s. ‘The family’s in the country. I’m staying at my
club.’ He hesitated, ‘I suppose I’d better introduce myself. Charles
Manning.’

‘Billy Prior.’
Covertly, they examined each other. Manning had a very round head,

emphasized by thick, sleek dark hair which he wore brushed back with no
parting. His eyes were alert. He resembled some kind of animal, Prior
thought, an otter perhaps. Manning saw a thin, fair-haired man, twenty-
three or four, with a blunt-nosed, high-cheekboned face and a general air of
picking his way delicately through life. Manning pushed open a door on the

left, and a breath of dead air came into the hall. ‘Why don’t you go in? I
won’t be a minute.’

Prior entered. Tall windows shuttered, furniture shrouded in white sheets.

A heavy smell of soot from the empty grate. Everything was under dust-
sheets except the tall mirror that reflected, through the open door, the mirror
in the hall. Prior found himself staring down a long corridor of Priors, some
with their backs to him, none more obviously real than the rest. He moved
away.

‘Would you like a drink?’ Manning asked from the door.
‘Yes, please.’
‘Whisky all right?’
‘Fine.’
Alone, Prior walked across to the grand piano, lifted the edge of the dust-

sheet and found himself looking at a photograph of a woman with two small
boys, one of them clutching a sailing boat to his chest.

When Manning came back, carrying a whisky bottle, a jug and two

glasses, Prior was staring at a crack above the door. ‘That looks a bit
ominous,’ he said.

‘Yes, doesn’t it? I don’t know what I’m supposed to do about it, really.

One can’t get workmen, so I just come in and look at it now and then.’ He
held up the jug. ‘Water?’

‘Just a dash.’
They moved across to the fireside chairs. Manning pulled off the sheets,

and Prior settled back against the stiff brocade. It didn’t give at all, but held
him tensely upright. They started making the sort of conversation they
might have made if they’d been introduced in the mess. Prior watched
Manning carefully, noting the MC ribbon, the wound stripe, the twitches,
the signs of tension, the occasional stammer. He was in a state, though it
was difficult to tell how much of his nervousness was due to the situation.
Which was dragging on a bit. If this went on they’d demolish the whole
bloody bottle and still be swopping regimental chit-chat at midnight. All
very nice, Prior thought, but not what I came for. He noticed that Manning’s
eyes, though they roamed all over the place, always returned to the stars on

Prior’s sleeve. Well, you knew I was an officer, he said silently. He was
beginning to suspect Manning might be one of those who cannot – simply
cannot – let go sexually with a social equal. Prior sighed, and stood up. ‘Do
you mind if I take this off?’ he said. ‘I’m quite warm.’

He wasn’t warm. In fact, to coin a phrase, he was bloody nithered.

However. He took off his tie, tunic and shirt, and threw them over the back
of a chair. Manning said nothing, simply watched. Prior ran his fingers
through his cropped hair till it stood up in spikes, lit a cigarette, rolled it in a
particular way along his bottom lip, and smiled. He’d transformed himself
into the sort of working-class boy Manning would think it was all right to
fuck. A sort of seminal spittoon. And it worked. Manning’s eyes grew dark
as his pupils flared. Bending over him, Prior put his hand between his legs,
thinking he’d probably never felt a spurt of purer class antagonism than he
felt at that moment. He roughened his accent. ‘A’ right?’

‘Yes. Let’s go upstairs.’
Prior followed him. On the first floor a door stood open, leading into a

large bedroom with a double bed. Manning pulled the door shut. Prior
smiled faintly. ’E would not take Oi into the bed where ’e ’ad deflowered
’is broide. Instead ’e went up and up and bloody up. To what were
obviously the servants’ quarters. Manning pushed open a door at the end of
the corridor, handed Prior the lamp and said, ‘I won’t be a minute.’

Prior went in. A double bed with a brass bedstead almost filled the tiny

room. He sat on the edge and bounced up and down. It was quite possibly
the noisiest bed he’d ever encountered. Thank God the house was empty.
Apart from the bed there was a washstand with a jug and bowl, a table with
a looking-glass, and a small closet curtained off. He got up and pulled the
curtain back. Two housemaids’ uniforms hung there, looking almost like the
maids themselves, the sleeves and caps had been so neatly arranged. A
smell came from the closet: lavender and sweat, a sad smell. Prior’s mother
had started her life in service in just such a house as this. He looked round
the room, the freezing little box of a room, with its view of roofs, and, on a
sudden impulse, got one of the uniforms out and buried his face in the
armpit, inhaling the smell of sweat. This impulse had nothing to do with

sex, though it came from a layer of personality every bit as deep. Manning
came back into the room just as Prior raised his head. Seeing Prior with the
uniform held against him, Manning looked, it had to be said, daunted. Prior
smiled, and put the uniform back on the peg.

Manning set a small jar down on the table by the bed. The click of glass

on wood brought them into a closer, tenser relationship than anything
they’d so far managed to achieve. Prior finished undressing and lay down
on the bed. Manning’s leg was bad. Very bad. Prior leant forward to
examine the knee, and for a moment they might have been boys in the
playground again, examining each other’s scabs.

‘It looks as if you’re out of it.’
‘Probably. The tendons’ve shortened, you see. They think I’ve got about

as much movement as I’m going to get. But then who knows? The way
things are going, is anybody out of it?’

Prior straightened up, and, since he was in the neighbourhood, began to

rub his face across the hair in Manning’s groin. Manning’s cock stirred and
rose and Prior took it into his mouth, but even then, for a long time, he
simply played, nicking his tongue round and round the glistening dome.
Manning’s thighs tautened. After a while his hand came up and caressed
Prior’s cropped hair, his thumb massaging the nape of his neck. Prior raised
his head and saw that Manning looked nervous, rightly, since in this
situation it was a gesture of tenderness that would precipitate violence, if
anything did. And Manning was in no state to cope with that. He went back
to his sucking, clasping Manning’s buttocks in his two hands and moving
his mouth rapidly up and down the shaft. Manning pushed him gently away
and got into bed. They lay stretched out for a moment side by side. Prior
rolled on to his elbow and started to stroke Manning’s chest, belly and
thighs. He was thinking how impossible it is to sum up sex in terms of who
stuffs what into where. This movement of his hand had in it lust;
resentment, of Manning’s use of the room among other things; sympathy,
for the wound; envy, because Manning was honourably out of it … And a
growing awareness that while he had been looking at Manning, Manning
had also been looking at him. Prior’s expression hardened. He thought,

Well, at least I don’t twitch as much as you do. The stroking hand stopped
at Manning’s waist, and he tried to turn him over, but Manning resisted.
‘No,’ he said. ‘Like this.’

Athletic sod. Prior unscrewed the jar, greased his cock with a mixture of

vaseline and spit, and wiped the residue on Manning’s arse. He guided
Manning’s legs up his chest, being exceedingly careful not to jerk the knee.
He was too eager, and the position was hopeless for control, he was fighting
himself before he’d got an inch in, and then Manning yelped and tried to
pull away. Prior started to withdraw, then suddenly realized that Manning
needed to be hurt. ‘Keep still,’ he said, and went on fucking. It was a
dangerous game. Prior was capable of real sadism, and knew it, and the
knee was only a inch or so away from his hand. He came quickly, with deep
shuddering groans, a feeling of being pulled out of himself that started in
his throat. Carefully, he lowered Manning’s legs and sucked him off. He
was so primed he was clutching Prior’s head and gasping almost before
he’d started. ‘I needed that,’ he said, when it was over. ‘I needed a good
fucking.’

You all do, Prior thought. Manning went to the bathroom. Prior reached

out and turned the looking-glass towards him. Into this glass they had
looked, half past five every morning, winter and summer, yawning, bleary-
eyed, checking to see their caps were on straight and their hair tucked away.
He remembered his mother telling him that, in the house where she’d
worked, if a maid met a member of the family in the corridor she had to
stand with her face turned to the wall.

Manning came back carrying the whisky bottle and glasses. He was

limping badly. Despite Prior’s efforts the position couldn’t have done the
knee any good.

‘Where d’you get it?’ Prior asked, nodding at the wound.
‘Passchendaele.’
‘Oh, yes. Your lot were in the assault on the ridge?’
‘That’s right.’ Manning poured the whisky and sat at the end of the bed,

propping himself up against the bedstead, and stretching his left leg out in
front of him. ‘Great fun.’

Prior said, ‘I’ve just had a Board.’ He didn’t want to talk about his

condition, but he was incapable of leaving the subject alone. Manning’s
silence on the subject, when a question would have been so much more
natural, had begun to irritate him.

‘What did they say?’ Manning asked.
‘They haven’t said anything yet. I’m supposed to be Permanent Home

Service, but with things the way they are …’

Manning hesitated, then asked, ‘It is neurasthenia, isn’t it?’
No, Prior wanted to say, it’s raging homicidal mania, with a particular

predilection for dismembering toffee-nosed gits with wonky knees. ‘No, it’s
asthma,’ he said. ‘I was neurasthenic, but then I had two asthmatic attacks
in the hospital, so that confused things a bit.’

‘Which hospital were you in?’
‘Craiglockhart. It’s up in –’
‘Ah, then you know Rivers.’
Prior stared. ‘He was my doctor. Still is. He’s … he’s in London now.’
‘Yes, I know.’
It was Prior’s turn not to ask the obvious question.
‘Are you still on sick leave?’ Manning asked, after a pause.
‘No, I’m at the Ministry of Munitions. In the …’ He looked at Manning.

‘And that’s where I’ve seen you. I knew I had.’

Manning smiled, but he was very obviously not pleased. ‘Just as well I

didn’t call myself “Smith”. I thought about it.’

‘If you’re going to do that I’d remove the letters from the hall table first.

They aren’t addressed to “Smith”.’ Prior looked down into his glass, and
gave up the struggle. ‘How do you know Rivers?’

Manning smiled. ‘He’s my doctor, too.’
‘Shell-shock?’
‘No. Not exactly. I … er … I was picked up by the police. About two

months ago. Not quite caught in the act, but … The young man disappeared
as soon as we got to the police station. Anyway.’

‘What happened?’

‘Oh, we all sat around. Nobody did anything unpleasant. I sent for my

solicitor, and eventually he arrived, and they let me go. Wound helped.
Medal helped.’ He looked directly at Prior. ‘Connections helped. You
mustn’t despise me too easily, you know. I’m not a fool. And then I went
home and waited. My solicitor seemed to think if it went to court I’d get
two years, but they probably wouldn’t give me hard labour because of the
leg.’

‘That’s big of them.’
‘Yes. Isn’t it? Then somebody said the thing to do was to go to a

psychologist and get treatment and and … and that would help. So I went to
Dr Head, who has quite a reputation in this field – I was actually told in so
many words “Henry Head can cure sodomites” – and he said he couldn’t do
me, he was snowed under, and he recommended Rivers. So I went to him,
and he said he’d take me on.’

‘Do you want to be cured?’
‘No.’
‘What does he do?’
‘Talks. Or rather, I talk. He listens.’
‘About sex?’
‘No, not very often. The war, mainly. You see that’s where the confusion

comes in because he took one look at me and decided I was neurasthenic. I
mean, I can see his point. I was in quite a state when I came out of hospital.
A lot worse than I realized at the time. One night at dinner I just picked up a
vase and smashed it against the wall. It was quite a large party, about twelve
people, and there was this awful … silence. And I couldn’t explain why I’d
done it. Except the vase was hideous. But then my wife said, “So is your
Aunt Dorothea. Where is that sort of thinking going to lead?”’ He smiled. ‘I
can’t talk to anybody else, so I talk to him.’

Prior put his hand on Manning’s arm. ‘Are you going to be all right? I

mean, are they going to leave you alone?’

‘I don’t know. I think if they were going to bring charges they’d’ve

brought them by now.’ His voice deepened. ‘ “At that moment there was a
knock on the door …” ’

Prior was thinking. ‘All the same, it’s rather convenient, isn’t it? That

you’re neurasthenic?’

‘Not particularly.’
‘I meant for Rivers. He doesn’t have to talk abou –’
‘I don’t know what Rivers thinks. Anyway, it’s the war I need to talk

about. And even with him, you know, there are some things I couldn’t –’

‘You will.’
They lay and looked at each other. Manning said, ‘You were going to say

which part of the ministry –’

‘Yes, so I was. Intelligence.’
‘With Major Lode?’
‘Yes. With Major Lode. And you?’
‘I’m on the fifth floor.’
Evidently the location was the answer. Manning turned and threw his arm

across Prior’s chest. ‘Do you fancy a bit of turn and turn about? Or don’t
you do that?’

Prior smiled. ‘I do anything.’

TWO

Charles Manning left the Ministry of Munitions two hours earlier than usual
and went to his house, where he’d arranged to meet a builder who’d
promised to repair the bomb damage. It was mid-afternoon. A surprisingly
sticky day for spring, warm and damp. When the sun shone, as it did
fitfully, emerging from banks of black cloud, the young leaves on the trees
glowed a vivid, almost virulent green.

He was walking abstractedly past the bombed site, when the crunch of

grit and the smell of charred brick made him pause, and peer through a gap
in the fence. The demolished houses had left an outline of themselves on
either side of the gap, like after-images on the retina. He saw the looped and
trellised bedroom wallpaper that once only the family and its servants
would have seen, exposed now to wind and rain and the gaze of casual
passers-by. Nothing moved in that wilderness, but, somewhere out of sight,
dust leaked steadily from the unstaunchable wound.

Suddenly a cat appeared, a skinny cat, one of the abandoned pets that

hung around the square. It began picking its way among the rubble, sharply
black and sleek, a silhouette at once angular and sinuous. It stopped, and
Manning was aware of baleful yellow eyes turned in his direction, of a cleft
pink nose raised to sift the air. Then it continued on its way, the soft pads of
its feet finding spaces between shards of glittering glass. Manning watched
till it was out of sight. Then, thinking he must get a move on, he swung his
stiff leg up the steps to his house and inserted his key in the lock,
remembering, with a faint smile, that he must pull and not push.

There was an envelope in the post-box. He took it out and carried it

through into the drawing-room, his eyes gradually becoming accustomed to
the darkness. A heavy smell of soot. There must have been another fall:

chimney-sweeping was another job one couldn’t get done. He looked down
at the envelope. Typewritten. Tradesman, probably. His family and friends
all knew he was staying at his club. He put the letter down on the dust-sheet
that covered the sofa and walked to the other end of the room, where he
opened the shutters, letting in a flood of sickly yellow light.

He went to look at the crack above the door. Is it a load-bearing wall? the

builder had asked. Manning thumped with his clenched fist. It didn’t sound
hollow or feel flimsy, but then these houses were very solidly built. He
crossed to the front wall, banged again and thought perhaps he could detect
a difference. Not much in it, though. He went back to the crack and noticed
that the whole surround of the door had been loosened. In fact the more
closely one examined it the worse it appeared. That looks ominous, Prior
had said, smiling slightly. Odd lad. Even as he felt himself begin to stir at
the recollection of the evening, Manning’s mind was at work, categorizing.
At first, noting Prior’s flattened vowels, he’d thought, oh yes. Temporary
gentleman. A nasty, snobbish little phrase, but everybody used it, though
obviously one tried not to use it in connection with people one liked. But
the amazing thing was how persistent one’s awareness of class distinction
was. The mind seemed capable of making these minute social assessments
in almost any circumstances. He remembered the Somme, how the
Northumberlands and Durhams had lain, where the machine-guns had
caught them, in neat swathes, like harvested wheat. Later that night,
crashing along a trench in pitch-blackness, trying desperately to work out
where the frontage he was responsible for ended, he’d stumbled into a
Northumberlands’ officer, very obviously shaken by the carnage inflicted
on his battalion. And who could blame him? God knows how many they’d
lost. Manning, sympathizing, steadying, well aware that his own nerves had
not yet been tested, had none the less found time to notice that the
Northumberlands’ officer dropped his aitches. He’d been jarred by it.
Horrified by the reaction, but jarred nevertheless. And the odd thing was he
knew if the man had been a private, he would not have been jarred, he
would have handled the situation much better.

As the evening with Prior had gone on, the description ‘temporary

gentleman’ had come to seem less and less appropriate. It suggested one of
those dreadful people – well, they were dreadful – who aped their betters,
anxious to get everything ‘right’, and became, in the process, pallid,
morally etiolated and thoroughly nauseating. Prior was saved from that not
because he didn’t imitate – he did – but because he wasn’t anxious. Once or
twice one might almost have thought one detected a glint of amusement. A
hint of parody, even. All the same, the basic truth was the man was neither
fish nor fowl nor good red herring. Socially. Sexually too, of course, though
this was a less comfortable reflection. He had a girl in the north, he said, but
then they all said that. Manning had suggested they should meet again, and
Prior had agreed, but politely, without much enthusiasm. Probably he
wouldn’t come, and probably it would be just as well. His working at the
Ministry brought the whole thing rather too close to … well. Too close.

Manning looked at his watch. Ten minutes before the builder was due. He

walked across to the piano, lifted the dust-sheet and brought out the
photograph of Jane and the boys. Taken last summer. What a little podge
Robert had been. Still was. He’d always be a round-cheeked, nondescript
sort of child. He was clutching the boat as if he suspected somebody was
planning to take it away from him. No doubt James had been. He’s like me,
Manning thought, looking at Robert. He felt an almost painful love for his
elder son, and sometimes he heard himself speaking too sharply to the boy,
but it was only because he could see so much of himself. He knew the areas
of vulnerability, and that made him afraid, because in the end one cannot
protect one’s children. Everybody – Robert too, probably, that was the sad
thing – assumed James was his favourite. It wasn’t true. His love for James
was an altogether sunnier, less complicated emotion. He had more fun with
James, because he could see James was resilient. He had his mother’s dark,
clearly defined brows, her cheekbones, her jaw, the same amused, direct
look. The photograph didn’t do her justice; somehow the sunlight had
bleached the strength out of her face. Probably she looked prettier because
of it, but she also looked a good deal less like Jane. ‘It was hideous.’ The
vase he’d thrown at the wall. ‘So is your Aunt Dorothea. Where is that sort

of thinking going to lead?’ Typical Jane. It sounded unsympathetic, but it
wasn’t. Not really. She was a woman who could have faced any amount of
physical danger without flinching, but the shadows in the mind terrified her.

Manning moved across to the fireplace. On the way he noticed the letter

and picked it up again, wondering once more who would have written to
this address. There were no outstanding bills. Everybody knew he was at
the club. He began to open it, thinking he should probably ask the builder to
do something about the dent in the wall where the vase had struck. Inside
the envelope, instead of the expected sheet of paper, was a newspaper
cutting. He turned it the right way up and read:

THE CULT OF THE CLITORIS

To be a member of Maud Allen’s private performance in Oscar Wilde’s Salome one has to
apply to a Miss Valetta, of 9 Duke Street, Adelphi, WC. If Scotland Yard were to seize
the list of these members I have no doubt they would secure the names of several
thousand of the first 47,000.

He’d seen the paragraph before. It had been reproduced – usually without
the heading – in several respectable newspapers, though it had originated in
the Vigilante, Pemberton Billing’s dreadful rag. Maud Allan – they hadn’t
even spelt her name right – was sueing Pemberton Billing for libel. A grave
mistake, in Manning’s view, because once in the witness-box Pemberton
Billing could accuse anybody with complete impunity. He would be
immune from prosecution. The people he named would not. Of course you
could see it from Maud Allan’s point of view. She would be ruined if she
didn’t sue. She was probably ruined anyway.

The question was, why had it been sent to him, and by whom? The

postmark told him nothing useful. There was no covering letter. Manning
dropped the cutting on the sofa, then picked it up again, holding the flimsy
yellowing page between his thumb and forefinger. He wiped his upper lip
on the back of his hand. Then he turned to the mirror as if to consult himself
and, because he’d left the drawing-room door open, found himself looking
into a labyrinth of repeated figures. His name was on that list. He was going
to Salome, and not simply as an ordinary member of the public, but in the

company of Robert Ross who, as Oscar Wilde’s literary executor, had
authorized the performance.

Immediately he began to ask himself whether there was an honourable

way out, but then he thought, no, that’s no use. To back out now would
simply reveal the extent of his fear to to to … to whoever was watching.
For obviously somebody was. Somebody had known to send the cutting
here.

Prior worked in the Intelligence Unit with Major Lode. Perhaps that had

something to do with it? He didn’t know. He didn’t know anything, that was
the devil of it.

The bell rang. Still holding the page, Manning went to the door. A thin,

spry, greying man, with rheumy blue eyes and ‘a top o’ the morning to you,
sorr’ expression, stood on the step.

‘Captain Manning?’ He took off his cap. ‘O’Brien, sir. I’ve come about

the repairs.’

Manning became aware that he was gaping. He swallowed, pushed the

cutting into his tunic pocket, and said, ‘Yes, of course. Come in.’

He showed O’Brien the crack in the wall, feeling almost too dazed to

follow what he was saying. He made himself concentrate. It was a load-
bearing wall.

‘How long do you think it’ll take?’
O’Brien pursed his lips. ‘Three days. Normally. Trouble is, you see, sir,

you can’t get the lads. Williams now.’ O’Brien shook his head sadly. ‘Good
worker in his day. The nipper. Willing lad. Not forward for his age.
Samuels.’ O’Brien tapped his chest. ‘Dust gets on his lungs.’

‘How long?’
‘Fortnight? Three weeks?’
‘When can you start?’
‘Any time, sir. Would Monday suit you?’
It had to be said O’Brien was a man who inspired instant mistrust. I hope

I’m doing the right thing, Manning thought, showing him to the door. He
went back to look at the crack again. In the course of exploring its load-
bearing properties O’Brien had dislodged a great quantity of plaster.

Manning looked down at the grey dust. He was beginning to suspect
O’Brien’s real talent might be for demolition. Oh, what does it matter, he
thought. His fingers closed round the cutting and he brought it out again.
He’d remembered that, a couple of months ago, when the article about the
Black Book and the 47,000 had first appeared, Robert Ross had been sent a
copy. Just like this. Anonymously. No covering letter. He walked to the
window and looked into the garden. There was a curious tension about this
yellow light, as if there might be thunder in the offing. And the bushes – all
overgrown, there’d been no proper pruning done for years – were
motionless, except for the very tips of their branches that twitched
ominously, like cats’ tails. A few drops of rain began to fall, splashing on to
the dusty terrace. A memory struggled to surface. Of sitting somewhere in
the dust and rain beginning to fall. Drops had splashed on to his face and
hands and he’d started to cry, but tentatively, not sure if this was the right
response. And then a nursery maid came running and swept him up.

He’d ask Ross tonight whether he’d received a cutting, or knew of

anybody else who had. Not that it would be reassuring. Ross was a
dangerous person to know, and would become more dangerous as the
hysteria over the Pemberton Billing case mounted. The prudent thing would
be to drop him altogether. Somehow, articulating this clearly for the first
time helped enormously. Of course he wasn’t going to drop Ross. Of course
he was going to Salome. It was a question of courage in the end.

Why to the house? Anybody who knew him well enough to know his

name would be on the list of subscribers must also know he was staying at
his club. But then perhaps they also knew he visited the house regularly, to
check that everything was all right, and … other things.

He mustn’t fall into the trap of overestimating what they knew. At the

moment he was doing their job for them.

Opening the letter like this in his own home was in some ways a worse

experience than opening it at the club would have been. His damaged house
leaked memories of Jane and the children, and of himself too, as he had
been before the war, memories so vivid in comparison with his present

depleted self that he found himself moving between pieces of shrouded
furniture like his own ghost.

There was nothing to be gained by brooding like this. He made sure the

fallen plaster was caught on the dust-sheet and had not seeped underneath
to be trodden into the carpet, shuttered the windows, replaced the
photograph beneath the dust-sheet, and let himself out.

Rain was falling. As he left the square and started to walk briskly down

the Bayswater Road, reflections of buildings and shadows of people shone
fuzzily in the pavements, as if another city lay trapped beneath the patina of
water and grease. He kept his head down, thinking he would go to see Ross
tonight, and remembering too that he was due to see Rivers next week. He
passed the Lancaster Gate underground with its breath of warm air, and
walked on.

In Oxford Street a horse had fallen between the shafts of a van and was

struggling feebly to get to its feet. The usual knot of bystanders had
gathered. He was going to be all right. He was …

Suddenly, the full force of the intrusion into his home struck at him, and

he was cowering on the pavement of Oxford Street as if a seventy-hour
bombardment were going on. He pretended to look in a shop window, but
he didn’t see anything. The sensation was extraordinary, one of the worst
attacks he’d ever had. Like being naked, high up on a ledge, somewhere, in
full light, with beneath him only jeering voices and millions of eyes.

Prior sat in the visitors’ waiting-room at Aylesbury Prison, right foot resting
on his left knee, hands clasping his ankle, and stared around him. The
shabbiness of this room was in marked contrast to the brutal but impressive
blood-and-bandages facade of the prison, though the shabbiness too was
designed to intimidate. Everything – the chipped green paint, the scuffed
no-colour floor, the nailed-down chairs – implied that those who visited
criminals were probably criminals themselves. A notice on the wall
informed them of. the conditions under which they might be searched.

Prior looked down at his greatcoat and nicked away an imaginary speck

of dust. This was not the battered and stained garment that Myra had so
foolishly refused to lie on, but an altogether superior version which had cost
two months’ salary. In these circumstances, it was worth every penny.

The door opened and the wardress came in. With very slightly

exaggerated courtesy, Prior rose to his feet. Sad but true, that nothing puts a
woman in her place more effectively than a chivalrous gesture performed in
a certain manner.

‘Yes, well, it does seem to be in order,’ she said.
He nodded. ‘Good.’
‘If you’d like to come this way.’
He reached the door first and held it open. He wasn’t inclined to waste

sympathy on her, this middle-aged, doughy-skinned woman. She had her
own power, after all, more absolute than any he possessed. If she were
humiliated now, no doubt some clapped-out old whore would be made to
pay.

He followed her down the corridor and out into the yard.
‘That’s the women’s block,’ she said, pointing.

A gloomy, massive building. Six rows of windows, small and close

together, like little piggy eyes. Prior looked at the yard. ‘But surely the men
can see the women when they exercise?’

‘Oh, no,’ she said. ‘They can’t see out of the windows. They’re too high

up for that.’

He asked her one or two questions about the way the prison was run, how

the shift system worked, whether transport to the prison was provided. It
had occurred to him that it might not be some anonymous whore who paid
for his victory, but the woman he had come to see, and he was anxious to
avoid that. ‘Shift working must be quite difficult,’ he said. ‘Particularly for
women.’

They stood in the cold yard while he got the story of her ailing mother.

Then he held the door of the women’s block open for her, and this time she
blushed instead of bridling, since the gesture was being offered in a
different spirit. Or she thought it was.

Another corridor. ‘I know this is terribly irregular,’ he said. ‘A man

seeing a female prisoner alone. But you do understand, don’t you? It is a
matter of security …’

‘Oh, yes, yes. The only reason I questioned it was her being confined to

the cell. We know all about security. We’ve had a leader of the Irish
rebellion in here.’ An internal struggle, then she burst out, ‘She was a
countess.’

Her face lit up with all the awe and deference of which the English

working class is capable. Oh dear oh dear.

‘Roper’s a different kettle offish,’ she went on. ‘Common as muck.’
They went through another set of doors and into a large hall. Prior would

have liked some warning of this. He’d expected another corridor, another
room. Instead he found himself standing at the bottom of what felt like a
pit. The high walls were ringed with three tiers of iron landings, studded by
iron doors, linked by iron staircases. In the centre of the pit sat a wardress
who, simply by looking up, could observe every door. Prior’s escort went
across and spoke to her colleague.

Prior looked around him, wondering what sort of women needed to be

kept in a place like this. Prostitutes, thieves, girls who ‘overlaid’ their
babies, abortionists who stuck their knitting needles into something vital –
did they really need to be here? A bell rang. Behind him the doors opened
and a dozen or so women trudged into the room, diverging into two lines as
they reached the stairs to the first landing. They wore identical grey smocks
that covered them from neck to ankle and blended with the iron grey of the
landings, so that the women looked like columns of moving metal.
Evidently they were not allowed to speak, and for a while there was no
sound except for the clatter of their boots on the stairs, and a chorus of
coughs.

Then a youngish woman turned her head and noticed him. Instantly, a stir

of excitement ran along the lines, like the rise of hair along a dog’s spine.
They broke ranks and came crowding to the railings, shouting down
comments on what they could see, and speculations on the size of what they
couldn’t. Somebody suggested he might like to settle the matter by getting
it out. Then a short square-headed woman jostled her way to the front and
lifted her smock to her shoulders, high enough for it to become apparent
that His Majesty’s bounty did not extend to the provision of knickers. She
jabbed her finger repeatedly towards the mound of thinning hair. Then a
whistle blew, wardresses came running, and the women were hustled back
into line. The tramp of feet started again, and soon the landings were empty
and silent, except for the banging of doors and the rattle of keys in locks.
The entire incident had taken less than three minutes.

Prior’s wardress came back. ‘That’s a relief,’ he said. ‘I was beginning to

feel like a pork chop in a famine.’

This did not go down well. ‘Roper’s on the top landing,’ she said.
Their boots clanged on the stairs. Looking down now at the empty

landings, Prior was puzzled by a sense of familiarity that he couldn’t place.
Then he remembered. It was like the trenches. No Man’s Land seen through
a periscope, an apparently empty landscape which in fact held thousands of
men. That misleading emptiness had always struck him as uncanny. Even

now, as he tramped along the third landing, he felt the prickle of hair in the
nape of his neck.

The wardress stopped outside No. 39. She bent and peered through the

peephole before unlocking the door. ‘Here you are,’ she said. ‘I’m afraid I’ll
have to lock you in. When you’re finished just bang on the door. I’ll be
along at the end. Good loud bang, mind.’ She hesitated. ‘She’s been on
hunger strike. You’ll find her quite weak.’

He followed the wardress into the room. It seemed very dark, though a

small, high, barred window set into the far wall let in a shaft of light. The
reflection of the bars was black on the floor, then suddenly faded, as a wisp
of cloud drifted across the sun. As his eyes became accustomed to the dark,
he saw a grey figure huddled on the plank bed, one skinny arm thrown
across its face. Apart from the bed, the only other furnishing was a bucket,
smelling powerfully of urine and faeces.

‘Roper?’
The figure on the bed neither moved nor spoke.
‘This is Lieutenant Prior. He’s come to talk to you.’
Still no response. For a moment he thought she was dead, and he’d

arrived too late. He said, ‘I’m from the Ministry of Munitions.’

Her face remained hidden. ‘Then you’d better bugger off back there,

then, hadn’t you?’

The wardress clicked her tongue. ‘I’ll leave you to it,’ she said. She

glanced round the bare cell. ‘Do you want a chair?’

‘No, I can manage.’
‘He’ll not be stopping long enough to need a chair.’
The door banged shut. He listened for the sound of retreating footsteps.

He walked closer to the bed. ‘You know, if you co-operate, there could be a
chance of remission.’

Silence.
‘That’s if you give us the information we need.’
Her eyes stayed shut. ‘I’ve told you once already. Bugger off back to

London you greasy, arse-licking little sod.’

At last he heard the clump of boots on the landing. ‘Prison hasn’t done

much for your language has it, Beattie?’

Her eyes opened. He moved so that the light from the window fell

directly on to his face.

‘Billy?’
He went closer. She looked him up and down, even touched his sleeve,

while a whole army of conflicting emotions fought for possession of her
face. She settled for the simplest. Hatred of the uniform. ‘Your dad must be
turning in his grave.’

‘Well, I expect he would be if he was in it. He isn’t, he’s alive and

kicking. My mother, mainly.’ She’d never liked him to talk about his
father’s treatment of his mother. Now, with that remark, they were back in
Tite Street, in the room behind the shop, beef stew and dumplings
simmering on the stove, Hettie peering into the mirror above the
mantelpiece, tweaking curls on to her forehead. Before the sense of
intimacy could be lost, he went and sat on the end of her bed, and she
shifted a little to make room for him. ‘You’ll never guess what I’ve just
seen,’ he said in the same gossipy tone, and lifted an imaginary smock
above his head.

Her face lit up with amusement. ‘Mad Mary,’ she said. ‘Eeh, dear me,

everybody sees that, chaplain, governor. I says, “Put it away, Mary, it’s
going bald.” But you can’t reason with her, she’s away to the woods is that
one, but you’d be surprised how many are. There’s women in here should
never’ve been sent to prison. They need help. Hey, and we’ve had a
countess, an Irish rebel, I met her in the yard. She says, “You’re the woman
who tried to kill Lloyd George. Let me shake your hand.” I says, “Well, it’s
very kind of you, love, but I didn’t.” ’

‘Didn’t you?’
‘ ’Course I bloody didn’t.’ She stared at him. ‘Did I try to kill Lloyd

George by sticking a curare-tipped blowdart in his arse? No. I. did. not.
Now if you’re asking, “Suppose you had a curare-tipped blowdart and
Lloyd George’s arse was just here, would you stick it in?” ’course I bloody
would, because there’ll be no peace while that bugger’s in power.’

Prior shook his head. ‘You can’t fasten it on to one person like that.’
‘Can’t you? I can.’
‘I don’t see how you can derive that from a Marxist analysis.’
‘Bugger Marxist analysis, I hate the sod.’
He waited. ‘Enough to kill him?’
‘Yes, enough to kill him! And I wouldn’t feel guilty about it either. Any

more than he feels guilty about the millions and millions of young lives he’s
chucked away.’ She fell back, her mouth working. ‘I’m not your milk-and-
water, creeping Jesus sort of pacifist.’

‘It might’ve been better if you hadn’t said all that in court.’
‘I told the truth in court. The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the

truth.’ She laughed. ‘Bloody fatal, that was. Do you know, Billy, I’ve seen
the time I could con anybody into anything, when I was a young woman.
Now they ask me a simple question and the truth pours out.’ She shook her
head. ‘It’s mixing with bloody Quakers, that’s what’s done it. Good
Christian company’s been the ruin of me.’

‘So you didn’t plan to kill him?’
‘The poison was for the dogs.’
She hitched herself up the bed and propped her head against the wall. It

was possible in this position to see how emaciated she was, how waxy her
skin. Her hair, which had been brown the last time he saw her, was now
almost entirely white. Thin strands escaped from the bun at the back of her
head and straggled about her neck. He started to speak, but she interrupted
him. ‘What are you here for, Billy?’

‘To help you.’
She smiled. ‘So what was all that about information?’
‘I had to say that. She was listening.’
‘But you are from the Ministry of Munitions?’
‘ ’Course I am. How do you think I got in? Doesn’t mean I’m here for

information, does it?’ He leant forward. ‘Think about it, Beattie. What
information have you got?’

She bridled. ‘You’d be surprised. People coming in and out.’ Then she

pulled a face. ‘Actually, there’s not that many politicals in here. They’re all

on about their fannies. You lose patience.’

‘I want you to tell me what happened.’
‘You mean you don’t know?’
‘I haven’t got a transcript of the trial.’
‘Haven’t you? You do surprise me. Why don’t you go and talk to

Spragge?’

‘I will. I want your version first, because I haven’t heard your version.’

He waited. ‘Look, Beattie, whatever damage was done was done at the trial.
I’m not asking you to name any names that didn’t come out then.’

She brooded for a moment. ‘You know Tommy Blenkinsop’s dead?’
‘Tommy –’
‘The deserter I had stopping with me. Hettie had gone away to live, you

know, she was teaching over at Middleton, so I had this spare room, and I
said I’d put Tommy up. Eeh, poor little Tommy, eleven kids, and do you
know to look at him you wouldn’t’ve thought he had a fuck in him? He says
to me, “You know, Beattie, I only joined up for a bit of peace.” Poor lad.
Anyway, that night we were sat over the fire, Tommy and me, and there was
this knock on the door, and I says to Tommy, “You go on upstairs, love.” I
answered it and there was …’ She sighed, looking into the distance.
‘Spragge. Rain pouring off him, it was a terrible night. And he said he had a
letter from Mac, so of course I asked him to come in. I’ve had time to think
since then. It was Mac he was after. He was the big fish, we just got caught
in the net. And the letter was genuine enough, he’d took Mac in as well as
me, so he must’ve been convincing, mustn’t he? Anyway, he explained he
was on his way to Liverpool, and he says, “Can you put me up?” and I says,
“Well, no, not really.” And then I thought, we-ell, and I says, “Unless you
don’t mind sharing a bed,” and I told him about Tommy. “Is he of the
homogenic persuasion?” he says. Well, I just looked at him. I says, “No, I
shouldn’t think so, he’s got eleven kids, do you want the bed or not?” So he
decided he was stopping and we sat down round the table, and after a while
he notices the photograph of our William on the mantelpiece. I don’t know
whether he knew about our William, I think he must’ve done, though,
because he kept bringing the conversation round, and saying what a fine lad

he was and all that. And you know I was worried sick about our William,
because I knew what was going on, you see, he’d managed to get a letter
smuggled out.’

‘What was going on?’
‘Well. You see, William didn’t get exemption. He … Partly he was

unlucky with the Board, but you know they don’t like moral objectors
anyway. If you’re religious – doesn’t matter how batty it is – you can say
you’ve got the Holy Spirit in a jamjar on the mantelpiece – that’s all right,
that’s fine. If you say, “I think it’s morally wrong for young men to be sent
out to slaughter each other,” God help you. The Chairman of the Board
actually said to our William, “You can’t be a conscientious objector because
you don’t believe in God, and people who don’t believe in God don’t have
consciences.” That was the level of it. Anyway, if you’re refused exemption
you get handed over to the army. The military police show up and take you
off to the barracks and you get given your first order, generally, “Get
stripped off and put the uniform on.” And of course the lads refuse, and
then it’s the detention centre. Our William was sent to Wandsworth, and it
was really tough. He was stripped and put in a cell with a stone floor and no
glass in the window – this is January, mind – and then, he says, they just
put a uniform beside you and they wait to see how long it’ll take you to
give in. Of course I was worried sick, I thought he was going to get
pneumonia, but actually he said in his letter it wasn’t the cold that bothered
him, it was being watched all the time. The eye in the door.’ She laughed. ‘I
didn’t know what he meant.’

She looked past Prior’s shoulder, and he turned to follow her gaze. He

found himself looking at an elaborately painted eye. The peephole formed
the pupil, but around this someone had taken the time and trouble to paint a
veined iris, an eyewhite, eyelashes and a lid. This eye, where no eye should
have been, was deeply disturbing to Prior. For a moment he was back in
France, looking at Towers’s eyeball in the palm of his hand. He bunked the
image away. ‘That’s horrible,’ he said, turning back to Beattie.

‘ ’S not so bad long as it stays in the door.’ She tapped the side of her

head. ‘You start worrying when it gets in here.’

‘Anyway, go on. He was talking about William.’
‘Yes, he kept bringing the conversation round, and of course I was

worried, and out it all came. It wasn’t just our William that was bothering
me, it was all of them.’

‘All the conchies?’
‘You know I don’t mean that.’
No, he thought. She was one of those who felt every death. She’d never

learnt to read the casualty lists over breakfast and then go off and have a
perfectly pleasant day, as the vast majority of civilians did. If she had learnt
to do that, she mightn’t have been here. ‘Go on,’ he said.

‘He could see I was getting upset and he says, “Why don’t we have a

drink?” Well, money was a bit tight, you know, with feeding Tommy as
well, but he says, “Don’t you worry, love, this one’s on me.” And he went
into the scullery and came back with two bloody great big jugs, and off he
went. Eeh, special brew. Well, you know me, Billy, two glasses of that, he
was me long-lost brother, and I did, I talked, I played me mouth. I cussed
Lloyd George, I cussed the King, I don’t know what bugger I didn’t cuss,
but I was lonely, Billy. I’d had nobody to talk to except Tommy for months,
and he was no company, poor little bugger, his nerves were gone. And of
course at the trial it all got twisted. He said I kept dropping hints Lloyd
George was going to die. I can remember exactly what I said. I says, “That
bloody, buggering bastard Lloyd George, he’s got a head on him like a
forty-shilling pisspot, but you mark my words he’ll come to rue.” There.
That was it. That was the death threat.’ She shook her head. ‘It was nowt of
the sort. Anyway we were half way down the second jug – or I was – and
he says, “Can I trust you?” I says, “Well, you’re in a pretty pickle if you
can’t.” And then he starts telling me about this detention centre where the
regime was very bad. Worse than Wandsworth. And you know all the stuff
he was telling me was stuff I’d told him, about being naked in the cells and
all that, but I was too daft to see it. And then he says, him and some of his
mates had found a way to get the lads out. They had a contact inside the
centre, one of the guards it was supposed to be. But, he says, the problem
was the dogs. They had these dogs patrolling the perimeter fence. I says,

“Well, poison.” He says, well, yes, but there was a problem about that. It
had to look like an outside job because of the guard. You see, they didn’t
want the detention centre to twig about him. So I says, “Curare.” ’

‘Fired through the fence in a blowdart?’
‘Yes.’
‘Fired at the dogs?’
‘Yes.’
‘Of course,’ Prior said, ‘you do realize, don’t you, a lot of people

wouldn’t know about curare?’

For the first time she looked uneasy. ‘Yes, well, I read about it in a book

on South America, and then I happened to mention it to Alf – our Winnie’s
husband – and he says, “Oh, yes, we’ve got some of that in the lab.” That’s
the only way I knew about it.’

‘No previous thoughts of killing Lloyd George? They said at the trial

you’d plotted to kill him before, when you were in the suffragettes.’

‘The suffragettes never threatened human life. That was a point of

honour: property, not life. It just shows Spragge’s ignorance, does that.
Couldn’t even think up a convincing lie.’

‘He seems to have convinced the jury.’
‘You know what was going on there as well as I do. You put a pacifist –

any pacifist – in the dock – could be Jesus Christ – and the biggest rogue
unhung in the witness-box, and who do you think they’re gunna believe?’

‘What did he say when you mentioned curare?’
‘He says, yes, but how on earth was he going to get his hands on that? I

says I knew where to get it, but it was too risky. And then he says if I
helped him, he’d help me. He’d get little Tommy across to Ireland, and that
clinched it for me, because you know Tommy was getting really weird. I
mean, to be honest, I thought if I didn’t get him out I was gunna have a
loony on me hands, like Lily Braithwaite’s husband. You know what a state
he was in when he come back.’

‘So you agreed to get the curare?’
‘Yes, he give me an address and told me to write to him when I got it. I

wrote to our Winnie’s Alf, and he mentioned dogs in his letter back to me,

but that letter was never produced, I think it slipped down a crack in the
pavement. And Alf said, yes, he’d get it. He works in a big medical
laboratory, and he had to sign for the poison. But he wasn’t worried, see,
because the dogs’d be dying at the other end of the country and nobody
would make the connection. But can you imagine him signing his name like
that if he’d thought it was for Lloyd George?’

‘Then what?’
‘I waited. The post seemed to take such a long time, but of course

unbeknownst to us all the letters were being opened. The parcel was
opened. And then when it was finally delivered the police were on the
doorstep in a matter of minutes. And I was charged with conspiracy to
murder Lloyd George, and others. That’s the other thing they dropped. It
wasn’t just Lloyd George they were on about. To begin with it was
hundreds of people I was supposed to be plotting to kill. And, of course, all
I could say was, “The poison was for the dogs,” but I couldn’t prove it, it
was Spragge’s word against mine, and he was working for the bloody
Ministry of Munitions. Oh, and the trial. You know he read all the letters
out in court?’

‘Smith did?’
‘Yeh, Smith. The Attorney-General. Oh, I was honoured, they wheeled

out all the big guns. And he read me letters out in court, about Winnie’s
period being late and all that. And you know he read the words the way I’d
wrote them. Just to get a laugh out of me, because I can’t spell, I never have
been able to. But I wonder how good his spelling’d be, if he’d left school
when he was eight?’

‘He shouldn’t’ve done that.’
‘I was fair game. Language too. He couldn’t get over the language, this

dreadful, coarse, lewd, vulgar, low woman who kept using all these words
his dear little wifie didn’t even know. I’ll bet.’

Prior sat back against the wall. He was finding the eye in the door

difficult to cope with. Facing it was intolerable, because you could never be
sure if there were a human eye at the centre of the painted eye. Sitting with
his back to it was worse, since there’s nothing more alarming than being

watched from behind. And when he sat sideways, he had the irritating
impression of somebody perpetually trying to attract his attention. It tired
him, and if it tired him after less than an hour, what must it have done to
Beattie, who’d had to endure it for over a year? He noticed that the latrine
bucket had been placed where it could be seen from the door. ‘Why’s the
bucket there?’ he asked.

‘Because some poor bloody cow drowned herself in her own piss.’
‘My God.’ He stared at her. ‘You’re not as bad as that, are you?’
‘No, I keep going. Trouble is, you’re punished if you go on hunger strike,

so I can’t have any visitors. I haven’t seen our Hettie for … oh, I don’t
know, it must be two months.’

‘I’ll see what I can do.’
‘That’s what Spragge said. When I told him about not being able to get

Tommy across to Ireland, he says, “I’ll see what I can do.” ’

‘The difference is I’m not asking for anything back.’
She touched his sleeve. ‘We were close once, Billy. You were like a son

to me.’ She waited. ‘I’m not going to ask whose side you’re on because you
mightn’t tell me the truth, and if you did, I wouldn’t believe you. But just
tell me this. Do you know whose side you’re on?’

He looked at her and smiled, but didn’t reply.

FOUR

The Ministry of Munitions was housed in the Hotel Metropole. The
reception desk, now guarded by armed police, had once been manned by
smooth-faced young men, trained not to look surprised when the sixth
couple in succession turned out to be called Smith, or when prosperous-
looking gentlemen, entertaining their curiously unprosperous-looking
nephews, requested a double room. No such innocent frolics now, Prior
thought, crossing the foyer. Goodness how the moral tone had declined.

On the third floor he tapped on Major Lode’s door. Lode looked up from

the file he was reading, dabbing, as he always did when confronted by a
new situation, at the outer corners of his large, silky, red-gold moustache. In
defiance of biology, Prior saw this moustache as a feminine adornment:
perhaps because it seemed to require so much protection from the outside
world.

‘How did it go?’ Lode asked.
‘Quite well, I think. She was … fairly hostile to begin with, but I think

towards the end she was starting to open up.’

‘Did you mention MacDowell?’
‘Only in passing. I thought it better not to … focus on him.’
‘Hmm, yes, quite right. So what’s the next step?’
‘I’d like to see Hettie Roper. The younger daughter. You remember she

was walking out with MacDowell?’

Lode smiled. ‘Walking out? Yes. I was just thinking, what a quaint

expression. But I thought that was over? That’s what she told the police.’

‘I don’t believe it. They were too close.’
‘Yes, well, do what you need to do. Good.’

And now, Prior thought, closing the door quietly behind him, you can

fumigate your fucking office. ‘What a quaint expression.’ I could buy and
sell you, he told the closed door. Lode had no idea. He’d spent his entire
adult life – boyhood too, for that matter – in uniformed, disciplined,
hierarchical institutions, and he simply couldn’t conceive of the possibility
that other people might function differently. It was all a great big
chessboard to him. This rag-bag collection of Quakers, socialists,
anarchists, suffragettes, syndicalists, Seventh Day Adventists and God
knows who else was merely an elaborate disguise, behind which lurked the
real anti-war movement, a secret, disciplined, highly efficient organization
dedicated to the overthrow of the state as surely and simply as Lode was
dedicated to its preservation. And on the other side of the board, at the head
of the opposing army, elusive, tenacious, dangerous: the Black King
himself, Patrick MacDowell. It wasn’t complete nonsense, of course. Mac
was certainly a more effective opponent of the war than most, if only
because he was not in love with suffering. Poor Mac, he’d had enough of
that by the time he was ten.

Prior walked down the corridor to his own room, tiny in comparison with

Lode’s, hardly more than a cupboard. Evidently, in pre-war days this room
had been reserved for those obliged to sin on a budget. He felt dirty,
physically dirty, after the long train journey, and when he looked into the
small glass above the washbasin he saw that his face was covered in smuts.
He washed as much of himself as he could reach without undressing, and
then began searching through the filing cabinet. He’d made a list of a
number of files that contained reports from Lionel Spragge, and it took him
only a few moments to gather them together and dump them on his desk.
He had an hour to read through them before Spragge arrived. Spragge had
been reluctant to come to the Ministry at all, suggesting they should meet
outside, at some pub or other, but Prior had wanted this first meeting to be
on his own ground.

He’d read the reports several times already, so it was merely a matter of

refreshing his memory. When he came to Beattie’s file, to Spragge’s reports
on the Roper affair and then to his deposition, he read more slowly. After a

while he looked up, puzzled by the sense of something unfamiliar in the
room. He stared round him, but could see nothing different, and then he
realized that the change was in himself. He had not been angry until now.

LIONEL ARTHUR MORTIMER SPRAGGE

ON HIS OATH SAITH AS FOLLOWS:

2 February 1917. I am employed at the Ministry of Munitions. I entered the employ of the
Ministry on 1 July 1916. I have been engaged making certain inquiries concerning
various organizations amongst others the Independent Labour Party and the No
Conscription fellowship. I reported to Major Lode. He was the officer from whom I
chiefly got my directions.

Between October and December 1916 I was sent to Liverpool to make inquiries

concerning one Patrick MacDowell. He had been the leading organizer of the Sheffield
strike in the Munitions factories. I told MacDowell I wanted to go to the Manchester area.
MacDowell gave me a letter to give to Mrs Beatrice Roper. On the night of I think the
23rd December I went to Mrs Roper’s shop, at 11 Tite Street, Salford, and gave her the
letter. After reading the letter Mrs Roper agreed that I could stay with her and we shook
hands very heartily indeed. She sat at one end of the table, and I sat next to her. There was
another man staying in the house at the time who was introduced to me as Tommy
Blenkinsop, a deserter. He did not come downstairs until later. Mrs Roper asked me about
myself. I told her I had been refused exemption and that I had been on the run since
September as a moral objector. I told her about being locked up in a detention centre and I
think I told her something of the treatment I had received there. At that she said, ‘That is
just like my William,’ and she got up and fetched a photograph from the dresser. It was a
small photograph of her son, William Roper. As she was showing me the photograph she
told me that before the war she had been active in the suffragettes and that she had burnt
down a church. I think her exact words were, ‘You know about St Michael’s? We were
nearly copped, but we bloody well did it.’ She laughed and said, ‘You should have seen
the flames go up.’ She then said, ‘And that was not all we did.’ She told me she had been
party to a plan to kill Mr Lloyd George, by inserting a curare-tipped nail through the sole
of his boot in such a way that it would pierce the skin when he put his weight on the foot,
causing instant lassitude followed by seizures. They had been planning to do this on the
Isle of Wight where Mr Lloyd George was staying at that time. There was a waiter in his
hotel sympathetic to the suffragette cause. I do not recollect the name of the hotel, or of
the waiter. I asked her why the attempt had not succeeded. She replied, ‘The bloody,
shitting, buggering old sod pissed off to France, didn’t he?’ Mrs Roper’s language was
fairly good most of the time but when she spoke of Mr Lloyd George she used bad
language. I then made diligent inquiries as to the nature of Mrs Roper’s attitude to Mr
Lloyd George. She several times expressed the opinion that he ought to be killed. I then
asked her whether there was anybody else who ought to be killed and she replied, ‘Yes,
the other George, that poncing old git in the Palace, he’d not be missed.’

I then asked her whether this was all talk or whether some plan was afoot. She replied,

‘Can I trust you?’ I think I said something to the effect that she was in a pretty pickle if
she could not. She then said that she knew where to get curare and that Walton Heath

Golf-course would be a good place to get Mr Lloyd George with an air-gun. She said she
knew three good lads in London who would do the job. She then asked me if I wanted to
be in on it and I considered it my duty to reply in the affirmative in order to procure
further information. I passed that night at Mrs Roper’s house, and the following morning
I reported back to Major Lode’s department in code.

Spragge was a big, fleshy, floridly handsome man, with thick brows and
startling blue-green eyes that slanted down at the outer corners. His neck
and jowls had thickened, and rose from his broad shoulders in a single
column. Hair sprouted from his ears, his nostrils, the cuffs of his shirt. He
was as unmistakably and crudely potent as a goat. Beattie would have gone
for him, Prior thought, as he stood up to shake hands. He wondered how he
knew that, and why he should mind as much as he did.

‘I asked you to come in,’ Prior said, after Spragge had settled into his

chair, ‘because we’re thinking of employing you again.’ He watched the
flare of hope. Spragge was less well turned out than he appeared to be at
first sight. His suit was shiny with wear, his shirt cuffs frayed. ‘You’ll have
gathered from the papers there’s a lot of unrest in the munitions industry at
the moment. Particularly in the north, where you spent a good deal of time,
didn’t you? In ’16.’

‘Yes, I –’
‘With MacDowell. Who’d just come out of a detention centre, I believe?’
‘Yes, he’s a deserter. Conchie. You should see the size of him, for God’s

sake. Built like a brick shithouse. See some of the scraggy little buggers that
get sent to France.’ Spragge was looking distinctly nervous. ‘I don’t think I
could approach him again. I mean, he knows me.’

‘He knows you from the Roper case, doesn’t he?’
‘Before that.’
‘You might be able to give advice, though. Obviously we’d need to keep

you away from the areas you were working in before.’

Spragge looked relieved.
‘You met MacDowell in the summer of ’ 16? In Sheffield?’
‘Yes, I was making inquiries into the shop stewards’ movement.’
Prior made a show of consulting his notes. ‘You stayed with Edward

Carpenter?’

‘I did.’ Spragge leant forward, his florid face shining with sweat, and said

in a sinister whisper, ‘Carpenter is of the homogenic persuasion.’

‘So I believe.’ That phrase again. It had stuck in Beattie’s memory, and

no wonder. It was transparently obvious that Spragge’s natural turn of
phrase would have been something like ‘fucking brown ’atter’. ‘Of the
homogenic persuasion’ was Major Lode. Who had once told Prior in, of all
places, the Café Royal, ‘This country is being brought to its knees. Not by
Germany’ – here he’d thumped the table so hard that plates and cutlery had
leapt into the air – ‘NOT BY GERMANY, but by an unholy alliance of
socialists, sodomites and shop stewards.’ Prior had felt scarcely able to
comment, never having been a shop steward. ‘Do you think that’s relevant?’

‘It was relevant to me. There was no lock on the door.’
‘He is eighty, isn’t he?’ said Prior.
Spragge shifted inside his jacket. ‘A vigorous eighty.’
‘You went to a meeting, next day? Addressed by Carpenter.’
‘I went with Carpenter.’
‘And in the course of his speech he quoted a number of … well, what

would you call them? Songs? Poems? In praise of homogenic love.’

‘He did. In public.’
‘Well, it was a public meeting, wasn’t it? And then after the meeting you

went into a smaller room, and there you were introduced to a number of
people, including the author of these songs?’

‘Yes.’
‘Walt Whitman.’
‘Yes.’
‘Walt Whitman is an American poet.’ Prior waited for Spragge’s mouth

to open. ‘A dead American poet.’

‘He didn’t look well.’
‘1819 to 1892.’
Spragge jerked his head. ‘Yeh, well, it’s the money, innit?’
‘Is it?’
‘I’ll say it is. Two pound ten a week I was promised. Mind you, he says

the information’s got to be good and you’ve got to keep it coming.’ Spragge

sat back and snorted. ‘Didn’t matter how good it was, I never had two
pound ten in my hand, not regular, just like that. Bonuses, yes. But what use
are dribs and drabs like that to me? I’m a family man.’

‘You got bonuses, did you?’
‘Now and then.’
‘That would be if you turned up something special?’
Spragge hesitated. ‘Yes.’
‘How big a bonus did you get for Beattie Roper?’
Spragge hesitated again, then clearly decided he had nothing to lose. ‘Not

big enough.’

‘But you got one?’
‘Yes.’
‘All in one go?’
‘Half on arrest, half on conviction.’
‘You got a bonus if she was convicted?’
‘Look, I know what you’re after. You’re saying I lied under oath. Well, I

didn’t. Do you think I’m gunna risk – what is it, five years – for a measly
fifty quid? ’Course I’m bloody not. I’d have to be mad, wouldn’t I?’

‘Or in debt.’
Spragge blinked. ‘Just because I lied about Walt Whitman doesn’t mean I

was lying all the time. That was the first report I wrote, I was desperate to
get enough in.’

‘You never talked about dogs to Mrs Roper?’
Spragge made an impatient gesture. ‘What dogs? There weren’t any

fucking dogs. They’re not used in detention centres. You might not know
that, but she does. She’s talked to men who’ve been in every detention
centre in England. She knows there aren’t any dogs.’ He stared at Prior.
‘Have you been talking to her?’

‘I’ve interviewed her, yes.’
Spragge snorted. ‘Well, all I can say is the old bitch’s got you properly

conned.’

‘I haven’t said I believed her.’
‘She was convicted. It doesn’t matter what you believe.’

‘It matters a great deal, from the point of view of your job prospects.’

Prior gave this time to sink in. ‘The letter that came with the poison. From
Mrs Roper’s son-in-law.’ He drew the file towards him. ‘ “If you get close
enough to the poor brutes, I pity them. Dead in twenty seconds.” ’

‘All that proves is that the son-in-law thought it was for the dogs. Well,

she’d have to tell him something, wouldn’t she?’

‘You still say she plotted to kill Lloyd George?’
‘Yes.’
‘And that the suggestion came from her, and not from you?’
‘Yes. She didn’t need any bloody encouragement!’
‘Even to the details? Even to suggesting Walton Heath Golf-course as a

good place to do it?’

‘That’s right.’
‘How would she know that? She’s spent her entire life in the back streets

of Salford, how would she know where Lloyd George plays golf?’

Spragge shrugged. ‘Read it in the paper? I don’t suppose it’s a state

secret.’ He leant forward. ‘You know, you want to be careful. If you’re
saying I acted as an agent provocateur – and that is what you’re saying,
isn’t it? – then you’re also saying that Major Lode employed an agent
provocateur. Either knowingly, in which case he’s a rogue, or unknowingly,
in which case he’s a fool. Either way, it’s not gunna do his career much
good, is it? You watch yourself. You might find out it’s your head on the
chopping-block.’

Prior spread his hands. ‘Who’s talking about chopping-blocks? I’m

interviewing a new agent – new to me. And I’ve made it clear – at least I
hope I’ve made it clear – that any little flight of fancy – Walt Whitman
rising from the dead – and I’ll be on to it. If there aren’t any flights of fancy,
well then … no need to worry.’ With the air of a man getting to the real
purpose of the meeting at last, Prior drew another file towards him. ‘Now
tell me what you know about MacDowell.’

After he’d finished milking Spragge of information, all of which he knew

already, and had sent him home to await the summons, Prior sat motionless
for a while, his chin propped on his hands.

‘The poison was for the dogs.’
‘There weren’t any fucking dogs. You might not know that, but she does.’
Was it possible Beattie had tried to reach out from her corner shop in Tite

Street and kill the Prime Minister? The Beattie he’d known before the war
would not have done that, but then that Beattie had been rooted in a
communal life. Oh, she’d been considered odd – any woman in Tite Street
who worked for the suffragettes was odd. But she hadn’t been isolated. That
came with the war.

Shortly after the outbreak of war, Miss Burton’s little dog had gone

missing. Miss Burton was a spinster who haunted the parish church,
arranged flowers, sorted jumble, cherished a hopeless love for the vicar –
how hopeless probably only Prior knew. He’d been at home at the time,
waiting for orders to join his regiment, and he’d helped her search for the
dog. They found it tied by a wire to the railway fence, in a buzzing cloud of
black flies, disembowelled. It was a dachshund. One of the enemy.

In that climate Beattie had found the courage to be a pacifist. People

stopped going to the shop. If it hadn’t been for the allotment, the family
would have starved. So many bricks came through the window they gave up
having it mended and lived behind boards. Shit – canine and human –
regularly plopped through the letter-box on to the carpet. In that isolation, in
that semi-darkness, Beattie had sheltered deserters and later, after the
passing of the Conscription Act, conscientious objectors who’d been
refused exemption. Until one day, carrying a letter from Mac, Spragge had
knocked on her door and uncovered a plot to assassinate the Prime Minister.
Or so he said.

Could she have plotted to kill Lloyd George? Prior thought he understood

how the powerless might begin to fancy themselves omnipotent. The
badges of hopeless drudgery, the brush and the cooking-pot, become the
flying broomstick and the cauldron, and not only in the minds of the
persecutors. At first there would be only wild and flailing words,
prophecies that Lloyd George would come to a dreadful end and then,
nudged along by Spragge – because whatever Beattie’s part in this, Spragge
had not been innocent – the sudden determination to act out the fantasy: to

destroy the man she blamed for prolonging the war and causing millions of
deaths.

Lode would have had no difficulty in believing Spragge. The poison plot

fitted in very neatly with his preconceptions about the anti-war movement.
Not much grasp of reality in all this, Prior thought, on either side. He was
used to thinking of politics in terms of conflicting interests, but what
seemed to have happened here was less a conflict of interests than a
disastrous meshing together of fantasies.

He began putting away the files. It was a situation where you had to hang

on to the few certainties, and he was certain that Spragge had lied under
oath, and since Spragge had been the only witness, this of itself meant the
conviction was unsafe.

He locked the filing cabinet and the door of his room, and walked along

to the end of the corridor. The lift was stuck on the fifth floor. He decided
not to wait and ran downstairs, coming out on to the mezzanine landing
where he paused and looked down into the foyer, as he often did, liking to
imagine the hotel as it must have been before the war, before this drabness
of black and khaki set in.

The shape of a head caught his attention. Charles Manning, waiting for

the lift, and with him – good God – Winston Churchill and Edward Marsh.
Prior watched. Manning, though obviously junior, seemed perfectly at ease
in their company. Certainly he was not merely dancing attendance; there
was a good deal of shared laughter, and, as they moved into the lift, Marsh’s
hand rested briefly on his shoulder. Well, well, well, Prior thought,
continuing on his way downstairs. ‘Connections’ indeed!

Prior lived in a seedy basement flat in Bayswater. He could have afforded
better, but he preferred to spend his money on properly tailored uniforms,
and these did not come cheap. His bedroom had french windows that
opened on to a small high-walled yard, so dark that he had never been
tempted to sit out, though his landlady had made an effort. The walls were
painted cream to a height of about ten feet, and there were a number of thin,
straggly plants dying in a great variety of containers.

The room was small and L-shaped. His bed lay along the upright of the

L, facing the window, with a desk and hard chair at the foot. The baseline of
the L contained a wardrobe, with an oval mirror set into the door. There was
space for nothing else.

The bathroom was next door. He had a tepid bath, and then, wrapped in

his dressing-gown, lay on the bed and lit a cigarette. He was too tired to
think constructively, and yet his mind whirred on. This was the frame of
mind that led to a bad night, and it irritated him, almost to the point of tears,
that he could do nothing about it.

He thought of Beattie in her cell. Eighteen months since Lionel Spragge

knocked on her door. Eighteen months ago he’d been in France. Eighteen
months ago William Roper had been in Wandsworth Detention Centre. An
image of William began to form in Prior’s mind, tiny but powerful, like the
initial letter of a gospel. William, naked in his cell, watched constantly
through the eye in the door, and beside him, on the stone floor, the uniform
he’d refused to put on. A small, high, barred window, lit with a bluish glow
from the snow outside.

He found himself resenting the power of this image. The claim it made

on his sympathy. Deliberately, he entered the cell and then let himself drift
out of the window, between the bars, into the falling snow. He was in
France now, lying out in the open with his platoon. The trenches had been
blown flat, there was no shelter from the icy wind, no hope of getting the
wounded back. And no water, because the water in the water-bottles had
frozen. Once a hawk flew over, its shadow black against the snow. The only
movement, the only life, in a landscape dead as the moon. Hour after hour
of silence, and the snow falling. Then, abruptly, Sanderson’s convulsed and
screaming face, as they cut the puttees away from his frost-bitten legs.

This was no use. Prior sat up and started reading The Times, but the print

blurred and Seattie’s face took its place, the white hair straggling round her
neck. He closed his eyes. The bell of the shop in Tite Street rang as he
pushed the door open. How old? Four? Five? A smell of cat pee and tarred
string from the bundles of firewood in the corner. Beattie’s cat had never
been able to resist marking those bundles. Mrs Thorpe plonked their Alfie

on the counter while she paid her bill. Alfie swung his short legs in their
sturdy boots, puffing away at a fag end, though he was only three. Between
drags, he sucked his mother’s breast, puffing and sucking alternately,
peering round the white curve at Prior, who was a Big Boy and therefore an
object of interest and suspicion. It was late in the afternoon. Mrs Thorpe
would be far gone. Jugs of best bitter were her favourite, chased down by
sips of something medicinal that she kept in a flask fastened to her thigh
with a homemade elastic garter. Whisky for the heart, brandy for the lungs,
gin for the bladder. Alfie, guzzling away at his mother’s milk, looked
contented, and well he might, since it could hardly have been less than 70
proof.

The past is a palimpsest, Prior thought. Early memories are always

obscured by accumulations of later knowledge. He made himself walk to
the counter again, this time remembering nothing but the moment, push his
sweaty coin across the cool marble, and ask, ‘What can I have for a
ha’penny?’

There was a white apron round Beattie’s waist with two pockets, stained

black from the coins inside them. These coins smelled very strong when she
emptied them on to the table to count them, a dark, dank, heavy smell.

‘What can I have for a ha’penny?’
Beattie’s voice, patient as if she hadn’t said all this a million times

before, reeled off the list: aniseed ball, sherbet delight, liquorice stick, a
packet of thousand-and-ones, and finally – his favourite because it lasted so
long – a gob-stopper.

Towers’s eye lay in the palm of his hand. ‘What am I supposed to do with

this gob-stopper?’ Logan’s hand reached out, grasped his shaking wrist,
and tipped the eye into the bag.

Don’t think about it, he told himself. It was too late in the day to risk

thinking about that.

He had no memory of Beattie’s face. She’d been an object then, a

mountain, the side of a house, vast, taken for granted, not a person to whom
you could attach adjectives. Though he could attach them readily enough
now: lively, opinionated, intelligent, uneducated, foul-mouthed, impulsive,

generous, quick-tempered, kind. Prior’s mother, his gentle and, it had to be
said, genteel mother, hated Beattie Roper, though, when his mother became
ill with suspected tuberculosis, it was to Beattie he’d been sent. That must
have been his father’s decision.

For almost a year, when he was five or six years old, he’d lived with

Beattie and played with her two daughters, Winnie, who was now in Leeds
Prison, and Hettie, who’d been charged with conspiracy to murder, but
acquitted. He’d been the baby, when they played houses; the customer,
when they played shops; the pupil, when they played schools; the patient,
when they played nurses; and all these roles had been extremely boring,
except, now and then, the role of patient.

They’d played under the big table in the kitchen, because its green

tasselled cloth hanging down all round them made a separate world.
Particularly on wash days, when the house was invaded by smells of soda,
Dolly Blue and wet wool, and the wind blew grit in from the yard, the table
was their refuge. Between the green tassels they looked out at adult boots
coming and going, and felt a pleasant sense of power.

Mr Carker’s boots. Mr Carker was secretary of the Independent Labour

Party, and sometimes he and Beattie sat together at the table, discussing
politics. These discussions had been, in every sense, above Prior’s head,
though he remembered one remark of Mr Carker’s to the effect that the
suffragettes simply exploited working-class women like Beattie. ‘It’s all
very well, talking about sisterhood, but when they go home at night and
drop their knickers, it’s somebody else’s job to pick them up.’

Probably it was the reference to dropping knickers that had made that

particular remark stick in his mind. Perhaps it excited Mr Carker too, for
shortly afterwards his boot crept along the floor and brushed against
Beattie’s foot. She moved her foot. The boot followed, accompanied this
time by a hand on her knee, a hand that just lifted the green tassels. Prior
looked round and saw Hettie’s stricken face. It was a house with no father,
and all the children, but particularly Hettie, were passionate in defence of
their mother. For the first time in his life, perhaps, Prior was aware of
another’s pain. Stealthily, he reached out and tied Mr Carker’s boot laces

together, so that when, finally, he got up to go, he tripped and measured his
full length on the floor.

The disciplining of children must have been the only subject on which

Beattie held no advanced views. She’d hauled him out of his hiding place,
tipped him over her knee and tanned his arse; and he’d clenched his teeth,
divided between a blaze of joy that he was suffering for Hettie’s sake, and
regret that the suffering should not have taken a more dignified form.

Major Lode, interviewing him for his present post, had leant across the

table and said, ‘You see, you know these people, don’t you?’

Prior took a last drag of his cigarette, leant over the edge of the bed and

stubbed it out in the ashtray. Yes.

He drew the curtains and got inside the sheets. He was afraid to go to

sleep, but he had learnt, from long experience, that to keep himself awake at
night only to fall asleep shortly before dawn made for the worst nightmares
of all. He lay and stared at the ceiling, unblinking, until his eyelids prickled,
then rolled over on to his side and brought his knees up to his chin.

He was back in the winter landscape, with a sound like wind blowing,

only it was not the wind, but the sound of emptiness. A hawk flew over and
he watched its shadow on the snow. They were marching back. His boot
went through thin ice into freezing mud. The ice meshed out round his foot,
white opaque lines radiating out so that he stood at the centre of a frozen
web.

The cold half woke him. He found his leg outside the covers and brought

it back inside, but now his whole body was cold. He was lying naked on a
stone floor. Because his sleep was light, he knew he was dreaming, and he
knew also that he had to wake up before something worse happened. He
turned and saw the eye watching him, an eye not painted but very much
alive. The white glittered in the moonlight. The same noise of emptiness
he’d heard in France had followed him into the cell. He stared at the eye,
and then, by a supreme effort of will, forced himself to sit up.

Sweating and clammy, he reached down for his cigarettes, and

remembered he’d left them on the desk. He got up and felt his way along,
not wanting to switch on the light because the horror of the nightmare was

heavy on him, and he was afraid of what the glare might reveal. He was
standing by the desk, in the half-darkness, dabbing his hands among his
papers, searching for the cigarette packet, when he heard a chuckle and
spun round. The eye was watching him from the door. He shrank back
against the table, his hands groping behind him for the paper-knife. His
fingers closed round the hilt and he sprang at the door, stabbing the eye
again and again, his naked body spattered with blood and some thick
whitish fluid that did not drip but clung to his belly, and quickly chilled.
Then, exhausted, he slipped to the floor and lay there, sobbing, and the
sound of his sobbing woke him up.

At first he simply stared at the door. Only when he was sure there was no

eye did he start to relax and take in the strangeness of his position. The
fingertips of his right hand patted the cold oilcloth, as if by touching it he
could make it turn into a mattress and sheets. No, he was out of bed, lying
on the floor. Nightmare, he thought, drawing a deep breath. He started to
pull himself up, feeling a wetness in his groin, and, as he did so, his splayed
fingers touched the knife. So that had been real. With a spasm of revulsion,
he struck out at it and sent it skittering across the floor.

FIVE

The aerodrome consisted of two runways and a straggle of low buildings set
in one corner of a field.

Rivers and Dundas got out of the car and stood looking at the sky: clear,

except for one bank of dark cloud away on the horizon.

‘Good weather for it, anyway,’ Dundas said.
It was possible to tell he was frightened, but only because Rivers had

been observing him closely for weeks. Dundas suffered from abnormal
reactions in the air. Where healthy pilots experienced no sensation at all,
Dundas reported feeling his head squashed into his body, or a loss of
movement in his legs. He suffered from nausea. More seriously still, he had
more than once experienced the preliminary stages of a faint. After every
physiological test possible had proved negative, he had been handed over to
Rivers for psychological observation. Unfortunately, Rivers was making no
progress. Dundas seemed to be exactly the sort of cheerful, likable, slightly
irresponsible young man he’d grown accustomed to dealing with in the
Royal Flying Corps. Apart from flying, his main interests were amateur
dramatics, music and girls, not necessarily in that order. He appeared, in
fact, to be entirely normal. Until he got into an aeroplane. And they were
here to do just that.

‘We seem to have arrived a bit early,’ Dundas said. ‘Would you like a cup

of tea?’

The canteen was empty, except for a group of young fliers gathered

round a table in the far corner, most of them in their twenties, one ginger-
haired lad noticeably younger. Dundas went off to get the tea, and Rivers
sat down at a table whose entire surface was covered with interlocking rings
of tea stains. The young men were reading newspapers, chatting in a

desultory fashion about the events of the day: the massive German advance,
Maud Allan’s libel action against Pemberton Billing, the cult of the clitoris.
A dark-haired young man held up a photograph of Maud Allan. ‘If she ever
fancies anything bigger she’s welcome to knock on my door.’

‘She’d not notice the difference,’ somebody said.
A good-natured scuffle. Then a new voice: ‘Did you hear the one about

Lord Albemarle? Went into the Turf, and said …’ A desiccated, aristocratic
bleat. ‘ “Keep reading in the papers about this Greek chap, Clitoris.
Anybody know who he is?” ’ They all laughed, the younger lad with
braying anguish; it was immediately clear his confusion at least equalled
Lord Albemarle’s.

Dundas came back with the tea and two very greasy doughnuts.
‘Not for me, thank you,’ Rivers said, patting his stomach. ‘I have to be

careful.’

Dundas nodded uncomprehendingly. Obviously duodenal ulcers and

having to be careful were a million miles away from his experience. He ate
both doughnuts with every sign of relish. Rivers sipped his tea and tried not
to think that if Dundas’s medical records were anything to go by (my God,
they’d better be!) he could expect to see the doughnuts again before long.

They didn’t talk much. Dundas was too tense, and Rivers respected his

need for silence. When they’d finished, they walked across to the hangars
together. Dundas disappeared inside the first hangar for a moment and came
back carrying flying helmets, jackets and gauntlets. Rivers put a jacket on
and followed Dundas across to the aeroplane.

‘Here she is,’ Dundas said, patting the fuselage. ‘Terrible old bucket.

Can’t think why they’ve given us this one.’

Because it’s the one they can best afford to lose, Rivers thought. He’d

intended this reflection as a small private joke, but instead it brought him
face to face with his own fear.

‘Right,’ Dundas said. ‘If you’d like to hop in.’
Rivers climbed into the observer’s seat and fastened the harness. Dundas

bent over him to check the buckles. A faint smile acknowledged the
reversal of the usual caring role. ‘All right?’ he said.

‘Fine.’
‘You’ve done a lot of flying, haven’t you?’
‘I don’t know about a lot. Some.’
‘But you’ve done spins and loops and things?’
‘Yes.’
Dundas smiled. ‘That’s all right, then.’
Something about Dundas’s smile held Rivers’s attention. Suddenly, he

felt certain Dundas was withholding something, even perhaps concealing it.
Not malingering. In fact, rather the reverse. He thought Dundas might be
minimizing his symptoms. It wasn’t a good moment for that particular
perception to strike.

Dundas pulled his helmet on, climbed in, exchanged a whole series of

shouts and waves with the mechanics. The engine stuttered, began to roar,
and then they were taxiing away from the hangar.

Rivers looked round him, at hedgerows thick with blossom, a sky

tumultuous with rising larks; then he snapped his goggles into place, and
the splendour contracted to a muddy pond.

He was now definitely afraid. The situation might almost be regarded as

a small experiment, with himself as the subject. The healthy reaction to fear
in a normal human being is the undertaking of some manipulative activity
designed to avoid or neutralize the danger. Provided such activity is
available, the individual ought to be unaware of feeling fear. But no such
activity was available. Like every other man who sits in the observer’s seat,
he was entirely dependent on his pilot. And what a pilot. He had long
believed that the essential factor in the production of war neurosis among
the two most vulnerable groups, observers and trench soldiers, was the
peculiarly passive, dependent and immobile nature of their experience. It
isn’t often that a hypothesis conceived in the scientist’s cortex is confirmed
by his gut, but his gut certainly seemed to be doing its best to prove this
one. He bit his lips to control the pain and concentrated hard on the back of
Dundas’s head, at the wisps of reddish-gold hair escaping from beneath the
helmet, the pink neck, the edge of white scarf, the brown leather of his
flying jacket, scuffed and scarred with wear.

‘ALL RIGHT?’ Dundas yelled.
They had reached their take-off position. The engine raced. Rivers felt

himself pushed hard back against the vibrating seat. The plane lifted,
bumped, lifted again, and then climbed steeply away from the huddle of
buildings.

He looked over the side, shielding his mouth from the wind. The

countryside stretched below them, grey striations of lanes and roads, the
glitter of a pond, great golden swathes of laburnum, a line of hedgerow
white with blossom, blue smoke from a bonfire drifting across a field of
green wheat.

A movement from Dundas brought him back to the task in hand. Dundas

was making a spinning movement with his hand. The comforting roar of the
engine faltered, then became an infuriated mosquito whine as the plane
started to spin. Dundas’s eyes were fixed on his instruments. Rivers
watched the sun revolve in a great spiral round the falling plane. Abruptly,
the sun vanished, and the green fields rushed up to meet them. Dundas
pulled on the stick, but something was wrong. The horizon was tilted.
Rivers leant forward and tilted his hand to the left. Slowly the horizon
straightened.

Dundas had lost his sense of the horizontal. Already.
‘HOW WAS IT?’ Rivers yelled.
Dundas waved his hand in an incomprehensible gesture, then put one

hand on top of his head and pressed repeatedly, indicating he’d felt his head
being squashed into his body. He made the spinning movement again.
Rivers shook his head and made a looping movement. After a moment’s
hesitation, Dundas’s thumb went up.

The plane banked steeply as Dundas turned and made for the city. He

was not meant to do this, and Rivers guessed he was trying to make the
flight last as long as possible. In a short time he saw beneath him the
sulphurous haze of London. This was the view seen by the German pilots as
they came in on moonlit bombing raids, following the silver thread of the
Thames, counting bridges, watching for the bulge of the Isle of Dogs.

Rivers tapped Dundas on the shoulder. Dundas turned round and nodded.

So much of his face was hidden by the goggles it was impossible to read his
expression. Rivers sat back and again concentrated on his own sensations.
After the fifth loop he began to feel he was loose in his seat, a reaction he
remembered from other flights and knew to be a frequent, though not
universal, reaction of healthy fliers. They again came out with one wing
down. Dundas leant over the side and retched, but didn’t vomit. Rivers
jerked his thumb at the ground, but Dundas ignored him.

With no idea at all now which manoeuvre to expect, Rivers sat back and

tried to relax as the plane climbed. The vast blue haze of London fell away
beneath the left wing-tip. Higher and colder. Wisps of cloud hid the sun;
columns of shadows flitted rapidly across the city. Rivers felt calm,
suddenly. There were worse ways to die, and he’d seen most of them.

Again the engine faltered, giving way to the mosquito whine as the plane

began to fall. Dundas came out of the spin, white, giddy, confused and
clearly finding it difficult to focus on his instruments. Rivers could see him
peering at them. He yelled, ‘DOWN!’ and jerked his finger at the ground.
Dundas leant out of the plane and was sick.

They had a bumpy landing, though not worse than many others Rivers

had experienced. After the plane had taxied to a halt, Dundas stayed in his
seat for a few moments before jumping down. He staggered slightly and
held on to the wing. Rivers climbed down and immediately went up to him.

‘I’m all right,’ Dundas said, letting go of the wing.
Two mechanics were walking towards the plane. Dundas turned to them

and made some comment on the flight. The three went into a huddle, and
Rivers walked to one side. Dundas was smiling and talking cheerfully, but
then Dundas was a very good actor.

When he came across to join Rivers, he said, ‘Sorry about that.’
‘Shall we go and sit down?’
Dundas looked towards the canteen, but shook his head. ‘I think I’d just

as soon get back, if you don’t mind.’

Rivers’s legs were trembling as they walked back to the car. He was

angry with himself for getting into such a state – angry, ashamed and

inclined to pretend he’d been less frightened than he knew he had been. He
observed this reaction, thinking he was in the state of fatigue and illness
that favours the development of an anxiety neurosis, and behaving in the
way most likely to bring it about. He was doing exactly what he told his
patients not to do: repressing the awareness of fear.

In the car going back to the hospital, Dundas examined his reactions

minutely. During the first spin, in addition to the squashed head feeling,
he’d felt sick. ‘Not so much sick. More a sort of bulge in my throat. And
then during the loop I felt really sick. And faint. The sky went dark.’

‘And in the last spin?’
‘That was terrible. I felt really confused.’
After leaving Dundas in the hospital entrance hall, Rivers went into his

room and threw his cap and cane on to the chair. Henry Head came in a
moment later. ‘How was he?’

‘Bad.’
‘Sick?’
‘And faint.’
‘Are you all right?’
‘No, I seem to be suffering from terminal stiff upper lip. You know the

way I go on about not repressing fear? What did I do?’ He spread his hands.

‘It’s the Public School Factor, Will. We’re all too well trained.’
‘It’s the Silly Old Fool Factor. Too many young men around.’
Head smiled. ‘No, well, I know what you mean. One doesn’t want to

seem totally decrepit.’

‘I had this sudden sense that Dundas was hiding something. And that

didn’t –’

‘He is.’
Rivers looked surprised.
‘He’s got a bottle of Bumstead’s Gleet Cure in his locker.’
‘Has he?’
‘Sister Mitchell noticed it. Syphilis wouldn’t make him go faint, mind.’
‘Lying awake worrying about it might.’ Rivers sat in silence for a

moment. ‘Well. Redirects the investigation a bit, doesn’t it?’

‘Makes it a helluva lot simpler.’ Head dropped into a sergeant-major’s

baritone. ‘ “Show us yer knob, lad.” Are you coming to dinner?’

‘Yes, and then I must dash. I’m supposed to be seeing somebody at

eight.’

Rivers had the top floor of a large house near Hampstead Heath. The house
was within a hundred yards of the great gun, and there were times when its
proximity showed in every line of his face.

Prior arrived exactly on time, and was about to ring the bell when he saw

Rivers walking rapidly up the hill.

‘Have you rung?’ Rivers asked, getting out his key.
‘No, I saw you coming.’
Rivers opened the door and stood aside to let Prior in. Mrs Irving,

Rivers’s landlady, was hovering in the hall, wanting to complain about the
Belgian refugees on the second floor whose failure to understand the extent
of the food shortages was making her life a misery. When that subject was
exhausted, there were the raids to be discussed. Wasn’t it scandalous they’d
been kept awake all night and not a word about it in The Times? Then there
was her daughter, who’d been summoned back from France, ostensibly
because her mother was ill, in fact because she was incapable of sorting out
her servant problems. Girls kept leaving her employ on the flimsy excuse
that they could earn five times as much in the munition factories. There was
no accounting for modern girls, she said. And Frances was so moody.

At last Mrs Irving was called away, by Frances presumably, at any rate

by a young woman with braided hair who gave Rivers a cool, amused,
sympathetic smile before she closed the door of the drawing-room.

‘I hope she’s letting you live rent free,’ Prior said.
They walked up the stairs together. Rivers paused on the second floor to

look down into the garden. The laburnum, he said, was particularly fine.
Prior didn’t believe in this sudden interest in horticulture. The pause was to
give him time to get his breath back. His chest was tighter than it had been
on his last visit, and Rivers would have noticed that. Damn Rivers, he
thought, knowing the response was utterly unfair. Whenever he needed

Rivers he became angry with him, often to the point where he couldn’t talk
about what was worrying him. He mustn’t let that happen tonight.

Normally Prior took a long time to get started, but this evening he was no

sooner settled in his chair than he launched into an account of his visit to
Mrs Roper. What emerged most vividly was the eye in the door. He reverted
to this again and again, how elaborately painted it had been, even to the
veins in the iris, how the latrine bucket had been placed within sight of it,
how it was never possible to tell whether a human eye was looking through
the painted one or not. It was clear from Prior’s expression, from his whole
demeanour, that he was seeing the eye as he spoke. Rivers was always
sensitive to the signs of intense visualization in other people, since this was
a capacity in which he himself was markedly deficient, a state of affairs
which had once seemed simple and now seemed very complicated indeed.
He switched his attention firmly back to Prior, asked a few questions about
his previous relationship with Mrs Roper, then listened intently to his
account of the nightmare. ‘Whose eye was it?’ he asked, when Prior had
finished.

Prior shrugged. ‘I don’t know. How should I know?’
‘It’s your dream.’
Prior drew a deep breath, reluctant to delve into a memory that could still

make his stomach heave. ‘I suppose Towers is the obvious connection.’

‘Had you been thinking about that?’
‘I remembered it when I was in the cell with Beattie. I … I actually saw it

for a moment. Then later I remembered I used to go and buy gob-stoppers
from Beattie’s shop.’ He paused. ‘I don’t know whether you remember, but
when I picked up Towers’s eye, I said, “What shall I do with this gob-
stopper?” ’

‘I remember.’
A long silence.
Rivers said slowly, ‘When one eye reminded you of the other, was that

just the obvious connection? I mean, because they were both eyes?’

Prior produced one of his elaborate shrugs. ‘I suppose so.’
Silence.

‘I don’t know. It was in the prison, but later … I don’t know. I knew I

was going to have a bad night. You you you just get to know the the feeling.
I felt sorry for Beattie. And then I started thinking about William – that’s
the son – and … you know, naked in his cell, stone floor, snow outside …’
He shook his head. ‘It was … quite powerful, and I … I think I resented
that. I resented having my sympathies manipulated. Because it’s nothing, is
it?’ A burst of anger. ‘I lost three men with frost-bite. And so I started
thinking about that, about those men and … It was a way of saying, “All
right, William, your bum’s numb. Tough luck.” Though that’s irrelevant, of
course.’ He smiled wryly. ‘It isn’t a suffering competition.’

‘And then you thought about Towers?’
‘Yes. But not in the same way as … as as the other men, I mean, I wasn’t

focusing on the horror of it. It was … I don’t know.’ He held out his hand to
Rivers, palm upwards. ‘A sort of talisman. Do you know what I mean? If
that happens to you …’ The outstretched hand started to shake. ‘There’s no
possible room for doubt where your loyalties are.’

Prior looked down at his shaking hand, and seemed to become aware of it

for the first time. He swallowed. ‘Sorry, will you excuse me a moment?’

He crashed out of the room. Doors opened and closed as he tried to locate

the bathroom. Rivers got up to help, then heard retching, followed by a
gush of water, followed by more retching. Prior wouldn’t want to be seen in
that condition. He sat down again.

It was obviously his day to cope with people being sick.
He rested his chin on his clasped hands, and waited. It had taken two

months’ hard work at Craiglockhart to get Prior to the point where he
remembered picking up Towers’s eye, and even then he’d had to resort to
hypnosis, something he always did with great reluctance. Prior had arrived
at the hospital mute, rebellious, possibly the least co-operative patient
Rivers had ever encountered, and with a very marked tendency to probe. To
insist on a two-way relationship. He had accused Rivers of being merely ‘a
strip of empathic wallpaper’ and asked him what the hell use he thought
that was. Later this had became something of a joke between them, but the

probing went on, combined with a sort of jeering flirtatiousness that had
been surprisingly difficult to handle.

Prior’s nightmares had been dreadful. He’d always insisted he couldn’t

remember them, though this had been obviously untrue. Eventually, he’d
told Rivers in a tone of icy self-disgust that his dreams of mutilation and
slaughter were accompanied by seminal emissions.

Prior came back into the room. ‘Sorry about that,’ he said casually,

settling back into his chair.

He hadn’t reached the bathroom in time. The front of his tunic was wet

where he’d had to sponge it down. He noticed Rivers noticing the stain, and
his face tightened. He’s going to make me pay for seeing that, Rivers
thought. No point questioning the logic of it. That was Prior. ‘Would you
like a break?’ Rivers asked, trying to relieve the tension.

Prior nodded.
‘Let’s go by the fire.’
They left the desk and settled themselves in armchairs. Rivers took off

his glasses and swept a hand down across his eyes.

‘Tired?’
‘Slightly. As Mrs Irving was saying, we had our own personal air-raid

last night. I suppose somebody panics and starts firing.’

A pause while they stared into the fire. Prior said, ‘I bumped into a

patient of yours the other night. Charles Manning.’

Rivers had started to clean his glasses. ‘I umm –’
‘Can’t talk about another patient. No, of course you can’t. He talked,

though. You know, when he mentioned your name I thought “war neurosis”
– well, he does tend to twitch a bit, doesn’t he? – but no, apparently not.
Met a handsome soldier. Nasty policeman’s hand on shoulder. What do you
know, suddenly he requires treatment. What was the …? Henry Head, that
was it. “Henry Head can cure sodomites.” So off he goes to Head, who
says, “Sorry, like to help. Snowed under.” With sodomites, presumably. The
mind does rather boggle doesn’t it? “Why don’t you try Rivers?” ’ Prior
waited. When there was no response he went on, ‘Manning was surprisingly
open about his little tastes. Cameronians with sweaty feet, apparently.

Touching, isn’t it, how some people develop a real devotion to the Highland
regiments? I wonder, Rivers …’ Prior was making little smacking
movements with his lips, a don worrying away at some particularly
recondite problem. ‘How would you set about “curing” somebody of
fancying Cameronians with sweaty feet?’

Rivers said coldly, ‘I should apply carbolic soap to the feet.’
‘Really? A leap ahead of Dr Freud there, I think.’
Rivers leant forward. ‘Stop this. Dr Head is “snowed under” by young

men who’ve had large parts of their brains shot away. In a rational society, a
man who spent his days like that wouldn’t have to spend his evenings, his
own time, remember, with men who could perfectly well be left to get on
with their own lives in their own way. The fact that he’s prepared to do it is
a tribute to Head.’

‘He’s a friend of yours?’
‘Yes.’
‘I suppose he could refuse to take them?’ Prior said.
‘No, he can’t do that. Two years’ hard labour, remember?’
A short silence. ‘I’m sorry.’
Rivers spread his hands.
But Prior wouldn’t let go. ‘All the same there must be times when one

patient actually does need to talk about another. I mean, it must be obvious
the conversation about the Cameronians could only have taken place in
bed?’

‘The thought had occurred.’
‘Well, suppose I need to talk about it? Suppose I’m racked with guilt?’
‘Are you?’
‘The point is –’ Abruptly, Prior gave up. ‘No. I don’t seem to feel sexual

guilt, you know. At all, really. About anything.’

Not true, Rivers thought. Prior had felt enormous guilt about the

nocturnal emissions that accompanied his nightmares. Guilt about an
involuntary action.

‘I used to,’ Prior said.
‘When was that?’

‘When I was twelve. Where we lived there was a young man who used to

be wheeled around on a trolley. I don’t know what was wrong with him,
tuberculosis of the spine, something like that, something terrible. And the
trolley creaked, so you could always hear it coming. And he was pointed
out to us as an illustration of what happened if you indulged in self-abuse.’

‘Who told you that?’
‘Scoutmaster. Mr Hailes. He actually said what came out was spinal

fluid. And of course you’ve only got a limited supply of that, and mine was
going down pretty fast. I used to lie awake and try not to do it, and I’d get
more and more frightened. Unfortunately, there was only one thing that
took my mind off the fear. So I did it again. And all the time this creaking
trolley was getting nearer and nearer. And we’d been told the first signs of
collapse were pallor and shadows under the eyes. And I used to get out of
bed in the morning and look in the mirror, and what do you know? Pallor.
Shadows under the eyes.’ He laughed. ‘It’s funny now, but at one time I
actually thought about suicide.’

‘What got you out of it?’
Prior smiled. ‘Not what. Who. Paddy MacDowell.’
‘The man who organized the Sheffield strike?’
The smile broadened. ‘Yes, at a later stage. He was otherwise engaged at

the time. “Bashing his bishop.” That’s what we used to call it. Mac’s bishop
got bashed oftener than anybody else’s. He used to more or less pull it out
and do it in public – and he was taller and stronger than any of us. So that
planted the first seed of doubt. And then Hailes said the way to purity was
to keep a glass of cold water by your bed, and then when temptation struck,
you could plunge “the Inflamed Organ” – he always called it that – into the
water. Well, I relayed this to Mac. Mac was common, he didn’t go to Scouts
– and he said, “But if it’s stiff how do you get it into the glass without
spilling the water?” And I suddenly had this picture of poor bloody Hailes
standing there with his limp “organ” in a glass of water and I just knew he
was talking rubbish. Poor little sod, he must’ve forgotten what an erection
looked like. Anyway, after that I gave up on guilt. I think I got through a
lifetime’s supply in six months.’

‘Was it a close friendship? With MacDowell?’
‘You mean, did we –’
‘No, I –’
‘Yes, it was close. We were that age, I suppose.’
Prior was looking much more relaxed. ‘Do you want to go on?’ Rivers

asked.

A slight hesitation. ‘No, but I think I’d better.’ For a while he didn’t

speak, then, measuring the words with movements of his steepled
fingertips, he said, ‘Dreams are attempts to resolve conflict. Right? Well, I
can’t see any conflict in this one.’

‘You stabbed somebody in the eye.’
‘Rivers. It was a door.’
‘The eye was alive.’
‘Yes.’
‘So why do you say there was no conflict?’
‘Because I was so identified with William or Beattie or … I don’t know.

William, probably, because I was naked. And I was attacking what seemed
to me the most awful feature of their situation, which is the eye. The
constant surveillance. So I don’t see that there’s any conflict. I mean it
might be very inconvenient in real life but in the dream there was no doubt
whose side I was on. Theirs.’

Rivers waited. When it was clear Prior could offer nothing more he said,

‘You say the worst feature of their situation is the eye?’

‘Yes.’
‘The constantly being spied on?’
‘Yes.’
Rivers asked gently, ‘In that meeting with Mrs Roper, who was the spy?’
‘I –’ Prior’s mouth twisted. ‘I was.’
Another pause. Rivers prompted. ‘So?’
‘So,’ Prior said in a disgusted singsong, jabbing with his index finger, ‘

“eye” was stabbing myself in the “I”. And God knows one wouldn’t want a
reputation for puns like that!’

A pause. Rivers asked, ‘What do you think about that? Does it seem …’

‘It’s possible, I suppose. I hate what I do. And I suppose I probably felt I

was in a false position. Well, obviously I did, I’d have to be mad not to.’

‘I want you to do something for me,’ Rivers said. ‘I want you to write

down any dreams you have that are as … as bad as this one. Just record
them. Don’t try to interpret. And send them to me. I’ll be seeing you again
on –’

‘No, I’m sorry, I can’t. It’ll have to be the following week. If that’s all

right? I’m going to see Hettie Roper.’

‘Back to Salford? Where will you be staying?’
‘At home.’ He pulled a face. ‘Yes, I know. How can I stay anywhere

else?’

Rivers nodded. He was remembering a visit of Prior’s parents to

Craiglockhart. In one afternoon they’d undone every slight sign of progress
and precipitated an asthmatic attack. ‘Does your father know what you’re
doing? I mean, does he know what the job involves?’

‘My God, I hope not.’ Prior shifted restlessly. ‘This is a dirty little war,

Rivers. I can honestly say I’d rather be in France.’

‘Yes. I’m sure you would.’
Prior gave him a sharp look. ‘You’re worried, aren’t you? Why? Because

I’m going home?’

‘No, not particularly.’
‘Oh, I see. Yes. It was a suicide dream.’ His expression changed. ‘You

needn’t worry. If anybody comes a cropper over this one, it will not be me.’

He looked quite different, suddenly: keen, alert, cold, observant,

detached, manipulative, ruthless. Rivers realized he was seeing, probably
for the first time, Prior’s public face. At Craiglockhart he’d been aggressive
and manipulative, but always from a position of comparative helplessness.
At times he’d reminded Rivers of a toddler clinging to his father’s sleeve in
order to be able to deliver a harder kick on his shins. Now, briefly, he
glimpsed the Prior other people saw: the Lodes, the Ropers, the Spragges,
and it came as a shock. Prior was formidable.

SIX

Against a yellow backcloth a woman draped in brilliant green veils writhed
and twisted. She looked like an exotic lizard or a poisonous snake. That,
apparently, had been Wilde’s intention. Robert Ross had been telling them
about it before the performance, recalling a day in Paris, Wilde darting
across the boulevards to look in shop windows, asking, ‘What about that?’
or ‘Or perhaps she should be naked except for the jewels?’ Yellow and
green was his colour scheme, though Wilde could not have foreseen what,
for Charles Manning, was its most disturbing feature: that the yellow was
the exact shade of munition girls’ skins. Others wouldn’t notice that, of
course. It only struck him because one of his duties at the Ministry was to
serve as the military member on a committee set up to inspect the health
and safety standards of munitions factories. One saw row after row of such
girls, yellow-skinned, strands of ginger hair escaping from under their green
caps, faces half hidden by respirators.

Ross had been quite interesting on Wilde’s plans for Salome, rather more

interesting than the performance so far. The most startling piece of
information was that Wilde himself had once played Salome, which did
rather boggle the imagination, since in photographs he looked far from
sylph-like, even by the normal standards of prosperous middle-aged men.
Manning directed his attention back to the stage. Since he’d made the effort
to attend – and it had been an effort, he was feeling very far from well – he
ought at least to give the play a chance, particularly since it had obviously
meant a great deal to Wilde, Iokanaan’s head had been brought in on a
charger and Salome was kneeling, hands outstretched towards it. Manning
felt an unexpected spasm of revulsion, not because the head was horrifying,
but because it wasn’t. Another thing Wilde couldn’t have foreseen: people

in the audience for whom severed heads were not necessarily made of
papier mâché.

Salome began to fondle the head. ‘Ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss

thy mouth, Iokanaan. Well! I will kiss it now. I will bite it with my teeth as
one bites a ripe fruit. Yes, I will kiss thy mouth, Iokanaan. I said it: did I not
say it? I said it. Ah! I will kiss it now.’

Manning was bored. If he were honest all this meant nothing to him. He

could see what Wilde was doing. He was attempting to convey the sense of
a great passion constricted, poisoned, denied legitimate outlets, but none the
less forced to the surface, expressed as destruction and cruelty because it
could not be expressed as love. It was not that he thought the theme trivial
or unworthy or out of date – certainly not that – but the language was
impossible for him. France had made it impossible.

He’d only to think for a second of the stinking yellow mud of the salient,

that porridge in which the lumps were human bodies, or parts of them, for
an impassable barrier to come between his mind and these words.

A line of men in gas masks clumps along the duckboards. Ahead of the
marching column what looks like a lump of mud sticks to the edge of the
track. Closer, it turns out to be a hand. Clumping feet. His own breathing
harsh inside the respirator, and then wriggling worm-like across the mud, a
voice, sly, insinuating, confidential: ‘Where’s Scudder? Where’s Scudder?
Where’s –’

On stage another question was being asked: ‘But wherefore dost thou not
look at me, Iokanaan? Thine eyes that were so terrible, so full of rage and
scorn, are shut now. Wherefore are they shut?’

He’s dead, for Christ’s sake, Manning thought. His knee had gone into
spasm, and he was in acute pain. He glanced sideways at Ross, whose gaze
was fixed on the stage, registering every nuance of the performance. He
looked ill. Even in this golden reflected light, he looked ill. Oh, God,
Manning thought, I wish this was over.

At last Herod cried, Kill that woman! and the soldiers rushed towards

Salome, daughter of Herodias, and crushed her beneath their shields.

A moment’s silence, then the applause burst out and Maud Allan,

impersonal beneath the heavy make-up, was curtsying, blowing kisses,
smiling, the severed head dangling from one small white hand.

Ross was surrounded as soon as the lights went up. Manning pushed

through and shook hands with him, added his murmur to the general buzz
of congratulation, then pointed to his knee, and to the back of the
auditorium. Ross nodded. ‘But you will come backstage?’

Pushing against the crowd to get to the top exit, Manning realized how

painful his leg was. He opened the door marked FIRE EXIT and went through.
A stone corridor, dimly lit, stretched ahead of him, with none of the gilt and
plush of the rest of the theatre. The men’s lavatory was at the end of the
corridor, down a short flight of stairs. He peed, and then lingered over the
business of washing his hands, wanting to postpone the moment when he
would have to go backstage and swap the usual chit-chat. He would much
rather have gone home. He was sleeping in his own house again, making
the need to keep an eye on the builders his excuse, though he was glad of
the chance to get away from the club. That silly incident, the newspaper
clipping sent to his house, had disturbed him, simply because it could have
been sent by anybody. He no longer felt he could trust people, members of
his club, people he worked with. Even tonight his unwillingness to attend
had not been primarily from fear of being seen with Ross – though that was
a factor – so much as from simple reluctance to mix. Perhaps he was
becoming too much of a recluse. Rivers certainly seemed to think he was.

He looked into the mirror. The overhead light cast deep shadows across

his face.

Clumping feet. His own breathing harsh inside the respirator, and then
wriggling worm-like across the mud, a voice, sly, insinuating, confidential:

‘What did you think of it?’

A man had come out of one of the cubicles and was staring at him in the

mirror. His sudden silent appearance startled Manning. ‘Not for me, I’m
afraid,’ Manning said, starting to dry his hands. ‘What did you think?’

The man, who had not moved, said abruptly, ‘I thought it was the

mutterings of a child with a grotesquely enlarged and diseased clitoris.’

‘Did you? I just thought it had dated rather badly.’
‘No,’ the man said, as if his opinion were the only one that could carry

weight. ‘It isn’t dated. In fact, in terms of what they’re trying to do, it’s an
extremely clever choice.’

Manning looked into the mirror, determined not to be thrown by this

ludicrous and yet curiously menacing figure. ‘You think enlarged clitorises
are a modern problem, do you?’

‘All the discontents of modern women can be cured by clitoridectomy.’
‘It’s a bit more complicated than that, surely.’
It was as if he hadn’t spoken. The man came closer until his face was

beside Manning’s in the glass. ‘There are women in this city whose
clitorises are so grotesquely enlarged, so horribly inflamed, they can be
satisfied ONLY BY BULL ELEPHANTS.’

Silence. Manning couldn’t think of anything to say.
‘Didn’t I see you in the box with Robert Ross?’
Manning turned to face him. Looking him straight in the eye and loading

every word with significance, he said, ‘I am from the Ministry of
Munitions.’ He touched the side of his nose, raised a cautionary finger and
departed.

Walking along the corridor, he was surprised to find himself trembling.

The man was a complete lunatic. One didn’t have to be Rivers to diagnose
that, and yet he had been, in a rather horrible way, impressive.

In the crush of Maud Allan’s dressing-room, he accepted a glass of wine

and edged his way towards Ross. ‘I’ve just met the most extraordinary man
in the downstairs lavatory.’

‘Hmm.’
‘No, not “hmm.” Mad. He went on and on about diseased clitorises.’
‘It’ll be Captain Spencer. Grein said he’d seen him.’

‘Who is he?’ Manning asked.
‘The source of all the trouble, my dear. He’s the man who saw the Black

Book. Who knows the names.’

‘But he’s mad.’
‘That won’t stop them believing him. The fact is …’ Ross looked around

cautiously. ‘She shouldn’t have sued. I know I’m the last person to say that,
but –’

‘What else could she have done?’
Ross shook his head. ‘Once they’re in court they can name anybody.’
‘Are they leaving you alone?’
‘No. I have a police officer more or less permanently stationed in the

drawing-room. I’d offer the poor man a bed if I didn’t think it would be
misinterpreted.’

When they left, twenty minutes later, Manning noticed Captain Spencer

standing under a street lamp on the other side of the road, watching.
Manning reached out to touch Ross’s sleeve, then thought better of it, and
let his hand drop.

On the train to Manchester, Prior read the Roper correspondence.

Dear Winnie,

Don’t worry about me pet I am orlrite Hettie come home for Xmas and

we had a good time even little Tommy purked up a bit and you no what he’s
like you notice this new year there wasnt the same nonsense talked as there
was last I think last year knocked the stuffing out of a lot of people except
that bloody buggering Welsh windbag he dont change his tune much the
poor lads

Hettie made me go to the sales with her cos she new I wanted a blowse

there was a nice black one no turnings but Hettie says aw Mam your
making yourself an old woman anyway you no Hettie I come away with a
navy blue with a little yellow rose on it I think it looks orlrite cant take it
back if it dont with it being in the sale we bumped into Mrs Warner you no
her from the suffragettes and of corse she asked after you but she was only
standoffish you could see her wanting to get away she says she thort to
much was made of Xmas and turcy was a very dry meat I says well Ive
never tasted it so I wouldnt no You no what Ronnie Carker used to say dont
you theyre only mecking use of you, Beattie when they go home at night
they dont even have to pick their nickers up mind you if Ronnie was there
they wouldnt need to take them of either

As regards your late visitor you want to remember youve had a lot of

worry with Alfs Mam being bad and then thier Ivy being so funny but
whatever you do dont let it go past the fortnite YOU COME HOME
otherwise youll end up with some bloody mucky cow with a neck you can

plant taties in women like that do no end of damidge Ive seen bits of young
lasses dragging themselves round years after

Did Alf get the letter I sent it on thursday but the post is very slow isnt it

I spose its the backlog from Xmas if he did get it ask him to send me the
stuff as soon as poss if he didn’t tell him not to worry Ill rite again I want it
for a man who stopped here just before Xmas he needs it to do somethink a
bit risky but only for him he doesnt no anythink about you and Alf so theres
no danger of you getting dragged in Anyway wil close now hoping this
finds you as it leaves me

Buckets of love

Mam

Dear Mam,
School again, dunno who’s more fed up, me or the kids. The hall roof
sprang a leak during the holidays. No hope of getting it mended, of course,
and it was blowing a gale today. Absolutely streaming down the panes and
no lights on and Weddell rabbiting on about the Empire and how we must
all tighten our belts and brace ourselves, though you don’t see him bracing
himself much, and he couldn’t tighten his belt not with that belly on him. I
just kept praying one of the drops from the ceiling was going to land on his
bald pate, but no luck. And all the kids coughing like mad. One starts off
and then they all start. So we got ‘Our glorious Empire …’ cough cough.
‘We must fight to the last man.’ cough cough ‘Our valiant lads …’ cough
cough. Oh, and he’s worked out how many old boys are in the trenches.
Quite a lot, which surprised me, I’d’ve thought they all had rickets. There’s
rickets in my class. You know that very domed forehead they get? Once you
know to look out for that you realize how much of it there is. And then we
have to listen to all this puke about what we’re fighting for. Still, it’s better
than it was before Christmas. I really did think I was going to throw up
then. Peace on earth to men of goodwill, and how we were all showing
goodwill by blowing up the Jerries and saving gallant little Belgium. I tried
to tell Standard Six what gallant little Belgium got up to in the Congo, but
he soon put a stop to that. I told him I was only doing it to compare a bad
colonial regime with the splendid record of our glorious Empire, but I don’t

think he believed me. He doesn’t trust me further than he could throw me
and that wouldn’t be far. He’s put me on teaching the little ones this term
and I don’t think that’s a coincidence either.

8’s been in touch. You know I’ve been worried sick about him ever since

he got nabbed, but he says it’s not too bad. One of the lads had a beard and
they shaved him with a cut-throat razor. He ended up pretty cut about, but
it’s surprising what they can find to laugh at. He says he hasn’t seen our
William but of course he wouldn’t with him being in solitary. It might be
the last we hear, though, Mam, because he says the guard who smuggles the
letters out is being moved.

One thing I have found out – from 10, you won’t know him – is the state

of things in Étaples. That’s the big camp where they all get sent to train and
he says he’s never seen anything like it. He says they treat the conscripts
like shit. Men tied to posts for the least little thing with their arms above
their heads. Doesn’t sound much, does it, but he says it’s agony. He says as
sure as anything there’s going to be a blow up there. I hope so, I do hope so.
A few officers shot by their own men, that’s all it’ll take, just the one little
spark, and it’ll spread like wildfire. I know it will.

Haven’t heard anything from Mac. I try to keep busy, I’m running round

like scalded cat half the time because I daren’t let myself think. The little
ones are nice, though. Nobody’s got to them yet. I thought of a new nursery
rhyme the other day.

Georgie Georgie, pudding and pie 
Perhaps the girls’ll make him cry

Let’s keep our fingers crossed, eh?
You want to stock up on food, Mam. I know it’s difficult when you’ve

got Tommy to feed, but if you get the chance put a few tins by. If it ever
comes to coupons, conchies’ families’ll be at the back of the queue, if they
get any at all.

Don’t worry about me, I’m all right. You think about yourself for a

change,

Lots of love,

Hettie

P.S. If that bloody Mac doesn’t write soon I’ll bash his bloody head in.

Dear Ma,
Find the stuff you asked for enclosed. Tell your friend to follow the
directions exactly. You will think me a softie I expect but I feel sorry for the
dogs. If you get close enough to the poor brutes, I pity them. Dead in
twenty seconds. Anyway, good luck. Reckon we’ll have peace by next
Christmas? Here’s hoping,

Alf

P.S. Winnie says to say she came all right.

My darling Hettie,
You’ll be wondering why you haven’t heard sooner. Well, there’s been all
hell let loose. Do you remember that lad with the hump on his back? Would
insist on going in front of the tribunal instead of getting out of it on health
grounds, which he certainly would have done. I’ve been trying to get him a
passage to Ireland and eventually succeeded, but he was picked up just as
he was getting on to the boat. The hump gave him away. We’d tried
everything to hide it. Charlie suggested putting a dress on him and trying to
make him look like a pregnant woman walking backwards, but I don’t
know how you do that. Anyway, he’s back in Wandsworth, where they’re
doing their best to flatten it for him no doubt. But it’s a nuisance because it
means we have to lie low and that means everybody else has had their trips
to the Emerald Isle postponed. It clogs the entire system up, and I lose
patience, I’m afraid. I know individuals matter, but getting six or seven men
across to Ireland isn’t going to stop the war. There’s only one way do that,
and we both know what it is.

I’m staying with Charlie Greaves’s mother. DON’T WRITE. I know you know

the address, but the trouble is you’re not the only one who knows it. All
incoming post is opened. I don’t want you in this any deeper than you are
already. And I’m not treating you like ‘the little woman’. There’s got to be
people they don’t know about, otherwise there’s no safe houses, and no
network to pass people on. Speaking of which, I sent a lad to your Mam just

before Christmas. Did you happen to bump into him? I wondered
afterwards if I’d done the right thing. Not that I’ve any doubts about him,
he’s a good lad, keen as mustard, but he does get carried away. I don’t
suppose it matters, but if you write to your Mam you might mention it,
though I suppose he’ll have moved on by now. How is she, by the way? I
wish we could get Tommy out of there. He’s not doing her any good at all.

I’m writing this in bed, which is a big brass one, masses of room, and

bouncy. It’s tippling down outside and the wind’s blowing, and I’d give
anything to have you in here with me. Soon.

All my love,

Mac

It seemed strange to Prior to be reading his friends’ private letters, though

these had all – with the exception of Alf’s letter and its inconvenient
mention of dogs – been read aloud at the Old Bailey. Even Hettie’s little
nursery rhyme had boomed around No. 1 Court, as the Attorney-General
argued it implied her involvement in the conspiracy. No, there was no
privacy left in these letters; he was not violating anything that mattered.
And yet, as the train thundered into a tunnel and the carriage filled with the
acrid smell of smoke, Prior turned to face his doubled reflection in the
window and thought he didn’t like himself very much. It was the last letter
he minded: the gentleness of Mac’s love for Hettie exposed, first in open
court and now again to him.

They’d found that letter in the pocket of Hettie’s skirt when they went to

the school to arrest her.

EIGHT

Harry Prior was getting ready to go out. A clean shirt had been put to air on
the clothes-horse in front of the fire, darkening and chilling the room. Billy
Prior and his mother sat at the table, she with her apron on, he in shirt and
braces, unable either to continue their interrupted conversation or to talk to
Harry. He bent over the sink, lathering his face, blathering and spluttering,
sticking his index fingers into his ears and waggling them. Then, after
rinsing the soap off, he placed one forefinger over each nostril in turn and
slung great gobs of green snot into the sink.

Prior, his elbow touching his mother’s side, felt her quiver fastidiously.

He laced his fingers round the hot cup of tea and raised it to his lips,
dipping his short nose delicately as he drank. How many times as a child
had he watched this tense, unnecessary scene, sharing his mother’s disgust
as he would have shared her fear of lightning. Now, as a man, in this over-
familiar room – the tiles worn down by his footsteps, the table polished by
his elbows – he thought he could see the conflict more even-handedly than
he had seen it then. It takes a great deal of aggression to quiver fastidiously
for twenty-eight years.

He thought, now, he could recognize his mother’s contribution to the

shared tragedy. He saw how the wincing sensitivity of her response was
actually feeding this brutal performance. He recalled her gentle, genteel,
whining, reproachful voice going on and on, long after his father’s
stumbling footsteps had jerked him into wakefulness; how he had sat on the
stairs and strained to hear, until his muscles ached with the tension, waiting
for her to say the one thing he would not be able to bear. And then the
scuffle of running steps, a stifled cry, and he would be half way downstairs,
listening to see if it was just a single slap, the back of his father’s hand

sending his mother staggering against the wall, or whether it was one of the
bad times. She never had the sense to shut up.

But then, he thought, his face shielded by the rim of his cup, one might

equally say she had never been coward enough to refrain from speaking her
mind for fear of the consequences. It would be very easy, under the pretext
of ‘even-handedness’, to slip too far the other way and blame the violence
in the home not on his brutality, but on her failure to manage it.

As a child, Prior remembered beating his clenched fist against the palm

of the other hand, over and over again, saying, with every smack of flesh on
flesh, PIG PIG PIG PIG. Obviously, his present attempt to understand his
parents’ marriage was more mature, more adult, more perceptive, more
sensitive, more insightful, more almost anything you cared to mention, than
PIG PIG PIG PIG, but it didn’t content him, because it was also a lie: a way
of claiming to be ‘above the battle’. And he was not above it: he was its
product. He and she – elemental forces, almost devoid of personal
characteristics – clawed each other in every cell of his body, and would do
so until he died. ‘They fight and fight and never rest on the Marches of my
breast,’ he thought, and I’m fucking fed up with it.

His father had got his jacket and cap on now, and stood ready to go out,

looking at them with a hard, dry, stretched-elastic smile, the two of them
together, as they had always been, waiting for him to go. ‘I’ll see you, then,’
he said.

There was no question, as in the majority of households there would have

been, of father and son going for a drink together.

‘When will you be back?’ his mother asked, as she had always done.
‘Elevenish. Don’t wait up.’
She always waited up. Oh, she would have said there was the fire to

damp down, tomorrow’s bait to be got ready, the table to be laid, the kettle
to be filled, but all these tasks could have been done earlier. Prior, once
more lowering his eyes to the cup, tried not to ask himself how many
violent scenes might have been avoided if his mother had simply taken his
father at his word and gone to bed. Hundreds? Or none? The man who
spoke so softly and considerately now might well have dragged her out of

bed to wait on him, when he staggered in from the pub with ten or eleven
pints on board.

Leave it, he told himself. Leave it.

After his father had gone, Prior and his mother went on sitting at the table
while they finished drinking their tea. She never mentioned France or
Craiglockhart. She seemed to want to ignore everything that had happened
to him since he left home. This was both an irritation and a relief. He asked
after boys he’d known at school. This one was dead, that one wounded,
Eddie Wilson had deserted. He remembered Eddie, didn’t he? There were
deserters in the paper every week, she said. The policeman who found
Eddie Wilson hiding in his mother’s coal-hole had been awarded a prize of
five shillings.

‘There was a letter in the paper the other week,’ she said. ‘From Father

Mackenzie. You remember him, don’t you?’

She found last week’s paper and handed it to him. He read the letter, first

silently and then aloud, in a wickedly accurate imitation of Father
Mackenzie’s liturgical flutings. ‘ “There may be some among you, who, by
reason of your wilful and culpable neglect of the Laws of Physical
development, are not fit to serve your country, but –” Oh, for Christ’s sake!’
He thew the paper down. ‘Some among them carry their wilful and culpable
neglect to the point of getting rickets. If he’s physically well developed it’s
because his mother could afford to shove good food in his gob four times a
day.’ And goodness wasn’t he well developed, Prior thought, remembering
Father Mackenzie in his socks.

‘He just thinks a lot of people are shirking, Billy. You’ve got to admit

he’s got a point.’

‘Do you know the height requirement for the Bantam regiments? Five

feet. And do you know how many men from round here fail that?’

‘Billy, sometimes you sound exactly like your father.’
He picked up the paper and pretended to read.
‘There’s a lot of talk about a strike at the munition works. Your father’s

all for it. Well, he would be, wouldn’t he?’

‘What’s it about?’
‘I don’t know.’ She groped for an unfamiliar word. ‘Dilution?’
‘Sounds right.’
‘Well, you can imagine your dad. “Bits of lasses earning more than I do.”

“You mark my words,” he says, “after the war they’ll bring in unskilled
labour. The missus’ll be going to work, and the man’ll be sat at home
minding the bairn. It’s the end of craftsmanship. This war’s the Trojan
horse, only they’re all too so-and-soing daft to see it.” ’

Typical, Prior thought. However determined his father might be to raise

the status of the working class as a whole, he was still more determined to
maintain distinctions within it.

‘Oh, and he doesn’t like false teeth. That’s another thing,’ his mother

went on. ‘Mrs Thorpe’s got them, you know. “Mutton dressed up as lamb,”
he says. The way he goes on about her teeth you’d think she’d bit him. And
then there’s Mrs Riley’s dustbin. Lobster tins, would you believe. “They
were glad of a bit of bread and scrape before the war.” ’

‘He’s got a funny idea of socialism.’
She shrugged. ‘I wouldn’t know. Things like women’s rights, he was

never in favour of that.’

‘No.’
‘I remember him going on at Beattie Roper about that.’
A pause. ‘I went to see Beattie.’
She looked stunned. ‘In prison?’
‘Yes.’
‘You’ve no call to go getting yourself mixed up in that.’
Faced with this sudden blaze of anger, he said, ‘I have to. It’s my job.’
‘Oh.’ She nodded, only half believing him.
‘How’s Hettie?’
His mother froze. ‘I wouldn’t know. I never see her.’
There had been a time, when he was seventeen, when he and Hettie

Roper had been ‘walking out’, and, for once, the ‘quaint expression’ had
been painfully accurate. ‘Walking’ was exactly what they did. And talking
too, of course: passionate, heated talk, about socialism and women’s rights,

spiritualism, Edward Carpenter’s ideas on male comradeship, whether there
could be such a thing as free love. He remembered one day on the beach at
Formby, sitting in the dunes as the sky darkened, and the sun hung low over
the sea. All day he had been wanting to touch her, and had not dared do it.
The sun lingered, tense and swollen, then spilled itself on to the water.
‘Come on,’ he said, picking up his jacket. ‘We’d better be getting back.’

That night, as on so many other nights, his mother had been waiting up

for him. A book was open on her knee, but she hadn’t bothered to light the
gas. And then the questions started. He realized then that she hated Hettie
Roper. He didn’t know why.

‘Does she still run the shop?’ he asked.
‘No point. Nobody’d buy anything off her if she did.’
‘Does she work?’
‘Not that I know of.’
‘So how does she live?’
A shrug. ‘She’s still got the allotment.’
‘I thought I’d pop round and see her.’
Silence.
Reminding himself he was no longer seventeen, Prior stood up and put

his cup on the draining-board. ‘I won’t be long.’

Before the war, women used to sit on their steps in the warm evenings until
after dark, postponing the moment when the raging bedbug must be faced,
and taking pleasure in the only social contact they could enjoy without fear
of condemnation. A woman seen chatting to her neighbours during the day
quickly felt the weight of public disapproval. ‘Eeh, look at that Mrs Thorpe.
Eleven kids. You’d think she could find herself summat to do, wouldn’t
you?’ Now, looking up and down the street, Prior saw deserted doorsteps.
Women were out and about, but walking purposefully, as if they had
somewhere to go.

He supposed it was Mrs Thorpe’s name that came particularly to mind

because she’d been one of the worst offenders, with her lard-white breasts
the size of footballs, and Georgie or Alfie or Bobby worrying away at them,

breaking off now and then for a drag on a tab end. Or perhaps,
subconsciously, he’d already identified her, for there she was, coming
towards him, divested of the clogs and shawl he’d always seen her in and
wearing not merely a coat and hat but flesh-coloured stockings and shoes. It
was scarcely possible the attractive woman with her should be Mrs Riley,
but he didn’t know who else it could be.

They greeted him with cries of delight, hugging, kissing, standing back,

flashing their incredible smiles. There was a saying round here: for every
child born a tooth lost, and certainly, before the war, Mrs Thorpe and Mrs
Riley had advertised their fecundity every time they opened their mouths.
Now, in place of gaps and blackened stumps was this even, flashing
whiteness. ‘What white teeth you have, Grandma,’ he said.

‘All the better to eat you with,’ said Mrs Riley. ‘And who are you calling

Grandma?’

Mrs Thorpe asked, ‘How long have you got, love?’ And then, before he

had time to answer, ‘Eeh, aren’t we awful, always asking that?’

‘Two days.’
‘Well, make the most of it. Don’t do anything we wouldn’t do, mind.’
He smiled. ‘How much scope does that give me?’
‘Fair bit, these days,’ said Mrs Riley.
He remembered, suddenly, that he’d sucked the breasts of both these

women. His mother had been very ill for two months after his birth, and
he’d been fed on tins of condensed milk from the corner shop, the same
milk adults used in their tea. Babies in these streets were regularly fed on it.
Babies fed on it regularly died. Then Mrs Thorpe and Mrs Riley had
appeared, at that time, he supposed, lively young girls each with her own
first baby at her breast. They had taken it in turns to feed him and, in so
doing, had probably saved his life. He had known this a long time, but
somehow, when Mrs Thorpe and Mrs Riley had been shapeless bundles in
shawls, it had not registered. Now, though not easily discomforted, he felt
himself start to blush.

‘Look at that,’ said Mrs Riley. ‘He’s courting, I can always tell.’
‘Are you courting?’ Mrs Thorpe asked.

‘Yes. Her name’s Sarah. Sarah Lumb.’
‘Good strong name that,’ said Mrs Riley.
‘She’s a good strong lass.’
‘Mebbe has need to be,’ said Mrs Riley, looking him up and down,

speculatively. ‘Do y’ fancy a drink?’

‘No, I’d like to, but I’ve got to see somebody.’
‘Well, if you change your mind we’ll be in the Rose and Crown.’
And off they went, cackling delightedly, two married women going out

for a drink together. Unheard of. And in his father’s pub too. No wonder the
old bugger thought Armageddon had arrived.

Prior walked on, noticing everywhere the signs of a new prosperity. Meat

might be scarce, bread might be grey, but the area was booming for all that.
Part of him was pleased, delighted even. ‘Bits of lasses earning more than I
do’? Good. Lobster tins in Mrs Riley’s dustbin? Good. He would have
given anything to have been simply, unequivocally, unambiguously pleased.
But he passed too many houses with black-edged cards in the window, and
to every name on the cards he could put a face. It seemed to him the streets
were full of ghosts, grey, famished, unappeasable ghosts, jostling on the
pavements, waiting outside homes that had prospered in their absence. He
imagined a fire blazing up, a window shaking its frame, a door gliding
open, and then somebody saying, ‘Wind’s getting up. Do you feel the
draught?’ and shutting the door fast.

The glow he’d felt in talking to Mrs Thorpe and Mrs Riley faded. He

slipped down the back alley between Marsh Street and Gladstone Terrace,
making for Tite Street and Beattie Roper’s shop, a journey he must have
taken thousands of times as a child, a boy, a young man, but now he moved
silently across the cobbles, feeling almost invisible. He was no more part of
the life around him than one of those returning ghosts.

He came out at the top of Hope Street and started to walk down it. Hope

Street ran parallel with the canal and was known, predictably, as No-Hope
Street, because of the alacrity with which its inhabitants transferred
themselves from one to the other. At least before the war they did. Suicides
were rare now. The war had cheered everybody up.

Half way down, on the corner of Hope Street and Tite Street, was

Beattie’s shop, its windows boarded up. He knocked loudly on the door.

‘You’ll not get an answer there, love,’ a woman said, passing by. He

waited until she’d turned the corner, then knelt and peered through the
letter-box. The counters were cleared, the floor swept clean. He called,
‘Hettie. It’s me, Billy.’ The door into the living-room stood open. He felt
her listening. ‘Hettie, it’s me.’

She came at last, kneeling on her side of the door to check he was alone.

There was a great rattling of bolts and chains, and she stood there, a thin,
dark, intense woman, older than he remembered. No longer pretty.

‘Billy.’
‘I’ve been to see your mother.’
‘Yes. She wrote.’
A long hesitation, which told him immediately what he wanted to know.

He took off his cap and stepped forward. Almost simultaneously, she stood
aside and said, ‘Come in.’

The living-room was empty. Both doors, one to the scullery, the other to

the stairs, were closed. He looked round the room, taking his time. A fire
blazed in the grate. The kettle stood on the hob beside it. The table, with its
green cloth, still took up most of the space, six empty chairs ranged neatly
round it. Hettie followed his gaze, and he could see how changes she’d
become accustomed to – the empty chairs – became strange again, and
unbearable as she saw them through his eyes. ‘Oh, Billy,’ she said, and then
she was in his arms and crying.

He cuddled her, lifting her off her feet, rocking her from side to side.

Only when the sobs subsided did he loosen his grip, and let her slide to the
ground. Her spread fingers encountered belt, buckles, buttons, tabs, stars:
the whole hated paraphernalia. He said quickly, ‘I see you’ve still got
Tibbs.’

A fat tabby cat lay coiled on the rug, the pale underside of his chin

exposed. Ghost smells of cat pee and creosote drifted in from the shop.

‘Yes,’ she said, laughing and sniffing. ‘Pees on everything now.’

Her laughter acknowledged the fund of shared memories. Thank God,

Prior thought, pulling out a chair and sitting down.

She fetched the tea-pot and started making tea. ‘How’s me mam? She

says she’s all right.’

‘Thin. But she’s eating. She’s come off the strike.’
‘Hmm. How long for? I tell her she shouldn’t do it, but she says, “How

else can I convince them?” ’

‘Have you been to see her?’
‘I’m going next week. I gather we’ve got you to thank for that?’
‘I put in a word.’
She poured the tea. ‘How come you’re in a position to put in a word?’
‘Got a job in the Ministry, that’s all. They’re not sending me back ’cause

of the asthma.’

‘But what do you do?’
He laughed. ‘Exactly what I did before the war. Push pieces of paper

across a desk. But I managed to get me hands on your mam’s file – via a
young lady in the filing department – and then I thought I’d go and see her.’

‘And you just bluffed your way in?’
‘Well, not exactly, I had Ministry of Munitions headed notepaper. That

gets you anywhere.’

‘Huh! I wish we had some.’
She believed him. Just as once her mother had believed Spragge. She was

sitting at the head of the table, in her mother’s chair, no doubt because that
made her mother’s absence seem less glaring, and he was sitting, almost
certainly, where Spragge had sat. He looked across to the dresser, and there
sure enough was the photograph of William.

Hettie saw him looking at it, and reached behind her. ‘I don’t think

you’ve seen this one, have you?’ she said, and handed it across.

William, was leaning against a stone wall, his arms loosely folded, and

he was smiling, though the smile had become strained as the photographer
fiddled with his camera. He was wearing bicycle clips. A pencilled date on
the back said ‘May 1913’. Prior thought he knew the place, they’d gone
there together, the three of them. Behind the wall, not visible in the

photograph, a steep bank shelved away, covered with brambles and
bracken, full of rabbits whose shiny round droppings lay every where.

‘Why does it look so long ago?’ he said, holding the photograph out in

front of him. Without conscious duplicity (though not without awareness),
he was groping for the tone of their pre-war friendship.

She laughed, a harsh yelp that didn’t sound like Hettie.
‘No, but it does, doesn’t it?’ he persisted. ‘I mean, it looks longer than it

is. You know, I was thinking about that on the way over. About …’ He took
a deep breath. ‘You know if you were writing about something like … oh, I
don’t know, enclosures, or the coming of the railways, you wouldn’t have
people standing round saying …’ He put a theatrical hand to his brow. ‘
“Oh, dear me, we are living through a period of terribly rapid social change,
aren’t we?” Because nobody’d believe people would be so … aware. But
here we are, living through just such a period, and everybody’s bloody well
aware of it. I’ve heard nothing else since I came home. Not the words, of
course, but the awareness. And I just wondered whether there aren’t periods
when people do become aware of what’s happening, and they look back on
their previous unconscious selves and it seems like decades ago. Another
life.’

‘Yes, I think you’re right.’ She thought for a moment. ‘I went to London

a couple of months ago, to see one of the few suffragette friends who still
wants to know me. And we were sitting in her house, and there was a raid,
and we actually heard shrapnel falling on the trees, and do you know it
sounded exactly like rain. And she was … full of herself. Short hair,
breeches, driving an ambulance, all things she’d never’ve been allowed to
do in a million years. And suddenly she grabbed hold of me and she said,
“Hettie, for women, this is the first day in the history of the world.” ’

‘And the last for a lot of men.’
Her face darkened. ‘Don’t beat me over the head with that, Billy. I’m the

pacifist, remember.’

‘At least you’ve got the vote.’
‘No, I haven’t. I’m not thirty. Mam hasn’t, she’s in prison. Winnie hasn’t,

same reason. William hasn’t, he’s had his vote taken away ‘cause he’s a

conchie. So as far as votes go this family’s one down on before the war.’

‘Where is William?’ Prior said, looking at the photograph again.
‘Dartmoor. He took the Home Office scheme. He’s doing “useful work

unconnected with the war”.’ She snorted. ‘Breaking stones.’

‘I’m surprised he took it.’
‘You wouldn’t be if you saw him. He’s that thin, you wouldn’t know

him.’

‘I had Mike Riordan in my platoon. You remember Mike? I didn’t know

him either. Only in his case it was the face that was missing.’

‘It isn’t a competition, Billy.’
‘No. You’re right.’
She touched his sleeve. ‘I wish we were on the same side.’
‘Well, as far as your mam’s concerned we are. You surely don’t think I’m

on Spragge’s side?’

Her expression changed. ‘Oh, that man. Do you know, I met him once,

just for a couple minutes, and I knew there was something wrong with him.’

‘You didn’t know about the poison?’
‘No, she kept all that from me. I wish she hadn’t, I’d’ve told her she was

daft to trust him. And that smirking bastard at the Old Bailey. It was awful,
Billy. You’re stood in that dock and you feel guilty, even though you know
you haven’t done it. For months afterwards I felt people could look straight
through me.’ She stopped. ‘Here, drink your tea. It’ll get cold.’

‘How are you managing?’
‘I survive. Your dad brings me a bit of meat now and then. Don’t look so

surprised, Billy.’ A pause. ‘I tell you who’s been good. Mrs Riley. Every
time she bakes she brings something round. You know mebbe just half a
dozen rock buns, but every bit helps. I’ve nothing to thank the others for,
except a few bricks through the window. What gets me you know is the way
they used to cut me mam dead in the street, they’d just look through her.
But let them be in trouble, or their daughters be in trouble, and there they
were, banging on the back door. I says, “You’re a fool, Mam. Why should
you risk prison for them?” But it was, “Oh, well, she had to have
instruments last time,” or “Poor bairn, she’s only seventeen.” And she’d do

it for them. And it all came out at the trial. You know, killing a baby when
its mother’s two months gone, that’s a terrible crime. But wait twenty years
and blow the same kid’s head off, that’s all right.’

Prior winced, thinking how strange it was that such words should come

so easily from her mouth, that she should have so little conception of what
memories they conjured up for him.

‘What about Mac? Do you ever see him?’
Her face became guarded. ‘No.’
‘Never?’
‘You know bloody well, Billy, he wouldn’t dare come here.’
Prior sat back in his chair. ‘I know he couldn’t stay away.’ He waited. ‘I

thought I heard somebody just now.’

Her eyes went to the scullery door.
‘Walking up and down.’
‘It’s a restless house. You’ve got to remember me mam held seances

here. In this room.’

‘You don’t believe in that.’
‘I know me mam wasn’t a fraud. Something happened. Whether it was

just the force of people’s need or not, I don’t know, but there used to be
nights when this table was shaking. It changes a place. I sit here on me own
some nights and I hear footsteps going round and round the table.’

He had a dreadfully clear perception of what her life must be like, alone

in this house, with the empty chairs and the boarded-up windows. It didn’t
surprise him that she heard footsteps going round the table.

‘Talking of Mac,’ he said, and felt her stiffen. ‘I thought I’d go round and

see his mam. I don’t suppose he still sees her, does he?’

‘That’s a good idea, Billy. I’d willingly go, but I doubt if she’d thank me

for it. In fact, I doubt if she’d invite me in.’

‘No, she’s a great patriot, Lizzie.’ He was smiling to himself. ‘You know

the last time I was home I bumped into her. Well.’ He laughed. ‘Fell over
her. You know the alley behind the Rose and Crown? “Just resting,” she
says. I got her on her feet and she took one look at the uniform and she
says, “Thank God for an honest man.” And out it all came. Apparently on

the day war broke out she did seven men for free because they’d just come
back from the recruiting office. They said. “And do you know,” she says.
“Five of them were still walking round in civvies a year after.” She says she
had a go at Wally Smith about it. And he says, “Well they wouldn’t let me
in because of me teeth.” And Lizzie says, “What the fuck do they want you
to do? Bite the buggers?” ’

Hettie was looking very uncomfortable. Since she was far from prudish

he could only suppose the story of Lizzie and her August 4th burst of
generosity was likely to be painful to the person on the other side of the
scullery door. He thought of saying, ‘Oh, come on, Mac, stop arsing about,’
but he didn’t dare risk it. Better make his plea first, then leave them alone to
talk about it.

‘I’d like to see Mac, Hettie.’
‘So would I,’ she flashed. ‘Fat chance.’
‘No, I mean I really do need to see him. If I’m going to do anything for

your mam, I’ve got to talk to him first. He –’

‘He didn’t know anything about it.’
‘No, but he knew Spragge. Spragge was with him the night before he

came here. He gave Spragge the address.’

‘Do you think he doesn’t know that? Spragge took in an awful lot of

people, Billy. He had letters.’

‘I know. I’m not … I’m not blaming Mac. I just want to talk to him. He

might remember something that would help. You see, if we could prove
Spragge acted as an agent provocateur with somebody else – or even tried
to – that would help to discredit his evidence in your mam’s case.’

She glanced at the scullery door. ‘I know somebody who bumps into Mac

now and then. I’ll see if I can get a message through.’

‘That’s all I ask.’ He stood up. ‘And now I’d better be off.’
She didn’t try to detain him. At the door he paused and said loudly, ‘I

thought I’d go for a walk by the cattle pens. I thought I’d go there now.’

She looked up at him. ‘Goodnight, Billy.’

NINE

It was not quite dusk when Prior reached the cattle pens, empty at this time
of the week and therefore unguarded. Mac, if he came at all, would wait till
dark, so there was time to kill. He lit a cigarette and strolled up and down,
remembering the taste of his first cigarette – given to him by Mac – and the
valiant efforts he’d made not to be sick.

He stood for a while, his hands gripping the cold metal of one of the

pens. He was recalling a time when he’d been ill – one of the many – and
he’d gone out and wandered the streets, not well enough yet to go back to
school but bored with being in the house. It had been a hot day, and he was
muffled up, a prickly scarf round his neck, a poultice bound to his chest.
The heat beat up into his face from the pavements as he dragged himself
along, stick-thin, white, bed-bound legs moving in front of him, the smell of
Wintergreen rising into his nostrils. The name made him think of pine trees,
snow-covered hills and the way the sheets felt when you thrust your hot
legs into a cool part, away from the sticky damp.

He heard their hoofs before he saw them and, like everybody else,

stopped to watch as the main street filled with cattle being driven to the
slaughterhouse. A smell of hot shit. Dust rising all round, getting into his
lungs, making him cough and bring up sticky green phlegm. He backed
away from the noise and commotion, ran up a back alley between the high
dark walls, then realized that, as in a nightmare, a cow was following him,
with slithering feet and staring eyes, and men chasing after her. More men
came running from the other end of the alley. They cornered her, closing in
from both sides, and the terrified animal slipped in her own green shit and
fell, and they threw heavy black nets around her and dragged her back to
the herd, while all along the alley housewives whose clean washing had

been swept aside erupted from their backyards, shouting and waving their
arms.

At the moment the nets landed Prior had looked across the heaving backs

and seen a boy, about his own age, standing pressed back against the wall,
his white, still face half hidden by a mass of cottery black hair. Mac.

The sight of the cow in the net stayed with him. Many a night he dreamt

about her and woke to lie staring into the swirling darkness. Sometimes
when he woke it was already light, and then, afraid to go back to sleep, he
would creep downstairs, open the door quietly and slip out into the empty,
dawn-smelling streets. The only other person about at that hour was the
knocker-up, an old woman with bent back and wisps of white hair escaping
from a black woollen shawl, who went from house to house, tapping on the
upper windows with her long pole, waiting for the drowsy or bad-tempered
answer, and moving on. Drifting along behind her, he’d found his way to
the cattle pens, and to the deepest friendship of his childhood.

He left the pens now and walked into the high shed, which was as vast as

a cathedral, and echoing. He walked up and down, dwarfed by the height,
imagining the place as it used to be and presumably still was, if you came at
the right time of week. He remembered the rattle of rain on the corrugated
iron roof, imagined it pouring down as it had on the night he first stayed
here with Mac. He looked round, and the empty stalls filled with terrified
cattle, huge shadows of tossing horns leapt across the ceiling as the guards
moved up and down with lanterns, checking that the overcrowded animals
were not suffocating to death. If they suffocated before they could be
slaughtered, their meat was unfit for human consumption, though it found
its way on to the market as ‘braxy’, in shops patronized only by the very
poor. There was no profit to be had from braxy, so if an animal was
distressed and appeared to be near death the guards would rouse the
slaughterman to come and dispatch it. These guards were supposed to be on
duty all night, but since they’d been away for long stretches on the drovers’
road they naturally wanted to sleep with their wives or girlfriends, and that
was where Mac came in. The job was subcontracted to him at a penny a
night, and he was good at it. He could calm a cow, even a cow who’d

already scented blood, to the point where she would yield milk into a
lemonade bottle. Prior could almost see him now, wedged into a wall of
sweating flesh, slithering on the green shit that always had about it the
smell of terror, coaxing, whispering, stroking, burrowing his head into the
cow’s side, and then coming back in triumph with the warm milk. They’d
swigged it from the bottle, sitting side by side on the bales of straw that
stood in one corner of the shed, and then, slowly and luxuriously, like
businessmen savouring particularly fine cigars, they smoked the tab ends
Mac had picked up from the streets.

Prior wandered across to the bales of straw and sat down, his cigarette a

small planet shining in the darkness, for the night was closing in fast. He
could just see the nail in the wall which had always been their target in
peeing competitions, and from the nail he moved in imagination to the
school playground. He had a lot of playground memories of Mac, and
classroom memories too, though few of these were happy. Mac was dirty
and his hair was lousy. He wore men’s shoes, and a jacket whose sleeves
came to the tips of his fingers, and he was always being beaten. As children
do, Prior supposed, he’d started by assuming that Mac was beaten more
often than anybody else because he was naughtier than anybody else. He
was inclined to believe now that the only valuable part of his education at
that abysmal school had been learning that this was not true. Lizzie’s
profession was well known. On the one occasion she’d come to school, her
speech had been slurred and she’d raised her voice in the corridor; they’d
all watched her through the classroom windows, every varied pitch of her
indignation expressed in the jiggling of the feather on her hat. No doubt
she’d come down to protest because they’d beaten Mac too hard. If so, the
visit did no good: he was beaten again as soon as she left. Prior remembered
those beatings. He remembered the painful pressure of emotions he’d felt:
fear, pity, anger, excitement, pleasure. He wondered now whether the
pleasure could possibly have been as sexual as he remembered it. Probably
not.

After one such occasion Prior had sat with his back to the railings that

divided the boys’ playground from the girls’, munching a sandwich and

watching Mac. Mac was running up and down the playground with Joe
Smailes on his back, staggering beneath the weight, his grubby hands with
their scabbed knuckles clasping Joe Smailes’s podgy pink thighs. Mac was
a bread horse: he gave other boys rides on his back in exchange for the crust
from their bread or the core of their apple. Lizzie had not been poor, as the
neighbourhood understood poverty, but she was too disorganized by drink
to provide regular meals. What disturbed Prior this time, what ensured that
his eyes never left Mac’s face as he staggered up and down, was the
knowledge that he’d deserved a beating every bit as much as Mac, but
because he was clean, tidy, well turned out, likely to win a scholarship and
bring desperately needed credit to the school, he’d been spared. He bit into
his second sandwich, thought, munched, choked. Suddenly he ran across
the playground, thrust what was left of the sandwich into Mac’s hands,
burst into tears, and ran away.

Who needed Marx when they had Tite Street Board School, Prior

thought, stubbing out his cigarette carefully between strips of golden straw.
Still absorbed in memories of the past, he got to his feet and started to walk
up and down. The moon had risen; its light was bright enough to cast his
shadow across the floor. His first awareness of Mac was of a shadow
growing beside his own, then the touch of a hand on his shoulder, and a
light amused voice asking, ‘Am I to understand you’ve been up my
mother?’

Prior turned. ‘What makes you say that?’
‘All that stuff about “Thank God for an honest man”, I don’t know what

else it could mean.’

‘Now would I do that?’
‘I don’t know. Before the war you’d’ve fucked a cow in a field if you

could’ve found one to stand still for you.’

And the bull. ‘Mac, I swear –’
‘Aw, forget it. If I was sensitive about that I’d’ve croaked years ago.’

Mac was smiling. This was almost, but not quite, a joke.

Prior said, ‘Shall we sit down?’

They sat on bales of straw a few feet apart, united and divided by the

rush of memory. They could see clearly enough, by moonlight and the
intermittent glow of cigarettes, to be able to judge each other’s expression.

‘It was you in the kitchen, then,’ Prior said. ‘I thought it was.’
‘Why, who’d you think it might be?’
Prior hesitated. ‘I was afraid it might be some poor frightened little sod

of a deserter, I was afraid he’d –’

‘What would you have done?’
‘Turned him in.’
Mac looked at him curiously. ‘Even though he’s “a poor frightened little

sod”?’

‘Yes. What about the poor frightened little sods who don’t desert?’
‘Well, at least we know where we stand.’
‘I don’t want to start by telling you a pack of lies.’
Mac laughed. ‘You told Hettie a few. That girl in the filing department,

the one who got you the files, my God, Billy, you must be ringing her bell.’

‘Say it, Mac.’
‘All right, I’ll say it. It strikes me you’d be a bloody good recruit, for

them. You with your commission and your posh accent, and your …’ With a
kind of mock delicacy, Mac touched his own chest. ‘Low friends. Officers’
mess one night, back streets of Salford the next. Equally at home or …’ He
smiled, relishing the intimacy of his capacity to wound. ‘Equally not at
home, in both.’

‘Whereas you of course are firmly embedded in the bosom of a loving

proletariat? Well, let me tell you, Mac, the part of the proletariat I’ve been
fighting with–the vast majority–they’d string you up from the nearest
fucking lamp-post and not think twice about it. And as for your striking
munition workers …’ Prior swept the shed with a burst of machine-gun fire.

There was a moment’s shocked silence, as if the childish gesture had

indeed produced carnage.

‘And don’t think they wouldn’t do it, they would. I know them.’
Mac said, ‘I’m surprised you feel quite so much pleasure at the idea of

the workers shooting each other.’

‘No pleasure, Mac. Just facing reality.’ Prior produced a flask from his

tunic pocket and handed it over. ‘Here, wash it down.’

Mac unscrewed the cap, drank, blinked as his eyes watered, then passed

the flask back, its neck unwiped. After a moment’s hesitation Prior drank,
thinking, as he did so, that the sacramental gesture was hollow. Milk in
unwiped lemonade bottles was a lifetime away.

‘You still haven’t explained,’ Mac said.
‘About the files? I work in the Intelligence Unit.’
Mac made a slight, involuntary movement.
‘They’d’ve been here by now.’
Mac smiled. ‘Must be quite nice, really. A foot on each side of the fence.

Long as you don’t mind what it’s doing to your balls.’

‘They’re all right, Mac. Worry about your own.’
‘Oh, I see. I wondered when that was coming. Men fight, is that it?’
‘No. I can see it takes courage to be a pacifist. At least, I suppose it does.

You see, my trouble is I don’t know what courage means. The only time
I’ve ever done anything even slightly brave, I couldn’t remember a bloody
thing about it. Bit like those men who bash the wife’s head in with a poker.
“Everything went black, m’lud.” ’

Mac nodded. ‘Well, since you’re being honest, I think a load of fucking

rubbish’s talked about how much courage it takes to be a pacifist. When I
was deported from the Clyde, they came for me in the middle of the night.
One minute I was dreaming about a blonde with lovely big tits and the next
minute I was looking up at six policemen with lovely big truncheons.
Anyway, they got me off to the station and they started pushing me around,
one to the other, you know, flat-of-the-hand stuff, and they were all
grinning, sort of nervous grins, and I knew what was coming, I knew they
were working themselves up. It’s surprising how much working up the
average man needs before he’ll do anything really violent. Well, you’d
know all about that.’

‘Yes,’ Prior said expressionlessly.
‘I was shitting meself. And then I thought, well. They’re not going to

blind you. They’re not going to shove dirty great pieces of hot metal in your

spine, they’re not going to blow the top of your head off, they’re not going
to amputate your arms and legs without an anaesthetic, so what the fuck are
you worried about? If you were in France you’d be facing all that. And of
course there’s always the unanswered question. Could you face it? Could
you pass the test? But where I think we differ, Billy, is that you think that’s
a Very Important Question, and I think it’s fucking trivial.’

Prior glanced sideways at him. ‘No, you don’t.’
‘All right, I don’t.’
‘You could always say you’re showing moral courage.’
‘No such thing. It’s a bit like medieval trial-by-combat, you know. In the

end moral and political truths have to be proved on the body, because this
mass of nerve and muscle and blood is what we are.’

‘That’s a very dangerous idea. It comes quite close to saying that the

willingness to suffer proves the rightness of the belief. But it doesn’t. The
most it can ever prove is the believer’s sincerity. And not always that. Some
people just like suffering.’

Mac was looking round the shed. He said, ‘I don’t think I do,’ but he

seemed to have tired of the argument, or perhaps the whisky had begun to
soften his mood. ‘I often think about those days.’

Prior waited. ‘You can trust me, you know.’
‘I trusted Spragge.’
‘You didn’t have pissing competitions with Spragge.’
‘Oh, that’s it, is it? Piss brothers?’
Prior laughed. ‘Something like that.’
A long silence. ‘What do you want?’
‘I want you to tell me about Spragge.’
Mac gave a choking laugh. ‘He’s your fucking employee.’
‘Not any more. The trial blew his cover.’
‘Good.’
‘He was with you, wasn’t he, the night before?’
‘I sent him there.’
Mac must find that almost intolerable, Prior thought. His debt to the

Ropers was total. Without Beattie, he’d’ve been a scabby, lousy, neglected

kid, barely able to read and write, fit only for the drovers’ road and the
slaughterhouse. Beattie had taken him in. By the age of thirteen he’d been
living more with her than with his own mother. As soon as the older boys in
the street gang stopped speculating about sex and started climbing Lizzie’s
stairs in search of more concrete information, Mac had found his own home
unbearable. He’d disappeared altogether for a time, going up the drovers’
road one summer, returning, older, harder, the first traces of cynicism and
deadness round his mouth and eyes. Then Beattie took charge. ‘What the
hell’s the matter with you?’ she asked. ‘You can read, can’t you? Just ’cos
the teachers think you’re stupid, doesn’t mean you are. Some of them aren’t
too bright. Here, read this. No, go on, read it. I want to know what you
think.’

‘He was after you, wasn’t he?’ Prior asked.
‘Yes.’
‘Do you think she meant to kill Lloyd George?’
‘Nah. You know Beattie. She finds a spider in the sink, she gets a bit of

newspaper and puts it in the yard.’

‘Hmm. I just wonder what she’d do if she found Lloyd George in the

sink.’

‘Run the fucking taps.’
They looked at each other and burst out laughing.
‘Look, if there was anything, the idea came from Spragge. And I think

helping people escape from a detention centre sounds about right. And
Spragge had tried it on before.’

‘Who with?’
‘Charlie Greaves, Joe Haswell. He offered them explosives to blow up a

munitions factory. Said he knew where he could get some. Well, for God’s
sake. They’re not exactly lying around, are they? As soon as they said no,
he started backing off. Pretended he hadn’t meant it.’

‘And you still sent him to Beattie?’
‘This is hindsight, man. It sticks in my mind now because of what

happened. At the time I just thought, oh God, another mad bugger.’

‘Could you get them to write it down? With dates, if possible.’

‘I don’t even know where they are.’
‘It’s for Beattie, Mac.’
Mac let out a sharp breath. ‘What do you want it for?’
‘To discredit Spragge, of course.’
‘They won’t reopen the case.’
‘Not publicly. But they might let her out. Quietly. She’s going to die in

there, Mac. She won’t last anywhere near ten years.’

A dragging silence.
‘I’m not asking them to incriminate themselves. All they have to do is

say “He offered us explosives and we refused.” ’

‘And you think they’re going to be believed?’
‘I think there’s a better chance than you might think. There’s a lot of

questions being asked about the way spies are used in munition factories.
Some of them are better at starting strikes than you are, Mac.’

‘All right.’ Mac stood up. ‘It’ll take a few weeks.’
‘As long as that?’
‘I’ve told you. I don’t know where they are.’
‘Where can I contact you?’
Mac laughed. ‘You fucking can’t. Here, give me your address.’
Prior took the notepad and pencil, and scribbled. ‘All right?’ ‘Don’t write

to Hettie. The post’s opened. And one more thing.’ Mac came very close,
resting his hands heavily on Prior’s shoulders. ‘If this is a trap, Billy, you’re
dead. I’m not a fucking Quaker, remember.’

For a moment the pressure on his shoulders increased, then Mac turned

and strode away.

Prior decided to take the short-cut home across the brick fields. This patch
of waste land always reminded him of France. Sump holes reflected a dull
gleam at the sky, tall grasses bent to the wind, pieces of scrap metal rusted,
rubbish stank, a rusting iron bedstead upreared itself, a jagged black shape
that, outlined against the horizon, would have served as a landmark on
patrol.

One of the ways in which he felt different from his brother officers, one

of the many, was that their England was a pastoral place: fields, streams,
wooded valleys, medieval churches surrounded by ancient elms. They
couldn’t grasp that for him, and for the vast majority of the men, the Front,
with its mechanization, its reduction of the individual to a cog in a machine,
its blasted landscape, was not a contrast with the life they’d known at home,
in Birmingham or Manchester or Glasgow or the Welsh pit villages, but a
nightmarish culmination. ‘Equally not at home in either,’ Mac had said. He
was right.

Prior lingered a while, listening to the night noises, remembering the

evenings in his childhood when he’d sat on the stairs, unable to sleep, until
his father had come in and gone to bed, and he knew his mother was safe.
Engines rumbled, coughed, whistled, hissed. Trucks shunted along,
bumpers clanged together. A few streets away a drunk started singing:
‘There’s an old mill by the stream, Nelly Dean.’

He ought to be getting back. He’d already been away much longer than

he’d meant. He began walking rapidly across the brick fields. One moment
he was striding confidently along and the next he was falling, sliding rather,
down a steep slope into pitch-black. He lay on his back at the muddy
bottom of the hole and saw the tall weeds wave against the sky. He wasn’t
hurt, but the breath had been knocked out of him. Gradually, his heart
stopped thumping. The stars looked brighter down here, just as they did in a
trench. He reached out for something to hold on to, and his groping fingers
encountered a sort of ledge. He patted along it and then froze. It was a
firestep. It couldn’t be, but it was. Disorientated and afraid, he felt further
and encountered a hole, and then another beside it, and another: funk holes,
scooped out of the clay. He was in a trench. Even as his mind staggered, he
was groping for an explanation. Boys played here. Street gangs. They must
have been digging for months to get as deep as this. But then probably the
trench was years old, as old as the real trenches, perhaps. He clambered out,
over what he suspected was No Man’s Land, and there, sure enough, were
the enemy lines.

Smiling to himself, unwilling to admit how deeply the bizarre incident

had shocked him, he walked on, more cautiously now, and reached the
railings at the far side. He was trembling. He had to hold on to the railings
to steady himself.

The shock made him rebellious. He decided he wouldn’t go straight

home after all. Witnessing these nasty little rows between his parents did
them no good, and him a great deal of harm. The time had come to call a
halt. He would go to the pub. Which pub? His way home took him past the
Rose and Crown, whose brass door flashed to and fro, letting out great
belches of warm beery air. He would go there. He would do what other men
do who come home on leave. Get drunk and forget.

He was greeted by a fug of human warmth, so hot he felt the skin on his

nose tingle as the pores opened. He stood looking round at the flushed and
noisy faces, and in the far corner spotted Mrs Thorpe and Mrs Riley with a
great gaggle of other women. He decided he ought to stand them a drink.
After all, they’d stood him many a drink in their day. A cry of recognition
greeted him as he approached, and the whole boozy crowd of them opened
up and took him in.

Two hours later Harry Prior was stumbling home, gazing in bleary

appreciation at the full moon, riding high and magnificent in the clear sky.
He paused on the bridge that spanned the canal to take a quick leak and
admire the view. The moon was reflected in the water. He looked down at
it, as a jet of hot piss hit the wall and trickled satisfyingly between the
cobbles, and wondered why it should be hobbling up and down. He checked
to see the real moon was behaving itself, then peered more closely at its
reflection.

It wasn’t the bloody moon at all, it was an arse. My God, the lad was

going at it. Harry had half a mind to cheer him on, but then he thought, no,
better not. A person might very easily be mistaken for a peeping Tom. He
leant further over, pressing himself against the rough granite, wishing he
could see more. All he could see of the woman was knees. Who the bloody
hell wants to watch a male arse bobbing up and down? Bloody golf-balls.
Still, it didn’t half give you ideas. Bugger all doing at home, knees glued

together. He rubbed himself against the wall for comfort, then wandered
disconsolately on.

‘There’s somebody on the bridge.’
Prior turned, but he couldn’t see anything. He listened to the fading

footsteps. ‘They’re going.’

She’d gone tense and braced herself against him. He’d have to start from

the beginning. He kissed her mouth, her nose, her hair, and then, lowering
his head in pure delight, feeling every taboo in the whole fucking country
crash round his ears, he sucked Mrs Riley’s breasts.

Part Two

TEN

Prior returned to London to find the city sweltering in sticky, humid,
thundery heat. Major Lode was more difficult than ever, and not merely
because of the weather. An attempt was under way to centralize the
intelligence services under the control of the War Office, and Lode was
fighting for the survival of the unit. The change was being pushed through
at an exalted level and very little filtered down to Prior, but he observed
Lode daily becoming fiercer, the blue eyes more vulnerable, the moustache
in ever greater need of protective dabbings and strokings, as his empire
collapsed around him. The files, ‘the brain cells of the unit’ Lode
proclaimed (God help it, thought Prior), were to be transferred to the War
Office. The task of ‘tidying them up’ before they were transferred was
allotted to Prior. At first he took this to be merely a routine clerical task,
perhaps designed to keep him out of trouble, but it quickly became clear
that Lode wanted ‘sensitive material’ referred to him. In other words,
evidence for the worst of the unit’s cock-ups was to be removed. The job,
though huge – the files numbered more than eight hundred – suited Prior
very well, since it solved what had hitherto been his main problem: how to
get enough access to past files to compile a dossier on Spragge.

He was busy and, within reason, happy, though he did not feel

particularly well. Then, four days after his return, something disturbing
happened.

He’d gone out to lunch in a nearby pub, bought himself a pint of beer and

opened The Times, as he always did, at the casualty lists. The name leapt
out at him.

Hore, Captain James Frederick. Killed in action on the 5th April, dearly

beloved younger son …

Jimmy Hore. They’d met on a riding course, trotting round a ring with

their stirrups crossed in front of them, their hands clasped behind their
heads. Acquiring the correct seat. The seat of gentlemen. Prior, who’d
already experienced the realities of trench warfare, had been angry and
amused, though he kept both reactions to himself, since he was convinced
nobody else could appreciate the idiocy of the situation as he did. Certainly
not this blank-faced moron trotting towards him, but then, as they trotted
past each other, he caught Jimmy’s eye and realized his face wasn’t blank at
all, but rigid with suppressed laughter. That glance of shared amusement
had been too much for Jimmy, who burst out laughing and fell off his horse.

Prior looked round the pub. Prosperous-looking men in pin-striped suits

jostled at the bar, chinking coins, bestowing well-oiled smiles on the pretty,
chestnut-haired barmaid. And Jimmy was dead. All the poor little bugger
had ever wanted to do was get married to … whatever her name was. And
work in a bank. Prior would have liked nothing better, at that moment, than
for a tank to come crashing through the doors and crush everybody, the way
they sometimes crushed the wounded who couldn’t get off the track in time.
The violence of his imaginings – he saw severed limbs, heard screams –
terrified him.

He couldn’t eat. He would just drink up and go. But when he lifted his

glass, his attention was caught by the amber lights winking in the beer.
Sunlight, shining through the glass, cast a ring of shimmering gold on the
surface of the table that danced when his hand moved. He started to play
with it, moving his hand to and fro.

He was back at his desk. No interval. One second he was in the pub, the

next sitting behind his desk. He looked across at the closed door. Blinked.
Thought, I must’ve gone to sleep. He felt relaxed, but without the clogged
feeling that follows midday sleep. He’d been reading The Times … Jimmy
Hore was dead. He couldn’t remember leaving the pub. He must have
walked all the way back in a complete dream. He looked at his watch, and
his brain struggled to make sense of the position of the hands. Ten past four.

Three hours had passed since he broke for lunch, and of that he could

account for perhaps twenty to twenty-five minutes. The rest was blank.

He made himself work until six. After all, in France he’d done paperwork
on a table that kept jumping several feet into the air. He could surely
manage to ignore a little disturbance like this. Though, as file after file
passed across his desk, he was aware, somewhere on the fringes of his
consciousness, that it was not ‘a little disturbance’. Something catastrophic
had happened.

Shortly after six he thought he recognized voices, and went out of his

room and a little way along the corridor. Major Lode and Lionel Spragge
were deep in conversation by the lifts. It was not possible to hear what they
were saying, but he noticed that Lode shook Spragge’s hand warmly as the
lift arrived. Prior slipped back into his room, but left the door open.

He was ready to produce some small query that would bring Lode into

his room, but in the event he didn’t need to. Lode stood in the doorway,
grinning. ‘Just seen Spragge,’ he said in his clipped, staccato voice. ‘What
have you been doing to him?’

‘Me? Nothing.’
‘Says you offered him a job.’
‘I didn’t offer him anything. Wishful thinking, I’m afraid.’
‘Well, he certainly seems to think you did. I had to tell him there was

nothing doing. Nappoo.’ Lode looked at him for a moment, then said in a
menacing, nannyish singsong, ‘He’s got it in for you.’

Bastard, Prior thought, as Lode closed the door behind him. It’s not my

fault your frigging unit’s being closed down.

Towards six it began to thunder, a desultory grumble on the horizon,

though the sun still shone. Prior worked for a further half hour, then gave
up. He’d been having bad headaches ever since he got back to London and
blamed them on the weather, though in fact he knew they’d started after his
fall into the children’s trench. He would go somewhere fairly reasonable to
eat. Cosset himself.

A sudden downpour began just as he reached the main steps. He looked

up, trying to judge how long it would last. A white sun shone through a thin
layer of cloud, but there were darker clouds massing over Nelson’s Column.

He went back upstairs to fetch his greatcoat. As he passed Lode’s room, he
heard an unfamiliar voice say, ‘Do you think he believed it?’

Lode replied, ‘Oh, I think so. I don’t see why he shouldn’t.’
Prior went along to his own room, shrugged himself into the heavy

greatcoat, and walked back to the lift. For once it arrived immediately in a
great clanking of cables and gates. He told himself there was no reason to
connect the overheard conversation with himself, but he found it difficult
not to. The atmosphere in the unit was rather like that. Plots and
counterplots, many of them seemingly pointless. So far he’d managed to
hold himself aloof.

The underground was crowded. Currents of hot, dead air moved across

his face as he waited on the edge of the platform. He couldn’t carry his
greatcoat – that was forbidden – and the sweat streamed down his sides. He
found himself wondering whether this reaction was not excessive, whether
he was not really ill. A subterranean rumbling, and the train erupted from
the tunnel. He found himself a seat near the door and glanced at the girl
beside him. Her hair was limp, her neck had a creased, swollen whiteness,
and yet she was attractive in her rumpled skirt and white blouse. He glanced
at her neckline, at the shadow between her breasts, then forced himself to
look away. He found that rumpled look in women amazingly attractive.

He ate at a small cafe not far from Marble Arch. It wasn’t as pleasant as

it had looked from the outside: the walls had faded to a sallow beige, the
windows streamed with condensation, blasts of steamy air belched from the
swing doors into the kitchen as waitresses banged in and out. After his meal
he lit a cigarette, drank two cups of hot, sweet, orange-coloured tea and
persuaded himself he felt better.

A twisting flight of stairs led down to his basement flat. The dustbins

from all the apartments in the house were kept in the small forecourt outside
his living-room window. The smell of rotting cabbage lingered. At night
there were rustlings that he tried to convince himself were cats. He put his
key in the lock and walked in. The hall was dark, but not cool. He threw his
briefcase and coat down on to a chair, then, pulling his tie off, went along
the corridor to the bathroom, ran a cold bath and nerved himself to get in.

His skin under the water looked bloated, and there were lines of silver
bubbles trapped in his pubic hair. He ran his fingers through, releasing
them, then clasped the edges of the bath and lowered his head beneath the
water.

He got out, wrapped himself in a towel, opened the french windows into

the small yard and lay down on the bed. Despite the open windows there
was no decrease in stuffiness. The only way you could get a movement of
air through the place was to have the french windows and the front door
open. But then you let the smell of cabbage in as well.

His head was aching. He turned and looked at the photograph of Sarah by

his bed. She was sitting on the bottom step of some kind of monument,
younger, plump, though not fat, with her hair dressed low so that it almost
covered her forehead. She was pretty, but he thought she looked more
ordinary than she did now, when her cheekbones had become more
prominent, and she wore her hair back from the high rounded forehead. Her
smile was different too. In the photograph it looked friendly, confiding,
almost puppyish. Now, though still warm, it always kept something back.
She was coming to see him sometime in the next few weeks, or at least it
seemed almost certain that she was. He was afraid to count on it. He was
afraid to picture her in the flat, because he knew that if he did the emptiness
when her imagined presence failed him would be intolerable.

What he needed was to get out. These days he tried to circumvent the

nightmares by going for a long walk early in the evening and then having
three very large whiskies before bed. He’d reluctantly come to the
conclusion that Rivers was right: sleeping draughts stopped working after
the first few weeks, and when they stopped the nightmares returned with
redoubled force. At least with the walk and the whisky he could count on a
few good hours before they started.

Walking the city streets on a hot evening, he seemed to feel the

pavements and the blank, white terraces breathe the day’s stored heat into
his face. His favourite walks were in Hyde Park. He liked the dusty gloom
beneath the trees, the glint of the Serpentine in the distance. Close to, by the
water’s edge, there was even the whisper of a breeze. He stopped and

watched some children paddling, three little girls with their dresses tucked
into their drawers, then switched his attention to two much bigger girls,
who came strolling along, arm in arm, but they read the hunger in his eyes
too clearly and hurried past, giggling.

He felt restless, and, for once, the restlessness had nothing to do with sex.

He had a definite and very strange sensation of wanting to be somewhere, a
specific place, and of not knowing what that place was. He began to stroll
towards the Achilles Monument. This was a frequent objective on his
evening walks, for no particular reason except that its heroic grandeur both
attracted and repelled him. It seemed to embody the same unreflecting
admiration of courage that he found in ‘The Charge of the Light Brigade’, a
poem that had meant a great deal to him as a boy, and still did, though what
it meant had become considerably more complex. He stared up at the
stupendous lunging figure, with its raised sword and shield, and thought,
not for the first time, that he was looking at the representation of an ideal
that no longer had validity.

Feeling dissatisfied, as if he’d expected the walk to end in something

more than this routine encounter with Achilles, he turned to go, and noticed
a man staring at him from under the shadow of the trees. We-ell. Young
men who linger in the park at dusk can expect to be stared at. Deliberately,
he quickened his pace, but then the back of his neck began to prickle, and a
second later he heard his name called.

Lionel Spragge came lumbering up to him, out of breath and plaintive.

‘Where are you going?’ he demanded.

‘Home.’
At that moment a gang of young people, five or six abreast, came

charging along the path, arms linked, broke round Spragge like a river
round a stone, and swept on. Two more boys, running to catch up, elbowed
him out of the way. Under cover of this disturbance, Prior walked away.

‘Hey, hang on.’ Spragge came puffing up behind him. ‘You can’t just go

walking off like that.’

‘Why not?’
Spragge tapped his watch. ‘Achilles. Nine o’clock.’

‘Well?’
Spragge looked genuinely bewildered. ‘Why make the appointment if

you don’t want to talk?’

Prior was beginning to feel frightened. ‘I came out for a walk.’
‘You came to see me.’
‘Did I? I don’t think so.’
‘You know you did.’ He stared at Prior. ‘Well, if this doesn’t take the

biscuit. You said, “I can’t talk now. Statue of Achilles, nine o’clock.”
What’s the point of denying it? I mean what is the point?’

Spragge stank. His shirt was dirty, there was three days’ growth of

stubble on his chin, he’d been drinking, his eyes were bloodshot, but the
bewilderment was genuine.

Prior said, ‘Well, I’m here now anyway. What do you want?’
‘If you hadn’t turned up I’d’ve come to your house.’
‘You don’t know where I live.’
‘I do. I followed you home.’
Prior laughed. A bark of astonishment.
‘I was behind you on the platform. I sat three seats away from you on the

train.’ Spragge waggled his finger at his temple. ‘You want to watch that.
First step to the loony bin.’

‘Piss off.’
Spragge caught his arm. ‘Don’t you want to know what I’ve got to say?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘Yes, you do,’ Spragge said confidingly, leaning close, breathing into his

face. ‘Come on. Sit down.’

They found a place. At the other end of the bench an elderly woman sat,

feeding a squirrel on nuts. Prior watched the animal’s tiny black hands
turning the nut delicately from side to side. ‘Make it quick, will you?’

‘I’ve remembered where I saw you.’
‘Have you?’
‘Meeting in Liverpool. You were speaking for the war, your father was

speaking against.’

‘Get to the point.’

‘Oh, I know a lot about you. It’s amazing what you can find out when

you try, and finding out things was my job, wasn’t it? When I had a job.’

‘You didn’t find things out,’ Prior said crisply. ‘You made them up.’
‘You and the Ropers. You were like this.’ Spragge jabbed his crossed

fingers into Prior’s face. ‘Thick as thieves. And MacDowell.’

‘That’s why I got the job.’
‘Oh, yeh, chuck me out and push you in.’
‘I came a year after you left.’
‘You told me I’d got a job.’
‘No, I didn’t.’
‘Yes, you did. I went straight back home and told the wife. And then

when I didn’t hear anything I went to see Lode, and he threw me out.
Bloody laughed at me.’ Spragge turned his downwards-slanting turquoise
eyes on Prior. ‘You were just pumping me. Trying to make out I put the old
cunt up to it.’

Prior got up. ‘Wash your mouth out.’
‘I thought that’d get you. You and her, you were –’
Prior crossed his fingers. ‘Like this?’
Spragge stared at him, a vein standing out at his temple, like a worm

under the clammy skin. ‘People don’t change.’

‘No, I agree, they don’t. I was a socialist then, I’m a socialist now. As far

as the war goes, I don’t have to prove my patriotism to you. I didn’t offer
you a job. I’m sorry if you told your wife I did, but that’s your
responsibility, not mine. Now bugger off and leave me alone.’

Prior walked away. He was aware of Spragge shouting, but was too angry

to hear what he said. He thought Spragge might follow him, and that if he
did there would be a fight. Spragge was taller, but older and flabbier. And
he didn’t care anyway. He wanted a fight. Spragge’s face floated in front of
him: the slightly bulbous nose, the sheen of sweat, the enlarged pores
around the nostrils, the tufts of grey hair protruding from them. He’d never
experienced such intense awareness of another person’s body before, except
in sex. What he felt was not simple dislike, but an intimate, obsessive,
deeply physical hatred.

Back in the flat he rinsed his face in cold water’ and, trembling slightly,

lay down on the bed. He plumped the pillows up behind him and groped in
the pocket of his tunic for a cigarette. Weren’t any. Then he remembered
he’d been wearing his greatcoat. He got up, checked the pockets and found
a packet of cigars. He didn’t smoke cigars. But he must have bought them,
and either smoked or offered them to somebody else, because there were
two missing from the pack. Just as he must have arranged to meet Spragge.
Spragge wouldn’t have lied about that. It was too blatant, too easily
discounted. No, he’d made the appointment all right. God knows when, or
why.

He got up from the bed, feeling the palms of his hands sticky. He went to

the front door and locked it, then stood with his back to it, looking down the
dark corridor to the half-open door of his bedroom, feeling a momentary
relief at being locked in, though he quickly realized this was nonsense.
Whatever it was he needed to be afraid of, it was on this side of the door.

ELEVEN

After a pause, Rivers asked, ‘Have there been any further episodes since
then?’

‘Yes, but I don’t think any of them involved other people. I don’t think

they did.’ Prior’s mouth twisted. ‘How would I know?’

‘Nobody’s said anything?’
‘No.’
‘How many?’
‘Seven.’
‘As many as that?
Prior looked away.
‘How long do they last?’
‘Longest, three hours. Shortest … I don’t know. Twenty minutes? The

long ones are frightening because you don’t know what you’ve done …’ He
attempted a laugh. ‘You just know you’ve had plenty of time to do it.’

‘I don’t think you should assume you’ve done anything wrong.’
‘Don’t you? Well, if it’s so bloody good, why do I need to forget it?’
Rivers waited a while. ‘What do you think you might have done?’
‘I don’t know, do I? Nipped across to Whitechapel and ripped up a few

prostitutes.’

Silence.
‘Look,’ Prior said, with the air of one attempting to engage the village

idiot in rational discourse, ‘you know as well as I do that that …’ He flung
himself back in his chair. ‘I’m not going to do this, I just refuse.’

Rivers waited.
Still not looking at him, Prior said, or rather chanted, ‘I have certain

impulses which I do not give way to except in strict moderation and at the

other person’s request. At least, in this state I don’t. I’m simply pointing out
that in the the the the other state I might not be so fucking scrupulous. And
don’t look at me like that.’

‘I’m sorry.’
‘You think this is a load of self-dramatizing rubbish, don’t you?’
Rivers said carefully, ‘I think you’ve been alone with the problem too

long.’

‘There’s nothing ridiculous in anything I’ve said.’
Rivers looked at the pale, proud, wintry face and caught a sigh. ‘I

certainly wouldn’t call it ridiculous.’

‘The fact is I don’t know and neither do you, so you’re in no position to

pontificate.’

Silence. Rivers said, ‘How are the nightmares?’
‘Bad. Oh, I had one you’ll like. I was was walking along a path in a kind

of desert and straight ahead of me was an eyeball. Not this size.’ Prior’s
cheeks twitched like boiling porridge. ‘Huge. And alive. And it was directly
in front of me and I knew this time it was going to get me.’ He smiled. ‘Do
whatever it is eyeballs do. Fortunately, there was a river running along
beside the path, so I leapt into the river and I was all right.’ He gazed
straight at Rivers. ‘But then I suppose all your patients jump into fucking
rivers sooner or later, don’t they?’

The antagonism was startling. They might have been back at

Craiglockhart, at the beginning of Prior’s treatment. ‘How did you feel
about being in the river?’

‘Fine. It sang to me, a sort of lullaby, it kept telling me I was going to be

all right and I was all right – as long as I stayed in the river.’

‘You didn’t feel you wanted to get out?’
‘In the dream? No. Now, YES.’
Rivers spread his hands. ‘Your coming here is entirely voluntary.’
‘With that degree of dependency? Of course it’s not fucking voluntary.’

He started to say something else and bit it back. ‘I’m sorry.’

‘Don’t be, there’s no need.’ Suddenly Rivers leant across the desk. ‘I’m

not here to be liked.’

‘I am sorry,’ Prior said, his face and voice hardening. ‘I thought I was

supposed to be accepting my emotions? Well, my emotion is that I’m sorry.’

‘In that case I accept your apology.’
A pause. ‘Do you know what I do when I come round from one of these

spells? I look at my hands because I half expect to see them covered in
hair.’

Rivers made no comment.
‘You’ve read Jekyll and Hyde?’
‘Yes.’ Rivers had been waiting for the reference. Patients who suffered

from fugue states invariably referred to the dissociated state – jocularly, but
not without fear – as ‘Hyde’. ‘In real life, you know, the fugue state is –
well, I was going to say “never”, but, in fact, there is one case – is almost
never the darker side of the personality. Usually it’s no more than a
difference in mood.’

‘But we don’t know. You see, the conversation I’m trying not to have is

the one where I point out that you could find out in five minutes flat and
you say, “Yes, I know, but I won’t do it.” ’

Silence.
‘Well?’
‘I’m sorry, I thought you said you didn’t want that conversation.’
‘You know, for somebody who isn’t here to be liked you have the most

wonderful manner. You used hypnosis at Craiglockhart.’

‘Yes, but in that case we could check the memory. You see, one of the

things people who believe in … the extensive use of hypnosis claim – well,
they don’t even claim it, they assume it – is that memories recovered in that
way are genuine memories. But they’re very often not. They can be
fantasies, or they can be responses to suggestions from the therapist.
Because one’s constantly making suggestions, and the ones you’re not
aware of making – not conscious of – are by far the most powerful. And
that’s dangerous because most therapists are interested in dissociated states
and so they – unconsciously of course – encourage the patient further down
that path. And one can’t avoid doing it. Even if one excludes everything
else, there’s still the enlargement of the pupils of the eyes.’

Prior leant forward and peered. ‘Yours are enlarged.’
Rivers took a deep breath. ‘You can get your memory back by the same

methods we used at Craiglockhart. You were very good at it.’

‘Is that why you do this?’ Prior swept his hand down across his eyes.
Rivers smiled. ‘No, of course not, it’s just a habit. Eye-strain. Now can

we –’

‘No, that’s not true. If it was eye-strain, you’d do it at random and you

don’t. You do it when … when something touches a nerve. Or or … It is a
way of hiding your feelings. You’ve just said it yourself, the eyes are the
one part you can’t turn into wallpaper – and so you cover them up.’

Rivers found this disconcerting. He tried to go on with what he’d been

going to say, and realized he’d lost the train of thought. After so many
hours of probing, manipulating, speculating, provoking, teasing, Prior had
finally – and almost casually – succeeded. He couldn’t ignore this; it had to
be dealt with. ‘I think … if as you say it isn’t random – and I don’t know
because it’s not something I’m aware of – it’s probably something to do
with not wanting to see the patient. For me the patient’s expressions and
gestures aren’t much use, because I have no visual memory, so I think
perhaps I stop myself seeing him as a way of concentrating on what he’s
saying. All right? Now perhaps we can –’

‘No visual memory at all?’
‘None at all.’
‘I don’t see how you think.’
‘Well, I suspect you’re a very visual person. Could we –’
‘Have you always been like this?’
Rivers thought, all right. He stood up and indicated to Prior that they

should exchange seats. Prior looked surprised and even uneasy, but quickly
recovered and sat down in Rivers’s chair with considerable aplomb. Rivers
saw him look round the study, taking in his changed perspective on the
room. ‘Isn’t this against the rules?’ he asked.

‘I can’t think of a single rule we’re not breaking.’
‘Can’t you?’ Prior said, smiling his delicate smile. ‘I can.’
‘I’m going to show you how boring this job is. When I was five …’

Prior shifted his position, leant forward, rested his chin on his clasped

hands, and said, in meltingly empathic tones, ‘Yes? Go on.’

Rivers was not in fact breaking the rules. He intended to do no more than

offer Prior an illustration from his own experience that he’d already used
several times in public lectures, but he hadn’t reckoned on doing it while
confronted by a caricature of himself. ‘One of the expressions of having no
visual memory is that I can’t remember the interior of any building I’ve
ever been in. I can’t remember this house when I’m not in it. I can’t
remember Craiglockhart, though I lived there for over a year. I can’t
remember St John’s, though I’ve lived there twenty years, but there is one
interior I do remember and that’s a house in Brighton I lived in till I was
five. I can remember part of that. The basement kitchen, the drawing-room,
the dining-room, my father’s study, but I can’t remember anything at all
about upstairs. And I’ve come to believe – I won’t go into the reasons – that
something happened to me on the top floor that was so terrible that I simply
had to forget it. And in order to ensure that I forgot I suppressed not just the
one memory, but the capacity to remember things visually at all.’ Rivers
paused, and waited for a response.

‘You were raped,’ Prior said. ‘Or beaten.’
Rivers’s face went stiff with shock. ‘I really don’t think I was.’
‘No, well, you wouldn’t, would you? The whole point is it’s too terrible

to contemplate.’

Rivers said something he knew he’d regret, but he had to say it. ‘This

was my father’s vicarage.’

‘I was raped in a vicarage once.’
It was on the tip of Rivers’s tongue to say that no doubt Prior had been

‘raped’ in any number of places, but he managed to restrain himself. ‘When
I said terrible I meant to a child of that age. I was five remember. Things
happen to children which are an enormous shock to the child, but which
wouldn’t seem terrible or or or even particularly important to an adult.’

‘And equally things happen to children which are genuinely terrible. And

would be recognized as terrible by anybody at any age.’

‘Yes, of course. How old were you?’

‘Eleven. I wasn’t meaning myself.’
‘You don’t classify that as “terrible”?’
‘No. I was receiving extra tuition.’ He gave a yelping laugh. ‘God, was I

receiving extra tuition. From the parish priest, Father Mackenzie. My
mother offered him a shilling a week – more than she could afford – but he
said, “Don’t worry, my good woman, I have seldom seen a more promising
boy.” ’ He added irritably, ‘Don’t look so shocked, Rivers.’

‘I am shocked.’
‘Then you shouldn’t be. He got paid in kind, that’s all.’ Suddenly Prior

leant forward and grasped Rivers’s knee, digging his fingers in round the
kneecap. ‘Everything has to be paid for, doesn’t it?’ He grasped the knee
harder. ‘Doesn’t it?’

‘No.’
Prior let go. ‘This terrible-in-big-black-inverted-commas thing that

happened to you, what do you think it was?’

‘I don’t know. Dressing-gown on the back of a door?’
‘As bad as that? Oh, my God.’
Rivers pressed on in defiance of Prior’s smile. ‘I had a patient once who

became claustrophobic as the result of being accidentally locked in a
corridor with a fierce dog. Or it seemed fierce to him. In that –’

‘Oh, I see. Even the bloody dog wasn’t really fierce.’
‘In that case his parents didn’t even know it had happened.’
‘You say you were five when this … non-event didn’t happen?’
‘Yes.’
‘How old were you when you started to stammer?’
‘Fi-ive.’
Prior leant back in Rivers’s chair and smiled. ‘Big dog.’
‘I didn’t mean to imply there was –’
‘For God’s sake. Whatever it was, you blinded yourself so you wouldn’t

have to go on seeing it.’

‘I wouldn’t put it as dramatically as that.’
‘You destroyed your visual memory. You put your mind’s eye out. Is that

what happened, or isn’t it?’

Rivers struggled with himself. Then said simply, ‘Yes.’
‘Do you ever think you’re on the verge of remembering?’
‘Sometimes.’
‘And what do you feel?’
‘Fear.’ He smiled. ‘Because the child’s emotions are still attached to the

memory.’

‘We’re back to the dressing-gown.’
‘Yes. Yes. I’m afraid we are, because I do sincerely believe it may be as

simple as that.’

‘Then one can only applaud,’ Prior said, and did. Three loud claps.
‘You know …’ Rivers hesitated and started again. ‘You must be wary of

filling the gaps in your memory with … with monsters. I think we all tend
to do it. As soon as we’re left with a blank, we start projecting our worst
fears on to it. It’s a bit like the guide for medieval map-makers, isn’t it?
Where unknown, there place monsters. But I do think you should try not to
do it, because what you’re really doing is subjecting yourself to a constant
stream of suggestion of of a very negative kind.’

‘All right. I’ll try not to. I’ll substitute the Rivers guide to map-making:

Where unknown, there place dressing-gowns. Or just possibly, dogs. Here,
have your chair back.’ Prior settled himself back into the patient’s chair,
murmuring, ‘Do you know, Rivers, you’re as neurotic as I am? And that’s
saying quite a lot.’

Rivers rested his chin on his hands. ‘How do you feel about that?’
‘Oh, my God, we are back to normal. You mean, “Do I feel a nasty,

mean-spirited sense of triumph?” No. I’m mean-spirited enough, I’m just
not stupid enough.’ Prior brooded a moment. ‘There’s one thing wrong with
the Rivers guide to map-making. Suppose there really are monsters?’

‘I think if there are, we’ll meet them soon enough.’
Prior looked straight at Rivers. ‘I’m frightened.’
‘I know.’

When Prior finally left – it had been a long, exhausting session – Rivers
switched off the desk lamp, went to sit in his armchair by the fire, and

indulged in some concentrated, unobserved eye-rubbing. Did he do it ‘when
something touched a nerve’? It was possible, he supposed. If there was a
pattern, Prior would certainly have spotted it. On the other hand, Prior was
equally capable of making the whole thing up.

He didn’t regret the decision to give Prior what he’d always claimed he

wanted – to change places – because in the process he’d discovered an
aspect of Prior that mightn’t have been uncovered in any other way. Not so
much the ‘extra tuition’ – though that was interesting, particularly in view
of Prior’s habit of aggressive flirtation – as the assumption that Rivers’s loss
of visual memory must have some totally traumatic explanation. That had
revealed more about Prior than he was aware of.

Though Prior had been a formidable interrogator. Whatever it was, you

blinded yourself so you wouldn’t have to go on seeing it … You put your
mind’s eye out. Simply by being rougher than any professional colleague
would ever have been, Prior had brought him face to face with the full
extent of his loss. People tended to assume he didn’t know what he’d lost,
but that wasn’t true. He did know, or glimpsed at least. Once, in the Torres
Straits, he’d attended a court held by the British official in collaboration
with the native chiefs, and an old woman had given evidence about a
dispute in which she was involved. As she spoke, she’d glanced from side
to side, clearly reliving every detail of the events she was describing, and
very obviously seeing people who were not present in court. And he had
looked at her, this scrawny, half-naked, elderly, illiterate woman, and he had
envied her. No doubt he’d encountered Europeans who had visual memories
of equal power, but his own deficiency had never before been brought home
to him with such force.

It was a loss, and he had long been aware of it, though he had been slow

to connect it with the Brighton house experience. Slower still to recognize
that the impact of the experience had gone beyond the loss of visual
memory and had occasioned a deep split between the rational, analytical
cast of his mind and his emotions. It was easy to overstate this: he had, after
all, been subject to a form of education which is designed to inculcate
precisely such a split, but he thought the division went deeper in him than it

did in most men. It was almost as if the experience – whatever it was – had
triggered an attempt at dissociation of personality, though, mercifully, not a
successful one. Still, he had been, throughout most of his life, a deeply
divided man, and though he would once have said that this division
exercised little, if any, influence on his thinking, he had come to believe it
had determined the direction of his research.

Many years after that initial unremembered experience, he and Henry

Head had conducted an experiment together. The nerve supplying Head’s
left forearm had been severed and sutured, and then over a period of five
years they had traced the progress of regeneration. This had taken place in
two phases. The first was characterized by a high threshold of sensation,
though when the sensation was finally evoked it was, to use Head’s own
word, ‘extreme’. In addition to this all-or-nothing quality, the sensation was
difficult to localize. Sitting blindfold at the table, Head had been unable to
locate the stimulus that was causing him such severe pain. This primitive
form of innervation they called the protopathic. The second phase of
regeneration – which they called the epicritic – followed some months later,
and was characterized by the ability to make graduated responses and to
locate the source of a stimulus precisely. As the epicritic level of
innervation was restored, the lower, or protopathic, level was partially
integrated with it and partially suppressed, so that the epicritic system
carried out two functions: one, to help the organism adapt to its
environment by supplying it with accurate information; the other, to
suppress the protopathic, to keep the animal within leashed. Inevitably, as
time went on, both words had acquired broader meanings, so that ‘epicritic’
came to stand for everything rational, ordered, cerebral, objective, while
‘protopathic’ referred to the emotional, the sensual, the chaotic, the
primitive. In this way the experiment both reflected Rivers’s internal
divisions and supplied him with a vocabulary in which to express them. He
might almost have said with Henry Jekyll, It was on the moral side, and in
my own person, that I learned to recognize the thorough and primitive
duality of man; I saw that, of the two natures that contended in the field of

my consciousness, even if I could rightly be said to be either, it was only
because I was radically both …

It was odd how the term ‘Jekyll and Hyde’ had passed into the language,

so that even people who had never read Stevenson’s story used the names as
a shorthand for internal divisions. Prior spoke of looking at his hands to
make sure they had not been transformed into the hairy hands of Hyde, and
he was not alone in that. Every patient Rivers had ever had who suffered
from a fugue state sooner or later referred to that state as ‘Hyde’, and
generally this was a plea for reassurance. In a hospital setting, where the
fugue state could be observed, such reassurance was easily given, but it was
less easy to reassure Prior. Partly because the fugue state couldn’t be
observed, but also because Prior’s sense of the darker side of his personality
was unusually strong. He might talk about being incapable of sexual guilt,
but, Rivers thought, he was deeply ashamed of his sadistic impulses, even
frightened of them. He believed there were monsters on his map, and who
was to say he was wrong?

There was one genuinely disturbing feature of the case: that odd business

of making an appointment in the fugue state and keeping it in the normal
state. It suggested the fugue state was capable of influencing Prior’s
behaviour even when it was not present, in other words, that it was
functioning as a co-consciousness. Not that a dual personality need develop
even from that. He intended to make sure it didn’t. There would be no
hypnosis, no artificial creation of dissociated states for experimental
purposes, no encouraging Prior to think of the fugue state as an alternative
self. Even so. It had to be remembered Prior was no mere bundle of
symptoms, but an extremely complex personality with his own views on his
condition. And his imagination was already at work, doing everything it
could to transform the fugue state into a malignant double. He believed in
the monsters – and whatever Rivers might decide to do, or refrain from
doing – Prior’s belief in them would inevitably give them power.

TWELVE

‘Now I want you to draw me an elephant,’ Head said.

His voice distorted, as if he were blowing bubbles in soapy water, Lucas

replied, ‘Yeth ah seen dom. Up. Uvver end.’

He took the notepad and pencil, and began to draw. Rivers was sitting

beside Head, but neither of them spoke since Lucas’s concentration must
not be disturbed. They had been doing the tests for half an hour and Lucas
was already tired. His tongue protruded between his teeth, giving him the
look of a small boy learning to read, except that, in Lucas’s case, the
protrusion was permanent.

Rivers noticed Head looking at the shrapnel wound on Lucas’s shaved

scalp, and knew he was thinking about the technical problems of
duplicating this on the skull of the cadaver he’d been working on that
morning. It was an interesting technique, Rivers thought. Head measured
the dimensions of the wound on the living patient, then traced the outline on
to the skull of a cadaver, drilled holes at regular intervals around the outline,
and introduced a blue dye into the holes. The entire skull cap could then be
lifted off and the brain structures underlying the dyed area dissected and
identified. In this way the area of brain death could be correlated precisely
with the nature of the patient’s language defects.

A laborious business, made more so by the need to duplicate the wounds

of two patients on every cadaver. One of the more surprising consequences
of the war was a shortage of suitable male corpses.

Rivers lifted his hands to his chin, smelling the medical school smell of

human fat and formaldehyde, only partially masked by carbolic soap. He
watched Head’s expression as he looked at Lucas’s shaved scalp, and
realized it differed hardly at all from his expression that morning as he’d

bent over the cadaver. For the moment, Lucas had become simply a
technical problem. Then Lucas looked up from his task, and instantly
Head’s face flashed open in his transforming smile. A murmur of
encouragement, and Lucas returned to his drawing. Head’s face, looking at
the ridged purple scar on the shaved head, again became remote,
withdrawn. His empathy, his strong sense of the humanity he shared with
his patients, was again suspended. A necessary suspension, without which
the practice of medical research, and indeed of medicine itself, would
hardly be possible, but none the less identifiably the same suspension the
soldier must achieve in order to kill. The end was different, but the
psychological mechanism employed to achieve it was essentially the same.
What Head was doing, Rivers thought, was in some ways a benign, epicritic
form of the morbid dissociation that had begun to afflict Prior. Head’s
dissociation was healthy because the researcher and the physician each had
instant access to the experience of the other, and both had access to Head’s
experience in all other areas of his life. Prior’s was pathological because
areas of his conscious experience had become inaccessible to memory.
What was interesting was why Head’s dissociation didn’t lead to the kind of
split that had taken place in Prior. Rivers shifted his position, and sighed.
One began by finding mental illness mystifying, and ended by being still
more mystified by health.

Lucas had finished. Head leant across the desk and took the drawing

from him. ‘Hmm,’ he said, looking at the remarkably cow-like creature in
front of him. A long pause. ‘What’s an elephant got in front?’

Again the blurting voice, always on the verge of becoming a wail. ‘He

got a big’ – Lucas’s good hand waved up and down – ‘straight about a yard
long.’

‘Do you know what it’s called?’
‘Same what you. Drive. Water with.’
‘Has he got a trunk?’
Lucas wriggled in his wheelchair and laughed. ‘He lost it.’
He reached for his drawing, wanting to correct it, but Head slipped it

quickly into the file. ‘Sums now.’

They went quickly through a range of simple sums. Lucas, whose ability

to understand numbers was unimpaired, got them predictably right. It was
Head’s custom to alternate tasks the patient found difficult or impossible
with others that he could perform successfully. The next task – designed to
discover whether Lucas’s understanding of ‘right’ and ‘left’ was impaired –
involved his attempting to imitate movements of Head’s arms, first in a
mirror and then facing him across the desk.

Rivers watched Head raise his left hand – ‘professional in shape and size;

… large, firm, white and comely’ – and thought he probably knew that hand
better than any part of his own body. He’d experimented on it for five years,
after all, and even now could have traced on to the skin the outline of the
remaining area of protopathic innervation – for the process of regeneration
is never complete. A triangle of skin between the thumb and forefinger
retained the primitive, all-or-nothing responses and remained abnormally
sensitive to changes in temperature. Sometimes, on a cold day, he would
notice Head shielding this triangle of skin beneath his other hand.

For a while, after the tests were complete, Head chatted to Lucas about

the results. It was Head’s particular gift to be able to involve his patients in
the study of their own condition. Lucas’s face, as Head outlined the extent
of his impairments, was alight with what one could only call clinical
interest. When, finally, an orderly appeared and wheeled him out of the
room, he was smiling.

‘He has … improved,’ Head said. ‘Slightly.’ He brushed his thinning hair

back from his forehead and for a moment looked utterly bleak. ‘Tea?’

‘I wouldn’t mind a glass of milk.’
‘Milk?’
Rivers patted his midriff. ‘Keeps the ulcers quiet.’
‘Why, are they protesting?’
‘God, how I hate psychologists.’
Head laughed. ‘I’ll get you the milk.’
Rivers glanced at The Times while he waited. In the Pemberton Billing

trial they’d reached the medical evidence – such as it was. As Head came
back into the room, Rivers read aloud: ‘ “Asked what should be done with

such people. Dr Serrel Cooke replied, ‘They are monsters. They should be
locked up.’” The voice of psychological medicine.’

Head handed him a cup. ‘Put it down, Rivers.’
Rivers folded the paper. ‘I keep trying to tell myself it’s funny.’
‘Well, it is, a lot of it. It was hilarious when that woman told the Judge

his name was in the Black Book.’ He waited for a reply. ‘Anyway, when do
you want to see Lucas? Tomorrow?’

‘Oh, I think we give the poor little blighter a rest, don’t we? Monday?’
They talked for a while about Lucas, then drifted into a rambling

conversation about the use of pacifist orderlies. The hospital contained a
great many paralysed patients in a building not designed to accommodate
them. There were only two lifts. The nurses and the existing orderlies – men
who were either disabled or above military age – did their best, but the lives
of patients were inevitably more restricted than they need have been. What
was desperately required was young male muscle, and this the pacifist
orderlies – recruited under the Home Office scheme – supplied. But they
also aroused hostility in the staff obliged to work with them. It had now
reached a point where it was doubtful whether the hospital could go on
using them. The irrationality of getting rid of much needed labour
exasperated Rivers, and he had spoken out against it at the last meeting of
the hospital management committee, rather too forcefully, perhaps, or at
least Head seemed to think so. ‘I’m not g-going b-back on it,’ he said. ‘I’ve
spent m-most of my l-life t-t-toning down what I w-wanted to s-say. I’m not
d-doing it any more.’

Head looked at him. ‘What happened to the gently flowing Rivers we all

used to know and love?’

‘Went AWOL in Scotland. Never been seen since.’
‘Yes.’
‘Yes what?’
‘Yes, that was my impression.’

The lift door was about to close. Rivers broke into a run, and Wantage, one
of the non-pacifist orderlies, clanged the gate open again. ‘There you are,

sir,’ he said, stepping back. ‘Room for a thin one.’

He was returning a man in a wheelchair to the ward. Rivers squeezed in

beside the wheelchair and pressed the button for the top floor.

Wantage was the most popular of the orderlies, partly because his built-

up boot supplied an instant explanation for why he wasn’t in France. He
was a fat, jolly man with a limitless capacity for hate. He hated skivers, he
hated shirkers, he hated conchies, he hated the Huns, he hated the Kaiser.
He loved the war. He had the gentlest hands in the hospital. He would have
given anything to be able to go and fight. Whenever Rivers saw him
lurching along behind a wheelchair, he was reminded of the crippled boy in
the Pied Piper story, left behind when the other children went into the
mountain.

At the second floor the lift stopped and a young nurse got in. Viggors, the

patient in the wheelchair, spoke to her, blushing slightly – she was evidently
a great favourite – and then sat, slumped to one side, his eyes level with her
waist, gazing covertly at her breasts. Wantage chattered on. On the third
floor the lift stopped again and Wantage pushed the wheelchair out.

Rivers was left wishing he hadn’t seen that look. Every day in this

hospital one was brutally reminded that the worst tragedies of the war were
not marked by little white crosses.

For safety reasons – his patients were mobile and could use the fire

escapes – both his wards were on the top floor. The hospital had been built
as a children’s hospital; the top floor had been the nursery and the walls
were decorated with Baa-baa Black Sheep, Little Bo Peep, Red Riding
Hood, Humpty-Dumpty. The windows were barred. On his arrival Rivers
had asked for these bars to be removed, but the War Office refused to pay
for any alterations beyond the absolute minimum: the provision of adult-
size baths and lavatories. Not washbasins. Lawrence was there now, shaving
in a basin that barely reached his knees. The eye, deprived of normal
perspective, saw him as a giant. No amount of experience seemed to correct
the initial impression.

Rivers collected his overnight key from sister and walked along the

corridor to his own room. The room was vast, with a huge bay window

overlooking Vincent Square. He went through into the adjoining room and
asked his secretary to send Captain Manning in.

Manning had been admitted because the anxiety attacks he’d suffered

ever since his return from France had become more severe, partly as a result
of his obsession with the Pemberton Billing affair. Rivers would have liked
to tell him to ignore the trial for the farrago of muck-raking nonsense it was,
but that was not possible. Manning had been sent a newspaper cutting about
Maud Allan and the ‘cult of the clitoris’. More recently he’d received a
copy of the 47,000 article. Manning was being targeted, presumably by
someone who knew he was a homosexual, and he could hardly be expected
to ignore that.

‘Have you been waiting long?’ Rivers asked.
‘Couple of minutes.’
Manning looked tired. No doubt last night had been spent dreading

coming into hospital. ‘How are you settling in?’

‘All right. I’ve been given a room to myself. I didn’t expect that.’
‘Have you brought the article with you?’ Rivers asked.
Manning handed it over. It was not, as Rivers had been assuming, a

newspaper cutting, but a specially produced copy, printed on to thick card.
At the top – typewritten – was the message: In the hope that this will
awaken your conscience.

‘Did you read it at the time?’ Manning asked. ‘When it first came out?’
‘No.’ Rivers smiled faintly. ‘A pleasure postponed.’

AS I SEE IT – THE FIRST 47,000

Harlots on the Wall

There have been given many reasons why England is prevented from putting her full strength
into the War. On several occasions in the columns of the Imperialist I have suggested that
Germany is making use of subtle but successful means to nullify our effort. Hope of profit
cannot be the only reason for our betrayal. All nations have their Harlots on the Wall, but these
are discovered in the first assault and the necessary action is taken. It is in the citadel that the
true danger lies. Corruption and blackmail being the work of menials is cheaper than bribery.
Moreover, fear of exposure entraps and makes slaves of men whom money could never buy.

There is all the more reason, as I see it, to suppose that the Germans, with their usual efficiency,
are making use of the most productive and cheapest methods.

Often in this column I have hinted at the possession of knowledge which tends to substantiate

this view. Within the past few days the most extraordinary facts have been placed before me
which co-ordinate with my past information.

Spreading Debauchery

There exists in the cabinet noir of a certain German Prince a book compiled by the Secret
Service from the reports of German agents who have infested this country for the past twenty
years, agents so vile and spreading debauchery of such a lasciviousness as only German minds
could conceive and only German bodies execute.

Sodom and Lesbia

The officer who discovered this book while on special service briefly outlined for me its
stupefying contents. In the beginning of the book is a precis of general instructions regarding the
propagation of evils which all decent men thought had perished in Sodom and Lesbia. The
blasphemous compilers even speak of the Groves and High Places mentioned in the Bible. The
most insidious arguments are outlined for the use of the German agent in his revolting work.
Then more than a thousand pages are filled with the names mentioned by German agents in their
reports. There are the names of 47,000 English men and women.

It is a most catholic miscellany. The names of privy councillors, youths of the chorus, wives

of Cabinet Ministers, dancing girls, even Cabinet Ministers themselves, while diplomats, poets,
bankers, editors, newspaper proprietors and members of His Majesty’s household follow each
other with no order of precedence.

As an example of the thoroughness with which the German agent works, lists of public

houses and bars were given which had been successfully demoralized. These could then be
depended upon to spread vice with the help of only one fixed agent. To secure those whose
social standing would suffer from frequenting public places, comfortable flats were taken and
furnished in an erotic manner. Paphian photographs were distributed, while equivocal pamphlets
were printed as the anonymous work of well-known writers.

The Navy in Danger

No one in the social scale was exempted from contamination by this perfect system. Agents
were specially enlisted in the navy, particularly in the engine-rooms. These had their special
instructions. Incestuous bars were established in Portsmouth and Chatham. In these meeting
places the stamina of British sailors was undermined. More dangerous still, German agents,
under the guise of indecent liaison, could obtain information as to the disposition of the fleet.

Even the loiterer in the streets was not immune. Meretricious agents of the Kaiser were

stationed at such points as Marble Arch and Hyde Park Corner. In this black book of sin details
were given of the unnatural defloration of children who were drawn to the parks by the summer
evening concerts.

The World of High Politics

Impure as were all these things, the great danger was seen in the reports of those agents who had
obtained entrée to the world of high politics. Wives of men in supreme position were entangled.
In Lesbian ecstasy the most sacred secrets of State were betrayed. The sexual peculiarities of
members of the peerage were used as a leverage to open fruitful fields for espionage.

In the glossary of this book is a list of expressions supposed to be used among themselves by

the soul-sick victims of this nauseating disease so skilfully spread by Potsdam.

Lives are in Jeopardy

In his official reports the German agent is not an idle boaster. The thought that 47,000 English
men and women are held in enemy bondage through fear calls all clean spirits to mortal combat.
There are three million men in France whose lives are in jeopardy, and whose bravery is of no
avail because of the lack of moral courage in 47,000 of their countrymen, and numbering among
their ranks, as they do, men and women in whose hands the destiny of this Empire rests.

As I see it, a carefully cultivated introduction of practices which hint at the extermination of

the race is to be the means by which the German is to prevent us avenging those mounds of lime
and mud which once were Britons.

The Fall of Rome

When in time I grasped the perfection of this demoniacal plan, it seemed to me that all the
horrors of shells and gas and pestilence introduced by the Germans in their open warfare would
have but a fraction of the effect in exterminating the manhood of Britain as the plan by which
they have already destroyed the first 47,000.

As I have already said in these columns, it is a terrible thought to contemplate that the British

Empire should fall as fell the great Empire of Rome, and the victor now, as then, should be the
Hun.

The story of the contents of this book has opened my eyes, and the matter must not rest.

Rivers threw the page down. ‘If only German minds can conceive of this
lasciviousness and only German bodies execute it, how on earth do the
47,000 manage to do it?’ He took off his glasses and swept his hand down
across his eyes. ‘Sorry, I’m being donnish.’ He looked at Manning, noting
the lines of strain around his eyes, the coarse tremor as he raised the
cigarette to his mouth. For somebody like Manning, profoundly committed
to living a double life, the revelation that both sides of his life were visible
to unknown eyes must be like having the door to the innermost part of one’s
identity smashed open. ‘Has anybody else been sent this?’

‘Ross. One or two others.’
‘Friends of Ross?’
‘Yes.’
‘Ross is a … quite a dangerous man to know.’
‘What can I do, Rivers? It’s not a recent friendship.’
Rivers sighed. ‘I don’t think you can do anything.’
Manning sat brooding. ‘I think it would help if I felt I could understand

it. I mean, I can see the war’s going pretty badly and there are always going
to be people who want scapegoats instead of reasons, but … Why this? I
can see why people with German names get beaten up … or or interned.
And conchies. I don’t approve, but I can understand it. I don’t understand
this.’

‘I’m not sure I do. I think it’s the result of certain impulses rising to the

surface in wartime, and having to be very formally disowned.
Homosexuality, for instance. In war there’s this enormous glorification of
love between men, and yet at the same time it arouses anxiety. Is it the right
kind of love? Well, one way to make sure it’s the right kind is to make
public disapproval of the other thing crystal clear. And then there’s pleasure
in killing –’

Manning looked shocked. ‘I don’t know that –’
‘No, I meant civilians. Vicarious, but real nevertheless. And in the

process sadistic impulses are aroused that would normally be repressed, and
that also causes anxiety. So to put on a play by a known homosexual in
which a woman kisses a man’s severed head …’

‘I talked about the trial to Jane. I said I thought the real target was Ross,

and one or two others, and she said of course I did. Seeing – what was it?
“Seeing his own sex as peripheral to the point at issue was a feat of mental
agility of which no man is capable.” ’

‘I look forward to meeting Mrs Manning one day.’
‘She says the the … sentimentality about the role women are playing –

doing their bit and all that – really masks a kind of deep-rooted fear that
they’re getting out of line. She thinks pillorying Maud Allan is actually a
way of teaching them a lesson. Not just lesbians. All women. Just as Salome

is presented as a strong woman by Wilde, and yet at the same time she has
to be killed. I mean it is quite striking at the end when all the men fall on
her and kill her.’

‘What do you think about that?’
‘I think it’s a bit naïve. I think it ignores Wilde’s identification with

Salome. He isn’t saying women like this have to be destroyed. He’s saying
people like me have to be destroyed. And how right he was. Is.’

This was all very well, Rivers thought, but Manning was ill, and it was

not literary discussion that was going to cure him.

‘Do you think Spencer’s mad?’ Manning asked abruptly.
‘On the basis of his evidence, yes. Though whether he’ll be recognized as

mad …’

‘It’s an odd contrast with Sassoon, isn’t it?’
Rivers looked surprised.
‘Spencer being fêted like this. Sassoon says something perfectly sensible

about the war, and he’s packed off to a mental hospital.’

Of course, Rivers thought, all the members of Robert Ross’s circle would

know the story of Sassoon’s protest against the war, and the part he’d
played in persuading Sassoon to go back.

Manning said, ‘I suppose I shouldn’t mention him?’
‘Why not?’
‘Because he’s a patient.’
‘He’s somebody we both know.’
‘Only he’s been on my mind lately. I was wondering if they’d have the

nerve to send this to him. Or to anybody out there.’

‘I think the sort of mind that produces this can’t conceive of the

possibility that any of “the 47,000” might be in France.’

So far Manning had found it impossible to talk about the war. Manning

himself would have denied this. He would have said they talked about it all
the time: strategy, tactics, war aims, the curiously inadequate response of
civilian writers, the poems of Sassoon and Graves. Suddenly, Rivers
thought he saw a way of beginning, very gently, to force the issue. ‘Are you

familiar with the strict Freudian view of war neurosis?’ he asked. Manning,
he knew, had read a certain amount of Freud.

‘I didn’t know there was one.’
‘Oh, yes. Basically, they believe the experience of an all-male

environment, with a high level of emotional intensity, together with the
experience of battle, arouses homosexual and sadistic impulses that are
normally repressed. In vulnerable men – obviously those in whom the
repressed desires are particularly strong – this leads to breakdown.’

‘Is that what you believe?’
Rivers shook his head. ‘I want to know what you think.’
‘I don’t know what makes other people break down. I don’t think sex had

much to do with my breakdown.’ A slight smile. ‘But then I’m not a
repressed homosexual.’

Rivers smiled back. ‘But you must have a … an instinctive reaction, that

it’s possible, or it’s obvious nonsense, or –’

‘I’m just trying to think. Do you know Sassoon’s poem “The Kiss”?’
‘The one about the bayonet. Yes.’
‘I think that’s the strongest poem he’s ever written. You know, I’ve never

served with him so I don’t know this from personal experience, but I’ve
talked a lot to Robert Graves and he says the extent to which Sassoon
contrives to be two totally different people at the Front is absolutely
amazing. You know he’s a tremendously successful and bloodthirsty
platoon commander, and yet at the same time, back in billets, out comes the
notebook. Another anti-war poem. And the poem uses the experience of the
platoon commander, but it never uses any of his attitudes. And yet for once,
in that one poem, he gets both versions of himself in.’

Yes, Rivers thought. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I see that.’
‘And of course it’s crawling with sexual ambiguities. But then I think it’s

too easy to see that as a matter of personal … I don’t know what. The fact is
the army’s attitude to the bayonet is pretty bloody ambiguous. You read the
training manuals and they’re all going on about importance of close
combat. Fair enough, but you get the impression there’s a value in it which
is independent of whether it gains the objective or not. It’s proper war.

Manly war. Not all this nonsense about machine-guns and shrapnel: And it’s
reflected in the training. I mean, it’s one long stream of sexual innuendo.
Stick him in the gooleys. No more little fritzes. If Sassoon had used
language like that, he’d never have been published.’ Manning stopped
abruptly. ‘You know I think I’ve lost the thread. No, that’s it, I was trying
… I was trying to be honest and think whether I hated bayonet practice
more because … because the body that the sack represents is one that I …
come on, Rivers. Nice psychological term?’

‘Love.’
‘I don’t know what the answer is. I don’t think so. We all hate it. I’ve no

way of knowing whether I hate it more, because we don’t talk about it. It’s
just a bloody awful job, and we get on and do it. I mean, you split enormous
parts of yourself off, anyway.’

‘Is that what you did?’
‘I suppose so.’ For a moment it seemed he was about to go on, then he

shook his head.

When he was sure there’d be no more, Rivers said, ‘You know we are

going to have to talk about the war, Charles.’

‘I do talk about it.’
Silence.
‘I just don’t see what good it would do to churn everything up. I know

what the theory is.’ He looked down at his hands. ‘My son Robert, when he
was little … he used to enjoy being bathed. And then quite suddenly he
turned against it. He used to go stiff and scream blue murder every time his
nurse tried to put him in. And it turned out he’d been watching the water go
down the plug-hole and he obviously thought he might go down with it.
Everybody told him not to be stupid.’ Manning smiled. ‘I must say it struck
me as an eminently reasonable fear.’

Rivers smiled. ‘I won’t let you go down the plug-hole.’

At dinner the talk was all of the Pemberton Billing trial. Everybody was
depressed by the medical evidence, since this was the first time
psychologists had been invited to pronounce in court on such a subject.

‘What do we get?’ somebody asked. ‘Serrel Cooke rambling on about
monsters and hereditary degeneracy. The man’s a joke.’

If he is, I’ve lost my sense of humour, Rivers thought.
After dinner he was glad to escape from the hospital and go for a stroll

round the square. London had become a depressing place. Every placard,
every newsboy’s cry, every headline focused on the trial. Lord Alfred
Douglas was in the witness-box now, apparently blaming England’s poor
showing in the war on the plays of Oscar Wilde. Any serious consideration
of the terrible state of affairs in France was pushed into second place by the
orgy of irrational prejudice that was taking place at the Old Bailey.
Manning was quite right of course, people didn’t want reasons, they wanted
scapegoats. You saw it in the hospital too, where hostility to the pacifist
orderlies mounted as the news from France grew worse, but there was some
element of logic in that. Men were being whipped back into line. Into the
Line. Unless he were suffering from the complaint Jane Manning had
diagnosed, of being incapable of seeing his own sex as peripheral to
anything. But no, he thought Manning was right. Maud Allan was in the
firing line almost by accident. The real targets were men who couldn’t or
wouldn’t conform.

Rivers’s thoughts turned to Sassoon. Manning’s experience clearly

showed that every member of Robert Ross’s circle was at risk, liable to the
same treatment as Ross himself. It didn’t help that Ross was opposed to the
war, though he had not approved of Sassoon’s protest, arguing – quite
rightly in Rivers’s opinion – that it would destroy Sassoon without having
any impact on the course of events. Ross’s own method of opposition,
according to Manning, was to show photographs of mutilated corpses to
any civilian who might benefit from the shock. Rivers was glad Sassoon
was well away from Ross, and the trial.

Once, at Craiglockhart, he’d tried to warn Sassoon of the danger. As long

ago as last November he’d told him about the cabinet noir, the Black Book,
the 47,000 names of eminent men and women whose double lives left them
open to German blackmail.

– Relax, Rivers. I’m not eminent.

– No, but you’re a friend of Robert Ross, and you’ve publicly advocated

a negotiated peace. That’s enough! You’re vulnerable, Siegfried. There’s no
point pretending you’re not.

– And what am I supposed to do about it? Toe the line, tailor my opinions

… But what you’re really saying is, if I can’t conform in one area of life,
then I have to conform in the others. Not just the surface things, everything.
Even against my conscience. Well, I can’t live like that. Nobody should live
like that.

It had been pleasant talking to Manning about Siegfried. Apart from

Robert Graves, whom Rivers saw occasionally, Manning was the only
acquaintance they had in common.

The square was deserted. On nights of the full moon people hurried back

to the safety of their cellars. Rivers’s footsteps seemed to follow him,
echoing along the empty pavement. The moon had drifted clear from the
last gauzy wrack of cloud, and his shadow stretched ahead of him, the edges
almost as sharp as they would have been by day.

So calm, so clear a night. We’re in for it, he thought. That was one thing

he’d never had to cope with at Craiglockhart: bombs falling within earshot
of patients who jumped out of their skins if a teaspoon rattled in a saucer.
He turned and began to walk rapidly towards the dark and shuttered
building.

THIRTEEN

Head is the one awake inside the sleeping hospital. Masked and gowned, a
single light burning above his head, he stands beside a dissecting table on
which a man lies, face upwards, naked, reeking of formaldehyde. The
genitals are shrivelled, the skin the dingy gold of old paper. Head finishes
drawing an outline on the shaven head, says, ‘Right then,’ and extends his
gloved hand for the drill. But something’s wrong. Even as the drill whirs,
the golden-skinned man stirs. Rivers tries to say, ‘Don’t, he’s alive,’ but
Head can’t, or won’t, hear him. A squeak of bone, a mouth stretched wide,
and then a hand grasps Head’s hand at the wrist, and the cadaver in all its
naked, half-flayed horror rises from the table and pushes him back.

The corridor outside Rivers’s room is empty, elongated, the floor

polished and gleaming. Then the doors at the end flap open with a noise like
the beating of wings and the cadaver bounds through, pads from door to
door, sniffs, tries to locate him more by smell than sight. At last it finds the
right door, advances on the bed, bends over him, thrusts its anatomical
drawing of a face into his, as he struggles to wake up and remember where
he is.

Christ. He lay back, aware of sweat on his chest and in his groin. He was

in a hospital bed, too high, too narrow, the mattress covered with rubber
that creaked as he moved. He could see that ruin of a face bending over
him. In these moments between sleep and waking, he was able to do –
briefly – what other people take for granted: see things that were not there.

Quickly, before the moment passed, he began to dissect the images of

which the dream was composed. The dissecting-room in the dream had not
been the room at the Anatomical Institute where he’d watched Head at
work that morning, but the anatomy theatre at Bart’s, where he had trained.

The whole emotional impression left by the dream was one of … He lay,

eyes closed in the darkness, sifting impressions. Contamination. To imagine
Head, the gentlest of men, drilling the skull of a conscious human being
was a sort of betrayal. The link with Head’s carrying out the tests on Lucas
was obvious. Rivers had thought, as he watched Head looking at Lucas, that
the same suspension of empathy that was so necessary a part of the
physician’s task was also, in other contexts, the root of all monstrosity. Not
merely the soldier, but the torturer also, practises the same suspension.

The dream was about dissociation. Like most of his dreams these days, a

dream about work. He never seemed to dream about sex any more, though
before the war sexual conflicts had been a frequent subject of dreams. A
cynic might have said he was too exhausted. He thought it was probably
more complicated, and more interesting, than that, but he had little time for
introspection. Certainly no time for it now. He sat up and flapped his
pyjama jacket to make the sweat evaporate, then lay back and tried to
compose himself for sleep. He never slept well on the nights he stayed at
the hospital, partly because of the uncomfortable bed, partly because the
expectation of being woken kept his sleep light.

He was just beginning to drift off when the whistles blew.
By the time the orderly knocked on his door, he was out of bed and

fastening his dressing-gown. He followed the man along the corridor to the
main ward where Sister Walters greeted him. She was a thin, long-nosed
Geordie with a sallow skin and a vein of class-hatred that reminded him of
Prior. Oddly enough, it seemed to be directed entirely at her own sex. She
hated the VADs, most of whom were girls of good family ‘doing their bit’
with – it had to be admitted – varying degrees of seriousness. She loved her
officer patients – my boys, she called them – but the VADs, girls from a
similar social background after all, she hated. One night last December, as
the guns thudded and the ground shook beneath the direct hit on Vauxhall
Bridge, they’d sat drinking cocoa together, and the barriers of rank had
come down, enough at least for her to say bitterly, ‘They make me sick, the
way they go on. “Oooh! Look at me! I’m dusting!” “I’m sweeping a floor.”

Do you know, when I was training we got eight quid a year. That was for a
seventy-hour week, and you got your breakages stopped off that.’

Cocoa was being made now and carried round on trays. Rivers went from

bed to bed of the main ward. Most of the men were reasonably calm,
though jerks and twitches were worse than normal. In the single rooms,
where the more seriously disturbed patients were, the signs of distress were
pitiful. These were men who had joked their way through bombardments
that rattled the tea-cups in Kent, now totally unmanned. Weston had wet
himself. He stood in the middle of his room, sobbing, while a nurse knelt in
front of him and coaxed him to step out of the circle of sodden cloth. Rivers
took over from her, got Weston into clean pyjamas and back into bed. He
stayed with him till he was calm, then handed over to an orderly and went
in search of Sister Walters.

She handed him his cocoa. ‘Captain Manning’s smoking. Do you think

you could –’

‘Yes, of course.’
At Craiglockhart the corridors had reeked of cigarettes, and there the staff

had contrived not to notice. Here, with two wards full of paralysed patients,
the no-smoking rule had to be enforced. Rivers tapped once and walked in.

Manning was sitting up in bed. ‘Hello,’ he said, sounding surprised.
‘I’m afraid I’ve got to ask you to put that out. Two lifts. Twenty

wheelchairs.’

‘Yes, certainly.’ Manning stubbed his cigarette out. ‘Stupid of me. I

didn’t know you did nights.’

‘Only at full moons.’
‘I thought that theory of mental illness had been exploded.’
Rivers smiled. ‘You know what I mean.’
‘Sister Walters says they got Vauxhall Bridge twice. Is that right?’
‘Yes. Though we don’t need to worry when they hit it. Only when they

miss.’

‘Reminds me of last Christmas. Do you remember that raid? I was

staying with Ross, Sassoon was there as well, and it was very funny
because it was the first raid I’d experienced, and I was all set to be the cool,

collected veteran, calming down the poor nervous civilians. I was a
complete bloody wreck. Ross’s housekeeper was better than me. Sassoon
was the same. In fact I remember him saying, “All that fuss about whether I
should go back or not. I won’t be any bloody good when I do.” ’

A ragged sound of singing. ‘Listen,’ Manning said. He began to sing with

them, almost under his breath.

Bombed last night
And bombed the night before
Gunna get bombed tonight
If we never get bombed any more.
When we’re bombed we’re scared as we can be …

‘First time I’ve heard that outside France.’ A pause. ‘You know, I’ve

been thinking about what you said … about remembering and trying to talk
about it.’

Rivers propped his chin on his hands and said, ‘Go on.’ Even as he

spoke, he recalled Prior’s wickedly accurate imitation of this position.
Damn Prior.

‘You know these attacks I have? Well, they tend to start with a sort of

waking dream. It’s nothing very much actually, it’s not horrifying, it’s just a
line of men marching along duckboards wearing gas masks and capes.
Everything’s a sort of greenish-yellow, the colour it is when you look
through the visor. The usual … porridge.’ He swallowed. ‘If a man slips off
the duckboard it’s not always possible to get him out and sometimes he just
sinks. The packs are so heavy, you see, and the mud’s fifteen feet deep. It’s
not like ordinary mud. It’s like a bog, it … sucks. They’re supposed to hold
on to the pack of the man in front.’

‘And you say this … dream triggers the attack?’
‘I don’t know. I suppose so.’
‘What in particular?’
Manning tried to answer and then shook his head.
‘If you had to pick out the worst thing, what would it be?’
‘There’s a hand coming out of the mud. It’s holding the duckboard and

… nothing else. Everything else is underneath.’

A short silence.
‘Oh, and there’s a voice.’ Manning reached for his cigarettes and then

remembered he couldn’t smoke. ‘It’s not coming from anybody. It’s just …
there.’

Rivers waited. ‘What does it say?’
‘ “Where’s Scudder?” ’ Manning smiled. ‘It’s a rather nasty, knowing

little voice. “Where’s Scudder? Where’s Scudder?” ’

‘Do you answer?’
Manning shook his head. ‘No point. It knows the answer.’
Silence, except for the sound of singing, fading now, and then, in the

distance, the thudding of the guns.

Rivers said, ‘You know, if we went down to my room you could smoke.’
Manning looked surprised. ‘Now?’
‘Why not? Unless you think you can get back to sleep?’
Manning didn’t answer that. There was no need.

‘There,’ Rivers said, putting an ashtray at Manning’s elbow. The lamp
created a circle of light around the desk, a world.

‘You don’t, do you?’ Manning said, lighting up.
‘A cigar now and then.’
Manning inhaled deeply, his eyes closed. ‘One of the reasons I don’t talk

about it,’ he said, smiling, ‘apart from cowardice, is that it seems so futile.’

‘Because it’s impossible to make people understand?’
‘Yes. Even a comparatively small thing. The feeling you get when you go

into the Salient, especially if you’ve been there before and you know what
you’re facing. You really do say goodbye to everything. You just put one
foot in front of another, one step, then the next, then the next.’

Rivers waited.
‘It’s … ungraspable,’ Manning said at last. ‘I don’t mean you can’t grasp

it because you haven’t been there. I mean, I can’t grasp it and I have been
there. I can’t get my mind round it.’

‘You were going to tell me about Scudder.’
‘Was I?’

Their eyes met.
Manning smiled. ‘Yes, I suppose I was. He was a man in my company.

You know, the whole thing’s based on the idea that if you’ve got the right
number of arms and legs and you’re not actually mentally defective you can
be turned into a soldier. Well, Scudder was the walking proof that it isn’t
true. He was hopeless. He knew he was. The night before we were due to
move up, he got drunk. Well, a lot of them got drunk, but he was … legless.
He didn’t turn up for parade, and so he was court-martialled. I went to see
him the night before. He was being held in a barn, and we sat on a bale of
straw and talked. It turned out he’d been treated for shell shock the previous
year. With electric shocks. I didn’t know they did that.’

‘Oh, yes,’ Rivers said. They do.’
‘He was at Messines when the mines went up. Apparently he used to

dream about mines and blood. And he used to jerk his head and make stupid
noises. That’s what the doctor called them. Stupid noises. Anyway it
worked, after a fashion. The electric shocks. The night after he had the
treatment he didn’t dream about mines. He dreamt he was back in the
trenches having electric shock treatment. I stayed with him a couple of
hours, I suppose.’ Manning smiled faintly. ‘He was a most unfortunate-
looking youth. I mention that in case there’s a doctrinaire Freudian lurking
under your desk.’

Rivers pretended to look. ‘No-o. There isn’t one behind it either.’
Manning laughed. ‘The thing was he was extremely bright. And I don’t

know whether it was snobbery or … or what it was, but I’d been assuming
he wasn’t. Actually I don’t think it was snobbery, it was just he was so
bloody bad at everything. You couldn’t believe there was an intelligent
mind behind all those … cock-ups. But there was.’ His expression became
momentarily remote. ‘After that, I noticed him more. I thought –’

‘What did he get?’
‘At the court martial? Two hours’ field punishment a day. When

everybody else was resting – uh! – he’d be cleaning limbers, that sort of
thing. I used to stop and have a word with him. I don’t think it helped

because it took him away from the other men, and in the end it’s the other
men who keep you going.’

‘Go on. You say you thought –’
‘I thought he was clumsy. And then after this talk I watched him, I

watched him at bayonet practice, running in and lunging and … missing.
You know, the thing’s this big, and he was missing it. And suddenly I
realized it was nothing to do with clumsiness. He couldn’t switch off. He
couldn’t … turn off the part of himself that minded. I’m quite certain when
he finally got the bayonet in, he saw it bleed. And that’s the opposite of
what should be happening. You know I saw men once … in close combat,
as the manuals say, and one man was reciting the instructions. Lunge, one,
two: twist, one, two, out, one, two … Literally, killing by numbers. And
that’s the way it has to be. If a man’s properly trained he’ll function on the
day almost like an automaton. And Scudder was the opposite of that.
Somehow the whole thing had gone into reverse. I think probably because
of the breakdown, because I can see the same sort of thing happening to me.
Like red – the colour red – whatever it is, even if it’s a flower or a book –
it’s always blood.’

Rivers had gone very still. He waited.
‘When I was out there, I could be in blood up to the elbows, it didn’t

bother me. It’s almost as if instead of normal feelings being cut off, there
aren’t any divisions left at all. Everything washes into everything else. I
don’t know if that makes sense.’

‘Very much so.’
A pause. ‘Anyway, we moved forward. It was raining. I don’t know why

I bother to say that. It was always raining. The heavens had opened. And we
were told to report to the graveyard.’ Manning laughed, a genuine full-
blooded laugh. ‘I thought, my God somebody’s developed a sense of
humour. But it was absolutely true. We were billeted in the graveyard. And
it was extraordinary. All the tombs had been damaged by shells and you
could see through into the vaults, and this was in an area where there were
corpses everywhere. The whole business of collecting and burying the dead
had broken down. Wherever you looked there were bodies or parts of

bodies, and yet some of the younger ones – Scudder was one – were
fascinated by these vaults. You’d come across them lying on their stomachs
trying to see through the holes, because the vaults were flooded, and the
coffins were floating around. It was almost as if these people were really
dead, and the corpses by the road weren’t. Any more than we were really
alive.

‘We were shelled that night. Three men wounded. I was organizing

stretcher-bearers – not easy, as you can imagine – and I’d just finished when
Hines walked up and said, “Scudder’s gone.” He’d just got up and walked
away. The other men thought he’d gone to the latrine, but then he didn’t
come back. We got together a search-party. I thought he might have fallen
into one of the vaults, and we crawled round calling his name, and all the
time I knew he hadn’t. I decided to go after him. I know, not what a
company commander ought to have done, but I had a very good second in
command and I knew he couldn’t have got far. You see, everything was
coming forward for the attack, and the road was absolutely choked. I hoped
I could get to him before the military police picked him up. He’d have been
shot. We were far enough forward for it to count as desertion in the face of
the enemy. I was struggling and floundering along, and it really was almost
impossible, and then I saw him. He hadn’t got very far. When I caught up
with him, he didn’t even look at me. Just went on walking. And I walked
beside him and tried to talk to him, and he obviously wasn’t listening. So I
just pushed him off the road, and we slithered down and stopped on the rim
of a crater. There’s always gas lingering on the water. When you get close
your eyes sting. He was blue. And I tried to talk to him. He said, “This is
mad.” And I said, “Yes, I know, but we’ve all got to do it.” In the end I
simply named people. Men in his platoon. And I said, “They’ve got to do it.
You’ll only make it harder for them.” In the end he just got up and followed
me, like a little lamb.’

Manning stirred and reached for another cigarette. ‘We went forward

almost as soon as we got back. The orders were full of words like
“trenches” and “attacking positions”. There weren’t any trenches. The
attacking position was a line of sticks tied with bits of white ribbon. We

were late arriving, and it was getting light. If we hadn’t been late, we’d’ve
crawled straight past them in the dark. The “line” was a row of shell-craters,
filled with this terrible sucking mud. And you just crouched beneath the
rim, and … waited. We advanced. No close work, but machine-guns
directly ahead up the slope. A lot of casualties. A lot, and no hope of getting
them back. It was taking the stretcher-bearers a couple of hours to go a
hundred yards. So there we were, crouched in another row of shell-holes
exactly like the first. And all hell was let loose. As soon as it died down a
bit, I tried to crawl from one hole to another. It took me an hour to crawl
between two holes. And in the other hole I found four men, none of them
wounded, and I thought, thank God, and then suddenly one of them said,
“Where’s Scudder?” Well, there was nothing I could do about it. I couldn’t
move, the shelling was so heavy. And then there was a lull, and we heard a
cry. It seemed to be coming from a crater slightly further back, not far, and
we crawled along and found him.

‘He’d either slipped or been blown down the slope. Blown, I suspect,

because he’d got quite a way in. He was already up to his chest. We tried to
get him out, but even forming a line and holding out a rifle we couldn’t
reach him. He could just get the tips of his fingers on the butt, but his hands
were slippery with mud and they kept sliding off. I could see if we went on
trying somebody else was going to slip in. And Scudder was panicking and
… pleading with us to do something. I have never seen anything like his
face. And it went on and on. He was slipping away all the time, but slowly.
I knew what I had to do. I got the men lined up and told him we were going
to try again, and while he was looking at the others I crawled round the
other side, and fired.’ Manning closed his eyes. ‘I missed. And that was
terrible, because then he knew what was happening. I fired again, and this
time I didn’t miss.

‘We spent the rest of the night there, in that hole. It was very odd. You

know, I don’t think any of the men would have said, “You did the wrong
thing. You should have let him die slowly.” And yet nobody wanted to talk
to me. They kept their distance.’

A long silence. ‘His mother wrote to me in hospital. To thank me.

Apparently Scudder had written to her and told her I’d been kind to him.’

Rivers said firmly, ‘You were.’
Manning looked at him and then quickly away. ‘We were relieved the

following night. I reported back to Battalion HQ and they expressed
extreme displeasure. Apparently we’d been a bulge in the line. We’d been
sitting in the wrong shell-holes. They were having dinner, veal and ham pie
and red wine, and suddenly I realized they weren’t even going to offer us a
fucking drink. I had Hines with me, he was dead on his feet. So I leant
across the table, took two glasses, gave one to Hines and said, “Gentlemen,
the King.” And of course they all had to struggle to their feet.’ He laughed.
‘And then we got the hell out of it before they could work out how to put an
officer on a charge for proposing the loyal toast. We staggered down that
road giggling like a pair of schoolboys. We were still laughing when the
shell got us. I got this. Poor old Hines … I crawled across to him. And he
looked straight at me and said, “I’m all right, Mum.” And died.’

Rivers stirred. He was about to speak when he heard bugles in the streets.

‘Let’s have the curtains open, shall we?’ he said.

He pulled the heavy curtains back, and grey dawn light flooded into the

room. Manning flinched. He got up and joined Rivers by the window, and
was just in time to see a taxi drive along the other side of the square. Rivers
opened the windows, and the sound of birdsong filled the room.

‘You know,’ Manning said, ‘when Ross told me they sounded the all-

clear by driving boy scouts with bugles round the streets in taxis, I didn’t
believe him.’

They watched the taxi leave the square. Manning said, ‘I used to find a

certain kind of Englishness engaging. I don’t any more.’

FOURTEEN

Sarah was coming. The thought buoyed Prior up as he walked along the
Bayswater Road to the underground station. Only when he was on the train,
staring sightlessly at his reflection in the black glass, did his thoughts turn
to Spragge. He hadn’t seen him face to face since that evening in the park,
but he’d suspected more than once that Spragge was following him.
Possibly it was just nerves. His nerves were bad, and the intolerable sticky
heat didn’t help. The gaps in his memory were increasing both in length and
frequency, and they terrified him.

Like the undiscovered territory on medieval maps, Rivers said. Where

unknown, there place monsters. But a better analogy, because closer to his
own experience, was No Man’s Land. He remembered looking down a lane
in France. The lane had a bend in it, and what was beyond the bend was
hidden by a tall hedge. Beyond that was No Man’s Land. Beyond that
again, the German lines. Full of men like himself. Men who ate, slept, shat,
blew on their fingers to ease the pain of cold, moved the candle closer,
strained their eyes to read again letters they already had by heart. He knew
that, they all knew it. Only it was impossible to believe, because the lane
led to a country where you couldn’t go, and this prohibition alone meant
that everything beyond that point was threatening. Uncanny.

Something about the lifeless air of the underground encouraged morbid

thoughts. Above ground, in the relatively cool, coke-smelling air of King’s
Cross, he felt more cheerful. Please God, he thought, no gaps while Sarah’s
here.

He waited by the barrier, sick with excitement. The train slid to a halt,

grunted, wheezed, belched, subsided into a series of disgruntled mutters,
and then all along its length doors swung open, and people started to get

out. The sheer excitement of knowing he was going to see her stopped him
seeing her, and for one terrifying moment all the women on the platform
were Sarah. Then his mind cleared, and there was only one woman, walking
straight towards him.

He caught her in his arms and swung her off her feet. When, finally, he

set her down they stared at each other. He noticed the yellow skin, the dark
shadows round her eyes, the fringe of ginger hair which was not her own
colour, but some effect of the chemicals she worked with.

‘Well?’ she said.
‘You look beautiful. But then you always do.’
He took her bag and steered her towards the taxi rank.
‘Can’t we go on the underground?’ she said, pulling back.
He looked surprised.
‘I’ve never been on it.’
Her face lit up as she stepped out on to the descending staircase. She was

too excited to talk until they were on the train, and had stopped at several
stations, and the first novelty of hurtling in a lighted capsule through dark
tunnels had worn off. Then she turned to him and said, ‘You look a bit tired.
Are you all right?’

‘It’s the heat,’ he said. ‘I haven’t been sleeping well.’
‘You will tonight.’
He smiled. ‘I was hoping not to sleep at all tonight.’
But that was too direct. She smiled but looked away.
‘How’s your mother?’
‘The same. The shop’s not doing too well. No demand for secondhand

stuff these days.’

‘What about Dr Lawson’s Cure for Female Blockages and Obstructions?

I bet she’s doing a roaring trade in that.’

‘Geraway, man. It’s all sixpenny ticklers these days.’
‘Is it?’ Prior asked innocently.
She smiled and eventually laughed.
‘How was your trip home?’ she asked after a while.
‘Not bad. I met a few old friends.’

‘Did you tell your mam about me?’
He hesitated.
‘You didn’t,’ she said.
‘I prepared the ground.’
‘Billy. You think she won’t like me, don’t you?’
He knew she wouldn’t. He had a very clear idea of the sort of girl his

mother wanted him to marry. One of those green-skinned, titless girls who
wore white lawn blouses and remembered their handkerchiefs. The
Ministry was full of them. The extraordinary thing was he did find them
attractive, though not in a way he liked. They woke his demons up, just as
surely as making love to Sarah put them to sleep. ‘It’s not that,’ he said.

‘Isn’t it?’ She smiled, and he realized she simply didn’t care. ‘What about

your dad?’

‘I don’t tell him anything.’
‘Do you think he’d like me?’
He’d never thought about it. As soon as he considered it, he knew his

father would like her, and she’d like him. She wouldn’t approve of the old
sod, but she’d get on all right with him. Instantly the idea of taking her
home became even less attractive. ‘There’s plenty of time,’ he said.

Leading her down the steps to the basement he was ashamed of the
overflowing bins and the smell, but he needn’t have worried. Sarah was
delighted with the flat. He realized, as he took her from room to room, that
it could have been twice as dark, twice as stuffy, and she would still have
been pleased with it. For two days and nights this would be their home, and
that was all that mattered.

She ended the tour sitting on the single bed in his room,

unselfconsciously bouncing up and down to test the mattress. Then she
looked up and found him watching her, and her face was suffused with a
blush that banished the yellow from her skin. His breath caught in his
throat, and he swallowed hard. ‘If you’d like to get washed or or bathed, it’s
next door.’

‘Yes, I –’

‘I’ll get a towel.’
Prior wished sometimes he didn’t know what it was like to be groped, to

be pounced on before you’re ready. As he pulled a towel out of the airing
cupboard, he heard the bathroom door open and then felt her arms come
round him and clasp his chest. She pressed her face between his shoulders,
her mouth against his spine. ‘Can you feel this?’ she asked. And she began
to groan, deep noises, making his spine and the hollows of his chest vibrate
with her breath. He pushed her gently away. ‘You must be tired,’ he said.

She giggled, and he felt her laughter in his bones. ‘Not too tired.’

They did have a bath, eventually. Afterwards, lying on the bed, she traced
his ribs with the tips of her fingers, propped up on one elbow, her hair
screening them both. ‘You know the part of men I like best?’ she said,
moving her finger down.

‘Men?’ Cupping his hands around his mouth, he called into the passage,

‘Ge-orge? Albert? Are you there?’

She smiled, but persisted. ‘This part.’ Her finger slid into the hollow

beneath his ribs and down across his belly.

‘There?’
‘Yes.’
‘Uh? Uh?’ he said, thrusting his hips upward.
‘Oh, that.’
‘ “That”!’ He struggled to sit up, only to subside as she slid down the bed

and took his flaccid penis into her mouth.

She looked up and smiled. ‘He’s nice too.’
‘He’s a bloody disgrace at the moment. Look at him.’
‘You can’t expect miracles.’
He closed his eyes. ‘Go on doing that you might just get one.’

Hanging over her, watching the stretched mouth, the slit eyes, the head
thrown back until it seemed her spine must crack, he remembered other
faces. The dying looked like that.

‘What shall we do?’ he asked. ‘Are you hungry?’

‘Not really.’
‘We could go to Oxford Street. Look round the shops.’
‘Don’t sound so enthusiastic.’
‘Or Kew.’
‘What do you want to do?’
‘Kew, I think. The weather can’t last and we can do indoor things

tomorrow.’

‘More? You’ll wear me out.’
‘Other things.’
‘Oh.’

Once in the gardens they wandered aimlessly, more interested in each other
than in the plants. As the afternoon wore on, the heat thickened until there
was a brassy glare in the sky, as if a furnace door had opened. Still they
walked, each adjusting to the other’s stride, hardly aware when their linked
shadow faded from the grass.

Drops of rain striking their faces startled them out of their absorption.

They looked around, dazed. The rain began to beat down, lashing their
heads and shoulders. In less time than seemed possible, Sarah’s hair was
hanging in dark, reddish-brown strands and the sleeves of her blouse had
become transparent. Prior looked for shelter, but could see only some trees.
They made for those and stood under them, but there was little protection.
Rain streaked the trunks and splashed through the leaves on to the backs of
their necks.

Sarah was beginning to shiver with cold. Prior didn’t know where they

were. He could see a little mock Grecian temple on a grassy mound, but
that was open to the wind. From his previous visits he remembered the
Palm House, which was certainly warm. That would be the best place if he
could manage to locate it. He worked out where the main gate was, and
thought he could remember that you turned left. ‘I think we should make a
run for it,’ he said. ‘This isn’t going to go over.’

They ran, heads bent, Prior with his arm round Sarah, splashing through

puddles. Rivulets of mud, washed out of flowerbeds, ran down the paths.
Sarah refused the offer of his tunic and strode through it all, drenched, skirt
caught between her legs, blouse transparent, hair stringy, skin glowing, with
a stride that would have covered mountains. She had decided to enjoy it, she
said.

The lake was a confusion of exploding circles and bubbles, too turbulent

to reflect the inky sky. They ran the last few yards and entered the Palm
House. Prior felt a rippling effect on his face and neck and then,
immediately, an uncomfortable wave of damp heat. He began to cough.
Sarah turned to him. ‘Isn’t this bad for your chest?’

‘No,’ he said, straightening up. ‘In fact it’s ideal.’
The aisles were crowded, so much so it was difficult to move. Thick

green foliage surrounded them, and towered to the dazzling glass roof
above their heads. Smells of wet earth, of leaves dripping moisture, a
constant trickle of water, and somewhere a trapped blackbird singing. But
as they moved deeper into the crush, it was the smell of people that took
over: damp cloth, wet hair, steamy skin.

Prior took Sarah’s arm and pointed to the gangway above. ‘Come on, it’ll

be less crowded.’

He had a dim feeling there might also be more air up there, for in spite of

what he’d said to Sarah he was finding the atmosphere oppressive. Sarah
followed slowly, wanting to look at the plants. She tugged at his arm and
pointed to a flower that had the most incredibly pink penile-looking
stamens. ‘Isn’t he beautiful?’

‘I thought you were a rib-cage girl?’
‘Not ribs. The –’
He laughed and pulled her to him. They were standing at the bottom of

the spiral staircase. She slid her hand between his legs and rubbed. ‘I could
be converted.’

He pressed her more closely against him, his mouth buried in her wet

hair, looking over her head, focusing on nothing. Suddenly his eye
registered a familiar shape. The green blur cleared, and he found himself

gazing, through the branches of some tall plant with holes in its leaves, into
the face of Lionel Spragge. There could be no mistake. They stared at each
other through the foliage, no more than four or five feet apart. Then
Spragge turned and pushed into the crowd, which swallowed him.

Sarah looked up. ‘What’s the matter?’
‘Let’s go upstairs.’
He took her hand and pulled her towards the staircase. At every turn he

looked down through the green leaves of the canopy at the heads and
shoulders below, until eventually they ceased to look like individual people.
As they climbed higher, the sound of rain on the glass roof grew louder. The
windows were misted up, and a steamy, diffuse, white light spread over
everything. He looked down on to the gleaming canopy of leaves. And then
at the aisles, searching for Spragge’s broad shoulders and square head. He
thought he saw him several times as he and Sarah walked round the
gangway, but could never be sure. At first Sarah exclaimed over the
different shapes and patterns of the leaves, which were indeed beautiful, as
he acknowledged after a cursory glance. Then, gradually, sensing his
withdrawal, she fell silent.

I should have spoken to him, Prior thought, though he couldn’t imagine

what he would have said. But somehow the not speaking seemed in
retrospect to give the encounter a hallucinatory quality. He looked down
again, and now he would have been relieved to see Spragge’s square head
moving below.

He felt Sarah watching him and made an effort to behave more normally,

rubbing condensation from the glass, trying to see out. ‘You know, I think
we might just as well make a dash for it.’

He had begun to feel exposed, here above the leaves, with the white light

flooding over everything. Down there in the crowd, Spragge had only to
look up through a gap in the foliage and there he was, floodlit under the
white light of the dome.

‘Yes, all right,’ Sarah said.
She sounded puzzled, but ready to go along with whatever he suggested.

But she was no fool, his Sarah. He was going to have to tell her something.

Others had also decided to make a dash for it. A group of women with

heavy drenched skirts were running stiff-legged towards the main gate.

‘Can you run?’ he asked.
A glint of amusement. ‘Can you?’
Good question. By the time they reached the underground station, he was

more out of breath than her. He remembered, as he pressed his hand to his
side, Spragge saying, ‘I was behind you on the platform.’ Suddenly he
didn’t want the underground. He didn’t want to be shut in. ‘Look, I’ve got a
better idea,’ he said. ‘Why don’t we go on the river? If we get off at
Westminster Bridge we could see the Abbey.’

The boat was already moored when they reached the landing stage, and

beginning to be crowded. At the last moment, as the engine began to throb,
a crowd of people swept on board, including what looked like a girls’
school party. Prior stood up and gave one of the teachers his seat. ‘I’ll get
you a cup of tea,’ he whispered to Sarah and went to the bar.

As he stood waiting his turn, the roar increased, the river churned, and

they began moving out into midstream. He got the tea, took it back to
Sarah, and tried to drink his own, but found it too difficult to keep his feet
on the tilting deck, so he moved away from her and went to stand in the
doorway that connected the covered deck with the open benches in the
stern. Even these were full, and in fact the rain had almost stopped. A white
sun could be glimpsed now and then through a hazy veil of cloud.

On the front bench a group of elderly cockney men were making the best

of a bad job, laughing and joking at everything. A little way behind, on the
end of the third bench, sat a man with unusually broad shoulders. He looked
like Spragge, but it was difficult to tell because he was wearing a hat and
facing away from Prior. Prior craned to see the side of his face. It was
Spragge. Had to be. And yet he wasn’t sure. There was something odd
about the way the man didn’t turn, didn’t move. Edging along the railing
towards him, Prior became aware of a slowness in his movements, as if he
were wading through glue. He saw himself, in his mind’s eye, go up to the
man, tap him on the shoulder, wait for him to turn, and the face that turned
towards him … was his own. He sat down, his eyes level with the railings

from which a row of glittering raindrops hung. He reached out his hand and,
with the tip of his forefinger, destroyed them one by one. The wet, running
uncomfortably under his shirt cuff, brought him back to himself. He looked
again. It might or might not be Spragge, but it certainly looked nothing like
him. The whole powerful, brutal bulk of the head and shoulders was as
different from his own slight build as any two physiques could be, and yet
again, as he got up and began to move forward, he felt he was looking at the
back of his own head. He breathed deeply, gazing through the rails at the
brown, swollen, sinuous river, making himself follow individual twigs and
leaves as they were borne along, noticing how the different currents of
water, as they met and parted, rippled like muscles under skin. They were
approaching another bridge. He steadied himself, walked up to the man and
tapped him on the shoulder.

Spragge’s face was a relief. So much so that it took several seconds for

the anger to surface. ‘What the hell are you doing here?’

‘Going back to London. What are you doing?’
He sounded genuinely surprised, but Prior had caught the hiccup of

laughter in his voice. Spragge had spoken more loudly than he needed,
playing to the small audience of cockneys, and to the larger audience on the
benches behind.

Prior lowered his voice. ‘Are you following me?’
‘Following you?’ Again very loud. ‘Now why should I do that?’
He sounded like a bottom-of-the-bill music-hall actor conveying injured

innocence. The impression was not of somebody who’d decided to act as
one possible response to a situation, but of somebody who couldn’t not act.
You had the feeling he would act in front of the bathroom mirror. That if
ever you succeeded in ripping the mask off there would be no face behind
it. Prior felt a wave of revulsion. ‘If you’re following me,’ he said, ‘I’ll –’

‘Yes, what will you do?’ Spragge waited, as if the question genuinely

interested him. ‘Call the police? Have me arrested? It’s not against the law
to go to Kew.’ He smiled. ‘Nice girl,’ he said, nodding towards the prow.
And then he cupped his hands against his chest.

‘If you go anywhere near her, I’ll break your fucking neck.’

Spragge laughed, jowls shaking. He put his hand on Prior’s chest and

slapped it, genially. ‘That’s all right,’ he said. Then he sat down again and
looked out over the river, with no more than a sideways glance at the
cockneys, and a faint smile.

In something not moving, something too steady for a boat. Hands, mottled
purple and green, moved along polished wood. Then he was back, staring
up at a window made of chips of purple and green light. He looked for
Sarah and couldn’t see her. In a panic he leapt up and began searching the
Abbey, thrusting tourists aside, trailing hostile stares.

He found her at last, standing by the effigy of an eighteenth-century

bishop, running her hand over the smooth marble. A shaft of sunlight had
found the auburn lights in her hair.

She looked up as he arrived, breathless. ‘You back now?’
The question was so apposite it silenced him. For a moment he thought,

she knows. And immediately rejected the idea. Of course she didn’t know.

They went home by taxi. Prior thought about Spragge, because he was

afraid of thinking about anything else. What angered him was the thought
that Spragge might have seen that little act of intimacy in the Palm House
when Sarah had moved closer and rubbed his cock through the hard cloth of
his breeches. A good moment. In all that press of wet, sweating, steamy-
skinned people, they’d been alone, and then Spragge’s face peering through
the leaves. Had he seen? He must have. Prior was aware of feeling an
almost excessive sense of exposure, of violation even, as if he’d been seen,
arse upwards, in the act itself.

The taxi jolted and swayed. A memory started to surface that seemed to

have nothing to do with the afternoon’s events. He was ill with asthma,
walking with his father’s hand. Where could they have been going? His
father had never taken him anywhere, he’d been too ashamed of the little
runt that had mysteriously sprung from his loins. Perhaps his mother had
been ill. Yes, that was it.

They’d sat on a bench somewhere, and a woman brought him lemonade.

Real lemonade, his father had said proudly – but why proudly? – not that

gassy bottled stuff. There had been lime jelly too, with jelly babies
suspended in it. While he was picking at it, his father and the woman went
upstairs. He could hear voices from the open window above his head. The
boy, Harry. Then his father’s voice, thick and hurried. He’s all right. Wraps
himself round that lot he won’t have much to grumble about.

‘Wrapping himself round that lot’ had not been easy. He loved jelly, but

hated jelly babies, mainly because of the way people ate them, nibbling at
their feet, then at their faces, then boldly biting off the head and turning the
headless body round to display the shiny open wound. He contemplated
eating his way round them, freeing them from their quivering prison, but he
knew he couldn’t do that. The jelly had been specially made – it wasn’t
grown-up food – and his father would be angry. So, one by one, he had
forced them down, swallowing them whole, his eyes fixed on the trees so he
wouldn’t have to think about what he was doing. Even so, he’d gagged once
or twice, his eyes had watered, while upstairs the thick whispers came and
went and the bed springs creaked.

On the way home his father had said, casually, ‘Better not tell your

mam.’ And then he’d sat him astride his shoulders and carried him all the
whole way home, all the way up the street with everybody looking, his
meaty hands clasped round his son’s thin white thighs. For once he’d ridden
home in triumph. And he hadn’t told his mam, though he’d stood by her
sick bed and listened to his father describe a visit to the park. He’d been
invited to join the great conspiracy and even at the age of five he knew the
value of it. He wasn’t going to jeopardize future outings by telling her
anything.

That night he’d woken up, hot and sticky, knowing he was going to be

sick. He started to cry and after a long time his father came in, blundering
round and stubbing his toes before he found the light. He looked up at him,
the huge man, looming over the bed. Then, slowly, erupting from his
mouth, the jelly babies returned – intact, or very nearly so – while his father
stood and gaped.

It must have been quite a sight, Prior thought, helping Sarah out of the

cab and turning to pay the driver. Like watching a sea-horse give birth.

Once inside the flat he lit the gas fire and made two mugs of strong sweet
tea, while Sarah went to take off her wet clothes. She came back wearing
his dressing-gown, shivering from the cold. He sat her down between his
knees and towelled her hair.

‘You know you were saying about the bit you liked best? For me it’s your

hair,’ he said, feeling his tongue thick and unwieldy, getting in the way of
his teeth. ‘It was the first thing I noticed. The different colours.’

‘You told me,’ she said, twisting round. ‘And you needn’t make it sound

so romantic. You were wondering which colour was down there. Weren’t
you?’

He smiled. ‘Yes.’
They sat sipping their tea. She said, ‘Well, are you going to tell me?’
‘Yes.’ He picked up two handfuls of hair and tugged on them. ‘But it’s

worse than you think. I need you to tell me what happened.’

‘When?’
‘On the boat.’
Her eyes widened, but she didn’t argue. ‘You gave your seat to that

woman and got a cup of tea and then you went and stood over by the bar. I
didn’t see what happened then, I was looking at the bank. Then the sun
came out and some of the girls went out on deck and this woman thought
she ought to go and keep an eye on them. So next time you came back there
was a seat next to me. I asked you which bridge we were going under and
you didn’t answer. I could see you were in one of your moods. So I left you
to it. Then when we got out, that man in the Palm House was waiting at the
top of the steps. He said something about me – I honestly didn’t hear what it
was – and you hit him. He came back at you, and you lifted your cane and
you were obviously going to brain him, so he backed off. He went across
the bridge, and you got hold of me and dragged me into the Abbey. I kept
saying, “What’s the matter?” I couldn’t get an answer, so I thought, sod it.
And I went off and looked at things on me own.’ She waited. ‘Are you
telling me you don’t remember all that?’

‘I remember the first bit.’
‘You don’t remember hitting him?’

‘No.’
‘Who is he?’
‘Doesn’t matter.’
‘It does bloody matter.’
‘It’s got nothing to do with you.’
Her face froze.
As she pulled away, he said, ‘No, look, I didn’t mean it like that.’ He

buried his head in his hands. ‘I’ll tell you all about him if you like, but
that’s not the bit that matters. What matters is that I can’t remember.’

‘It’s happened before?’
‘It’s been happening for oh … two months.’
He could see her mind busily at work, trying to minimize the

significance. ‘But you lost your memory once before, didn’t you? I mean,
when you came back from France you said you couldn’t remember
anything.’ She switched to a tone of condemnation. ‘You’ve let yourself get
run down, that’s what you’ve done.’

‘Look, I need you to tell me about it.’ He tried to sound light-hearted.

‘You’re the first person who’s met him.’

‘Don’t you mean “me”? Well, it is you, isn’t it?’
Prior shook his head. ‘You don’t understand.’ He leapt up and took a

piece of paper out of the top drawer of the sideboard. ‘Look.’

Sarah looked down and read: Why don’t you leave my fucking cigars

alone?

‘I found some cigars in my pocket. I threw them away.’
‘But it’s your writing.’
‘YES. How can I say “I” about that?’
Sarah was thinking. ‘When I said it was you, I didn’t just mean … the

obvious. I meant I … I meant I recognized you in that mood. Do you
remember the first time we went out together? That day on the beach.’

‘Yes, of –’
‘Well, you were like that then. Hating everybody. You were all right on

the train, but once we were on the beach, I don’t know what happened, you
just went right away from me and I couldn’t reach you. I could feel the

hatred coming off you. It was like anybody who hadn’t been to France was
rubbish. Well, you were like that on the boat. And there’s no talking to you
when you’re in that mood. You just despise everybody.’ She hesitated.
‘Including me.’

‘It’s not a mood, Sarah. People remember moods.’

In bed that night, coiled round her, he kissed all along her spine, gently, so
as not to wake her, his lips moving from one vertebra to the next.

Stepping stones to sanity.
But the day after tomorrow, she would be gone.

FIFTEEN

Sarah left early on the Monday morning. They clung together by the barrier
at King’s Cross, breathing in coke fumes, and did not say goodbye.

He worked late, putting off the moment when he’d have to face the empty
flat. On his way home he kept telling himself it wouldn’t be too bad, or at
least it wouldn’t be as bad as he expected.

It was worse.
He wandered from room to room, searching for traces of her, trying to

convince himself a dent in the sofa cushion was where her head had rested.
He sat down and put his own head there, but this simply provided a more
painful vantage point from which to survey the emptiness of the room.

It’ll get better, he told himself.
It didn’t.

He took to walking the streets at night in an effort to get tired enough to
sleep. London by night fascinated him. He walked along the pavements,
looking at place-names: Marble Arch, Piccadilly, Charing Cross, Tottenham
Court Road. All these places had trenches named after them. And,
gradually, as he walked through the streets of the night city, that other city,
the unimaginable labyrinth, grew around him, its sandbag walls bleached
pale in the light of a flare, until some chance happening, a piece of paper
blown across the pavement, a girl’s laugh, brought him back to a knowledge
of where he was.

He got a letter from Sarah and put it on the mantelpiece, under a small
china figure of a windblown girl walking a dog, where he would see it as
soon as he came through the door.

Often, on his night-time walks, he thought about Spragge, and the more he
thought the more puzzled he became. The man’s whole sweaty, rumpled,
drink-sodden appearance suggested a down-and-out, a man blundering
through life, and yet the effort required to watch the flat and follow him all
the way to Kew revealed a considerable degree of persistence. It didn’t
make sense.

One obvious explanation was that he was working for Lode, but Prior

distrusted the idea. The atmosphere in the Intelligence Unit was such that
baseless suspicions were mistaken for reality at every turn. It was like a
trick picture he’d seen once, in which staircases appeared to lead between
the various floors of a building. Only very gradually did he realize that the
perspective made no sense, that the elaborate staircases connected nothing
with nothing.

His landlady, Mrs Rollaston, turned up on the doorstep, cradling her bosom
in her arms as women do when they feel threatened. ‘I thought you’d like to
know there’s somebody coming to do the bins. I know I said Monday, but I
just couldn’t get anybody.’

She was obviously continuing a conversation.
Prior nodded, and smiled.
He could recall no occasion on which he’d spoken to Mrs Rollaston

about the bins.

He needed to see Spragge, but the address on the file, as he discovered
standing on a gritty, windswept pavement in Whitechapel, was out of date.
The bloodless girl who peered up at him from the basement, a grizzling
baby in her arms, said she’d lived there a year and no, she didn’t know
where the previous tenant had gone. The landlady might, though.

The landlady, traced to the snug bar of the local pub, confirmed the name

had been Spragge. She didn’t know where he was now. Did he know this
was the very pub Mary Kelly had been drinking in the night the Ripper
killed her? She’d known Mary Kelly as well as she knew her own sister,

heart in one place, liver in another, intestines draped all over the floor, in
that very chair –

He bought her a port and lemon and left her to her memories. Odd, he

thought, that the fascination with the Ripper and his miserable five victims
should persist, when half of Europe was at it.

He was losing more time. Not in huge chunks, but frequently, perhaps

four or five times a day. In the evenings, unless he was seeing Rivers, he
stayed at home. He knew the flat was bad for him, both physically and
mentally, but he was afraid to venture out because it seemed to give him
more scope. Nonsense, of course. He could and did go out, though
sometimes the only sign was the smell of fresh air on Prior’s skin.

One morning Lode sent for him.

‘I just thought I’d share the good news,’ Lode said. ‘Since there isn’t

much of it these days. They’ve caught MacDowell.’

Prior was knocked sick by the shock, but he managed to keep his face

expressionless. ‘Oh? When?’

‘A few days ago. In Liverpool. Charles Greaves’s house. They got

Greaves too.’

‘Hmm. Well, that is progress.’
‘Good news, isn’t it?’
Prior nodded.
‘You know,’ Lode said, watching him narrowly, ‘I used to think I

understood you. I used to think I had you taped.’ He waited. ‘Ah, well.
Back to work.’

Prior wondered why Lode’s endless patting and petting of his moustache

should ever have struck him as a sign of vulnerability. It didn’t seem so
now.

The nights were bad. He was still taking sleeping draughts, sometimes

repeating the dose when the first one failed to work. Rivers strenuously
advised him against it, but he ignored the advice. He had to sleep.

That evening, fast asleep after the second draught, he was awakened by a

knocking on the door. The bromide clung to him like glue. Even when he

managed to get out of bed, he felt physically sick. For a moment, as he
pulled on his breeches and shirt, he thought he might actually be sick. The
knocking went on, then stopped.

Presumably whoever it was had got tired and gone away. Prior was about

to fall back into bed when he remembered he’d left the door open. Of all the
bloody stupid things to do. But it was the only way of getting some air into
the place.

It was no use, he’d have to go and close it.
The passage was full of the smell of rotting cabbage. The area round the

bins had not been cleaned, in spite of Mrs Rollaston’s promise. Prior
stumbled along, hitching up his braces as he went.

The door was open. He looked out. The sky was not the normal blue of a

summer evening, but brownish, like caught butter. He went back inside and
closed the door.

He was walking past the door of the living-room when he heard a

movement.

Slowly, he pushed the half-open door wide. Spragge was sitting, stolidly,

in the armchair, thick fingers relaxed on his splayed thighs. He looked up
with a sheepish, rather silly expression on his face. Sheepish, but obstinate.
‘Well?’ he said. ‘What do you want to see me about?’

‘Do you always walk into people’s houses uninvited?’
‘I thought I heard you say come in.’ He didn’t bother to make the lie

convincing. ‘I knew you must be in because the door was open. You want to
watch that. You could get burgled.’ A glance round the room pointed out
that there was nothing worth taking.

Prior was angry. Not because Spragge had walked in uninvited; it was

deeper, less rational than that. He was angry because of the way Spragge’s
fingers curled on his thighs, innocent-looking fingers, the waxy pink of very
cheap sausages.

‘I’ll get up and knock again if you like,’ Spragge said, pulling a comical

face.

‘It doesn’t matter,’ Prior said, sitting down. ‘What do you want?’
‘What do you want?’

Prior looked blank.
‘You’re the one who’s been chasing me.’
Spragge was drunk. Oh, he hid it well. There was just the merest hint of

over-precision in his speech, a kind of truculence bubbling beneath the
surface.

‘What about a drink?’ Prior suggested.
‘Yeh, all right.’
Prior needed time to think, to work out how he was going to approach

Spragge. He went into the kitchen where he kept the whisky. The trouble
was he detested Spragge to the point where the necessary manipulation
became distasteful. You didn’t manipulate people like Spragge. You
squashed them.

He poured a jug of water and, in the sudden silence after he’d turned off

the tap, heard a movement, furtive, it seemed to him, in the next room.
Rapidly, he crossed to the door.

Spragge was removing Sarah’s letter from underneath the ornament on

the mantelpiece. No, not removing it. Putting it back.

‘Have you read that?’ Prior burst into the room. He was remembering

how explicit Sarah’s references to their love-making had been. ‘Have you
read it?’

Spragge swallowed hard. ‘It’s the job.’
‘You shouldn’t’ve done that.’
‘Aw, for God’s sake,’ Spragge said. ‘Do you think she’d mind? I saw her

in the Palm House, she virtually had your dick out.’

Prior grasped Spragge lightly by the forearms and butted him in the face,

his head coming into satisfying, cartilage-crunching contact with Spragge’s
nose. Spragge tried to pull away, then slumped forward, spouting blood,
snorting, putting up an ineffectual shaking hand to stop the flow.

Prior tried to make him stand up, like a child trying to make a toy work.

Spragge staggered backwards and fell against the standard lamp, which
crashed over and landed on top of him. He lay there, holding his spread
fingers over his shattered nose, trying to speak, and gurgling instead.

Disgusted, with himself as much as Spragge, Prior went into the kitchen,

wrung out a tea-towel in cold water, came back, and handed it to Spragge.
‘Here, put this over it.’

Wincing, tears streaming down his face, Spragge dabbed at his face with

the wet cloth. ‘Broken,’ he managed to say. He gestured vaguely at the
towel, which was drenched in blood. Prior took it away and brought
another. He looked at the roll of fat above Spragge’s trousers and
contemplated landing a boot in his kidneys. But you couldn’t, the man was
pathetic. He threw the tea-towel at Spragge and sat down in the nearest
chair, shaking with rage, unappeased. He wanted to fight. Instead of that he
was farting about with tea-towels like Florence fucking Nightingale.

After a while Spragge started to cry. Prior stared at him with awed

disgust and thought, my God, I’m not taking this. ‘Come on,’ he said,
grabbing Spragge by the sleeve. ‘Out.’

‘Can’t walk.’
‘I’ll get you a taxi.’
Prior struggled into his boots and puttees, then returned to the living-

room and dragged Spragge to his feet. Spragge lurched and stumbled to the
door, half of his own volition, half dragged there by Prior. Bastard, Prior
thought, pushing him up the steps, but the anger was ebbing now, leaving
him lonely.

They staggered down the street, Spragge leaning heavily on Prior. Like

two drunks. ‘Do you realize how much trouble I’d get into if I was seen like
this?’ Prior asked.

The first two taxis went past. Spragge’s face, in the brown air, looked

dingy, but less obviously bloody than it had in the flat. He stood, swaying
slightly, apart from the noise and heat, the passing crowds, the sweaty faces.
He was visibly nursing his bitterness, carrying it around with him like a too
full cup. ‘Lode offered me a passage to South Africa. Did you know that?
All expenses paid.’

‘Will you go?’
‘Might.’ He looked round him, and the bitterness spilled. ‘Fuck all here.’

Prior remembered there were things he needed to know. ‘Did Lode tell

you to follow me?’

‘Yes.’
‘Were you following me when I went to see Hettie Roper?’
‘No, not there.’
Either Spragge was a better actor than he’d so far appeared, or he was

telling the truth. Spragge started waving and shouting ‘Taxi!’

It pulled up a few paces further on. ‘I’ll need money,’ he said.
Prior dug in his breeches pockets. ‘Here, take this.’
Spragge bent down and said, ‘Marble Arch.’ He wasn’t going to give an

address while Prior was within hearing.

‘You must have been following me,’ Prior said. ‘It was you who told the

police where to find MacDowell.’

Spragge looked up from the dim interior. ‘Not me, guv.’ His tone was

ironical, indifferent. ‘Lode says it was you.’

SIXTEEN

In the Empire Hospital Charles Manning surveyed the chess-board and
gently, with the tip of his forefinger, knocked over the black king.

‘You win,’ he said. ‘Again.’
Lucas grinned, and then pointed over Manning’s shoulder to the figure of

a man in army uniform, standing just inside the entrance to the ward.

Manning stood up. For a second there might have been a flicker of fear.
Fear was too strong a word, perhaps, but Manning certainly wasn’t at ease
though he gave the usual, expensively acquired imitation of it, coming
towards Prior, offering his hand. ‘Well,’ he said. ‘This is a surprise.’

‘How are you?’
‘Getting better. Let’s go along to my room.’
Manning chatted easily as they walked along the corridor. ‘Remarkable

chap, that. Do you know, he can’t remember the names of any of the
pieces? But, my God, he knows how to play.’

Manning’s room was pleasant, with a bowl of roses on the bedside table,

and a bright, yellow and red covered book lying face down on the bed.

‘A name you’ll know,’ Manning said, picking it up.
Prior read the title, Counter-Attack, and the name, Siegfried Sassoon.
‘You must’ve been at Craiglockhart at the same time,’ Manning said.
‘Ye-es. Though I don’t know how much of a bond that is. Frankly.’ Prior

closed the book and put it on the bedside table beside a photograph of
Manning’s wife and children, the same photograph that had been on the
grand piano at his house. ‘He hated the place.’

‘Did he?’

‘Oh, yes, he made that perfectly clear. And the people. Nervous wrecks,

lead-swingers and degenerates.’

‘Well,’ Manning said, waving Prior to a chair, ‘as one nervous, lead-

swinging degenerate to another … how are you?’

‘All right, I think. The Intelligence Unit’s being closed down, so I don’t

quite know what’s going to happen.’

Manning smiled. ‘I suppose you want to stay in the Ministry?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘Oh? Well, that might be a bit more difficult. I’ve got a friend at the War

Office – Charles Moncrieff – I don’t know whether you know him?
Anyway, one of his jobs is to select instructors for cadet battalions. I
suppose that might be a possibility?’

Prior leant forward. ‘Hang on a minute. I didn’t come here to brown-nose

you or your fucking friend at the War Office. What I was going to say – if
you wouldn’t mind listening – is that I want to talk to you about
something.’

‘What?’
‘Who. A woman called Mrs Roper. Beattie Roper.’
Manning was looking puzzled. ‘The Mrs Roper? Poison-plot Roper?’
‘Yes.’ Prior got a file out of his briefcase. ‘Except she didn’t do it.’
Manning took the file from him. ‘You want me to read it?’
‘I’ve summarized it. It’ll only take you a few minutes.’
Manning read with total concentration. When he finished he looked up.

‘Can I keep this?’

‘Yes, I’ve got a copy. I’ve got copies of the documents as well.’
‘You mean you’ve made personal copies of Ministry files?’ Manning

pursed his lips. ‘You certainly don’t play by the rules, do you?’

‘Neither do you.’
‘We’re in the same boat there, aren’t we?’ A hardening of tone. ‘I would

have thought we were in exactly the same boat.’

The merest hint of a glance at the photograph. ‘Not quite.’
Manning got up and walked across to the window. For a while he said

nothing. Then he turned and said, ‘Why? Why on earth couldn’t you just

come in and say, “Look, I’m worried about this. Will you read the report?”
All right, you’ve got the opening to do so because of … There was no need
for anything like that.’

Prior had a sudden chilling perception that Manning was right. ‘Rubbish.

Beattie Roper’s a working-class woman from the back streets of Salford.
You don’t give a fuck about her. I don’t mean you personally – though that’s
true too – I mean your class.’

Manning was looking interested now rather than angry. ‘You really do

think class determines everything, don’t you?’

‘Whether people are taken seriously or not? Yes.’
‘But it’s not a question of individuals, is it? All right, I don’t know

anything about women in the back streets of Salford. I don’t pretend to. I
don’t want to. It doesn’t mean I want to see them sent to prison on perjured
evidence. Or anybody else for that matter.’

‘Look, can we skip the moral outrage? When I came in here, you

assumed I was after a cushy job. I didn’t even get the first bloody sentence
out. Are you seriously saying you would have made that assumption about a
person of your own class?’

‘Yes.’
‘I don’t believe you.’
‘No, I would.’
‘You get dozens of them, I suppose, begging for safe jobs?’
‘Yes,’ Manning said bleakly.
Prior looked at him. ‘Golly. What fun.’
‘Not really.’
They sat in silence, each registering the change in atmosphere, neither of

them sure what it meant. ‘You’re right,’ Manning said at last. ‘It was an
insulting assumption to make. I’m sorry.’

At that moment the door opened and Rivers came in.
‘Charles, I –’ He stopped abruptly when he saw Prior. ‘Hello. I’m sorry, I

didn’t realize you had a visitor.’ He smiled at Prior. ‘I hope you’re not tiring
my patient?’

‘He’s wearing me out,’ Prior snapped.

‘What did you want to see me about?’ Manning asked.
Rivers said, ‘Nothing that can’t wait.’
He went out and left them alone.
There was a short silence. ‘I’m sorry too,’ Prior said. ‘You’re right, of

course. Class prejudice isn’t any more admirable for being directed
upwards.’ Just more fucking justified. ‘Do you think I should show that to
her MP?’

‘Oh, God, no, don’t do that. Once they’ve denied it in the House, it’ll be

set in concrete. No, I’ll have a word with Eddie Marsh. Only don’t expect
too much. I mean, it’s perfectly clear even from your report she was
sheltering deserters. That’s two years’ hard labour. She’s only done one.’

‘She wasn’t charged with that.’
Manning said, ‘They’re not going to let her out yet.’
‘So what will they do?’
‘Wait till the war’s over. Let her go quietly.’
Prior shook his head. ‘She won’t last that long.’

That night, at nine o’clock, Prior went out for a drink. He came to himself
in the small hours of the morning, fumbling to get his key into the lock. He
had no recollection of the intervening five hours.

Rivers rubbed the corners of his eyes with an audible squidge. ‘That’s the
longest, isn’t it?’

‘Yes. Just.’
‘Any clues? I mean, had you been drinking?’
‘Like a fish. I’ve still got the headache.’
Rivers replaced his glasses.
‘One of the … how shall I put it?’ Prior breathed deeply. ‘Inconveniences

of my present position is that I do tend to end up with somebody else’s
hangover. Really rather frequently.’

‘Not “somebody else’s”.’
Prior looked away. ‘You’ve no idea how disgusting it is to examine one’s

own underpants for signs of “recent activity”.’

Rivers looked down at the backs of his hands. ‘I’m going to say

something you probably won’t like.’

The telephone began to ring in the next room.
Prior smiled. ‘And I’m going to have to wait for it too.’
The call was from Captain Harris, telephoning to arrange the details of a

flight they were to make tomorrow. Rivers jotted the time down, and took a
few moments to collect his thoughts before returning to Prior.

Prior was standing by the mantelpiece, looking through a stack of field

postcards. Well, that was all right, Rivers thought, closing the door. Field
postcards contained no information about the sender except the fact that he
was alive. Or had been at the time it was posted. ‘His book’s out, you
know?’ Prior said, holding a postcard up. ‘Manning’s got a copy.’

‘Yes.’
Rivers sat down and waited for Prior to join him.
‘I suppose this is the real challenge,’ Prior said. ‘For you. The ones who

go back. They must be the ones you ask the questions about. I mean
obviously all this face your emotions, own up to fear, let yourself feel grief
… works wonders. Here.’ Prior came closer. Bent over him. ‘But what
about there? Do you think it helps there? Or do they just go mad quicker?’

‘Nobody’s ever done a follow-up. Electric shock treatment has a very

high relapse rate. What mine is, I just don’t know. Obviously the patients
who stay in touch are a self-selected group, and such evidence as they
provide is anecdotal, and therefore almost useless.’

‘My God, Rivers. You’re a cold bugger.’
‘You asked me a scientific question. You got a scientific answer.’
Prior sat down. ‘Well dodged.’
Rivers took his glasses off. ‘I’m really not trying to dodge anything.

What I was going to say is I think perhaps you should think about coming
into hospital. The –’

‘No. You can’t order me to.’
‘No, that’s true. I hoped you trusted me enough to take my advice.’
Prior shook his head. ‘I just can’t face it.’

Rivers nodded. ‘Then we’ll have to manage outside. Will you at least

take some sick leave?’

Another jerk of the head. ‘Not yet.’

Prior avoided thinking about the interview with Beattie Roper till he was
crossing the prison yard. She’d been on hunger strike again, the wardress
said, jangling her keys. And she’d had flu. No resistance. In sick bay all last
week. He’d find her weak. The prison doctor had wanted to force-feed her,
but the Home Office in its wisdom had decided that such methods were not
to be used.

She was thinner than he remembered.
He stood just inside the door. She was lying on the bed, the light from the

barred window casting a shadow across her face. The wardress stood
against the wall, by the closed door.

‘I need to see her alone.’
He expected an argument, but the wardress withdrew immediately.
‘The voice of authority, Billy.’
Mucus clung to the corners of her lips when she spoke, as if her mouth

were seldom opened.

He moved closer to the bed. ‘I hear you’ve been ill.’
‘Flu. Everybody’s had it.’
He remained standing, as if he needed her permission to sit. She nodded

towards the chair.

‘I’ve been doing what I can,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid it doesn’t amount to

much. I was hoping Mac might be able to help, but –’

A chest movement that might have been a laugh. ‘Not where he is. You

know where they’ve sent him, don’t you? Wandsworth.’

‘You see, you did shelter deserters. They think you’d do it again.’
She hoisted herself up the bed. ‘Bloody right ‘n’ all. I might look like a

bloody scarecrow but in here’ – she tapped the side of her head – ‘I’m the
same.’

Outside the door the wardress coughed.
‘You remember a lad called Brightmore?’

‘No.’
‘Go on, you do.’
He didn’t, but he nodded.
‘Lovely lad. They sent him to Cleethorpes. Twelve months’ detention.

’Course he went on refusing to obey orders so he got twenty-eight days
solitary and what they did they dug a hole, and it was flooded at the bottom
and they put him in that. Couldn’t sit down, couldn’t lie down. Nothing to
look at but clay walls. Somebody come to the top of the pit and told him his
pals had been shipped off to France and shot, and if he didn’t toe the line
the same thing’d happen to him. He thought his mind was going to give
way. Then it started pissing down and the hole flooded and the soldiers who
were guarding him were that sorry for him they took him out and let him
sleep in a tent. They didn’t half cop it when the CO found out. Next day he
was back in the pit. If one of them soldiers hadn’t given him a cigarette
packet to write on, he’d’ve died in there. As it was they got a letter
smuggled out –’

‘And the officers who did it were court-martialled. Beattie, there’s a

million men in France up to their dicks in water. Who’s going to get court-
martialled for that?’

‘Every bloody general in France if I had my way. You’re not the only one

who cares about them lads, what do you think this is about if it’s not about
them?’ A pause. ‘What I was trying to say was compared with a hole in the
ground this is a fucking palace. And I’m lucky to be here.’

He looked at her, seeing her heart beat visibly under the thin shift. ‘Have

you seen Hettie?’

‘Twice. Fact, she’s due today. I gather we’ve got you to thank for that?’
‘It’s nothing.’
‘No, it’s not nothing, Billy. It’s a helluva lot.’ She hesitated. ‘One thing I

should tell you – I’m not saying I believe it, mind – our Hettie thinks it was
a bit too much of a coincidence Mac getting picked up the way he was. She
…’ Beattie shook her head. ‘She thinks you told them where to go.’

‘That’s not true.’
‘No, I know it’s not. It’s all right, son, I’ll talk to her.’

He put his hand on her bare arm and felt the bone. ‘I’ve got to go,’ he

said.

He went to the door and knocked. ‘I’ll see you again,’ he said, turning

back to her.

She looked at him, but didn’t answer.
Following the wardress across the yard, he was hardly aware of the

massive walls with their rows of barred windows. He didn’t see Hettie
coming towards him, carrying a string bag, accompanied by another
wardress, until they were almost level. Then he called her name and,
reluctantly, she stopped.

The wardresses stood and watched.
Hettie came towards him. ‘I’m surprised you’ve got the nerve to show

your face.’

In spite of the words he bent towards her, expecting a greeting. She spat

in his face.

The wardress grasped her arm. Wiping his cheek, slowly, not taking his

eyes off Hettie, he said, ‘It’s all right. Let her go.’

Each with an escort, they moved off in opposite directions, toiling across

the vast expanse of asphalt like beetles. Hettie turned before the building
swallowed her and, in a voice that cracked with despair, she shouted, ‘You
bastard. What about Mac?’

Outside, Prior stared up at the building as the blood-and-bandages facade

darkened in the light drizzle. Hettie’s spit seemed to burn his skin. He raised
his hand and wiped his cheek again, then turned and began walking rapidly
towards the station. A refrain beat in his head. With every scuff and slurry
of his boots on the gravel, he heard: the bastards have won. The bastards
have won. The bastards …

Part Three

SEVENTEEN

Rivers had cleared the afternoon to finish a report on military training for
the Medical Research Council. For days now he’d had infantry-training
manuals piled up on his desk, and he spent the first hour immersed in them,
before going back to the last sentence he’d written.

Many of those who pass unscathed through modern warfare do so because of the
sluggishness of their imaginations, but if imagination is active and powerful, it is
probably far better to allow it to play around the trials and dangers of warfare than to
carry out a prolonged system of repression …

A tap on the door. Captain Bolden had attacked a nurse. Rivers did a
disguised run along the corridor, saw the lift was in the basement and took
the stairs three at a time. He found a group of nurses and two orderlies
clustered round Bolden’s door. Apparently he was refusing to let them in.
From a babble of indignant chatter he managed to extract the information
that Bolden had thrown a knife at Nurse Pratt. Not a very sharp knife, and it
hadn’t hit her, but still a knife. Nurse Pratt was one of the oldest and most
experienced nurses on the ward. Unfortunately her experience had been
gained on the locked wards of large Victorian lunatic asylums, where in any
altercation between a member of staff and a patient the patient was
automatically and indisputably wrong. One could see it so clearly from both
points of view. Bolden resorted to violence quickly and easily, but then he
had spent the past four years being trained to do exactly that. Nurse Pratt
was being asked, for the first time in a working life of thirty years, to handle
patients who were as accustomed to giving orders as to taking them.

Rivers handed his stick to an orderly and tapped on the door. ‘Can I come

in?’

A grunt, not definitely discouraging. Rivers opened the door and walked

in. Bolden was standing by the window, still angry, sheepish, ashamed.
Rivers, who was taller than Bolden, sat down, allowing Bolden to tower
over him. Bolden was a very frightened man. ‘Now then. What is it this
time?’

‘I told her the beef was inedible. She said I should think myself lucky to

have it.’

‘So you threw a knife?’
‘I missed, didn’t I?’
They talked for half an hour. Then Rivers stood up to go.
‘I’ll tell her I’m sorry,’ Bolden said.
‘Well, that would be a start. As long as you don’t get irritated by her

response.’

‘I do try,’ Bolden said, glowering at him.
‘I know you do. And you’re right about the beef. I couldn’t eat it either.’
Rivers had a word with Sister Walters, hoping she could persuade Nurse

Pratt to receive the apology graciously, and then thought he might as well
have a word with Manning, since he was on the ward anyway. He set off
towards Manning’s room, then checked, remembering Manning was more
likely to be on the neurological ward where he had struck up a firm
friendship with Lucas and a couple of other chess fanatics. Manning was
making good progress. He was almost ready to go home.

They were playing chess. Entirely silent and absorbed. He was standing

beside them before they looked up.

Now that the discharge from Lucas’s wound had stopped, his hair was

growing back, and it covered the white scalp in a dark fuzz. Rather
touching. He looked like some kind of incongruous, ungainly chick. ‘How’s
it going?’ Rivers asked, directing the question at Manning.

‘I’m being trounced,’ Manning said cheerfully. ‘19–17 in his favour.’
Lucas pointed to the board. ‘20–17,’ he gurgled and grinned.
He certainly knew his numbers, Rivers thought, smiling as he walked

away. In an unscreened bed further down the ward one of the pacifist
orderlies was cleaning up an incontinent patient. Viggors’s legs circled

continuously in an involuntary stepping movement, and it really needed two
people to change him, one to clean him up, the other to hold his legs. He
was getting liquid excrement on his heels, and spreading it all over the
bottom sheet. Martin, the orderly, was red-faced and flustered, Viggors
white with rage and shame.

Rivers stopped by the bed. ‘Have you heard of screens?’ he asked.
Martin looked up. ‘Wantage said he was going to get them.’
Wantage was lounging in the doorway of the staff-room, smoking a

cigarette, clearly in no hurry to rescue a conchie orderly from an impossible
position. His eyes widened. ‘I was just –’

‘I know exactly what you’re doing. Screens round that bed. Now. And get

in there and help.’ He called over his shoulder as he walked off. ‘And put
that cigarette out.’

Rivers was still shaking with anger when he got back to his desk. He

made himself concentrate on the uncompleted sentence.

… if imagination is active and powerful, it is probably far better to allow it to play around
the trials and dangers of warfare than to carry out a prolonged system of repression by
which morbid energy may be stored so as to form a kind of dump ready to explode on the
occurrence of some mental shock or bodily illness.

Exploding ammunition dumps had become a cliché, he supposed. Still,
Bolden did a very good imitation of one. He wasn’t doing too badly
himself.

A tap on the door. ‘No,’ Rivers said. ‘Whatever it is, no.’
Miss Rogers smiled. ‘There was a telephone call, while you were up on

the ward. About a Captain Sassoon.’

Rivers was on his feet. ‘What about him?’
‘He’s in the American Red Cross Hospital at Lancaster Gate with a head

wound, they said. Would you go and see him?’

‘How bad is it?’
‘I don’t know. They didn’t say.’

In the taxi going to Lancaster Gate, Rivers’s own words ran round and
round in his head. If imagination is active and powerful, it is probably far

better to allow it to play around … He looked out of the window, shaking
his head as if to clear it. It wasn’t even as if the advice were appropriate. He
didn’t need imagination, for Christ’s sake. He was a neurologist. He knew
exactly what shrapnel and bullets do to the brain.

The ward was a large room with ornate plasterwork, and tall windows

opening on a view of Hyde Park. Two of the beds were empty. The others
contained lightly wounded men, all looking reasonably cheerful. On a table
in the centre of the ward a gramophone was playing a popular love song.
You made me love you.

A nurse came bustling up to him. ‘Who were you –’
‘Captain Sassoon.’
‘He’s been moved to a single room. Didn’t they tell you? Another two

floors, I’m afraid, but I don’t think he’s allowed …’ Her eye fell on his
RAMC badges. ‘Are you Dr Rivers?’

‘Yes.’
‘I think Dr Saunders is expecting you.’
Dr Saunders was waiting outside the door of his room, a small man with

pouched cheeks, receding ginger hair and blue eyes ten years younger than
the rest of his face. ‘They sent you to the main ward,’ he said, shaking
hands.

Rivers followed him into the room. ‘How bad is he?’
‘The wound – not bad at all. In fact, I can show you.’ He took an X-ray

from a file on his desk and held it to the light. Sassoon’s skull stared out at
them. ‘You see?’ Saunders pointed to the intact bone. ‘The bullet went right
across there.’ He indicated the place on his own head. ‘What he’s got is a
rather neat parting in the scalp.’

Rivers breathed out. ‘Lucky man,’ he said, as lightly as he could.
‘I don’t think he thinks so.’
They sat at opposite sides of the desk. ‘I got a rather garbled message,

I’m afraid,’ Rivers said. ‘I wasn’t clear whether you’d asked me to see him
or –’

‘It was me. I saw your name on the file and I thought since you’d dealt

with him before you might not mind seeing him again.’ Saunders hesitated.

‘I gather he was quite an unusual patient.’

Rivers looked down at his own signature at the end of the Craiglockhart

report. ‘He’d protested against the war. It was …’ He took a deep breath.
‘Convenient to say he’d broken down.’

‘Convenient for whom?’
‘The War Office. His friends. Ultimately for Sassoon.’
‘And you persuaded him to go back?’
‘He decided to go back. What’s wrong?’
‘He’s … He was all right when he arrived. Seemed to be. Then he had

about eight visitors all at his bed at the one time. The hospital rules say two.
But the nurse on duty was very young and apparently she felt she couldn’t
ask them to leave. She won’t make that mistake again. Anyway, by the time
they finally did leave he was in a terrible state. Very upset. And then he had
a bad night – everybody had a bad night – and we decided to try a single
room and no visitors.’

‘Is he depressed?’
‘No. Rather the reverse. Excitable. Can’t stop talking. And now he’s got

nobody to talk to.’

Rivers smiled. ‘Perhaps I’d better go along and provide an audience.’

Deep-carpeted corridors, gilt-framed pictures on the wall. He followed
Saunders, remembering the corridors of Craiglockhart. Dark, draughty,
smelling of cigarettes. But this was oppressive too, in its airless, cushioned
luxury. He looked out of a window into a deep dark well between two
buildings. A pigeon stood on a window-sill, one cracked pink foot curled
round the edge of the abyss.

Saunders said, ‘He seems to have a good patch in the afternoon. He

might be asleep.’ He opened the door softly and they went in.

Sassoon was asleep, his face pale and drawn beneath the cap of

bandages. ‘Shall I –’ Saunders whispered, pointing to Sassoon.

‘No, leave him. I’ll wait.’
‘I’ll leave you to it, then,’ Saunders said, and withdrew.

Rivers sat down by the bed. There was another bed in the room, but it

was not made up. Flowers, fruit, chocolate, books were piled up on the
bedside table. He did not intend to wake Siegfried, but gradually some
recollection of whispered voices began to disturb the shuttered face.
Siegfried moistened his lips and a second later opened his eyes. He focused
them on Rivers, and for a moment there was joy, followed immediately by
fear. He stretched out his hand and touched Rivers’s sleeve. He’s making
sure I’m real, Rivers thought. A rather revealing gesture.

The hand slid down and touched the back of his hand. Siegfried

swallowed, and started to sit up. ‘I’m glad to see you,’ he said, offering his
hand. ‘I thought for a mo –’ He checked himself. ‘They won’t let you stay,’
he said, smiling apologetically. ‘I’m not allowed to see anybody.’

‘No, it’s all right. They know I’m here.’
‘I suppose it’s because you’re a doctor,’ Siegfried said, settling back.

‘They wouldn’t let Lady Ottoline in, I heard Mrs Fisher talking to her in the
corridor.’

His manner was different, Rivers thought. Talkative, restless, rapid

speech, and he was looking directly at Rivers, something he almost never
did, particularly at the beginning of a meeting. But he seemed perfectly
rational, and the changes were within normal bounds. ‘Why won’t they let
you see anybody?’

‘It’s because of Sunday, everybody came, Robert Ross, Meicklejon,

Sitwell, oh God, Eddie Marsh, and they were all talking about the book and
I got excited and –’ He raised his hands to his forehead. ‘FIZZLE. POP. I
had a bad night, kept everybody awake, and they put me in here.’

‘How was last night?’
Siegfried pulled a face. ‘Bad. I keep thinking how big it is, the war, and

how impossible it is to write about, and how useless it is to get angry, that’s
such a trivial reaction, it doesn’t, it just doesn’t do any sort of justice to the
to the to the tragedy, you know you spend your entire life out there obsessed
with this tiny little sector of the Front, I mean thirty yards of sandbags,
that’s the war, you’ve no conception of anything else, and now I think I can

see all of it, vast armies, flares going up, millions of people, millions,
millions.’

Rivers waited. ‘You say you see it?’
‘Oh, yes, it just unfolds.’ A circling movement of his arms. ‘And it’s

marvellous in a way, but it’s terrible too and I get so frightened because
you’d have to be Tolstoy.’ He gripped Rivers’s hand. ‘I’ve got to see Ross, I
don’t care about the others, but you’ve got to make them let me see him, he
looks awful, that bloody bloody bloody trial. Do you know Lord Alfred
Douglas called him “the leader of all the sodomites in London”? Only he
said it in the witness-box, so Robbie can’t sue.’

‘Just as well, perhaps.’
‘And he’s been asked to resign from all his committees, I mean he

offered, but it was accepted with alacrity. I’ve got to see him. Apart from
anything else he brings me the reviews.’

‘They’re good, aren’t they? I’ve been looking out for them.’
‘Most of them.’
Rivers smiled. ‘You can’t write a controversial book and expect universal

praise, Siegfried.’

‘Can’t I?’
They laughed, and for a moment everything seemed normal. Then

Siegfried’s face darkened. ‘Do you know we actually sat in dug-outs in
France and talked about that trial? The papers were full of it, I think it was
the one thing that could have made me glad I was out there, I mean, for
God’s sake, the Germans on the Marne, five thousand prisoners taken and
all you read in the papers is who’s going to bed with whom and are they
being blackmailed? God.’

‘I’ll see what I can do about Ross.’
‘Do you think they’ll listen to you?’
Rivers hesitated. ‘I think they might.’ Obviously Siegfried didn’t know

he’d been called in professionally. ‘How’s the head?’

A spasm of contempt. ‘It’s a scratch. I should never’ve let them send me

back, do you know that’s the last thing I said to my servant, “I’m coming

back.” “Back in three weeks,” I yelled at him as I was being driven away.
And then I let myself be corrupted.’

‘Corrupted? That’s a harsh word, isn’t it?’
‘I should’ve refused to come back.’
‘Siegfried, nobody would have listened to you if you had. Head injuries

have to be taken seriously.’

‘But don’t you see, the timing was perfect? Did you see my poem in the

Nation? “I Stood with the Dead”. Well, there you are. Or there I was rather,
perched on the top-most bough, carolling away. BANG! Oops! Sorry.
Missed.’

‘I’m glad it did.’
A bleak sideways glance from Siegfried. ‘I’m not.’
Silence.
‘I feel amputated. I don’t belong here. I keep looking at all this …’ The

waving hand took in fruit, flowers, chocolates. ‘I just wish I could parcel it
up and send it out to them. I did manage to send them a gramophone. Then
I got … ill.’

‘You know, what I don’t understand,’ Rivers said, ‘is how you could

possibly have been wounded there.’

‘I was in No Man’s Land.’
‘No, I meant under the helmet.’
‘I’d taken it off.’ An awkward pause. ‘We’d been out to lob some hand-

grenades at a machine-gun, two of us, they were getting cheeky, you see,
they’d brought it too far forward, and so we …’ He smiled faintly. ‘Re-
established dominance. Anyway, we threw the grenades, I don’t think we
hit anybody – by which I mean there were no screams – and then we set off
back and by this time it was getting light, and I was so happy.’ His face
blazed with exultation. ‘Oh, God, Rivers, you wouldn’t believe how happy.
And I stood up and took the helmet off, and I turned to look at the German
lines. And that’s when the bullet got me.’

Rivers was so angry he knew he had to get away. He walked across to the

window and stared, unseeing, at the road, the railings, the distant glitter of
the Serpentine under the summer sun. He had been lying to himself, he

thought, pretending this was merely one more crisis in a busy working day.
This anger stripped all pretence away from him. ‘Why?’ he said, turning
back to Siegfried.

‘I wanted to see them.’
‘You mean you wanted to get killed.’
‘No.’
‘You stand up in the middle of No Man’s Land, in the morning, the sun

rising, you take off your helmet, you turn to face the German lines, and you
tell me you weren’t trying to get killed.’

Siegfried shook his head. ‘I’ve told you, I was happy.’
Rivers took a deep breath. He walked back to the bed, schooling himself

to a display of professional gentleness. ‘You were happy?’

‘Yes, I was happy most of the time, I suppose mainly because I’ve

succeeded in cutting off the part of me that hates it.’ A faint smile. ‘Except
when writing poems for the Nation. I was … There’s a book you ought to
read. I’ll try to dig it out, it says something to the effect that a man who
makes up his mind to die takes leave of a good many things, and is, in some
sense, dead already. Well, I had made up my mind to die. What other
solution was there for me? But making up your mind to die isn’t the same
as trying to get killed. Not that it made much difference.’ He touched the
bandage tentatively. ‘I must say, I thought the standard of British sniping
was higher than this.’

‘British sniping?’
‘Yes, didn’t they tell you? My own NCO. Mistook me for the German

army, rushed out into No Man’s Land shouting, “Come on, you fuckers,”
and shot me.’ He laughed. ‘God, I’ve never seen a man look so horrified.’

Rivers sat down by the bed. ‘You’ll never be closer.’
‘I’ve been closer. Shell landed a foot away. Literally. Didn’t explode.’

Siegfried twitched suddenly, a movement Rivers had seen many thousands
of times in other patients, too often surely for it to be shocking.

‘You can’t get shell-shock, can you?’ Siegfried asked. ‘From a shell that

doesn’t explode?’

Rivers looked down at his hands. ‘I think that one probably did a fair

amount of damage.’

Siegfried looked towards the window. ‘You know, they’re going on a raid

soon, Jowett, five or six of the others, my men, Rivers, my men, men I
trained and I’m not going to be there when they come back.’

‘They’re not your men now, Siegfried. They’re somebody else’s men.

You’ve got to let go.’

‘I can’t.’

Rivers had been invited to dinner with the Heads, and arrived to find the
Haddons and Grafton Elliot Smith already there. No opportunity for private
conversation with Henry or Ruth presented itself until the end of the
evening, when Rivers contrived that he should be the last to leave. It was
not unusual after a dinner with the Heads for him to stay behind enjoying
their particular brand of unmalicious gossip, well aware that his own foibles
and frailties would be dissected as soon as he left, and sure enough of their
love for him not to mind.

Not that he was inclined to gossip tonight. As soon as they were alone, he

told them about Siegfried, clarifying his own perception of the situation as
he spoke.

‘Excited, you say?’ Henry asked.
‘Yes.’
‘Manic?’
‘Oh, no, nowhere near. Though there was a hint of … elation, I suppose,

once or twice, particularly when he was talking about his feelings
immediately before he was wounded. And the afternoons are his best time.
Apparently the nights are bad. I’ve promised I’ll go back. In fact, I ought to
be going.’ He stood up. ‘I’m not worried. He’ll be all right.’

‘Does he regret going back?’ Ruth asked.
‘I don’t know,’ Rivers said. ‘I haven’t asked.’
After seeing Rivers off, Head came back into the living-room to find

Ruth gazing reflectively into the fire.

‘No, well, he wouldn’t, would he?’ she said, looking up.
‘He might think there wasn’t much point,’ Henry said, sitting down on

the other side of the fire.

A long, companionable silence. They were too replete with company and

conversation to want to talk much, too comfortable to make the move for
bed.

‘He came to see me last year, you know,’ Henry said. ‘Almost a sort of

consultation. He got himself into quite a state over Sassoon.’

‘Yes, I know. I didn’t realize he’d talked to you about it.’
Head hesitated. ‘I think he suddenly realized he was using … his

professional skills, if you like, to defuse a situation that wasn’t … medical.
There’s really nothing else you can do if you’re a doctor in the army in
wartime. There’s always the possibility of conflict between what the army
needs and what the patient needs, but with Sassoon it was … very sharp. I
told him basically not to be silly.’

Ruth gave a surprised laugh. ‘Poor Will.’
‘No, I meant it.’
‘I’m sure you did, but you wouldn’t have said it to a patient.’
‘I told him Sassoon was capable of making up his own mind, and that his

influence probably wasn’t as great as he thought it was. I thought he was
being … I don’t know. Not vain –’

‘Over-scrupulous?’
‘Frankly, I thought he was being neurotic. But I’ve seen him with a lot of

patients since then, and I’m not so sure. You know how you get out of date
with people if you haven’t seen them for a while? I think I was out of date.
Something happened to him in Scotland. Somehow or other he acquired this
enormous power over young men, people generally perhaps, but
particularly young men. It really is amazing, they’ll do anything for him.
Even get better.’

‘Even go back to France?’
‘Yes, I think so.’
Ruth shrugged slightly. ‘I don’t see the change. But then I suspect he’s

always shown a slightly different side to me anyway.’ She smiled. ‘I’m very
fond of him, but –’

‘He is of you.’

‘I sometimes wonder why we even like each other, you know. When you

think how it started. You going to Cambridge every weekend so he could
stick pins in your arm. I never had a weekend with you the whole of the
first year we were married.’

‘It wasn’t as bad as that. Anyway, you got on all right.’
‘Do you think he still thinks Sassoon went back because of him?’
Head hesitated. ‘I think he knows the extent of his influence.’
‘Hmm,’ Ruth said. ‘Do you think he’s in love with him?’
‘He’s a patient.’
Ruth smiled and shook her head. ‘That’s not an answer.’
Head looked at her. ‘Yes, it is. It has to be.’

Siegfried was sitting up in bed, pyjama jacket off, face and chest gleaming
with sweat. ‘Is it hot, Rivers?’ he asked, as if their conversation had never
been interrupted. ‘Or is it just me?’

‘Warm.’
‘I’m boiling. I’ve been sitting here simmering like a kettle.’
Rivers sat down beside the bed.
‘I’ve been writing to Graves. In verse. Do you want to read it?’
Rivers took the notepad and found himself reading an account of his visit

that afternoon. The pain was so intense that for a moment he had to keep
quite still. ‘Is that how you see me?’ he said at last. ‘Somebody who’s going
to make you go back to France till you break down altogether?’

‘Yes,’ Sassoon said cheerfully. ‘But that’s all right, I want you to. You’re

my external conscience, Rivers, my father confessor. You can’t let me down
now, you’ve got to make me go back.’

Rivers read the poem again. ‘You shouldn’t send this.’
‘Why not? It took me ages. Oh, I know what it is, you don’t think I

should say all that about the lovely soldier lads. Well, they are lovely. You
think Graves is going to be shocked. Frankly, Rivers, I don’t care; shocking
Graves is one of my few remaining pleasures. I wrote to him – not to shock
him – just an ordinary letter, only I made the mistake of talking with
enthusiasm about training in one paragraph, and in the next paragraph I said

what a bloody awful business the war was, and what do I get back? A
lecture on consistency, oh, and some very pathetic reproaches about not
terrifying your friends by pretending to be mad, I thought that was
particularly rich. I’ve done one totally consistent, totally sane thing in my
life, and that was to protest against the war. And who stopped me?’

Graves, Rivers thought. But not only Graves. It was true, he saw it now,

perhaps more clearly than he had at the time, that whatever the public
meaning of Siegfried’s protest, its private meaning was derived from a
striving for consistency, for singleness of being in a man whose internal
divisions had been dangerously deepened by the war.

‘You mustn’t blame Graves. He did what –’
‘I don’t blame him, I’m just not prepared to be lectured by him. I survive

out there by being two people, sometimes I even manage to be both of them
in one evening. You know, I’ll be sitting with Stiffy and Jowett – Jowett is
beautiful – and I’ll start talking about wanting to go and fight, and I’ll get
them all fired up and banging the table and saying, yes, enough of training,
time to get stuck in to the real thing. And then I leave them and go to my
room and think how young they are. Nineteen, Rivers. Nineteen. And
they’ve no bloody idea. Oh, God, I hope they live.’

Suddenly, he started to cry. Wiping the back of his hand across his

mouth, he sniffed and said, ‘Sorry.’

‘That’s all right.’
‘You know what finally put the kibosh on my Jekyll and Hyde

performance, no, listen, this is funny. I got a new second in command.
Pinto. Absolute jewel. But the first time I met him he was reading Counter-
Attack, and he looked up and said, “Are you the same Sassoon?” My God,
Rivers, what a bloody question. But of course I said, “Yes.” What else could
I say? And yet do you know I think that’s when things started to unravel.’ A
marked change in tone. ‘It was when I faced up to how bloody stupid it
was.’

Rivers looked puzzled. ‘What was?’
‘My pathetic little formula for getting myself back to France.’ He

adopted a mincing, effeminate tone. ‘ “I’m not going back to kill people.

I’m only going back to look after some men.” ’ His own voice. ‘Why didn’t
you kick me in the head, Rivers? Why didn’t you put me out of my
misery?’

Rivers made himself answer. ‘Because I was afraid if you started

thinking about that, you wouldn’t go back at all.’

He might as well not have spoken. ‘You’ve only got to read the training

manual. “A commander must demand the impossible and not think of
sparing his men. Those who fall out must be left behind and must no more
stop the pursuit than casualties stopped the assault.” That’s it. Expendable,
interchangeable units. That’s what I went back to “look after”.’ A pause.
‘All I wanted was to see them through their first tour of duty and I couldn’t
even do that.’

‘Pinto’s there,’ Rivers said tentatively.
‘Oh, yes, and he’s good. He’s really good.’
Siegfried’s face and neck were running with sweat. ‘Shall I open the

window?’ Rivers asked.

‘Please. They keep shutting it, I don’t know why.’
Rivers went to open the window. Behind him, Siegfried said, ‘I’m sorry

you don’t like my lovely soldier lads.’

‘I didn’t say I didn’t like them. I said you shouldn’t send them.’
‘There was one in particular.’
‘Jowett,’ said Rivers.
‘I wrote a poem about Jowett. Not that he’ll ever know. He was asleep.

He looked as if he were dead.’ A silence. ‘It’s odd, isn’t it, how one can feel
fatherly towards somebody, I mean, genuinely fatherly, not exploiting the
situation or even being tempted to, and yet there’s this other current. And I
don’t think one invalidates the other. I think it’s perfectly possible for them
both to be genuine.’

‘Yes,’ said Rivers, with the merest hint of dryness, ‘I imagine so.’ He

came back to the bed. ‘You say things “started to unravel”?’

‘Yes, because I’d always coped with the situation by blocking out the

killing side, cutting it off, and then suddenly one’s brought face to face with
the fact that, no, actually there’s only one person there and that person is a

potential killer of Huns. That’s what our CO used to call us. It had a very
strange effect. I mean, I went out on patrol, that sort of thing, but I’ve
always done that, I’ve never been able to sit in a trench, it’s not courage, I
just can’t do it, but this time it was different because I wasn’t going out to
kill or even to test my nerve, though that did come into it. I just wanted to
see. I wanted to see the other side. I used to spend a lot of time looking
through the periscope. It was a cornfield. Farmland. Sometimes you’d see a
column of smoke coming up from the German lines, but quite often you’d
see nothing.’ A pause, then he said casually, ‘I went across once. Dropped
down into the trench and walked along, and there were four Germans
standing by a machine-gun. One of them turned round and saw me.’

‘What happened?’
‘Nothing. We just looked at each other. Then he decided he ought to tell

his friends. And I decided it was time to leave.’

A tense silence.
‘I suppose I should have killed him,’ Siegfried said.
‘He should certainly have killed you.’
‘He had the excuse of surprise. You know, Rivers, it’s no good

encouraging people to know themselves and … face up to their emotions,
because out there they’re better off not having any. If people are going to
have to kill, they need to be brought up to expect to have to do it. They need
to be trained not to care because if you don’t …’ Siegfried gripped Rivers’s
hand so tightly that his face clenched with the effort of concealing his pain.
‘It’s too cruel.’

Rivers had been with Siegfried for over an hour and so far nothing had

been said that might not equally well have been dealt with at some more
convenient time of day. But now, his excitement began to increase, words
tripped him up, his mind stumbled along in the wake of his ideas, trying
desperately to catch up. He spoke of the vastness of the war, of the
impossibility of one mind encompassing it all. Again and again he spoke of
the need to train boys to kill; from earliest childhood, he said, they must be
taught to expect nothing else and they must never never be allowed to
question what lies ahead. All this was mixed in with his anxieties about the

raid Jowett and the others were going on. He spoke so vividly and with so
much detail that at times he clearly believed himself to be in France.

There was no point arguing with any of this. It took Rivers three hours to

calm him down and get him to sleep. Even after his breathing had become
steady, Rivers went on sitting by the bed, afraid to move in case the
withdrawal of his hand should cause him to wake. Long hairs on the back of
Siegfried’s forearm caught the light. Rivers looked at them, too exhausted
to think clearly, remembering the experiments he and Head had done on the
pilomotor reflex. Head’s hairs had become erect every time he read a
particular poem. The holy shiver, as the Germans call it. For Head it was
awakened by poetry; for Rivers, more than once, it had been the beauty of a
scientific hypothesis, one that brought into unexpected harmony a whole
range of disparate facts. What had intrigued Rivers most was that human
beings should respond to the highest mental and spiritual achievements of
their culture with the same reflex that raises the hairs on a dog’s back. The
epicritic grounded in the protopathic, the ultimate expression of the unity
we persist in regarding as the condition of perfect health. Though why we
think of it like that, God knows, since most of us survive by cultivating
internal divisions.

Siegfried was now deeply asleep. Cautiously, Rivers withdrew his hand,

flexing the fingers. It had grown colder and Siegfried had fallen asleep
outside the covers. Rivers went to shut the window, and stood for a moment
attempting to arrange the story he’d been told into a coherent pattern, but
that wasn’t possible, though the outline was clear enough. Siegfried had
always coped with the war by being two people: the anti-war poet and
pacifist; the bloodthirsty, efficient company commander. The dissociation
couldn’t be called pathological, since experience gained in one state was
available to the other. Not just available: it was the serving officer’s
experience that furnished the raw material, the ammunition, if you liked, for
the poems. More importantly, and perhaps more ambiguously, that
experience of bloodshed supplied the moral authority for the pacifist’s
protest: a soldier’s declaration. No wonder Pinto’s innocent question had
precipitated something of a crisis.

Though he would have broken down anyway this time, Rivers thought.

He had gone back hating the war, turning his face away from the reality of
killing and maiming, and as soon as that reality was borne in upon him, he
had found the situation unbearable. All of which might have been foreseen.
Had been foreseen.

Night had turned the window into a black mirror. His face floated there,

and behind it, Siegfried and the rumpled bed. If Siegfried’s attempt at
dissociation had failed, so had his own. He was finding it difficult to be
both involved and objective, to turn steadily on Siegfried both sides of
medicine’s split face. But that was his problem. Siegfried need never be
aware of it.

It was still dark. A light wind stirred the black trees in the park. He took

his boots off and climbed on to the other bed, not expecting to be able to
sleep, but thinking that at least he might rest. He closed his eyes. At first his
thoughts whirred on, almost as active as Siegfried’s and not much more
coherent. For some reason the situation reminded him of sleeping on board
the deck of a tramp steamer travelling between the islands of Melanesia.
There, one slept in a covered cabin on deck, on a bench that left vertical
stripes down one’s back, surrounded by fellow passengers, and what a
motley assemblage they were. He remembered a particular voyage when
one of his companions had been a young Anglican priest, so determined to
observe holy modesty in these difficult conditions that he’d washed the
lower part of his body underneath the skirt of his cassock, while Rivers
stripped off and had buckets of water thrown over him by the sailors who
came up to swab the deck.

His other companion on that trip had been a trader who rejoiced in the

name of Seamus O’Dowd, though he had no trace of an Irish accent.
O’Dowd drank. In the smoky saloon after dinner, belching gin and dental
decay into Rivers’s face, he had boasted of his exploits as a blackbirder, for
he’d started life kidnapping natives to work on the Queensland plantations.
Now he simply cheated them. His most recent coup had been to convince
them that the great Queen (nobody in the Condominion dared tell the
natives Victoria was dead) found their genitals disgusting, and could not

sleep easy in her bed at Windsor until they were covered by the long Johns
that Seamus had inadvertently bought as part of a job lot while even more
drunk than usual.

They wore them on their heads, Rivers remembered. It had been a feature

of the island in that first autumn of the war, naked young men wearing long
Johns elaborately folded on their heads. They looked beautiful. Meanwhile,
in England, other young men had been rushing to don a less flattering garb.

Drifting between sleep and waking, Rivers remembered the smells of oil

and copra, the cacophony of snores and whistles from the sleepers crammed
into the small cabin on deck, the vibration of the engine that seemed to get
into one’s teeth, the strange, brilliant, ferocious southern stars. He couldn’t
for the life of him think what was producing this flood of nostalgia. Perhaps
it was his own experience of duality that formed the link, for certainly in the
years before the war he had experienced a splitting of personality as
profound as any suffered by Siegfried. It had been not merely a matter of
living two different lives, divided between the dons of Cambridge and the
missionaries and headhunters of Melanesia, but of being a different person
in the two places. It was his Melanesian self he preferred, but his attempts
to integrate that self into his way of life in England had produced nothing
but frustration and misery. Perhaps, contrary to what was usually supposed,
duality was the stable state; the attempt at integration, dangerous. Certainly
Siegfried had found it so.

He raised himself on his elbow and looked at Siegfried, who was

sleeping with his face turned to the window. Perhaps the burst of nostalgia
was caused by nothing more mysterious than this: the attempt to sleep in a
room where another person’s breathing was audible. Sleeping in the same
room as another person belonged with his Melanesian self. In England it
simply didn’t happen. But it was restful, the rise and fall of breath, like the
wash of waves round the prow of the boat, and gradually, as the light
thinned, he drifted off to sleep.

He woke to find Siegfried kneeling by his bed. The window was open,

the curtains lifting in the breeze. A trickle of bird-song came into the room.

In a half-embarrassed way, Siegfried said, ‘I seem to have talked an

awful lot of rubbish last night.’ He looked cold and exhausted, but calm. ‘I
suppose I had a fever?’

Rivers didn’t reply.
‘Anyway, I’m all right now.’ Diffidently, he touched Rivers’s sleeve. ‘I

don’t know what I’d do without you.’

A week later Rivers was sitting in his armchair in front of the fire, feeling
physically tired in an almost sensuous way. This was a rare feeling with
him, since most days produced a grating emotional exhaustion which was
certainly not conducive to sleep. But he had been flying, which always tired
him out physically, and he’d seen Siegfried a lot calmer and happier than he
had recently been, though still very far from well.

Prior was the mystery. Prior had missed an appointment, something he’d

never done before, and Rivers wasn’t sure what he should do about it. There
was little he could do except drop Prior a line expressing his continued
willingness to help, but there had been some suggestion that Prior worried
about the degree of his dependence. If he had decided to break off the
association there was nothing Rivers could – or should – do about it. He
wouldn’t come now. He was over two hours late.

Rivers was just thinking he really must make the effort to do something

when there was a tap on the door, and the maid came in. ‘There’s a Mr Prior
to see you,’ she said, sounding doubtful, for it was very late. ‘Shall I tell
him –’

‘No, no. Ask him to come up.’
He felt very unfit to cope with this, whatever it was, but he buttoned his

tunic and looked vaguely around for his boots. Prior seemed to be climbing
the stairs very quickly, an easy, light tread quite unlike his usual step. His
asthma had been very bad on his last visit. He had paused several times on
the final flight of stairs and even then had entered the room almost too
breathless to speak. The maid must have misheard the name, that or –

Prior came into the room, pausing just inside the door to look round.
‘Are you all right?’ Rivers asked.

‘Yes. Fine.’ He looked at the clock and seemed to become aware that the

lateness of the hour required some explanation. ‘I had to see you.’

Rivers waved him to a chair and went to close the door.
‘Well,’ he said, when Prior was settled. ‘Your chest’s a lot better.’
Prior breathed in. Testing. He looked hard at Rivers and nodded.
‘You were going to go to the prison last time we spoke,’ Rivers said. ‘To

see Mrs Roper. Did you go?’

Prior was shaking his head, though not, Rivers thought, in answer to the

question. At last he said, in a markedly sibilant voice, ‘I didn’t think you
would have pretended.’

‘Pretended what?’ Rivers asked. He waited, then prompted gently, ‘What

am I pretending?’

‘That we’ve met before.’
Momentarily, Rivers closed his eyes. When he opened them again Prior

was grinning. ‘I thought of saying, “Dr Rivers, I presume?” ’

‘If we haven’t met before, how did you know me?’
‘I sit in.’ Prior spread his hands. ‘I sit in. Well, let’s face it, there’s not a

lot of choice, is there? I don’t know how you put up with him. I couldn’t.
Are you sure it’s a good idea to let him get away with it?’

‘With what?’
‘With being so cheeky.’
‘The sick have a certain licence,’ Rivers said dryly.
‘Oh, and he is sick, isn’t he?’ Prior said earnestly, leaning forward. ‘Do

you know, I honestly believe he’s getting worse?’

A long silence. Rivers clasped his hands under his chin. ‘Do you think

you could manage to say “I”?’

‘ ’Fraid not. No.’
The antagonism was unmistakable. Rivers was aware of having seen

Prior in this mood before, in the early weeks at Craiglockhart. Exactly this.
The same incongruous mixture of effeminacy and menace.

‘You know, it’s really quite simple,’ Prior went on. ‘Either we can sit

here and have a totally barren argument about which pronouns we’re going
to use, or we can talk. I think it’s more important to talk.’

‘I agree.’
‘Good. Do you mind if I smoke?’
‘I never do mind, do I?’
Prior was patting his tunic pockets. ‘I’ll kill him,’ he said smiling. ‘Ah,

no, it’s all right.’ He held up a packet of cigars. ‘I’ve got him trained. He
used to throw them away.’

‘What would you like to talk about?’
A broad smile. ‘I thought you might have some ideas.’
‘You say you “sit in”. Does that mean you know everything he knows?’
‘Yes. But he doesn’t know anything I know. Only it’s … it’s not quite as

neat as that. Sometimes I see things he can’t see, even when he’s there.’

‘Things he doesn’t notice?’
‘Doesn’t want to notice. Like for example he hates Spragge. I mean, he

has perfectly good reasons for disliking him, but what he feels goes a long
way beyond that. And he knows that, and he doesn’t know why, even
though it’s staring him in the face. Literally. Spragge’s like his father.’

‘Like his own – like Spragge’s father?’
‘No. Well, he may be. How would I know? Like Billy’s father. I mean, it’s

a really striking resemblance, and he just doesn’t see it.’ Prior paused,
puzzled by some quality in Rivers’s silence. ‘You see what I mean?’

‘His father?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you really saying he’s not your father?’
‘Of course he isn’t. How could he be?’
‘How could he not be? In the end one body begets another.’
Prior’s expression hardened. ‘I was born two years ago. In a shell-hole in

France. I have no father.’

Rivers felt he needed time to think. A week would have been about right.

He said, ‘I met Mr Prior at Craiglockhart.’

‘Yes, I know.’
‘He mentioned hitting Billy. Was that a frequent occurrence?’
‘No. Oddly enough.’
‘How do you know?’

‘I’ve told you. I know everything he knows.’
‘So you have access to his memories?’
‘Yes.’
‘And you also have your own memories.’
‘That’s right.’
‘Why “oddly”?’
A blank look.
‘You said it was odd his father didn’t beat him.’
‘Just because when you look at the relationship you think there must

have been something like that. But there wasn’t. Once his parents were
having a row and he went downstairs and tried to get between them, and his
father picked him up and threw him on the sofa. Only, being a bit the worse
for wear, he missed the sofa and hit the wall.’ Prior laughed. ‘He never went
down again.’

‘So he just used to lie in bed and listen.’
‘No, he used to get up and sit on the stairs.’
‘What was he feeling?’
‘I’m not good on feelings, Rivers. You’d better ask him.’
‘Does that mean you don’t know what he was feeling?’
‘Angry. He used to do this.’ Prior banged his clenched fist against the

palm of the other hand. ‘PIG PIG PIG PIG. And then he’d get frightened, I
suppose he was frightened that if he got too angry he’d go downstairs. So
he fixed his eyes on the barometer and blotted everything out.’

‘Then what happened?’
‘Nothing. He wasn’t there.’
‘Who was there?’
Prior shrugged his shoulders. ‘I don’t know. Somebody who didn’t care.’
‘Not you?’
‘No, I told you –’
‘You were born in a shell-hole.’ A pause. ‘Can you tell me about it?’
An elaborate shrug. ‘There isn’t much to tell. He was wounded. Not

badly, but it hurt. He knew he had to go on. And he couldn’t. So I came.’

Again that elusive impression of childishness. ‘Why were you able to go

on when he couldn’t?’

‘I’m better at it.’
‘Better at … ?’
‘Fighting.’
‘Why are you better?’
‘Oh, for God’s sake –’
‘No, it isn’t a stupid question. You’re not taller, you’re not stronger,

you’re not faster … you’re not better trained. How could you be? So why
are you better?’

‘I’m not frightened.’
‘Everybody’s frightened sometimes.’
‘I’m not. And I don’t feel pain.’
‘I see. So you didn’t feel the wound?’
‘No.’ Prior looked at Rivers, narrowing his eyes. ‘You don’t believe a

bloody word of this, do you?’

Rivers couldn’t bring himself to reply.
‘Look.’ Prior drew strongly on his cigar, until the tip glowed red, then,

almost casually, stubbed it out in the palm of his left hand. He leant towards
Rivers, smiling. ‘This isn’t acting, Rivers. Watch the pupils,’ he said,
pulling down the lid of one eye.

The room filled with the smell of burning skin.
‘And now you can have your little blue-eyed boy back.’
A withdrawn, almost drugged look, like extreme shock or the beginning

of orgasm. Then, abruptly, the features convulsed with pain, and Prior, teeth
chattering uncontrollably, raised his shaking hand and rocked it against his
chest.

‘I haven’t got any pain-killers,’ Rivers said. ‘You’d better drink this.’

Prior took the brandy and held out his other hand for Rivers to complete

the dressing. ‘Aren’t you going to tell me what happened?’ he said.

‘You burnt yourself.’
‘Why?’

Rivers sighed. ‘It was a dramatic gesture that went wrong.’
He’d decided not to tell Prior about the loss of normal sensation. It was a

common symptom of hysterical disorders, but knowledge of it would only
serve to reinforce Prior’s belief that the alternating state of consciousness
was a monster with whom he could have nothing in common.

‘What was he like?’ Prior asked.
‘What were you like? Bloody-minded.’
‘Violent?’
‘Well, yes. Obviously,’ Rivers said, indicating the burn.
‘No, I meant –’
‘Did you take a swing at me? No.’ Rivers smiled. ‘Sorry.’
‘You make it sound as if it’s something I want.’
Rivers was thinking deeply. ‘I think that’s true,’ he said, knotting the

ends of the bandage.

‘No. Why should I want it? It’s creating bloody havoc.’
‘You know, Billy, the really interesting thing about tonight is that you

turned up in the other state. I mean that while in the other state you still
wanted to keep the appointment.’

‘What did you call me?’
‘Billy. Do you mind? I –’
‘No, it’s just that it’s the first time. Did you know that? Sassoon was

Siegfried. Anderson was Ralph. I noticed the other day you called Manning
Charles. I was always “Prior”. In moments of exasperation I was Mister
Prior.’

‘I’m sorry, I –’ Oh, God, Rivers thought. Prior was incapable of

interpreting that as anything other than snobbery. And perhaps it had been.
Partly. Though it had been more to do with his habit of sneering
suggestiveness. ‘I’d no idea you minded.’

‘No, well, you’re not very perceptive, are you? Anyway, it doesn’t

matter.’ He stood up. ‘I’d better be off.’

‘You can’t go now, the trains have stopped. And, in any case, you’re in

no state to be on your own. You’d better sleep here.’

Prior hesitated. ‘All right.’

‘I’ll make up the bed.’
Rivers saw Prior settled for the night, then went to his own room, telling

himself it would be fatal, at this late hour, to attempt any assessment of
Prior’s situation. That must wait till morning. But the effort of not thinking
about Prior proved almost equally disastrous, for he drifted off into a half-
dreaming state, the only condition, apart from feverish illness, in which he
had normal powers of visualization. He tossed and turned, scarcely aware of
his surroundings, while persistent images floated before him. France.
Craters, a waste of mud, splintered trees. Once he woke and lay looking
into the darkness, faintly amused that his identification with his patients
should have reached the point where he dreamt their dreams rather than his
own. He heard the church bell chime three, and then sank back into his half-
sleep. This was a dreadful place. Nothing human could live here. Nothing
human did. He was entirely alone, until, with a puckering of the surface, a
belch of foul vapours, the mud began to move, to gather itself together, to
rise and stand before him in the shape of a man. A man who turned and
began striding towards England. He tried to call out, no, not that way, and
the movement of his lips half woke him. But he sank down again, and again
the mud gathered itself into the shape of a man, faster and faster until it
seemed the whole night was full of such creatures, creatures composed of
Flanders mud and nothing else, moving their grotesque limbs in the
direction of home.

Sunlight was streaming into the room. Rivers lay thinking about the

dream, then switched his thoughts to yesterday evening. In the fugue state
(though it was more than that) Prior had claimed to feel no pain and no fear,
to have been born in a shell-hole, to have no father. Presumably no
relationships that pre-dated that abnormal birth.

To feel no pain and no fear in a situation that seemed to call for both was

not impossible, or even abnormal. He’d been in such a state himself, once,
while on his way to the Torres Straits, suffering from severe sunburn, severe
enough to have burnt the skin on his legs black. He’d lain on the deck of a
ketch, rolling from side to side as waves broke across the ship, in constant
pain from the salt water that soaked into his burns, vomiting helplessly,

unable to stand or even sit up. Then the ketch had dragged her anchor and
they’d been in imminent danger of shipwreck, and for the whole of that
time he’d moved freely, he hadn’t vomited, he’d felt no pain and no fear. He
had simply performed coolly and calmly the actions needed to avert danger,
as they all had. After they’d landed, his legs had hurt like hell and he’d once
more been unable to walk. He’d been carried up from the beach on a litter,
and had spent the first few days seeing patients from his sick bed, shuffling
from the patient to the dispensing cupboard and back again on his bottom.
He smiled to himself, thinking Prior would like that story. Physician, heal
thyself.

Other people had had similar experiences. Men had escaped from danger

before now by running on broken legs. But Prior had created a state whose
freedom from fear and pain was persistent, encapsulated, inaccessible to
normal consciousness. Almost as if his mind had created a warrior double, a
creature formed out of Flanders clay, as his dream had suggested. And he
had brought it home with him.

Rivers, thinking over the previous evening, found that he retained one

very powerful impression. In Prior’s speech and behaviour there had been a
persistent element of childishness. He’d said, He was wounded. Not badly,
but it hurt. He knew he had to go on. And he couldn’t. So I came. So I came.
The simplicity of it. As if one were talking to a child who still believed in
magic. And on the stairs. What happened then? Nothing. He wasn’t there. It
was like a toddler who believes himself to be invisible because he’s closed
his eyes. And that extraordinary claim: I have no father. Surely behind the
adult voice, there was another, shrill, defiant, saying, He’s not my Dad? At
any rate it was a starting-point. He could think of no other.

Rivers had not thought Prior would appear for breakfast, but no sooner had
he sat down himself than the door opened and Prior came in, looking
dejected, and in obvious pain. ‘How did you sleep?’ Rivers asked.

‘All right. Well, I got a couple of hours.’
‘I’ve asked the girl to bring us some more.’
‘It doesn’t matter, I’m not hungry.’

‘Well, at least have some coffee. You ought to have something.’
‘Yes, thanks, but then I must be going.’
‘I’d rather you stayed. For a few days. Until things are easier.’
‘I wouldn’t dream of imposing on you.’
‘You wouldn’t be “imposing”.’
‘All right,’ Prior said at last. ‘Thank you.’
The maid arrived with a second tray. Rivers was amused to see Prior

devour the food with single-minded concentration, while he sipped milky
coffee and read The Times. ‘I’ve got an hour before I need go to the
hospital,’ he said, when Prior had finished. ‘Do you feel well enough?’

When they were settled in chairs beside the desk, Rivers said, ‘I’d like to

go back quite a long way.’

Prior nodded. He looked too exhausted to be doing this.
‘Do you remember the house you lived in when you were five?’
A faint smile. ‘Yes.’
‘Do you remember the top of the stairs?’
‘Yes. It’s no great feat, Rivers. Most people can.’
Rivers smiled. ‘I walked into that one, didn’t I? Do you remember what

was there?’

‘Bedrooms.’
‘No, I mean on the landing.’
‘Nothing, there wasn’t … No, the barometer. That’s right. The needle

always pointed to stormy. I didn’t think that was funny at the time.’

‘Do you remember anything else about it?’
‘No.’
‘What did you do when your father came in drunk?’
‘Put my head under the bedclothes.’
‘Nothing else?’
‘I went down once. He threw me against the wall.’
‘Were you badly hurt?’
‘Bruised. He was devastated. He cried.’
‘And you never went down again?’

‘No. I used to sit on the landing, going PIG PIG PIG PIG.’ He made as if

to pound his fist against the other palm, then remembered the burn.

‘Where were you exactly? Leaning over the banisters?’
‘No, I used to sit on the top step. If they started shouting I’d shuffle a bit

further down.’

‘And where was the barometer in relation to you?’
‘On my left. I hope this is leading somewhere, Rivers.’
‘I think it is.’
‘It was a bit like a teddy-bear, I suppose. I mean it was a sort of

companion.’

‘Can you imagine yourself back there?’
‘I’ve said I –’
‘No, take your time.’
‘All right.’ Prior closed his eyes, then opened them again, looking

puzzled.

‘Yes?’
‘Nothing. It used to catch the light. There was a street lamp …’ He

gestured vaguely over his shoulder. ‘This is going to sound absolutely mad.
I used to go into the shine on the glass.’

A long silence.
‘When it got too bad. And I didn’t want to be there.’
‘Then what happened? Did you go back to bed?’
‘I must’ve done, mustn’t I? Look, if you’re saying this dates back to then,

you’re wrong. The gaps started in France, they got better at Craiglockhart,
they started again a few months ago. It’s nothing to do with bloody
barometers.’

Silence.
‘Say something, Rivers.’
‘I think it has. I think when you were quite small you discovered a way

of dealing with a very unpleasant situation. I think you found out how to put
yourself into a kind of trance. A dissociated state. And then in France,
under that intolerable pressure, you rediscovered it.’

Prior shook his head. ‘You’re saying it isn’t something that happens. It’s

something I do.’

‘Not deliberately.’ He waited. ‘Look, you know the sort of thing that

happens. People lose their tempers, they burst into tears, they have
nightmares. They behave like children, in many respects. All I’m
suggesting is that you rediscovered a method of coping that served you well
as a child. But which is –’

‘I went into the shine on the glass.’
Rivers looked puzzled. ‘Yes, you said.’
‘No, in the pub, the first time it happened. The first time in England. I

was watching the sunlight on a glass of beer.’ He thought for a moment.
‘And I was very angry because Jimmy was dead, and … everybody was
enjoying themselves. I started to imagine what it would be like if a tank
came in and crushed them. And I suppose I got frightened. It was so vivid,
you see. Almost as if it had happened.’ A long pause. ‘You say it’s self-
hypnosis.’

‘I think it must be. Something like that.’
‘So if I could do it and tell myself to remember in theory that would fill

in the gaps. All the gaps, because I’d bring all the memories back with me.’

‘I don’t know if that’s the right thing to do.’
‘But in theory it would work.’
‘If you could become sufficiently aware of the process, yes.’
Prior was lost in thought. ‘Is it just remembering?’
‘I don’t think I know what you mean.’
‘If I remember is that enough to heal the split?’
‘No, I don’t think so. I think there has to be a moment of … recognition.

Acceptance. There has to be a moment when you look in the mirror and say,
yes, this too is myself.’

‘That could be difficult.’
‘Why should it be?’
Prior’s lips twisted. ‘I find some parts of me pretty bloody unacceptable

even at the best of times.’

The sadism again. ‘There was nothing I saw or heard last night that

would lead me to believe anything … terrible might be happening.’

‘Perhaps you’re just not his type.’
‘ “Mister Prior.” ’
A reluctant smile. ‘All right.’
Rivers stood up. ‘I think we’ve got as far as we can for the moment.

Don’t spend the day brooding, will you? And don’t get depressed. We’ve
made a lot of progress. It’ll do you much more good to have a break. Here,
you’ll need this.’ Rivers went to his desk, opened the top drawer, and took
out a key. ‘I’ll tell the servants to expect you.’

TWENTY

Prior woke with a cry and lay in the darkness, sweating, disorientated,
unable to understand why the grey square of window was on his right,
instead of opposite his bed as it should have been. He’d been with Rivers
for over a fortnight and yet he still had these moments when he woke and
couldn’t remember where he was. Footsteps came padding to his door.

‘Are you all right?’ Rivers’s voice.
‘Come in.’ Prior put the lamp on. ‘I’m sorry I woke you.’
‘You cried out. I couldn’t think what it was.’
‘Yes, I know, I’m sorry.’
They looked at each other. Prior smiled. ‘Shades of Craiglockhart.’
‘Yes,’ Rivers said. ‘We’ve done this often enough.’
‘You were on duty then. Go on, get back to bed. You need the rest.’
‘Will you be able to get back to sleep?’
‘Oh, yes, I’ll be all right.’ He looked at Rivers’s exhausted face. ‘And

you certainly should. Go on, go back to bed.’

The dream had been about Mac, Prior thought, as the door closed behind

Rivers. He couldn’t remember it clearly, only that it had been full of
struggling animals and the smell of blood. Rivers seemed to think it was a
good sign that his nightmares had moved away from the war, back into his
childhood, but they were no less horrifying, and in any case they were still
about the war, he knew they were. Rivers made him talk endlessly about his
childhood, particularly his early childhood, the rows between his parents,
his own fear, the evenings he’d spent at the top of the stairs, listening,
words and blows burnt into him till he could bear it no longer, and decided
not to be there. He could still not remember what happened in the childhood
gaps, though now he remembered that there had been gaps, though only

when he was quite small. Once, in sheer exasperation, he’d asked Rivers
how he was getting on with his own gap, the darkness at the top of his own
stairs, but Rivers had simply smiled and pressed on. One always thought of
Rivers as a gentle man, but Prior sometimes wondered why one did.
Relentless might have been a better word.

The nightmares, though, were not about the rows between his parents.

The nightmares were about Mac. And that was strange because most of his
memories of Mac were pleasant.

An expanse of gritty asphalt. A low building with wire cages over the

windows. Smells of custard and sweaty socks. The singing lesson, Monday
morning, straight after Assembly, with Horton prowling up and down the
aisles, swishing his cane against his trouser leg, listening for wrong notes.
His taste had run to sentimental ballads, ‘The Lost Chord’ a firm favourite.
This was the time Mr Hailes was inculcating a terror of masturbation, with
his lectures on Inflamed Organs and the exhaustion which followed from
playing with them. Horton sat down at the piano and sang in his manly
baritone:

I was seated one day at the organ
Weary and ill at ease.

Prior gave an incredulous yelp of laughter, one or two of the others

sniggered, Mac guffawed. The piano faltered into silence. Horton stood up,
summoned Mac to the front of the room and invited him to share the joke.
‘Well?’ said Horton. ‘I’m sure we could all do with being amused.’

‘I don’t think you’d think it was funny, sir.’
Mac was savagely caned. Prior was let off. Horton had heard Prior laugh

too, he was sure of it, but Prior, thanks to his mother’s scrimping and
saving, was always well turned out. Shirts ironed, shoes polished, he looked
like the sort of boy who might get a scholarship, as indeed he did, thanks
partly to Father Mackenzie’s more robust approach to organ playing.
Bastard, Prior thought, as Horton’s arm swung.

Years later, after witnessing the brutalities of trench warfare, he still

thought: Bastard.

At the time he had been determined on revenge. Angrier on Mac’s behalf

than he would ever have been on his own.

Horton was a man of regular habits. Precisely twenty minutes before the

bell rang for the end of the dinner break, he could be seen trekking across
the playground to the masters’ lavatory. Not for him the newspaper the boys
had to make do with. Bulging from one side of his jacket, like a single tit,
was a roll of toilet-paper. He marched across the yard with precise military
tread, almost unnoticed by the shouting and running boys. Humour in the
playground was decidedly scatological, but Horton’s clockwork shitting
was too old a joke to laugh at.

One dinnertime, posting Mac where he could see the main entrance to the

school, Prior went in on a recce. Next day he and Mac slipped into the
lavatory and locked the door of one of the cubicles. Prior lit a match,
applied it to the wick of a candle, shielded the flame with both hands until it
burned brightly, and fixed it in its own wax to a square of plywood.

Prompt to the minute, Mr Horton entered. He was puzzled by the locked

cubicle. ‘Mr Barnes?’

Prior produced a baritone grunt of immense effort and Horton said no

more. Not even that constipated grunt tempted them to giggle. Horton’s
beatings were no laughing matter. They waited in silence, feeling the rise
and fall of each other’s breath. Then, slowly, Prior lowered the candle into
the water that ran beneath the lavatory seat. It was one long seat, really,
though the cubicles divided it. The candle flickered briefly, but then the
flame rose up again and burnt steadily. Prior urged it along the dark water,
and it bobbed along, going much faster than he’d thought it would. Mac
was already unbolting the door. They ran across the playground, to where a
game of High Cockalorum was in progress (by arrangement) and hurled
themselves on top of the heap of struggling boys.

Behind them, candle flame met arse. A howl of pain and incredulity, and

Horton appeared, gazing wildly round him. No use him looking for signs of
guilt. He inspired such terror that guilt was written plain on every one of the
two hundred faces that turned towards him. In any case there was dignity to
be considered. He limped across the playground and no more was heard.

Once he was safely out of sight, Prior and Mac went quietly round the

corner to the forbidden area by the pile of coke and there they danced a
solemn and entirely silent dance of triumph.

And why am I bothering to recall such an incident in so much detail,

Prior asked himself. Because every memory of friendship I come up with is
a shield against Hettie’s spit in my face, a way of saying of course I
couldn’t have done it. What surprised him now was how innocent he’d felt
when Beattie first mentioned Hettie’s belief that he’d betrayed Mac. ‘I
didn’t do it,’ he’d said automatically, with total assurance, for all the world
as if he could answer for every minute of his waking life. Only on the train
coming back to London had he forced himself to accept that it was possible
he’d betrayed Mac. Or at any rate that it was impossible for him to deny it.

Since then he’d gained one fact from Rivers that filled him with fear. He

now knew that in the fugue state he’d denied that his father was his father.
If he was prepared to deny that – a simple biological fact after all – what
chance did pre-war friendships have? Rivers had hesitated visibly when
telling him what his other state had said, and yet Prior’s reaction to it had
been more complicated than simple rejection or denial. To say that one had
been born in a shell-hole is to say something absurdly self-dramatizing.
Even by my standards, Prior thought wryly. Yet if you asked anybody
who’d fought in France whether he thought he was the same person he’d
been before the war, the person his family still remembered, the
overwhelming majority – no, not even that, all of them, all of them would
say no. It was merely a matter of degree. And one did feel at times very
powerfully that the only loyalties that actually mattered were loyalties
forged there. Picard clay was a powerful glue. Might it not, applied to pre-
war friendships with conscientious objectors, be an equally powerful
solvent?

Not in this state, he reminded himself. In this state he’d risked court

martial for Beattie’s sake, copying out documents that incriminated
Spragge. But then Beattie was a woman, and couldn’t fight. His other self
might be less tolerant of healthy strapping young men spending the war

years trying to disrupt the supply of ammunition on which other lives
depended.

But Mac, he thought. Mac.
He did eventually drift off to sleep, and woke three hours later, to find the

room full of sunshine. He peered sleepily at his watch, then reached for his
dressing-gown. Rivers, already shaved and fully dressed, was sitting over
the remains of breakfast. ‘It seemed better to let you sleep,’ he said. ‘I’m
afraid the coffee’s cold.’

‘Did you get back to sleep?’
‘Yes.’
Lying hound, thought Prior. He drank the cold coffee as he shaved and

dressed. Rivers was waiting by the desk. For a moment Prior felt rebellious,
but then he looked at Rivers and saw how tired he was and thought, my
God, if he can manage it, I can. He sat down, and the familiar position, the
light falling on to Rivers’s face, made him aware that he’d taken a decision.
‘I’m going to see Mac,’ he said.

Silence. ‘I think the reason I’m not making any progress is that … there’s

a there’s th-there’s oh, for Christ’s sake.’ He threw back his head. ‘There’s a
barrier, and I think it’s something to do with him.’

‘Finding out one fact about your behaviour over the past few weeks isn’t

going to change anything.’

‘I think it might.’
Another long silence. Rivers shifted his position, ‘Yes, I do see that.’
‘And although I see the point, I mean, I see how important it is to get to

the root of it, I do need to be functioning now. Somehow going over what
happened with my parents just makes me feel like a sort of lifelong
hopeless neurotic. It makes me feel I’ll never be able to do anything.’

‘Oh, I shouldn’t worry about that,’ Rivers said. ‘Half the world’s work’s

done by hopeless neurotics.’

This was accompanied by an involuntary glance at his desk. Prior

laughed aloud. ‘Would you like me to help you with any of it?’

Rivers smiled. ‘I was thinking of Darwin.’

‘Like hell. Why don’t you let me do that?’ Prior asked, pointing to a

stack of papers on the desk. ‘You’re just typing it out, aren’t you? You’re
not altering it.’

‘It’s very kind of you, but you couldn’t read the writing. That’s why I

have to type it. My secretary can’t read it either.’

‘Let’s have a look. Do you mind?’ Prior picked up a sheet of paper.

‘Rivers, do you realize this is the graphic equivalent of a stammer? I mean,
whatever it is you couldn’t say, you certainly didn’t intend to write it.’

Rivers pointed his index finger. ‘You’re getting better.’
Prior smiled. Without apparent effort, he read a sentence aloud: Thus, a

frequent factor in the production of war neurosis is the necessity of restraint
of the expression of dislike or disrespect for those of superior rank. ‘There’s
no hope for me, then, is there? I wonder why you bother.’ He pushed Rivers
gently off the chair. ‘Go on, you get on with something else.’

Rivers shook his head. ‘Do you know, nobody’s ever done that before.’
‘I’m good at breaking codes.’
‘Is that a boast?’
‘No. Pure terror.’

As Rivers turned the corner, he saw a man leaving Sassoon’s room. They
met face to face in the narrow corridor, and stopped.

‘Dr Rivers?’
‘Yes.’
‘Robert Ross.’
They shook hands. After a few pleasantries about the weather, Ross said,

‘I don’t know whether Siegfried’s talked about the future at all?’

‘I believe he has various plans. Obviously he’s in no state to do anything

very much at the moment.’

‘Gosse has some idea he could be useful in war propaganda, you know.

Apparently Siegfried told him his only qualification for the job was that
he’d been wounded in the head.’

They laughed, united by their shared affection for Siegfried, then said

goodbye. Rivers was left with the impression that Ross had wanted to tell

him something, but had thought better of it.

Siegfried was sitting up in bed, a notepad on his knees. ‘Was that you

talking to Ross?’

‘Yes.’
‘He looks ill, doesn’t he?’
He looked worse than ‘ill’. He looked as if he were dying. ‘It’s difficult

to tell when you don’t know the person.’

‘I shan’t be seeing him next week. He’s off to the country.’
Rivers sat down by the bed.
‘I’ve been trying to write to Owen,’ Sassoon said. ‘You remember Owen?

Little chap. Used to be in the breakfast-room selling the Hydra. ’

‘Yes, I remember. Brock’s patient.’
‘Well, he sent me a poem and I praised it to to the skies and now it’s been

passed round …’ Siegfried pulled a face. ‘Nobody else likes it. And now I
look at it again I’m not. sure either. The fact is …’ he said, putting the pad
on his bedside table, ‘my judgement’s gone. And not just for Owen’s work.
I thought I’d done one or two good things, but when I look at them again
they’re rubbish. In fact, I don’t think I’ve done anything good since I left
Craiglockhart.’

Rivers said carefully, ‘You think that at the moment because you’re

depressed. Give yourself a rest.’

‘Am I depressed?’
‘You know you are.’
‘I don’t know what point there is in it anyway. What’s an antiwar poet

except a poet who’s dependent on war? I thought a lot of things were
simple, Rivers, and …’ A pause. ‘Eddie Marsh came to see me. He thinks
he can find me a job at the Ministry of Munitions.’

‘What do you think about that?’
‘I don’t know.’
Rivers nodded. ‘Well, you’ve got plenty of time.’
‘I don’t even know whether I’m going back to France. Am I?’
‘I shall do everything I can to prevent it. I don’t think anybody expects

you to go back this time.’

‘I never regretted going back, you know. Not once.’ He sat up suddenly,

clasping his arms round his knees. ‘You know what I’d really like to do? Go
to Sheffield and work in a factory.’

‘In a factory?’
‘Yes, why not? I don’t want to spend the rest of my life wrapped up in the

sort of cocoon I was in before the war. I want to find out about ordinary
people. Workers.’

‘Why Sheffield?’
‘Because it’s close to Edward Carpenter.’
Silence.
‘Why not?’ Siegfried demanded. ‘Why not? I did everything anybody

wanted me to do. Everything you wanted me to do. I gave in, I went back.
Now why can’t I do something that’s right for me?’

‘Because you’re still in the army.’
‘But you say yourself nobody expects –’
‘That’s a very different matter from a General Discharge. I see no

grounds for that.’

‘Does it rest with you?’
‘Yes.’ Rivers got up and walked to the window. He had hoped this time

to be able to use his skills unambiguously for Siegfried’s benefit. Instead,
he was faced with the task of putting obstacles in the way of yet another
hare-brained scheme, because this was another protest, smaller, more
private, less hopeful, than his public declaration had been, but still a protest.

Behind him Siegfried said, ‘There was a great jamboree in the park

yesterday. Bands playing.’

Rivers turned to look at him. ‘Of course, I was forgetting. August 4th.’
‘They were unveiling some sort of shrine to the dead. Or giving thanks

for the war, I’m not sure which. There’s a Committee for War Memorials.
One of the committees Robbie had to resign from. Can’t have the Glorious
Dead commemorated by a sodomite. Even if some of the Glorious Dead
were sodomites.’

‘You’re very bitter.’

‘And you’re right, it’s no good. You can ride anger.’ Siegfried raised his

hands in a horseman’s gesture, forefingers splayed to take the reins. ‘I don’t
know what you do with bitterness. Nothing, probably.’

Rivers caught and held a sigh. ‘There’s something I want to say. In my

own defence, I suppose. If at any time you’d said to me, “I am a pacifist. I
believe it’s always and in all circumstances wrong to kill”, I … I wouldn’t
have agreed with you, I’d’ve made you argue the case every step of the
way, but in the end I’d’ve done everything in my power to help you get out
of the army.’

‘You don’t need a defence. I told you, I never regretted going back.’
‘But then you have to face the fact that you’re still a soldier.’ Rivers

opened his mouth, looked down at Siegfried, and shut it again. ‘You know,
you really oughtn’t to be lying in bed on a day like this. Why don’t you get
dressed? We could go out.’

Siegfried looked at his tunic, hanging on the back of the door. ‘No,

thanks, I’d rather not.’

‘You haven’t been dressed since you arrived.’
‘I can’t be bothered to dazzle the VADs.’
‘Dazzle? Isn’t that a bit conceited?’
‘Fact, Rivers.’ Siegfried smiled. ‘One of life’s minor ironies.’
Rivers walked across the room, took Siegfried’s tunic from the peg and

threw it on to the bed. ‘Come on, Siegfried. Put it on. You can’t spend the
rest of your life in pyjamas.’

‘I can’t spend the rest of my life in that either.’
‘No, but you have to spend the rest of the war in it.’
For a moment it looked as if Siegfried would refuse. Then, slowly, he

pushed back the covers and got out of bed. He looked terrible. White.
Twitching. Exhausted.

‘We needn’t go far,’ Rivers said.
Slowly, Sassoon started to put on the uniform.

It was easier for Prior to arrange a visit to Mac than he had expected. He
still had Ministry of Munitions headed notepaper, having taken a pile with

him when he cleared his desk. But probably even without it, the uniform,
the wound stripe, the earnestly expressed wish to save an old friend from
the shame of pacifism, would have been enough to get him an interview.

Mac was sitting on his plank bed, his head in his hands.
Prior said, ‘Hello, Mac.’
The hands came down. Mac looked … as people do look who’ve had

repeated disagreements with detention camp guards.

‘On your feet,’ the guard said.
‘No,’ Prior said sharply. ‘Leave us.’
The man looked startled, but obeyed. It was a relief when the door

clanged shut behind him. Prior had been dreading a situation where Mac
refused to salute him, and the guards spent the next half hour bouncing his
head off the wall.

‘Well,’ Prior said.
No chair. No glass in the window. A smell of stale urine from the bucket,

placed where it could be seen from the door. And behind him … yes, of
course. The eye.

‘I didn’t expect to see you,’ Mac said. Neither his voice nor his manner

was friendly, but he showed no obvious rancour. Perhaps, like a soldier,
he’d become accustomed to the giving and receiving of hard, impersonal
knocks. There was no room for emotion in this.

‘At least they’ve given you a blanket.’
Mac was naked underneath the blanket and the cell was cold even in

summer.

‘For your visit. It goes when you go.’
Prior sat down at the foot of the plank bed and looked around him.
‘One of the main weapons, that,’ said Mac conversationally. ‘Marching

you about the place naked. Especially since they don’t give you any paper
to wipe yourself with and the food in here’s enough to give a brass monkey
the shits.’ He waited. ‘The arsehole plays a major part in breaking people
down, did you know that?’

‘You look as if they’ve worked you over.’

‘Work? Pleasure. One of them …’ Mac raised his forearm. ‘Hang your

towel on it.’

‘Is that over now?’
‘The beatings? They’re over when I give in.’
A uniform was lying, neatly folded, on the end of the bed.
‘Can I ask you something, Billy? Do you talk about the war in the

trenches? I don’t mean day-to-day stuff, pass the ammunition, all that, I
mean, “Why are we fighting?” “What is it all for?” ’

‘No. We’re ’ere because we’re ’ere.’
‘Same in here.’
Prior looked puzzled. ‘There’s nobody to talk to. ’
Mac smiled. ‘Morse code on the pipes. I take it I can rely on you not to

tell the CO?’

‘Of course.’
‘ “Of course”, Billy?’
‘It wasn’t me.’
Mac smiled and shook his head. ‘Why come here if you’re going to say

that? Why come at all? I don’t know. Do you just want to see what you’ve
done?’

Prior opened his mouth for a second denial, and closed it again. ‘I’ve got

something for you,’ he said, digging into his tunic pocket and bringing out
two bars of chocolate. He watched Mac’s pupils flare, then go dead. ‘Yes, I
know. It’s contaminated. I’ve touched it.’ He held the chocolate out, using
his body to screen Mac from the eye. ‘But you have to survive.’

Mac aligned himself exactly with Prior so that he could take the

chocolate without being seen. ‘That’s true.’

‘You’d better eat it. They’ll search you.’
‘They won’t. That would mean doubting your integrity. An officer and a

gentleman, no less. All the same I think I will have some.’ He slit the paper
with his fingernail, broke off a piece and started to eat. The movements of
his mouth and throat were awkward. Hunger had turned eating into an act
as private as bishop-bashing. Prior tried to look away, but there was nothing
to look at. His eyes could only wander round the cell and return to Mac.

‘Nine steps that way. Seven this. I do a lot of walking.’
‘How long are you in for?’
‘Solitary? Ninety days. If I reoffend – which is my intention – back in.

Another ninety.’

Prior looked down at his hands. ‘And no letters?’
‘No.’
Mac managed a smile between mouthfuls. ‘Why did you come, Billy?’
‘To find out what you thought.’
‘About you? What a self-centred little shit you are.’
‘Yes.’
‘I didn’t believe it. The sergeant in Liverpool told me it was you, I mean,

he mentioned your name. He was standing on my scrotum at the time, so, as
you can imagine, it had a certain ring to it. I still didn’t believe it, but the
more I thought about it the more I thought, yes.’ Mac was speaking intently,
and yet almost indifferently, as if he didn’t care whether Prior listened or
not. Perhaps speaking at all was merely a way of salving his pride, of
distracting Prior’s attention while the all-important business of devouring
the chocolate went on. ‘And then I thought, he told you. Do you remember
in the cattle shed I asked you what you’d have done if you’d found a
deserter in Hettie’s scullery and you said, “I’d turn him in. What else could
I do?” And then I remembered a story I heard, about a man who found a
snake half dead and nursed it back to life. He fed it, took care of it. And
then he let it go. And the next time they met it bit him. And this was a very
poisonous snake, he … knew he was going to die. And with his last gasp,
he said, “But why? I saved you, I fed you, I nursed you. Why did you bite
me?” And the snake said, “But you knew I was a snake.” ’

A long silence. Prior moved at last. ‘It’s a good story.’
‘It’s a fucking marvellous story. Only …’
Prior waited. ‘Only what?’
‘Now shall I be greedy, and eat it all?’
‘Make sure of it. I would.’
‘I probably hate you a lot less than you think. Not that I’d say we were

bosom pals exactly, in fact if I meet you after the war I’ll probably try to

kill you …’ He smiled and shook his head. ‘Was it all a lie about wanting to
help Beattie?’

‘No, it was all true.’
‘You know what I’d like? I’d like you to look me straight in the eye, put

on that phoney public school accent of yours, and say, yes I told the police
where to find you, and I’m not ashamed of that. It was my duty.’

‘I can’t.’
Mac was watching him intently. ‘Then I don’t understand. I thought

you’d finally worked out whose side you were on.’

‘There was never any doubt about that,’ Prior said, raising his sleeve.

‘People who wear this. More or less with pride.’ He stood up. ‘I shan’t say
I’m sorry.’

Mac looked up at him. ‘Don’t. Chocolate’s too precious to bring back.’
Prior knocked, and waited impatiently for the guard to appear. He

realized the painted eye must be looking straight at his belt buckle.
Surreptitiously, he put his finger into the hole until it touched cool glass.
Towers’s eye, he remembered, lying in the palm of his hand, had been
warm.

The guard appeared and, with one backward glance, he followed him

along the iron landing and down the stairs. He had the rest of the day to get
through before he could talk to Rivers, but he was glad of that. It was right
that the first confusion and pain should be borne alone. He did not doubt for
a moment that Mac’s story was true – Mac had no reason to lie. Though he
still had no memory of doing it, he had betrayed Mac.

He remembered an occasion when he’d held out a shaking hand to

Rivers, stuttering something totally incoherent about Towers’s eye, how the
memory of holding it in his hand had become a talisman, a reminder of
where the deepest loyalties lie. That was still true. And yet he could not
justify what he had done to Mac. Even if his other self hated Mac for
refusing to fight, for trying to bring the munitions factories to a halt, it
remained true that in arranging to meet Mac he had in effect offered him a
safe conduct – for Beattie’s sake. Even leaving aside the childhood
friendship, there had been a personal undertaking given in the present,

trusted in the present, betrayed in the present. He could not, whether to
satisfy Mac or console himself, say, ‘I did my duty.’ What had happened
was altogether darker, more complex than that.

Drill was going on in the yard outside. Familiar shouts, the slurrying and

stamping of boots, lines of regimented bodies moving as one. In the front
rank a conchie was being ‘persuaded’ to take part. That is, he was being
manhandled first into one position, then another. ‘Marking time’ consisted
of being kicked on the ankles by the guards on either side. No attempt was
made to hide what was happening. Presumably it was taken for granted that
an officer would approve.

Prior watched for a while, then turned away.

TWENTY-ONE

A freshening breeze, blowing across the Serpentine, fumbled the roses,
loosening red and yellow petals that lay on the dry soil or drifted across the
paths. Rivers and Sassoon had been wandering along beside the lake for no
more than fifteen minutes, but already Sassoon looked tired.

‘I’ve been very good,’ he said. ‘The last few days. Out of bed and

dressed before breakfast.’

‘Good.’
Glutinous yellow sunlight, slanting between the trees, cast their shadows

across the water.

‘Do you remember me telling you about Richard Dadd?’ Siegfried asked

suddenly. ‘Drowning his father in the Serpentine?’

‘Yes,’ Rivers said, and waited for more. When Siegfried didn’t speak, he

asked, ‘Should I be hanging on to a tree?’

Siegfried smiled. ‘No, not you.’
The deck-chairs beside the lake were empty, bellying in the wind, but on

a sunny sheltered bank soldiers home on leave sat or lay entwined with their
girls, the girls’ summer dresses bright splashes against the khaki of their
uniforms. A woman in a black uniform appeared on the ridge and began to
make her way diagonally down the slope. As she advanced, a black beetle
toiling across the grass, the lovers drew apart, and a girl close to the path
tugged anxiously at the hem of her skirt.

‘I’ve even been to the common room,’ Siegfried said. ‘You know what

the topic of conversation was? The changes you notice when you’re home
on leave and whether any of them are for the better. And somebody said,
yes, every time you came home women’s skirts were shorter. I’m afraid it’s
not much consolation to me.’

Rivers caught a sigh. Depression and bitterness had become Siegfried’s

settled state. If he seemed better than he had when he first arrived, it was
mainly because depression – provided it hasn’t reached the point of stupor –
is more easily disguised than elation. He was actually very ill indeed.

‘I must say I’ll be glad to be out of London,’ Siegfried went on. ‘Have

you heard any more about this convalescent home?’

‘Oh, yes. They can take you.’
‘It’s … I’m sorry, I’ve forgotten where you said it was.’
‘Coldstream. Near Berwick-on-Tweed.’
‘Is that anywhere near Scarborough? It’s just Owen’s stationed in

Scarborough.’

‘Well, it’s not near, but you could probably get there and back in a day.’

Rivers hesitated. ‘There is one thing I think you … might not like. There
has to be a Medical Board first.’

‘Yes.’
Siegfried sounded puzzled. This wasn’t the first time he’d been in

hospital: riding accident during training, trench fever, wounded, ‘shell-
shocked’ at Craiglockhart, wounded again. He knew the routine backwards.

‘At Craiglockhart,’ Rivers said.
A stunned silence. ‘No. Why Craiglockhart?’
‘Because you’re my patient. Because I want to be on the Board.’
Siegfried couldn’t take it in. ‘I can’t go back there.’
‘I’m afraid you’ve got to. It’s only for a few days, Siegfried.’
Siegfried shook his head. ‘I can’t. You don’t know what you’re asking.’
There was an empty bench a few yards further on. Rivers sat down and

indicated that Siegfried should join him. ‘Tell me, then.’

A silence during which Sassoon struggled visibly with himself.
‘Why can’t you?’ Rivers prompted gently.
‘Because it would mean admitting I’m one of them.’
Rivers felt a flare of anger, but brought it quickly under control. ‘One of

whom?’

Siegfried was silent. At last he said, ‘You know what I mean.’

‘Yes, I’m afraid I do. One of the degenerates, the loonies, the lead-

swingers, the cowards.’ He waited for a response, but Siegfried had turned
his head away. ‘You know, Siegfried, sometimes I … reproach myself with
having exercised too great an influence on you. At a time when you were
vulnerable and … perhaps needed to be left alone to come to your own
decision in your way.’ Rivers shook his head. ‘Well, I shan’t be doing that
again. If you still think like that I haven’t influenced you at all. I haven’t
managed to convey a single bloody thing. Not a bloody thing.’ He looked
out over the lake. The wind blew a dark ripple across the surface like goose
pimples spreading across skin. ‘Perhaps we’d better be getting back.’

‘Not yet.’
‘You have to go back to Craiglockhart. I’m sorry, I’ll make it as short as I

can, but you have to go.’

Siegfried nodded. He was sitting with his big hands clasped between his

knees. ‘All right. But you do see what I’m trying to say? I know you find it
offensive, but … It’s not just admitting I’m one of them now, it’s admitting
I always was. Don’t you see?’

‘Yes, and it’s nonsense. One day I’m going to give you a copy of your

admission report. “No physical or mental signs of any nervous disorder.” If
you’re tormenting yourself with the idea that your protest was some kind of
symptom, well, for God’s sake, stop. It wasn’t. It was an entirely valid, sane
response to the situation we’re all in.’ He paused. ‘Wrong, of course.’

‘When I was in France I used to think of it as breakdown. It was easier

than –’

‘Than remembering what you believed?’
‘Yes.’ Siegfried looked down at his hands. ‘Now I just feel as if a trap’s

been sprung.’ A slight laugh. ‘Not by you, I don’t mean by you. But it has,
hasn’t it? It’s absolutely fall circle. Literally back to the beginning. Only
worse, because now I belong there.’

‘Three days. I promise.’
Siegfried got up. ‘All right.’
Rivers remained seated for a moment. He wanted to say, if there is a trap,

I’m in it too, but he couldn’t. ‘Come on,’ he said, standing up. ‘Let’s go

back.’

The bomb site had been tidied up, Prior saw. Rubble cleared away, the
pavements swept clean of white dust, the houses on either side of the gap
shored up. A cold wind whistled through the gap, disturbing the trees,
whipping up litter into whirlpools that ran along the gutters. The sun blazed
in the windows of the houses opposite the gap, turning the far side of the
square into a wall of fire.

Prior was early for his appointment and dawdled along, noticing what on

his previous visit, walking with Charles Manning through the spring dark,
he had not noticed: that many of the elegant houses had dingy basements,
like white teeth yellow round the gums.

He pressed the bell of Manning’s house and turned slightly away,

expecting to have to wait, but the door was opened almost immediately and
by Manning himself, so quickly indeed that he must have been hovering in
the hall. He might have appeared anxious, but his smile, his whole bearing,
gave the impression of impulsive informality.

‘It’s all right, I’ve got it,’ he said to somebody over his shoulder, and

stood aside to let Prior in. ‘I’m glad you could come. I thought of waiting
till we were both back at work, but –’

‘I’m not going back,’ Prior said quickly.
‘Ah.’
The living-room door stood open. No dust-sheets now.
‘Oh, yes, come and see,’ Manning said, noticing the direction of his

glance.

They went in. A smell of furniture polish and roses.
‘You found a builder, then,’ Prior said, looking up at the door.
‘Yes. I must say he didn’t inspire a lot of confidence, but he seems to

have done all right. As far as one can tell.’ Manning patted the wall. ‘I’ve
got a sneaking suspicion the wallpaper might be holding the plaster up.’

They found themselves staring rather too long at the place where the

crack had been, and glanced at each other, momentarily at a loss. ‘Come
and sit down,’ Manning said.

A bowl of red and yellow roses stood in the fireplace where before there

had been scrumpled newspaper dusted with soot. No mirror either – that
had been moved. The whole room had been redecorated. So much was
changed that the unyielding brocade of the sofa came as a shock. Prior
flexed his shoulders, remembering. It was almost as if the body had an
alternative store of memory in the nerve endings, for the sensation of being
held stiffly erect induced a state of sensual awareness. He looked at
Manning, and knew that he too was remembering.

‘Would you like a drink?’
Manning went across to the sideboard. Prior, noticing a book lying face

down on the floor near an armchair, reached across and picked it up. Rex v.
Pemberton Billing. It was a complete transcript of the trial. What an
extraordinary thing for Manning to be reading. Manning came back with
the drinks. ‘Is it good?’ Prior asked, holding up the book.

‘Fascinating,’ Manning said. ‘I realized while I was reading it wh-wh-

what’s actually h-happening. It’s just that people are saturated with tragedy,
they simply can’t respond any more. So they’ve decided to play the rest of
the war as farce.’

‘I can’t say I’d be prepared to fork out good money for this.’
‘I didn’t,’ Manning said, sitting down. ‘It was sent to me. By “a well-

wisher”.’

Prior raised his eyebrows. ‘Really?’
‘Oh, yes. I’ve had several little … communications.’
‘Captain Spencer came to see us, you know.’
‘ “Us”?’
‘The Intelligence Unit. I think somebody must have told him the first

question he’d be asked in court was whether he’d informed the appropriate
authorities when he discovered the Great Conspiracy. So he was scurrying
round London informing them.’ Prior laughed.

‘Did he mention any names?’
‘Good Lord, yes.’ Prior looked up and caught a fleeting expression of

anxiety. ‘Not you.’

‘No, I didn’t think that, I’m not important enough. Robert Ross?’

‘Well, yes.’
Manning nodded. ‘You say you’re not going back?’
‘There’s nothing to go back to. I went in to check my pigeonhole and …

it was like the Marie Celeste. Files gone. Lode gone.’

‘He’s …’
‘Teaching cadets. In Wales. No doubt that pleases him.’
‘Why, is he Welsh?’
‘I was being sarcastic. I shouldn’t think it pleases him in the least.

Spragge. I don’t know whether you –’

‘The informer?’
‘That’s right. He’s gone – or going, I’m not sure which – to South Africa.

All expenses paid.’

Manning hesitated. ‘I … don’t think you should feel nothing useful came

out of that. I showed Eddie Marsh your report and … he was rather
impressed actually. As I was. He thought it was … very cogently argued.
Very effective.’

‘It may have been cogently argued. It certainly wasn’t effective. She’s

still in prison.’

Manning smiled. ‘The point is –’
The french windows were thrown open, and a chubby-cheeked child

peered, blinking, into the dark interior. ‘Daddy?’

‘Not now, Robert,’ Manning said, turning round. ‘Ask Elsie.’
Manning’s face softened as he watched the child close the door carefully

behind him. His delight in his house and family was so obvious it seemed
churlish to wonder if he ever regretted the empty rooms of early spring, the
smells of soot and fallen plaster, the footsteps that had followed him
upstairs to the maids’ bedroom.

‘The point is that being able to organize an array of complicated facts and

present them succinctly is quite a rare ability. And just the sort of thing
we’re looking for in my line of work.’

‘Which is …’
‘Health and safety. To cut a long story short, I’m offering you a job.’
‘Ah.’

‘I think you might find it worth while. Since it’s basically protecting the

interests of the workers.’

Prior was in no hurry to reply. He had resigned himself, not entirely with

reluctance, to going back to Scarborough, to resuming the boring,
comfortless life of an army camp in England. At the same time he knew
Manning’s offer was one for which a great many men would have given an
arm or a leg, and not merely in the meaningless way that expression was
normally used. ‘Is Rivers behind this?’

‘No.’
Prior wasn’t sure he believed him. ‘I’m very grateful, Charles – don’t

think I don’t appreciate it – but I’m afraid I can’t accept.’

‘Why not?’
‘Sarah – that’s my girlfriend – she’s in the north. I’d be able to see quite a

lot of her if I was in Scarborough. And – that’s a big factor. And … I’m not
sure how much I want a cushy job.’

Manning hesitated. ‘It does have one very big advantage. It’s most

unlikely you’d be sent back to France. Though I suppose that’s not very
likely anyway.’

‘Oh, I don’t know.’
‘What rating are you?’
‘A4.’
‘That’s a long way from the top.’
‘With a Board in two weeks’ time.’
‘Rivers wouldn’t let it happen.’
‘Rivers has nothing to do with it. I was given my original rating on the

basis of my asthma.’

‘But he’d write to the Board if you asked him.’
‘I know. In fact I think Rivers could be quite eloquent on the subject of

my unfitness for France. The point is, he won’t be asked.’

‘How are you really?’
‘A lot better.’
Manning toyed with his glass. ‘What was the trouble exactly?’

Prior smiled, remained silent just long enough for Manning to feel

embarrassed by the intrusiveness of the question, then answered it.
‘Memory lapses. Black-outs, I suppose. They do seem to be over.’

‘Do you know what you did during them?’
‘Yes.’ Prior smiled again. ‘Nothing I don’t have a tendency to do.’
Manning became aware that he was looking almost indecently curious,

and quickly corrected his expression.

‘How about you?’ Prior said.
‘Mending. It was much harder work than I thought it would be.’
‘Rivers? Oh, yes.’
‘I mean, he’s an absolute slave-driver. And you can’t grumble because

you know he’s driving himself even harder.’

A glance of amusement and shared affection. Then Manning said, ‘You

sound almost as if you want to go back.’,

‘Yes, I suppose I do, in a way. It’s odd, isn’t it? In spite of everything – I

mean in spite of Not Believing in the War and Not Having Faith in Our
Generals and all that, it still seems the only clean place to be.’

‘Yes. My God, yes.’
They stared at each other, aware of a depth of understanding that the

surface facts of their relationship scarcely accounted for.

‘Not an option for me, I’m afraid,’ Manning added, stretching out his leg.

‘But I do know what you mean.’

‘Do you think we’re mad?’
‘Both been in the loony bin.’
‘You’d better not let Rivers hear you calling it that.’
‘I wouldn’t dare. The offer’s open for the next few days, you know,’

Manning said, putting down his glass. ‘I shan’t be seeing Marsh till –’

Prior smiled and shook his head. ‘No. Thank you, but no.’
‘You don’t think you might regret it?’
Prior laughed. ‘Charles, if I get sent back – if, if, if, if – I shall sit in a

dug-out and look back to this afternoon, and I shall think, “You bloody
fool.”’

‘Well,’ Manning said, standing up. ‘I tried.’

In the hall a maid came forward carrying Prior’s cap and cane. Prior

glanced at her: she was sallow-skinned, middle aged, about as old as his
mother, he supposed. He stared at her uniform, remembering how he’d
pressed his face into the armpits, smelling the careworn, sad smell.
Manning was saying something, but he didn’t hear what it was. He turned
to him and said, ‘Now I come to think of it, Spencer did mention other
names.’

Manning said smoothly, ‘Thank you, Alice. I’ll see Mr Prior out.’
‘Winston Churchill and Edward Marsh.’
Manning gave an astonished yelp. ‘Churchill?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then he is mad.’
‘Yes, that’s what I thought.’ Prior walked to the door, then stopped. ‘He

said Churchill and Marsh spent an entire afternoon beating each other’s
buttocks with a plaited birch.’

‘Yes.’
‘What do you mean “yes”?’
‘Churchill was Home Secretary at the time.’
‘Oh, well, that explains everything.’
‘It was a new kind of birch.’ Manning looked impatient. ‘I don’t know

the details, there’d been some sort of controversy about it. I think people
were saying it was cruel. So naturally they –’

‘Tried it out on each other.’
‘Yes.’ Manning’s expression hardened. ‘They were doing their duty.’
‘What conclusion did they reach?’
‘I think they both thought they’d had worse beatings at school.’
Prior nodded, glanced round to make sure they were unobserved, then

took hold of Manning’s pudgy cheeks and chucked them. ‘There’ll always
be an England,’ he told him and ran, laughing, down the steps.

Author’s Note

The reader may find it useful to have a brief outline of the historical events
that occurred in 1917–1918 on which this novel is based.

Beattie Roper’s story is loosely based on the ‘poison plot’ of 1917. Alice

Wheeldon, a second-hand clothes dealer living in the back streets of Derby,
was accused and convicted of having conspired to murder Lloyd George,
Arthur Henderson and other persons by poisoning. The poison, in the case
of Lloyd George, was to be administered by a curare-tipped blowdart. The
trial depositions are in the Public Record Office, Chancery Lane, and
provide a fascinating insight into the lives of absolutist pacifists on the run,
and the Ministry of Munitions agents who spied on them. Mrs Wheeldon
was convicted on the unsupported evidence of such informers and
sentenced to ten years’ hard labour, despite her insistence that the poison
she had procured was intended for the guard dogs at a detention centre.
After the war she was released, but, weakened by prison diet, hard labour
and repeated hunger strikes, died in 1919.

Friends of Alice Wheeldon by Sheila Rowbotham (Pluto Press, 1986)

contains a useful essay: ‘Rebel Networks in the First World War’.

In January 1918 the Imperialist (later the Vigilante), a newspaper owned

and edited by the MP Noel Pemberton Billing, carried an article entitled
‘The First 47,000’. It purported to be written by Pemberton Billing himself,
but in fact the author was a Captain Harold Spencer, who claimed that he
had been a British Intelligence agent at the time when he saw and read the
Black Book in the cabinet noir of ‘a certain German Prince’.

In April this article was followed by a short paragraph entitled ‘The Cult

of the Clitoris’, again purporting to be written by Pemberton Billing, and
again written by Harold Spencer. This suggested that the list of subscribers

to a private performance of Oscar Wilde’s Salome might contain many
names of the 47,000. Maud Allan, who was to dance the part of Salome,
sued Pemberton Billing for libel, since the paragraph clearly implied she
was a lesbian.

The trial was presided over by Lord Justice Darling. Pemberton Billing

defended himself. Having been identified early in the proceedings as one of
the 47,000, Darling lost control of the court.

The star defence witness was Harold Spencer. In addition to giving free

rein to his obsession with women who had hypertrophied and diseased
clitorises and therefore could be satisfied only by bull elephants, Spencer
alleged that many members of the Asquith War Cabinet had been in the pay
of the Germans, that Maud Allan was Asquith’s wife’s lover and a German
agent, that many high-ranking officers in the British army were Germans,
and that persons who had the courage and patriotism to point these facts out
were marooned on desert islands where they had to subsist on iron rations
from submarines.

Lord Alfred Douglas, another defence witness, seized the opportunity of

pursuing his personal dispute with Robert Ross, Oscar Wilde’s devoted
friend and literary executor, identifying him as ‘the leader of all the
sodomites in London’.

After six days of chaos in the courtroom and hysteria in the newspapers,

Pemberton Billing won the case and was carried shoulder-high through the
cheering crowds that had gathered outside the Old Bailey.

Later that year Harold Spencer was certified insane.
Robert Ross died of heart failure, on 5 October, aged forty-nine.
Pemberton Billing went on to have a distinguished parliamentary career.
In 1917 Siegfried Sassoon (1886–1967), after protesting against the war,

had been persuaded by his friend Robert Graves to accept a Medical Board,
which decided that he was suffering from a mental breakdown and that he
should be sent to Craiglockhart War Hospital, Edinburgh. There he came
under the care of Dr W. H. R. Rivers, FRS (1864–1922), the distinguished
neurologist and social anthropologist. At Craiglockhart, Sassoon reached
the conclusion that, although his views on the war had not changed, it was

nevertheless his duty to return to active service, where he could at least
share the suffering of his men.

After a period in Palestine he returned to France on 9 May 1918. On 13

July, returning late from a patrol, he was wounded in the scalp by a rifle
shot from one of his own NCOs; he was then sent back to England, to the
American Women’s Red Cross Hospital at Lancaster Gate. The fact that he
was ill enough for Rivers to have found it necessary to sit up with him is
recalled in a letter from Katharine Rivers to Ruth Head (unpublished letters
of the Rivers family, Imperial War Museum).

Winston Churchill’s and Edward Marsh’s devotion to duty while at the

Home Office is mentioned in Edward Marsh, Patron of the Arts: A
Biography by Christopher Hassall (Longmans, 1959).

THE GHOST ROAD

             ‘Roads’, Edward Thomas

Part One

ONE

In deck-chairs all along the front the bald pink knees of Bradford
businessmen nuzzled the sun.

Billy Prior leant on the sea-wall. Ten or twelve feet below him a family

was gathering its things together for the trek back to boardinghouse or
railway station. A fat, middle-aged woman, swollen feet bulging over lace-
up shoes, a man with a lobster-coloured tonsure – my God, he’d be
regretting it tomorrow – and a small child, a boy, being towelled dry by a
young woman. His little tassel wobbled as he stood, square-mouthed with
pain, howling, ‘Ma-a-am.’ Wet sand was the problem. It always was, Prior
remembered. However carefully you tiptoed back from that final paddle,
your legs got coated all over again, and the towel always hurt.

The child wriggled and his mother slapped him hard, leaving red prints

on his chubby buttocks. He stopped screaming, gulped with shock, then
settled down to a persistent grizzle. The older woman protested, ‘Hey, our
Louie, there’s no need for that.’ She grabbed the towel. ‘C’mon, give it
here, you’ve no bloody patience, you.’

The girl – but she was not a girl, she was a woman of twenty-five or

twenty-six, perhaps – retreated, resentful but also relieved. You could see
her problem. Married, but the war, whether by widowing her or simply by
taking her husband away, had reduced her to a position of tutelage in her
mother’s house, and then what was the point? Hot spunk trickling down the
thigh, the months of heaviness, the child born on a gush of blood – if all
that didn’t entitle you to the status and independence of a woman, what did?
Oh, and she’d be frustrated too. Her old single bed back, or perhaps a
double bed with the child, listening to snores and creaks and farts from her
parents’ bed on the other side of the wall.

She was scrabbling in her handbag, dislodging bus tickets, comb, purse,

producing, finally, a packet of Woodbines. She let the cigarette dangle wetly
from her lower lip while she groped for the matches. Her lips were plump, a
pale salmon pink at the centre, darkening to brownish red at the edges. She
glanced up, caught him looking at her, and flushed, not with pleasure – his
lust was too blatant to be flattering – but drawn by it, nevertheless, into the
memory of her unencumbered girlhood.

Her mother was helping the little boy step into his drawers, his hand a

dimpled starfish on her broad shoulder. The flare of the match caught her
attention. ‘For God’s sake, Louie,’ she snapped. ‘If you could only see how
common you look …’

Louie’s gaze hadn’t moved. Her mother turned and squinted up into the

sun, seeing the characteristic silhouette that said ‘officer’. ‘Look for the thin
knees,’ German snipers were told, but where they saw prey this woman saw
a predator. If he’d been a private she’d have asked him what the bloody hell
he thought he was gawping at. As it was, she said, ‘Nice weather we’re
having, sir.’

Prior smiled, amused, recognizing his mother’s speech, the accent of

working-class gentility. ‘Let’s hope it lasts.’

He touched his cap and withdrew, thinking, as he strolled off, that the girl

was neither a widow nor married. The way the mother’s voice had cracked
with panic over that word ‘common’ said it all. Louie’s knees were by no
means glued together, even after the child. And her mother was absolutely
right, with that fag stuck in her mouth she did look common. Gloriously,
devastatingly, fuckably common.

He ought to be getting back to barracks. He had his medical in less than

an hour, and it certainly wouldn’t do to arrive gasping. He had no business
to be drifting along the front looking at girls. But he looked anyway,
hoarding golden fuzz on a bare arm, the bluish shadow between breasts
thrust together by stays, breathing in lavender sharpened by sweat.

The blare of music inside the fairground drew him to stand in the

entrance. So far today the only young men he’d seen had been in uniform,
but here were men as young as himself in civilian dress. Munitions workers.

One of them was chatting to a young girl with bright yellow skin. He felt
the automatic flow of bile begin and turned away, forcing himself to
contemplate the bald grass. A child, holding a stick of candy-floss, turned to
watch him, attracted to the man who stood so still among all the swirl and
dazzle. He caught her looking at him and smiled, remembering the soft
cotton-wool sweetness of candy-floss that turned to clag on the roof of your
mouth. She bridled and turned away, clutching her mother’s skirt. Very
wise.

As he walked on, his smile faded. He could have been a munitions

worker, he thought. Kept out of danger. Lined his pockets. His father would
have wangled him a place in a nice safe reserved occupation, and would not
have despised him for it either, unlike many fathers. The weedy little runt
would at least have been behaving like a sensible weedy little runt, refusing
to fight in ‘the bosses’ war’. But he’d never seriously considered doing that.

Why not? he wondered now. Because I don’t want to be one of them, he

thought, remembering a munitions worker’s hand patting a girl’s bottom as
he helped her into the swing-boat. Not duty, not patriotism, not fear of what
other people would think, certainly not that. No, a kind of … fastidiousness.
Once, as a small boy, he’d slipped chewed-up pieces of fatty mutton into
the pocket of his trousers, because he couldn’t bring himself to swallow
them, and his father, when the crime came to light, had said, in tones of
ringing disgust, ‘That bairn’s too fussy to live.’ Too fussy to live, Prior
thought. There you are, nowhere near France and an epitaph already. The
thought cheered him up enormously.

By now he was walking up the hill towards the barracks, a chest-

tightening climb, but he was managing it well. His asthma was good at the
moment, better than it had been for months. All the same it might be as well
to sit quietly somewhere for a few minutes before he went into the
examination room. In the end all he could do was to turn up in a reasonable
state, and answer the questions honestly (or at least tell no lies that were
likely to be found out). The decision would be taken by other people. It
always was.

Though he had managed to take one decision himself.

His thoughts shifted to Charles Manning and the last evening they’d

spent together in London.

– Have you stopped to think what’s going to happen if you’re not sent

back? Manning had asked. Six months, at least six months, probably to the
end of the war, making sure new recruits wash between their toes.

– Might have its moments.
– Doing a hundred and one completely routine jobs, each of which could

be done equally well by somebody else. You’d be much better working at the
Ministry. I can’t promise to keep the job open.

– No, thank you, Charles.
No, thank you. He was passing the Clarence Gardens Hotel where he’d

been stationed briefly last winter before the summons to London came.
Plenty of routine jobs there. He and Owen, his fellow nut-case, had arrived
on the same day, neither of them welcomed by the CO. They’d been
assigned to ‘light duties’. Prior became an administrative dogsbody, sorting
out the battalion’s chaotic filing system. Owen fared yet worse, chivvying
the charladies, ordering vegetables, peering into lavatory bowls in search of
unmilitary stains. Mitchell had given them hell. Prior got him in the
mornings when he was totally vile, Owen in the evenings when brandy had
mellowed him slightly.

– What do you expect? Prior said, when Owen complained. He’s lost two

sons. And who shows up instead of them? Couple of twitching Nancy boys
from a loony-bin in Scotland.

Silence from Owen.
– That’s what he thinks, you know.
As he reached the entrance to the barracks, a squad of men in singlets and

shorts, returning from a cross-country run, overtook him and he stood back
to let them pass. Bare thighs streaked with mud, steam rising from sweaty
chests, glazed eyes, slack mouths, and as they pounded and panted past, he
recognized Owen at the head of the column, turning to wave.

‘Good heavens,’ Mather said, as Prior pulled off his shirt. ‘You haven’t
been getting much outdoor exercise, have you?’

‘I’ve been working at the Ministry of Munitions.’
Mather was middle aged, furrow-cheeked, sandy-haired, shrewd.
‘All right, drop your drawers. Bend over.’
They always went for the arse, Prior thought, doing as he was told. An

army marches on its stomach, and hobbles on its haemorrhoids. He felt
gloved fingers on his buttocks, separating them, and thought, Better men
than you have paid for this.

‘I see you’ve got asthma.’
There? ‘Yes, sir.’
‘Turn round.’
Another unduly intimate gesture.
‘Cough’
Prior cleared his throat.
‘I said, cough.’ The fingers jabbed. ‘And again.’ The hand changed sides.

‘Again.’

Prior was aware of wheezing as he caught his breath.
‘How long?’
Prior looked blank, then stammered. ‘S-six months, sir.’
‘Six months? But it says –’
‘I mean, the doctor told my mother I had it when I was six months old,

sir.’

‘Ah.’ Mather turned over a page of the file. ‘That makes more sense.’
‘Apparently I couldn’t tolerate milk.’
Mather looked up. ‘Awkward little bugger, weren’t you? Well, we’d

better have a listen.’ He reached for his stethoscope and came towards
Prior. ‘What were you doing at the Ministry of Munitions?’

‘Intelligence, sir.’
‘Oooh, very impressive. Catch anybody?’
Prior looked bleakly ahead of him. ‘Yes.’
‘Patrol here caught a German spy on the cliffs.’ Mather snorted, fitting

the stethoscope. ‘Tickled a local yokel with their bayonets more like.’

Prior started to say something, but Mather was listening to his chest.

After a few minutes, he straightened up. ‘Yes, you have got a bit of a

wheeze.’ His attention was caught by the scar on Prior’s elbow. He turned
the arm towards him.

‘The Somme,’ Prior said.
‘Must’ve hurt.’
‘The expression “funny bone” didn’t seem appropriate at the time.’
Mather went back to the desk, sat down. ‘Now let’s see if I’ve got this

straight. You were invalided home with shell-shock. That right? April last
year?’

‘Yes, sir.’
‘And you were sent first to Netley and then to Craiglockhart War

Hospital, where you remained till … November.’ He looked up. ‘I suppose
you get a lot of dipsomania, in places like that? Alcohol, man,’ he
explained, as Prior continued to look blank.

‘Didn’t see any, sir. If I had I’d certainly have drunk it.’
‘So what were your symptoms?’
‘I was mute, sir. Some people found it an improvement on the basic

model.’

But Mather was reading, not listening. ‘W. H. R. Rivers,’ he said. ‘I knew

him. He was two years ahead of me at Bart’s. Paralytic stammer.’

Prior looked puzzled. ‘No.’
‘Ah? Got his own voice back too. He must be good.’ He tapped a sheet of

paper. ‘The discharge report says asthma.’

‘I had two attacks while I was there.’
‘Hm.’ Mather smiled. ‘Any problems with the nerves now?’
‘No.’
‘Appetite?’
‘I could eat more than I get.’
‘So could we all, laddie. Sleeping all right?’
‘Not last night. Bloody tent leaks.’
‘Generally?’
‘I sleep all right.’
Mather sat back in his chair. ‘How did you get in?’
‘Through the flap.’

Mather’s forefinger shot up. ‘Watch it, laddie. How did you get into the

army?’

A brief struggle with temptation, ending as Prior’s struggles with

temptation usually did. ‘I lied to the doctor, Doctor.’

Surprisingly, Mather laughed, a short bark.
‘Everybody lied,’ Prior said.
‘So they did, I remember it well. I saw men who’d climbed out of the

window of the workhouse infirmary to come and enlist. Syphilis, epilepsy,
tuberculosis, rickets. One lad – little squeaky voice, not a hair on his chin,
fourteen, if that – looked me straight in the eye and swore on his mother’s
life he was nineteen.’ Mather smiled, revealing brown teeth. ‘Not one of
them got past me.’

Oh fuck.
‘Gas training,’ Mather said.
Silence.
‘Well?’
‘Terribly good idea,’ Prior said earnestly.
‘Did you go through the huts?’
‘No.’
‘You must be affected at very low concentrations?’
‘I was known as the battalion canary, sir. Partly that. Partly my pleasant,

cheerful personality.’

Mather looked at him. ‘Get dressed.’
‘The point is I managed perfectly well for three years. I didn’t once

report sick with asthma or the effects of gas.’

‘Yes, laddie.’ Mather looked unexpectedly compassionate. ‘And it might

be said you’ve done your bit.’

A twitch of the pale, proud face. ‘Not by me.’
‘And the asthma never played you up in France?’
‘Never.’
‘Two attacks in Craiglockhart. None in France. I wonder why?’
‘Open-air life suited my chest, sir.’

‘We’re not running a sanatorium, laddie. Go on, get dressed. Then you go

left along the corridor, turn left at the end, and you’ll see a row of chairs.
Wait there.’

Mather went into the adjoining room and started on his next victim. Prior

dressed, pausing to wipe the sweat off his upper lip. Like going over the
top, he thought. No, it wasn’t. Nothing was like that. Civilians seemed to
use that expression all the time now. I went a bit over the top last night, they
said, meaning they’d had a second glass of port. Prior peered into the small
looking-glass behind the wash-basin, checking the knot in his tie. If they
didn’t send him back he was going to be awfully lonely, marooned among
civilians with their glib talk. His reflection jeered, Lonely? You? Oh, c’mon,
duckie. You can always split in two. At least the Board didn’t know about
that. Or rather they didn’t, provided Rivers hadn’t written to them. A
paralytic stammer. Not just any old stammer. Paralytic. Interesting, Prior
thought, letting himself out of the room.

The place smelled like a barracks. Well, it was a barracks, but the

Clarence Gardens Hotel, after months of army use, had not smelled
anything like this. His nose twitched, identifying armpits, feet, socks, oil,
boot-polish, carbolic soap, the last blown in bubbles between the raw
fingers of a boy scrubbing the floor. Rear-end like a truck and a face to
match, but Prior produced a charming smile, nevertheless, because he owed
it to himself, and strode on, leaving a trail of muddy footprints across the
wet floor.

One man waiting. Owen.
‘The O’s and the P’s again,’ Owen said, picking up a pile of John Bulls

from the vacant chair and dumping them on the floor. They’d last waited
together like this at Craiglockhart, at their final board.

Prior jerked his head at the door. ‘Who’s in?’
‘Nesbit. He’s been in thirty minutes.’
‘What’s taking so long?’
Owen hesitated, then mouthed, ‘Clap.’
Well, Prior thought, that was one way of getting out of it. And then he

thought, You uncharitable bastard, how do you know he got it deliberately?

And then he thought, Well, I am an uncharitable bastard.

‘I won’t take long,’ Owen said. ‘I’m GS already.’
‘Then why are you here?’
‘Irregular heartbeat. I added my name to the draft, but when I had the

final medical they promptly took it off again.’

‘You added your name to the draft? Sure it’s your heart that’s wrong?’
Owen laughed, and looked away. ‘I’d just heard Sassoon was wounded.

It seemed the only thing to do.’

Yes, Prior thought, it would. He remembered them at Craiglockhart: the

incongruous pair, Sassoon so tall, Owen so short, the love Owen hadn’t
been able, or hadn’t bothered, to disguise.

‘Also,’ Owen said, ‘I was getting pretty tired of being regarded as “a

twitching Nancy boy from a loony-bin in Scotland”.’

Prior smiled. ‘I applied it to myself as well.’
Owen had cut himself shaving, he noticed. Blood in shiny brown flakes

filled the crease between cheek and earlobe.

‘Do you think you’ll be all right this time?’
Owen said cheerfully, ‘Oh, yes, I should think so. I’ve been doing a lot of

running.’

‘I saw.’
The door opened. Nesbit came out, looking distinctly pale.
Owen stood up. ‘Do they want me in?’
‘I don’t know.’
Owen sat down again. ‘Worse than the dentist, isn’t it?’ he said, forcing a

laugh.

A few minutes later he was called in. Prior sat listening to the murmur of

voices, thinking what bloody awful luck it was to have got Mather. Some
MOs would send a corpse back if you propped one up in front of them,
particularly now when every man was needed for the latest in a long line of
‘one last pushes’. Abruptly, before he was ready, the door opened and Owen
came out. Owen started to speak and then, realizing the Board’s secretary
had followed him, raised a thumb instead. From which Prior concluded that
Owen’s chances of ending the year deaf, blind, dumb, paralysed, doubly

incontinent, insane, brain damaged or – if he were lucky – just plain dead
had enormously increased. We’re all mad here, he thought, following the
secretary into the room, saluting, sitting down in the solitary chair facing
the long table, meeting every eye confidently but not too confidently. And
really, amidst the general insanity, was it fair to penalize a man merely
because in conditions of extreme stress he tended to develop two separate
personalities? You could argue the army was getting a bargain.

After the first few questions he began to relax. They were concentrating

on his asthma and the risks of exposure to gas, and to those questions he
had one totally convincing answer: he had been out to France three times
and on none of these occasions had he been invalided back to base or home
to England because of asthma. Trench fever, yes; wound, yes; shell-shock,
yes. Asthma, no.

When the last question had been asked and answered, Mitchell drew the

papers together in front of him, and patted them into shape. Prior watched
the big white hands with their sprinkling of age spots and the shadowing of
hair at the sides.

‘Right,’ Mitchell said at last. ‘I think that’s all …’
The pause was so long Prior began to wonder whether he would ever

speak again.

‘Your asthma’s worse than you’re letting on, isn’t it?’ He tapped the

discharge report. ‘According to this anyway.’

‘It was bad at Craiglockhart, sir. But I can honestly say it was worse there

than it ever was in France.’

‘Well,’ Mitchell said. ‘Results posted this afternoon.’ He smiled briskly.

‘You won’t have long to wait.’

TWO

Crude copies of Tenniel’s drawings from Alice in Wonderland decorated
one end of Ward Seven, for in peacetime this had been a children’s hospital.
Alice, tiny enough to swim in a sea of her own tears; Alice, unfolding like a
telescope till she was nine feet tall; Alice, grown so large her arm protruded
from the window; and, most strikingly, Alice with the serpent’s neck,
undulating above the trees.

Behind Rivers, a creaking trolley passed from bed to bed: the patients’

breakfast dishes were being cleared away.

‘Come on, Captain McBride, drink up,’ Sister Roberts said, crackling

past. ‘We’ve not got all day, you know.’

This was said loudly, for his benefit. He’d arrived on the ward too early,

before they were ready for him.

‘You knew him, didn’t you?’ Elliot Smith said, coming up to him,

looking over his shoulder.

Rivers looked puzzled.
‘Lewis Carroll.’
‘Oh, yes. Yes.’
‘What was he like?’
Rivers spread his hands.
‘Did you like him?’
‘I think I wanted him very much to like me. And he didn’t.’ A slight

smile. ‘I’m probably the last person to ask about him.’

Elliot Smith pointed to the snake-neck. ‘That’s interesting, isn’t it?’
‘Ready now, Captain Rivers,’ Sister Roberts said. They watched her

march off.

‘ “Captain,” ’ Elliot Smith murmured.

‘I’m in the dog house,’ Rivers said. ‘I only get “Dr” when she approves

of me.’

Behind the screens Ian Moffet lay naked from the waist down. He looked

defiant, nervous, full of fragile, ungrounded pride. His skin had a greenish
pallor, though that might merely be the reflection of light from the green
screens that surrounded his bed, creating a world, a rock pool full of secret
life. Rivers pushed one screen back so that light from the window flooded
in. Now Moffet’s legs, stretched out on the counterpane, were the dense
grey-white of big, cheap cod. Muscles flabby but not wasted, as they would
have been in a case of spinal injury, though he’d been unable to walk for
more than three months, an unusually long time for hysterical paralysis to
persist.

The history was, in one sense, simple. Moffet had fallen down in a

‘fainting fit’ while on his way to the Front, shortly after hearing the guns for
the first time. When he recovered consciousness he could not move his legs.

‘It was ridiculous to expect me to go to the Front,’ he’d said in their first

interview. ‘I can’t stand noise. I’ve never been able to stay in the same room
as a champagne cork popping.’

You poor blighter, Rivers had thought, startled out of compassion. More

than any other patient Moffet brought the words ‘Pull yourself together,
man’ to the brink of his lips.

‘Why didn’t you apply for exemption?’ he’d asked instead.
Moffet had looked at him as if he’d just been accused of eating peas from

a knife. ‘One is not a pacifist.’

He’d tried everything with Moffet. No, he hadn’t. He’d not, for example,

tried attaching electrodes to Moffet’s legs and throwing the switch, as Dr
Yealland would certainly have done by now. He’d not held tubes of radium
against his skin till it burnt. He’d not given him subcutaneous injections of
ether. All these things were being done to get men back to the Front or keep
them there. He’d not even hypnotized him. What he’d actually tried was
reason. He didn’t like what he was going to do now, but it had become
apparent that, until Moffet’s reliance on the physical symptom was broken,
no more rational approach stood any chance of working.

‘You understand what I’m going to do?’ he asked.
‘I know what you’re going to do.’
Rivers smiled. ‘Tell me, then.’
‘Well, as far as I can make out, you … er … intend to draw …’ Minute

muscles twitched round Moffet’s nose and lips, giving him the look of a
supercilious rabbit. ‘Stocking tops? On my legs, here.’ With delicately
pointed fingers he traced two lines across the tops of his thighs. ‘And then,
gradually, day by day, you propose to … um … lower the stockings, and as
the stockings are unrolled, so to speak, the … er … paralysis will …’ A
positive orgy of twitching. ‘Retreat.’

‘That’s right.’
Moffet’s voice drooled contempt. ‘And you have no doubt this procedure

will work?’

Rivers looked into the pupils of his eyes so intently that for a moment he

registered no colour except black. ‘None whatsoever.’

Moffet stared at him, then turned away.
‘Shall we get started?’ Rivers lifted Moffet’s left leg and began to draw a

thick black line on to his skin, two inches below the fold of the groin.

‘I hope that’s not indelible.’
‘Of course it’s not. I’m going to have to wash it off in the morning.’
Rivers looked at the length of Moffet’s legs and tried to calculate how

long it was going to take him to reach the toes. Two weeks? And that would
have to include Sundays, which put paid to his plans for a weekend in
Ramsgate with his sisters. Katharine was far from well; in fact she was
virtually bedridden and for much the same reasons as Moffet. Rivers
frowned with concentration as he carried the pencil line under the thigh.
Moffet’s flabby skin kept snagging the pencil point.

Elliot Smith’s comment on the serpent: ‘That’s interesting.’ It was no

more than he’d thought himself. Evidently snakes had lost the right to be
simply snakes. Dodgson had hated them, a quite exceptionally intense
hatred, and the woods round Knowles Bank were full of them, particularly
in spring when you regularly stumbled across knots of adders, as many as
thirty or forty sometimes, drowsy from their winter sleep. They’d gone for a

walk once, the whole family, Ethel and Katharine holding Dodgson’s hands,
himself and Charles trailing behind, imitating his rather prissy, constipated-
hen walk, though careful not to let their father catch them at it. They
rounded a bend, Dodgson and the girls leading, and there, right in the centre
of the path, was a snake. Zigzag markings, black on yellow, orange eyes,
forked tongue flickering out of that wide, cynical (anthropomorphic
rubbish) mouth. Dodgson went white. He sat down, collapsed rather, on a
tree stump and the girls fanned him with their hats, while father caught the
snake in a cleft stick and threw it far away, a black s against the sky
unravelling as it fell.

Later he went back to look for it, spending an hour searching through the

flamy bracken, but only found a cast-off skin draped over a stone,
transparent, the brilliant markings faded, the ghost of a snake.

Why was the devil shown in the form of a snake? he asked his father,

because it was the only question he knew how to ask.

Later there’d been other questions, other ways of finding answers. Once,

while he was home for the weekend, Katharine sat on an adder, and ran
home screaming. He’d gone straight out and killed it, or so he thought,
intending to dissect it at Bart’s. Finding the family in the drawing-room,
he’d tipped the snake out on to the hearthrug to show them, and found
himself confronted by an adder that was very far from dead. The girls
screamed and hid behind the sofa, while he and his father and Charles
trampled it to death.

How do you think about an incident like that now? he wondered,

beginning the second circle. Probably every generation thinks the world of
its youth has been changed past recognition, but he thought for his
generation – Moffet’s too, of course – the task of making meaningful
connections was quite unusually difficult. A good deal of innocence had
been lost in recent years. Not all of it on battlefields.

He lowered Moffet’s leg and walked round the bed. From here he could

see, through a gap in the screens, the drawings of Alice. Suddenly, with
Moffet’s paralysed leg clamped to his side as he closed the circle, Rivers
saw the drawings not as an irrelevance, left over from the days when this

had been a children’s ward, but as cruelly, savagely appropriate. All those
bodily transformations causing all those problems. But they solved them
too. Alice in Hysterialand.

‘There,’ he said, putting the leg down. ‘Now can you prop yourself up a

bit?’

Moffet raised himself on to his elbows and looked down at his legs.

‘Quite apart from anything else,’ he said, enunciating each word distinctly,
‘it looks bloody obscene.’

Rivers looked down. ‘Ye-es,’ he agreed. ‘But it won’t when we get below

the knee. And tomorrow the sensation in this area’ – he measured it out
with his forefingers – ‘will be normal.’

Their eyes met. Moffet would have liked to deny it was possible, but his

gaze shifted. He’d already begun to invest the circles with power.

Rivers touched his shoulder. ‘See you tomorrow morning,’ he said.
Quickly, he ran downstairs and plunged into the warren of corridors,

wondering if he’d have time to read the files on the new patients before the
first of them arrived for his appointment. He glanced at his watch, and
something about the action tweaked his memory. Now that would be
‘interesting’, he thought. An innocent young boy becomes aware that he is
the object of an adult’s abnormal affection. Put bluntly, the Rev. Charles
Do-do-do-do-Dodgson can’t keep his hands off him, but – thanks to that
gentleman’s formidable conscience – nothing untoward occurs. The years
pass, puberty arrives, friendship fades. In the adult life of that child no
abnormality appears, except perhaps for a certain difficulty in integrating
the sexual drive with the rest of the personality (What do you mean
‘perhaps’? he asked himself), until, in middle age, the patient begins to
suffer from the delusion that he is turning into an extremely large,
eccentrically dressed white rabbit, forever running down corridors
consulting its watch. What a case history. Pity it didn’t happen, he thought,
pushing the door of his consulting-room open, it would account for quite a
lot.

He thought, sometimes, he understood Katharine’s childhood better than

his own.

Cheshire Cat! Cheshire Cat! he and Charles had chanted as she sat

enthroned in Dodgson’s lap, grinning from ear to ear. The nickname, so
casually bestowed, had lasted all her childhood, and his only consolation
was she hadn’t minded it a bit. Poor Kath, she’d had little enough to smile
about since.

Files, he told himself. He took them out of his briefcase and started to

read. Geoffrey Wansbeck, twenty-two years old. Wansbeck had – well,
murdered, he supposed the word would have to be – a German prisoner, for
no better reason (Wansbeck said) than that he was feeling tired and irritable
and resented having to escort the man back from the line. For … eight
months – in fact, nearer ten – he’d experienced no remorse, but then, while
in hospital recovering from a minor wound, he’d started to suffer from
hypnagogic hallucinations in which he would wake suddenly to find the
dead German standing by his bed. Always, accompanying the visual
hallucination, would be the reek of decomposition. After a few weeks the
olfactory hallucination began to occur independently, only now the smell
seemed to emanate from Wansbeck himself. He was convinced others could
smell it and, no matter how often he was reassured, avoided close contact
with other people as much as he could.

Hmm. Rivers took off his glasses and rubbed his eyes, swinging his chair

round to face the window. He’d had a bad night and was finding it difficult
to concentrate. Late August sunlight, the colour of cider, streamed into the
room, and he was suddenly seized by sadness, a banal, calendar-dictated
sadness, for the past summer and all the summers that were past.

At dinner one evening Mr Dodgson had leant across to mother and said,

‘I l-l-l-love all ch-ch-ch-ch-’

‘Train won’t start,’ Charles had whispered.
‘Children, M-Mrs R-Rivers, as l-l-l-long as they’re g-g-g-girls.’
He had looked down the table at the two boys, and it had seemed to

Rivers that the sheer force of his animosity had loosened his tongue.

‘Boys are a mistake.’
Charles hadn’t minded that Mr Dodgson disliked them, but he had. Mr

Dodgson was the first adult he’d met who stammered as badly as he did

himself, and the rejection hurt.

‘Are w-we a m-m-m-m-mistake?’ he’d asked his mother at bedtime. ‘W-

why are w-we?’

‘Of course you’re not a mistake,’ his mother had said, smoothing the hair

back from his forehead.

‘So w-why d-d-does h-he s-say w-w-w-w-we are?’
‘I expect he just likes girls more than boys.’
‘B-b-b-b-but w-w-why d-d-does he?’

Wansbeck’s eyes were inflamed, whether from crying or because of his cold
was difficult to tell.

Rivers waited for the latest paroxysm of coughing to pass. ‘You know we

don’t have to do this now. I can equally well see you when you’re feeling
better.’

Wansbeck wiped his raw nose on the back of his hand. ‘No, I’d rather get

it over with.’ He shifted in his seat, flicking his tongue over cracked lips,
and gazed fretfully round the room. ‘Do you think we could have the
window open?’

Rivers looked surprised – in spite of the sunshine, the wind was bitingly

cold – but he got up and opened the window, realizing, as he did so, that
Wansbeck’s request was prompted by his fear of the smell. The breeze
sucked the net curtains through the gap. Rivers went back to his chair and
waited.

‘I used a bayonet I found on a corpse. We were going through a wood,

and there’d been a lot of heavy fighting. I remember the man I took it from,
he’d died with an expression of absolute agony on his face. Big man, very
dark, lot of blood round his nose, black, covered with flies, a sort of …
buzzing moustache. I remember him better than the man I killed. He was
walking ahead of me, I couldn’t do it in his back, so I shouted at him to turn
round. He knew straight away. I stuck it in, and he screamed, and … I
pulled it out, and stuck it in. And again. And again. He was on the ground
and it was easier. He kept saying, “Bitte, Bitte,” and putting his hands …’

Wansbeck raised his own, palms outwards. ‘The odd thing was I heard it in
English. Bitter, bitter. I knew the word, but I didn’t register what it meant.’

‘Would it have made a difference?’
A puckering of the lips.
‘What were you thinking about immediately before you picked up the

bayonet?’

‘Nothing.’
‘Nothing at all?’
‘I just wanted to go to sleep, and this bastard was stopping me.’
‘How long had you been in the line?’
‘Twelve days.’ Wansbeck shook his head. ‘Not good enough.’
‘What isn’t good enough?’
‘That. As an excuse.’
‘Reasons aren’t excuses.’
‘No?’
Rivers was thinking deeply. ‘What do you think I can do to help?’
‘Nothing. With respect.’
‘Oh, damn that.’
Wansbeck smiled. ‘As you say.’ He held his handkerchief to his mouth as

another fit of coughing seized him. ‘I’ll try not to give you this at least.’

Wansbeck was a man of exceptionally good physique, tall, broad-

shouldered, deep-chested. Rivers, estimating height, weight, muscular tone,
noting the tremor of the huge hands, a slight twitch of the left eyelid, was
aware, at a different level, of the pathos of a strong body broken – though
he didn’t know why the word ‘broken’ should occur to him, since,
objectively speaking, Wansbeck’s physical suffering amounted to nothing
more than a bad cold. He’d made a good recovery from his wound.

‘When did you first notice the smell?’
‘In the hospital. Look, everybody goes on about the smell. I know there

isn’t one.’ A faint smile. ‘It’s just I can still smell it.’

‘When was the first time?’
‘I was in a side ward. Three beds. One man quite bad, he’d got a piece of

shrapnel stuck in his back. He was called Jessop, not that it matters. The

other was a slight arm wound, and he was obviously getting better and I
realized there was a chance I’d be left alone with Jessop. The one who
couldn’t move. And I started to worry about it, because he was helpless and
I knew if I wanted to kill him I could.’

‘Did you dislike him at all? Jessop.’
‘Not in the least. No.’
‘So it was just the fact that he was helpless?’
Wansbeck thought a moment. ‘Yes.’
‘Were you left alone with him?’
‘Yes.’
‘What happened?’
A sound midway between a snort and a laugh. ‘It was a long night.’
‘Did you want to kill him?’
‘Yes –’
‘No, think. Did you want to kill him or were you afraid of wanting to kill

him?’

Silence. ‘I don’t know. What difference does it make?’
‘Enormous.’
‘Afraid. I think. After that I asked if I could go on to the main ward. And

to answer your question, the first time I noticed the smell was the following
morning.’ A long silence, during which he started to speak several times
before eventually saying, ‘You know when I told the doctor about not
wanting to be left alone with Jessop, he said, “How long have you suffered
from homosexual impulses?” ’ A quick, casual glance, but Wansbeck
couldn’t disguise his anger. ‘I didn’t want to to to fuck him, I wanted to kill
him.’

‘Does it still bother you to be alone with people?’
Wansbeck glanced round the room. ‘I avoid it when I can.’
They exchanged smiles. Wansbeck put his hand up and stroked his neck.
‘Is your throat bothering you?’
‘Bit sore.’
Rivers went round the desk and felt his glands. Wansbeck stared past him

with a strained look. Evidently the smell was particularly bad. ‘Yes, they are

a bit swollen.’ He touched Wansbeck’s forehead, then checked his pulse. ‘I
think you’d be better off in bed.’

Wansbeck nodded. ‘You know, I can tell the smell isn’t real, because I

can still smell it. I’m too bunged up to smell anything else.’

Rivers smiled. He was starting to like Wansbeck. ‘Tell Sister Roberts I’ve

told you to go to bed, and would she take your temperature, please. I’ll be
up to see you later.’

At the door Wansbeck turned. ‘Thank you for what you didn’t say.’
‘And what’s that?’
‘ “It was only a boche – if it was up to me I’d give you a medal.

Nobody’s going to hang you for it.” ’

‘You mean other people have said that?’
‘Oh, yes. It never seems to occur to them that punishment might be a

relief.’

Rivers looked hard at him. ‘Self-administered?’
‘No.’
A fractional hesitation?
‘Go to bed,’ Rivers said. ‘I’ll be up in a minute.’

After Wansbeck had gone, Rivers went to close the window, and stood for a
moment watching boys playing in the square. High sharp cries, like
seagulls.

‘Are w-we a m-m-m-m-mistake? W-why are w-we?’
‘Of course you’re not a mistake,’ his mother had said, smoothing the hair

back from his forehead.

‘So w-why d-d-does h-he s-say w-w-w-w-we are?’
‘I expect he just likes girls more than boys.’
‘B-b-b-b-but w-w-why d-d-does he?’
Rivers smiled. I know, he thought, I know. Questions, questions.
‘Boys are rough and noisy. And they fight.’
‘B-b-but you h-h-have to to to f-f-f-ight, s-s-sometimes.’
Yes.

Prior dawdled along, scuffing the sleeve of his tunic along the sea-wall,
looking out over the pale, level, filthy sands to where the waves turned.
Silence was a relief after the jabber of tongues in the mess: who was going
out with the next draft, who was up for promotion, who had been
recommended for an MC. The eyes that slid to your chest and then to your
left sleeve. The cards, the gossip, the triviality, the muck-raking, the rubbish
– he’d be glad to be shot of it all.

He was going back to France. He’d spent the evening writing to people:

Sarah, his mother, Charles Manning, Rivers. And the last letter had
reminded him of Craiglockhart, so that now he drifted along, remembering
the light flashing on Rivers’s glasses, and the everlasting pok-pok from the
tennis courts that somehow wove itself into the pattern of their speech and
silence, as Rivers extracted his memories of France from him, one by one,
like a dentist pulling teeth.

He wondered what Rivers would think of his going back. Not much.
The beach was dark below him. They were all gone, the munitions

workers and their girls, the war profiteers with stubby fingers turning the
pages of John Bull. German boats came in close sometimes. ‘Not close
enough,’ Owen had said, as they’d waited for the draft list to go up on the
wall. And he’d laughed, with that slightly alarmed look he sometimes had.

A friendly, lolling, dog-on-its-back sort of sea. You could swim in that

and not feel cold. He started to wander along with no idea of where his feet
were taking him or why. After a few minutes he rounded the headland and
looked along the half-circle of South Bay at the opposite cliffs, surmounted
by their white Georgian terraces. Some of his brother officers were up there

now, living it up at the most expensive of the town’s oyster bars. He’d been
there himself two nights ago, but tonight he didn’t fancy it.

Closer at hand were souvenir shops, coconut-shies, swing-boats, funny

hats, the crack of rifle fire, screams of terror from the haunted house where
cardboard skeletons leapt out of the cupboards with green electric light
bulbs flashing in the sockets of their skulls. If they’d seen … Oh, leave it,
leave it.

Behind him, along the road that led to the barracks, were prim boarding-

houses with thick lace curtains that screened out the vulgarity of day-
trippers. You couldn’t go for a walk anywhere in Scarborough without
seeing the English class system, laid out before you in all its full, intricate
horror.

He heard a gasp of pain beside him, and a hand clutched his sleeve. A

red-haired woman, flashily dressed and alone. ‘Sorry, love, it’s these shoes.’
She smiled brightly at him. ‘I keep going over on the heel.’

She rested her arms beside his on the railings, her right elbow lightly

touching his sleeve.

‘No, thanks.’
‘Why, you been offered summat?’
She muttered on. It had come to summat if a decent woman couldn’t have

a rest without being … pestered. And who did he think he was anyway?
Couple of bits of gold braid, they think their shit smells of violets –

‘I don’t pay.’
A whoop of laughter. ‘Well, you’re certainly not getting it free.’
He smiled, allowing a note of pathos to creep into his voice. ‘I’m going

back to France next week.’

‘Aw, piss off.’
For a moment he hoped she might take her own advice, but she didn’t.

They stood side by side, almost touching, but he was miles away,
remembering Lizzie MacDowell and the first day of the war. ‘Long Liz’
they called her, for, among the girls who worked Commercial Road, most of
them reared in the workhouse, Lizzie’s height – a full five feet no less –
made her a giant. She was his best friend’s mother, a fact not at the forefront

of his mind when he met her in a back alley on his way home from the pub
and told her he’d enlisted.

– Good lad! she’d said.
Lizzie was a great enthusiast for the Empire. And somehow or other he’d

gone home with her, stumbling up the passage and into the back bedroom,
until finally, in a film of cooling sweat, they’d lain together on the sagging
bed, while the bedbugs feasted and a smell of urine rose from the
chamberpot underneath. She’d told him about her regulars. One man came
every month, turned a chair upside-down and shoved each one of the four
legs in turn up his arse. Didn’t want her to do anything, she said. Just watch.

– Well, you know what a worry-guts I am. I keep thinking what’ll I do if

he gets stuck?

– Saw the bloody leg off.
– Do you mind, that’s the only decent chair I’ve got.
‘What’s so funny?’
‘Just thinking about an old friend.’
Money had not changed hands on that occasion. He’d been Lizzie’s

patriotic gesture: one of seven. Poor Lizzie, she’d been very disillusioned
when five of the seven turned out not to have enlisted at all.

‘Do you fancy a bit of company, then?’
He looked at her. ‘You don’t give up, do you?’ And then suddenly the

shrieks, the rattle of rifle fire, pub doors belching smells of warm beer were
intolerable. Anything not to have to go on being the oil bead on this filthy
water. ‘All right.’

She was telling the truth about her shoes. If she hadn’t clung to his arm

she’d have fallen over more than once as they climbed the steep steps to the
quieter streets behind the foreshore.

‘What do they call you?’ she asked, breathing port into his face.
‘Billy. You?’
‘Elinor.’
I’ll bet, he thought. ‘D’ y’ get “Nellie”?’
‘Sometimes,’ she said, her voice pinched with dignity. ‘It’s just round the

corner here.’ Perhaps she sensed he was having second thoughts for her arm

tightened. ‘ ’S not far.’

They went up a flight of steps to the door. As she fumbled with the key

he looked round, and almost stumbled over a cluster of unwashed milk
bottles, furred green.

‘Mind,’ she said. ‘You’ll have everybody out.’
The hall dark, smelling of drains and mice. A face – no more than a slit

of sallow skin and one eye – peered through a crack in the door on his left.

‘You’ll have to be quiet,’ Nellie whispered, and then, catching sight of

the face just as the door closed, yelled, ‘There’s some right nosy bastards
round here.’

They walked up the stairs, arms round each other’s waists, shoulders and

hips bumping in the narrow space, catching the breath of each other’s
laughter, until her tipsiness communicated itself to him and all doubt and
reluctance dissolved away.

She unlocked the door. A naked overhead bulb revealed a tousled bed, a

chair piled high with camisoles and stays, a wash-stand and – surprisingly
businesslike, this – a clean towel and a bar of yellow soap.

‘You won’t mind having a little wash.’
He didn’t mind. He was buggered if he’d rely on it, though.
‘Do you know,’ she said, unbuttoning her blouse, ‘I had one poor lad the

other week washed his hands?’

Prior tugged at his tie, looking around for somewhere to put his clothes,

and noticed a chair by the fireplace. Rather a grand fireplace, with a garland
of flowers and fruit carved into the mantel, but boarded up now, of course,
and a gas fire set into it. He was pulling his half-unbuttoned tunic over his
head when he noticed a smell of gas. Faint but unmistakable. Tented in dark
khaki, he fought back the rush of panic, sweat streaming down his sides, not
the gradual sweat of exercise but a sudden drench, rank, slippery, hot, then
immediately cold. He freed himself from the tunic and went to open the
window, looking out over sharp-angled, moonlit roofs to the sea. He told
himself there was no reason to be afraid, but he was afraid. All the usual
reactions: dry mouth, wet armpits, skipping heart, the bulge in the throat
that makes you cough. Tight scrotum, shrivelled cock. Jesus Christ, he was

going to have to put a johnny on that, talk about a kid in its father’s
overcoat. He heard his own voice, awkward, sounding younger than he felt.
‘I’m afraid this isn’t going to work.’

‘Aw, don’t say that, love, it’ll be al –’
Phoney warmth. She was used to pumping up limp pricks.
‘No, it won’t.’
He came back into the room and looked at her. Her hair had fallen across

her shoulders, not in a cloudy mass but in distinct coils, precise crescents,
like you see on the floor of a barber’s shop. He picked up one of the coils
and wound it round his fingers. Red stripes marked the places where the
bones of her stays bit into the skin. Catching the direction of his glance, she
rubbed ineffectually at them. He wasn’t behaving as clients generally
behaved, and any departure from the usual run of things made her nervous.
Two people’s fear in the room now. But her gaze remained steady,
surprisingly steady, when you thought that only five minutes ago she’d been
too tipsy to walk straight. Now … well, she’d had a few, but she certainly
wasn’t drunk. Perhaps she needed the mask of drunkenness more than she
needed drink.

‘Have I got a spot on the end of me conk or what?’
‘No,’ he said stupidly.
They stared at each other.
‘Wouldn’t hurt to lie down,’ she said.
He finished undressing, reached out and tentatively took the weight of

her breasts in his hands. So far, he realized, he hadn’t had the shopping list,
the awful litany that started whenever you met a woman’s eyes in Covent
Garden or the Strand. ‘… and five bob extra to suck me tits.’

‘Two quid,’ she said, reading his thoughts. ‘On the table there.’
He got into bed, telling himself the cold damp patch under his left

buttock was imagination. He put his hand down. It wasn’t. Dotted here and
there on the sheet were tiny coils of pubic hair. He wondered whose spunk
he was lying in, whether he knew him, how carefully she’d washed
afterwards. He groped around in his mind for the appropriate feeling of

disgust, and found excitement instead, no, more than that, the sober
certainty of power.

All the men who’d passed through, through Scarborough, through her, on

their way to the Front … And how many of them dead? As she squatted
over the bowl to wash – a token affair, he was glad to see – he felt them
gathering in the hall, thronging the narrow stair, pressing against the door.
Halted on the threshold only by the glare of light.

‘Can we have that out?’ he said. ‘It’s in my eyes.’
And now they were free to enter. Waiting, though, till the springs creaked

and sagged beneath her weight. His hands were their hands, their famished
eyes were his. Pupils strained wide in starlight fastened on a creamy belly
and a smudge of dark hair. He stroked and murmured and her fingers closed
round him. ‘There you are, you see. I told you it’d be all right.’

He fucked her slowly. After a while her hands came round and grasped

his arse, nails digging in, though whether this was a pretence to hurry things
along or a genuine flicker of response he couldn’t tell. He was aware of
their weight on him, his arms were braced to carry it …

And then something went wrong. He looked down at the shuttered face

and recognized the look, recognized it not with his eyes but with the
muscles of his own face, for he too had lain like this, waiting for it to be
over. A full year of fucking, before he managed to come, on the narrow
monastic bed, a crucifix above it, on the far wall – he would never forget it
– a picture of St Lawrence roasting on his grid. The first time Father
Mackenzie knelt, holding him round the waist, crying, We really touched
bottom that time, didn’t we? One way of putting it, but we? What the fuck
did he mean by we? Later – though not much later, he’d been a forward
child – he’d begun to charge, not so much resorting to prostitution as
inventing it, for he knew of nobody else who got money that way. First
Father Mackenzie. Then others.

The only way not to be her was to hate her. Narrowing his eyes, he

blurred her features, ran them together into the face they pinned to the
revolver targets. A snarling, baby-eating boche. But they didn’t want that,

the men who used his eyes and hands as theirs. He felt them withdraw, like
a wave falling back.

All right, then, for me. He lowered his forehead on to hers, knowing

without having to be told that she wouldn’t let him kiss her. She wriggled
beneath him, and he lifted his weight. Slowly and deliberately, she put her
index finger deep into her mouth, and brought it out with a startling pop,
and then – he had time to guess what she intended – scratched the small of
his back delicately so that he shivered and thrust deeper, and rammed the
finger hard up his arse. Ah, he cried, more with shock than pleasure, but
already he was bursting, spilling, falling towards her, gasping for breath,
laughing, gasping again, tears stinging his eyes as he rolled off her and lay
still. Hoist on his own petard. That had always been one of his tricks to
speed the unreasonably lingering guest.

She got up immediately and squatted over the bowl. He took the hint and

started to dress, sniffing round the fireplace as he buttoned his tunic.

‘What’s the marra with you?’
‘I thought I could smell gas.’
‘Oh that, yeh, you probably can. Tap leaks. I’m tired of telling her.’
He wouldn’t do this again, he decided, buckling his belt. It might work

for some men, but … not for him. For him, it was all slip and slither,
running across shingle. He hadn’t been sure at the end who was fucking
who. Even the excitement he’d felt at the idea of sliding in on another
man’s spunk was ambiguous, to say the least. Not that he minded ambiguity
– he couldn’t have lived at all if he’d minded that – but this was the kind of
ambiguity people hide behind. And he was too proud to hide.

On his way back to the barracks he forgot her. A few hundred yards from
the gate he drew level with a group of officers. Most had paced themselves
well, and were now rather more sober than they’d been when he bumped
into them earlier in the evening. But Dalrymple was in a desperate state,
striding along with the exalted, visionary look of somebody whose sole aim
in life is to get to the lavatory in time.

‘Will he be all right?’ Prior asked.

‘We’ll get him there,’ said Bainbrigge.
As they entered the barracks gates, thunder rumbled on the horizon; the

clouds were briefly lit by lightning. Prior waited till the crowd cleared
before going across to the main building to get washed, thinking, as he
stripped off and splashed cold water over his chest and groin, that a deserted
wash-room at night, all white tiles and naked lights, is the most convincing
portrayal of hell the human mind can devise. He peered into the brown-
spotted glass, remembering the moment when Nellie’s face had dissolved
into the face of the boche target.

– What’s the worst thing you could have done? Rivers asked.
A phoney question. Rivers didn’t believe in the worst things. He thought

Prior was being histrionic. And perhaps I was, Prior thought, staring into
the glass at the row of empty cubicles behind him, feeling ‘the worst things’
crowd in behind him, jostling for the privilege of breathing down his neck.
He’d even, coming to himself at four or five o’clock in the morning with no
idea of how the night had been spent, thought it possible he might have
killed somebody. And yet, why should that be ‘the worst thing’? His
reflection stared back at him, hollow-eyed. Murder was only killing in the
wrong place.

The wind was rising as he hurried across the gritty tarmac to his tent.

Bent double, he braced himself to face the smell of armpits and socks,
heavy on the day’s stored heat, for though they left the flaps open, nothing
could prevent the tents becoming ovens in hot weather. He took a deep
breath, as deep as he could manage, and crawled into the stinking dark.

A voice said, ‘Hello.’
Of course. Hallet. The past week he’d had the tent to himself, because

Hallet had been away on a bombing course in Ripon.

‘Can you see all right?’
The beam of a torch illuminated yellow grass littered with cigarette butts.
‘I can manage, thanks.’
Blinking to reaccustom himself to the blackness, Prior wriggled into his

sleeping-bag.

‘You’re just back from London, aren’t you?’

He resigned himself to having to talk. ‘Yes. Week ago.’
A flicker of lightning found the whites of Hallet’s eyes. ‘Have you been

boarded yet?’

‘Out next draft. You?’
‘Next draft.’
Voice casual, but the mouth dry.
‘First time?’ Prior asked.
‘Yes, as a matter of fact it is.’
Now that Prior was accustomed to the gloom he could see Hallet clearly:

olive-skinned, almost Mediterranean-looking, a nice crooked mouth with
prominent front teeth that he was evidently self-conscious about, for he kept
pulling his upper lip down to hide them. Quite fetching. Not that in these
circumstances Prior ever permitted himself to be fetched.

‘I’m really rather looking forward to it.’
The words hung on the air, obviously requiring an answer of some kind,

but then what could one say? He was scared shitless, he was right to be
scared shitless, and any ‘reassuring’ remark risked drawing attention to one
or other of these unfortunate facts.

‘Some of the men in my platoon have been out three times,’ Hallet said.

‘I think that’s the only thing that bothers me, really. How the hell do you
lead men who know more than you do?’

‘You pray for a good sergeant. A really good sergeant tells you what

orders to give him, doesn’t let anybody else see him doing it, and doesn’t let
himself know he’s doing it.’

‘How many times have you –?’
‘This’ll be the fourth. Wound, shell-shock, trench fever. Not in that

order.’

Hallet was lying on his back, hands clasped behind his head, nothing

much visible from Prior’s angle except his chin. How appallingly random it
all was. If Hallet’s father had got a gleam in his eye two years later than he
did, Hallet wouldn’t be here. He might even have missed the war altogether,
perhaps spent the rest of his life goaded by the irrational shame of having
escaped. ‘Cowed subjection to the ghosts of friends who died.’ That was it

exactly, couldn’t be better put. Ghosts everywhere. Even the living were
only ghosts in the making … You learned to ration your commitment to
them. This moment in this tent already had the quality of remembered
experience. Or perhaps he was simply getting old. But then, after all, in
trench time he was old. A generation lasted six months, less than that on the
Somme, barely twelve weeks. He was this boy’s great-grandfather.

He looked at Hallet again, at the warm column of his neck, and tried to

think of something to say, something light-hearted and easy, but could think
of nothing. He stared instead at the stained canvas, lit by flickers of summer
lightning, and noticed that the largest stain looked like a map of Africa.

FOUR

Two black lines circled Moffet’s legs immediately above the knee.

‘Close your eyes,’ Rivers said. ‘I want you to tell me exactly what you

feel.’

‘Pinprick.’
‘How many?’
The pins touched again.
‘Two.’
Again.
‘One.’
Again.
‘Two.’ Moffett sounded bored. ‘Two. Two.’ A pause. ‘Not sure.’
‘All right. You can open your eyes now.’
He hadn’t lied once. He’d lain with closed eyes, a fluttering visible

beneath the thin lids, and Rivers had read in every line and fold of his face
the temptation to lie, and yet the progression of yeses and noes had been
totally accurate. True, he couldn’t have hoped to lie convincingly, or not for
long, but it was interesting that he hadn’t tried. This was pure hysteria,
uncontaminated by malingering.

‘Rivers, do you ever think you were born into the wrong century?’
Rivers looked surprised. ‘Survived into, perhaps.’
‘It’s just this reminds me of seventeenth-century witch-finders, you

know? They used to stick pins in people too.’

‘I expect they were looking for the same thing. Areas of abnormal

sensation.’

‘Do you think they found them?’

Rivers lifted Moffet’s left leg and began to draw a line three inches lower

than the line he’d drawn yesterday morning. ‘I don’t see why not. Some
witches were probably hysterics. At least a lot of the reported phenomena
suggest that.’

‘And the witch-finders?’
‘I don’t know. Simpler. Nastier.’
‘I don’t like that word. Applied to this.’
‘Hysteria?’ He could quite see that ‘shell-shock’, useless and inaccurate

though the term was, might appeal to Moffet rather-more. It did at least
sound appropriately male. ‘I don’t think anybody likes it. The trouble is
nobody likes the alternatives either.’

‘It derives,’ Moffet continued, hardening his voice, ‘from the Greek

hysterā. The womb.’

‘Yes,’ Rivers said dryly. ‘I know.’
The problem with Moffet was that he was too intelligent to be satisfied

with such a crude solution as paralysis. Hysterical symptoms of this gross
kind – paralysis, deafness, blindness, muteness – occurred quite frequently
in the immediate aftermath of trauma but they normally lingered only in
those who were either uneducated or frankly stupid. Moffet was neither.

And whether this rather dramatic form of treatment was helping … Oh, it

would get rid of the paralysis, but was there not the possibility that it might
also reinforce a belief in magical solutions? Rivers sighed and walked
round the bed. All his instincts were against it, but he knew it would get
Moffet on his feet again. A witch-doctor could do this, he thought,
beginning to draw, and probably better than I can. Come to think of it, there
was one person who’d have done it brilliantly …

In Melanesia he’d quickly formed the habit of accompanying Njiru on his
rounds. They would set off together, always in single file, because the path
winding through thick bush was too narrow for them to walk abreast.

Seen from the rear, the extent of Njiru’s spinal curvature was dreadfully

apparent. Rivers wondered how such deformities were explained – which
spirit inflicted them, and why? Sweat stung his bitten eyelids – he kept

having to wipe his forearm across his face. Mainly the heat, but partly also
anxiety. It was a bit like your first day at a new school, he thought, knowing
you’ve got to get things right and that your chances of getting them right
are infinitesimal because you know nothing. Only at school, provided you
start at the same time as everybody else, you can solve the problem by
fading into the group, darting about with all the other little grey minnows,
safety in the shoal, but here he was alone, except for Hocart, and Hocart had
been running a fever ever since they arrived, and today had chosen to stay
behind in their tent.

At the village he crawled into a hut and squatted on the earth floor,

watching and listening, while Njiru attended to his patient. An old woman,
evidently a regular to judge by the way she and Njiru laughed and joked
together. She was introduced as Namboko Taru, though ‘Namboko’, which
he at first took to be a name, turned out to be a title: ‘widow’. The same
word also meant ‘widower’, but was not used as a title when applied to
men. Two more disconnected facts to add to his discouragingly small heap.

Namboko Taru lay down, pushing the strip of brown bark cloth she wore

down far enough to expose her belly. Njiru poured coconut oil on to her
abdomen and began a massage, while Rivers tried to find out what was
wrong. Constipation, it appeared. Was it, he wanted to ask, in view of her
age, chronic constipation, or had there been a recent change in bowel habit?
And was it simply constipation, or was there alternating diarrhoea? But his
attempts to convey ‘alternating diarrhoea’ in a mixture of pidgin and mime
threatened to bring the proceedings to a halt entirely, and he gave up, while
Namboko Taru wiped tears of laughter from her cheeks. He might not be
contributing to the cure but he was certainly taking her mind off the
condition.

Meanwhile the movements of Njiru’s hands began to focus on a region

below and to the left of the navel. He was chanting under his breath,
swaying backwards and forwards, scooping the slack flesh together
between the heel of his palms, like a woman gathering dough. The constant
low murmur and the rhythmic movement were hypnotic. Suddenly, with a
barking cry, Njiru seemed to catch something, shielded it in his cupped

hands while he crawled to the door, and then threw it as far as he could into
the bush. A brief conversation between doctor and patient, then Namboko
Taru fastened her cloth and went into the bush, from whence, ten minutes
later, a far happier woman emerged.

Meanwhile Rivers and Njiru talked. Namboko Taru’s complaint belonged

to a group of illnesses called tagosoro, which were inflicted by the spirit
called Mateana. This particular condition – nggasin – was caused by an
octopus that had taken up residence in the lower intestine, from where its
tentacles might spread until they reached the throat. At this point the disease
would prove fatal. As so often happened, one could detect behind the native
belief the shadowy outline of a disease only too familiar to western
medicine, though perhaps this was not a helpful way of looking at it.
Namboko Taru believed she was cured. And certainly as a treatment for
simple constipation the massage could hardly have been bettered, and had
not differed in any essential respect from western massage, until very near
the end.

Rivers pointed to himself and then to the coconut oil. Njiru nodded,

poured oil into his palms and began the massage, chanting, rocking … Once
again that curious hypnotic effect, a sense of being totally focused on,
totally cared for. Njiru was a good doctor, however many octopi he located
in the colon. The fingers probed deeper, the chanting quickened, the
movements of the hands neared a climax, and then – nothing. Njiru sat
back, smiling, terminating the physical contact as tactfully as he’d initiated
it.

Rivers sketched the movement Njiru hadn’t made. ‘You no throw …

nggasin?’

A gleam of irony. ‘You no got nggasin.’

But you have, Rivers thought, sponging yesterday’s black lines off Moffet’s
legs.

‘And tomorrow,’ he said authoritatively, measuring with his forefingers,

‘this area will be normal.’

Moffet glared at him. ‘You are consciously and deliberately destroying

my self-respect.’

‘I think you’ll find that starts to come back once you’re on your feet.’
Sister Carmichael was hovering on the other side of the screens, waiting

to snatch the trolley from him. She was shocked by his insistence on doing
everything himself, including the washing off of the previous lines.
Consultants do not wash patients. Nurses wash patients. She would have
been only marginally more distressed if she’d come on to the ward and
found him mopping the floor. What he could not get across to her was that
the rules of medicine are one thing, the rules of ritual drama quite another.

Wansbeck had had a bad night, she said, once the trolley had been

snatched away. Temperature of 103, and he kept trying to open the window.

‘All right, I’ll see him next.’
The nurses had just finished sponging Wansbeck down, and he lay half

naked, his skin a curdled bluish white against the snowy white of the sheets.
As Rivers watched a shiver ran along his arms and chest, roughening and
darkening the skin. They finished drying him, covered him up, and he was
free to talk, though too weak to manage more than a few words.

Rivers was beginning to feel concerned about Wansbeck. Spanish

influenza was quite unusually virulent and he had it badly, and yet he
seemed indifferent to the outcome. Rivers grasped him firmly round the
wrist. ‘You know you’ve got to fight this.’

Probably ‘fight’ was the only word he understood. ‘Done enough of that,’

he muttered, and turned away.

In Westminster the leaves were already beginning to turn. Not to the
brilliant reds and golds of the countryside, but a shabby tarnished yellow. In
another few weeks they would start to fall. The worst thing about London
was that summer ended so soon.

‘You know, sometimes,’ Rivers said carefully, his glasses flashing as he

turned back from the window, ‘it helps just to go back and try to to to to …
gather things together. So. Let’s see if I’ve got this right. You were in
hospital after a riding accident –’

‘Yes, that’s right. I didn’t notice the mare –’
‘Yes. And while you were there, one of the nurses cut your penis off and

put it in a jar of formaldehyde in the basement.’

Telford shook his head. ‘I didn’t say for for …’
‘Formaldehyde. No, I know you didn’t. They don’t use pickling vinegar.’
‘Ah, well, you see, you’d know that.’
A deep breath. ‘Why do you think she did that?’
Telford shrugged. ‘Dunno.’
‘But you must have wondered. I mean it was quite an astonishing thing to

do, wasn’t it?’

‘Wasn’t for me to ask questions.’ Telford leant forward, delivering what

he obviously thought was the coup de grâce. ‘You wouldn’t want me
teaching you your job, would you?’

At the moment he’d have welcomed assistance from any quarter. ‘Didn’t

the doctor say anything?’

‘Not a dicky bird.’
‘Telford.’ Rivers clasped his hands. ‘What do you pee out of?’
‘M’cock, you stupid bugger, what do you pee out of?’
Rivers concentrated on straightening his blotter. ‘I wonder if it would

help if we talked a little about women?’

It might have done. He was never to know. A few minutes later Telford

said, ‘I can’t say I care for the tone of this conversation, Rivers. It may have
escaped your notice, but we’re not in a barracks.’ He stood up. ‘God knows,
the last thing I want to do is pull rank, but I’d be grateful if you’d address
me as Major Telford in future.’

He went out, slamming the door.

Moffet lay back, eyes closed, grinding, ‘Yes, yes, yes, yes,’ as the pin
pricked his skin.

The usual routine, and yet something was different. The air of

indifference had gone. Deliberately, Rivers let the pin stray across the line
on to skin that should still have been numb.

‘Yes, yes, yes.’

The pin stopped. Moffet opened his eyes and smiled wearily. ‘You can go

all the way down if you like.’ He closed his eyes again. Rivers moved the
pin down the leg at intervals of two inches. ‘Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.’ Wearily
now, each ‘yes’ coming precisely at the moment the pin touched the skin.
Over the shin, across the arch of the foot, down to the tip of the big toe.
‘YES.’

Moffet had yelled the word. Through the gap in the screens, Rivers saw

the other patients turn and stare at the shrouded bed. He put the pin down.
‘Well.’

He wasn’t particularly surprised: the removal of hysterical paralysis was

often – one might almost say generally – as dramatic as the onset. Moffet
lay still, his face sallow against the whiteness of the pillow, making no
attempt to hide his depression, and indeed why should he? His sole defence
against the unbearable had been taken away and nothing put in its place.

‘When did this happen?’
‘First thing.’
‘Have you tried to walk?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Do you want to?’
‘Seems the logical next step. So to speak.’
‘Can you swing yourself round? Sit on the side.’
Rivers knelt and began massaging Moffet’s calves, chafing the slack

flesh between his hands.

‘I suppose I’m expected to be grateful.’
‘No.’ He stood up. ‘All right, shall we try? Put your hands on my

shoulders.’

Moffet levered himself off the edge of the bed.
‘How does it feel?’
‘Don’t know. Weird.’
‘Do you want to try a few steps?’ Awkwardly, like untalented dancers,

they shuffled across the floor, the curtains ballooning out around them.
Rivers put his hands up and loosened Moffet’s grip. ‘No, you’re all right,

I’ve got you.’ Two steps, then Moffet fell forward into his arms. Rivers
lowered him back on to the bed. ‘I think that’s probably enough for now.’

Moffet collapsed against the pillows.
‘It’s important to keep at it, but I wouldn’t try it just yet without an

orderly.’ He hesitated. ‘You know we’re going to have to talk about why
this happened.’

He waited, but Moffet remained stubbornly silent.
‘I’ll be along again later.’

Later that afternoon, Major Telford – as he must now remember to call him
– sidled up and tapped him discreetly on the shoulder. ‘Yes, Major Telford,
what is it?’

A conspiratorial whisper. ‘Spot of bother in the latrines.’
Rivers followed him into the wash-room, wondering which bit of

Telford’s anatomy had dropped off now.

Telford pointed to the bathroom. ‘Chap’s been in there ages.’
‘Yes, but –’
‘Keeps groaning. Well, he did – stopped now.’
Rivers rattled the handle. ‘Hello?’
‘Tried that, it’s locked.’
It couldn’t be – there weren’t any locks. Rivers lay down and looked

under the door. A lot of water had slopped on to the floor, he could see an
arm drooping over the edge of the bath – a puffy, white arm with blood
oozing from the wrist. A chair had been wedged under the door handle. He
tried pushing it, but it was no use. He stood up and kicked. The door was
hardly thicker than cardboard – the bathrooms were mere cubicles put in
cheaply when the War Office adapted the hospital for military use – and the
second kick broke the hinges. He burst into the room, startled by his own
face in the looking-glass. Moffet lay in the bath, pink water lapping the
shining belly as it rose and fell. Breathing anyway. His head had slipped to
one side, but his nostrils were clear of the water. A whisky bottle skittered
across the floor as Rivers knelt by the bath. Cuts on both wrists, superficial
on the right – deep on the left. Loss of blood probably fairly heavy, but you

can never bloody well tell in water. He pushed Moffet’s eyelids up, smelled
his breath, felt for the pulse …

‘Dead, is he?’ Telford asked cheerfully.
Dead drunk. ‘I think he’ll be all right.’
Lack of space was the problem. Barely enough room to squeeze between

the wash-basin and the bath at knee height. He had to bend from the waist
to get his hands round Moffet’s chest and then his fingertips slipped on the
cold, plump skin. Telford stood, looking on.

‘Get his legs.’
They heaved, but without co-ordination, Rivers finally managing to haul

the shoulders out of the water just as Telford grew tired of waiting and
dropped the legs back in. They were gasping for breath, shoulders bumping
in the confined space.

‘All right, together,’ Rivers said. ‘One, two …’
Moffet came clear, only to fall back with a splash, a great plume of water

flying up and drenching them both.

‘I’ll try to get m’leg under him,’ Telford said.
They lifted again, and Telford stepped into the water so that Moffet was

balanced across his thigh, Rivers supporting the head and shoulders. They
froze like that, an improbable and vaguely obscene pietà. ‘All right?’ Rivers
asked.

‘Right, I’ve got him.’
They collapsed in a heap on the floor, blood from Moffet’s left wrist

flowing more copiously now, bright, distinct drops splashing on to the
mottled tiles. Rivers dragged a clean towel off the rail and pressed it hard
against the deepest cut. ‘There, you take over,’ he said. ‘I’ll get Sister
Roberts. Just press now, no need for anything else. No tourniquets.’

‘Shouldn’t dream of it,’ Telford said, fluffing his shoulders.
Rivers intercepted Sister Roberts on her way down the ward. ‘Moffet,’ he

said, pointing behind him. ‘He’s slashed his wrists. We need a wheelchair.’

He returned to find Telford entertaining the now semi-conscious Moffet

with a story about an inexperienced groom who’d applied a tourniquet to
the leg of his favourite hunter. ‘Gangrene set in, would you believe? We had

to shoot the poor sod.’ Telford looked down at the fluttering lids. ‘And it
was only a graze.’

Moffet flapped like a landed fish, moaned, vomited yellow bile. Rivers

tapped his cheek. ‘Have you taken anything?’

Sister Roberts came creaking to the door with a wheelchair. Telford

looked up at her, horrified, whipped a flannel off the side of the bath and
draped it over Moffet’s genitals.

‘For God’s sake, man,’ Rivers snapped. ‘She’s a nurse.’ Though with

Telford’s history it probably wasn’t Sister Roberts’s modesty he thought he
was protecting. ‘If you could get us a couple of blankets,’ he said, twisting
in the narrow space.

Moffet’s head lolled to one side as they hauled him into the chair and

wrapped blankets round him, though Rivers was beginning to suspect he
was less drowsy than he seemed.

‘Well,’ he said, straightening up. ‘I think I can manage now, Major

Telford. Thank you, you’ve been a great help.’

‘That’s all right.’ He looked down at Moffet and sniffed. ‘Helps break up

the afternoon. Anyway, what’s all this Major nonsense?’ he demanded,
punching Rivers playfully in the biceps. ‘Don’t be such a stuffed shirt,
man.’

And off he went, whistling ‘A Bachelor Gay Am I’.
They wheeled Moffet into a side ward, since nothing is worse for morale

on a ‘shell-shock’ ward than a suicide attempt. Except a successful suicide
of course. He remembered the man at Craiglockhart who’d succeeded in
hanging himself. Quite apart from his own tragedy he’d undone weeks of
careful work on other people.

The deepest gash required stitching. Rivers set to work immediately, and

was rather surprised to find Moffet stoical. He watched the needle dip in
and out, only licking his lips once towards the end.

‘There,’ Rivers said. ‘All done.’
Moffet rolled his head restlessly. ‘I didn’t make a very good job of it, did

I?’

‘Not many people do. The only person I’ve ever known to succeed by

that method was a surgeon – he virtually severed his left hand.’ He got up
and stretched his legs, pressing a hand hard into the small of his back. ‘How
much whisky did you have?’

‘Half a bottle. Bit more perhaps.’
No point talking to him, then.
‘Where did you get it?’
‘My mother. Does it matter?’
‘And the razor?’
Moffet looked puzzled. ‘Mine.’
‘All right. You try to get some sleep.’
‘Will you have to tell the police?’
‘No.’ Rivers looked down at him. ‘You’re a soldier. You’re under

military discipline.’

He found Sister Roberts waiting for him. ‘I’m afraid we can’t let this go,’

he said. ‘The lockers are supposed to be searched regularly.’

‘I’ll ask Miss Banbury. She was the last person to do it.’
She was also Sister Roberts’s bête noire, for no better reason than that

she was well-meaning, clumsy, enthusiastic, unqualified and upper class.

‘His mother gave him the whisky.’
‘Can’t say I’m surprised. Silly woman.’
Sister Roberts, as he knew from numerous air-raid conversations of the

previous winter, was the eldest girl in a family of eleven. She’d clawed her
way out of the Gateshead slums and therefore felt obliged to believe in the
corrosive effects on the human psyche of good food, good housing and
good education.

‘Telford was a bit of a revelation, wasn’t he?’ she said. ‘Surprisingly

cool.’

‘Oh, Telford’s fine. Until he opened his big mouth nobody noticed he was

mad.’ He added, not entirely as an afterthought, ‘He works at the War
Office.’

Outside in the corridor he met Wansbeck, now much better though surely

not well enough to be up and about.

‘How do you feel?’ Rivers asked.
‘Bit weak. Throat’s still sore, but I’m not coughing as much.’
‘You’d be better off in bed. Go on, back with you.’
As the doors banged shut behind Wansbeck, Rivers became aware of an

insistent clicking. Nothing to account for it. The long corridor stretched
ahead, empty, its grey, palely shining floor faintly marked with the shadows
of the window frames. Click, click, click. And then he realized the sound
was being caused by the bobbles on the end of the blind strings, tapping
against each other in the slight breeze. But identifying the sound didn’t
seem to lessen its potency. It was almost the sound of a yacht’s rigging, but
the memory went deeper than that.

He had reached the lift before he managed to dredge it up. That day Njiru

took him to see the skull houses at Pa Na Gundu, they’d walked for miles in
sweltering heat, scarcely a breath of wind, and no sound except the buzzing
of flies. Then, abruptly, they came out into a clearing, sharp blades of
sunlight slanting down between the trees, and ahead of them, rising up the
slope, six or seven skull houses, their gratings ornamented with strings of
dangling shells. The feeling of being watched that skulls always gave you.
Dazzled by the sudden light, he followed Njiru up the slope, towards a knot
of shadows, and then one of the shadows moved, resolving itself into the
shape of Nareti, the blind mortuary priest who squatted there, all pointed
knees and elbows, snail trails of pus running from the corners of his eyes.

The furthest of the skull houses was being repaired, and its occupants had

been taken out and arranged on the ground so that at first sight the clearing
seemed to be cobbled with skulls. He’d hung back, not sure how close he
was permitted to approach, and at that moment a sudden fierce gust of wind
shook the trees and all the strings of votary shells rattled and clicked
together.

The lift doors clanged open in his face, startling him back into the present

day.

FIVE

Ada Lumb always wore black, less in mourning for her husband – if she’d
ever had one – than because black enabled an air of awesome respectability
to be maintained at minimal cost.

Respectability was Ada’s god. She’d arrived in this neighbourhood

eighteen years before, recently widowed, or so she claimed, with two pretty,
immaculately dressed little girls in tow. The house had belonged to a man
called Dirty Dick, who rambled and muttered and frightened children on
street corners. Yellowing newspapers were stacked high in every room.
Within a few weeks Ada had the house painted, doorstep scrubbed, range
black-leaded, net curtains up at every window. At a safe distance from the
house, she bought a lock-up shop, selling boiled boots, second-hand clothes
and – below the counter – a great variety of patent medicines designed to
procure abortion or cure clap. Pennyroyal Syrup, Dr Lawson’s Cure for
Female Blockages and Obstructions, Dr Morse’s Invigorating Cordial,
Curtis’s Manhood, Sir Samuel Hannay’s Specific, Bumstead’s Gleet Cure,
The Unfortunate’s Friend, and Davy’s Lac-Elephantis, a foul-smelling
suspension of chalk and God knows what, which claimed to be the
medicated milk of elephants.

But on Sundays she locked up the shop and entertained the Vicar, the

Rev. Arthur Lindsey, in a room which might have been designed as a stage
set for the purpose. Dark oak furniture, plants with thick, durable, rubbery
leaves – Ada had no patience with flowers, always drooping and dying –
and, prominently displayed on a side table, the family Bible, open at a
particularly fortifying text. In this setting Ada poured tea into china cups,
dabbed her rat trap of a mouth with a starched napkin and engaged in light,

or, in deference to the Sabbath, improving conversation on the topics of the
day.

Billy Prior sat at the other end of the table, a concession to his new status

as future son-in-law. No more material concessions had been forthcoming:
he and Sarah had not been left alone together for a second. Though Ada was
gratified by the engagement. She believed in marriage, the more strongly,
Prior suspected, for never having sampled it herself. You don’t know that, he
reminded himself. But then he looked round the room and thought, Yes, I
do. Photographs of Sarah and Cynthia stood on the sideboard, but none of
the grandparents, none of their father. No portrait of Ada-the-blushing-
bride. And the fortifying text she’d selected for display was the chapter of
the Book of Job in which Eliphaz the Temanite visits his friend and seeks to
console him for the plague of boils which covers his skin from crown to
sole by pointing out that he had it coming. One thing Ada did have was a
sense of humour. Oh, and an eye for male flesh. Yesterday he’d helped her
hang curtains, and her gaze on his groin as she handed the curtains up had
been so frankly appraising he’d almost blushed. You might fool Lindsey, he
thought, but you don’t fool me.

He made an effort to attend to the conversation. They were talking about

the granting of the vote to women of thirty and over, an act of which Ada
strongly disapproved. It had pleased Almighty God, she said, to create the
one sex visibly and unmistakably superior to the other, and that was all
there was to be said in the matter. From the way Lindsey simpered and
giggled, one could only assume he thought he knew which sex was meant.
He was one of those Anglo-Catholic young men who waft about in a
positive miasma of stale incense and seminal fluid. Prior knew the type –
biblically as well.

Sarah touched the teapot, and stood up. ‘I think this could do with

freshening. Billy?’

‘Does it take two of you, Sarah?’
‘I need Billy to open the door, Mother.’
In the kitchen she burst out, ‘Honestly, what century does she think she’s

living in?’

Prior shrugged. From the kitchen window Melbourne Terrace sloped

steeply down, a shoal of red-grey roofs half hidden in swathes of mist and
rain. He wondered whether Ada had taken this house for the view, for the
sweep of cobbled road, the rows and rows of smoking chimney-stacks, was
as dramatic in its way as a mountain range, and, for Ada, rather more
significant. For there, below her, was the life she’d saved her daughters
from: scabby-mouthed children, women with black eyes, bedbugs, street
fights, marriage lines pasted to the inside of the front window to humiliate
neighbours who had none of their own to display. He could quite see how
the vote might seem irrelevant to a woman engaged in such a battle.

Sarah came across and joined him by the window, putting her arms round

his chest from behind and resting her face against his shoulder. ‘I hope it’s
nicer tomorrow. You haven’t had much luck with the weather, have you?’

Wasn’t all he hadn’t had. He turned to face her. ‘When are we going to

get some time alone?’

‘I don’t know.’ She shook her head. ‘I’ll work something out.’
‘Look, you could pretend to go to work, and –’
‘I can’t pretend to go to work, Billy. We need the money. Come on, she’ll

be wondering where we are.’

Prior found a plate of lardy cake thrust into his hand, and followed her

back into the front room.

They found Lindsey confiding his ideas for next week’s sermon – he was

attracted to the idea of sacrifice, he said. Are you indeed? thought Prior,
plonking the plate down. Cynthia, not long widowed, was hanging on every
word, probably on her mother’s instructions: she was by far the more
biddable of the two girls. Sitting down, Prior nudged Lindsey’s foot under
the table and was delighted to see a faint blush begin around the dog collar
and work its way upwards. A sidelong, flickering glance, a brushing and
shying away of eyes, and … You’re wasting your lardy cake on that one,
Ma, Prior told his future mother-in-law silently, folding his arms.

After Lindsey had gone, Ada changed into her weekday dress and settled
down with a bag of humbugs and a novel. She sat close to the fire, raising

her skirt high enough to reveal elastic garters and an expanse of white thigh.
As her skirt warmed through, a faint scent of urine rose from it, for Ada, as
he knew from Sarah, followed the old custom and when taken short in the
street straddled her legs like a mare and pissed in the gutter. His being
allowed to witness these intimacies was another concession to the ring on
Sarah’s finger.

The young people gathered round the piano, and, after the requisite

number of hymns had been thumped and bellowed through, passed on to
sentimental favourites from before the war.

‘You’ll know this one, Ma,’ Prior said, drawing out the vowel sounds,

ogling her over his shoulder. Rather to his surprise, she sang with him.

For her beauty was sold,
For an old man’s gold,
She’s just a bird in a gilded cage!

‘By heck, it was never my luck,’ Ada said, going back to her book.

Prior glanced at his watch. ‘Do you fancy a turn round the block?’ he

asked Sarah, closing the piano lid.

‘Yes.’ A quick glance at Cynthia.
‘I’m too tired,’ said Cynthia.
‘You’re never thinking of walking in this?’ Ada said. ‘Listen at it. It’s

blowing a gale.’

It was too.
‘Anyway it’s work tomorrow, our Sarah,’ Ada said, closing her book. ‘I

think we’d all be better for an early night. Are you comfortable on that sofa,
Billy?’

‘Fine, thank you.’ Except there’s this ruddy great pole sticking into the

cushions.

‘You might try lying on your back.’
They’d have burnt her in the Middle Ages. Sarah brought down blankets

and pillows from her bedroom, and, watched by Ada from the foot of the
stairs, kissed him chastely goodnight.

It’s my embarkation leave, he wanted to howl. We’re engaged.

The door closed behind her. He wasn’t ready for bed – or rather he

wasn’t ready for bed alone. He took off his tunic and boots, wandered
round the room, looked at photographs, finally threw himself on to the sofa
and picked up Ada’s discarded novel.

Ada had a great stock of books. A few romances, which she read with

every appearance of enjoyment, gurgles of laughter erupting from the black
bombazine like a hot spring from volcanic earth. But she preferred penny
dreadfuls, which she read propped up against the milk bottle as she
prepared the evening meal. Fingerprints, translucent with butter, encrusted
with batter, sticky with jam, edged every page. Bloody thumbprints led up
to one particularly gory murder. All the books had murders in them, all
carried out by women. Aristocratic ladies ranged abroad, pushing their
husbands into rivers, off balconies, over cliffs, under trains or, in the case of
the more domestically inclined, feminine type of woman, remained at home
and jalloped them to death. Only the final pages were free of cooking stains,
and for a long time this puzzled him, until he realized that, in the final
chapter, the adulterous murderesses were caught and punished. Ada had no
truck with that. Her heroines got away with it.

The clock ticked loudly, as it had done all last night, a malevolent tick

that kept him awake. He picked it up, intending to put it in the kitchen, but
it stopped at once and only resumed its ticking when he replaced it on the
mantel shelf. For Christ’s sake, he thought, even the bloody clock’s trained
to keep its knees together.

He could hear the girls getting undressed in the room overhead: the

thump of shoes being kicked off, snatches of conversation, giggles, almost –
he convinced himself – the sigh of petticoats dropping to the floor. Sarah’s
momentary nakedness, before the white shroud of nightdress came down.
He got up and went to the piano, stroking the keys, singing under his breath.

Far, far from Wipers
I long to be,
Where German snipers
Can’t get at me.

Damp is my dug-out,
Cold are my feet

Waiting for Whizzbangs
To put me to sleep.

The door opened. He turned and saw Sarah, a white column of nightgown, a
thick plait hanging down over her left shoulder.

‘I’m sorry,’ he said, closing the piano. ‘Have I been making too much

noise?’

‘No, I just wanted to see you.’
Incredibly, impossibly, the sound of girlish whispering and giggling

continued overhead.

‘Cynthia,’ Sarah said, closing the door. ‘She’s pretending I’m still there.’
She knelt on the hearthrug, and began feeding the few remaining sticks of

wood into the fire. Then, carefully, so as not to douse the flames, she
dropped shiny nuggets of coal into the fiery caverns the dying fire had
made. A hiss, for the coal was damp after recent rain, and, for a moment,
the glow on her face and hair darkened, then blazed up again.

‘We seem to keep missing each other,’ she said.
‘You mean we’re kept apart.’
That amazing hair, he thought. Even now, when it was all brushed and

tamed for bed, he could see five or six different shades of copper, auburn,
bronze, even a strand of pure gold that looked as if it must belong to
somebody else.

She turned to look at him. ‘It’s her house, Billy.’
‘Have I said anything?’
The firelight, gilding her face, disguised the munitions-factory yellow of

her skin.

‘We could get married by special licence,’ he said. ‘At least I suppose we

could, I don’t know how long it takes.’

‘No, we couldn’t.’
No, he thought, because after the war things’ll be different, I could be

getting on in the world, I might not want to be saddled with a wife from
Beale Street. I have to be protected from myself. Sarah had a great sense of
honour. About as much use to a woman as a jock-strap, he’d have thought,
but there it was, Sarah was saddled with it. ‘I love you, Sarah Lumb.’

‘I love you, Billy Prior.’
She leant back, and he unbuttoned her night-dress, pushing it off her

shoulders so that the side of one heavy breast was etched in trembling gold.
He slid to the floor beside her and took her in his arms, feeling her tense
against him. ‘It’s all right, it’s all right.’

And all he wanted, at that moment, was to hide his face between her

breasts and shut out the relentless ticking of the clock. But a voice above
shouted, ‘Sarah? Cynthia? Time you were asleep.’

‘I’ll have to go.’
‘All right.’
But his hands refused to loosen their grip, and she had to pull herself

away.

‘Look, tomorrow night she goes to the spuggies. I’ll tell her I’ve got a

headache, and see if I can stay here.’

Next morning, after they’d all gone to work, he went upstairs to Sarah’s
room, exhausted after another bad night measured by the chiming of the
clock. He needed to lie in the bed where Sarah slept, to wrap himself in
these stained sheets, for even in this fanatically clean household the girls’
skins sloughed off, staining the sheets yellow, and no amount of washing
would get the stains out. He didn’t mind. He would lie happily here, in the
trough made by her body during the night, smelling the faint smell of
lavender and soap.

On the bedside table was a photograph of himself, taken when he was

first commissioned. Unformed schoolboy face. Had he ever been as young
as that? Undressed and in bed, he squinted at the half-drawn curtains,
wondering if it was worth the effort of getting up to close them. No, he
decided, he would simply turn his back to the light.

He turned over, and for a second closed his eyes, his brain not

immediately interpreting what in that brief glance he had seen. Then he sat
up. On the dresser stood a photograph of a young man in uniform, a
private’s uniform. Not Cynthia’s husband – he knew his face from wedding

groups. He got out of bed and went to look. Johnny, of course. Who else?
Sarah’s first fiancé.

The usual inanely smiling face half whited out by the sun. Behind him, a

few feet of unbombed France. And why should he begrudge this? Because I
thought I’d taken his place. He hadn’t even thought it, he’d just assumed it.
She’d talked only once about Johnny and then she’d been drunk on the port
he’d been plying her with to get her knickers off. Loos. That was it. Gas
blown back over the British lines. He peered again at the unknown face.
The whiting out seemed almost to be an unintended symbol of the oblivion
into which we all go. Last night, he’d wondered what colour Sarah’s skin
had been under the jaundice produced by the chemicals she worked with.
This man had known. He’d known this Sarah – picking up a snapshot – this
happy, slightly plump, hoydenish girl struggling to keep her skirts down on
the boat-swing. What you noticed in Sarah now was the high rounded
forehead, the prominent cheekbones, the bright, cool amused gaze. Always
the sense of something being held back. He’d been looking all along at a
face scoured out by grief, and he’d never known it till now.

‘Nice walk in the fresh air,’ Ada said, spearing black felt with a hat-pin.
‘Just the thing for a headache.’

‘I won’t be in the fresh air, Mam. That room gets awfully stuffy, you

know.’

Ada bent down, thrusting her face into her daughter’s. ‘Sarah, go and get

your coat.’

Sarah looked at Billy and shrugged slightly.
‘I’ll come too,’ he said, standing up.
‘Are you sure?’ Ada asked. ‘The spuggies aren’t everybody’s cup of tea.’
‘Wouldn’t miss it for the world.’
They walked down the street together, Ada leading the way, sweeping

along in her black skirt, for in the matter of skirt length she made no
concessions to the present day. She glided along as if on invisible casters.

‘I suppose she does know contacting the dead’s a heresy?’ Billy asked.

‘The Vicar wouldn’t like it.’

‘Oh, she doesn’t believe in it. She only goes for the night out.’
The meeting was held above a shop that sold surgical appliances, a range

of products whose advertising is necessarily discreet. The window, lined
with red and green crêpe paper left over from Christmas, contained nothing
but a picture of a white-haired man swinging his granddaughter above his
head.

They went up a narrow staircase into a tiny room. A piano, a table with a

vase of flowers, five or six rows of chairs, net curtains whose shadows
tattooed skin. They couldn’t find four seats together and so Prior found
himself sitting behind Sarah.

‘How’s your headache, Sarah?’ Ada asked.
‘Bit better, thank you, Mam.’
How’s your ballsache, Billy? Bloody awful, thank you, Ma.
A man walked up and stood on the rostrum, looking carefully round the

room. Counting the penny contributions to tea and biscuits? Assessing the
general level of credulity? Or was he perhaps not a rogue at all but simply
mad? No, not mad. A small, self-satisfied man with brown teeth.

Prior followed his gaze round the room, as the blinds were drawn down,

shutting out the sun. Women, mostly in black, a scattering of men, all
middle aged or older, except one, whose hands and face twitched
uncontrollably. Too many widows. Too many mothers looking for contact
with lost sons – and this was an area where they’d all joined up together.
Whole streets of them, going off in a day. And this man, smoothing down
his thin hair, announcing the number of the hymn, had known them all –
birthmarks, nicknames, funny little habits – he knew exactly what every
woman in this room wanted to hear. Fraud, Prior thought, and that he
deceived himself made it no better.

Angels of Jesus, Angels of Light
Singing to we-elcome the pilgrims of the night.

They sat down with the usual coughs, chair scrapings, tummy rumbles, and
he stood in front of them, establishing the silence, deepening it.

At last he was ready. Their loved ones were with them, he said, they were

present in this room. The messages started coming. First a description, then

a flicker of the eyes in the direction of the woman whose husband or son he
had been describing, then the message. Anodyne messages. They were
having a whale of a time, it seemed, on the other side, beyond this vale of
tears, singing hymns, rejoicing in the Lamb, casting down their golden
crowns around the glassy sea. Ah, yes, Prior wanted to ask, but how’s the
fucking?

Then, without warning, the twitching man stood up and started to speak.

Not words. A gurgling rush of sound like the overflow of a drainpipe, and
yet with inflections, pauses, emphases, everything that speech contains
except meaning. People turned towards him, watching the sounds jerk out
of him, as he stood with thrown-back head and glazed eyes. The man on the
rostrum was wearing a forced, sickly smile. One hysteric upstaged by
another. I’d take the pair of you on, Prior thought.

He touched Sarah’s shoulder. ‘I can’t stand any more of this. I’ll wait

outside.’

He ran downstairs, then crossed the street and slipped into the alley

opposite, positioning himself midway between two stinking midden holes.
He lit a cigarette and thought glossolalia. ‘A spiritual gift of no intrinsic
significance, unless the man possessing it can interpret what he receives in a
way that tends to the edification of the faithful.’ Father Mackenzie,
preparing him for Confirmation, when he was … eleven years old? Twelve?
What a teacher the man was – in or out of his cassock.

From his vantage point, watching like a stranger, he saw Sarah come out

and look up and down the empty road.

‘Sarah.’
She ran across, face pale beneath the munitions-factory yellow. ‘What

happened?’

‘Nothing. I couldn’t stand it, that’s all.’ A pause. ‘We have to die, we

don’t have to worship it.’

They stood together, looking up and down the street, which was dotted

here and there with puddles of recent rain. Fitful gleams of sunlight.

‘I’m not going back in.’
‘No.’

She waited, still worried.
‘We could go back home,’ she said.
‘Have you got a key?’
‘Yes.’
They stared at each other.
‘Come on,’ he said, grabbing her arm.
They ran along the shining street, splashing through puddles, Sarah’s hair

coming loose in a cascade of pins, then down an alley where white sheets
bellied and snapped, shirt-sleeves caught them, wet cotton stung their faces
and necks. They arrived at the door red-faced, Sarah’s hair hanging in rat’s-
tails down her back.

She rattled the key in the lock, while he stood looking back the way

they’d come, half expecting to see Ada hurtling towards them on her
Widow-of-Windsor casters. They half fell into the passage, and he ran
towards the stairs. ‘No,’ she said. No, he thought. The front room, then. He
made to pull the curtains across. ‘No, don’t do that, they’ll think
somebody’s dead. Behind the sofa.’ He was already on his knees in front of
her, his hands under her skirt, groping for the waistband of her drawers,
pulling them down, casting them aside, he didn’t care where they fell. At
the last moment he thought, This isn’t going to work. They’d had to leave
the front door open – it would be impossible to explain why it was locked –
but the thought of Ada Lumb looking down at your bare arse was enough to
give a brass monkey the wilts.

‘Careful,’ Sarah said, as he went in.
But he’s always careful, always prepared – though never prepared for the

surge of joy he feels now. He’s like some aquatic animal, an otter, returning
to its burrow, greeting its mate nose to nose, curling up, safe, warm, dark,
wet. His mind shrinks to a point that listens for footsteps, but his cock
swells, huge and blind, filling the world. His thrusts deepen and quicken,
but then he forces himself to pull back, to keep them shallow, a butterfly
fluttering that he knows she likes. Her hands come up and grasp his
buttocks – always a moment of danger – and for a while he has to stop
altogether, hanging there, mouth open. Then, cautiously, he starts again.

Cords stand out in her neck, her belly tightens, the fingers clutching his arse
are claws now. She groans, and he feels the movement of muscles in her
belly. Another groan, a cry, and now it’s impossible to stop, every thrust as
irresistible as the next breath to a drowning man. She raises her legs higher,
inviting him deeper, and he tries not to hear the desperation in her gasps, the
disappointment in her final cry, as he spills himself into her.

‘Yes?’ he gasps, as soon as he can speak.
‘No.’
Oh God. He drives himself on, thrusting away in a frictionless frenzy, his

knob a point of fire, feeling her teeter teeter on the brink, and then at last at
last tip over, fall, clutching and throbbing round his shrinking cock till he
cries out in pain. Oh, but she’s there, she’s laughing, he hears her laughter
deep in his chest.

Only his groin’s wet, too wet. He lifted himself off her and looked down.

Spunk, beaten stiff as egg-white, streaked their hair, flecks of foam on a
horse’s muzzle, spume blown back from the breaking wave, but to him it
meant one thing. The johnny – unfortunate word in the circumstances – was
still inside Sarah. He hooked it out, and they stared at it.

Sarah felt inside. ‘I think I’m all right,’ she said. ‘It’s all outside.’
No oiled casters, but a firm tread approached the house. He flung the

rubber into the fire, a million or so Billies and Sarahs perishing in a gasp of
flame. Small bloody comfort if another million were still inside her. She
pulled her skirts down and sat, sweating and desperate, in her mother’s
chair. He was about to sit down himself when he caught sight of her
drawers thrown across the family Bible, one raised leg drawing a decent
veil over Job and his boils. He snatched them up and stuffed them down the
neck of his tunic, which left him no time for his flies. He picked up the
Bible and sat with it in his lap.

‘Well,’ Ada said. ‘What happened to you?’
Sarah said, ‘Billy started thinking about a friend of his, Mam.’
Prior sat with his head on one hand, a passable imitation of David

mourning Jonathan.

Ada sniffed. ‘I see you’ve not thought to put the kettle on, our Sarah. It’s

a true saying in this life, if you want anything doing do it yourself.’

She went into the kitchen. Cynthia, glancing timidly from one to the

other, sat down on the edge of the sofa. Billy pulled Sarah’s drawers out of
his tunic and threw them across to her. Cynthia squealed, bunching her
clothes between her legs like a little girl afraid of wetting herself. Sarah
calmly stood up and put the drawers on, while Prior fumbled with buttons
beneath the Bible.

Ada came back into the room. ‘You missed a good show,’ she said. ‘Mrs

Roper had to be carried out. Still, no doubt you’ve been better employed.’
She indicated the Bible.

‘I was just trying to find the bit about the war-horse to show Sarah. But

it’s all right, I know it off by heart.’ He looked straight at Ada. ‘He paweth
in the valley and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed
men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from
the sword. He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle
afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.’

He got up and replaced the Bible, aware of three faces gawping at him.

An odd moment. ‘And now if you don’t mind,’ he said, ‘I think I’d like to
lie down.’

Sarah was allowed to go to the railway station with him unaccompanied.
They stood on the empty platform, exhausted mentally and physically,
obliged to cherish these last moments together, both secretly, guiltily
wanting it to be over.

He picked up her hand and kissed the ring. ‘Don’t worry, Sarah.’
‘I’m not worried.’ She smiled. ‘This time next year.’
He hadn’t thought about the actual marriage at all, once she’d made it

clear she didn’t want a quick wedding. Next year was a lifetime away.
Perhaps even a bit more. He watched a pigeon walk along the edge of the
platform, raw feet clicking on the concrete. ‘Come on,’ he said. ‘Let’s walk
along.’

They stopped under the shelter of the roof, for there was a fine rain

blowing. White northern light filtered through sooty glass. Sarah’s face
pinched with cold.

‘Write as soon as you get there,’ she said.
‘I’ll write from London. I’ll write on the train if you like.’
She smiled and shook her head. ‘I’m glad you told your mam anyway.’
‘She was delighted.’
She was horrified.
– Marrying a factory girl not that it matters of course as long as you’re

happy but I’d’ve thought you could have done a bit better for yourself than
that.

His father was incredulous.
– Married? You?
– Oscar Wilde was married, Dad, Prior had not been able to resist saying.
But then his father had come to the station to see him off – first time in

four years – and he’d to get out of bed to do it, because he was on nights,
and he was wearing his Sunday suit, and he’d shaved, and he was sober.
Jesus Christ, Prior had thought, all we need is the wreath.

A small hard pellet of dismay lodged in his throat. Premonition? No-o,

nothing so portentous. A slight sense of pushing his luck, perhaps. This was
the fourth time, and four was one too many.

‘I expect they’ll invite you over.’
Sarah smiled. ‘I think I’ll wait till you get back.’
He glanced covertly at his watch. Where was the bloody train? And then

he saw it, in the distance, crawling doubtfully along, trailing its plume of
steam. No sound yet, though as he stepped closer to the edge of the
platform he felt or sensed a vibration in the rails. He turned to face Sarah,
blocking her view of the train.

She was looking up at the rafters. ‘Have you seen them?’
He followed her gaze and saw that every rafter was lined with pigeons.

‘The warmth, I suppose,’ he said vaguely.

The roar of the approaching train startled the birds. They rose as one,

streaming out from under the glass roof in a great flapping and beating of

wings, wheeling, banking, swooping, turning, a black wave against the
smoke-filled sky. Prior and Sarah watched, open-mouthed, drunk on the
sight of so much freedom, their linked hands slackening, able, finally, to
think of nothing, as the train steamed in.

SIX

After tea he took Kath’s photograph album up to her room. He usually
brought snapshots of family and friends with him on these visits, because he
knew how much pleasure they gave her. She was sitting up in bed, faded
brown hair tied back by a blue ribbon, a pink bed jacket draped around her
shoulders. Blue and pink: the colours of the nursery. He took the tray off her
lap and gave her the album and the photographs.

She seized on a group of staff at the Empire Hospital. ‘You’ve got your

usual I-don’t-want-to-be-photographed expression,’ she said, holding it up
to the light.

‘Well, I didn’t.’
She was already busy pasting glue on to the back. ‘Is it true the natives

think the camera steals their souls?’

‘Some of them. The sensible ones.’
She pressed her handkerchief carefully around the edges of the

photograph, catching the seepage of glue. ‘It’s a good one of Dr Head.’

‘Oh, Henry isn’t worried, he hasn’t got a soul.’
‘Will.’
He looked at the tray. ‘You haven’t eaten much.’
‘I’m glad Ethel’s having a break. It’s been a shocking year.’
Ramsgate had been bombed heavily, a great many civilians, mainly

women and children, killed. As a result Kath’s health, which had long given
cause for concern, had dramatically deteriorated. Ethel, who’d looked after
their father in his old age, and then after this invalid younger sister, had
begun to show signs of strain herself, and the brothers had decided
something must be done. A holiday was out of the question, ruled out by

Ethel herself – she could not and would not go – but she had agreed to stay
with friends for a long weekend.

‘I think that’s the car now,’ Rivers said. ‘I’d better get the suitcase down.’
He found Ethel in the hall, pinning on her hat.
‘Now,’ she said, unable to let go, ‘you’ve got the telephone number?’
‘Yes.’
‘You’re sure you’ve got it?’
‘Yes.’ He pushed her gently towards the door.
‘No, listen, Will. If you’re worried, don’t hesitate, call the doctor.’
‘Ethel, I am a doctor.’
‘No, I mean a proper doctor.’
He was still smiling as he went back upstairs.
‘Is she gone?’
‘Yes, I had to push her out of the door, but she’s gone. Have you finished

sticking them in?’

He took the album from her and began turning the pages, pausing at a

photograph of himself and the other members of the Torres Straits
expedition. Barefoot, bare-armed, bearded, sun-tanned, wearing a collection
of spectacularly villainous hats, they looked for all the world like a low-
budget production of The Pirates of Penzance. The flower of British
anthropology, he thought, God help us. He turned a few more pages,
stopping at a snapshot from his days in Heidelberg. What on earth made
him think those side whiskers were a good idea?

‘I knew you’d stop there,’ Katharine said. ‘It’s her, isn’t it? The stout

one.’

‘Alma? Of course it isn’t.’ His sisters had teased him mercilessly at the

time, because he’d happened to be standing next to Alma in a snapshot.
‘Anyway, she wasn’t stout, she was … comfortable.’

‘She was stout. We really did think you were going to marry her, you

know. She was the only woman we ever saw you with.’

‘That’s not true either. Remember all the young ladies mother used to

invite to tea?’

‘I remember you sloping off upstairs to get away from them. You were

just like Mr Dodgson. He used to do that.’

Kath sometimes combined with childlike innocence a child’s sharpness

of perception.

‘Like Dodgson? God forbid.’
‘You didn’t like him, did you?’
He hesitated. ‘No.’
‘You were jealous. You and Charles.’
‘Yes, I think we were. Ah, this is the girl I’m looking for,’ he said,

holding up a photograph of a little girl in a white dress. Even in faded sepia
it was possible to tell what an exceptionally beautiful child she’d been.

Light from the standard lamp fell on the side of Dodgson’s face as he
opened the book.

‘S-shouldn’t we wait f-for K-K-K-Kath?’ he asked, the name clotting on

his tongue.

Sitting on the sofa beside Charles, Will thought, That’s because it’s the

same sound as hard c. C was Dodgson’s worst consonant. F and m were his.

‘No, I think we should start,’ his father said. ‘It’s not fair to keep

everybody waiting, just because Kath’s late.’

‘She’ll be here soon,’ Mother said. ‘Her stomach’s a good clock.’
‘Aren’t you w-w-w-w-w-woorr …?’
‘Not really. She knows she mustn’t leave the grounds.’
Will intercepted a glance between his parents. Mother shouldn’t have

completed Mr Dodgson’s sentence for him like that. You were supposed to
let people flounder, no matter how long it took.

Mr Dodgson stammered less when he read. And why was that? Because

he knew the words so well he didn’t have to think about them? Or because,
although his voice was loud, he was really just reading to Ethel, who sat
curled up in the crook of his arm, where she could see the pictures? He
never stammered much when he was talking to the girls. Or was it because
these were his words, and he was determined to get them out, no matter

what? It certainly wasn’t because he was thinking about the movements of
his tongue, which was what father said you should do.

‘The rabbit hole,’ Mr Dodgson read, or rather recited, for he was not

looking at the page but at the top of Ethel’s head, ‘went straight on like a
tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that
Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found
herself falling down a very deep –’

Kath burst in, hot, dirty, dishevelled, trailing her hat by its long blue

ribbon, raspberry stains round her mouth, grubby hands streaked with
cuckoo spit. She went straight to Mr Dodgson and gave him a bunch of
flowers whose stalks had wilted in the heat and flopped over the back of her
hand.

He took them from her and sat looking stupid, not knowing where to put

them, when his attention was caught. ‘Look,’ he said, ‘you’ve g-g-got a l-l-
l-ladybird in your h-hair.’

Kath stood, breathing through her mouth with concentration, as he teased

the strands of hair apart and persuaded the insect on to the tip of his finger.
He showed it to her, then carefully stood up, meaning to carry it to the
window, but the scarlet shards parted, the black wings spread, and the insect
sailed out, a dark speck on the blue air.

Dodgson sat down, drew Katharine on to his lap, folded his other arm

round Ethel again, and picked up the book.

‘– well,’ he said, and everybody laughed.

‘Do you remember how he hated snakes?’ Kath said, leaning back against
the pillows with the sunlight on her greying hair.

‘Yes, I remember.’
He was thinking that the whole course of Kath’s life had been

constriction into a smaller and smaller space. As children they’d both had a
hundred acres of safe woods and fields to roam in, but from that point on
his life had expanded: medical school, round the world as a ship’s doctor,
Germany, the Torres Straits, India, Australia, the Solomon Islands, the New
Hebrides. And over the same period the little girl who’d rambled all day

through woods and fields had become the younger of the two Miss Rivers,
scrutinized by her father’s parishioners, the slightest breach of decorum
noted, and then, after father’s retirement, a small house in Ramsgate,
deteriorating health, confinement to the house, then to the bedroom, then to
the bed. And yet she was no more intrinsically neurasthenic than he was
himself. But a good mind must have something to feed on, and hers,
deprived of other nourishment, had fed on itself.

He said slowly, ‘I think what I remember most is endless croquet.’ Oh

God, he remembered, hours and hours of it, a vast red sun hanging above
the trees, Dodgson’s body forming a hoop round Kath’s, his hands
enclosing hers, the click of mallets on balls, and mother’s voice drifting
across the lawn asking how much longer were they going to be? It was time
for Kath to come in. ‘Mathematical croquet,’ Rivers said. ‘Nobody could
win.’

‘I used to win.’
‘He helped you cheat.’
‘Yes.’ A faint smile. ‘I know he did.’
Once, on the river, Dodgson had tried to pin up Kath’s skirts so she could

paddle. He’d done it often enough before, indeed he carried safety-pins in
his lapels specifically for the purpose, but this time she’d pushed him away.
Some intensity in his gaze? Some quality in his touch? Their mother had
spoken sharply to her, but Dodgson had said, ‘No, leave her alone.’

‘It’s a pity we lost his letters,’ Rivers said.
‘Oh, and the drawings. There was a whole crate of things went missing.

I’m sure that painting of Uncle Will went at the same time –’

‘I don’t remember that.’
‘Yes, you do.’
‘Where was it?’
‘At the top of the stairs. You couldn’t put it in the drawing-room, it was

too horrible.’

‘What was it of?’
‘Uncle William having his leg cut off. And there was somebody waiting

with a sort of cauldron full of hot tar ready to pour it over the stump.’

‘Are you sure?’
‘You didn’t like it. When we all went downstairs in the morning I used to

see you not looking at it. You were like this.’ She turned her head to one
side.

‘Well, you have surprised me.’
A modestly triumphant smile. ‘I remember more than you do.’
Though, even as she spoke, he had a faint, very faint, recollection of

Father lifting him up to look at something. A curious exposed feeling at the
nape of his neck. ‘Father tried very hard with Charles and me. Didn’t he?’

‘You more than Charles.’
‘Ah, well, yes, I was the guinea-pig, wasn’t I? The first child always is.’

A greater bitterness in his voice than he knew how to account for. He
brushed it aside. ‘I’ll make us some cocoa, shall I? And then I think you
should try and get some sleep.’

– Do you remember how he hated snakes?
– Yes, I remember.
That’s the trouble, Rivers thought, taking off his shirt in the spare

bedroom that had once been his father’s study, I remember her childhood
better than my own. Though another person’s life, observed from outside,
always has a shape and definition that one’s own life lacks.

It was odd he couldn’t remember that picture, when Kath, ten years

younger, remembered it so clearly. He’d certainly have been shown it, many
many times. He was named after William Rivers of the Victory, who, as a
young midshipman, had shot the man who shot Lord Nelson. That was the
family legend anyway. And the great man, dying, had not indulged in any
effete nonsense about kissing Hardy, nor had he entrusted Lady Hamilton to
the conscience of a grateful nation. No, his last words had been, ‘Look after
young Will Rivers for me.’ And young Will Rivers had needed looking
after. He’d been wounded in the mouth and leg, and the leg had had to be
amputated. Without an anaesthetic, since there were no anaesthetics, except
rum. And then hot tar to cauterize the spurting stump. My God, it was a
wonder any of them survived. And throughout the ordeal – family legend

again – he had not once cried out. He’d survived, married, had children,
become Warden of Greenwich Hospital. There was a portrait bust of him
there, in the Painted Hall.

Now that he did remember being taken to see. Was that the occasion on

which his father had lifted him up to look? No, he’d have been eight or
nine.

And then he remembered. Quite casually, a bubble breaking on the

surface. He’d had his hair cut, he’d just been breeched, yes, that was it, his
neck felt funny, and so did his legs. And he was crying. Yes, it was all
coming back. He’d embarrassed his father in the barber’s shop by howling
his head off. Bits of him were being cut off, bits of him were dropping on to
the floor. His father shushed him, and when that didn’t work, slapped his
leg. He gasped with shock, filled his lungs with air, and howled louder. So
being shown the picture was a lesson? You don’t behave like that, you
behave like this. ‘He didn’t cry,’ his father had said, holding him up. ‘He
didn’t make a sound.’

And I’ve been stammering ever since, Rivers thought, inclined to see the

funny side. Though what had it meant – Trafalgar, the Napoleonic wars – to
a four-year-old for whom a summer’s day was endless? Nothing, it could
have meant nothing. Or, worse, it had meant something fearfully simple.
The same name, the slapped leg, being told not to cry. Had he perhaps
looked at the picture and concluded that this was what happened to you if
your name was William Rivers?

He’d avoided looking at it, Kath said, even turning his head away so that

he could not glimpse it by mistake as he went past. Had he also deliberately
suppressed the visual image of it, making it impossible for himself to see it
in his mind’s eye? Prior, told that Rivers attributed his almost total lack of
visual memory to an event in his childhood that he had succeeded in
forgetting, had said brutally, ‘You were raped or beaten … Whatever it was,
you put your mind’s eye out rather than have to go on seeing it. Is that what
happened, or isn’t it?’ Yes, Rivers had been obliged to admit, though he’d
argued very strongly for a less dramatic interpretation of events. It could
have been something quite trivial, he’d said, though terrifying to a child.

Something as simple as the fearsome shadow of a dressing-gown on the
back of the nursery door. Small children are not like adults, he’d insisted.
What terrifies them may seem trivial to us.

Was this the suppressed memory? He didn’t know. Was it trivial? Well,

yes, in a way, compared with Prior’s lurid imaginings. A smack on the leg,
a lesson in manliness from an over-conscientious but loving father. It’s a
long way from sadistic beatings or sexual assault. And yet it wasn’t as
trivial as it seemed at first. That silence – for him now that was the centre of
the picture – not the blood, not the knife, but that resolutely clenched
mouth. Every day of his working life he looked at twitching mouths that
had once been clenched. Go on, he said, though rarely in so many words,
cry. It’s all right to grieve. Breakdown’s nothing to be ashamed of – the
pressures were intolerable. But, also, stop crying. Get up on your feet.
Walk. He both distrusted that silence and endorsed it, as he was bound to
do, he thought, being his father’s son.

He went to Greenwich by train, visited the portrait bust in the Painted Hall,
then continued his journey by steamer, arriving at Westminster steps in the
late afternoon. The underground was crowded, he couldn’t find a taxi, and
by the time he turned the corner of Holford Road Prior was already there,
standing on the steps. ‘Have you knocked?’ Rivers asked.

‘No, I saw you coming. Been at the hospital?’
‘No, I’ve just got back from Ramsgate.’ He fitted his key into the lock.

‘Now if we tiptoe across the hall …’

Prior smiled, having encountered Rivers’s landlady many times in the

past.

‘All clear,’ Rivers said.
They walked upstairs side by side, Rivers noticing how easily Prior was

breathing. Sometimes, during the past summer, he’d listened to Prior’s step
on these stairs and counted the pauses. He’d never gone out on to the top
landing to greet Prior as he did with all his other patients because he knew
how intolerable he would find it to be seen fighting for breath. But now his
chest was remarkably clear, a reflection perhaps of the satisfaction he felt at

going back to France. Rivers opened the door of his rooms, and stood aside
to let Prior enter.

Somehow or other he had to prevent this meeting becoming a

confrontation, as consultations with Prior still tended to do. Prior would
enjoy the skirmish at the time – there was nothing he liked better – but he’d
regret it later. ‘Well, sit yourself down,’ Rivers said, taking Prior’s coat and
pointing to a chair by the fire. ‘How are you?’

‘Quite well. Chest works. Tongue works.’
‘Nightmares?’
‘Hmm … a few. I had one where the faces on the revolver targets – you

know, horrible snarling baby-eating boche – turned into the faces of people
I love. But only after I’d pulled the trigger, so there was nothing I could do
about it. ’Fraid I killed you every time.’

‘Ah, so it isn’t a bad nightmare, then?’
They smiled at each other. Rivers thought Prior was entirely unaware of

what he’d said, though that was always a dangerous assumption to make
about Prior. Perhaps because he’d recently been thinking about his own
father Rivers was more than usually aware of the strong father–son element
in his relationship with Prior. He had no son; Prior utterly rejected his
natural father. ‘Oh, by the way, congratulations on your engagement.’

Hmm, Prior thought. Charles Manning’s congratulations had also been

brief, though in his case the brevity might be excused, since he’d had to
take Prior’s cock out of his mouth to be able to say anything at all. ‘Thank
you.’

‘Have you fixed a date?’
‘Next August. We met in August, we got engaged in August, so …’
‘And when do you leave for France?’
‘Tonight. I’m glad to be going.’
‘Yes.’
Prior smiled. ‘Do you think I’m ready to go back?’
A slight hesitation. ‘I think I’d be happier if you did another twelve

weeks’ home service. Which would still,’ he persisted across Prior’s
interruptions, ‘get you back to France by the end of November.’

‘Why?’
‘You know why. Two months ago you were having memory lapses.

Rather bad ones actually. Anyway this is purely hypothetical. Wasn’t my
decision –’

Prior leant forward. ‘I was afraid you’d write.’
‘It never occurred to me anybody would think of sending you back.’
‘I think the MO was against it. Well, that was my impression anyway.

How would I know? As for the Board, well, they wanted to send me back. I
wanted to go.’

‘What did they ask you about? Nerves?’
‘No, not mentioned. They don’t believe in shell-shock. You’d be

surprised how many army Medical Boards don’t.’

Rivers snorted. ‘Oh, I don’t think I would. Anyway, you’re going back.

You’ve got what you wanted.’

‘At the moment I can’t wait to see the back of England.’
‘Any particular reason?’
‘It’s nothing really. I just had my fur rubbed up the wrong way.’ He

hesitated. ‘Manning took me to meet Robert Ross. I don’t know whether
you’ve met him? Through Sassoon?’

‘Briefly.’
‘I liked him, he was charming – I wasn’t equally keen on some of his

friends.’

Rivers waited.
‘One in particular. Apparently he’d been stood up by his boyfriend – he’d

been expecting an amorous weekend – and the poor chap had decided it
wasn’t worth the train fare from Leeds. And this man – Birtwhistle, his
name is – was saying, “Of course one can’t rely on them. Their values are
totally different from ours. They’re a different species, really. The WCs.”
Smirk, smirk.’

Rivers looked puzzled.
‘Working classes. Water-closets. The men who’re getting their ballocks

shot off so he can go on being the lily on the dung heap. God, they make me
sick.’

‘I’m sure you more than held your own.’
‘No, I didn’t, that’s what bothers me. It all got tangled up with being a

guest and being polite. To Ross, of course, not him. Anyway I decided to
give this prat a run for his money so we adjourned upstairs afterwards.’

‘You and Manning?’
‘No, me and Birtwhistle. Birtwhistle and I.’
‘It doesn’t sound much like a punishment.’
‘Oh, it was. Nothing like sexual humiliation, Rivers. Nobody ever forgets

that.’

Rivers looked into the trustless eyes, and thought, My God, I wouldn’t

want to cross you. Though he had crossed him many times, in the course of
therapy, and refused more than one invitation to ‘adjourn upstairs’.

‘I just wish your last evening had been pleasanter.’
Prior shrugged. ‘It was all right. It just … he happens to represent

everything in England that isn’t worth fighting for. Which made him a
rather bracing companion.’ He glanced at his watch. ‘I’d better be going.
I’m catching the midnight train.’

Rivers hesitated. ‘Please don’t think because I personally would have

recommended another three months in England that I don’t have every
confidence in your ability to … to …’

‘Do my duty to King and country.’
‘Yes.’
‘Rivers, you don’t think I should be going back at all.’
Rivers hesitated. ‘The Board at Craiglockhart recommended permanent

home service and that wasn’t because of your nerves, it was on the basis of
your asthma alone. I haven’t seen anything to make me change my mind.’

Prior looked at him, smiled, and slapped him on both arms. ‘I’ve got to

go.’

Rivers said slowly, as he went to get Prior’s coat, ‘Do you remember

saying something to me once about the the the ones who go back b-being
the real test cases? From the point of view of finding out whether a
particular therapy works?’

‘Yes, I remember.’ Another smile. ‘I was getting at you.’

‘You always were. Well, it just occurs to me you’re actually rather better

equipped than most people to observe that process. I think you have great
powers of detachment.’

‘ “Cold-blooded little bastard,”’ Prior translated, then thought for a

moment. ‘You’re giving me a football to kick across, aren’t you? You
remember that story? The Suffolk’s kicking a football across No Man’s
Land when the whistles blew on the Somme? Bloody mad.’

‘No, the battle was mad. The football was sane. Whoever ordered them to

do that was a very good psychologist.’

‘Ah!’
‘But I know what you mean. It’s become the kind of incident one can’t

take seriously any more. Only I’m not sure that’s right, you see. I suppose
what one should be asking is whether an ideal becomes invalid because the
people who hold it are betrayed.’

‘If holding it makes them into naïve idiots, yes.’
‘Were they?’
‘If they were, I can’t talk. I’m going back.’
Rivers smiled. ‘So you don’t want my football?’
‘On the contrary, I think it’s a brilliant idea. I’ll send you the half-time

score.’

Rivers handed him his greatcoat, examining it first. ‘I’m impressed.’
‘So you should be at the price.’ Prior started to put it on. ‘Do you know

you can get these with scarlet silk linings?’

‘Army greatcoats?’
‘Yes. Saw one in the Café Royal. On the back of one of my old

intelligence colleagues. Quite a startling effect when he crossed his legs,
subtle, you know, like a baboon’s bottom. Apparently he’s supposed to sit
there and “attract the attention of anti-war elements”.’

‘Was he?’
‘He was attracting attention. I don’t know what their views on the war

were. Another thing that made me glad to be getting out of it.’ He held out
his hand. ‘Don’t come down.’

Rivers took him at his word, but went through to the bedroom window

and looked out, lifting the curtain an inch to one side. Miss Irving’s voice, a
laughing farewell, and then Prior appeared, foreshortened, running down
the steps.

On Vao there was a custom that when a bastard was born some leading

man on the island adopted the child and brought him up as his own. The
boy called him father, and grew up surrounded by love and care and then,
when he reached puberty, he was given the honour, as befitted the son of a
great man, of leading in the sacrificial pig, one of the huge-tusked boars in
which the wealth of the people was measured. He was given new bracelets,
new necklaces, a new penis wrapper and then, in front of the entire
community, all of whom knew what was about to happen, he led the pig to
the sacrificial stone, where his father waited with upraised club. And, as the
boy drew near, he brought the club down and crushed his son’s skull.

In one of his father’s churches, St Faith’s, at Maidstone, the window to

the left of the altar shows Abraham with the knife raised to slay his son,
and, below the human figures, a ram caught in the thicket by his horns. The
two events represented the difference between savagery and civilization, for
in the second scenario the voice of God is about to forbid the sacrifice, and
will be heeded. He had knelt at that altar rail for years, Sunday after
Sunday, receiving the chalice from his father’s hands.

Perhaps, Rivers thought, watching Prior’s head bob along behind the

hedge and disappear from view, it was because he’d been thinking so much
about fathers and sons recently that the memory of the two sacrifices had
returned, but he wished this particular memory had chosen another moment
to surface.

Part Two

29 August 1918

Bought this in a stationer’s just off Fleet Street quite a long time ago. I’ve
been carrying it round with me ever since unused, mainly because it’s so
grand. I bought it for the marbled covers and the thick creamy pages and
ever since then the thick creamy pages have been saying, Piss off, what
could you possibly write on us that would be worth reading? It’s a
marvellous shop, a real old-fashioned stationer’s. Stationers’, second-hand
bookshops, ironmongers’. Feel a great need at the moment to concentrate
on small pleasures. If the whole of one’s life can be summoned up and held
in the palm of one hand, in the living moment, then time means nothing.
World without end, Amen.

Load of crap. Facts are what we need, man. Facts.
Arrived in London to find no porters, no taxis, and the hotels full.

Charles Manning on the platform (the train was so late I was sure he’d’ve
gone home), offering, as a solution, the room he rents in Half Moon Street,
‘for the nights when he works late at the office and doesn’t want to disturb
the household’. Oh, c’mon, Charles, I wanted to say. It’s me, remember? I
was all for trudging round a few more hotels, but he was limping badly and
obviously in pain and pissed off with me for going back when I could have
been comfortably established in the Min of Mu chasing bits of paper across
a desk, like him. (He’d go back to France tomorrow if they’d have him.)

When we got to Half Moon Street we went straight upstairs and he

produced a bottle of whisky. Not bad (but not what he drinks himself either)
and I waited for him to do what everybody else would do in the
circumstances and collect the rent. He didn’t, of course. I’m plagued with

honourable people. I thought, Oh, for Christ’s sake, if you haven’t got the
gumption to ask for it bloody do without. I was feeling tired and sticky and
wanted a bath. After ten minutes of swishing soapy water round my groin
and whisky round my guts I started to feel better. I had a quiet consultation
with myself in the bathroom mirror, all steamy and pink and conspiratorial,
and went back in and said, Right let’s be having you. Over the end of the
bed. He likes being dominated, as people often do who’ve never had to
raise their voice in their lives to get other people running after them.

Then we went out to dinner, came back, Charles stayed a while, long

enough to introduce me to Ross – extraordinary man, rather Chinese-
looking, and not just physically, a sense of a very old civilization. I shook
his hand and I thought I’m shaking the hand that … Well, there is the
connection with Wilde. And I felt at home in this rather beleaguered little
community. Beleaguered, because Ross thinks he’s going to be arrested, he
thinks the utterly disgusting Pemberton Billing affair has given them carte
blanche to go ahead and do it. He may be exaggerating the risk, he looks ill,
he looks as if he goes to bed and broods, but one or two people there,
including Manning, don’t seem to rule out an arrest. A comfortable
atmosphere in spite of it. Soldiers who aren’t militarists, pacifists who
aren’t prigs, and talking to each other. Now there’s a miracle.

But then – Birtwhistle. He’s a don at Cambridge, very clever, apparently.

Curiously, he actually prides himself on having a broader grasp of British
society than the average person, i.e. he pokes working-class boys’ bottoms.
Might even be true, I suppose, though the heterosexual equivalent doesn’t
pride itself on broadening its social experience whenever it nips off for a
knee-wobbler in Bethnal Green. Ah, but these are relationships, Birtwhistle
would say. Did say. Lurve, no less. And yet he spoke of his working-class
lover – his WC – in tones of utter contempt. And he didn’t succeed in
placing me, or not accurately enough. So much for the broader grasp. I
played a rather cruel convoluted game with him afterwards. Which satisfied
me a great deal at the time, but now I feel contaminated, as I wouldn’t have
done if I’d kicked him in the balls (which would also have been kinder).

Manning – after we’d had sex – became very strange. Great distances

opened up. Partly because he hadn’t intended it to happen – or didn’t think
he had – and partly just because I’m going back and he isn’t. Two inches of
sheet between us – miles miles. I was glad when he went and I’m even more
glad he’s not here now. Very few pleasures in sex are any match for a
narrow bed and cool, clean sheets. (A post-coital reflection if ever I heard
one.)

30 August

Collected my coat today. I’m not even going to write down how much it
cost, but it’s warm and light and it looks good, and I need all of that.

Mooched round the rest of the day doing nothing very much. Dinner at

Half Moon Street in my room. Saw Rivers afterwards. Had made up my
mind not to ask what he thought about my going back – and specifically not
to ask if he thought I was fit – then asked anyway and was predictably
irritated by the answer.

I had a very clear perception while we were talking – I suppose because

I’ve been away for a while – that his power over people, the power to heal
if you like, springs directly from some sort of wound or deformity in him.
He has a lot of strengths, but he isn’t working from strength. Difficult to say
this without sounding patronizing, which isn’t how I feel. In fact for me it’s
the best thing about him – well the only thing that makes him tolerable,
actually – that he doesn’t sit behind the desk implicitly setting himself up as
some sort of standard of mental health. He once said to me half the world’s
work’s done by hopeless neurotics, and I think he had himself in mind. And
me.

Got to the station with an hour to spare and Manning showed up. I

wished he hadn’t but there he was and of course we had one of these awful
station conversations. The ripples between those going out and those
staying behind are so bloody awful the whole thing’s best avoided.
However, we got through it, looked at each other through the window with
mutual relief and then away we went. Or I went.

Arrived here (Folkestone) in the middle of the night, exhausted. There’s

something about railway stations, and I’ve been in a lot of them recently.
The goodbyes all get trapped under the roof and suck the oxygen out of the
air. No other reason for me to feel like this.

Saturday, 31 August

Woke tired. But got up anyway, not wasting time – ‘wasting time’, ‘killing
time’ start to be phrases you notice – lying in bed, and sat on the balcony
for a while watching the sun come up and decided to do what people always
think about doing, and then think again and go back to sleep: I decided to
swim before breakfast. So down to the beach. Hovered on the shingle by the
waterline, told myself not to be so feeble, etc., and plunged in. Water pearly
grey, absolutely bloody freezing, but, after the first shock, total exhilaration.
I stood for a while afterwards up to my knees, feeling the surge and suck
round my legs, neither in the sea nor on the land. Marvellous. Still the
slanting light of early morning. Worm casts on the beach very prominent,
the sun casting vast shadows from little things, and I thought of the beach
outside Edinburgh where I made love to Sarah for the first time. Went
straight back and wrote to her. Then walked through town, giving myself
small treats, chocolates, etc. and avoiding other officers.

Saw Hallet with his family, looking quite desperate. All of them, but I

meant Hallet. Poor little bugger’s had a station goodbye that’s lasted for
days. I waved and passed on.

On board

People playing cards below deck, but there’s quite a heave on the sea, and
I’d rather be out here watching it. Great bands of pale green in the wake,
laced with thick foam, and terns hovering, riding rather – only the most
fractional adjustment of their wings needed to keep them motionless. And
they come quite close.

Watched the cliffs disappear. Tried to think of something worthy of the

occasion and came up with: The further out from England the nearer is to

France, and then couldn’t get rid of the bloody thing, it just ran round and
round my head.

Hallet came up and stood a few yards away, not wanting to intrude on

what he took to be a fond farewell to the motherland. In the end I gave in,
we sat down and talked. Full of idealism. I’d rather have had the Walrus and
the Carpenter.

It’s very obvious that Hallet’s adopted me. Like one of those little pilot

fish or the terns for that matter. He thinks because I’ve been out three times
before I know what’s going on. Seems a bright enough lad. I wonder how
long it’ll take him to work out that nobody knows what’s going on?

Sunday, 1 September

Étaples marginally less brutal than I remember it, though still a squad of
men passed me running the gauntlet of the canaries, who yelled abuse in
their faces much as they always did. And you think, All right it has to be
brutal – think what they’re being toughened up for – but actually that
misses the point. It’s the impersonality that forms the biggest part of the
sheer fucking nastiness of this place. Nobody knows anybody. You marshal
men around – they don’t know you, don’t trust you (why should they?) and
you don’t invest anything in them.

Same feeling, in a milder form, between the officers. We sleep in

dormitories, and it’s the same feeling you get on big wards in hospitals –
privacy sacrificed without intimacy being gained.

Hallet’s in the next bed. He sat on his bed this evening and showed me a

photograph of his girl – fiancee, I should say. His parents think he’s too
young to marry, which he fiercely objects to, pointing out that he’s old
enough for this. Of course I don’t think he’s old enough for this either, but I
don’t say so. Instead I told him I’d got engaged too and showed him a
photograph of Sarah. And then we sat smiling at each other inanely, feeling
like complete idiots. Well, I did.

Wednesday, 4 September

Time passes quickly here. Enough to do during the day, and a fair amount
of free time. But the atmosphere’s awful. The mess has scuffed no-colour
lino – the colour of misery, if misery has a colour – and a big round table in
the middle, covered with dog-eared copies of Punch and John Bull, exactly
like a dentist’s waiting-room. The same pervasive fear. The same reluctance
to waste time on people you’re probably never going to see again anyway.

I get out as often as I can. Walked miles today, great windswept sandy

foothills, and a long line of stunted pines all leaning away from the sea.

Saturday, 7 September

Posted to the 2nd Manchesters. We leave tomorrow.

It’s evening now, and everybody’s scribbling away, telling people the

news, or as much of the news as we’re allowed to tell them. I look up and
down the dormitory and there’s hardly a sound except for pages being
turned, and here and there a pen scratching. It’s like this every evening. And
not just letters either. Diaries. Poems. At least two would-be poets in this
hut alone.

Why? you have to ask yourself. I think it’s a way of claiming immunity.

First-person narrators can’t die, so as long as we keep telling the story of
our own lives we’re safe. Ha bloody fucking Ha.

EIGHT

Rivers turned to watch the sun swelling and reddening as it sank, a brutal,
bloody disc, scored by steeples and factory chimneys, obscured by a haze of
drifting brown and yellow smoke.

He’d come out to walk on Hampstead Heath because he was feeling ill,

and needed to clear his head before settling down to an evening’s work, but
it wasn’t helping. With every step he felt worse, muscles aching, throat
sore, eyes stinging, skin clammy. By the time he got back to his lodgings,
he’d decided to miss dinner and go straight to bed. He knocked on the door
of Mrs Irving’s private apartments, told her he wasn’t feeling well and
wouldn’t be in to dinner, and glimpsed through the open door the portrait of
her dead son that hung above the mantelpiece, with flowers beneath it and
candlesticks on either side.

Going slowly upstairs, pausing frequently to lean on the banister, Rivers

thought about what he’d just seen: the portrait, the flowers. A shrine. Not
fundamentally different from the skull houses of Pa Na Gundu where he’d
gone with Njiru. The same human impulse at work. Difficult to know what
to make of these flashes of cross-cultural recognition. From a strictly
professional point of view, they were almost meaningless, but then one
didn’t have such experiences as a disembodied anthropological intelligence,
but as a man, and as a man one had to make some kind of sense of them.

Once in bed he started to shiver. The sheets felt cold against his hot legs.

He slept and dreamt of the croquet lawn at Knowles Bank, his mother in a
long white dress coming out to call the children in, the sun setting over the
wood casting very long, fine shadows across the lawn. The shadows of the
hoops were particularly long and fearful. He’d been awake for several
minutes before he realized he was trying to remember the rules of,

mathematical croquet, as devised by Dodgson, and actually feeling
distressed because he couldn’t remember them. Then he realized that
although he was now fully awake he could still see the lawn, which meant
his temperature was very high. Always, in a high fever, his visual memory
returned, giving him a secret, obscurely shameful pleasure in being ill. He
wouldn’t sleep again – he was far too hot – so he simply lay and let his
newly opened mind’s eye roam.

On the Southern Cross, on the voyage to Eddystone, he’d stood on deck,

watching the pale green wake furrow the dark sea, reluctant to exchange the
slight breeze for the stuffy heat below deck.

At one of the stops a group of natives got on, the men wearing cast-off

European suits, the women floral-print dresses. A few of the women had
naked breasts, but most were obviously missionized. A pathetic little
remnant they looked, squatting there, part of the small army of uprooted
natives who drifted from one island to the next, one mission station to the
next, and belonged nowhere. At first sight all mission stations seemed to be
surrounded by converts, and the uninitiated always assumed these were
converts from that island. Only later did one become aware of this uprooted
population, travelling from one station to the next, most of them from
islands where the impact of western culture had been particularly
devastating.

He squatted down beside them, and, as he expected, found enough

knowledge of pidgin to make conversation possible. He’d devised a
questionnaire that he used on occasions when it was necessary to extract the
maximum amount of information quickly. The first question was always:
Suppose you were lucky enough to find a guinea, with whom would you
share it? This produced a list of names, names which he would then ask
them to translate into kinship terms. And from there one could move to
virtually any aspect of their society.

When he sensed they were getting tired he paid them their tobacco sticks

and stood up to go, but then one of the women caught his arm and pulled
him down again. Poking him playfully in the chest, she retrieved two words
of English from her small store: ‘Your turn.’

The questions were posed again and in the same order. When he told

them that, since he was unmarried and had no children, he would not
necessarily feel obliged to share his guinea with anybody, they at first
refused to believe him. Had he no parents living? Yes, a father. Brothers and
sisters? One brother, two sisters. Same mother, same father? Yes. But he
would not automatically share the guinea with them, though he might
choose to do so.

The woman who’d pulled his arm looked amused at first, then, when she

was sure she’d understood, horrified. And so it went on. Because the
questions were very carefully chosen, they gradually formed an impression
– and not a vague impression either, in some respects quite precise – of the
life of a bachelor don in a Cambridge college. Hilarity was the main
response. And if the questions had led on to more intimate territory? If he’d
been able, or willing, to lay before them the whole constricting business of
trying to fit into society, of living under and around and outside the law,
what would have been their reaction then? Laughter. They’d have gone on
laughing. They would not have known how to pity him. He looked up, at
the blue, empty sky, and realized that their view of his society was neither
more nor less valid than his of theirs. No bearded elderly white man looked
down on them, endorsing one set of values and condemning the other. And
with that realization, the whole frame of social and moral rules that keeps
individuals imprisoned – and sane – collapsed, and for a moment he was in
the same position as these drifting, dispossessed people. A condition of
absolute free-fall.

Then, next day, after a restless night, he and Hocart transferred to a tramp

steamer for the last stage of the journey, and there he met the logical end
product of the process of free-fall – the splat on the pavement, as it were –
Brennan.

Smells of engine oil and copra, of sweaty human beings sleeping too close
together in the little covered cabin on deck. Above their heads, offering no
clear reference point to northern eyes, foreign constellations wheeled and
turned.

Brennan slept opposite, his profile, under a fringe of greying curls, like

that of a Roman emperor’s favourite run to seed. He snored, gargled,
stopped breathing, gargled again, muttered a protest as if he thought
somebody else had woken him, returned to sleep. On the other side of the
cabin was Father Michael, trailing behind him the atmosphere of the
theological college he’d not long left behind – cups of cocoa and late-night
discussions on chastity in other people’s bedrooms. Then Hocart, looking
much younger than twenty-five, his upper lip pouting on every breath.

Rivers supposed he must have slept eventually, though it seemed no time

at all before they were stretching and stumbling out on deck.

The deckhands, emerging from their airless hellhole next to the engine,

swabbed passengers down along with the deck. They finished off with a
bucket of cold water thrown full into the face so that one was left gasping
and blinded. Brennan stood, eyes closed, one hand resting between his
plump breasts, a hirsute Aphrodite, water dripping from his nose, his
foreskin, the hairs on his wrinkled and baggy scrotum. It was impossible to
dislike somebody who brought such enormous zest to the minute-by-minute
business of living.

As the sun rose, beating down on to the steaming deck, they began the

day-long search for patches of shade. Father Michael and Hocart came
close to quarrelling about the record of missionaries in the islands. Hocart
was the product of a Victorian vicarage, and something of a rebel. Michael
obviously thought he’d fallen among atheists, or worse. Brennan listened to
the argument, scratched his neck, then gathered phlegm in his throat, a rich,
bubbling sound – his zest for life became a bit much at times – and spat it
on the deck, where he inspected it carefully, and Rivers, cursing his medical
training, found himself inspecting it too. ‘I knew a missionary once,’
Brennan said, with a look of placid, lazy malice. ‘Didn’t speak a word of
the language – just sets up shop – Jesus saves. And then he starts to get
worried ’cause they all come flocking round but he can’t get the buggers to
kneel down. So down on his knees he goes. “What’s the word for this?”
Well you know and I know,’ Brennan said, turning to Rivers, ‘there’s only
one thing they do kneeling down. Come next Sunday, bloody great

congregation, up he stands – raises his arms.’ He looked at Michael and, in
an amazingly pure counter-tenor, sang, ‘Let us fuck.’

A bray of laughter from the open door of the engine-room where the

skipper stood, wiping his fingers on an oily rag.

‘I wish you’d leave Michael alone,’ Rivers said to Hocart after the others

had gone below deck.

‘Why? He’s an arrogant little –’
‘He’s a baby.’
But Hocart, a baby himself, saw no need for mercy.
After dark, packed round the rickety table on which they ate their dinner,

there was no escaping each other’s company. Elbows jarred, knees joggled,
the leather seats tormented patches of prickly heat. Much covert and not so
covert scratching of backsides went on. The skipper joined them for the
meal, but contributed little to the conversation, preferring to be amused in
silence. His trade had made him a connoisseur of social discomfort.

Brennan, sensing that Rivers liked him, embarked on what threatened to

become his life story, interspersed with swigs of whisky and great breathy
revelations of dental decay. He showed Rivers a photograph of his three
naked brown babies tumbling over each other in the dust. Behind them,
face, neck and breasts covered in tattoos, stood a young girl. ‘She must be
from Lepers Island,’ Rivers said.

Brennan took the photograph back and stared at it. ‘Yeh, that’s right.

Bitch.’

He seemed about to say more. Rivers said quickly, ‘I didn’t realize you’d

been in the New Hebrides.’

‘Started there.’
He’d started as a ‘blackbirder’, as so many of the older traders had,

kidnapping natives to work on the Queensland plantations, and he was
frank about his methods too. Make friends with them, invite them on board
ship, get them drunk and Bob’s your uncle. By the time they come round
they’re out at sea and there’s bugger all they can do about it. Used to give
the girls a bit of a run round the deck, mind. We-ll why not, they’re all
gunna get their arses fucked off when they get to the plantations anyway.

‘Do you know,’ he went on, leaning across the table in search of somebody
to shock, and fixing on Michael, though Hocart’s expression might have
made him the more obvious choice, ‘you can buy a woman – white, mind –
for forty quid in Sydney?’

‘I’d’ve thought forty quid was a bit steep,’ Hocart said.
‘Buy, man, I’m not talking about fucking rent.’
‘So why didn’t you?’
‘Nah,’ Brennan said morosely, swishing whisky round his glass. ‘Years

on their backs.’ He turned to Rivers. ‘Half way through the honeymoon
you’d be pissing hedgehogs backwards. He knows what I mean,’ he said,
jerking his thumb at Rivers.

‘We all know what you mean,’ Hocart said.
The skipper leant forward, smiling a positively old-maidish smile. ‘How

about a nice game of cards?’

And then there was no further talk, only the creaking of the spirit-lamp

above their heads, and the plump slap of cards on the table. Rivers, amused,
watched Hocart slowly realize that when confronted by a dwindling stock
of coins, Father Michael cheated and Brennan didn’t.

Next morning – a small triumph for Melanesia – Father Michael, who’d

hitherto crouched over a bucket to wash, stripped off with the rest of them,
his white arum lily of a body with its improbable stamen looking almost
shocking beside Brennan’s.

The conversation that morning meandered on amicably enough, as they

leaned together, sweating, in their patches of shade, until a smudge of blue-
green on the horizon restored them to separateness.

By late afternoon they’d moored by a rotting landing stage on Eddystone,

and clambered ashore to supervise the unloading of their stores. Rivers was
used to missionized islands where canoes paddled out to meet the incoming
steamer, brown faces, white eyes, flashing smiles, while others gathered at
the landing stage, ready to carry bags up to the mission station for a few
sticks of tobacco or even sheer Christian goodwill. A cheerful picture, as
long as you didn’t notice the rows and rows of crosses in the mission
graveyard, men and women in the prime of life dead of the diseases of the

English nursery: whooping cough, measles, diphtheria, chicken pox, scarlet
fever – all were fatal here. And the mission boat carried them from island to
island, station to station, remorselessly, year after year.

Instead of that – nothing. Nobody appeared. Rivers and Hocart waved till

the steamer dwindled to a point on the glittering water, then lugged the tent
and enough food for the night up to a small clearing a hundred yards or so
above the beach. Spread out below them was the Bay of Narovo. The
village, whose huts they could just see between the trees, was also called
Narovo.

‘Aren’t we a bit close?’ Hocart asked.
‘We don’t want to be too far away. If we’re isolated we’ll be frightening.

The wicked witch lives in the wood, remember.’

‘What do you suppose they’ll do?’
Rivers shrugged. ‘They’ll be along.’
By the time they’d erected the tent the swift tropical darkness was falling.

After sunset the island breathed for a moment in silence; from the bush
arose the buzz of different insects, the cries of different birds. Rivers was
intensely aware of the fragility of the small lighted area round the tent. He
kept peering into the trees and thought he saw dark shapes flitting between
the trunks, but still nobody appeared.

After a meal of tinned meat and turnipy pineapple, Hocart said he would

lie down. He looked utterly exhausted, and Rivers suspected he might be
running a slight fever. Shrouded in his mosquito net, Hocart talked for a
while, then switched off his torch and turned over to sleep.

Rivers sat at a table immediately outside the tent, trying to mend the oil-

lamp which was smoking badly. A small figure alone in the clearing, in a
storm-of pale wings, for every moth in the bush appeared and fluttered
round the light. Now and then one succeeded in finding a way in, and there
was a quick sizzle, a flare, more smoke. Rivers shook out the charred
corpse and started again. An oddly nerve-racking business, this. Working so
close to the light, he was almost blinded and could see virtually nothing
even when he raised his head. He was aware of the thick darkness of the
bush around him, but more as a pressure on his mind than through his

senses. Once he stopped, thinking he heard a flute being played in the
village. He sniffed the oil on his fingers, wiped his chin on the back of his
hand, and sat back for a rest, his retinas aching as they do after an optician
has shone his torch on to them. He took his glasses off and wiped them on
his shirt. When he put them on again he saw a figure had come out from
among the trees, and was standing on the edge of the clearing. A man in
early middle age, white lime streaks in his hair, around the eye sockets, and
along the cheek and jaw-bones, so that it seemed – until he caught the glint
of eye white – that he was looking at a skull. He sat absolutely still, as the
man came towards him. Alone, or apparently alone. He indicated the other
chair, thinking it might be refused, but his visitor sat down, inclined his
head slightly, and smiled.

Rivers pointed to himself and said his name.
A thin brown hand raised to his shell necklace. ‘Njiru.’
They stared at each other. Rivers thought he ought to offer food, but the

only food easily available was the remains of the pineapple, and he was
chary of breaking off the encounter by going into the tent to look for it.

Njiru was deformed. Without the curvature of the spine he would have

been a tall man – by Melanesian standards very tall – and he carried himself
with obvious authority. In addition to the shell necklace he wore ear-rings,
arm rings and bracelets all made of shells, and somehow it was immediately
apparent that these ornaments had great value. His earlobes, elongated by
the constant wearing of heavy shells, almost brushed his shoulders when he
moved. The eyes were remarkable: hooded, piercing, intelligent, shrewd.
Wary.

They went on staring at each other, reluctant to start exploring their

shared resource of pidgin, aware, perhaps, even in these first moments, of
how defective an instrument it would be for what they needed to say to each
other.

Suddenly Njiru pointed to the lamp. ‘Baggerup.’
Rivers was so surprised he laughed out loud. ‘No, no baggerup. I mend.’

Njiru was the eldest son of Rembo, the chief who controlled the most
important cults on the island. Because of his deformity, he’d never been
able to compete with other young men, in canoeing, fishing, building or
war. By way of compensation, he’d devoted himself to thought and
learning, and, in particular, to the art of healing. His abilities would have
made him remarkable in any society. On Eddystone, his power rested
primarily on the number of spirits he controlled. The people made no
distinction between knowledge and power, either in their own language or
in pidgin. ‘Njiru knows Mateana’ meant Njiru had the power to cure the
diseases caused by Mateana. Similarly, Rivers was told within a few days of
arriving on the island that Njiru ‘knew’ Ave. Without in the least
understanding the significance of what he’d been told, he repeated it to
Njiru. ‘Kundaite he say you know Ave.’

A snort of derision. ‘Kundaite he speak gammon.’
He was by far the best interpreter and – when he chose – the most

reliable informant, capable of making rigorous distinctions between what he
knew and what he merely supposed, between evidence and hypothesis. But
he did not generally choose to share information. If knowledge was power,
then Njiru kept a firm grasp on his. Indeed, at first he would do no more
than translate passively what others said. In particular, he acted as
interpreter between Rivers and Rinambesi.

Rinambesi was the oldest man on the island, the liveliest, and, after

Njiru, the most vigorous. He seemed immune to the apathy and depression
that many of the younger islanders seemed to feel, perhaps because he lived
so much in the glories of the past. Like very old people the world over, he
was hazy about yesterday’s events, but vividly remembered the triumphs of
his youth. He’d been a great head-hunter once, ferocious enough to have
secured the rare privilege of a second wife. His memory for the genealogies
of the islanders was phenomenal, and this was chiefly what brought Rivers
to him. And yet, time and time again, the flow of information faltered,
though it was not immediately obvious why.

Sexual intercourse between unmarried young people was very free,

though ‘free’ was perhaps the wrong word, since every act had to be

preceded by a payment of shells by the young man to the girl’s parents.
After marriage complete fidelity was required, and one expression of this
was that one must never utter the name of an ex-lover.

All the women’s names in Rinambesi’s generation had to be left blank.

Looking at the row of cards in front of him, Rivers turned to Njiru. ‘This
fellow make fuck-fuck all women?’

A gleam of amusement. ‘Yes.’
Rivers threw the pencil down. Rinambesi, grinning toothlessly, was

making a deeply unsuccessful attempt to look modest. Rivers started to
laugh and after a moment Njiru joined in, a curious moment of kinship
across the gulf of culture.

A thread-like wail from the baby Njiru held in his hands, one palm cradling
the head, the other the buttocks, a morsel of black-eyed misery squirming in
between.

Her name was Kwini and her mother was dead. Worse than that, she’d

died in childbirth, which made her an evil spirit, likely to attempt to reclaim
her child. The body had been dumped at sea, a bundle of rags strapped
between the breasts to fool the mother into thinking she had her baby with
her, but still … Kwini’s failure to thrive was attributed to her mother’s
attempts to get her back.

She certainly wasn’t thriving: skin hung in loose folds from her thighs.

Rivers looked round the circle at her grandmother’s wrinkled dugs, the flat
chest of her nine-year-old sister, the highly developed pectoral muscles of
her father. He asked what she was being fed on. Mashed-up yams softened
by spit was the answer. The tiny hands clawed the air as if she would wring
life out of it.

Njiru passed the leaves he was holding several times between his legs

and then, stretching to his full height, attached them to the rafters at the
gable end, where the scare ghost shivered in the draught. ‘Come down and
depart, you ghost, her mother; do not haunt this child and let her live.’

‘Will she live?’ Rivers asked.

He had his own opinion, but wanted to know what Njiru would say. Njiru

spread his hands.

On their way back to Narovo, Rivers questioned him about the ghosts of

women who died in childbirth. This was not a rare form of death, since the
custom was for women to give birth alone, and there was no tradition of
midwifery. Such ghosts could not be named, he already knew that. In the
genealogies they were referred to as evil spirits. It had startled him at first to
be told quite casually that such and such a man had married ‘an evil spirit’.

They were called tomate pa na savo – the ghosts of the confining house –

Njiru explained, and they were dreaded, since their chief aim was to ensure
that as many other women as possible should die in the same way.

One ghost in particular inspired dread: Ange Mate. She was more

powerful, more vengeful than any other ghost of the confining house.
Rivers had been taken to see Ange Mate’s well, a hole in the ground which
had once been a living spring, now choked with coconut husks. Still, he
sensed there was something more that Njiru was reluctant to tell him. ‘What
does she do?’ he wanted to know. It puzzled him that the men were
obviously frightened of her, if it were true that the tomate pa na savo
selected women as their victims.

Reluctantly, Njiru said she lay in wait for men, particularly for men who

fell asleep on the beach at Pa Njale. ‘But what does she do?’ A ripple of
amusement among Njiru’s retinue, a strange response in view of the
obvious terror she inspired. Then he guessed. When Ange Mate came upon
a man sleeping she forced him to have sex with her. ‘Is he good-fellow
after?’ Rivers asked.

No, seemed to be the answer, he suffered from a long list of complaints,

not the least of which was a disappearing penis. Rivers would have liked to
ask about the psychological effects, but that was almost impossible. The
language of introspection was simply not available.

By the time they reached Narovo, the sun was low in the sky. Rivers

went down to the beach, following the narrow bush path that petered out
into fine white sand. Hocart’s head was a dark sleek ball, far out, but then
he saw Rivers, waved and shouted.

Slowly Rivers waded out, looking down, rather liking the dislocation the

refraction of the light produced, the misalignment of knees and feet. As
usual he was joined by a shoal of little darting black fish who piloted him
out into deeper waters – always a moment of absolute magic. Behind him,
the bluish shadows of rocks crept over the white sand.

After their swim they lay in the shallows, talking over the events of the

day. In the rough division of labour they’d mapped out between them,
death, funerary rites and skull houses belonged to Hocart, ghosts, sex,
marriage and kinship to Rivers, but it had already become clear that no
division really made sense. Each of them was constantly acquiring
information relating to one of the other’s specialities.

Hocart, though, was in a mood to tease. ‘Why’ve I got death when

you’ve got sex?’ he wanted to know. ‘Ghosts and sex don’t go together.
Now ghosts and death …’

‘All right, you can have ghosts.’
‘No …’ Hocart began, and then laughed.
Not true anyway, Rivers thought. On Eddystone ghosts and sex did go

together, or so at least it must seem to men who fell asleep on the beach at
Pa Njale and woke between the ravening thighs of Ange Mate.

They lay in silence, almost too lazy to speak, as the shadows lengthened

and the sun began its precipitate descent. Nightfall on Eddystone was
abrupt, as if some positive force of darkness in the waters of the bay had
risen up and swallowed the sun. At last, driven back to shore by the cooling
water, they snatched up their clothes and ran, laughing, back to the tent.

Mbuko was dying of a disease caused by the spirits of Kita, and had no
more than a few hours to live.

Kita, Njiru explained, causes a man to waste away ‘till he too small all

bone he got no meat’. Certainly Mbuko could not have been more
emaciated. He looked more like an anatomical drawing than a man, except
for the persistent flutter of his heart under the stretched skin. He lay on the
raised wooden platform that was used for sleeping, though nobody else now
slept in the hut. Njiru said they were afraid. Outside, bright sunshine,

people coming and going. Now and then a neighbour would look in to see if
he were still alive. ‘Soon,’ the people sitting round would say, indifferently,
shaking their heads. Some were obviously amused or repelled by his plight.
‘Rakiana’ was the word one heard over and over again. Rakiana. Thin.

Even Njiru who, within the framework of his culture, was a

compassionate man (and we can none of us claim more, Rivers thought),
seemed to feel, not indifference or contempt exactly, but that Mbuko had
become merely a problem to be solved. Njiru looked across the barely
breathing heap of bones at Rivers and said, ‘Mate.’

‘Mate’ in all the dictionaries was translated as ‘dead’.
‘No mate,’ Rivers said, breathing deeply and pointing to Mbuko’s chest.
There and then, across the dying man, he received a tutorial, not unlike

those he remembered from his student days in Bart’s. Mate did not mean
dead, it designated a state of which death was the appropriate outcome.
Mbuko was mate because he was critically ill. Rinambesi, though quite
disgustingly healthy, still with a keen eye for the girls, was also mate
because he’d lived to an age when if he wasn’t dead he damn well ought to
be. The term for actual death, the moment when the sagena – here Njiru
breathed in, slapping his belly in the region of the diaphragm – the
‘something he stop long belly’ departed, was mate ndapu. In pidgin, ‘die
finish’. ‘Was the sagena the same as the soul?’ Rivers wanted to know. ‘Of
course it wasn’t,’ Njiru snapped, nostrils flaring with impatience. Oh God,
it was Bart’s all over again. Heaven help the unsuspecting public when we
let you loose on them. The problem with Mbuko, Njiru pressed on, as with
all those who fell into the power of Kita, was that he couldn’t die. He
seemed to be making a very creditable stab at it, Rivers thought
rebelliously. Kita could ‘make him small’, but not kill him. ‘Kita pausia,’
Njiru said, stroking Mbuko. ‘Kita loves him?’ Rivers suggested. No, Njiru
would know the word. Kita was nursing him.

Njiru hung malanjari leaves from the gable end of the hut where the scare

ghost shivered in the draught, and began chanting the prayer of exorcism.
His shadow came and went across the dying man’s face. At one point
Rivers got cramp in his legs and tried to stand up, but the people on either

side of him pulled him down. He must not walk under the malanjari leaves,
they said, or he would waste away and become like Mbuko.

Hocart came into the hut, edging round the walls, keeping well clear of

the malanjari leaves, until he reached Rivers. Now that all eyes were
focused on Njiru, Rivers could take Mbuko’s pulse. He shook his head.
‘Not long.’

Scattered all round were bits of calico and bark cloth streaked with

mucus, with here and there a great splash of red where Mbuko had
haemorrhaged. Now gobs of phlegm rose into his mouth and he lacked the
strength even to spit them out. Rivers found a fresh piece of cloth,
moistened it with his own saliva, and cleaned the dying man’s mouth. His
tongue came out and flicked across his dry lips. Then a rattle in the throat, a
lift and flare of the rib-cage, and it was over. One of the women wailed
briefly, but the wail faltered into silence, and she put a hand over her mouth
as if embarrassed.

Rivers automatically reached out to close the eyes, then stopped himself.

Mbuko’s body was bound into a sitting position by bands of calico passed
round his neck and under his knees. He was tied to a pole, and two men
carried him out into the open air. Rivers and Hocart followed the little
group down the path to the beach.

The body was propped up, still in a sitting position, in the stern of a

canoe, his shield and axe were placed beside him, and he was quickly
paddled out to sea. Rivers waited until the canoe was a shadow on the
glittering waters of the bay, then went back to the hut and gathered together
the stained cloths, which he buried at a safe distance from the village. As he
scraped dry earth over the heap of rags, he felt an intense craving to scrub
his arms up to the elbow in boiled water. That would have to wait till he got
back to the tent. For the moment he contented himself with wiping his
palms several times hard on the seat of his trousers.

He went back to the beach, where a disgruntled Hocart lingered by the

waterline. They had both been hoping that this death would shed light on
the cult of the skull. Instead …

‘They don’t keep the skull,’ Hocart said.

As they watched, the paddlers in the canoe tipped the corpse

unceremoniously over the side, where it sank beneath the water with
scarcely a splash.

Rivers shook his head. ‘I’m afraid what we need is a proper death.’

NINE

Wyatt had embarked on some interminable anecdote about a brothel he’d
been to in which there was a whore so grotesquely fat you got your money
back if you succeeded in fucking her.

Prior rested his cheek on the cold glass of the train window, glancing

sidelong at the doubled reflection of cheekbone and eye, and then deeper
into the shadowy compartment with its transparent occupants laughing and
gesturing, floating shapes on the rain-flawed pane.

A roar of laughter as the story climaxed. Gregg, happily married with a

small daughter, smiled tolerantly. Hallet uneasily joined in. One young lad
brayed so loudly his virginity became painfully apparent to everybody but
himself. Only Owen made no attempt to disguise his disgust, but then he
hated ‘the commercials’, as he called them.

They’d been on the train for three hours, jammed together on slatted

wooden seats, stale sweat in armpits, groin and feet, a smoky smell of urine
where some half-baked idiot had pissed into the wind.

Five minutes later the train slipped into the dark station, a few discreet

naphtha flares the only light.

Prior walked along to the trucks, where the men were stirring. Strange

faces peered blearily up at him as he swept the torch across them, shading
the beam in his cupped hand, so that he saw them – not figuratively but
quite literally – in a glow of blood. They were not his, or anybody’s, men,
just an anonymous draft that he’d shepherded a stage further to their
destination.

This section of the train had stopped well short of the platform, and there

was a big drop from the truck. Repeated crunches of gravel under boots as
men, still dazed from sleep, grappled with the shock of rain and windswept

darkness. Marshalled together, they half stumbled, half marched alongside
the train, on to the platform and through into the station yard where, after an
interminable wait, guides finally appeared, their wet capes reflecting a fish
gleam at the sky, as they gesticulated and gabbled, directing units to their
billets.

Prior saw his draft settled in a church hall, said goodbye and wished them

luck. Their faces turned towards him registered nothing, subdued to the
impersonality of the process that had them in its grip.

Then he was free. Felt it too, following the guide through unlit streets,

past that sandbagged witch’s tit of a cathedral, along the canal accompanied
in the water by a doddering old crone of a moon.

The night, the silent guide, the effort of not slipping on broken

pavements, sharpened his senses. An overhanging branch of laburnum flung
a scattering of cold raindrops into his eyes and he was startled by the
intensity of his joy. A joy perhaps not unconnected with the ruinous
appearance of these houses. Solid bourgeois houses they must have been in
peacetime, the homes of men making their way in the world, men who’d
been sure that certain things would never change, and where were they
now? Every house in the road was damaged, some ruined. The ruins stood
out starkly, black jagged edges in the white gulf of moonlight.

‘Here you are, sir.’
A gate hanging from its hinges, roses massed round a broken pergola,

white ruffled blooms with a heavy scent, unpruned, twisting round each
other for support. Beyond, paths and terraces overgrown with weeds. Lace
curtains hanging limp behind cracked or shattered glass; on the first floor
the one window still unbroken briefly held the moon.

The guide preceded him up the path. No lock on the door, black and

white tiles in the hall – a sudden sharp memory of Craiglockhart – and then
a glimmer of light at the top of the stairs and Hallet appeared, holding a
candle. ‘Come on up. Mind that stair.’

Hallet had got his sleeping-bag out and arranged his belongings carefully

in a corner of what must once have been the master bedroom. His fiancée’s
photograph stood on a chair.

‘Potts and Owen are upstairs.’
Prior went to the window and looked out at the houses opposite,

fingering the lace curtains that were stiff with dried rain and dirt. ‘This is all
right, isn’t it?’ he said suddenly, turning into the room.

They grinned at each other.
‘Bathroom’s just opposite,’ Hallet said, pointing it out like a careful host.
‘You mean it works?’
‘Well, the bucket works.’
Prior sat down abruptly on the floor and yawned. He was too tired to care

where he was. They lit cigarettes and shared a bar of chocolate, Prior
leaning against the wall, Hallet sitting cross-legged on his sleeping-bag,
both of them staring round like big-eyed children, struggling to take in the
strangeness.

It’ll wear off, Prior thought, lighting a candle and venturing across the

landing to find a room of his own. It’ll all seem normal in the morning.

But it didn’t. Prior woke early, and lay lazily watching the shadows of
leaves on a wall that the rising sun had turned from white to gold. He was
just turning over to go back to sleep, when something black flickered across
the room. He waited, and saw a swallow lift and loop through the open
window and out into the dazzling air.

On that first morning he looked out on to a green jungle of garden, sun-

baked, humming with insects, the once formal flower-beds transformed into
brambly tunnels in which hidden life rustled and burrowed. He rested his
arms on the window-sill and peered out, cautiously, through the jagged
edges of glass, at Owen and Potts, who were carrying a table from one of
the houses across the road. He shouted down to them, as they paused for
breath, and they waved back.

He would have said that the war could not surprise him, that somewhere

on the Somme he had mislaid the capacity to be surprised, but the next few
days were a constant succession of surprises.

They had nothing to do. They were responsible for no one. The war had

forgotten them.

There were only two items of furniture that went with the house. One

was a vast carved oak sideboard that must surely have been built in the
dining-room, for it could never have been brought in through the door; the
other was a child’s painted rocking-horse on the top floor of the house, in a
room with bars at the window. Everything else they found for themselves.
Prior moved in and out of the ruined houses, taking whatever caught his
eye, and the houses, cool and dark in the midday heat, received him
placidly. He brought his trophies home and arranged them carefully in his
room, or in the dining-room they all shared.

In the evenings he and Hallet, Owen and Potts lit candles, sitting around

the table that was Owen’s chief find, and with the tall windows, the
elaborately moulded ceilings, the bowls of roses and the wine created a
fragile civilization, a fellowship on the brink of disaster.

And then ruined it by arguing about the war. Or Potts and Hallet argued.

Potts had been a science student at Manchester University, bright, articulate,
cynical in the thorough-going way of those who have not so far encountered
much to be cynical about. The war, he insisted loudly, flushed with wine,
was feathering the nests of profiteers. It was being fought to safeguard
access to the oil-wells of Mesopotamia. It had nothing, absolutely nothing,
to do with Belgian neutrality, the rights of small nations or anything like
that. And if Hallet thought it had, then Hallet was a naïve idiot. Hallet came
from an old army family and had been well and expensively educated to
think as little as possible; confronted by Potts, he floundered, but then
quickly began to formulate beliefs that he had hitherto assumed everybody
shared.

Prior and Owen exchanged secretive smiles, though neither probably

could have said of what the secret consisted. Owen was playing with the
fallen petals of roses he’d picked that afternoon. Pink, yellow, white roses,
but no red roses, Prior saw.

‘What do you think?’ Potts asked, irritated by Prior’s silence.
‘What do I think? I think what you’re saying is basically a conspiracy

theory, and like all conspiracy theories it’s optimistic. What you’re saying
is, OK the war isn’t being fought for the reasons we’re told, but it is being

fought for a reason. It’s not benefiting the people it’s supposed to be
benefiting, but it is benefiting somebody. And I don’t believe that, you see.
I think things are actually much worse than you think because there isn’t
any kind of rational justification left. It’s become a self-perpetuating
system. Nobody benefits. Nobody’s in control. Nobody knows how to stop.’

Hallet looked from one to the other. ‘Look, all this just isn’t true. You’re

– no, not you – people are letting themselves get demoralized because
they’re having to pay a higher price than they thought they were going to
have to pay. But it doesn’t alter the basic facts. We are fighting for the
legitimate interests of our own country. We are fighting in defence of
Belgian neutrality. We are fighting for French independence. We aren’t in
Germany. They are in France.’ He looked round the table and, like a little
boy, said pleadingly, ‘This is still a just war.’

‘You say we kill the Beast,’ Owen said slowly. ‘I say we fight because

men lost their bearings in the night.’ He smiled at their expressions, and
stood up. ‘Shall we open another bottle?’

Alone that night, the smell of snuffed-out candle lingering on the air,

Prior remembered the bowl of pink and gold and white roses, but did not
bother to recall Potts’s and Hallet’s arguments. This house they shared was
so strange in terms of what the war had hitherto meant that he wanted to fix
the particular sights and sounds and smells in his mind. He felt enchanted,
cocooned from anything that could possibly cause pain, though even as the
thought formed, a trickle of plaster leaked from the ceiling of the back
bedroom where a shell had struck, the house bleeding quietly from its
unstaunchable wound.

In the mornings he went into town, wandering round the stalls that had been
set up in front of the cathedral to sell ‘souvenirs’. So many souvenirs were
to be found in the rubble of the bombed city that trade was not brisk. Prior
saw nothing that he wanted to buy, and anyway he had a shelf of souvenirs
at home, mainly collected on his first time in France. He’d thought of them
often at Craiglockhart as Rivers probed his mind for buried memories of his

last few weeks in France. Souvenirs, my God. When the mind will happily
wipe itself clean in the effort to forget.

On the way home he saw Owen and Potts ahead of him, and hurried to

catch them up. Owen had found a child’s lace-trimmed surplice in the
rubble near the cathedral and wore it as a scarf, the cloth startlingly white
against his sunburnt neck. Potts hugged a toby-jug to his chest, stoutly
refusing to admit it was hideous. They turned off the road and cut through
the back gardens, entering a world that nobody would have guessed at, from
the comparative normality of the road.

A labyrinth of green pathways led from garden to garden, and they

slipped from one to another, over broken walls or through splintered fences,
skirting bramble-filled craters, brushing down paths overgrown with weeds,
with flowers that had seeded themselves and become rank, with overgrown
roses that snagged their sleeves and pulled them back. Snails crunched
under their boots, nettles stung their hands, cuckoo spit flecked a bare neck,
but the secret path wound on. Hundreds of men, billeted as they were in
these ruined houses, had broken down every wall, every fence, forced a
passage through all the hedges, so that they could slip unimpeded from one
patch of ground to the next. The war, fought and refought over strips of
muddy earth, paradoxically gave them the freedom of animals to pass from
territory to territory, unobserved. And something of an animal’s alertness
too, for just as Owen pushed aside an elderberry branch at the entrance to
their own garden, his ears caught a slight sound, and he held up his hand.

Hallet was in the garden, undressing. Dappled light played across his

body, lending it the illusion of fragility, the greenish tinge of ill-health,
though he was as hard and sun-tanned as the rest of them. As they watched,
not calling out a greeting as by now they should have done, he stepped out
of his drawers and out of time, standing by the pool edge, thin, pale, his
body where the uniform had hidden it starkly white. Sharp collar-bones,
bluish shadows underneath. He was going to lie down in the overgrown
goldfish pool with its white lilies and golden insects fumbling the pale
flowers. His toes curled round the mossy edge as he gingerly lowered
himself, gasping as the water hit his balls.

They strolled across the tall grass towards him and stood looking down.

Legs bloated-looking under water, silver bubbles trapped in his hair, cock
slumped on his thigh like a seal hauled out on to the rocks. He looked up at
them lazily, fingers straying through his bush, freeing the bubbles.

‘Enjoying yourself?’ Prior asked, nodding at the hand.
Hallet laughed, shielding his eyes with his other hand, but didn’t move.
‘I’d be careful if I were you,’ Owen said, in a tight voice. ‘I expect those

fish are ravenous.’

And not just the fish, Prior thought.
‘Anybody want some wine?’ Potts asked, going into the house.
They drank it on the terrace, Hallet lying in the pond, till it grew too cold.
‘You know they might leave us here,’ Owen said, squinting up into the

sun.

‘Shut up!’ Potts said.
Everybody touched wood, crossed fingers, groped for lucky charms: all

the small, protective devices of men who have no control over their own
fate. No use, Prior thought. Somewhere, outside the range of human
hearing, and yet heard by all of them, a clock had begun to tick.

11 September 1918

I don’t think it helps Owen that I’m here. And it certainly doesn’t help me
that he’s here. We’re both walking a tightrope and the last thing either of us
wants or needs is to be watched by somebody who knows the full terror of
the fall.

At Craiglockhart we avoided each other. It was easy to do that there, in

spite of the overcrowding. The labyrinth of corridors, so many turnings, so
many alternative routes, you need never meet anybody you didn’t want to
meet except, now and then, in Rivers’s room or Brock’s, yourself.

Two incidents this week. We were all in town together and we saw

wounded being rushed through the streets – some of them quite bad. Hallet
and Potts stared at them, and you could see them thinking, That could be
me, in a few days or weeks. Looking at the bandages, trying to imagine

what was underneath. Trying not to imagine. Fear: rational, proportionate,
appropriate fear. And I glanced at Owen and he was indifferent. As I was. I
don’t mean unsympathetic, necessarily. (Though it’s amazing what you
leave behind when the pack’s heavy.)

The other was at supper last night. Hallet was cockahoop because he’d

found some flypaper on one of those stalls in the cathedral square. Ever
since we arrived we’ve been plagued by enormous wasps – Owen thinks
they’re hornets – and by flies, great, buzzing, drunk, heavy, angry, dying
bluebottles. And Hallet had solved it all. There was this flypaper buzzing
above our heads, revolving first one way, then the other, with its cargo of
dead and dying. The sound of summer on the Somme.

I stuck it as long as I could, then climbed up on to the table and took it

down, carried it right to the end of the garden and threw it away as far as I
could. A pathetic effort – it described a shallow arc and fluttered to the
ground. Hallet was quite seriously offended, and of course completely
bewildered.

‘Don’t blame me if you all get tummy upsets,’ he said.
Owen started to laugh, and I joined in, and neither of us could stop.

Hallet and Potts looked from one to the other, grinning like embarrassed
dogs. They obviously thought we’d cracked. The trouble is neither of us can
be sure they aren’t right. When I noticed the absence of red roses, I looked
at Owen and saw him noticing that I’d noticed. It’s no use.

My servant, Longstaffe

I chose him at bayonet practice. He was running in with bloodcurdling
yells, stabbing, twisting, withdrawing, running on. I thought, My God,
textbook. Nothing of the sort – I’ve realized since that what he was actually
doing was once-moreing unto the breach at Agincourt.

I had a word with him. He knew why, of course, and he wanted the job.

Not a bad life, officer’s servant, if you have to be here at all. He told me
he’d been a gentleman’s gentleman before the war and that clinched it.
Later, when we were waiting for the train to Amiens, he owned up. He was

an actor. The nearest he’d ever got to being a gentleman’s gentleman was
playing a butler at the Alhambra, Bradford. A larger part than it sounded, he
was anxious to point out, because in this particular production the butler did
it – a departure from convention that so little pleased the inhabitants of
Bradford that the play had to be taken off after seventeen days.

Perhaps he was sure of me by then. Actually I found all that even more

irresistible. Phoney gentleman’s gentleman, but then I’m a fairly phoney
gentleman myself.

An ironing board of a body, totally flat. Interesting gestures, though. He’s

the only man I’ve ever known to open doors with his hips. Perfectly plain,
nondescript features. No Wanted poster would ever find him, but also this
curious feeling that his face could be anything he wanted it to be, even
beautiful, if the part required it. And burningly ambitious. Knows tracts of
Shakespeare off by heart. A curious, old-fashioned romantic patriot, though
I don’t know why I say that, there’s plenty of them about. Hallet, for
instance. But then they don’t all quote, ‘We few, we happy few, we band of
brothers,’ as he did, quite without embarrassment, the other night while I
was getting ready for bed. I said very sourly indeed that a more appropriate
quotation for this stage of the war might be: ‘I am in blood stepped in so far
that should I wade no more …’ His leap across the room was rather
remarkable. He’d slapped a hand across my mouth, and we were staring at
each other, dumbstruck, before either of us had time to think, his face chalk-
white and I suspect mine as well, each trying to remember what the penalty
is for smacking an officer in the gob. Quite possibly death.

Since then we’ve both gone very quiet, retreating behind the barriers of

rank, which are as necessary to his protection as to mine, though not
retreating quickly enough. Like the French lines at Agincourt, the barriers
have been thoroughly breached.

Friday, the 13th September (No bloody comment)

We’re not going to join the battalion. The battalion’s coming here to join us.
I suppose this explains this curious out-of-time holiday we’ve been having.

Ended today, anyway. Rode round inspecting billets.

Weather also changed, which makes the other changes somehow more

tolerable. Wind and rain, lowering grey clouds.

Saturday, 14 September

Watched the Manchesters march in, streaming rain, wet capes. Shattered
faces, bloodshot eyes. Been having a bad time. One or two faces I
recognized from last year. Before that? I don’t think so. Nobody talks about
the losses. What they moaned about, sitting on bales of straw, peeling socks
off bloody feet, was the absence of fags. They’d been rolling their own in
bits of paper, torn-up envelopes, anything, no tobacco of course, had to
smoke weeds they picked by the side of the road and dried by tying them to
their packs whenever the sun shone. I’ve written to Mam and Sarah and
everybody else I can think of, begging for Woodbines.

Sunday, 15 September

Joined battalion. Adjutant a nice worried-looking man who suggested I
might be battalion Gas Officer (which reveals a sense of humour not
otherwise apparent). Marshall-of-the-Ten-Wounds was there, striding up
and down, talking loudly. Everything about him – skin, gestures,
expression, posture, voice – bold, free, coarse. Unscrupulous? Perhaps, I
don’t know, at any rate he doesn’t care. Enjoys life, I think. By
temperament and training a warrior. Bold, cunning, ruthless, resolute, quick
of decision, amazingly brave – and if that’s a human being then a human
being isn’t what I am. He’s spent his entire adult life gravitating towards
fighting – impossible to imagine him leading any other sort of life.

Last night, our last night in Amiens, there was a great storm, flashes of

sheet lightning, wind buffeting and slogging the house.

I’d just got to bed when I heard a strange rumbling from above. Hallet

appeared in the doorway, white-faced and staring. Only starlight to see by
and the whole house with its broken windows so draughty the candle kept

being blown out. We got an oil-lamp from the kitchen. Hallet said, ‘Is it the
guns?’ I said, ‘Of course it bloody isn’t, it’s coming from upstairs.’

The stairway leading to the upper floor and the nursery is narrow. We got

to the nursery door, paused, looked at each other. Hallet’s face illuminated
from below had bulges under the eyes like a second lid. I pushed the door
open and a blast of cold wind from the broken window hit me. All I saw at
first was movement at the far end of the room and then I started to laugh
because it was just the rocking-horse rocking. The wind was strong enough
to have got it going, I can’t think of any other explanation, and its rockers
were grinding away on the bare wooden floor.

It ought to have been an anti-climax, and at first I thought it was. We

moved the thing away from the window, out of the draught, and went
downstairs still laughing, telling Potts, who peered round the door of his
room, there was nothing to worry about, go back to sleep, but in my own
room with the lamp out I lay awake and all night long that rumbling went
on in my head.

TEN

They didn’t have to wait long for their proper death.

Ngea was a strong, vigorous man, the most powerful chief on the island

after Rembo. Everything to live for, apparently, and yet, as one saw so often
in Melanesia, he was not putting up a fight. He lay in his hall, watching the
scare ghost turn and turn in the draught, and his life lay, it seemed to Rivers,
like a dandelion clock on the palm of his open hand.

His condition was so bad that, at one point, Emele, his wife, and the other

women began to wail, the long, drawn out, throbbing, musical wail of the
women, but then the sick man rallied slightly and the wailing was
abandoned.

Rivers said goodbye to him, promised to see him again tomorrow, though

he knew he wouldn’t, and walked back to the tent. It was dark by the time
he got back, and the green canvas of the tent glowed with the light of the
lamp inside it. Hocart’s shadow, sharply black and elongated, reached
hugely over the roof. Rivers pushed a heavy weight of damp washing aside
and went in.

Hocart was sitting cross-legged on the ground, with a pencil held

sideways in his mouth, typing up his notes. ‘I had to retreat because of the
midges.’

‘Midges?’
‘Whatever.’
Hocart was careless with quinine, careless with the mosquito nets. Rivers

threw himself down on his bed, clasped his hands behind his head and
watched him. After a few seconds Hocart pulled his shirt over his head, and
fanned himself with a sheaf of blank pages. As always the heat of the day
was trapped inside the tent, and their bodies ran with sweat.

‘You’ve lost weight,’ Rivers said, looking at the shadows between

Hocart’s ribs. ‘Rakiana, that’s the word for you.’

‘Well,’ Hocart said, round the pencil. ‘Just as long as your pal Njiru

doesn’t start trying to put me out of my misery …’

‘Is he my pal?’
A quick glance. ‘You know he is.’
They worked for a couple of hours, ate some baked yam pudding that

Namboko Taru had made for them, worked again, then turned off the lamp.

An hour or so later Rivers heard the sound of footsteps approaching the

tent. Hocart had fallen asleep, one raised arm shielding his eyes, the
pressure of the pillow pushing his cheek and mouth out of shape. Enough
moonlight filtered through the canvas for the shadow of the passer-by to
stalk across the inside of the tent. A minute later another, taller shadow
followed.

Mali? Mali was a girl of thirteen who’d recently retired to the menstrual

hut for the first time. When she’d re-emerged, five days later, arrangements
for her defloration were already well in hand. A young man, Runi – he’d be
about eighteen – had paid her parents the two arm rings that entitled him to
spend twenty consecutive nights with her, and had decided – it was his
decision, the girl had no say in the matter – to share the privilege with two
of his friends.

Runi was considered a bit of a pest. Only the other day he and his two

closest friends – presumably the two he’d invited to share Mali – had
climbed some kanarium trees and pelted their unfortunate owners with
unripe nuts. Rivers had been reminded of Rag Week. The old people
grumbled, and then said, what can you expect, young men cooped up on the
island sitting about like old women, instead of being off in their canoes, as
they ought to have been, burning villages and taking heads.

Whispers, quite close by. A startled cry, almost a yelp, then grunts,

groans, moans, a long crescendo of sobbing cries.

Hocart woke up, listened. ‘Oh God, not again.’
‘Shush.’

There was a belief on the island that a girl’s defloration is never the first

time, because her first bleeding means the moon has already lain with her.
The men denied they believed it, insisting it was just a story they told the
girls to reassure them, which at least implied a certain tenderness. He hoped
so. She looked such a child.

A few minutes’ whispering, and the grunts began again. What it is to be

eighteen. Another cry, this time definitely male, and footsteps coming back.

‘One down, two to go,’ Hocart said.
‘You realize for the rest of their lives they won’t be able to say each

other’s names?’

No reply. Rivers wondered if he’d drifted back to sleep but when he

turned to look, caught the gleam of eye white under the mosquito net. More
footsteps. Another shadow climbed the far wall of the tent. A short pause,
whispers, then the gasps began again.

Rivers sighed. ‘You know, Rinambesi says when a chief dies the last

thing that happens, used to happen, rather, is a great head-hunting raid,
followed by a feast, and all the girls are available free to all the warriors.
And not reluctant either, apparently. They run into the sea to greet them.’

‘Head-hunting as an aphrodisiac?’
‘Why not?’
‘They seem to be doing all right without it,’ Hocart said, as the moans

got louder.

‘No babies, though.’
The genealogies made grim reading. Families of five or six had been

common three or four generations ago. Now many marriages were
childless.

The last shadow came and went. Rivers supposed he must have slept,

because it seemed no time at all before the grey early morning light made
the mosquito nets as stark and sinister as shrouds. Fowl-he-sing-out was the
pidgin term for this pre-dawn hour, and the fowls had started, first a
bubbling trickle of notes, always the same bird, he didn’t know its name,
rising to a frenzy of competing shrieks and cries. But this morning there
was a new noise. At first he lay, blinking sleepily, unable to attach meaning

to it, but then he realized it was the wailing of women, almost
indistinguishable at this distance from the sound of flutes. And he knew
Ngea was dead.

They arrived at Ngea’s hall to find the corpse bound into the sitting
position, propped up against a pillar. A stout stick had been strapped to its
back, keeping the head and neck more or less erect – a sort of external
spine. Ngea had been bathed and dressed in his best clothes, the lime on his
face and in his hair freshly painted, bunches of riria leaves, a plant
forbidden to men in life, fastened to his necklaces. Beside him sat his
widow, Emele, not crying or wailing with the other women. Very calm, very
dignified.

While the women rocked and wailed Njiru was systematically destroying

the dead man’s possessions, with the exception of the axe which he had set
aside. One rare arm ring after another was smashed. Rivers squatted beside
Njiru, and asked, in a low voice so as not to disturb the mourners, why they
had to be destroyed.

‘You make him no good he go Sonto. All same Ngea he stink, he rotten,

bymby he go Sonto.’

The wailing went on all day, people coming from across the island to bid

Ngea farewell. Towards evening – surely, Rivers thought, the disposal of
the corpse could not be much longer delayed – Njiru hung a bunch of areca
nuts from the rafters by the scare ghost, took down a cluster and held it out
in front of them all. He waited till the last wail faltered into silence and
every eye was on him, before he began to pray. ‘I take down the portion of
the chiefly dead.’ He bowed towards the corpse, which gazed back at him
with glazed eyes. ‘Be not angry with us, be not resentful, do not punish us.
Let them drink and eat, break coconuts, open the oven. Let the children eat,
let the women eat, let the men eat, and be not angry with us, you chiefly
dead, oh, oh, oh.’

The curious sound, half howl, half bark, that ended prayers on

Eddystone. Njiru put a nut in his mouth and ate it. The people kept glancing
nervously at Ngea, but Njiru went round the circle, offering the cluster of

nuts to each person in turn. Every man, woman and child took one and ate
it. Even a small child had a tiny crunched-up fragment forced into its
mouth.

Ngea, without further ceremony, was slung on to a pole and carried off

‘into the bush’, they said, though in fact they took him to the beach, where
he was placed in a stone enclosure – an era – with his axe and his shield at
his feet. Still propped in a sitting position, his head kept erect by the stick,
he looked out over the low stone wall, westwards, to the sunset. Food was
left with him, and food for his mother and father, the ‘old ghosts’. Once,
Njiru said, and there was no mistaking the bitterness in his voice, a slave
would have been killed at this moment, and the head placed between Ngea’s
feet. Njiru glared at Rivers, as if he held him personally responsible for the
abolition of the custom. ‘Now no all same.’

Next day Rivers went to Ngea’s hall to offer his condolences to Emele,

and was confronted by an extraordinary sight. A wooden enclosure had
been built inside the hall, similar in size and shape to the stone era in which
Ngea’s corpse had been placed, but with higher walls. Inside this enclosure,
knees bent up to her chin, hands resting on her feet, in exactly the same
position as the corpse of her husband, sat Emele. She had been there, it
seemed, all night, and from the expression of agony on her face it was clear
cramp had set in.

A number of widows squatted round the enclosure, looking like stumps

of wood in their brown bark loincloths. Many of them were his regular
informants on such topics as sexual relations, kinship, the arrangement of
marriage. Rivers mimicked Emele’s cramped position, and asked for the
word. Tongo polo, they said reluctantly, glancing at each other. Tongo polo,
he repeated, making sure he’d got the inflection right. But his efforts to
speak their language were not received with the usual maternal warmth. He
thought they looked nervous.

‘How long?’ he asked, crouching down again.
But they wouldn’t answer, and when he looked round he saw that Njiru

had come into the hall and was standing just inside the door.

Before Ngea’s death Njiru had agreed to take Rivers and Hocart to see the
cave at Pa Na Keru. It was situated near the summit of the highest mountain
on the island, and it was a morning’s walk, the early stages through thick
bush, to get there. Rivers was inclined to think Ngea’s death would lead to
the postponement of the trip, but when he emerged from the tent the
following morning it was to find Njiru, surrounded by a much larger retinue
than usual, waiting for him.

He gave them leaves to wear to protect them from the spirits of the

mountain, and the whole group set off in good spirits, laughing and
chattering, though they fell silent in the late morning as the ground sloped
steeply upwards and the muscles of thighs and back began to ache. The path
up the mountain, like all the paths on the island, was so narrow that they
had to go in single file.

A solemnity had settled over the gathering. Rivers watched the

movement of muscles in the back ahead of him, as they toiled and sweated
up the slope. Before them was a massive rock-wall with a cave set into it,
like a dark mouth. They slipped and slithered up towards it, sending
showers of small pebbles peppering down behind them. The final slope was
encumbered with big rocks and boulders, and other, flatter stones, some of
them sharp. It was near noon, and their shadows had dwindled to ragged
black shapes fluttering around their moving feet. One of the men picked up
a stone and threw it at the cave mouth to scare away the ghosts. Rivers and
Hocart were the only people there never to have visited the cave before, and
they were not allowed to approach until Njiru had prayed that they might be
protected from disease. While the prayer went on they watched the others
bob down and disappear under the hanging wall of rock.

The cave was low but surprisingly deep, deep enough for the far end to

be hidden in shadow. A flat stone near the entrance was called the ghost
seat. This was where the new ghost sat and occasionally, to pass the time,
drew on the walls. Further in, on the cusp of darkness, was another boulder
where the old ghosts sat. ‘All old tomate come and look new tomate,’ they
were told.

Rivers turned to Njiru and pointed to the seat of the old ghosts. ‘Man he

stink, he rotten, bymby he go Sonto. Why him no go Sonto?’ he asked.

Njiru spread his hands.
Various marks on the wall were interpreted as being the drawings of the

new ghosts. Hocart started sketching the marks and recording the
identifications he was given. A man, a spirit, pigs, a war canoe.

Njiru wanted to pursue the matter of the old ghosts. He did not himself

believe, he said, that there were ghosts in the cave. It was a, a … His
patience with pidgin ran out. A varavara, he concluded. As nearly as Rivers
could make out, this meant a metaphor, a figure of speech. Increasingly
now, when they were alone, they tried to understand concepts in the other’s
language, to escape from the fogged communication of pidgin. The
language barrier was more formidable than Rivers had initially supposed,
for in addition to the ordinary dialect there was the ‘high speech’ of ritual,
myth and prayer. There was also, though he had not been permitted to hear
it, talk blong tomate: the language of ghosts.

While talking, they had unconsciously wandered deeper into the cave.

Now Rivers touched Njiru’s arm and pointed to a narrow slit in the back
wall. They had to clamber over fallen rocks to reach it, and when they did,
it seemed to be too small to admit even a very thin man. Once, Njiru said,
the cave had been ‘good fellow’ right into the centre of the mountain, but
then an earthquake had dislodged part of the roof. Rivers knelt down and
peered into the darkness. If he crawled he was sure he could get through.
And he’d brought a torch with him, not knowing whether the cave would be
dark or not. He turned on his back and wriggled through, catching his arm,
feeling a wetness that he thought might be blood. On the other side he stood
up tentatively, and then stretched his arms high above his head. He had a
sense of immense space around him. The cave was big. He was reaching in
his back pocket for the torch when he realized Njiru was following him
through. He put his hand into the hole, trying to shield the other man’s
deformed back from the jagged edge of the rock.

They stood together, breathing. Rivers shone his torch at the floor and

cautiously they moved deeper into the cave. He put a hand out and touched

something that slithered away under his fingers, then swung the torch
round, a weak sickly ring of yellow light that revealed what for a second
made him doubt his sanity: the walls were alive. They were covered in
heaving black fur.

Bats, of course. After the first jolt of fear, it was obvious. He directed the

torch at the ceiling where more bats hung, thousands of them, hundreds of
thousands perhaps, little sooty stalactites. As the torch swept over them,
they raised their heads, frenzied little faces, wet pink gums, white fangs, all
jabbering with fear.

Moving very slowly and quietly, not wanting to disturb them further, he

again shone the torch at the ground, so that they stood, disconnected feet
and legs, in a pool of light. He shouldn’t have been startled by the bats,
because he knew – Njiru had mentioned it – that in the old days it had been
a regular outing for the men of Narovo to go and hunt bats in the cave at Pa
Na Keru. But then one day, or so the legend said, a man took the wrong
turning and, while his companions wound their way out of the mountain,
his every step was leading him deeper into it. At last he stumbled upon
another exit, and made his way back to the village, but, though he’d been
missing less than a week, he returned an old man. He stayed with his
mother for three days, but then his face turned black and he crumbled away
into dust.

Nobody had followed them into the inner cave. Hocart was busy with his

drawings and the islanders were presumably afraid of the legend. Was Njiru
also afraid? If he was, he didn’t show it. They could hear talk and laughter
only a few feet away, in the outer cave, but their isolation in this hot, fur-
lined darkness was complete.

This was the first time he’d been alone with Njiru since Ngea’s death,

and Rivers wanted to talk about Emele: partly because any ceremony
connected with the death of a chief was important, but partly too because he
felt concern for the woman herself.

‘Tongo polo,’ he said.
He felt Njiru withdraw.
‘How long?’ he persisted. ‘How many days?’

Njiru shook his head. ‘Man old time he savvy tongo polo, now no all

same.’

The last words were accompanied by a dismissive chopping movement

of his hand, not intended to make contact with anything, but his fingers
clipped the end of the torch and sent it clattering to the ground, where it
continued to shine, a single yellow eye focused on them in the darkness.
Then the walls lifted off and came towards them. Rivers barely had time to
see the beam of light become a tunnel filled with struggling shapes before
he was enclosed in flapping squeaking screaming darkness, blinded, his
skin shrinking from the contact that never came.

He stood with eyes closed, teeth clenched, senses so inundated they’d

virtually ceased to exist, his mind shrunk to a single point of light. Keep
still, he told himself, they won’t touch you. And after that he didn’t think at
all but endured, a pillar of flesh that the soles of his feet connected to the
earth, the bones of his skull vibrating to the bats’ unvarying high-pitched
scream.

The cave mouth disgorged fleeing human beings; behind them the bats

streamed out in a dark cloud that furled over on to itself as it rose, like
blood flowing from a wound under water. Eventually, shocked into silence,
they all turned to stare, and watched for a full minute, before the stream
thinned to a trickle.

Inside the cave, Rivers and Njiru opened their eyes. Rivers was not aware

of having moved during the exodus, indeed would have sworn that he had
not, but he discovered that he was gripping Njiru’s hand. He felt … not
dazed, dazed was the wrong word. The opposite of dazed. Almost as if a
rind had been pared off, naked, unshelled, lying in contact with the earth.
Wonderingly, in the intense silence, they gazed round the grey granite walls,
with here and there in the vastness black squares of baby bats hung upside-
down to await their mothers’ return.

A shaft of sunlight struck his eyes.

‘Sorry,’ Miss Irving said, and pulled the curtain a little way back. ‘What

sort of night did you have?

‘So-so.’
He seemed to have spent the entire night between hot, fur-lined walls and

the fur had got on to his teeth.

‘Here’s your tea,’ she said, putting the tray across his knees.
He drank it gratefully, sending out messages to various parts of his body

to find out what the situation was. Ghastly, seemed to be the general
response.

‘Don’t you think you should have a doctor?’ She smiled at him. ‘Doctor.’
‘No. All he’d do is tell me to stay in bed and drink plenty of fluids. I can

tell myself that.’

‘All right. Ring if there’s anything you want.’
‘Would you mind drawing the curtains?’
The darkness reminded him of the cave. All night he’d had bats clinging

to the inside walls of his skull. But now at least there was a breeze, the
curtains breathed gently. But he was still too hot. He kicked off the covers,
unbuttoned his jacket and flapped the edges, ran his tongue round his
cracked lips. Hot.

The sun beat down the moment they left the cave. It was past noon, but the
hard bright white rocks reflected heat into their faces. They walked more
slowly on the way back, Rivers intensely aware of Njiru walking just ahead
of him, though they did not speak. Near the village they began, by mutual
consent, to lag behind the others. Hocart turned to wait, but Rivers waved
him on.

They sat down on an overturned tree trunk covered in moss. The sun

crashed down, beating the tops of their heads, like somebody hammering
tent pegs into the ground. And yet even in these sweaty clothes, the
shoulders of his shirt thickly encrusted with bat droppings, Rivers had the
same feeling of being new, unsheathed.

They sat tranquilly, side by side, in no hurry to begin the mangled

business of communication. A slight breeze cooled their skin.

‘Tongo polo,’ Rivers said at last, because that’s where they’d left off.

How long? he asked again. How many days?

A bright, amused, unmistakably affectionate look from Njiru. There was

no fixed time, he said, though eighteen days was common. His grandmother
had observed tongo polo for two hundred days, but that was exceptional
because Homu, his grandfather, had been a great chief. The men of Roviana
blew the conch for her.

Blew the conch? Rivers asked. What did that mean?
A short silence, though not, Rivers thought, indicating a reluctance to go

on speaking. At that moment Njiru would have told him anything. Perhaps
this was the result of that time in the cave when they’d reached out and
gripped each other’s hands. No, he thought. No. There had been two
experiences in the cave, and he was quite certain Njiru shared in both. One
was the reaching out to grasp each other’s hands. But the other was a
shrinking, no, no, not shrinking, a compression of identity into a single hard
unassailable point: the point at which no further compromise is possible,
where nothing remains except pure naked self-assertion. The right to be and
to be as one is.

Njiru’s grandfather, Homu, was famous for having taken ninety-three

heads in a single afternoon. Through his grandmother he was related to
Inkava, who, until the British destroyed his stronghold, had been the most
ferocious of the great head-hunting chiefs of Roviana. This was his
inheritance. Rivers glanced sideways at him, close enough to see how the
white lime flaked on the taut skin of his cheekbones. Njiru was speaking,
not out of friendship – though he felt friendship – but out of that hard core
of identity, no longer concerned to evade questions or disguise his pride in
the culture of his people.

The blowing of the conch, he said, signifies the completion of a

successful raid. He turned and looked directly at Rivers. The widow of a
chief can be freed only by the taking of a head.

ELEVEN

Monday, 16 September 1918

We live in tamboos – a sort of cross between a cowshed and an outdoor
privy. Corrugated iron walls and roof – bloody noisy when it rains, and it’s
raining now – carpeted with straw that rustles and smells and gleams in the
candle-light. Fields outside – perfectly reasonable fields when we arrived.
Now, after last night’s heavy rain and the constant churning of boots and
wheels, there’s a depth of about eighteen inches of mud. The duckboards
are starting to sink. Oh, and it gets into everything. The inside of my
sleeping-bag is not inviting – I was tempted to sleep outside it last night.
But. Mustn’t complain. (Why not? The entire army survives on grousing.)
In fact mud and duck-boards are about the only familiar things left.

I’ve got a permanent feeling of wrongness at the nape of my neck.

Exposure’s the right word, I suppose, and for once the army’s bad joke of a
haircut isn’t to blame. We’re out in the open all the time and I’m used to a
war where one scurries about below ground like a mole or a rat. (Rats
thrived on us – literally. We must have devastated the moles.) It occurred to
me last night that Rivers’s idea of my using myself as a test case – the
football he told me to dribble across – has one fundamental flaw in it. Same
loony – different war. As far as I can make out, Rivers’s theory is that the
crucial factor in accounting for the vast number of breakdowns this war has
produced is not the horrors – war’s always produced plenty of those – but
the fact that the strain has to be borne in conditions of immobility, passivity
and helplessness. Cramped in holes in the ground waiting for the next
random shell to put you out. If that is the crucial factor, then the test’s

invalid – because every exercise we do now is designed to prepare for open,
mobile warfare. And that’s what’s happening – it’s all different.

I told Rivers once that the sensation of going over the top was sexy. I

don’t think he believed me, but actually there was something in common –
racing blood, risk, physical exposure, a kind of awful daring about it.
(Obviously I’m not talking about sex in bed.) But I don’t feel anything like
that now. There’s, for me, a nagging, constant apprehension, because I’m
out in the open and I know I shouldn’t be. New kind of war. The trouble is
my. nerves are the same old nerves. I’d be happier with a ton or two of
France on top of my head.

Day was spent on general clean-up. The men’s reward was compulsory

games. I stood obediently on the touchline and yelled and waved. A cold
grey day. The ball seemed to fly across the lowering sky like a drenched,
heavy, reluctant bird. The men were coated in mud, plumes of steam rising
from their mouths. All tremendously competitive, of course – ‘C’ against
‘D’ – and curiously unreal. Street-corner football played in the spirit of
public-school rugby. I stood and watched my red-faced, red-kneed
compatriots charging up and down a social No Man’s Land. But at least
officers and men play together – it’s the only informal contact there is
outside the line.

At half-time some of them stripped off their shirts and the steam rose

from their bodies, red and white, chapped hands and faces, as they stood
panting. Jenkins waved at somebody off the pitch and for a moment his face
was turned towards me, greenish eyes, red hair, milky white skin blotched
with freckles, I had to make an effort to look away. Mustn’t get the
reputation of ‘having an eye for Tommy’. Bad for discipline. Though I
don’t know what the fuck else there is to look at.

That’s the other change: the men’s expressions. That look on Jenkins’s

face as he turned to wave. Before, there were basically two expressions.
One you saw at Étaples, the rabbit-locked-up-with-a-stoat look. I’ve only
ever seen that expression in one other place, and that was the Royces’
house. Family of four boys in the next street to us. Their father used to
make them line up every night after he’d had a few pints, and lift their shirt-

tails. Then he’d thrash them with a ruler on their bare bums. Every night
without fail. One of them asked once, ‘What’s it for, Dad?’ And he said,
‘It’s for whatever you’ve done that you think you’ve got away with.’ But
my God they could fight. One of them was the bane of my life at school.

The other expression was the trench expression. It looks quite daunting if

you don’t know what it is. Any one of my platoon could have posed for a
propaganda poster of the Brutal Hun, but it wasn’t brutality or anything like
that. It was a sort of morose disgust, and it came from living in trenches that
had bits of human bone sticking out of the walls, in freezing weather
corpses propped up on the fire step, flooded latrines.

Whatever happens to us it can’t be as bad as that.

Wednesday, 18 September

Today we went to the divisional baths, which are in a huge, low barn. For
once it was sunny and dry and the march, though long, was not too tiring.
They weren’t ready for us and the men sat on the grass outside and waited,
leaning on each other’s knees or stretched out on the grass with their arms
behind their heads. Then it was their turn.

The usual rows of rain butts, wine barrels, a couple of old baths (proper

baths). The water any temperature from boiling to tepid depending on
where you were in the queue. They take off their clothes, leave them in
piles, line up naked, larking about, jostling, a lot of jokes, a few songs,
everybody happy because it’s not the dreary routine of drills and training.
Inside the barn, hundreds of tiny chinks of sunlight from gaps in the walls
and roof, so the light shimmers like shot silk, and these gleams dance over
everything, brown faces and necks, white bodies, the dividing line round
the throat sharp as a guillotine.

One of my problems with the baths is that I’m always dressed. Officers

bathe separately. And … Well, it’s odd. One of the things I like sexually,
one of the things I fantasize about, is simply being fully dressed with a
naked lover, holding him or her from behind. And what I feel (apart from
the obvious) is great tenderness – the sort of tenderness that depends on

being more powerful, and that is really, I suppose, just the acceptable face
of sadism.

This doesn’t matter with a lover, where it’s just a game, but here the

disproportion of power is real and the nakedness involuntary. Nothing to be
done about it. I mean, I can scarcely trip about with downcast eyes like a
maiden aunt at a leek show. But I feel uncomfortable, and I suspect most of
the other officers don’t.

Through the barn, out into the open air, dressing in clean clothes, a

variety of drawers and vests, most of them too big. The army orders these
things to fit the Sons of Empire, but some of the Sons of Empire didn’t get
much to eat when they were kids. One of the men in my platoon, barely
regulation height, got a pair of drawers he could pull up to his chin. He
paraded around, laughing at himself, not minding in the least when
everybody else laughed too.

Watching him, it suddenly struck me that soldiers’ nakedness has a

quality of pathos, not merely because the body is so obviously vulnerable,
but because they put on indignity and anonymity with their clothes, and for
most people, civilians, most of the time, the reverse is true.

March back very cheerful, everybody singing, lice eggs popping in the

seams of the clean clothes as soon as the bodies warm them through. But
we’re used to that. And I started thinking – there’s a lot of time to think on
marches – about Father Mackenzie’s church, the huge shadowy crucifix on
the rood screen dominating everything, a sheaf of hollyhocks lying in the
chancel waiting to be arranged, their long stems scrawling wet across the
floor. And behind every altar, blood, torture, death. St John’s head on a
platter, Salome offering it to Herodias, the women’s white arms a sort of
cage around the severed head with its glazed eyes. Christ at the whipping
block, his expression distinctly familiar. St Sebastian hamming it up and my
old friend St Lawrence on his grid. Father Mackenzie’s voice booming from
the vestry. He loved me, the poor sod, I really think he did.

And I thought about the rows of bare bodies lining up for the baths, and I

thought it isn’t just me. Whole bloody western front’s a wanker’s paradise.
This is what they’ve been praying for, this is what they’ve been longing for,

for years. Rivers would say something sane and humorous and sensible at
this point, but I stand by it and anyway Rivers isn’t here. Whenever a man
with a fuckable arse hoves into view you can be quite certain something
perfectly dreadful’s going to happen.

But then, something perfectly dreadful is going to happen. So that’s all

right.

Sunday, 22 September

Morning – about the nearest we ever get to a lie-in (I’ve been up and on the
go by 5.30 every day this week). Wyatt’s shaving and there’s a voluntary
service starting just outside. Smell of bacon frying, sound of pots and pans
clattering about and Longstaffe whistling as he cleans my boots. Hallet’s on
the other side of the table writing to his fiancee, something that always
takes hours and hours. And the rain’s stopped and there’s a shaft of sunlight
on the ground and the straw looks like gold. The razor rattling against the
side of the bowl makes a pleasant sound. The ghost of Sunday Morning at
home – roast beef and gravy, the windows steamed up, the News of the
World rustling as Dad drops half of it, the Sally Army tuning up outside.

Onward, Christian soldiers,
Marching as to war,
With the cross of Jesus
Going on before.

Twenty – perhaps a few more – male voices in unison. Longstaffe’s singing
the alternative version:

Forward Joe Soap’s army
Marching without fear
With your brave commander
Safely in the rear.
He boasts and skites
From morn till night
And thinks he’s very brave,
But the men who really did the job
Are dead and in their grave.

Sung very cheerfully with great good humour. We’re all looking forward to
Sunday dinner, which is roast beef and roast potatoes. I’m famished. And
there is not going to be a gas drill during this meal. I know.

Tuesday, 24 September

Bussed forward. Men sang all the way, in high spirits, mainly I think
because they didn’t have to march.

Thursday, 26 September

The nearest village is in ruins. Extraordinary jagged shapes of broken walls
in moonlight, silver mountains and chasms, with here and there black pits
of craters thronged with weeds.

Some of the other villages aren’t even ruins. You’re not supposed to

mention the effects of enemy fire, but a lot of this is the effect of British fire
so perhaps I can mention it. Nothing’s left. We passed through one village
that hadn’t a single wall above knee height. Old trenches everywhere,
tangles of rusting barbed-wire, rib-cages of horses that rotted where they
fell. And worse and worse.

The men, except for the one or two I remember from last year, are still

reserved. Sometimes when they’re alone at night you hear laughter. Not
often. They guard the little privacy they have jealously. Most of the
‘devotion’ people talk about is from officers – some of the officers – to the
men. I don’t myself see much sign that it’s reciprocated. If they trust
anybody they trust the NCOs, who’re older, for the most part, and come
from the same background. But then I wasn’t born to the delusion that I’m
responsible for them.

What I am responsible for is GAS. Either the Adjutant wasn’t joking or if

he was it’s a continuing joke. My old nickname – the Canary – has been
revived. Owen for some reason is known as the Ghost. Evidently when he
disappeared into Craiglockhart – and I suspect didn’t write to anybody
because he was ashamed (I didn’t either) – they concluded he was dead.

Gas drill happens several times a day. The routine lectures aren’t resented

too much (except by me – I have to give them), but the random drills are
hated by everybody. You’re settling down for the night, or about to score a
goal, or raising the first forkful of hot food to your lips, and wham! Rattles
whirl, masks are pulled on, arms and fists pumped, and then the muffled
hollow shout GAS! GAS! GAS! Creatures with huge eyes like insects
flicker between the trees. What they hate – what I hate – is the gas drill that
comes while you’re marching or doing PT or bayonet training, because then
you have to go on, flailing about in green light, with the sound of your
breathing – In. Out. In. Out. – drowning all other sounds. And every
movement leeches energy away.

Nobody likes the mask. But what I have to do is watch out for the

occasional man who just can’t cope with it at all, who panics as soon as it
comes down over his head. And unfortunately I think I’ve found one,
though he’s in my company which means I can keep an eye on him.

The attitude to gas has changed. It’s used more and feared less. A few of

the men are positively gas happy. OK, they think, if a whiff or two gets you
back to base and doesn’t kill you, why not? It’s become the equivalent of
shooting yourself in the foot and a lot harder to detect.

At dinner I told Hallet and Potts that four years ago we were told to

protect ourselves from gas by pissing on our socks. You folded one sock
into a pad and used the other to tie it over your mouth and nose. They gaped
at me, not sure if I was serious or not. ‘Did it work?’ asked Hallet. ‘No,’ I
said. ‘But it didn’t half take your mind off it.’ And they both laughed, quite
relieved, I think, to know I was only having them on.

It used to give you spots round your mouth. Not that that was our main

worry at the time.

And today was pay day. After an afternoon spent crawling running

falling crawling again across wet fields, the men were so caked in mud they
looked as if they were made of it. Tired, but pay day’s always good, even if
you’ve nothing to spend it on, and they were chattering, jostling, laughing
as they queued. Then the rattles whirred. A groan went up – (with the real

thing there isn’t time to groan – more practice needed) and then the usual
routine: clenched fists, pumping arms, GAS! GAS! GAS!

They went on queuing. Mud-brown men standing in mud, the slanting

rays of the sun gilding the backs of their hands, the only flesh now visible. I
was sitting next to Hardwick, ticking off names on the list. One man,
waiting immediately behind the man who was being paid, turned his face a
little to one side, and I saw, in those huge insect eyes, not one but two
setting suns.

Friday, 28 September

Since yesterday evening there’s been a continuous bombardment. All the
roads forward are choked, drivers stuck in the mud, swearing at each other,
a flickering greenish-yellow light in the sky and every now and then the
whine and thud of a shell. A constant drone of planes overhead, all going
one way.

We move forward tonight.

TWELVE

Rivers walked along the path between the tent and Narovo village, the full
moon casting his shadow ahead of him. All around were the scuffles and
squeals of the bush, the scream of some bird that turned into a laugh, then
silence for a moment, more scuffles, more squeals, the night-long frenzy of
killing and eating.

Once in the village he went straight to Ngea’s hall, stooped and went in.

The scare ghost shivered at his approach.

The women were asleep, the widows who tended Emele. He tiptoed past

them, and knelt down, calling, ‘Emele! Emele!’, an urgent whisper that
caused one of the widows to stir and mutter in her sleep. He waited till she
settled before he called the name again. When there was no reply he pushed
the door open and there, curled up in the prescribed position, back bent,
hands resting on her feet, was Kath.

‘Kath, Kath,’ he said. ‘What on earth are you doing here?’ And the

movement of his lips woke him up.

He sat on the edge of the bed, peering at his watch. Four o’clock, never a

good time to wake. His throat was very sore. He swallowed several times,
and decided what was needed was that good old medical stand-by, a glass
of water.

In the bathroom he blinked in the white light, caught a glimpse of himself

in the looking-glass and thought, My God, is this really what you’ve done
to yourself? He took a moment to contemplate baggy eyes and thinning
hair, but he wasn’t sunk so deep in neurosis or narcissism as to believe an
overhead light at four a.m. lays bare the soul. He drank a glass of water and
went back to bed.

Despite the hour the curtains let in a little light, starlight, he supposed,

there was no moon tonight. It was curiously reminiscent of the light in the
tent on Eddystone. He beat the pillows into a more comfortable shape, and
tried to get back to sleep.

‘Leave the flap open,’ Rivers said.

It had been hotter than usual, an oven of a day in which people and trees

had shimmered like reflections in water. The earth outside the tent was
baked hard. He watched a line of red ants struggle across the immensity, a
group at the rear carrying a dead beetle many times their own size.

Hocart emerged from the tent. ‘I don’t think I can face sleeping in there

tonight.’

‘We can sleep out here if you like. As long as you’re careful with the

net.’

The remains of their evening meal lay on the table. Neither of them had

felt like eating much.

‘What do we do?’ Hocart said, sitting cross-legged on the ground beside

Rivers. ‘What do we do if they come back with a head? Or heads, God help
us.’

Rivers said slowly, ‘Logically, we don’t intervene.’
‘Logically, we’re dead. Even if we decide we won’t tell the authorities,

how do they know we won’t? From their point of view, the only safe thing
to do is –’

‘Obey the law.’
‘Get rid of us.’
‘I don’t think they’ll do that.’
‘Could they?’
‘Well, yes, probably. The point is, it won’t happen, there isn’t going to be

a head.’

‘But if –’
‘If there is we’ll deal with it.’
A long, stubborn, unconvinced silence from Hocart.

‘Look, you know what the penalties are. If they go on a raid there’s no

way the British Commissioner isn’t going to hear about it. And then you’ve
got a gunboat off the coast, villages on fire, trees cut down, crops destroyed,
pigs killed. Screaming women and children driven into the bush. You know
what happens.’

‘Makes you proud to be British, doesn’t it?’
‘Are you suggesting head-hunting should be allowed?’
‘No.’ Tight-lipped.
‘Good. When these people were taking heads they virtually depopulated

Ysabel. It had to be stopped.’

‘So how are they going to get her out?’
Rivers hesitated. ‘I don’t know. She can’t stay in there for ever.’
What he secretly thought, but was superstitiously afraid of saying, was

that the situation would end in Emele’s suicide. He could see no other way
out.

The following morning he went to see Namboko Taru. She’d become

very fond of him (and he of her) ever since his miming of alternating
constipation and diarrhoea had kept her amused while Njiru removed the
nggasin from her belly.

She and her friend Namboko Nali had been bathing in the sea and their

hair smelled of salt water. Taru’s scrawny brown arms were folded across
her breasts as she sat, with her back against the wall of her hut, steaming
gently in the sun, while hens stepped delicately around her, pecking the
dust. He sat beside her, admiring the gleam of dull emerald in the cockerel’s
neck feathers, as the village came slowly to life.

After a few minutes’ gossip he started asking her about love charms, the

subject they’d talked about at their last meeting. Three other women came
out and listened. He got out his notebook and took down the words of the
charm Taru supplied, aware that more than the usual amount of whispering
and giggling was going on. Taru offered him betel to chew, and thinking,
What the hell, who needs teeth? he accepted it. The women giggled again.
A little while later Taru offered him lime, and to humour her he let her draw
white lines on his cheekbones. The giggling was now almost out of control,

but he pressed on to the end of the charm, at which point it was revealed
that the words only became efficacious if the man accepted betel and lime
from the woman’s basket.

He laughed with them, and by the time they’d finished they were on such

terms that he felt he could ask them anything. Even about Emele and tongo
polo. Taru vehemently denied there was any question of suicide. Suicide,
ungi, was totally different. Taru and Nali had helped Kera, the widow of the
previous chief, to kill herself. She had tried poisoning herself with tobacco
and that hadn’t worked. And then she’d tried to hang herself, but the bough
had broken. So they’d held a pole for her, high above their heads, and she’d
twined a strip of calico round her throat and hanged herself from the pole.
Garrotted more like, Rivers thought. It would not have been a quick or an
easy death. What decided whether the widow would ungi or observe tongo
polo? he asked. It was her choice, they said.

Returning to the tent, he found Hocart lying outside, having spent the

first part of the morning washing clothes. He was asleep, or resting, with his
arms across his face shielding his eyes from the sun. Rivers put his foot on
his chest and pressed lightly.

Hocart peered up at him, taking in the white lines on his face. ‘My God.’
‘I think I just got engaged.’
A bubble of laughter shook Hocart’s ribs. ‘Lucky woman.’

Sleeping was difficult, because of the heat, even after they’d taken their
beds outside the tent. Sometimes they gave up altogether, and went to lie in
the shallows, where the small waves, gleaming with phosphorescent light,
broke over them.

Rivers had become obsessed by Emele. Wherever he was, whatever he

was doing, the thought of the woman cramped inside the enclosure, inside
the hut, followed him until he saw every other aspect of life on the island in
the shadow of her imprisonment.

In the mornings he would go down to bathe and watch the canoes go out,

foam flashing from the paddles, a wordless song drifting across the water:

‘Aie, aie, aie.’ All vowel sounds, it seemed to be, no consonants. And then
the smack of water being slapped to lure bonito into the nets.

It was still idyllic. His own happiness did not lessen, but always, now,

there were these two points of darkness: Emele cramped in her enclosure;
Ngea rotting in his era. Once he walked up the path on the other side of the
beach, unable to explain his desire to see Ngea, for the facts of physical
decomposition neither fascinated nor frightened him. A corpse was
something one buried or dissected. Nothing more. And yet he needed to see
Ngea.

The smell reached him when he was no more than half way up the path.

He pinched his nostrils, breathing through his open mouth, but even so a
few yards further on he had to abandon the attempt. A black cloud of flies,
so dense it looked solid, rose at his approach, heat made audible. He backed
away, as much as anything because they reminded him of the bats in the
cave, and that experience, the sense of being unshelled, peeled in some way,
that had seemed so positive at the time, now made him afraid. He was open
to whatever might happen in this place, open in the way that a child is, since
no previous experience was relevant.

The heat continued. From mid-afternoon onwards there was a curious

bronze light in the sky, which became brownish towards evening, as if even
the air were singed. Occasional flicks of wind teased the outermost
branches of the trees, but did not disturb the intense brooding stillness.

Rivers slept uneasily, waking finally at ‘fowl-he-sing-out’, aware of

having heard a new and different sound. He lay and listened and was, just
about to turn over and try to snatch an extra hour when it came again: the
brazen blare of a conch shell.

He was on his feet and outside the tent in a matter of minutes. The bush

distorted sounds, bouncing echoes back, but then he was aware of the crash
of hurrying footsteps through the undergrowth, people running down to the
beach. He shook Hocart awake, and followed the crowd, holding back a
little, not knowing how secret this was, or how much it might matter that he
was witnessing it.

He saw Njiru at the water’s edge, draped in a white cloth, with a staff in

his hand, looking out over the bay.

A canoe was heading in, quickly, paddled by Lembu, and in the stern was

a bundle of some kind. He was too far away to see what it . was, but an ah
went up from the crowd, and suddenly, the women and girls began running
into the sea, prancing like horses until they reached a depth where they
could cast themselves forward and swim. Clinging to the canoe’s side, they
escorted it into the shallow water, and Lembu got out, everything about him
shining, teeth, hair, eyes, skin, and hauled the canoe up the beach. He
walked back to the stern, unwrapped the bundle, and dragged the contents
out on to the sand. A small boy about four years old.

Rivers walked down to the canoe, since nobody seemed to care whether

he saw this or not. The child’s face was tear-stained, streaked with dirt and
snot. He was not actually crying now, though irregular hiccups shook his
thin chest. As people surged towards him and stared, he moved closer to his
captor, resting one grubby hand on Lembu’s naked thigh.

Rivers went up to Njiru. ‘Is that your head?’ he asked, unaware that he

spoke English, not pidgin.

‘Yes,’ Njiru said steadily.
He took the child from Lembu and, surrounded by excited, smiling

people, carried him up the beach path to the village. Rivers followed, but
kept well back as the crowd gathered outside Ngea’s hall. Lembu blew the
conch as they entered the village, and again inside the hall. After a while
Emele emerged, hobbling, resting her arms on the shoulders of Taru and
Nali. Lembu and Njiru followed her out, and there was general rejoicing,
except from the small boy, who stood alone at the centre of the throng, his
eyes like black bubbles that at any moment might burst.

THIRTEEN

4 October 1918

What can one say? And yet I’ve got to write something because however
little I remember now I’ll remember less in years to come. And it’s not true
to say one remembers nothing. A lot of it you know you’ll never forget, and
a few things you’ll pray to forget and not be able to. But the connections go.
Bubbles break on the surface like they do on the flooded craters round here
– the ones that’ve been here years and have God knows what underneath.

The night of I think the 1st (dates go too) we lay all night in a trench one

foot deep – the reward of success because this was a German trench.
Another reward of success was that we had no British troops on our left,
we’d raced ahead of them all. I think I’m right in saying we were the only
units that broke through the Hindenburg line and maintained the position. It
was dark, early evening, deep black, and we expected a counter-attack at
dawn. Until then there was nothing to do but wait, both intolerably cramped
and intolerably exposed, enfilading machine-gun fire on three sides.
‘Cramped’ isn’t a figure of speech either. The trench was hardly more than
a scraping in the earth. Any careless movement and you’d had it. And for a
lot of the time we wore gas masks, because there’d been a very heavy gas
barrage put down by our side and it lingered. The whole area smelled like a
failed suicide attempt, and I kept hearing Sarah’s voice saying about
Johnny, It was our own gas, our own bloody gas. In spite of all the drills
some of the men were slow to put their masks on, one or two had bad
reactions, and then Oakshott decided to have a panic attack. I crawled along
to him, not past people, over them, one eel wriggling across the others in
the tank, and tried to calm him down. I remember at one point I burst out

laughing, can’t remember why, but it did me good. There’s a kind of angry
laughter that gets you back to the centre of yourself. I shared a bar of
chocolate with Longstaffe and we huddled together under my greatcoat and
tried to keep warm. And then the counter-attack came.

Two bubbles break here. Longstaffe sliding back into the trench with a

red hole in his forehead and an expression of mild surprise on his face. And
the bayonet work. Which I will not remember. Rivers would say, remember
now – any suppressed memory stores up trouble for the future. Well, too
bad. Refusing to think’s the only way I can survive and anyway what
future?

The whole thing was breakdown territory, as defined by Rivers. Confined

space, immobility, helplessness, passivity, constant danger that you can do
nothing to avert. But my nerves seem to be all right. Or at least no worse
than anybody else’s. All our minds are in flight, each man tries to reach his
own accommodation with what he saw. What he did. But on the surface it’s
all jollity. We’re marching back, through the same desolation, but towards
safety. Another battalion has leap-frogged us into the line. And every time
my right foot hits the ground I say, over, over, over. Because the war’s
coming to an end, and we all know it, and it’s coming to an end partly
because of what we did. We broke through. We held the position.

5 October

I think the worst time was after the counter-attack, when we lay in that
trench all day surrounded by the dead. I still had Longstaffe by my side,
though his expression changed after death. The look of surprise faded. And
we listened to the wounded groaning outside. Two stretcher-bearers
volunteered to go out and were hit as soon as they stood up. Another tried
later. After that I said, No more, everybody keep down. By nightfall most of
the groaning had stopped. A few of the more lightly wounded crawled in
under cover of darkness and we patched them up as best we could. But one
man kept on and on, it didn’t sound like a human being, or even like an
animal, a sort of guttural gurgling like a blocked drain.

I decided I ought to try myself, and took Lucas with me. Not like going

over the top used to be, climbing out of the bloody trench. Just a quick
slither through the wire, barbs snagging the sleeves, and into the mud. I felt
the coldness on my cheek, and the immense space above, that sense you
always get when lying on the ground in the open of the earth as a ball
turning in space. There was time to feel this, in spite of the bullets – which
anyway frightened me less than the thought of having to see what was
making that sound.

The gurgling led us to him. He was lying halfway down the side of a

flooded crater and the smell of gas was stronger here, as it always is near
water. As we started down, bullets peppered the surface, plop, plop, plop,
an innocent sound like when you skim a flat stone across a river, and bullets
flicked the rim where we’d been a second before and sent cascades of loose
earth down after us. The gurgling changed as we got closer so he knew
something different was happening. I don’t think he could have known
more than that. I got right up to his feet, and started checking his legs for
wounds, nothing, but then I didn’t expect it. That sound only comes from a
head wound. What made it marginally worse was that the side of the head
nearest me was untouched. His whole frame was shaking, his skin blue in
the starlight as our skins were too, but his was the deep blue of shock. I said
‘Hallet’ and for a second the gurgling stopped. I gestured to Lucas and he
helped me turn him further over on to his back, and we saw the wound.
Brain exposed, a lot of blood, a lot of stuff not blood down the side of the
neck. One eye gone. A hole – I was going to say in his left cheek – where
his left cheek had been. Something was burning, casting an orange light
into the sky which reflected down on us. The farm that had been one of our
reference points. The underside of the clouds was stained orange by the
flames.

We got a rope underneath him and started hauling him round the crater,

up the other side, towards our trench and all the time I was thinking, What’s
the use? He’s going to die anyway. I think I thought about killing him. At
one point he screamed and I saw the fillings in his back teeth and his mouth
filled with blood. After that he was quiet, and it was easier but then a flare

went up and everything paled in the trembling light. Bastards, bastards,
bastards, I thought. I heard a movement and there on the rim of the crater
was a white face looking down. Carter, who, I later discovered, had come
out entirely on his own initiative. That was just right. More than three and
we’d have been getting in each other’s way. We managed to drag him back
through fire that was, if anything, lighter than before, though not
intentionally I think. Too little mercy had been shown by either side that
day for gestures of that sort to be possible.

We fell into the trench, Hallet on top of us. I got something damp on my

face that wasn’t mud, and brushing it away found a gob of Hallet’s brain
between my fingertips. Because he’d gone quiet on the last stretch I
expected to find him unconscious or dead, but he was neither. I gave him a
drink of water. I had to press my hand against his face to get it down,
because otherwise it slopped out of the hole. And all the time I was doing it
I was thinking, Die can’t you? For God’s sake, man, just die. But he didn’t.

When at last we were ordered to pull back I remember peering up at the

sky and seeing the stars sparse and pale through a gauze of greenish light,
and thinking, Thank God it’s evening, because shells were still coming
over, and some of them were falling directly on the road. At least we’d be
marching towards the relative safety of night.

The sun hung on the lip of the horizon, filling the sky. I don’t know

whether it was the angle or the drifting smoke that half obscured it, but it
was enormous. The whole scene looked like something that couldn’t be
happening on earth, partly the sun, partly the utter lifelessness of the land
around us, pitted, scarred, pockmarked with stinking craters and scrawls of
barbed-wire. Not even birds, not even carrion feeders. Even the crows have
given up. And I stumbled along at the head of the company and I waited for
the sun to go down. And the sodding thing didn’t. IT ROSE. It wasn’t just
me. I looked round at the others and I saw the same stupefaction on every
face. We hadn’t slept for four days. Tiredness like that is another world, just
like noise, the noise of a bombardment, isn’t like other noise. You see
people wade through it, lean into it. I honestly think if the war went on for a
hundred years another language would evolve, one that was capable of

describing the sound of a bombardment or the buzzing of flies on a hot
August day on the Somme. There are no words. There are no words for
what I felt when I saw the setting sun rise.

6 October

We’re far enough back now for officers from different companies to mess
together again. I sit at a rickety little table censoring letters, for the post has
arrived, including one for me from Sarah saying she isn’t pregnant. I don’t
know what I feel exactly. I ought to be delighted and of course I am, but
that was not the first reaction. There was a split second of something else,
before the relief set in.

Letters arrive for the dead. I check names against the list and write

Deceased in a firm bold hand in the top left-hand corner. Casualties were
heavy, not so much in the initial attack as in the counter-attacks.

Gregg died of wounds. I remember him showing me a letter from home

that had big ‘kisses’ in red crayon from his little girl.

Of the people who shared the house in Amiens only a month ago, Potts is

wounded, but likely to live. Jones (Owen’s servant) wounded, likely to live.
Hallet’s wounds are so bad I don’t think he can possibly survive. I see him
sometimes lying in the lily pond in the garden with the golden fish darting
all around him, and silver lines of bubbles on his thighs. More like a pattern
than a picture, no depth to it, no perspective, but brilliantly clear. And
Longstaffe’s dead.

The Thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?
I look across at Owen, who’s doing casualty reports with a Woodbine –

now blessedly plentiful again – stuck to his bottom lip, and his hair, rather
lank at the moment, flopping over his forehead. For days after the battle he
went round with his tunic stiff with blood, but then I had blood and brains
on me. We must have stunk like the drains in a slaughterhouse, but we’ve
long since stopped smelling each other. He looks like one of the boys you
see on street corners in the East End. Open to offers. I must say I wouldn’t
mind. He looks up, feeling himself the subject of scrutiny, smiles and

pushes the fags across. I saw him in the attack, caped and masked in blood,
seize a machine-gun and turn it on its previous owners at point-blank range.
Like killing fish in a bucket. And I wonder if he sees those faces, grey,
open-mouthed faces, life draining out of them before the bullets hit, as I see
the faces of the men I killed in the counter-attack. I won’t ask. He wouldn’t
answer if I did. I wouldn’t dare ask. For the first time it occurs to me that
Rivers’s job also requires courage.

We don’t even mention our own dead. The days pass crowded with

meaningless incident, and it’s easier to forget. I run the ball of my thumb
against the two first fingers of my right hand where a gob of Hallet’s brain
was, and I don’t feel anything very much.

We are Craiglockhart’s success stories. Look at us. We don’t remember,

we don’t feel, we don’t think – at least not beyond the confines of what’s
needed to do the job. By any proper civilized standard (but what does that
mean now?) we are objects of horror. But our nerves are completely steady.
And we are still alive.

Part Three

FOURTEEN

SHEER FIGHTING

BOTH SIDES PAY THE PRICE

HUNS WAIT FOR THE BAYONET

Prior would have been in that, Rivers thought. He picked the paper up from
his breakfast tray and made a real effort to concentrate. It was clear, even
from this gung-ho report, that casualties had been heavy. No point checking
the casualty lists yet: individual names took at least a week to come
through. But he could probably expect a field postcard in the next few days,
if Prior was all right. He’d sounded fine in his last letter, but that was ten
days ago.

Reading it, Rivers had felt the stab of envy he always experienced on

receiving letters from men serving in France. If the wretched war had to
happen he’d rather have spent it with Marshall-of-the-Ten-Wounds than
with Telford-of-the-Pickled-Penis. He tried to focus on the details of the
engagement, but the print blurred before his eyes. And his boiled egg –
though God knows what it had cost Mrs Irving to buy – was going down
like lead. He really thought he’d be sick if he forced any more of it down.
He took his glasses off, put them on the bedside table and pushed the tray
away. He meant only to rest a while before starting again, but his fingers
slackened and twitched on the counterpane and, after a few minutes, the
newspaper with its headlines shrieking about distant battles slipped sighing
to the floor.

Ngea’s skull, jammed into the v of a cleft stick, bleached in the sun. A
solitary bluebottle buzzed in and out of the eye sockets and, finding nothing
there of interest, sailed away into the blue sky.

On his way down to the beach to bathe, Rivers paused to look at the

skull. Only a month ago he’d spoken to this man, had even held his hand
briefly on parting. No wonder the islanders wore necklaces of pepeu leaves
to guard themselves against tomate gani yambo: the Corpse-eating Spirit.

Later the same day he saw the little boy whom Lembu had brought back

from Ysabel squatting listlessly outside Njiru’s hut, poking about in the dust
with a small stick. He was not crying, but he looked dazed. The story was
he’d been bought, but Rivers was not inclined to believe it. In these islands
– still, in spite of the abolition of headhunting, warrior communities – not
even the poorest family would willingly part with a son. Abduction was
more likely. He watched the child for several minutes, wanting to go to him,
and yet knowing the appearance of a strange white man would only terrify
him more.

‘Are they going to kill him?’ Hocart said, lying sleepless in bed that

night.

‘No, they won’t do that – they’d have to kill us too.’
‘Perhaps that wouldn’t worry them.’
‘The Commissioner’s response to it would.’
But after Hocart was uneasily asleep, twitching and muttering, Rivers lay

awake, thinking that if the islanders wanted to get rid of them it wouldn’t be
too difficult. White men died of blackwater fever all the time, and no doubt
there were poisons that mimicked the symptoms. You only had to look at
Ngea’s skull to know that by the time the next steamer put in there wouldn’t
be enough of them left to make investigation possible. Moreover, the next
steamer would be Brennan’s, since he was the local trader, and, confronted
by any sign of trouble, he’d simply skedaddle as fast as possible. No, they’d
just have to wait and see, and be cautious.

Next morning, when he arrived in the village, the little boy had gone.

They were invited to witness the placing of Ngea’s skull in the skull house.
Njiru officiated.

At dawn they were woken by the screams of pigs being slaughtered, and

all morning columns of smoke had risen from the cooking fires. It was noon

before the ceremony started, the sun crashing down on shoulders and heads,
the heat intensified by two fires, the sacrificial fire on the hearth in front of
the skull house, and the common fire where Rivers and Hocart sat along
with people from the village and the surrounding hamlets. Rivers looked
out for the small captive boy, but could not see him. Beside him Lembu was
plaiting a creeper which he used to tie Ngea’s jaw-bone to his skull, before
placing a diadem of shells round the cranium and other shells in the sockets
of the eyes.

Across the fire, moving figures shimmered in the heat. A woman with a

baby in her arms, Nanja, whose own child had died in the confining house
and who was now nursing Kwini, the emaciated baby whom Rivers had
first seen with Njiru. The child worried at the nipple, guzzling and snuffling
– already her wasted thighs had begun to fill out. She would live, he
thought, and the idea cheered him for, to western eyes, the stacked-up skulls
made disturbing companions.

Njiru raised Ngea’s crowned skull above his head, and a silence fell,

broken only by the careless cries of the children, but they were some
distance away. Rivers could follow most of Njiru’s prayer without need of
an interpreter. ‘We offer pudding, we offer pig, to you the ghosts. Be
propitious in war, be propitious in the sea fight, be propitious at the fort, be
propitious at the burning of the thatch. Receive the chiefly dead …’ Here
Njiru placed Ngea’s skull in the house. ‘And be you propitious and smite
our enemies, oh, oh, oh!’

It was a prayer for success in the great head-hunting raid that ought to

have concluded the mourning for the dead chief. The Vavolo, the Night
Festival, at which all the young women were free – tugele – to all the
returning warriors. But the raid would not happen. The prayer could not be
answered. Njiru put pork and yam pudding in the sacrificial fire, whose
flames burned dull in the sunlight. Then he took the remains of the pudding
and walked round the stones that encircled the clearing, placing a mouthful
of food on each stone. The stones were called tomate patu, stone ghosts,
and were erected as memorials to men who died and whose bodies could
not be brought home. Rivers watched him go from stone to stone.

Head-hunting had to be banned, and yet the effects of banning it were

everywhere apparent in the listlessness and lethargy of the people’s lives.
Head-hunting was what they had lived for. Though it might seem callous or
frivolous to say so, head-hunting had been the most tremendous fun and
without it life lost almost all its zest.

This was a people perishing from the absence of war. It showed in the

genealogies, the decline in the birth rate from one generation to the next –
the island’s population was less than half what it had been in Rinambesi’s
youth – and much of that decline was deliberate.

Against the background of such despair might not the temptation of

taking one small head in honour of a dead chief prove irresistible? Raids,
no, they couldn’t do that, the punishment was too severe. But who was to
miss one small boy?

Rivers ate the baked yarns and pork offered to him, but remained

thoughtful. Once he looked up to see Njiru on the other side of the fire, a
tall, lean, twisted shape wavering in the column of heat, and surprised on
the other man’s face an expression of – bitterness? No, stronger than that.
Hatred, even.

Kundaite could interpret talk blong tomate: the language of ghosts.
Sometimes, he said, a meeting was held on the night the old ghosts arrived
to take the new ghost back to Sonto with them, and he would question the
ghosts and the people would hear them speak. Would this be done for
Ngea? Rivers asked. Kundaite didn’t know, he wasn’t sure, he didn’t think
so. Would it be done if we give you ten sticks of tobacco? Kundaite nodded.
He was given five and promised the other five the following morning.
Would they hear Ngea speak? Hocart asked. No, was the reply. ‘Ngea he no
speak yet. He all same small fellow piccanini.’ Kundaite, grasping his
tobacco sticks, seemed to be worried. ‘Don’t tell Njiru,’ he said at last.

They all met at sunset in what had been Ngea’s hall, and sat cross-legged

around the fire. It had been made with green sticks and smoked badly. They
coughed, their eyes watered, they waited, nothing happened. Outside it was
totally dark, for the moon had not yet risen. Nanja brought in dry sticks,

feeding them into the fire skilfully, one by one, until the flames crackled
and spurted. Kwini cried and Nanja jiggled and soothed her. Older children
sat big-eyed in the firelight, and Rivers felt his own eyelids grow heavy, for
he had been up since dawn walking miles in the heat. He blinked hard,
making himself look round the circle. Emele – Namboko Emele as she must
now be called – was there, wearing brown bark cloth without lime or
necklaces. But not Njiru, a surprising absence surely, since he’d placed
Ngea’s skull in the skull house.

Kundaite came in and sat beside the door in the side of the hut. At a word

from him the torches were extinguished, though Rivers could still see
people’s faces clearly, leaping and shining in the firelight. Silence fell, and
deepened, and deepened again. Kundaite closed his eyes and began to moan
beneath his breath. Rivers watched him sceptically, wondering whether the
attempt to induce a trance state was genuine or merely histrionic. Abruptly,
Kundaite seemed to come to himself. He put three sticks of tobacco in the
fire as a sacrificial offering, saying casually that the ghosts were on their
way from Sonto. A long silence. Nothing happened. Somebody suggested
the ghosts were afraid of a dog that was lying by the fire. The animal raised
its head on hearing its name, decided there was nothing to worry about and
settled down again with a sigh. Others said the ghosts were afraid of the
white men.

Rivers’s back and thighs were aching from the squatting position.

Suddenly Kundaite said, ‘Listen, the canoes.’ It was clear, looking round
the circle, that they were hearing the swish of paddles. Joy and grief
mingled on every face. Emele started the musical wailing characteristic of
the women, but stopped when Kundaite held up his hand.

A tense silence. Then somebody whistled. The sound was curiously

difficult to locate. Rivers looked round the faces, but could not see who was
making the sound. The people began calling out names, familiar to him
from the genealogies, each person calling the name of a relative who had
recently died. Some not so recently. Namboko Taru called for her
grandmother. Then the name Onda was called and somebody whistled

again. Rivers could see Hocart also looking round the room, trying to locate
the whistler.

A discussion about the white men followed, the ghost’s whistles being

translated by Kundaite. Who were the white men? Why were they here?
Why did they want to hear the language of ghosts? Did the ghosts object to
the white men’s presence? Kundaite asked. ‘What do we do if they say
“yes”?’ Hocart asked, not moving his lips. ‘Get out quick.’

But the ghosts did not object. Onda, whistling, said he had never seen

white men. Kundaite pointed to Rivers and Hocart. Onda, apparently
satisfied, fell silent. Kundaite’s father, also called Kundaite, came next and
asked for tobacco. The living Kundaite put his last two sticks in the fire,
saying, ‘Here is tobacco for you, Kunda. Smoke and depart.’ Namboko
Rupe, Ngea’s mother, spoke next, saying she had come to take Ngea to
Sonto. Other relatives of Ngea followed. At last Kundaite said that Ngea
himself was in the room.

A deeper silence fell. Rivers felt the hairs on his arms rise. Namboko

Emele began to wail for her husband. Kundaite said, Don’t cry. He’s going
to Sonto. Ngea’s mother said, He must go now. He must blow the conch and
come to Sonto. By now the room was full of whistles, slithering up and
down the walls and all across the floor. At times the sounds seemed almost
to be a ripple running across the skin. Namboko Emele began to wail again,
and the other women joined in. ‘Don’t cry,’ Ngea’s mother said again,
through Kundaite’s mouth. ‘I have come to take him to Sonto.’ Then,
Kundaite said, Ngea blew the conch. Everybody in the room, except Rivers
and Hocart, heard it, and then the whistles faded and there was silence save
for the musical wails and cries of the women.

Ten years later, throwing off hot sheets, Rivers reflected that the questions
the ghosts had asked had all been questions the living people wanted
answered. What were the white men doing on the island? Were they as
harmless as they appeared? Why did they want to hear the language of
ghosts? Was it possible the spirits might be offended by their presence?

At Craiglockhart, Sassoon, trying to decide whether he should abandon

his protest and go back to France, had woken to find the ghost of a dead
comrade standing by his bed. And thereafter, on more than one occasion,
shadowy figures had gathered out of the storm, asking him, Why was he not
in the line? Why had he deserted his men?

The ghosts were not an attempt at evasion, Rivers thought, either by

Siegfried or by the islanders. Rather, the questions became more insistent,
more powerful, for being projected into the mouths of the dead.

Walking back to the tent, a circle of torchlight swaying round their feet,
their shoulders bumping as they tried to stay abreast on the narrow path,
Rivers and Hocart talked about the seance. A silly word that didn’t seem to
suit the occasion, but Rivers couldn’t think of a better.

‘Who was whistling?’ Hocart asked.
‘I don’t know.’
The occasion had moved him in a way he’d never expected when they sat

down by that fire. They talked about it for a while, getting the sequence of
events clear in their minds, for they had not been able to take notes. Then
Rivers said, ‘Njiru wasn’t there.’

‘No, I noticed that.’
Back at the tent Hocart said, ‘Shall I light the lamp?’
‘No, don’t bother. Not for me anyway. I can’t wait to get to bed.’ He was

unbuckling his belt as he spoke, rubbing the skin underneath where trapped
sweat prickled. He kicked his trousers to one side and lay down on the bed,
only to cry out as his head came into violent contact with something hard
and cold. Hocart came in with the torch, his face white behind the beam. On
the pillow, indenting it as Rivers’s head would have done, was an axe.
Rivers picked it up and held it closer to the light. The carving on the handle
was rather fine by the standards of the island, and there was a knot, a flaw
in the wood, close to the blade.

‘Somebody must have left it behind,’ Hocart said uncertainly.
‘Well, yes, obviously.’

‘No, I mean by accident. Whoever it is, he’ll be back for it in the

morning.’

‘I hope not,’ Rivers said dryly. ‘It’s Ngea’s.’
‘Are you sure?’
Rivers indicated the knot in the wood. ‘Yes, I remember this, I noticed it

when they put it in the era with him.’ He stroked the blade. ‘No, I’m afraid
we’ve been asking too many awkward questions. We’re being warned.’

FIFTEEN

10 October 1918

Back into corrugated iron privies again, which are dry but in other ways
less comfortable than dug-outs. Owen has somehow managed to stick a
portrait of Siegfried Sassoon to the wall of his. Sassoon in distinctly
Byronic mode, I should say – not the Sassoon I remember, legging it down
the main corridor at Craiglockhart with his golf-clubs on his back, hell-bent
on getting out of the place as fast as possible. I stood and stared, gawped at
it. And suddenly I was back in Rivers’s room, watching the late afternoon
sun glint on his glasses during one of his endless silences. Rivers’s silences
are not manipulative. (Mine are. Always.) He’s not trying to make you say
more than you want, he’s trying to create a safe space round what you’ve
said already, so you can think about it without shitting yourself. White net
curtains drifting in on the breeze. Pok-pok, pok-pok, from the tennis courts,
until somebody misses and the rhythm goes.

Owen said, tentatively, something I didn’t quite catch. Something to the

effect that we ‘old Craiglockhartians’ must stick together. Once that would
have made me puke. I always felt, watching Owen at Craiglockhart, that
there was some kind of fantasy going on, that he was having the public-
school education he’d missed. I always wanted to say, it’s a loony-bin,
Owen. Who do you think you’re kidding? I don’t feel that now – perhaps
because Craiglockhart was a shared experience of failure, and the past few
weeks have expunged it for both of us. Wiped it out in blood, you might
say, if you were histrionic, and I am. And not our own blood either.

Would that remark deserve one of Rivers’s silences? I don’t know.

Sometimes I used to think he was back with his fucking head-hunters – he

really does love them, his whole face lights up when he talks about them –
and that gives him a slightly odd perspective on ‘the present conflict’ as
they say.

I’ve been recommended for the MC for going out to bring Hallet in. I’d

have been like a dog with two tails three years ago. Hallet’s still alive,
anyway. More than a medal, I wish somebody would just tell me I did the
right thing.

11 October

Today we all had to stand up in front of the men and promulgate a new
order. ‘Peace talk in any form is to cease immediately in the Fourth Army.’

The brass hats needn’t worry. Some of the men were sitting on bales of

straw cleaning equipment while one read aloud from the paper: Austro-
Hungarian Empire collapses, peace imminent, etc. Jenkins, a wizened
weasel of a man (must be over age, surely), hawked the accumulated
phlegm of four long years into his mouth and spat on his rifle. Then he went
back to polishing it. Can’t think of a better comment.

And yet. And yet. We all, at some level, think we may have made it, we

may be going to be all right. At any moment now the guns may stop. Oddly
enough it doesn’t help.

We spend our time in the usual way while ‘at rest’. Baths, change of

clothes, general clean-up, exercises, compulsory games, church parade. Oh,
and of course, gas drills. A lot of the men are coughing and hoicking and
wheezing because they were slow putting on their masks. And perhaps
deliberately in some cases; perhaps some people thought they’d get sent
back. If so, they’ve been thoroughly disillusioned, and the proof is the
endless cough, cough, cough, cough that accompanies all other activities.
Owen irritated me profoundly by saying it was their own fault. He put his
mask on in time, he’s all right, he says. I’m afraid I let fly. The only person
round here who has the right to be smug about surviving a gas attack is me.
ME.

When we got here we found a new draft had arrived from Scarborough.

They’re sitting around at the moment, expecting to be welcomed, though so
far they haven’t been. Difficult to say why the other men avoid them, but
they do. Heads too full of battle to be able to cope with all those clean,
innocent, pink faces. A couple of them I remember. One particularly useless
boy, the bane of Owen’s life at the Clarence Gardens Hotel, until he upset
some hot soup in the CO’s lap, after which everybody, including Owen,
found him a lot more tolerable. Waiters, drummer boys. They sit around,
when they’re not being chivvied from one place to another, most of them
dejected, miserable. Frightened. A few strut up and down – hard men – real
killers – and succeed only in looking even more like baby thrushes than the
rest.

12 October

Parcels arrived today. Shared out fags in parcels intended for the dead and
wounded. Tempers immediately improved. A lot of niggling administrative
jobs connected with feeding men from the new draft into the companies.
Get flashes from the battle while I’m filling in forms. The man I bayoneted.
What worries me is that he was middle aged. Odd really – it’s supposed to
be golden youth you mourn for. But he was so obviously somebody who
should have been at home, watching his kids grow up, wondering whether
brushing his hair over the bald patch would make it more or less obvious,
grumbling about the price of beer. And yes, you could see all this in his face
– with some people you can. Some people do look exactly what they are.
Fuck it.

Meanwhile more exercises. Route marches. We feed our faces on

precisely adequate quantities of horrible food. Bread now has potatoes in it.
(Makes an interesting combination with the wood chippings.)

15 October

Last night we were entertained by The Peddlers, the whole battalion, and a
few officers invited over from our neighbours on the left. Among whom
was Marshall-of-the-Ten-Wounds, now acting Lt Colonel, who applauded
every turn with childlike glee. Exactly what you wouldn’t expect him to do.
At the end of the evening, when things are allowed to get a bit slushy,
somebody sang ‘Roses of Picardy’:

Roses are flowering in Picardy
But there’s never a rose like you.

Not a bad voice – it soared over the privies and the tents, the columns of
smoke from the fires – and I looked along the row and there was Marshall
with great big fat tears rolling down his cheeks. I envied him.

16 October

Bainbrigge’s dead. I remember him in the oyster bar in Scarborough a
couple of nights before we left. We were all pissed, but Bainbrigge was
pissed enough to quote his own poems (than which there is no pisseder). He
was talking to Owen, saying real anti-war poems ought to celebrate what
war deprives men of – wait for it – ‘Beethoven, Botticelli, beer and boys.’
Owen kicked him under the table, for my benefit, I think. A wasted kick.

More new arrivals from England yesterday. And I’ve been transferred to

a tent, just as the weather’s laying on the first real taste of winter. The
misery of sleety rain under canvas. Not that we spend much time under it.
We’re out all day doing route marches, column into line, consolidation, etc.,
etc. And gas drills.

But now it’s evening. The men are leaning against their packs or each

other’s knees, aching legs allowed to sprawl at last, writing to wives,
mothers, girlfriends. Perhaps even one or two to Beethoven & Co. I said I
wasn’t born to the delusion that I’m responsible for them. True. (True I
wasn’t born to it, true it’s a delusion.) But I wouldn’t like it to be thought I
didn’t care. So. Going round the group nearest to me. Wilson’s got a
fucking great nail sticking up through the heel of his left boot. We’ve all
had a go at it: hammers, pliers, tent pegs, God knows what. Still it sticks up,

and since it breaks the skin he’s quite likely to get a septic sore, unless I can
find him another pair of boots. Which ought to be easy, but isn’t.
Unfortunately, the septic sore won’t be enough to get him out of the line if
we have to go back there. It’ll just exhaust him, make every step a greater
misery than it need be.

Oakshott, who’s sort of on the fringes of the group – he’s taken to not

talking to people – is well on the way to cracking up. (I should know.) The
thing is he’s not windy, he’s a perfectly good soldier, no more than
reasonably afraid of rifle and machine-gun bullets, shells, grenades. (Let’s
not ask ourselves how afraid that is.) He isn’t even windy about gas, though
inevitably it comes across like that. He’s just terrified of the mask. I don’t
know what to do with him. Once or twice recently I’ve noticed him lagging
behind in gas drills, and I’ve noticed myself letting him get away with it.
Which I mustn’t do. If he gets away with it, they’ll all start.

Next to him, in front of him rather, is Moore. Moore’s wife spent the

evening of the Friday before last in the lounge bar of the Rose and Crown (I
know it well) in the company of one Jack Puddephat, who has a good job at
the munitions factory (same one Dad works at) and brings home five quid a
week. Moore’s sister-in-law, a public-spirited soul, was kind enough to
write and tell him about it.

Heywood’s kid has tonsillitis and the doctor’s all for whipping them out.

Heywood’s all for leaving well alone, but the letter he’s writing now won’t
get there in time.

Buxton’s missus is expecting their first. The birth doesn’t seem to worry

her, but it terrifies him. His own mother died in childbirth, and he’s
convinced himself the same thing’s going to happen to her.

Jenkins writes the most incredibly passionate love letters to his wife.

They’ve been married since before the Flood, but obviously nothing’s
faded. I get erections reading them. Nothing else I’ve done sexually has
filled me with such shame. In fact it’s the only thing that’s ever filled me
with any shame. He must know they’re censored, and yet still he writes,
page after page. Perhaps he needs to say it so much he somehow manages
to forget that I read them first? It’s the mental equivalent of the baths. Here

I sit, fully clothed as it were, knowing my letters to Sarah won’t be
censored. I suppose random checks are carried out on officers’ letters, but at
least it’s done somewhere else, and not by people you have to see every
day.

Peace talk goes on whether orders forbidding it are promulgated or no.

On the night we heard the Germans had agreed to peace talks there was a
great impromptu party, officers and men together. Everybody sang. And
then next day in John Bull there’s Bottomley saying, No, no, no and once
again no. We must fight to the bitter end. (Whose end? ) I don’t want any
more talk about not being out to destroy the German nation – that is just
what I am out for …

But it doesn’t wash with the men. Not this time. In fact some of them

have taken to going to the latrines waving copies of John Bull.

Nobody here sees the point of going on now.

18 October 4

But others do. We leave here today, going back into the line.

SIXTEEN

October rain spattered the glass. Outside in Vincent Square golden leaves
were trodden in the mud. Rivers stopped coughing, put his handkerchief
away, and apologized.

‘ ’S all right,’ Wansbeck said. ‘I should be apologizing to you. I gave it

you.’

‘At least I can’t give it back,’ Rivers said, wiping his eyes. ‘In fact you

and I are about the only two round here who can’t get it.’

‘Things are getting pretty bad, aren’t they? I mean, on the wards. I don’t

suppose I could do anything to help?’

Rivers looked blank.
‘Lifting patients. It just seems bloody ridiculous a great big chap like me

sitting around doing nothing while some poor little nurse struggles to lift a
twelve-stone man on her own.’

‘It’s very kind of you,’ Rivers said carefully. ‘But I really don’t think the

authorities would allow it. In any case you’re not doing “nothing”.’

Silence. The hint was not taken up. Rivers forced himself to open his

shoulders, knowing his tension was communicating itself to Wansbeck,
though it was only the tension of driving himself through a long day while
still feeling very far from well. ‘How have you been?’

‘Smell’s gone.’ A flicker of amusement. ‘I know it wasn’t there, but it’s

still nice to be rid of it.’

‘Hmm, good.’ What pleased Rivers even more than the vanished smell

was the hint of self-mockery. The one expression you never see on the faces
of the mentally ill. ‘When did that happen?’

‘Just faded gradually. I suppose about the middle of last week I suddenly

realized I wasn’t worried about it any more.’

‘And the dream?’
‘It isn’t a dream.’
‘The apparition, then.’
‘Oh, we still see quite a bit of each other.’
‘Do you ever miss a night?’
A faint smile. ‘You mean, does he ever miss a night? No.’
A long silence. Rivers said, ‘It’s difficult, isn’t it, to talk about …

beliefs?’

‘Is it?’
‘I find it so.’
Wansbeck smiled. ‘What a very honest man you are.’
‘I wanted to ask if you believe in life after death?’
A groan, followed by silence.
It is difficult, Rivers thought. He could list all the taboo topics on

Eddystone, but in his own society it seemed to him the taboos had shifted
quite considerably in recent years. It was almost easier now to ask a man
about his private life than to ask what beliefs he lived by. Before the war …
but one must beware of attributing everything to the war. The change had
started years before the war.

‘No,’ Wansbeck said at last.
‘You had to think.’
‘Yes, well, I used to believe in it. I was brought up to. I suppose one

doesn’t like to have to admit it’s gone. Faith.’

‘What changed your mind?’
A flare of the eyebrows. Rivers waited.
‘Corpses. Especially in cold weather when they couldn’t be buried. And

in summer in No Man’s Land. The flies buzzing.’

They rose from Ngea’s body in a black cloud.
‘It needn’t have that effect, though, need it? What about priests keeping a

model of a skull on their desks? Because it reminds them of their faith.’

Or Njiru. Man he stink, he rotten, bymby he go Sonto. A simple, casual

statement of fact.

‘Well, that’s the effect it had on me. I’d like to believe. I’d like to believe

in the possibility of – you’re right, it is embarrassing – redemption.’

Silence.
‘Anyway,’ Rivers said, when it became clear there would be no more,

‘you don’t believe that the apparition is the man you killed? You don’t
believe it’s his ghost?’

‘No, though I’m not sure I’d believe that even if I were still a Christian.’
‘So what is it?’
‘A projection of my own mind.’
‘Of your guilt?’
‘No. Guilt’s what I feel sitting here, I don’t need an apparition. No, it’s

…’ A deep sigh. ‘Guilt as objective fact – not guilt as feeling. It’s not …
well, I was going to say it’s not subjective, but of course it has to be,
doesn’t it?’

‘It’s the representation to yourself of external standards that you believe

to be valid?’

‘Yes.’
‘What language does it speak?’
A blank look. ‘Doesn’t. Doesn’t speak.’
‘What language would it speak if it spoke? Yes, I know it’s an irrational

question but then the apparition isn’t rational either. What language would
–’

‘English. Has to be.’
‘So why don’t you speak to it?’
‘It’s only there for a second.’
‘That’s not the way you described it. You said it was endless.’
‘All right, it’s an endless second.’
‘You should be able to say a lot, then.’
‘Tell it my life story?’
Rivers said gently, ‘It knows your life story.’
Wansbeck was thinking deeply. ‘All right. It’s bloody mad, but I’ll have a

go.’

‘What will you say?’

‘I have absolutely no idea.’
After Wansbeck had gone, Rivers sat quietly for a few minutes before

adding a note to the file. Sassoon had been much in his mind while he was
speaking to Wansbeck, Sassoon and the apparitions that gathered round his
bed and demanded to know why he was not in France. Also, another of his
patients at Craiglockhart, Harrington, who’d had dreadful nightmares, even
by Craiglockhart standards, and the nightmares had continued into the semi-
waking state, so that they acquired the character of hypnagogic
hallucinations. He saw the severed head, torso and limbs of a dismembered
body hurtling towards him out of the darkness. A variant of this was a face
bending over him, the lips, nose and eyelids eaten away as if by leprosy.
The face, in so far as it was identifiable at all, was the face of a close friend
whom Harrington had seen blown to pieces. From these dreams he woke
either vomiting or with a wet bed, or both.

At the time he witnessed his friend’s death Harrington had already been

suffering from headaches, split vision, nausea, vomiting, disorder of
micturition, spells of forgetfulness and a persistent gross tremor of the
hands, dating from an explosion two months before in which he’d been
buried alive. Despite these symptoms he had remained on duty (shoot the
MO, thought Rivers) until his friend’s death precipitated a total collapse.

What was interesting about Harrington was that instead of treatment

bringing about an elaboration of the nightmares, so that the horrors began to
assume a more symbolic, less directly representational form – the normal
path to recovery – something rather more remarkable had happened. His
friend’s body had begun to reassemble itself. Night after night the eaten-
away features had fleshed out again. And Harrington talked to him. Long
conversations, apparently, or they seemed long to him on waking, telling his
friend about Rivers, about life at Craiglockhart, about the treatment he was
receiving …

After several weeks of this, he awoke one day with his memory of the

first hour after the explosion restored. He had, even in his traumatized state
and under heavy fire, crawled round the pieces of his friend’s body
collecting items of equipment – belt, revolver, cap and lapel badges – to

send to the mother. The knowledge that, far from having fled from the
scene, he had behaved with exemplary courage and loyalty, did a great deal
to restore Harrington’s self-esteem, for, like most of the patients at
Craiglockhart, he suffered from a deep sense of shame and failure. From
then on the improvement was dramatic, though still the conversations with
the dead friend continued, until one morning he awoke crying, and realized
he was crying, not only for his own loss but also for his friend’s, for the
unlived years.

Wansbeck’s predicament was worse than either of these cases. Siegfried’s

apparitions vanished as soon as he agreed to give up his protest and go back
to France. The external demands the nocturnal visitors represented, and
which Siegfried himself believed to be valid, had been met. Harrington had
been enormously helped by the discovery that he’d behaved better than he
thought he had. From that moment on, his recovery had been one of the
most dramatic Rivers could recall. Neither of these outcomes was available
to Wansbeck, who’d fought a perfectly honourable war until one action had
made him in his own eyes – and in the eyes of the law – a criminal. Almost
everything one could say to console him either obscenely glossed over the
offence or was in some other way insulting, and would have been instantly
recognized as such by Wansbeck. A lesser man would have borne this
better.

Rivers wondered whether Sassoon and Harrington had been too much in

the forefront of his mind while he was listening to Wansbeck. At best, on
such occasions, one became a conduit whereby one man’s hard-won
experience of self-healing was made available to another. At worst, one no
longer listened attentively enough to the individual voice. There was a real
danger, he thought, that in the end the stories would become one story, the
voices blend into a single cry of pain.

And he was tired. Because of the flu epidemic he’d been on duty for

thirty of the last forty-eight hours and he was on duty again tonight too.
Sighing, he reached for an envelope, took out an X-ray and clipped it to the
screen.

A skull stared out at him. He stood back and looked at it for a moment,

one lens of his glasses illumined by the lighted screen, the other reflecting
the rainy light of a November afternoon. Then he reached for the notes.

Second Lieutenant Matthew Hallet, aged twenty, admitted 18 October with bullet wounds
to the head and to the lower jaw. On admission he was incapable of giving an account of
his injuries, and the only information brought with him was a small card saying he had
been wounded on 30 September.

So he was now twenty days post-injury.

A rifle bullet had entered just to the left of the inner canthus of the right eye and had
made its exit directly above the insertion of the left ear. The wound of entry was marked
by a small perfectly healed scar. The wound of exit consisted of a large irregular opening
in the bone and tissues of the scalp, and through this protruded a suppurating hernia
cerebri which pulsated.

Oh God.

He had so far said nothing spontaneously. When directly addressed he responded, but his
speech was incomprehensible. The wound to his lower jaw made it difficult to determine
whether this represented a deficit in the power of using language, or whether the failure
to communicate was entirely or primarily mechanical. He showed some understanding of
speech, however, since he had responded to simple questions, when asked to do so, by
movements of his unparalysed hand.

Somewhere at the fringe of Rivers’s perception was the soft sound of rain

continually falling, seeming to seal the hospital away from the darkening
afternoon. It had rained incessantly since early morning, the darkness of the
day somehow making it even harder to stay awake. He took his glasses off,
rubbed his eyes, and turned to the window, where each raindrop caught and
held a crescent moon of silver light.

‘Do you suppose it’s ever going to stop?’ Hocart said, turning over
restlessly in the gloom of the tent.

It had been raining ever since they’d found Ngea’s axe, not restrained

English rain but a downpour, a gurgling splatter that flooded into the tent no
matter how hard they tried to keep it out. Possibly it was stupid to stay
inside at all, though difficult not to when even a five-yard dash into the

bush to pee meant you came back with hair plastered to your skull and a
transparent shirt sticking to your chest.

They lay and watched it through the open flap, a solid wall of water

through which the not too distant trees could be glimpsed only dimly, a
wavering blue mass beaten hither and thither by a wind that blew in sudden
spiteful squalls. Hocart, in his frustration, had been kicking the roof of the
tent where it sloped steeply down over his bed, and his muddy footprints
now added to the general squalor and smell. Hot wet bodies, hair washed
daily but only in sea water, salt drying to a white scurf on the surface of the
skin. The only escape was into the sea, where total immersion relieved the
misery of wet.

On the fourth day the rain eased slightly. Rivers stepped out into the

clearing and saw Njiru coming along the path towards him, for once
without his retinue.

Rivers had been wondering whether to mention the axe, and had decided

not to, but as soon as he looked at Njiru he knew it was essential to bring it
out into the open.

‘Blong you?’ he said, holding it out.
‘Blong Ngea,’ Njiru said, and smiled.
But he took it, putting it into the string basket he carried slung over one

shoulder. Rivers heard the chink of one blade on another as it hit Njiru’s
axe. It was important to be totally steadfast at this moment, Rivers thought.
He and Hocart were probably the only white men in the archipelago, apart
from the missionaries – some of the missionaries – who didn’t carry guns.
They didn’t carry knives either, though on an island covered in dense bush a
machete would have been useful. Nothing that could possibly be mistaken
for a weapon. And they went barefoot, as the natives did. Harmlessness was
their defence, not guaranteed to succeed by any means, but guns would
have made the job impossible.

Njiru had come, he said, because one of the oldest skull houses on the

island was being rebuilt, and he had to go to say the prayer of purification
over the priest. Would Rivers like to go with him? Of course, there was no
question.

They set off, Njiru remarking at one point that it always rained when a

skull house was being rebuilt because ‘tomate he like bathe all time ’long
fresh water’. Soon the narrow path and the steamy heat made conversation
impossible. Rivers watched the movement of muscles under the oiled skin,
wondering, not for the first time, how much pain Njiru suffered. He was a
mystery in many respects and likely to remain so. He was not married, for
example, this among a people to whom the concept of celibacy was wholly
foreign. Was that because his deformity caused the girls or their parents to
regard him as a poor catch? But then in island terms he was both wealthy
and powerful. Did he himself feel a disinclination for the married state?
And what had the impact been on a small crippled boy of knowing he was
the grandson of Homu, the greatest of the head-hunting chiefs? It was
worse, Rivers thought, smiling to himself, than being the great-nephew of
the man who shot the man who shot Lord Nelson.

None of these questions could be pursued. It was not lack of words

merely, but a lack of shared concepts. The islanders seemed hardly to have
discovered the idea of personality, in the western sense, much less to have
contracted the habit of introspection. Njiru was one of the most powerful
men on the island, perhaps the most powerful. To Rivers and Hocart it
seemed abundantly apparent that he owed his position to quite exceptional
intelligence, vigour and resolution, but such qualities were never mentioned
by the islanders when they attempted to explain his position. His power was
attributed entirely to the number of spirits he controlled. He ‘knew’
Mateana. And above all, he ‘knew’ Ave. Njiru knows Ave. One of the first
things he’d been told, though he hadn’t understood the significance of the
statement then, and perhaps did not fully understand it even now.

In view of that chink of blade on blade, what accounted for this sudden

change of attitude? He was reasonably certain it was Njiru who’d put
Ngea’s axe in the tent. He hadn’t even pretended surprise when Rivers
offered it to him. And yet here he was, being apparently helpful and co-
operative, actually inviting him to be present at an important ritual
occasion. But then he was like this, one moment clamming up completely,
even ordering other people to withhold information, and yet at other times

easily the best informant on the island. Standing over them sometimes to
make sure they got every detail of a ritual, every word of a prayer exactly
right.

The inconsistency probably reflected Njiru’s doubts about the reality of

his own power. Others were persuaded by it, but he was capable of standing
back and asking himself the hard questions. Why, if he controlled the
spirits, why, if the rituals did everything he claimed for them, were the
white men still here? Not Rivers and Hocart, whom he liked and respected,
but the others: the government that forbade the taking of heads though the
people lived for it, the traders who cheated them, the plantation bosses who
exploited them, and, most of all, the missionaries who destroyed their faith.
If you can’t prevent such things happening, what is the actual value of your
knowledge?

And so he swayed to and fro: sometimes guarding his knowledge

jealously, sometimes sharing it freely, sometimes spitting it out with a bitter,
angry pride, sometimes almost with gratitude to Rivers, whose obvious
interest in what he was being told seemed to confirm its value. And then
again he would sheer off, ashamed of ever needing that confirmation.

A stormy relationship, then, on Njiru’s side, and yet the mutual respect

went deep. He wouldn’t kill me, Rivers thought. Then he thought, Actually,
in certain circumstances, that’s exactly what he’d do.

By the time they reached the turning off the coastal path, the sun was at

its highest point. Sweat tickled the tip of Rivers’s nose, producing a
constant frenzy of irritation. His groin was a swamp. At first the darkness
under the trees was welcome, after the dreadful white glare, but then a
cloud of stinging insects fastened on the sweat.

Abruptly, they came out into a clearing, sharp blades of sunlight slanting

down between the trees, and ahead of them, rising steeply up the slope, six
or seven skull houses, their gratings ornamented with strings of dangling
shells. The feeling of being watched that skulls always gave you. Dazzled
by the sudden light, he followed Njiru up the slope, towards a knot of
shadows, and then one of the shadows moved, resolving itself into the

shape of Nareti, the blind mortuary priest who squatted there, all pointed
knees and elbows, snails’ trails of pus running from the corners of his eyes.

The furthest of the skull houses was being repaired, and its occupants had

been taken out and arranged on the ground so that, at first sight, the clearing
seemed to be cobbled with skulls. He hung back, not sure how close he was
permitted to approach, and at that moment a sudden fierce gust of wind
shook the trees and all the strings of votary shells rattled and clicked
together.

Njiru beckoned Rivers to join him and, without further preliminary,

began the prayer of purification, rubbing leaves down Nareti’s legs from
buttock to ankle.

‘I purify at the great stream of Mondo. It flows down, it flows up, it

washes away the poisonous water of the chiefly dead. The thatch is
poisonous, the rafters are poisonous, the creepers are poisonous, the ground
is poisonous …’

Among the skulls laid out on the ground were several that had belonged

to children. Children loved and wept over? Or children brought back from
Ysabel and Choiseul and sacrificed?

‘Let me purify this priest. Let him come down and pass under. Let him

come down and step over. Let him not waste away, let him not get the rash,
let him not get the itch. Let him be bonito in the sea, porpoise in the sea, eel
in the fresh water, crayfish in the fresh water, vape in the fresh water. I
purify, I purify, I purify with all the chiefs.’

Njiru’s voice, which had risen in pitch, dropped on the final words.
Always in Melanesia, the abrupt transition from ritual to everyday life.

Njiru was soon chatting and laughing with Nareti, then he summoned
Rivers to follow him. A short path led to Nareti’s hut and there, squatting in
the dust, having the remains of lunch licked off his face by a dog, was the
small boy whom Lembu had brought from Ysabel. Healthy, well-fed.
Unbruised, Rivers saw, looking closely, not happy, but then that was hardly
to be hoped for. He watched him for a few minutes. At least the dog was a
friend.

He was to assist Nareti, Njiru said. When he grew up he would be a

mortuary priest in his turn. An odd fate, to spend one’s life tending the
skulls of a foreign people, but at least he would have a life, and perhaps not
a bad one, for the mortuary priests became wealthy and enjoyed
considerable respect. This taking of captives had been the custom even in
the days of head-hunting, Njiru explained. He was in one of his
communicative phases. Some of the ‘heads’ taken on a raid were always
brought back alive, and kept for occasions when they might be quickly
needed. A sort of living larder of heads. Such captives were never ill-treated
– the idea of deliberate cruelty was foreign to the people – and indeed they
often attained positions of wealth and honour, though always knowing that,
at any moment, their heads might be required.

On their way back across the clearing Njiru stopped, selected the central

skull from the middle row, and held it out to Rivers.

‘Homu.’
Rivers took the skull, aware of the immense honour that was being done

to him, and searching for something to say and the words to say it in. He
ran his fingers round the occiput and traced the cranial sutures. He
remembered a time at Bart’s, holding a human brain in his hands for the
first time, being amazed at the weight of it. This blown eggshell had
contained the only product of the forces of evolution capable of
understanding its own origins. But then for Njiru too the skull was sacred
not in or of itself, but because it had contained the spirit, the tomate.

He looked at Njiru and realized it wasn’t necessary to say anything. He

handed the skull back, with a slight inclination of his head, and for a
moment their linked hands grasped it, each holding the object of highest
value in the world.

The bullet caused gross damage to the left eye as it passed backwards in the direction of
the temporal lobe. Left pupil fixed, cornea insensitive, eyelid droops, no movement of the
globe except downwards. Eye blind because of rupture of the choroid and atrophy of the
optic nerve. Yes. A tendency to clonus at the right ankle joint … All right.

Switching off the lighted screen and replacing the notes in the file, Rivers

glanced at the cover and noticed that Hallet was in the 2nd Manchesters. He

wondered if he knew Billy Prior, or whether, if he did, he would remember.

SEVENTEEN

19 October 1918

Marched all day through utter devastation. Dead horses, unburied men,
stench of corruption. Sometimes you look at all this, craters, stinking mud,
stagnant water, trees like gigantic burnt matches, and you think the land
can’t possibly recover. It’s poisoned. Poison’s dripped into it from rotting
men, dead horses, gas. It will, of course. Fifty years from now a farmer’ll
be ploughing these fields and turn up skulls.

A huge crow flew over us, flapping and croaking mournfully. One for

sorrow. The men didn’t rest till they’d succeeded in spotting another.

Joy awaits us, then.
The unburied dead, though not cheerful companions for a march, had one

good result. A boot for Wilson. Getting it wasn’t pleasant, but once the
debris left by the previous owner (of the previous owner) had been cleaned
out it did well enough. He looks happier.

Men very cheerful for the most part, a long singing column winding

tirelessly along (but we’ve a long way to go yet!). I found myself thinking
about Longstaffe. Not dead three weeks, and yet he rarely crosses my mind.
In Tite Street, three doors down from Beattie’s shop, there was an old
couple who’d been married over fifty years and everybody thought when
one of them went the other would be devastated. But when the husband
died the old lady didn’t seem all that upset, and hardly talked about him
once the funeral was over. In spite of all the young male vigour around here
– and my God it’s bloody overwhelming at times – we’re all in the same
position as that old woman. Too close to death ourselves to make a fuss. We
economize on grief.

Later

Men bivouac in the open, but the officers are in dug-outs, the remains of an
elaborate German system. The dug-outs are boarded off, but behind the
planks are tunnels which reach back very deep. You can put your eye to a
gap in the boards and look into darkness and after a while the eyeball
begins to ache from the cold air. The extraordinary thing is everybody’s
slightly nervous about these tunnels, far more than about the guns that
rumble and flicker and light up the sky as I write. And it’s not a rational
fear. It’s something to do with the children whom the Pied Piper led into the
mountain, who never came out again, or Rip Van Winkle who came out and
found that years and years had passed and nobody knew him. It’s
interesting, well, at least it interests me, that we’re still afraid in this
irrational way when at the same time we’re surrounded by the worst the
twentieth century can do: shells, revolvers, rifles, guns, gas. I think it’s
because it strikes a particular chord. Children do go into the mountain and
not come back. We’ve all been home on leave and found home so foreign
that we couldn’t fit in. What about after the war? But perhaps it’s better not
to think about that. Tempting fate. Anyway, here comes dinner. I’m hungry.

20 October

Another mammoth march. Lousy rotten stinking job too, rounding up the
stragglers. Forget leadership. This is where leadership ends and bullying
starts. I heard myself hassling and chivvying like one of those bloody
instructors at Etaples. Except at least I’m doing what I’m bullying other
people into doing.

I turned on one man, mouth open to give him a really good blast, and

then I saw his face. He was asthmatic. That tight, pale, drawn worried look.
If you’re asthmatic yourself you can’t miss it. He might as well have been
carrying a placard. I fell in beside him and tried to talk to him, but he
couldn’t talk and march at once, or creep rather – he certainly wasn’t
marching. That’s the thing about asthma: it creates the instant brotherhood

shared humanity routinely fails to create. I got him into the horse
ambulance, well propped up, gripped his wrist and said goodbye. I doubt if
he saw me go. When you’re as bad as that nothing matters except the next
breath.

The curious thing is as soon as I saw his face, my own chest tightened,

just because I’d been reminded of the possibility, I suppose. So far, touch
wood, there’s been no trouble. But I’m a bit wheezy tonight.

Singing very ragged by mid-afternoon, a lot of men marching in silence,

it had become a test of endurance. But then suddenly, or so it seemed –
we’d been marching half asleep – we found ourselves with green fields on
either side, farmhouses with roofs on, trees with branches, and civilians.
We’d marched right through the battlefields into what used to be securely
German-held territory. Women. Children. Dogs. Cats. I think we were all
amazed that the world had such creatures in it. A-lot of wolf whistling at the
girls, and nobody inclined to be fussy. ‘Girl’ soon stretched from fourteen
to fifty.

I’m writing this at a kitchen table in a cottage. Outside is a farmyard with

ordinary farmyard noises. Honking geese are a miracle. Though we move
on again soon. They’re questioning civilians in the next room, Owen’s
French coming in handy. And at this table, until a few weeks ago, a German
officer sat and wrote letters home.

22 October

Still here, but not for much longer. We move on again later today. Not even
the pouring rain that puckers the surface of the pond – with its official
ducks and unofficial moorhens – can remove the feeling of serenity I have.
Chest a lot easier, in spite of the damp.

24 October

More marching. I have visions of us marching into Berlin at this rate.
Nearest village was shelled last night. Five civilians killed. When did we
stop thinking of civilians as human? Quite a long time ago, I think.

Anyhow, nobody’s devastated by the news. And yet the people round here
are friendly, we get on well with them. Only there’s a slight wariness, I
suppose. They hated the invasion, nobody doubts that, but the Germans
were here a long time. An accommodation of some sort was reached. And
the German troops in this area anyway seem to have been very disciplined.
No atrocities. The respectable young ladies of the village are very
respectable young ladies indeed, despite having spent four years in the
clutches of the brutal and lascivious Hun. And the shell-holes that lie in the
orchards, fields and roads round here – great gaping wounds – were made
by our guns. The bombardment was very heavy at times. Some of the
children run away from us. And yet we’re greeted everywhere with open
arms.

Still can’t get used to ordinary noises, especially women’s and children’s

voices. It must feel like this coming out of prison.

25 October

Owen is to be court-martialled. Mainly because he speaks French better
than anybody else and all the local girls make a bee-line for him, not just
thanking him either, but actually kissing him. I caught his eye while all this
was going on, and thought I detected an answering gleam. Of irony or
whatever. Anyway the Great Unkissed are thoroughly fed up with him and
have convened a subalterns’ court martial. Shot at dawn, I shouldn’t
wonder.

Wyatt, meanwhile, is visiting a farmhouse on the outskirts of the village

where lives an accommodating widow and her equally accommodating but
rather more nubile daughters. At this very moment, probably, he’s dipping
his wick where many a German wick has dipped before it. (A frisson
wasted on Wyatt, believe me.)

But this morning I saw a woman in the village with sunlight on her hair

and one of those long loaves of bread in her arms and there was more
sensuality in that moment than in all Wyatt’s humping and pumping. Out of
bounds, of course. Perfectly respectable housewife doing the shopping.

26 October

This morning I went to one of the local farms to sort out a billeting
problem. The woman who runs the farm had accused some of the men in
‘C’ company of stealing eggs. They denied it vociferously, but I’m sure
she’s right. After calming her down and paying her more for the eggs than
they were worth, I noticed a boy with red hair staring at me. Not staring
exactly, but his eyes met mine longer than was strictly necessary. About
sixteen, I suppose. Perhaps a bit older. He was walking across the yard
clanking a bucket of pig swill, and after I’d taken leave of Madame (his
mother, I think) I followed him into the fetid darkness, full of snuffling and
munching, pigs rooting round with moist quivering nostrils, trotting towards
him on delicate pink feet. After he poured the swill in they squealed and
guzzled for a bit, then raised their heads, watching us calmly from under
long fine white eyelashes as they munched. I scratched their backs and tried
to talk to him. Chinks of sunlight came in through gaps in the tiles, a smelly
greenish wetness under foot. He spoke rapidly and I got very little of it –
schoolboy French no use at all. I spun back-scratching out as long as I
could, then departed, wondering how much of that initial look I’d imagined.

Nothing particularly attractive about him – dead white skin, splodgy

freckles, curious flat golden brown eyes – not that it bothered me. After two
months without sex I’d have settled for the pigs.

I met him again later, near the church. There’s a lane runs past the

churchyard, a low stone wall on one side, a canal on the other, one of the
many canals that run through this area. A rather dank gloomy stretch of
water, listlessly reflecting a dense white sky, fringed by willows with limp
yellow leaves. He was sitting with his big, red, raw-knuckled hands clasped
between his knees. The red hair glowed in the greyish light, not bright red,
not auburn, a dark, flat, burnt-looking colour.

He was very obviously lingering. He greeted me with a smile and tapped

his mouth, making smoking movements. I gave him a Woodbine and stood
by the canal, a few feet away, looking up and down to make sure we
weren’t being observed. He made smoking movements again and pointed to

the packet. When I didn’t immediately respond, he pointed again and said
something in German. I thought, My God. Have you really got your head
stuck so deep in the fucking pig bucket you don’t know which army’s up
the other end? I suppose it should have disgusted me, but it didn’t. In fact it
had the opposite effect – I’d have given him every packet I possessed. I
handed them over and he got up and led me into the trees. It took a while
finding somewhere sufficiently screened. I showed him what I wanted. He
leant against the tree trunk, bracing himself on his hands. I pulled down his
trousers and drawers and started nosing and tonguing round his arse,
worrying at the crack to get in because the position hardened the muscles. A
smell of chrysanths left too long in water, then a deeper friendlier smell,
prim, pursed hole glistening with spit and, on the other side of that tight
French sphincter, German spunk. Not literally – they left a bit longer ago
than that – but there nevertheless, the shadowy figures one used to glimpse
through periscopes in the trenches, and my tongue reaching out for them. I
thought,

Oh ye millions I embrace you,
This kiss is for the whole world …

Suddenly it struck me as funny, and my breath made a farting noise
between his buttocks and he tried to pull away, but I held on, and fucked
him, and then turned him round and sucked off his quite small stubby very
purple cock.

And then we parted. And I’ve been neurotically running my tongue

round my lips feeling for sores ever since.

27 October

Everybody finds these marches gruelling. I spend a lot of my time on foot
inspections. Some of the men have blisters the size of eggs. And my own
feet, which were not good this morning, are now very not good.

But we’re in decent billets tonight. I’ve actually got a bed in a room with

roses on the wallpaper, and a few left in the garden too. Went out and
picked some and put them in a bowl on the kitchen table in memory of

Amiens. Big blowsy roses well past their best, but we move on again today
so I won’t be here to see the petals fall.

29 October

Arrived here under cover of darkness. Village wretched, people unsmiling,
dazed-looking, not surprising when you think we were bombing them to
buggery not long ago.

There’s a rumour going round that the Austrians have signed a peace

treaty. The men cheered up when they heard it, and they need cheering
when you look at their feet. Nobody here can understand why it’s still going
on.

I lay in bed last night and listened to them in the barn singing. I wish I

didn’t feel they’re being sacrificed to the subclauses and the small print. But
I think they are.

Thursday, 31 October

And here for a while we shall stay. The Germans are dug in on the other
side of the Sambre-Oise Canal, and seem to be preparing to make a stand.

The village is still occupied, but houses in the forward area have been

evacuated and we’re crammed into the cellar of one of them. Now and then
we venture upstairs into the furnished rooms, feeling like rats or mice, and
then we scurry back into our hole again. But it’s warm, it feels safe, though
the whole house shakes with the impact of exploding shells, and it’s not
good to think what a direct hit would do. Above ground the Germans have
chopped down all the trees, but there’s a great tangle of undergrowth,
brambles that catch at your legs as you walk past, dead bracken the exact
shade, or one of the shades, of Sarah’s hair. No possibility of exercises or
drill or anything. We lie low by day, and patrol at night, for of course
they’ve left alarm posts on this, side of the canal, a sort of human trip-wire
to warn of an impending attack. Cleaning them out’s a nasty job since it has
to be silent. Knives and knobkerries in other words.

1 November

My turn to go out last night. One alarm post ‘exterminated’. I hope it’s the
last. We crawled almost to the edge of the canal, and lay looking at it. There
was just enough starlight to see by. A strong sense of the Germans on the
other side, peering into the darkness as we were, silent, watchful. I had the
sense that somewhere out there was a pair of eyes looking directly into
mine.

The canal’s raised about four feet above the surrounding fields, with

drainage ditches on either side (the Germans have very sensibly flooded
them). It’s forty feet wide. Too wide to be easily bridged, too narrow from
the point of view of a successful bombardment. There’s no safety margin to
allow for shells falling short, so men and equipment will have to be kept
quite a long way back. Which means that when the barrage lifts, as it’s
supposed to do, and sweeps forward three hundred yards, there’ll be about
five minutes in which to get across the swampy fields, across the drainage
ditches, and reach even our side of the canal. Plenty of time for them to get
their breath and man the guns – though officially, of course, they’ll all have
been wiped out.

The field opposite’s partially flooded already, and it’s still raining. Not

just rain, they’ve also flooded the drainage ditches on their side. From the
canal the ground rises steeply to La Motte Farm, which is our objective in
the attack. Uphill all the way. Not a scrap of cover. Machine-gunners behind
every clump of grass.

Looking at the ground, even like that in semi-darkness, the problem

became dreadfully apparent. Far clearer than it is on any of the maps,
though we spend hours of every day bent over them. There are two
possibilities. Either you bombard the opposite bank so heavily that no
machine-gunner can possibly survive, in which case the ditches and quite
possibly even the canal bank will burst, and the field on the other side will
become a nightmare of weltering mud ten feet deep, as bad as anything at
Passchendaele. Or you keep the bombardment light, move it on quickly,
and wait for the infantry to catch up. In that case you take the risk that

unscathed machine-gunners will pop up all over the place, and settle down
for a nice bit of concentrated target practice.

It’s a choice between Passchendaele and the Somme. Only a miniature

version of each, but then that’s not much consolation. It only takes one
bullet per man.

They’ve chosen the Somme. This afternoon we had a joint briefing with

the Lancashire Fusiliers on our left. Marshall-of-the-Ten-Wounds was there,
surprisingly outspoken I thought, though you can afford to be when you’re
so covered in wound stripes and medals it’s starting to look like an eccentric
form of camouflage. He said his men stand no chance of getting up the
slope with machine-guns still intact above them and no cover. Building a
bridge in the open under the sort of fire we’re likely to encounter is
impossible. The whole operation’s insane. The chances of success are zero.

Nobody argued with him, I mean nobody discussed it. We were just told

flatly, a simple, unsupported assertion, that the weight of the artillery would
overcome all opposition. I think those words sent a chill down the spine of
every man there who remembered the Somme. Marshall threw his pencil
down and sat with his arms folded, silent, for the rest of the briefing.

So here we sit writing letters. Supplies take a long time to get here,

because the Germans blocked the roads and blew up the bridges as they
withdrew. Nobody’s been inside a proper shop for six weeks, so I keep
tearing pages out of the back of this book and giving them to people.

Not many left now. But enough.

2 November 1918
2nd Manchester Regt. France

My dear Rivers,
As you’ll have realized from my last letter, I’m still intact. Should this happy state of
affairs not continue, I would be grateful if you would try to see my mother. She took quite
a fancy to you when you met last year at Craiglockhart and you, more than most people,
would know what to say. Or have the sense to say nothing, which was always rather your
forte, wasn’t it?

My nerves are in perfect working order. By which I mean that in my present situation,

the only sane thing to do is to run away, and I will not do it. Test passed?

Yours
Billy Prior

A chilly little note to send to someone who’s done so much for me. Wrong
tone completely, but there isn’t time to get it right.

I daren’t think about Sarah.

3 November

We’re packed so tight in this cellar my elbow’s constantly being jogged by
people on either side. Cigarette smoke stings my eyes, I honestly believe if
you ran out of fags here you’d just need to breathe deeply. But I’ve got
enough to last, even after my spasm of generosity on the canal bank. Which
this morning I reread, tore out and burned. Another canal bank meeting
awaits – but this time the sort people approve of.

Curious day – it seems to have gone on for ever. We had another briefing

at a farmhouse further along the lane. We were greeted by a little yapping
terrier, still a puppy, black and white and full of himself, tucking one of his
legs up as he ran so that at first I thought he was crippled, but the children
in the house said no, he always runs like that. He quietened down a bit, but
then got excited and started yapping again. Winterton nodded at me, and
said, ‘We can’t have that.’

I shot it myself. I’m proud of that. In the trenches sometimes you’d be

watching through a periscope and you’d see a German soldier – generally
well back in the support lines – walking along believing himself to be safe,
and he’d drop his breeches and settle down for a nice contented crap. You
don’t want to shoot him because there’s something about the vulnerability
of that bare arse, you feel the draught up your own crack, a moment of basic
human empathy. So you point him out to the sentry and order the sentry to
shoot him. That lets everybody off the hook – you haven’t shot him, the
sentry has, but only under orders.

But I shot the dog myself. I took him into the barn holding on to his

collar. He knew something bad was going to happen, and he rolled over on
to his back and showed me his puppy-pink tummy and widdled a bit, quite
certain these devices for deflecting aggression would work. I tickled him
behind his ear and said, ‘Sorry, old son. I’m human – we’re not like that.’

And I’m glad of the fug of human warmth in here, and not just because it

keeps out the wind and rain. Those who’ve bagged themselves seats by the
fire have steam rising from their boots and puttees. The rest of us just
wiggle our toes and make do.

Having said I daren’t think about Sarah, I think about her all the time. I

remember the first time we met – that ludicrous wrestling match on a
tombstone which in retrospect seems a rather appropriate start for a
relationship so hedged in by death. And before that in the pub, plying her
with port to get her knickers off, and she wanted to talk about Johnny’s
death and I didn’t want to listen. Loos, she said. I remember standing by the
bar and thinking that words didn’t mean anything any more. Patriotism
honour courage vomit vomit vomit. Only the names meant anything. Mons,
Loos, the Somme, Arras, Verdun, Ypres.

But now I look round this cellar with the candles burning on the tables

and our linked shadows leaping on the walls, and I realize there’s another
group of words that still mean something. Little words that trip through
sentences unregarded: us, them, we, they, here, there. These are the words
of power, and long after we’re gone, they’ll lie about in the language, like
the unexploded grenades in these fields, and any one of them’ll take your
hand off.

Wyatt sleeps like a baby, except that no baby ever snored like that.

Hoggart’s peeling potatoes. Mugs of chlorine-tasting tea stand round. And
somebody’s chopping wood and feeding it to the fire, though it’s so damp
every fresh stick produces darkness, sizzling, a temporary shadowing of
faces and eyes and then the flames lick round it, and the fire blazes up
again. We need a good fire. Everybody’s coughing and wheezing, a nasty
cold going the rounds. I’m starting to feel a tickle in my throat, hot and
shivery at the same time. I think of rats on the canal bank with long naked
tails and the thought of that cold water is definitely not inviting. But we
sing, we tell jokes and every joke told here is funny. Everybody’s
amazingly cheerful. The word I’m trying not to use is fey. There is an
element of that. We all know what the chances are.

And soon I shall turf Wyatt out of that bunk and try to get some sleep.

Five months ago Charles Manning offered me a job at the Ministry of

Munitions and I turned it down, and said if I was sent back to France … ‘If
if if if – I shall sit in a dug-out and look back to this afternoon, and I shall
think, “You bloody fool.”’

I remember sitting on the stiff brocade sofa in his drawing-room as I said

it.

Well, here I am, in what passes for a dug-out. And I look round me at all

these faces and all I can think is: What an utter bloody fool I would have
been not to come back.

Brown fog enveloped the hospital. Coils of sulphurous vapour hung in the
entrance hall, static, whirled into different patterns whenever somebody
entered or left the building. He’d gone out himself earlier in the evening to
buy a paper from the stand outside Victoria Station, a brisk ten-minute walk
there and back, a chance to get some air into his lungs, though air these
days scorched the throat. The news was good. At any moment now, one felt,
the guns would stop and they would all be released into their private lives.
They all felt it – and yet it almost seemed not to matter. The end that
everybody had longed for was overshadowed by the Spanish influenza
epidemic that had the hospital in its grip. If somebody had rushed along the
corridor now opening doors and shouting, ‘The war’s over,’ he’d have said,
‘Oh, really?’ and gone back to writing up notes.

He looked at his watch and stood up. Time to go up to the ward.
Marsden was trying to catch his eye. He’d had the impression that

morning, during his ward round, that Marsden wanted to ask something, but
had been deterred by the formality of the occasion. Rivers had a quick word
with Sister Roberts – the staffing situation for this duty was particularly bad
– and then went and sat by Marsden’s bed, chatting about this and that
while he worked himself up to say whatever it was he wanted to say. It was
quite simple. He’d overheard a junior doctor talking to a colleague at the
foot of his bed and had caught the phrase ‘elicited the coital reflex’. Did this
mean, Marsden wanted to know, that he would eventually, he stressed,
hedging his bets, not now obviously, eventually, be able to have sex again?
‘Have sex’ was produced in a flat, no nonsense, all-chaps-together tone. He
meant ‘make love’. He meant ‘have children’. His wife’s photograph stood
on his locker. Rivers’s neck muscles tensed with the effort of not looking at

it. No, he said slowly, it didn’t mean that. He explained what it meant.
Marsden wasn’t listening, but he needed a smoke-screen of words behind
which to prepare his reaction. He was pleating the hem of the sheet between
his fingertips. ‘Well,’ he said casually, when Rivers had finished. ‘I didn’t
really think it meant that. Just thought I’d ask.’

One incident; one day.

Faces shadowed by steel helmets, they would hardly have recognized each
other, even if the faint starlight had enabled them to see clearly. Prior,
crouching in a ditch beside the crossroads, kept looking at the inside of his
left wrist where normally his watch would have been. It had been taken
away from him twenty minutes ago to be synchronized. The usual
symptoms: dry mouth, sweaty palms, pounding heart, irritable bladder, cold
feet. What a brutally accurate term ‘cold feet’ was. Though ‘shitting
yourself’ – the other brutally accurate term – did not apply. He’d been
glugging Tincture of Opium all day, as had several others of the old hands.
He’d be shitting bricks for a fortnight when this was over, but at least he
wouldn’t be shitting himself tonight.

He looked again at his wrist, caught Owen doing the same, smiled with

shared irritation, said nothing. He stared at the stars, trying to locate the
plough, but couldn’t concentrate. Rain clouds were massing. All we need. A
few minutes later a runner came back with his watch and with a tremendous
sense – delusional, of course – of being in control again he strapped it on.

Then they were moving forward, hundreds of men eerily quiet, starlit

shadows barely darkening the grass. And no dogs barked.

The clock at the end of the ward blurred, then moved into focus again. He
was finding it difficult to keep awake now that the rounds were done, the
reports written and his task was simply to be there, ready for whatever
emergencies the night might throw his way. Sister Roberts put a mug of
orange-coloured tea, syrupy with sugar, in front of him, and he took a gulp.
They sat together at the night nurses’ station – there were no night nurses,
they were all off with flu – drinking the too strong, too sweet tea, watching

the other end of the ward, where the green screens had been placed round
Hallet’s bed. A single lamp shone above his bed so the green curtains
glowed against the darkness of the rest of the ward. Through a gap between
the screens Rivers could see one of the family, a young boy, fourteen,
fifteen years old perhaps, Hallet’s younger brother, wriggling about on his
chair, bored with the long hours of waiting and knowing it was unforgivable
to be bored.

‘I wish the mother would go home and lie down,’ Sister Roberts said.

‘She’s absolutely at the end of her tether.’ A sniff. ‘And that girl looks the
hysterical type to me.’

She never liked the girls. ‘Is she his sister?’
‘Fiancée.’
A muttering from behind the screen, but no discernible words. Rivers

stood up. ‘I’d better have a look.’

‘Do you want the relatives out?’
‘Please. It’ll only take a minute.’
The family looked up as he pushed the screens aside. They had been

sitting round this bed off and on for nearly thirty-six hours, ever since
Hallet’s condition had begun to deteriorate. Mrs Hallet, the mother, was on
Hallet’s right, he suspected because the family had decided she should be
spared, as far as possible, seeing the left side of Hallet’s face. The worst
was hidden by the dressing over the eye, but still enough was visible. The
father sat on the bad side, a middle-aged man, very erect, retired
professional army, in uniform for the duration of the war. He had a way of
straightening his shoulders, bracing himself that suggested chronic back
pain rather than a reaction to the present situation. And then the girl, whose
name was … Susan, was it? She sat, twisting a handkerchief between her
fingers, often with a polite, meaningless smile on her face, in the middle of
the family she had been going to join and must now surely realize she
would not be joining. And the boy, who was almost the most touching of
all, gauche, graceless, angry with everything, his voice sometimes
squeaking humiliatingly so that he blushed, at other times braying down the

ward, difficult, rebellious, demanding attention, because he was afraid if he
stopped behaving like this he would cry.

They stood up when he came in, looking at him in a way familiar from

his earliest days in hospital medicine. They expected him to do something.
Although they’d been told Hallet was critically ill, they were still hoping
he’d ‘make him better’.

Sister Roberts asked them to wait outside and they retreated to the

waiting-room at the end of the main corridor.

He looked at Hallet. The whole of the left side of his face drooped. The

exposed eye was sunk deep in his skull, open, though he didn’t seem to be
fully conscious. His hair had been shaved off, preparatory to whatever
operation had left the horseshoe-shaped scar, now healing ironically well,
above the suppurating wound left by the rifle bullet. The hernia cerebri
pulsated, looking like some strange submarine form of life, the mouth of a
sea anemone perhaps. The whole of the left side of his body was useless.
Even when he was conscious enough to speak the drooping of the mouth
and the damage to the lower jaw made his speech impossible to follow.
This, more than anything else, horrified his family. You saw them straining
to understand, but they couldn’t grasp a word he said. His voice came in a
whisper because he lacked the strength to project it. He seemed to be
whispering now. Rivers bent over him, listened, then straightened up,
deciding he must have imagined the sound. Hallet had not stirred, beyond
the usual twitching below the coverlet, the constant clonus to which his
right ankle joint was subject.

Why are you alive? Rivers thought, looking down into the gar-goyled

face.

Mate, would have been Njiru’s word for this: the state of which death is

the appropriate and therefore the desirable outcome. He would have seen
Hallet as being, in every meaningful way, dead already, and his sole
purpose would have been to hasten the moment of actual death: mate
ndapu, die finish. Rivers fingered his lapel badge, his unimpaired nerves
transmitting the shape of the caduceus to his undamaged brain, his

allegiance to a different set of beliefs confirmed without the conflict ever
breaking the surface of consciousness.

He took Hallet’s pulse. ‘All right,’ he said to Sister Roberts. ‘You can let

them back in.’

He watched her walk off, then thought it was cowardice not to face them,

and followed her down the corridor, passing Mrs Hallet on the way. She
hesitated when she saw him, but the drive to get back to her son was too
strong. Susan and the younger brother followed on behind. He found Major
Hallet lingering by an open window, smoking furiously. A breath of muggy,
damp, foggy air came into the room, a reminder that there was an outside
world.

‘Pathetic, isn’t it?’ Major Hallet said, raising the cigarette. ‘Well?’
Rivers hesitated.
‘Not long now, eh?’
‘No, not long.’
In spite of his terseness, tears immediately welled up in Major Hallet’s

eyes. He turned away, his voice shaking. ‘He’s been so brave. He’s been so
bloody brave.’ A moment during which he struggled for control. ‘How long
exactly do you think?’

‘I don’t know. Hours.’
‘Oh God.’
‘Keep talking to him. He does recognize your voices and he can

understand.’

‘But we can’t understand him. It’s terrible, he’s obviously expecting an

answer and we can’t say anything.’

They went back to the ward together, Major Hallet pausing outside the

screen for a moment, bracing his back. A muttering from the bed. ‘You
see?’ Major Hallet said helplessly.

Rivers followed him through the gap in the screens and leant over to

listen to Hallet. His voice was a slurred whisper. ‘Shotvarfet.’

At first Rivers could only be sure of the initial consonant and thought he

might be trying to say ‘Susan’, but the phrase was longer than that. He

straightened and shook his head. ‘Keep talking to him, Mrs Hallet. He does
recognize your voice.’

She bent forward and shyly, covered with the social embarrassment that

crops up so agonizingly on these occasions, tried to talk, telling him news
of home, Auntie Ethel sent her love, Madeleine was getting married in
April …

Susan had that smile on her lips again, fixed, meaningless, a baboon

rictus of sheer terror. And the boy’s face, a mask of fear and fury because he
knew that any moment now the tears would start, and he’d be shamed in
front of some merciless tribunal in his own mind.

Rivers left them to it. Sister Roberts and the one orderly were busy with

Adams who had to be turned every hour. He sat in the night station’s circle
of light, looking up and down the ward, forcing himself to name and recall
the details of every patient, his tired mind waiting for the next jerk of the
clock.

The glowing green screens round Hallet’s bed reminded him of the tent

on Eddystone, on the nights when the insects were really bad and they had
to take the lamp inside. You’d go out into the bush and come back and
there’d be this great glow of light, and Hocart’s shadow huge on the canvas.
Safety, or as close to it as you could get on the edge of the dark.

On their last evening he sat outside the tent, packing cases full of clothes
and equipment ranged around him, typing up his final notes. Hocart was
away on the other side of the island and not due back for hours. Working so
close to the light his eyes grew tired, and he sat back rubbing the inner
corners; he opened them again to find Njiru a few feet away watching him,
having approached silently on his bare feet.

Rivers took the lamp from the table and set it on the ground, squatting

down beside it, since he knew Njiru was more comfortable on the ground.
The bush exuded blackness. The big moths that loved a particular flowering
bush that grew all round the tent bumped furrily against the glass, so that he
and Njiru sat in a cloud of pale wings.

They chatted for a while about some of the more than four hundred

acquaintances they now had in common, then a long easy silence fell.

‘Kundaite says you know Ave,’ Rivers said very quietly, almost as if the

bush itself had spoken, and Njiru were being asked to do no more than think
aloud.

Njiru said, almost exactly as he’d said at the beginning, ‘Kundaite he no

speak true, he savvy gammon ’long nanasa,’ but now he spoke with a faint
growl of laughter in his voice, adding in English, ‘He is a liar.’

‘He is a liar, but I think you do know Ave.’
He was reminded suddenly of an incident in the Torres Straits when

Haddon had been trying to get skulls to measure. One man had said, with
immense dignity, ‘Be patient. You will have all our skulls in time.’ It was
not a comfortable memory. He was not asking for skulls but he was asking
for something at least equally sacred. He leant forward and their shadows
leapt and grappled against the bush. ‘Tell me about Ave.’

Ave lives in Ysabel. He is both one spirit and many spirits. His mouth is

long and filled with the blood of the men he devours. Kita and Mateana are
nothing beside him because they destroy only the individual, but Ave kills
‘all people ’long house’. The broken rainbow belongs to him, and presages
both epidemic disease and war. Ave is the destroyer of peoples.

And the words of exorcism? He told him even that, the last bubbles rising

from the mouth of a drowning man. Not only told him, but, with that blend
of scholarly exactitude and intellectual impatience for which he was
remarkable, insisted on Rivers learning the words in Melanesian, in the
‘high speech’, until he had the inflection on every syllable perfect. This was
the basis, Rivers thought, toiling and stumbling over the words, of Njiru’s
power, the reason why on meeting him even the greatest chiefs stepped off
the path.

‘And now,’ Njiru said, lifting his head in a mixture of pride and

contempt, ‘now you will put it in your book.’

I never have, Rivers thought. His and Hocart’s book on Eddystone had been
one of the casualties of the war, though hardly – he glanced up and down

the ward with its rows of brain-damaged and paralysed young men – the
most significant.

He had spoken them, though, during the course of a lecture to the Royal

Society, and had been delighted to find that he didn’t need to consult his
notes as he spoke. He was still word-perfect.

A commotion from behind the screens. Hallet had begun to cry out and

his family was trying to soothe him. A muttering all along the ward as the
other patients stirred and grumbled in their sleep, dragged reluctantly back
into consciousness. But the grumbling stopped as they realized where the
cries were coming from. A silence fell. Faces turned towards the screens as
if the battle being waged behind them was every man’s battle.

Rivers walked quietly across. The family stood up again as he came in.

‘No, it’s all right,’ he said. ‘No need to move.’

He took Hallet’s pulse. He felt the parents’ gaze on him, the father’s red-

veined, unblinking eyes and the mother’s pale fierce face with its working
mouth.

‘This is it, isn’t it?’ Major Hallet said in a whisper.
Rivers looked down at Hallet, who was now fully conscious. Oh God, he

thought, it’s going to be one of those. He shook his head. ‘Not long.’

The barrage was due to start in fifteen minutes’ time. Prior shared a bar of
chocolate with Robson, sitting hunched up together against the damp cold
mist. Then they started crawling forward. The sappers, who were burdened
by materials for the construction of the pontoon bridge, were taking the
lane, so the Manchesters had to advance over the waterlogged fields. The
rain had stopped, but the already marshy ground had flooded in places, and
over each stretch of water lay a thick blanket of mist. Concentrate on
nothing but the moment, Prior told himself, moving forward on knees and
elbows like a frog or a lizard or like – like anything except a man. First the
right knee, then the left, then the right, then the left again, and again, and
again, slithering through fleshy green grass that smelled incredibly sharp as
scrabbling boots cut it. Even with all this mist there was now a perceptible

thinning of the light, a gleam from the canal where it ran between spindly,
dead trees.

There is to be no retirement under any circumstances. That was the order.

They have tied us to the stake, we cannot fly, but bear-like we must fight
the course. The men were silent, staring straight ahead into the mist. Talk,
even in whispers, was forbidden. Prior looked at his watch, licked dry lips,
watched the second hand crawl to the quarter hour. All around him was a
tension of held breath. 5.43. Two more minutes. He crouched further down,
whistle clenched between his teeth.

Prompt as ever, hell erupted. Shells whined over, flashes of light, plumes

of water from the drainage ditches, tons of mud and earth flung into the air.
A shell fell short. The ground shook beneath them and a shower of pebbles
and clods of earth peppered their steel helmets. Five minutes of this, five
minutes of the air bursting in waves against your face, men with dazed
faces braced against it, as they picked up the light bridges meant for fording
the flooded drainage ditches, and carried them out to the front. Then,
abruptly, silence. A gasp for air, then noise again, but further back, as the
barrage lifted and drummed down on to the empty fields.

Prior blew the whistle, couldn’t hear it, was on his feet and running

anyway, urging the men on with wordless cries. They rushed forward,
making for the line of trees. Prior kept shouting, ‘Steady, steady! Not too
fast on the left!’ It was important there should be no bunching when they
reached the bridges. ‘Keep it straight!’ Though the men were stumbling into
quagmires or tripping over clumps of grass. A shell whizzing over from the
German side exploded in a shower of mud and water. And another. He saw
several little figures topple over, it didn’t look serious, somehow, they
didn’t look like beings who could be hurt.

Bridges laid down, quickly, efficiently, no bunching at the crossings, just

the clump of boots on wood, and then they emerged from beneath the
shelter of the trees and out into the terrifying openness of the bank. As bare
as an eyeball, no cover anywhere, and the machine-gunners on the other
side were alive and well. They dropped down, firing to cover the sappers as
they struggled to assemble the bridge, but nothing covered them. Bullets fell

like rain, puckering the surface of the canal, and the men started to fall.
Prior saw the man next to him, a silent, surprised face, no sound, as he
twirled and fell, a slash of scarlet like a huge flower bursting open on his
chest. Crawling forward, he fired at the bank opposite though he could
hardly see it for the clouds of smoke that drifted across. The sappers were
still struggling with the bridge, binding pontoon sections together with wire
that sparked in their hands as bullets struck it. And still the terrible rain fell.
Only two sappers left, and then the Manchesters took over the building of
the bridge. Kirk paddled out in a crate to give covering fire, was hit, hit
again, this time in the face, went on firing directly at the machine-gunners
who crouched in their defended holes only a few yards away. Prior was
about to start across the water with ammunition when he was himself hit,
though it didn’t feel like a bullet, more like a blow from something big and
hard, a truncheon or a cricket bat, only it knocked him off his feet and he
fell, one arm trailing over the edge of the canal.

He tried to turn to crawl back beyond the drainage ditches, knowing it

was only a matter of time before he was hit again, but the gas was thick
here and he couldn’t reach his mask. Banal, simple, repetitive thoughts ran
round and round his mind. Balls up. Bloody mad. Oh Christ. There was no
pain, more a spreading numbness that left his brain clear. He saw Kirk die.
He saw Owen die, his body lifted off the ground by bullets, describing a
slow arc in the air as it fell. It seemed to take for ever to fall, and Prior’s
consciousness fluttered down with it. He gazed at his reflection in the water,
which broke and reformed and broke again as bullets hit the surface and
then, gradually, as the numbness spread, he ceased to see it.

The light was growing now, the subdued, brownish light of a November
dawn. At the far end of the ward, Simpson, too far gone himself to have any
understanding of what was happening, jargoned and gobbled away, but all
the other faces were turned towards the screens, each man lending the little
strength he had to support Hallet in his struggle.

So far, except for the twice repeated whisper and the wordless cries,

Hallet had been silent, but now the whisper began again, only more loudly.

Shotvarfet. Shotvarfet. Again and again, increasing in volume as he directed
all his strength into the cry. His mother tried to soothe him, but he didn’t
hear her. Shotvarfet. Shotvarfet. Again and again, each time louder, ringing
across the ward. He opened his one eye and gazed directly at Rivers, who
had come from behind the screens and was standing at the foot of his bed.

‘What’s he saying?’ Major Hallet asked.
Rivers opened his mouth to say he didn’t know and then realized he did.

‘He’s saying, “It’s not worth it.”’

‘Oh, it is worth it, it is,’ Major Hallet said, gripping his son’s hand. The

man was in agony. He hardly knew what he was saying.

‘Shotvarfet.’
The cry rose again as if he hadn’t spoken, and now the other patients

were growing restless. A buzz of protest not against the cry, but in support
of it, a wordless murmur from damaged brains and drooping mouths.

‘Shotvarfet. Shotvarfet.’
‘I can’t stand much more of this,’ Major Hallet said. The mother’s eyes

never left her son’s face. Her lips were moving though she made no sound.
Rivers was aware of a pressure building in his own throat as that single cry
from the patients went on and on. He could not afterwards be sure that he
had succeeded in keeping silent, or whether he too had joined in. All he
could remember later was gripping the metal rail at the end of the bed till
his hands hurt.

And then suddenly it was over. The mangled words faded into silence,

and a moment or two later, with an odd movement of the chest and stomach
muscles like somebody taking off a too tight jumper, Hallet died.

Rivers reached the bedside before the family realized he was gone,

closed the one eye, and from sheer force of habit looked at his watch.

‘6.25,’ he said, addressing Sister Roberts.
He raised the sheet as far as Hallet’s chin, arranged his arms by his sides

and withdrew silently, leaving the family alone with their grief, wishing, as
he pulled the screens more closely together, that he had not seen the young
girl turn aside to hide her expression of relief.

On the edge of the canal the Manchesters lie, eyes still open, limbs not yet
decently arranged, for the stretcher-bearers have departed with the last of
the wounded, and the dead are left alone. The battle has withdrawn from
them; the bridge they succeeded in building was destroyed by a single shell.
Further down the canal another and more successful crossing is being
attempted, but the cries and shouts come faintly here.

The sun has risen. The first shaft strikes the water and creeps towards

them along the bank, discovering here the back of a hand, there the side of a
neck, lending a rosy glow to skin from which the blood has fled, and then,
finding nothing here that can respond to it, the shaft of light passes over
them and begins to probe the distant fields.

Grey light tinged with rosy pink seeps in through the tall windows. Rivers,
slumped at the night nurses’ station, struggles to stay awake. On the edge of
sleep he hears Njiru’s voice, repeating the words of the exorcism of Ave.

O Sumbi! O Gesese! O Palapoko! O Gorepoko! O you Ngengere at the

root of the sky. Go down, depart ye.

And there, suddenly, not separate from the ward, not in any way ghostly,

not in fashion blong tomate, but himself in every particular, advancing
down the ward of the Empire Hospital, attended by his shadowy retinue, as
Rivers had so often seen him on the coastal path on Eddystone, came Njiru.

There is an end of men, an end of chiefs, an end of chieftains’ wives, an

end of chiefs’ children – then go down and depart. Do not yearn for us, the
fingerless, the crippled, the broken. Go down and depart, oh, oh, oh.

He bent over Rivers, staring into his face with those piercing hooded

eyes. A long moment, and then the brown face, with its streaks of lime,
faded into the light of the daytime ward.

Author’s Note

The reader may wish to know more about some of the historical characters
encountered in this novel.

Colonel Marshall-of-the-Ten-Wounds was killed attempting to cross the

Sambre-Oise canal, having led his men ‘without regard for his personal
safety’. He was awarded a posthumous VC.

James Kirk, who paddled himself out on to the canal to give covering

fire, was also awarded a posthumous VC.

Wilfred Owen’s MC, for gallantry in capturing an enemy machine-gun

and inflicting ‘considerable losses’ on the enemy at the battle of Joncourt,
was awarded after his death.

Rivers drew on his Eddystone data in several published papers, but the

major joint work he and Hocart planned was never written. His notebooks
are in the Rare Manuscripts Department of Cambridge University Library.

Njiru, Kundaite, Namboko Taru, Namboko Emele, Nareti, Lembu and the

captive child are also historical, but of them nothing more is known.

The following works can be unreservedly recommended:

W. H. R. Rivers by Richard Slobodin (Sutton Publishing, 1997)

Memories of Lewis Carroll by Katharine Rivers, with an Introduction by
Richard Slobodin (Library Research News, McMaster University, 1976)

Collected Letters of Wilfred Owen (Oxford University Press, 1967)

Wilfred Owen by Jon Stallworthy (Oxford University Press, 1974)

Owen the Poet by Dominic Hibberd (Macmillan, 1986)

Wilfred Owen, The Last Year by Dominic Hibberd (Constable, 1992)

Wilfred Owen’s Voices: Language and Community by Douglas Kerr
(Clarendon Press, 1993)

Wilfred Owen, Poet and Soldier by Helen McPhail (Gliddon Books in
association with the Wilfred Owen Association, 1993)

THE BEGINNING

Let the conversation begin …

Follow the Penguin Twitter.com@penguinukbooks

Keep up-to-date with all our stories YouTube.com/penguinbooks

Pin ‘Penguin Books’ to your Pinterest

Like ‘Penguin Books’ on Facebook.com/penguinbooks

Find out more about the author and

discover more stories like this at Penguin.co.uk

VIKING

Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA 
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a
division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) 
Penguin Group (Australia), 707 Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3008, Australia (a division of
Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India 
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand (a division of
Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Office Park, 181 Jan Smuts Avenue,
Parktown North, Gauteng 2193, South Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

www.penguin.com

The Regeneration Trilogy first published 1966
Regeneration published by Viking 1991
The Eye in the Door first published by Viking 1993
The Ghost Road first published by Viking 1995

Copyright © Pat Barker, 1991, 1993, 1995

Cover artwork © Mark Hearld

The moral right of the author has been asserted

All rights reserved.

ISBN: 978-0-241-96709-6

