Anne McCaffrey - Novel - Restoree

A CORGI BOOK

Originally published in Great Britain by Rapp & Whiting Limited

Copyright © 1967 by Anne McCaffrey

Corgi Books are published by Transworld Publishers Ltd., 61-63 Uxbridge
Road, Baling, London

W5 5SA, in Australia by Transworld Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd., 15-23
Helles Avenue,

Moorebank, NSW 2170, and in New Zealand by Transworld Publishers
(N.Z.) Ltd., Cnr. Moselle and

Waipareira Avenues, Henderson, Auckland.

Printed and bound in Great Britain by Cox & Wyman Ltd., Reading, Berks.

To "My Favourite Relative"

G. N. McElroy

All of the characters in this book are fictitious and any resemblance to actual
persons living or

dead is purely coincidental

CHAPTER ONE

Contents <> - Next <>

The only warning of danger I had was a disgusting wave of dead sea-creature
stench. For a moment,

it overwhelmed the humid, baked pavement smell that permeated the
relatively cooler air of Central Park

that hot July night. One minute I was turning off the pathway to the Zoo in
search of a spot that might

have a breeze from the lake and the next I was fainting with terror.

I have one other impression of that final second before all horror overcame
me: of a huge

dirigible-shaped form looming lightless. I remember that only because I
thought to myself that someone

was going to catch hell for flying so low over the city. Then the black bulk of
the thing seemed to

compress the stinking air through my skull, robbing me of breath and sanity
with its aura of alien terror.

Of the next long interlude, which I am informed was a period of withdrawal
from a reality too

disrupting to contemplate, I remember only isolated incoherencies. It is
composed of horrifying

fragments, do-si-do-ing in a random partnering of all nightmare symbols,
tinted with unlikely colors,

accompanied by fetid odors, by intense heat and shivering cold and worst of
all, nerve-memories of

excruciating pain. I remember, and forget as quickly as possible,
dismembered pieces of the human

body; the pattern of severed blood vessels, sawn bones, the patterns of the
fine lines on wrinkled skin.

And throat-searing screams. And a voice, dinning into the ears of my mind,
repeating with endless,

stomach-churning patience, collections of syllables I strained desperately to
sort into comprehensible

phrases.

Red, yellow, blue beads rolled, parabolically, evading a needle and its
umbilical string. A spoon

dipped into a blue bowl, into a red bowl; a spoon dipped into a red bowl, into
a blue bowl, until my body

was forced into the mold of a spoon and itself was dipped into the bowl, my
greatly enlarged mouth the

bowl of that spoon. Plaits of human hair swayed toward oddly shaped sheets
of pale white leather. The

gentle voice with the iron insistence of the dedicated droned on and on until
each repetition seemed to

trampoline into the gray matter of my mind.

Then, after eons of this inescapable routine, I began to clutch at snatches seen
normally and rationally;

a face on a sea of white which stretched limitlessly beyond my blinkered
perception. I would be aware of

bending over this face. I kept trying to make the face resemble someone I
knew: one of the junior

account men who invaded the source library of the advertising agency where I
worked; one of the

anonymous faces on the buses I rode from my 48th Street cold-water flat.

At other times, I would find a tray of food held in front of me and associate
myself as the carrier. This

troubled me even more because of all things, I hated serving food. In college I
had paid for my board

working as a waitress and sometimes a cook in private families, resenting the
necessary exigencies of a

junior female member of a large family. It seemed to me my earliest
recollections were of setting or

clearing the table and serving food. But the feeling of the entire scene here
had an alien quality to it,

despite the fact my coherent vision was limited. The tray and dishes had a
different touch and the smell of

the food was unfamiliar.

The next identifiable sensation was that of the warmth of sun on my shoulders
and the caress of wind,

of green light in my eyes. I heard screams that can only be heard and not
described, but they might have

been from earlier sections of the nightmare. I had the feeling on my hands of
the slippery softness of

soapy water. Then the face on the vast expanse of white would reappear. I
gradually became aware of

an unfailing order in the procedure of my dreams. Face, food, water, sunshine,
face, food, water, dark.

The repetition was endless and I was passive to it, prompted by the droning
voice, no longer gentle, but

equally insistent.

Slowly, not just that face on a sea of white but peripheral details took form
and coherency. The face

would belong to a man, an ugly man with vacant eyes, black hair, sallow
pitted skin. The fact that he bore

not one morsel of resemblance to any of my brothers or any of the overbright

young men at the agency

gave me distinct pleasure. His face was on a pillow which was on a bed of
hospital height. And always I

was in the position of looking down, not being on a level, with him. Had he
been bending over me, I

might just have been alarmed that all the tales of rampant white slavery in
New York City drilled into me

by my provincial parents were indeed true. My first conscious query was why
was I not the patient since,

obviously, something was very wrong with me.

The mere sensation of sun warmth gradually expanded to include oddly
shaped trees with willowy,

waving fronds, and with the feel of the wind was the cool fragrance of floral
odors.

The ground no longer hovered somewhere beyond my comprehension but
was suddenly squarely

under my feet. I was standing on a walk, bordered with blooms I never
remembered seeing before. The

trays I carried contained individual colored dishes with foods that smelled
appetizingly and I fed them to

the face in the sea of white.

I cannot judge the length of this semiconscious state. I was a passive observer,
comparing the

anomalies with personal recollections and finding no parallels. I was,
however, not the least bit alarmed

by all that, which should have alarmed me, as I am normally very curious, in
a discreet way.

I do know that the transition into full consciousness was brutally abrupt. As if
the focus of my mind,

so long blurred, had suddenly been returned to balance. As if a kaleidoscope
had astonishingly settled

into a familiar design instead of random, meaningless patterns.

Out of the jumble, my grateful eyes reviewed an entire panorama of sloping
bluish lawns, felicitously

set with flowering shrubs and populated by couples strolling casually down
the paths. Each woman wore

a gown the exact cut and color of the blue one I wore. Each man had a blue
tunic and a coat gruesomely

reminiscent of a straitjacket. Beyond the bluish swath, lay little cottages of
white stone, with wide

windows, barred by white columns at narrow regular intervals. Directly in
front of my face was a

shimmering opacity I recognized, by some agency, as a fence and dangerous
to me.

I was not, however, one of a couple. I was in a group of eight people, strolling
the walks, and the

other seven were men. Only one, the man directly to my left, wore the strange
jacket.

A voice, issuing from the left side of the man in the jacket, spoke an irritating
combination of

comprehensible words and jumbled syllables.

'And so… he is as well as can be expected. Certainly his physical appearance
has improved. Notice

the firm tone to his flesh, the clear color of his complexion.'

'Then you do have hopes?' asked an urgent, wistful younger voice. Its owner I
could see without

noticeably turning my head. He was a young man, tall and slender, with a
sensitive, pale-gold tired face

dominated by deeply circled eyes. He was dressed in a simple but rich
fashion. His concerned attention

was on the man whose harness controls I now found myself holding.

'Hopes, yes… (another incomprehensible spate of words. It seemed to me I
was hearing another

language in which I could not yet think)… we have had so few successes with
this sort of… Our skill

does not include mental breakdowns… the strains and concerns of affairs in
your behalf and for his

country… but you may be sure we are taking the very best care of him until
that time. Monsorlit's…'

This was not the reassurance the young man wanted. He sighed resignedly,
placing a gentle hand on

my charge's shoulder. It was the lightest of gestures, but it stopped the man
stolidly in his tracks. In the

vacuousness of the face, there was no comprehension of the action, no
reaction, no sign whatever of

intelligence.

'Harlan, Harlan,' the youth cried in bitter distress, his eyes brimming with
tears, 'how could this have

happened to you?' 'Come, Sir Ferrill,' commanded a stern voice with no
vestige of sympathy in its

hardness. 'You know that emotional stress can bring about another one of your
attacks. You have little

enough strength as it is.'

The speaker fetched round in my sight. Immediately I saw his face, I disliked
him. I considered myself

scarcely a proper judge in this newly rational state of mind, but the instinct to
hate him was as sharp as

the fleshy face of the man was bland. His eyes, close together on either side of
a large nose, were

disturbingly cold, calculating and wary. His full sensuous lips sealed tightly
over his teeth and his heavy

jaw was implacable. His heavyset figure was ponderous, not just fleshy or
muscular but unwieldy.

'Your solicitude for my health is touching, Gorlot, but I will judge which
emotion I can afford,'

snapped the young man with such regality the implacable man demurred.

The youth continued to speak, ignoring this Gorlot.

'Since that is his condition, I must leave Harlan here,' he said to a corpulent,
moon-faced individual

who bowed with oily obsequity at each phrase. 'But… if I am not informed
the moment an improvement

is noticed…' and the youth left the threat in mid-air with the authority of one
who is used to complete

obedience.

The unctuous man bowed again to the back of the youth who turned and
walked with brisk steps

down another path. The smile on the fat man's face did not indicate obedience
to the injunction. Nor did

the knowing look this Gorlot exchanged with him. The others in the party
walked into my line of vision

and followed the youth and Gorlot.

When they were out of hearing, the fat man turned to me with a sneer and
snapped a command, 'To

the house,' and I, obviously from some well-rehearsed practice in that dim
past from which I had so

recently emerged, turned myself and my charge around and took a path
towards a little cottage among

the trees.

At the door stood an armed attendant, a brutish, coarse-looking person who
spoke as we

approached but spoke as one who knows he isn't heard.

'Back in your cage, most high, noble and exalted Regent.' He threw open the
door he had just

unlocked. With a brutal shove he pushed my charge into the house. With an
equally brutal and obscene

caress, he pushed me inside and snapped the door lock.

The patient lay crumpled over the chair into which he had been pushed. I
wondered how I would be

able to get him to his feet, for he was tall and big-boned. But, as I put one
hand under his arm, he took it

as a signal and almost unaided got to his feet. His shins were bleeding
slightly, but there was no sign of

expression in the vacant eyes.

'Poor man,' I muttered to myself, 'which of us has been the madder?'

'Take off harness,' blared a voice from the ceiling, startling me breathless. I
spotted the grillwork that

housed the speaker. 'Take off harness,' the voice repeated, slowly, distinctly, as
to a child or… a

childlike mind.

I did as I was told.

'Take off harness,' the voice repeated four more times even as I had completed
the task. 'If I've said

that once, I've said it a million times,' the voice grumbled in a lower and more
normal tone.

'You'd gripe in a priest's cave, you would,' came a half-muffled reply. 'By the
Seven Brothers, you

won't find me complaining. This life suits me fine. Plenty of food, nothing
much to do except lock doors

and… unlock any pretty legs I want.'

'You like that, you Milbait,' was the sneering reply.

'Ahhh, that's your main problem in life, Balon, you have to have a struggle to
please you. Not me.'

'Who do you think you are, telling me what my problem is? Monsorlit?' Balon
growled. His voice

altered again as he issued another command. 'Seat patient.'

I scuffled with the chair, picked it up, half pushing the man into it.

'Get tray at wall slot. Get tray at wall slot.'

I located the wall slot and the tray on which were two sets of dishes, one red
and one blue.

'Feed patient blue food. Feed patient blue food.'

My patient ate with a half-animal intensity, snapping at each bite as the spoon
touched his lips, gulping

it down half-chewed.

'Eat red food. Eat red food,' was the next order. 'Damned if I care if the
dummies eat or not. They

give me Milshivers.'

'You'd care all right if you had to feed all of Gleto's drugged prizes yourself.
Then I'd never hear the

end of your blasting. Your trouble is, you don't know a prime cave when you

see it. Me, I like it fine.

Those dummies do all our work. This is better pay than patrolling, too. Not
that I'd patrol with the

half-blown reliners they call squadron leaders these days. And not with a war
on Tane. Who wants

hand-to-hand combat? And it's better than running illegals. You can never tell
nowadays when Gorlot's

going to have to make more commitments and who wants to end up with a
needle? Or tied to the local

Mil Rock?'

'Balon,' shouted a new voice in the background I recognized as Gleto's.
'You've been at Lamar again.

Leave him alone. Just luck I looked in at him on my way to greet Ferrill. You
keep your hands off him.'

'If you knew what the Milrouser had done to me, you wouldn't…' began the
grumbler passionately.

'I don't care if he blocked your cave,' Gleto said angrily, 'you cut him up once
more and you'll join

him.'

'Eat red food. Eat red food,' Balon snarled in the speaker system.

There were no more incidental remarks over the speaker that day, but it was a
constant source of

odd, vulgar dialogues between much the same personnel during the next
week.

Although I never understood their topical references until much later, my
understanding of the

language increased immensely… if limited to a very rough vernacular. I knew
there was a war going on

between these people and the inhabitants of another planet, Tane. I knew that
the army unit, the Patrol,

was considered to be run by incompetents and that the casualties were high.
That there was a sudden

epidemic of insanity that caused the guards no end of secret amusement.

I had been told by Balon to return the tray after I had eaten the red food. I was
then told to be seated

in the other chair of the room without any further commands for what seemed
a long time. My private

meditations were uninterrupted until the green sun had sunk from sight and a
twin-moonlit night well

darkened.

As the greening twilight increased to the point of low visibility, I was briefly
startled to see the lights in

the four corners of the room come on. It was not overly bright for me to
assume that a central agency

turned on all the functions of the cottage, remotely controlling the order of the
days with no need for

personal contact. This isolation was merciful to me as I sorted out truth from
fancy in newly regained

sanity.

Perhaps, on another day, if I hadn't heard the coarse interchange, I might have
innocently announced

my rationality. The wise decision to remain silent was strengthened each day
by the grotesque

conversations I overheard. It was lucky, too, that there was not a single
diversion in that barely furnished

room so that my activity, outside of the care of my patient, was restricted to
looking out the window or

sitting looking at my vacant-eyed companion. Any other industry would have
immediately communicated

my change to the guard on his random rounds.

I learned early that the speaker system was two-way. A chance, overloud
comment on my part

fetched the guard instantly. To him I presented the same vacant stare that
inhabited the face of my

charge. He looked at me suspiciously, caressed me in a vulgar fashion that
shocked me motionless and

departed with a shrug of his shoulders.

After that I lived with another dread, that one of them might select me for his
pleasure.

It was a good thing, too, that there was no visual check installed in the cottage
or I should have been

apprehended the very next morning of my rationality as I stood in front of the
window and made my most

amazing discovery.

For the body I inhabited bore few resemblances to the one I distinctly
remembered possessing. It

was the same height, same chestnut hair, but it was a slim, graceful figure I
saw, not my former awkward

self. And my skin was a warm golden color. All over. In contour my face was
similar, but now my blue

eyes stared at, to me, a totally transformed face. My incredulous fingers softly
caressed the new,

marvelously congruous nose. No longer was I crucified by that horrible
hooked monstrosity bequeathed

me with hereditary injustice from some New England zealot. This new nose,
all golden, fine-grained skin,

was straight, short and charming. I stroked it, reveling in the tactile sensation
that proved it was really part

of me and there was no more of it than I could see in the window reflection.
How many, many agonies

that horrid nose had given me. How often I had railed at the injustice of
parents who produced child after

indiscriminate child and had no money to provide more than basic needs and
none to remedy cruel

genetic jokes.

Had they been at least sympathetic, I would not have left home. But they
couldn't even understand

why I wanted to save money for plastic surgery. Only Jewish girls felt it
necessary to have nose bobs.

The fact that I looked Semitic with such a nose didn't bear on that problem.

'You are as God made you, Sara, and you've much to commend you to any
decent self-respecting

man.'

'But nothing to commend myself to me,' I remembered saying, 'and I don't see
any decent

self-respecting men pounding a path to my door.'

They couldn't argue that, certainly, for not even my brothers could be
blackmailed or pressured into

getting me dates. But they could and did argue against my going to New
York, although I had a written

job offer, a good one with an advertising firm, confirmed and secured.

'Why the library right here in Seaford has offered you a very nice position,'
my father had argued.

'Seaford? I might as well rot in the end of the world,' I had cried. 'I'm twenty-

one and I'm leaving

home. If I cook another meal for anyone, it'll be for myself and not for six
field-hand appetites that don't

know decent food from pigs' swill.' I had glared at my brothers, busy
shoveling food into their mouths. 'If

I iron anything, it'll be my own clothing, not shirts and shirts and shirts.'

'The girl's ill,' my mother had declared as if this explained my unexpected
outburst.

'All that education,' my father had retorted sourly. He had resented my
insistence on college, to the

point where I had had to work constantly to support myself: making ends
meet only because library

majors got state support.

'I'm not ill. I'm sick, but not of education. I'm sick of Seaford and everyone in
it.'

'But everyone knows you here, hon,' Seth, the brother next oldest to me, said
soothingly. He alone

came nearest to appreciating my despair. He had needed glasses desperately
as a young boy and his

now permanently damaged eyes were weak, watering and subject to continual
inflammations.

'And no one wants me,' I had cried from the bitterness of my soul. 'At twenty-
one, I have never even

had a date.'

'I'm leaving, Mother,' I had repeated quietly and to end conversation had
started to clear the table.

And I did leave, taking my suitcase from the back porch on my way out the
kitchen door to catch the

night bus to Wilmington and the train to New York City.

But now, here on some strange planet, God only knows how many light-years
from Seaford,

Delaware, I had my new nose. I giggled. If I ever got back home, I could use
my savings for a trip to

Europe. Only I was abroad already.

I stroked my nose again and then the smooth, golden-skinned arms where the
dark hairy growth had

once added to the list of my physical embarrassments.

Further examination proved that three prominent scars, the rewards of trying
to play tomboy to my

older brothers, were gone from my body. Of my disfiguring marks, only the
double gash on my right

instep where I had stepped on a bottle wading remained. But the corns on my
toes from shoes too short

for growing feet were gone.

I was utterly delighted, mystified and grateful to, if appalled by, the strange
agency that had caused

this transformation. I was all my most glowing dreams had once evoked. Not
beautiful but pretty, healthy

looking with my golden tan (only it wasn't a tan, I discovered), properly
curved - and precious little

advantage could I see of it, locked in one room with a mindless idiot.

The air of danger and despair that hung over the pleasant gardens and bare
cottages could not be

mistaken. When outsiders walked among us, the guards were tensely alert.
The lack of treatments of any

kind, the tenor of the conversations I overheard on the loudspeakers,

contrasted strangely with the

luxurious surroundings and the physical appearance girls and patients were
made to maintain. The other

women who paraded with their charges were pretty, perfect in their prettiness
with almost frightening

similarity. Their expressions were only slightly more intelligent than those of
their patients. A case of the

dolt caring for the idiotic in a moronic paradise.

I learned the reason for the simple harness that had to be strapped on my man
before each

promenade in the garden. A small, needled vial containing a tan, viscous
fluid, was aimed at the right arm

through the padding that kept both arms bound to the sides. A jerk on the
reins exerted a pressure that

drove the needle into the arm.

I saw one man run berserk, yelling, dragging the girl who, in her stupidity,
still clutched the reins. He

halted abruptly, screaming in agony, and dropped rigid to the ground. The
performance thoroughly

frightened me and I regarded the big man I cared for with alarm. I knew of no
such precautions should a

seizure overtake a patient in the cottage. One night, though, I did hear the
sudden crescendo of hysterical

laughter, shrieks and a final shrill cry from a neighboring cottage. I did see the
limp, bloody figure of a girl

carried out. Another pretty, blue-robed woman took her place by the next
exercise hour, vacantly

parading her glassy-eyed charge. I took to staring at my ugly man at all times,
hoping to forestall such an

occurrence in my cottage. I knew every line on his face, every pitted scar,
every twitch of his muscles. At

one point, I started with every deep breath he took.

My patient received his first professional visit eight days after my recovery.
Three men came in; a

white-coated technician pushed in a small treatment cart and immediately left;
the fat-faced man called

Gleto came in and a man whose appearance was an odd contrast to Gleto's.

Gleto ordered me to stand in one corner and vacantly I moved after what I
considered an appropriate

time for moronic comprehension. I stood, however, so that I could see
everything that went on and the

third man held my attention most.

He was not tall, just my height, and carried himself stiffly erect. His
movements were all as precise as

a Scots guardsman, no motion was wasted. His skin seemed to be drawn
tightly across his skull and each

straight black hair on his head was precisely combed into place. His nose was
high-bridged and thin; his

lips were thin, his eyes of a nondescript shade were penetrating and intense,
set deeply into his skull.

There was no expression on his face nor were there any lines that indicated he
had ever had any

expression. A colder personality I never met nor a more impressive one. In
dress, manner, color, motion,

speech, he was a machine of efficiency, not a human being.

He made a rapid and thorough examination of the patient, skimming the first
page of the stiff chart on

the treatment wagon without missing a word. Looking up, he said:

'I see no need whatever of increasing the dosage now. The injection every two
weeks plus the oral

amounts in his food are ample to subdue his personality,' and he implied that
his valuable time had been

wasted.

'I'm taking no chances,' Gleto replied accusingly, 'and you haven't been here
in two months. You

know how powerful Harlan is physically,' and the heavy, fat eyelids flickered
with unctuous

insolence,'since it took three injections to hold him under the first week.'

The cold man looked at Gleto. 'And you will no doubt recall from whose
laboratories cerol originated

and who is most familiar with its properties. I am no more eager for his
recovery than you. It would

interrupt my research at a time when success is a matter of weeks away.' The
thin, precise eyebrows

raised imperceptibly and the cold man reached for the chart again, flipping
over a few rigid sheets before

his thin finger jabbed at a notation.

With no expression he now indicated displeasure.

'Where is the weekly absorption count? If you are stupid enough to ignore the
simple precaution of an

absorption count, naturally you are stupid enough to sit quivering with fright
that Harlan might recover. I

thought I had made the necessity of those checks adequately clear to your
technicians.'

Gleto attempted to pass this off.

'Do not evade the issue, Gleto,' came the implacable voice. 'The absorption
count has not been taken

for four weeks. One is to be taken immediately and retaken every other week.
When I have perfected a

simple check, I do not intend to waste time coming here just to remind you to
use it.'

'I don't have the technicians to…'

'What about that… fellow outside?'

Gleto snorted at the suggestion.

'I thought so. You've spent only enough of your wealth to maintain an
outward appearance of

efficiency and shiver in your bed at night because your avarice prevents you
from hiring sufficient

personnel to run this place properly.'

Gleto looked at him suspiciously and then twisted his lip into a sneer.

'You don't fool me, Monsorlit; absorption rates, ha! That's just an excuse to
get more of your

dummies off your hands.'

Monsorlit turned his eyes from the chart he had started to reread to gaze at the
fat man. The room

became still, broken only by the breathing of the patient, until the sneer left
Gleto's face and he began to

shift his bulk restlessly.

'Your assessment of the situation is erroneous and I mistakenly credited you
with more medical

acumen than you possess. And I correct your term "dummy" to "mental
defective".' Monsorlit's voice

without changing pitch gave the effect of a shouted disgust for Gleto. 'Since
your perception is limited by

its effect on your cash pouch, I will send, with my compliments, a
repossessed technician who can

perform this simple but necessary test. He will come each fifth day. I will
have one ready for such tasks in

four weeks. In the meantime,' Monsorlit took a lancet and ampul and deftly
took a blood sample from

the ugly man.

Gleto recovered his poise and affected a knowing smile.

'Your generosity, indeed,' he scoffed.

'The technician's instructions will be limited to Harlan, as he is the only one
with whom I am

concerned,' Monsorlit continued, taking up a filled syringe, testing it and then
plunging it into the patient's

vein. The man's body became rigid with muscular tension, quivered as if
trying to release itself from the

grip of the drug and finally relaxed. Sweat beaded his brow and rolled
unheeded to the pillow.

'If he's here, why can't he do Trenor's nine as well?' Gleto insisted angrily.

Monsorlit stood up, wiped his hands precisely with an antiseptic solution.

'As I said, my only concern is Harlan. If you wish to hire the services of the
technician for the others,

you may check with the business director for the rates.'

Gleto's face turned an apoplectic purple and he controlled himself with effort.

'That's how you market your dummies. Oh, you're clever, Monsorlit, but one
day…'

Monsorlit eyed him dispassionately.

'One day my techniques will replace this… this,' his gesture indicated the
gardens and cottages,

'unprofessional arrangement. There will be no need for it. Men may come to
my hospital, broken in body

or mind, and leave whole and sane.'

Gleto's little eyes widened with a touch of horror.

'They aren't dummies then; you've been restoring again. That's your deal with
Gorlot. I thought your

safe-from-Milness had taken a tumble.' Gleto laughed derisively now. 'How
long do you think it'll be

before Council finds out! And gasses you and your vegetables!' Gleto stopped
with a sudden thought and

gasped, looking at me in terror. 'Is this one a restoree? Are all these dummies
restorees? Are you

unloading the dead-alive on me?' he screeched, advancing on Monsorlit.

'Does she act like a restoree?' the physician asked calmly. 'No, she acts
exactly as she is, a moron

from my Mental Defectives Clinic, repossessed through shock techniques of
enough intelligence to

perform the monotonous and routine duties of your establishment just as
others from my Clinic pick fruits

and vegetables in the farmlands of Motlina and South Cant. Don't think you're
the only miser to take

advantage of this type of limited perception personnel in these times of
worker rebellions and rising

prices. And don't think you do me a favor when you use them. The only favor
is to your fat self and your

fattening purse.' Monsorlit accurately judged the fat man's capacity for insult
and took up another subject.

'The technician will be sent here for Harlan's absorption rates and, because of
his limited intelligence,

will be unable to grasp the necessity for performing any other tests. Trenor
will, for all his imperfections,

take a jaundiced view toward your neglect of his nine reluctant patients. The
decision is up to you and I

believe your loss would be the greatest.'

Monsorlit left the room, motioning to the technician to collect the cart.

Gleto stared after the precise figure, pouting angrily, and when the technician
nervously tipped over

several bottles on the table, his fat fist clubbed the man viciously.

Satisfied, he hitched his tunic into a more comfortable crease over his
shoulders and stalked out. I

stood staring in front of me while the cart was wheeled out and for some
minutes after the lock snapped

into place. The tension of the scene between Gleto and Monsorlit was cold
and heavy in the room and I

was cold and scared.

CHAPTER TWO

The ugly man whom they called Harlan lay twitching occasionally. I had
considered it misfortune

enough that he should have fallen over the edge of sanity in the prime of life.
Now I knew him to be an

unwilling drugged victim of some scheme, my pity was tinged with outraged
righteousness. I looked more

closely at the face, hoping to find in it some vestige of intelligence I had
missed, some reassurance of

personality to fit in with the entirely different role in which he was cast.

His gray eyes, their pupils dilated to the edge of the iris, stared with their
customary vacuity at the

ceiling. I saw now that the ugly face did have an innate strength and that
immobility did not rob his long,

heavily boned frame of its look of power. I wondered if a vibrant personality
overcame the basic ugliness

of features. Perhaps a smile. I fashioned one on the lax lips, but it was too
much a mockery for me to

judge the spontaneous effect.

I had noticed during my care of him the scars on his person: the new tissues
were smooth, no gaping

pulls to indicate stitches, not even on the raggedy gash across one cheek. The
tip of one index finger was

missing. He was a battered and bedamned fellow.

As I pitied him, I pitied myself, for my sympathy now tied me to him more

effectively than any

possible dedication to a mental cripple. I was stung with an impulse to batter
down the door and run, run,

run away from the fear, the implications of evil, the vulgarity of the guards
and the massive frustrating

boredom. I wanted to leave all his unfamiliarity, and somehow, although logic
indicated I was nowhere

near my own world, find my way home.

After I had settled him for the night, it occurred to me that if he were sane, he
could help. And

perhaps, he could be made sane. Monsorlit had spoken of doses in his food. If
I could withhold his food

long enough, he might partially recover, at least enough to help me.

There was one drawback. If I didn't feed him, his hunger would betray me.
And I would go hungry if

I fed him all my food. I decided, in the final analysis, that I had no choice but
to try this idea. I certainly

didn't know the planet and he did.

The next morning I fed him most of my food, and just a little of his own,
eating the remainder of mine

and some of his to sustain me. I felt strangely disoriented all day and had
difficulty in forcing myself to

move. The next day this feeling had increased so noticeably that I ate none of
his food and gave him

none. I got very hungry.

By the fifth day, I was ravenous and he was so restless during the night I had
to block the speaker

grill with a pillow. He was hungry, too, and bit savagely at the spoon, so that I

gave him even the little I

had reserved for myself, eating only enough of the blue food to stop the
roaring within me.

That night, he spoke in his sleep and I lay rigid with terror that the pillow had
not sufficiently muffled

the sound. Every moment I expected the guard to come striding in.

During breakfast on the sixth day, his eyes blinked and he tried desperately to
focus them. He was

struggling so hard, mouthing sounds in an effort to speak, that I was torn
between the desire to hear and

the necessity of keeping him quiet.

Such hope as swelled in my heart for his return to sanity was rudely
disappointed during our morning

walk. He did not seem to grasp my furtive, whispered explanations. His eyes
still blinking furiously to

focus were as vacuous as ever. At dinner, he ate more normally, chewing with
intense concentration. The

night was a continual struggle for me, against the sleep I desperately craved,
against his moaning which I

had to muffle against my shoulder. The next morning, he actually seemed to
see me and I smiled

encouragingly, hopefully, patting his hand reassuringly. The witlessness had
left his expression and he

looked at me, deeply puzzled, struggling to form a question when the guard
walked in on one of his

sporadic visits. Rigid with horror, I stared at the man I had almost rescued,
my one chance to leave this

horrible place suddenly torn from me as success was so near.

The guard barely glanced at me. Furiously he jerked his finger at the red
bowls and then, shouting a

litany of 'Blue bowl for the patient. Blue bowl for the patient,' he struck me
again and again with his whip.

I shrieked in pain and fear and cringed back from the flailing whip, trying to
climb under the bed, away

from the searing lash.

'This imbecile piece of idiocy is color-blind all of a sudden,' he yelled at the
loudspeaker. 'Blue bowl

for the patient. Blue bowl for the patient,' he shouted, emphasizing his phrases
with lashes for me until his

rage was spent and I lay weeping, sore and bleeding, half under the bed.

Gleto arrived in minutes and examined the patient, giving him an injection
and watching as I was made

to feed Harlan from the blue bowl. Gleto added his blows to my painful back,
grinning sadistically at my

yelps. I cowered back against the wall as far from him as I could get.

'What bowl do you feed the patient from?' he demanded, advancing on me.
'Red bowl?'

I shook my head violently.

'Blue bowl?'

I nodded violently.

'Blue bowl, blue bowl, blue, blue, blue,' he roared, punctuating each word
with an open-handed slap

on whatever part of my twisting body it met.

'Blue, blue, blue,' I shrieked back, covering my face with my arms and
keeping my back to the wall.

'That'll take care of her,' Gleto grunted with satisfaction and, to my weeping
relief, he and the guard

left.

Although some of the weals on my back and legs were bleeding, a warm
soaking in the shower was

all the treatment I had. That night, uncomfortable to the point where no
position gave me relief or the

solace of sleep, I lay awake. Several times, Harlan's heavy limbs overlapped
me and made me cry out

involuntarily. The speaker chortled back with delight at my discomfort. I
resolved not to give them

additional satisfaction and stifled my moans.

Mulling over my 'bravery', I realized that I had actually escaped very lightly.
The guards and Gleto

were so secure in their assumption of my idiocy, they never once had
questioned a deliberate attempt on

my part to feed the prisoner the wrong food. They also assumed that I had
made the mistake only once.

They had not examined Harlan closely, but the administration of the drug had
drawn him back into his

witlessness. No technician, though, had come to take an absorption count. I
had not yet lost my chance

to escape nor to free Harlan from his stupor.

I was not lucky enough to continue my experiment with Harlan as
immediately as I had resolved. A

guard was present at every feeding for the next four days. Four longer days I
never endured, filled with

constant cuffs that added new bruises to barely healed ones and new
obscenities to a list my limited

experience had never wildly imagined.

As soon as I was sure they had decided I had learned my lesson, I started
again. Nothing could have

induced me to acquiesce now. That brief, if interrupted, respite from the
drugged food contributed to

Harlan's quicker recovery. By the fourth day, he responded to my insistent
urgings for silence. On the

fifth day, he spoke for the first time on the morning walk. I saw the deliberate
effort he made to keep his

voice low. It was difficult for him to enunciate. He had to repeat the simplest
phrase with frustrating

ineptness.

'They beat you,' he managed to say finally, his eyes focusing on the bruises on
my face and arms. I

clutched at him and nearly wept for the unexpected comfort of his first
rational words. A deep feeling of

gratitude, joy, respect and love flooded me. I had been too long denied a
normal society. The bruises

abruptly lost their aches and I straightened shoulders I had curved against the
tenderness of my back.

'How long,' he struggled to say, 'am I here?'

'I don't know. I have no way of telling.'

The approach of the guard curtailed conversation for a while.

'Way escape?'

'I don't know.'

'You must,' he insisted.

I steered him toward the menacing opacity of the force screen fence and he

nodded imperceptibly in

understanding.

'There has to be a way,' he asserted. 'The date?' and I could only shake my
head as his look

reproached me for my ignorance. He couldn't know I had never been taught to
tell the time of his world

nor understand the names of days and months.

We were herded back to the cottage and the guard, while I shuddered
apprehensively, kicked Harlan

into the room as he always did. I ducked by as quickly as I could as much to
escape the lascivious touch

of the guard as to caution Harlan against violence and warn him about the
ceiling speaker. He was staring

at it as I hurried to him, his lips moving, his eyes snapping as the therapy of
anger cleared his mind of the

last hold of the drug.

He examined his jacket with care and discovered the needle and its paralytic
fluid. With bare nails he

managed to pry it out of the stiff fabric. He held it in his hand thoughtfully for
the prize it was, looking

speculatively at the door. He grinned suddenly, not at all nicely, and secreted
the vial in the belt of his

loose tunic.

I indicated that we would have to sit down, would have to follow the orders of
the speaker

assiduously, pantomimed the pillow over the grillwork and nighttime. He
nodded comprehension, sighing

with impatience.

So we sat, facing each other. He looked above my head, deep in thought, his
big hands flexing and

stroking the arm of the chair as we waited.

Now his face was alive with the spirit of him, he was no longer an ugly
person. His deep-set eyes

sparkled and his mobile face showed some of the changes within him his
thoughts provoked.

Occasionally he would glance at me, curiously, smiling to reassure me. Once
or twice, after some thought

struck him, he inhaled as if to speak, caught himself and compressed his lips
impatiently.

The arrival of dinner was a very welcome diversion. He reached for the blue
bowl and I all but

snatched it out of his hands. I hurriedly dumped it in the commode and
showed him that it could not be

eaten.

With a quizzical expression he regarded the one small portion of dinner that
remained, shrugged his

shoulders and divided it in two. Bowing with mock ceremony, he handed me
my spoon with a flourish

that made me want to laugh. We ate slowly to make our stomachs think they
were being fed. I have since

looked back on that bizarre first meal with Harlan as one of the happiest
moments of my life.

To have found a friend, again, to be companionable with another human!

The next day, at lunchtime, we had an awful moment. As Harlan was about to
dump the blue bowl

with obvious relish, I heard the lock turn. Harlan needed no prompting to
assume a stupid expression. I

began, slowly, to feed him from the blue bowl. The guard watched this
performance, fingering his whip. I

trusted he interpreted my trembling as fear of a beating rather than terror at
discovery. He left and the

lock clicked us into privacy.

Harlan rose swiftly, and, by the simple expedient of thrusting a finger down
his throat, expelled the

drugged food.

That first night, lying beside him on our mutual bed after the muffling pillow
had been crammed against

the grillwork was another of my special memories. I was keenly aware of his
warm strength beside me.

Before I had had no thoughts at all about the propriety of sleeping next to an
inert moron, but a vibrant

personality rested beside me now and I was acutely conscious of myself and
him.

Harlan recovered control of his tongue, but he was puzzled at my own still-
halting speech and my

inability to understand parts of his questions.

His perplexity made me nervous in a half-fearful way as if by the mere
accident of not speaking

clearly, I had committed some wrong. Defensively and with some involved
explanations of my presence,

I managed to make it clear that I knew I came from another solar system. His
doubt was so apparent

that I sketched the Sun and its planets by fingernail into the bedsheet. It held
the impression long enough

for him to grasp my meaning.

Immediately his expression became wary and veiled. He strained to see me
clearly in the moonlight

and shook his head impatiently at the limitations of that glow. We were lying
side by side when he

suddenly leaned away from his close inspection. He took my hands in his,
stroking my wrists with hard

thumbs. He sat up and did the same thing to my ankles, then my hairline. His
confusion persisted and,

against my soundless protest, he turned back my dress to run light, impersonal
fingers over the rest of my

body as though I had been someone dead. This reassured whatever worried
him. But his body remained

tense and his expression was no longer as open and friendly as before.

He asked me almost too casually how I got here.

'I don't know. But you do believe me… that I'm not from this world?'

He shrugged.

'My sun has nine planets, my world only one moon; my sun is golden, not
green,' I persisted urgently.

'And the reason I have trouble understanding you is that you speak so fast and
use words I don't know.

It isn't because I'm stupid… or insane.'

His withdrawal made me frantic that I might lose the precious companionship
I had so recently won.

He must understand me so he would take me with him. I could see he had
every intention of escaping as

soon as he could. I had no doubts he would succeed or die in the attempt.
Death to me was preferable to

the alternative of remaining in this ghastly place.

'I can't remember how I got here,' I wailed softly. 'I just don't know. I was
walking in a park at night

on my own planet and something big and black hovered over me. The rest is
all mixed up in the most

horrible, horrible nightmares.'

'Describe them,' he demanded in a cold, tight voice that scared me.

The words rolled out. The weight of the grotesque scenes and experiences,
walled up in my

subconscious, poured out, as if voicing them would erase the remembered
horror and terror. I don't

recall what I did say and what I couldn't bring myself to say until I realized
that I was trembling violently

and he was holding me close against him. At first, I thought he was trying to
muffle my voice, but then I

heard his voice soft with low reassurances and his hands were very gentle.

'Be quiet now. I do believe you. I do. There's only one way you could have
got here. No, no. I don't

doubt now a thing you've said. But that you are sane and… well, it's a
miracle.'

There was incredulous wonder in his tone. He looked at me again, excitedly.
The only thing I cared

about was that he was no longer withdrawn and cold, and that he did believe
me.

'You know how I got here?'

'Let's say,' he demurred candidly, 'I know how you must have got to this solar
system. But how you

reached Lothar and this place, I can't even hazard a guess. The only possible
explanation…'

'You mean your people have interstellar travel and brought me here as a
slave,' I interrupted, thinking

with a sudden rush of hope that I would be able to get back to Earth. Though
what Earth held for me

was too mundane after this experience.

He hesitated, considering his next words. Then, settling me into a comfortable
position against his

shoulder, his lips above my ear, he explained.

'My people didn't bring you here. I'm reasonably sure of that. We do have
interstellar travel, but I

cannot believe my race has penetrated to your section of space. Before I took
so conveniently ill,' and his

voice was sardonic, 'no new exploration was contemplated.' He snorted with
remembered exasperation.

'I am reasonably sure, however, that your planet has been invaded by the
curse, and paradoxically, the

salvation of our Lothar. We call them the Mil. They're a race of cellular giants
which have had interstellar

flight since the beginning of our recorded history, some two thousand years
ago. To be precise, they are

the beginning of our recorded history. We are, bluntly, their cattle, their
fodder. That's all right, take it

easy,' he said reassuringly.

His similes forced me to admit to myself what I had desperately tried to hide;
that the disassembled

pieces of anatomy that twisted and turned through my nightmares were
horrifyingly like the joints on

hooks in a meat market.

'They have periodically raided this system for centuries. When we finally
penetrated one of their

depots here on Lothar [I realized he was using the historic "we"], we began
the long struggle to free

ourselves and our planet of this terrible scourge. We turned their own
weapons on them and then had to

learn how to use them properly and repair them. Kind of progress in reverse.
Now, we have not only

been able to keep them off Lothar, but also out of this immediate sector of
space. Our losses are still

heavy in every encounter, as it is difficult to best an enemy with armaments
similar to your own. Our big

advantage is our own physical structure. However, rarely do any of our ships
and patrolmen fall victims

of the Mil.

'I don't know how far they range, but I suppose we have forced them to find
new sources of supply.

Your planet, for one. Easy now. I forget it's difficult for you to accept such a
terrible fate for your people.

We've lived with it all our lives.'

'But, if these…

'Mil, although at one time we called them "God",' Harlan remarked, grimly
humorous.

'… these Mil captured me on a raid on Earth, how did I get here? On your
planet?'

Harlan frowned. 'I would like to believe that our Patrol intercepted the ship
you were on and

captured it. But…' and he stopped as if he could see the fallacies in the theory
and they disturbed him. 'It

must be way past Eclipse; or is it? If it is, I've been here a long time. Haven't
you got any idea of how

long you've been here?'

'I can only recall the last few weeks clearly. Yet it seems as if I've been here
forever. I guess I was in

shock or something,' I ended lamely. 'I certainly was surprised to find I was a
nurse for someone else.'

'All the more reason to get out of here as soon as possible. My head is clear
now and my reflexes feel

normal. It's been like swimming through sand. Still,' and he looked at me
speculatively again, shaking his

head, 'I don't understand how you managed to remain…' he hesitated and
supplied another word, '…

untouched.'

'Untouched? Oh, but I don't look the way I used to,' I assured him, my hand
rubbing my nose.

'Don't be ridiculous. You obviously aren't a restoree,' he said sharply. I felt
tension return to his body

and coldness to his voice. 'There isn't a mark on you.'

'No, that's just it. There isn't,' I replied. 'I've lost three scars,' and I pointed to
the areas involved, 'and

someone took pity on my…' my hand touching my nose.

'Scars? Missing?' he interrupted in a hoarse whisper.

'Yes,' I prattled on. 'I had a long gash on my arm where I got caught on a
picket fence…' and my

voice trailed off as I saw his face. The mixture of horror, distaste, disbelief,
anger and, strangely, hatred,

stunned me.

He grabbed my wrists in an angry grip and rubbed them, tracing the junction
of hand and arm with

fingers that hurt with their prodding. He felt around my ears, pulling my hair
back roughly.

'What's the matter?' I pleaded, my delight congealing.

He shook his head, hard, as someone whose neck muscles have contracted
spasmodically.

'I don't know, Sara. It's just hard to believe,' he replied enigmatically. 'Yet you
would not have been

able to think things through the way you have if… We've got to get out of
here. We have got to get out!'

he said passionately.

With a fluid stride, he crossed the room and yanked the pillow from the grill.
He settled back in the

bed, patting my arm reassuringly, as if he realized how worried I was by his
reactions.

It was a long time before sleep came to either of us. I remember feeling his
fingers on my wrist again

just as I drifted into unconsciousness.

CHAPTER THREE

During his sleeplessness, Harlan had made the only plan of escape our mutual
limited knowledge of

the asylum afforded. To pass the force screen, we must overpower the guard
in the cottage by means of

the drug vial we had pried from the straitjacket. Harlan would wear the
uniform, I would daub myself

with blood, Harlan having assured me that the blood would be donated by the
guard. We would try to

pass out the gate of this section of the asylum as if I had been attacked by my
patient. From there on, we

must improvise. If it came to sheer strength, the powerfully built Harlan
would prevail. However, neither

of us could foresee what preparation might have been made for escapes.

We also had no choice. Each day might bring the arrival of the technician to
take Harlan's absorption

rate and we were too sure of the results of that test. I also couldn't tell when
the next intravenous injection

would be administered. With it, I would have to start all over again, denying
Harlan the drugged food,

waiting for his return to sanity.

Whatever qualms or fears I might have normally entertained were overruled.
Harlan's anxiety and

frustration intensified my own desire to be out of this mad place. And, too,
not once did Harlan intimate

he felt he had a better chance of escaping by himself although I was sure he
did. He had included my

release in his calculations and brushed aside my own half-hearted attempt at
sacrifice.

Every day Harlan's recovery had been jeopardized by the random appearances
of the guard. This

one day, when we were nervously primed for our escape, he was conspicuous
by his absence. Harlan

had to exert a tremendous control over his impatience and I was constantly
forced to remind him during

the exercise period to stop charging up the paths, to school his expression into
the proper witlessness. He

endured these corrections far better than I should have. All in all, by evening
both our tempers were

frayed by the unrewarded waiting.

As soon as the lights were out, Harlan, releasing some of his frustration in the
action, rammed the

pillow against the speaker and began to pace around the room in a frenzied
way.

His pacing grew as unendurable to me as a fingernail scraped across slate.

'Last night,' I began hesitantly, not knowing what I wanted to say but knowing
that any conversation

was better than this taut silence, 'last night, I told you who I was and how I
got here. Who are you

besides Harlan and how did you get in here? Who drugged you? Why?'

He paused in mid-stride, frowning as my questions brought him out of his
thoughts. He gave a sort of

snort, smiled and, after another moment's silence, began to talk. He had a
pleasant voice when he kept it

low, but it had the burr of the military bark and a metallic quality. Gradually,
as he talked, he stopped

pacing, and then sat down, watching me as he spoke with a disconcerting
attention.

'You certainly do deserve some explanations, if only for all the meals you
gave up,' he said, gripping

my shoulder as a gesture of his continued gratitude.

'Before I came here, I was Regent of this planet for my eldest brother's son,
Ferrill.'

'I thought the guard had called you Regent, but it didn't make any sense then.'

Harlan grimaced. 'That guard… It's the custom here on Lothar for the
Commander of the Perimeter

Patrol to assume the duties of Regent if the heir to the Warlordship is under
age when he becomes a

candidate.'

'Why couldn't you be Warlord if you were brother to the…'

'No, that doesn't follow,' Harlan replied blandly. 'I should say, Ferrill was my
half-brother. We had

the same father, but Ferrill's mother was the first wife and his progeny inherit.
Besides, I've other plans

for my time once Ferrill is of age. Like finding your planet. I like finding new
planets. I like exploring.' A

boyish grin lit his features. 'I've had luck in that direction already. Found two
new ones, fraternal planets

around the star we call Tane, my fourth year on Patrol.'

I gathered this involved more than just searching a section of space until you
found stars with

satellites. I murmured proper things, only he frowned.

'They've been more trouble than they're worth… almost,' he continued. 'The
inhabitants are

humanoid, but the gentlest, dumbest people imaginable. They make some of
our associates here look like

Council members. They've got two of the most beautiful planets, crawling
with game animals; Lothar

doesn't have too many any more. Their oceans are full of edible fish; their
lands, which the Tanes don't

even bother to cultivate, would support millions of us. They've got mineral
resources that make the mind

swim when you think how many ships, instruments and fuel it means in terms
of our fight against the Mil.

And those innocent creatures roam from one place to another like pleasant
dreamers.'

'Haven't the Mil bothered them?'

'Evidently not. They don't have even an elementary sense of caution or
suspicion. They would have

fled from our expeditionary ships if they had encountered the Mil. Most of
our fleet has been recruited

from or designed after Mil ships.'

'Why are the Tanes trouble then? Can't you just colonize or mine or…'

Harlan leaned forward, balancing his elbows on knees and slapping one palm
into the other to

emphasize a statement. Or, which was disconcerting, he would point his
tipless finger at me.

'I don't know about your world, but here on Lothar we're crowded. So
crowded that every inch of

land is either cultivated or catacombed with mines, cities and factories. We
run to big families, sort of law

of supply and demand. But the Mil don't harvest us anymore, so every new
child crowds his family that

much more. There aren't enough jobs to go around nowadays nor is there
enough food as there used to

be. We don't need so many men in active Patrol, but yet we have to train
every young man against the

day we're big enough and strong enough to follow the Mil back to their own
planet and wipe them off its

face.'

'So,' I interrupted, 'everyone who isn't well off wants a share of one of the
Tane planets and to hell

with the Tanes.'

He nodded agreement. 'Only it isn't just those that aren't well situated. It's the
big landowners, the big

industrialists and the big scientists who want priority and mean to get it. And
they've got all kinds of

reasons.'

'I'll bet,' and I refrained from giving him a brief account of the American
Indian. 'And I imagine no one

cares what happens to the Tane.'

My perspicacity pleased him.

'Council had accepted a plan to allow colonization first for farmers, because
our crying need is food.

But farmers are conservative and those younger sons, willing to go, those
without patrons in Council, are

being intimidated or beaten up unless they belong to a certain guild. And the
people who lead that guild

will buy up the land once the farmers settle on it and that will be the end of

individual agricultural

expansion. Or, take the small mining outfits. Only a few have dared to apply
for permission to work the

Tanes. Why? They've found their homes ruined, their credit is suddenly
destroyed, or their equipment is

wrecked just before takeoff.'

'But surely you're trying to find out who's behind it?'

'It is one group,' Harlan said wearily. 'I'd found that much out before this
happened to me. There is

one man, or a few men, who were guiding the attacks on my colonists. But
what baffles me is: why? I

mean, for what reason. You see, Lothar has always had just one purpose since
we first shook off the

yoke of superstition and managed to repel the Mil from landing on our planet.
We mean to destroy the

Mil completely. Our whole psychology, our whole history, has been directed
toward that aim.'

'Perhaps after… how long did you say… two thousand years, this purpose is
wearing a little thin,' I

suggested with the Crusades in mind.

'It couldn't,' he said without qualification. 'Not when the Mil are always so
close.' He frowned. 'You

see, actually it's only in the last one hundred and fifty years that we've kept
them entirely away from our

planet. And we couldn't have done that without Ertoi and Glan.'

'Who?'

'Inhabitants of another nearby star. You can see them from here,' he said
blandly. He pointed out the

window to a pulsating red blink that was the primary of the system. 'Ertoi and
Glan take care of that

entire section of space. We've been able to push our Perimeter Patrol four
light-years beyond our own

system. Since then, we have adequate protection against a concerted attack.
The first time,' he said with

justifiable pride, 'we lost all but two ships of our entire combined fleets, but
no Mil landed on our planets.'

'Well, who do you think is the traitor?'

'My second-in-command, a fellow by the name of Gorlot.' Harlan's eyes
narrowed speculatively. 'I'm

not sure. It couldn't be that… No. They know we're not ready to go after the
Mil yet unless that new

weapon…" and he trailed off tantalizingly. 'This Gorlot's a throwback.
Uncivilized. He lives only for battle

and he's a master strategist. Pulled off some extraordinary maneuvers three
Eclipses ago. That's why I

seconded his appointment when Gartly retired. But he's no good as a
peacetime officer and the Perimeter

has been very peaceful. He belongs back in the days of the first Harlan with
the Seventeen Sons when it

was all we could do to find caves deep enough to escape the Mil. He'd be the
proper man to send out to

the Mil, but… That hothead forgets that no Lotharian has the guts,' he threw
in, 'besides himself, because

he did it one day on a wager, to walk into a Mil ship until it's been completely
decontaminated. The smell

of those things is enough to set a tough squadron leader raving. Until the
Alliance with Ertoi and Glan, we

had to wait until the Mil decomposed inside their ships before we could refit
them. Fortunately, the Ertoi

and Glan aren't hampered by such childish terrors.

'I wonder,' and Harlan drew back into his thoughts for a long time. His
conclusions did not settle his

mind, for he growled with impatience and resumed his pacing, cursing Gorlot,
cursing his own stupidity

for falling into the trap of the asylum.

'I've got to get out of here and back to Lothara,' he cried in a groan, clenching
and unclenching his

fists behind his back as he paced.

CHAPTER FOUR

Sleep that night was not restful. It was peopled with formless obscenities and
charged with fear and

anger, frustration and hopelessness. I was alone in the bed when I awoke.
Startled I turned in panic and

saw with relief that Harlan was up and pacing, his face black with worry and
fatigue.

At breakfast there were none of the pleasant pantomimes we affected about
the division and

consumption of our scanty ration. Harlan ate quickly, glowering.

The walk in the garden that morning was sheer relief. The four bare walls of
the cottage had grown

smaller with every passing minute. Harlan had draped his jacket loosely on
him so that a strong outward

pressure would free him. We had agreed to delay returning to our cottage until
the guard was forced to

round us up. This assured us of a chance of overcoming him once we got to
the cottage. So we dawdled

at the far end of the grounds on the outside paths following the line of the
force screen. We were at the

high end, midway between two posts when it happened.

One of the patients went berserk. He threw himself at the screen, dragging his
unwilling companion

with him. Together they went up into a torch of blue flame, burning fast and
hotly with only the echo of

screams of unutterable agony to mark their death.

Even as I stared with paralyzed horror at these human torches, Harlan had
reacted to the opportunity.

Flinging off the jacket, he grabbed me by the shoulder and together we
hurtled into the faltering screen. I

thought I, too, would be consumed in flame. The pain and shock that coursed
through my body was too

intense for me even to scream a protest. Then, once past the weakened barrier,
only an endurable ache

and burning sensation remained. The burning was quite legitimate because
our clothing had been reduced

in an instant to scorched tatters. Even the heavily padded jacket was singed
brown. Harlan, however,

gave me no time to pause and take stock. Grabbing my hand, he pulled me
through the land moat around

the force screen and into the grain field with its high waving grasses.

'Have you no idea, Sara, where this asylum is?'

'None,' I cried, feeling the pull of the sharp grass tendrils against my
sensitized flesh. The fence had

always blotted out the environs of the asylum.

'Farm, farm, farm,' Harlan panted. He was tall enough to see over the rolling
fields that stretched out

in all directions from the institution. He glanced up at the sun, squinting, but it
was too near the zenith to

be much help. He halted briefly, sniffing the slight breeze.

'Sea!' he declared and abruptly turned off to the right, guiding me with a firm
hand under my elbow.

'Can't we just find a road? It would lead us somewhere,' I gasped, struggling

to keep my feet under

me at the pace he set.

'Road!' he flung at me contemptuously and trotted up the rise in front of us.
He kept glancing back

over his shoulder. I didn't dare look back. It was all I could do to keep up with
him.

We ran through the fields until I had such a grabbing in my side, I could not
run further. He sensed,

rather than inquired, about my condition and let me collapse in the shelter of
the tall grain at the next rise.

Keeping himself sheltered by the grain, he looked out in all directions, again
sniffing the breeze.

'We may have a little time before we'll be turned up missing, Sara,' he said,
dropping down beside

me. 'They'll have their hands full, rounding up the patients. They may not
even take a head count right

away. They've gotten lax and overconfident. However, the situation of the
asylum itself, located right in

the middle of farmlands, makes an air search ridiculously easy.' He stopped
and grabbed up a handful of

straw. 'Of course. We've got part of our camouflage right here.' He laughed
and started stuffing straw

into his tunic so that the stalks stuck straight up behind his back and out
across his shoulders. I followed

his lead and, when my tunic parted over one shoulder, plastered myself hastily
with the soft moist earth.

'Good girl,' Harlan said and smeared his own skin with dirt where it showed
whitely through. We

looked like scarecrows after a week's rain when we had finished.

'Now, we will make for the sea. The moment you hear any noise at all, drop
flat in the furrows,' and

he pointed out the cultivation ridges. 'The grain is tall enough and thick
enough that we may not be visible

when they're going to look for running figures. And, they won't expect me to
make for the sea,' he added

cryptically.

He held out his hand to me, and, taking a deep breath, I rose and we started
out again.

We had scarcely gone the length of that field when I heard something or other
than our laboring

breath. Before I could react on my own, my face was in the dirt, Harlan's
body overlapping mine.

Had the searchers been on foot, passing near us, I'm certain the sound of my
heart would have given

us away. The chirrop, chirrop of a plane car neared, passed over us, retreated
and cautiously we rose,

checking to make sure another was not hovering. Running low we made it to
the top of the next field.

Even I could see that the land was sloping down gradually. The smell of the
sea, tart and crisp, was

strong enough for me to scent as I held my sweating face up to cool in the
wind.

I'm not sure I was grateful for the times we had to lie face down in the moist
black soil, waiting till the

searchers passed over us. I got my wind back each time, true, but the terror of
waiting, unable to risk a

glance above, was more breath-snatching than the exertion of flight. Six times
we dropped, each time a

little nearer to where the land dropped off to the sea. And then, there was the
sea before us, a hundred

feet down the high straight precipice on which we stood.

My courage sank, for here, at the cliff edge, which seemed to curve for miles
in each direction, the

fields of tall grain ended. Fifty yards between sea and field was covered with
only low straggling bush,

inadequate cover for us walking straw-stacks.

Harlan caught my despairing appraisal and squeezed my hand reassuringly.

'There are ways down to the beaches.'

'And then what?' I gasped, indicating the pounding surf.

'The tide will be going out soon and we can go swiftly on the sand, taking
cover under the cliffs if

necessary. Much better for us. Come, now we strike northeast. These cliffs tell
me exactly where we

are.'

But he didn't bother to tell me, either because he knew it wouldn't matter or
because he forgot I

wouldn't know. As it happened, we were in South Cant.

He had held on to the padded jacket all through our flight in the fields. Now,
as he removed the straw

from his own clothes, he realized my nakedness. Ripping off two of the
dangling tapes with which to

secure his tattered tunic round his waist, he gave me the jacket. Quickly I
threw it on, tying the remains of

my dress around my waist.

'Good, the dirt is still useful,' he grinned and, taking my hand, we set off

again.

Harlan was too good a leader to tire us both to the point where we would be
unable to make a final

dash. We rested at intervals and a bit longer when we chanced on a stream not
far from where we made

our descent to the sea beach. As he had predicted, by the time we did find a
way down, the tide was

retreating from the bronze sands. The cool strand was refreshing to our weary
feet.

My flimsy sandals, adequate for treading garden paths, gave way all too
quickly on the abrasive

surface of the beach. Walking on the damp coarse sands turned into torture for
me once the sandals gave

out and the soft skin on my feet was abraded with each step. I was wondering
how long I could continue

this way when I was brought up sharply against Harlan's rigid body. There
was no need for him to

caution me to silence. I could see the boat as it stood out from the cove we
faced. I could see the men as

they clustered around their fire, hear their voices as they argued. Worst of all,
I could smell the food they

were cooking for their supper. Now hunger overruled the other discomforts
and the fact that I had

missed what lunch there was to eat made the lack of dinner torture.

Harlan pulled me back into the sheltering shadows of the cliff. Had we
continued on much farther,

even the gathering darkness would not have hidden us from a chance look by
the fishermen.

'Can you swim?' and when I nodded,'to that?' he asked, pointing to the boat.

'Yes,' I agreed although I was not the least bit confident. I was so tired and my
feet hurt and my

stomach ached and I was very annoyed with everything for going so wrong so
long. I didn't consider how

extremely lucky we had been so far. At least not with the smell of food in my
nostrils after a prolonged

fast. I comforted myself with the thought that I wouldn't have to walk to the
boat.

I didn't count on the icy water nor the sting of salt in the multitude of
scratches and abrasions that

scored my body. Nor did Harlan allow me time to ease into the water as I
preferred doing on family

outings at Rehoboth. Harlan pulled me inexorably deeper.

'Don't swim overarm yet,' he hissed at me and a wave caught me full face. His
arms supported me

while I coughed the water out. 'You can swim?' he asked.

'Yes, yes,' I assured him, stung by his skepticism and I struck out toward the
boat with a vigorous

breast-stroke.

As if he still doubted my ability, Harlan matched his pace to mine, only he
guided me out to sea,

rather than on an oblique line toward the boat from the shore. I caught his
purpose, to approach the boat

from the seaside, although it added many yards to the original distance.

If the sea stung my cuts, its coldness supplied me with a false feeling of
exhilaration. I tried to speed

up, to prove to Harlan I was competent, but he warned me not to extend
myself. He was right, of course,

because as we turned toward the boat finally, my weariness returned doubled.
It was so difficult to get

my arms out of the water, hard to keep my legs moving.

'Sara, not far now,' Harlan's voice said encouragingly. His face was a white
blob over my right

shoulder as I swam and ahead of us the boat was a solid blackness, its single
mast silhouetted against the

dying light of the twilight sky. Thrashing frantically, I lunged at the stern line,
missing, going under, writhing

upward, grabbing out in panic. Harlan's hand found mine and guided it to the
security of the rope.

'Rest,' he whispered and cautiously swam round the boat. I could hear him, a
barely discernible

rippling, as I gulped for breath.

'No one aboard,' he confirmed. 'But they took the small-boat ashore.' For
some reason this

disappointed him. 'Oh, well, in that case it'll take them a long time to spread
the alarm.'

'Maybe they'd be friendly,' I hazarded, looking up at the sheer slippery side of
the ship and wondering

how I was ever going to make it into the cockpit.

Harlan answered my suggestion with a snort. He lunged up out of the water,
caught at the gunwhale,

his body a whiteness against the dark boat. He got both hands secured and
then I heard him inhale as he

gathered his strength to pull himself up.

How selfish can you get, I derided myself, he's just as hungry, just as tired,
just as sore as you are and

worried to boot.

I heard him swear softly, a note of pain in his voice. I could hear him padding
somewhere on board

and then his face appeared above me.

'Grab this,' he whispered and a heavy soft rope dangled in my face.

I looped it around my wrists, thankful I shouldn't have to make the climb
unaided. Kicking myself out

of the water, I felt Harlan pull me. As soon as I could reach the side, I grabbed
for it, resolved to use as

little of Harlan's energy as possible. Once safely on board, I felt drained of
any power to move and I was

numb with the chill of the cool evening.

'Here, get this on,' he urged and pressed a handful of clothing on me. The
garments smelled of sweat,

stale and sour, and were sticky with salt. But I struggled into an old sweater
and found it covered me

halfway to the knees. I rolled up the sleeves and wished it covered me to the
ankles.

'I suppose it's too much to ask if you've sailed a boat,' Harlan said in a low
voice.

'Yes, but only as a crew member, long ago.'

He gripped my shoulder with rough gratitude. 'You never cease to supply my
need.'

I struggled to a sitting position, wondering what he meant exactly, and looked
around. As nearly as I

could gauge in the light, the boat was about thirty-five feet long, sloop-rigged,
the sail now neatly furled

on the boom, the jibsail not even out. The boat was obviously a workship; I

could see piles of nets and

woven baskets. There seemed to be a small cabin and it was here that Harlan
had found sweaters.

'It's a shame but I've got to cut the anchor. Too much time and noise to lift it
out of the water.' Harlan

told me. I could see the gleam of a knife blade in his hand.

'It'll save time if I cut and you hoist the sail,' I told him and taking the knife,
crept forward. My hands

seemed strengthless as I sawed away at the heavy anchor line, thankful it
wasn't chain. I heard Harlan

heaving at the sail and it seemed like noise enough to rouse the dead. It did
rouse the men on the beach. I

sawed faster.

'Hurry, Sara,' I heard Harlan call and wondered why he still kept his voice low
if the men had heard

the creak of the sail.

I felt the line and there was only one strand still uncut. Frantically, I hacked
away and, just as I felt the

pull of the ship against the wind in its sail, the anchor line parted.

'Grab the tiller and head for the sea,' Harlan cried, still struggling to lift the
cumbersome sail. I guess in

the dim light it was difficult to see what he was doing. And he was tired, but
he made heavy work with

the sheet.

Tripping over deck-stored gear, I scrambled astern and found the unfamiliar
tiller handle.

If for only this one adventure, my tomboy days paid rich dividends. I had run
with Harlan, swum with

him and now I was able to crew for him. And, undoubtedly, I cautioned
myself with the memory of sour

disappointments, when the Yacht Club Dance on this world came round, it
wouldn't be Sara who was

waltzed by the ship's captain.

Harlan was cursing as he tried to make fast the sheet. I caught at the trailing
line as the boom

threatened to knock him overboard. I trimmed sail and steered for the open
sea.

The men on shore now had realized what had happened and were shouting
threats across the water

as Harlan joined me.

'It's another miracle that you can sail,' he muttered to me. 'I can't.'

'You can't?' I gasped, appalled at the situation. 'Why not?' I demanded, as the
responsibility now

resting on me became apparent to my tired brain. He couldn't possibly
imagine that I could sail this

bloody boat on an unknown sea to a port I'd never seen.

'Too busy,' he grinned. 'You're doing all right.'

That explained his ambiguous comments and his awkwardness with the sail.

'Now, yes,' I practically screamed at him, 'but if you knew you couldn't sail,
why in heaven's name did

you steal the boat?'

'I'd've figured it out, but I'm glad you already know how,' he repeated
complacently.

The volume of his audacity was frightening.

'That's comforting to know,' I said acidly. 'Sailing an open sea is easy even for

an idiot Regent. And I

imagine you probably would have figured it out before you piled up on a
beach or reefs. At least you

have the advantage, I assume, of some familiarity with the coastline of this
world. I don't. I don't know

your goddamned world!'

'My what world?' he asked as I had interjected an English cussword.

'What do you want me to do now?' I cried, tears of fear, frustration and fatigue
starting down my

face.

'Steer for the open sea,' he said blandly.

'And then what? I don't even know how big your seas are, what the tides are
like! You've got two

bloody moons to complicate that minor detail of sailing. How do you expect
me to…'

He put his arm around me, settling down beside me. His very presence and
magnificent

self-confidence helped calm my hysteria.

'The Finger Sea on which we sail,' he began calmly, 'is deep, no reefs or
shoals except along the

eastern edge. We will sail due east across it toward Astolla. It will probably
take all night, so we would

face the reefs in daylight when nothing is as overwhelming as it is at night. I
do know navigation, Sara.

And since you can handle the mechanics of sailing, we'll be all right. My
purpose in heading east is to

reach the home of an old friend of mine.' He chuckled to himself. 'We fought
so the last time we met, I'm

sure no one will think to check at Gartly's for me.'

'If you fought, why would he welcome you?' I demanded, worrying not so
much about what

happened when we arrived as to how we would manage to arrive in the first
place.

'Gartly is part of my loyal opposition, that's all. He has no love for Gorlot at
all or any of that cave.

None at all,' and Harlan mused on some private memories, his face sober.

The wind freshened and the ship moved at a willing clip. The wind was also
cold and I began to

shiver.

'First, there must be some food aboard. I could eat a brant,' Harlan said. 'And
there had better be

more clothing, too.'

He found both. The coarse bread and strong cheese filled my stomach and
with rough cloth pants to

keep me warm, my fearfulness dissipated. The ship was simple to handle,
even for one person, the lines

being winched astern so a lone steersman could handle the sheets from the
cockpit on a long haul.

'How long a sail is it?' I asked Harlan when he settled down beside me again
after another thorough

prowl about the ship.

He shrugged.

'I have only a spaceman's idea of distance. A mere half hour or so by
planecar.'

I groaned. 'I wish you really knew what you had let us in for,' I said,
depression overwhelming me.

'I do what I must,' he said sternly. 'And I must get to Gartly.'

No apologies was I ever to get from Harlan. And naturally I found myself
accepting his inexorable

logic that we would get where we wanted to go, novices though we were,
because we had to.

The sheer audacity of his idea was what saved us, I think, from discovery. For
we sailed all that night

with a good stiff following breeze. Harlan insisted on taking a trick to allow
me to rest although I was

reluctant to leave a complete tyro in charge of the ship. He assured me that if
the wind would change -my

one worry because sailing with a good following wind is child's play-he
would wake me. He kept his

word, waking me at dawn when the breeze dropped off. He also pointed with
smug complacency at the

distant outline of mountains on the horizon.

He had used a hand line and caught us breakfast. Once I had mastered the
cooking stove, we ate hot

food until we were stuffed. With land at least in sight and a full stomach for
only the second time in

several weeks, my depression disappeared.

'We were farther up the coast than I thought,' he remarked. 'Let's get close
enough so I can figure out

where we are.'

I shook my head over his blithe unconcern. He laughed at me and then peered
at the rising sun.

'That is,' he amended, 'if we get any wind.'

'That'll be a long paddle,' I remarked, trying not to be too sour.

'Pessimist,' he teased. 'Yesterday at this time, we were securely locked up in
Gleto's amusing retreat

with not a chance in a hundred of getting out. You make the most of the
opportunities the gods grant and

you'll win out.' Harlan said with fine good humor. 'Did I not have you as a
nurse? Did you not have the

wit to understand what was being done to me? Can you say that we have not
succeeded in escaping?'

'Those men had all night to get somewhere to report their ship stolen,' I
reminded him.

'True enough,' he replied, unruffled. 'But they don't know who stole. One
man? Several? There are

plenty of bandsmen prowling. Nor, if they were simple fishermen, are they
likely to give wind of it to

Gorlot's people. I had meant to take the small-boat which they might easily
believe had been improperly

tied. But…' and he shrugged. 'But this gets me closer quicker to help. Then,
too, how long will it take

Gleto to summon up enough courage to inform Gorlot I'm missing?' he
chuckled nastily.

'He'll delay as long as he can,' I replied, feeling a little reassured by that one
fact.

'And, as it is known I have never sailed, the last place anyone will look for
Harlan is on the sea.'

'It's going to be a long row,' I repeated, looking anxiously at the limp sail and
the glassy water.

'We can while the time away,' he suggested in such an altered tone of voice I
glanced around sharply

at him.

Before I realized what he had in mind, he had pulled me into his arms.
Startled and completely

surprised, I clutched involuntarily at his shoulders for balance and was being
kissed expertly and

thoroughly. What thoughts my emotions gave room for were chaotic. I was as
split into the various facets

of my personality as if I had been literally blown apart.

The girl with the beaknose had never been kissed except as a party joke or
absentmindedly by

departing brothers. The unwanted girl who had stolen longing looks at
shamelessly necking couples in

Central Park had no firsthand experience with returning a kiss. His forceful
invasion of my lips met neither

resistance nor response. The stranger, by some crazy agency dumped on a
strange planet, could and did

not want to antagonize her one friend. And the sister who had overheard her
brothers' candid comments

on girls was all too certain the direction such beginnings would take. And I,
all of me, didn't want him to

stop kissing because of the way my heart pounded and my body ached for the
feeling of his hands. Yet I

didn't know what to do.

I could sense the change almost as soon as it begun. Harlan lifted his head and
looked at me slightly

puzzled.

'And what's wrong with me?' he asked.

I realized he was asking me if he were the cause of my inability to respond.

'Nothing, it's just…'

'Don't they kiss on your planet?' he asked with a boyish incredulity.

'Yes, but I never did,' I said inanely, my hand going to my nose.

That did it. I could see his face change again, that closing-out look I hated.
Although I was still in his

arms, against his chest, he had withdrawn.

'Please, Harlan, don't go away from me like that,' I pleaded.

His look softened and he took my hand, his thumb absently rubbing my wrist.

'Then you are untouched?' he asked kindly, as if this were not exactly a
privileged state on his world.

I could only nod, knowing I must be blushing at his frankness. I was torn with
a horrifyingly

unmaidenlike desire to encourage him, even if I didn't know how to go about
it at all.

He chuckled at some inner thought and hugged me with affection but no
passion, kissing me gently on

the eyes.

'Then, my dear Sara, this is neither the time nor the place if such beginnings
are to be auspicious. We

both smell to the high heaven and…'

A sudden flapping, creaking, caught both our attentions and we hastily
disengaged to duck as the

untended boom, moved by the rising wind, missed knocking us overboard by
a hair's breadth.

'Yes, this is neither the time nor the place,' Harlan repeated, laughing boyishly
as he lunged for the

trailing line and I grabbed the swinging tiller.

Again I was torn by opposing desires: relief that I had been saved rude

wakenings, and frustration

because I had been aroused. I wanted Harlan. And when again would I be in a
position alone with him

when there was opportunity and time?

'Damn the wind,' I muttered to myself as I eased the ship about.

The purple smudge on the horizon deepened into the green of treed slopes,
fringed with boiling surf. I

pointed out the inhospitable coastline.

'We can't land in that, Harlan,' I protested.

'Let's sail southerly. The land breaks into the delta of the Astolla River past
this range. Only we want

to land before we get to Astolla itself.' He squinted at the mountains. 'Gartly
lives above Astolla and that

will be the hardest part of the trip.'

He didn't qualify his comment, so I didn't realise then he meant that the
danger of being encountered

by someone who would recognize him was greater. I took him to mean the
mountains and I groaned.

He turned to me, laughing. 'All uphill, Sara, all uphill. Only,' he noticed my
feet, bruised and raw, 'we'll

have to do something about them.'

'And this,' I added, distastefully indicating my overlong sweater.

He rummaged in the cabin and came up with additional ill-smelling garments.
Finding a bucket and a

line, he heaved it overboard and to my amused astonishment, he started to
sluice the clothing up and

down in the clean seawater. He wrung them out neatly and spread them to dry

on the deck.

'Our hosts were probably good fishermen but incredibly dirty,' he commented
when he had finished.

'They'll dry quickly. Shall I take a turn?'

'I'm fine,' I assured him and then I still was, what with the recent sleep and
enough food and his

approval.

He went forward and I saw him heave the bucket over-board again. This time
it was himself he

washed. I tried to keep the sail between me and glimpses of his strong golden
body. It had been one

thing to tend him as a moron, another to consider him as a lover.

I should not presume on his friendship later, I promised myself. He was too
much consequence for

someone like me and I'd be more than a fool to think I meant anything to him.

We sailed on for a long while, well into the sunny morning, until I was
lethargic with the sun, hungry

again and very tired. I was mesmerized by the masthead and the jibsprit
which I kept pointed toward the

ever nearing shore line. I was lost in fatigue and musings when suddenly
Harlan's hand dropped to my

shoulder.

Startled, I gasped and flinched as though I'd been struck.

'Is my touch offensive?' he asked, frowning.

'No, no,' I hastily assured him. 'I was worlds away.'

He knelt down beside me and I noticed his bare chest was red with sun.

'You've got a burn.'

'So have you,' he retorted and I saw he had put on clean dry pants. He thrust a
handful of dry clothing

toward me. 'These were the smallest and may fit better. Go on forward and
wash some of the mud off,

Sara.'

I hesitated as I rose, as much from weariness and being in one position so
long, as from the

knowledge the sail did not conceal much from a determined watcher.

'If I look, I won't tell,' he taunted, grinning wickedly.

Grabbing the clothes from him, I turned on my heel with as much dignity as I
could and made my way

to the bow. The pail was there and some soft, linenlike sheeting that he must
have used as toweling.

Traces remained of mud stains that hadn't come out with just a seawater
rinsing.

It was very heartening to remove that filthy old sweater. And better still to get
the rest of the mud off

my body. My face stung in the salt bath, but when I was clean and dressed
again, I did feel better. With

decided pleasure I kicked the rags of my asylum tunic overboard and watched
them sink below the

surface.

'Now,' said Harlan as I returned to the cockpit, 'we must give you a plausible
account of your

existence in case you meet some awkward questioning. Gartly was my
second-in-command and is an

honorable man, but you, my dear Searcher,' and his phrase puzzled

me,'require some explanation, even

to the most loyal comrade.'

'Why not the truth?'

'Sara,' and he turned my face so I looked at him fully, 'you have no idea how
you got to this planet?'

When I shook my head negatively, he continued,'then until I do find out, or
you remember, the mere fact

that you are not of this planet is very dangerous. As soon as I can, I shall start
some adroit inquiries, but

for you to come out and admit to an extraplanetary origin would mean your
death without further

explanation to you or from you.'

'It'd be much easier to tell the truth. Then it wouldn't matter how many things
I didn't know,' I said

plaintively.

His look silenced me. 'I have taken that into consideration. I'd prefer to be
able to send you up to my

estates in North Lothar, but I may not be able to do that right away. Of course,
the less you have to say

about your past the better, but Gartly's of the Old Beliefs, and clan and
cavesite mean much to him. Now

listen, Jurasse is the next largest city to Lothara. It's northwest of the Finger
Sea, deep in the mountains.

Your father… what was your father's name? Steven? No, make him Stane, a
better Lotharan name.

Your father Stane was a mining engineer. I'll put you on a professional level,
my dear lady,' and he

grinned at me, 'and as there are several hundred thousand miners and

engineers in and out of Jurasse,

there's scant way of checking.'

'But he must have gone to college or university,' I said.

'Un-i-ver-sity?' Harlan asked, puzzled.

'Advanced schooling, training in his speciality,' I qualified.

Harlan shook his head quickly. 'No. One learns on the job here. Stane is a
fairly common name and

we'll make you of Estril clan and Odern cavesite.'

'What is the significance of clans and cavesites?' I asked grimly.

Harlan exhaled his breath and looked at me. Then he covered my hands with
his big strong one. 'I'll

explain all that later. In the meantime, it is only important for you to know a
clan name; the Estrils are

conservative but known for their intense loyalty to their leaders, and the
Odern is such an enormous old

cave, hundreds of clans could refuge here.'

'All right. Estril and Odern. Jurasse, next largest city, mining, northwest.'

'Good girl. Your father died in a mine accident that happened just… well, I
don't know how long ago

now, but it happened in the Tenth Month of the Single Eclipse. Just memorize
it, Sara, no explanations.

The same earth fault destroyed blocks of apartment buildings. So you can
have lived at the sign of the

Horns and no one will be able to run an accurate or quick check. Your
important relative is your mother.

What was your mother's name?'

'I wish you'd stop saying "was". For all I know, they are very much alive,' I
snapped.

'Not as far as you're concerned on Lothar,' Harlan said with patient firmness.

'Maria.'

'Make it Mara of the Thort clan, that's a South Cant group. Farmlands had
some bad plague about

thirty years ago… how old are you, Sara?'

'Twenty-four.'

He smiled and started to say something, changing his subject even as he
opened his mouth to speak.

'Fine. Then all but your mother died in that plague, so you have no maternal
family to worry about. This

happens often enough and as the Clan Head may always be approached, no
one is ever really orphaned.

Between Jurasse and South Cant your accent can be accounted for. South
Cant slurs and Jurasse is

throaty.'

'Mara of the Thorts from South Cant. No cavesite?'

'South Cant was not settled until caves were no longer a necessity.'

'Where did I meet you?' I asked.

Harlan stared off into space, rubbing his mouth with his hand.

"That's the hard one, Sara. Particularly since I don't know how long it's been
since I was first drugged

nor how or when you might have been brought here.'

'Might there have been a group of old loyal cavemen who have fallen out with
Gorlot and were

suspicious of your collapse?'

'It's possible. Let me think on this. Once I get to Gartly, I can catch up on
recent happenings. Then I'll

fill in a logical background.'

'Now,' he said more briskly, 'the last part of our journey presents the greatest
hazard of discovery. If

we are taken into custody, you can insist on silence until you have talked to a
Clan Officer.'

Earth-type spy stories and atrocities crowded into my mind.

'Won't they just kill me to keep me quiet and have done?'

'Kill a potential mother?" he demanded, his eyes flashing. 'Unheard of.' He
looked at me. 'Do they kill

women who can bear children on your world?' he asked with trenchant scorn
for such a wasteful culture.

I nodded slowly.

'Not on Lothar. Women are too important, even to Gorlot. No, your life is
safe.' He emphasized 'life'.

'And I have made my claim on you already. Is that agreeable to you?'

His eyes locked with mine in an expression that warmed me to the pit of my
stomach. I could only

nod mutely. His hand again covered mine as he continued. 'However, should I
be taken and you can

escape, no, no… it is possible. And, Sara, you are to run if I tell you. Promise
me that!' Again I nodded

until his hand ceased his painful grip as he got my grudging consent. 'All
right, I am taken and you are

free. Get to Lothara itself and to the "Place of the Birds". Ask for Jokan. Tell
him, and only him, all that

has happened. He is my brother.'

'And how do I get there? Fly?'

'That's the quickest way,' he said, taking me literally. 'Oh. No money.' He
shook his head, gritted his

teeth and swore with an eloquence that beggared what I had heard from the
guards.

'We'll do it together, somehow, Sara. We've come this far in our search
because my Sara can sail,

and think and act,' and he grinned at the face I made at him. 'If we can win
through to Gartly, we'll have

money, a planecar and help. Then we can make further plans. The important
thing is to make it to Gartly.'

The way the surf broke so savagely against the shore line, even that modest
ambition seemed unlikely.

We were sailing a close-hauled tack now, and farther down the coast, I could
see the mountains falling

away to a plain. And at the farthest point, the glint of buildings in the sun.

'Let's beach the boat as soon as we can,' Harlan urged, scanning the shore.

I glared at him.

'Pick your spot, pal.'

'It's easy to see I spent my youth exploring the wrong planets,' Harlan growled
to himself as we sailed

on and on.

I had noticed other sails, standing out to sea.

'Any chance they might be investigating us?' I asked him. He shook his head
impatiently. I glanced out

at the shore line anxiously and sighed.

'I haven't been to this part of Astolla in years, but it seems to me there is a
beach. Gartly's one form

of relaxation is fishing and…'

'Look,' I cried, half-rising from the cockpit.

Directly ahead of us, half hidden by the sail's spread, was a planecar. Harlan
catapulted into the

cabin.

'You there in the fisherboat,' a voice, magnified artificially, roared down at
me. The hovering craft

swung round the ship. All I could think was they'd been able to see Harlan
hiding in the cabin. 'From

where are you bound?'

'And what business is it of yours?' I demanded evasively, cursing because that
was another thing

Harlan had not bothered to brief me on.

'Answer when you're spoken to, woman,' I was told rudely and I doubted
Harlan's surety that

women are not maltreated on Lothar.

'Come back when I can answer, you idiot,' I said, throwing over the tiller on
an unnecessary tack

which made me obviously too busy with sheet and line to answer. It also cut
off the plane's view of the

cabin.

'Are you alone?' they persisted.

'Son of a Seventeenth Son, yes,' I screamed at the top of my lungs,
remembering a mild oath from the

guards' dialogues.

The boom, swinging free, completely covered the cabin hatch although the
plane was hovering

suspiciously low on my stern. The ship had lost all way, sail flapping. I
glanced up at the planecar as it

swung forward. I saw the military uniforms on the occupants. I could even see
the faces of the men and I

didn't like them.

'You Milrousers, go bother someone else. I'm too busy. Get off my back,' I
yelled, shaking a fist at

them.

The boat rolled in the surf and another look to port confirmed that my ruse
was putting me in peril.

Hastily I trimmed the sail and tried to get sea room between me and the
jagged rocks of the shore. That I

was in trouble now was too apparent to the airborne nuisances. The plane
roared off with a speed

startling to one used to wallowing helicopters.

'Harlan, get up here on the double,' I called once the plane was safely away.
'Harlan,' for the tide had

seized the boat, carrying us farther and farther inshore. 'HARLAN!' I
screamed just as the boat struck a

submerged rock I had not even a moment's warning to avoid.

Harlan came on board just as the boom swung about and, as I rose in horror, it
swept us both off the

deck and into the sea.

I came up gasping, the heavy seaman's clothing weighing me down. But
Harlan came up, too, not far

from me.

'Are you all right?'

'I'm mad, clear through,' I screamed at him. 'Of all the stupid things to have
happen…'

'Don't waste energy, swim,' Harlan ordered as the little fishing boat, unguided,
was lifted by the surge

of the tide and cracked down onto the rocks. Hanks, splinters, tackle, debris of
all sort went flying in

every direction as we swam out of the way. A flying piece of deck hit me
heavily on the shoulder, but the

thick sweater protected me enough so that all I got was the terrible initial
buffet. Harlan disentangled

himself from fouled line and we both struck out away from the flotsam on the
water.

'I'm sorry,' I told Harlan, swimming at my shoulder.

'I wouldn't be,' he said good-naturedly. 'It'll probably be easier to get ashore
swimming than sailing.'

We were about a hundred yards from the rocky beach and I could see that the
haphazard rocks, a

menace to a boat, were wide enough for a man's body to pass between them.
One only had to hold

one's course through them to make it safely in. Still, the tidal pull was now
very strong and if we were

smacked against one of those rocks, it'd be too bad. It was nervous business
and we swept awfully close

to the rough-skinned boulders. The uneven footing when we reached
shallower water was worse going

than the actual passage of the reef rocks. The footing was slippery and the tide
tore at my feet. I slipped

several times and then went completely down, skinning one leg so badly that

Harlan had to support me

the last five yards.

Quickly, when he saw the bleeding, he picked me up in his arms and carried
me up the sand to the

edge of the woods. He slit the trouser leg, baring the nasty gash the length of
my shin. My whole leg

ached from the jar of my fall as well as the lacerations. I felt very very tired.

'We must get farther into the woods before the planecar comes back. The
wreck will be noticed,'

Harlan said.

'Leave me here,' I pleaded with him after one glance at the thick underbrush.
'I'm so tired. I'll only

slow you down.'

'My dear lady, I have no intention of leaving you,' he said angrily.

He tore the sleeve from my sweater and bandaged my leg. He was about to
pick me up despite my

protests when he froze, his eyes on the shore a little to the right of us.

I whirled and saw a figure sauntering along the rocky beach, fishing gear
draped all over him. The

young man stopped when he saw us and then hurried forward.

'Can you give me a hand, stranger?' Harlan called. 'We've lost our sloop and
my lady is hurt.'

I thought that his audacity would win out over the odds again. The young man
was almost to us when

he stopped short, his mouth open in surprised shock, his body dropping to a
crouch as recognition

dawned on him.

'Harlan?' he cried, half questioning, half stating the incredible fact.

It was too much for me and for the only time in my life I fainted.

CHAPTER FIVE

Something was burning my throat and my leg was on fire and someone was
choking me and I struck

out wildly.

'Sara, Sara, it's all right,' I heard Harlan say. Opening my eyes, I saw first trees
all around us, then

Harlan and then the concerned face of the young man from the beach. 'We're
safe, Sara. This is Cire, the

youngest son of my old commandant, Gartly. It's all right.'

'You're sure?' I asked stupidly, looking at Cire who seemed to me far too
young to be as much help

as Harlan's cheerful reassurance implied.

'Here, drink this.' He held the metal bottle for me and it was more of the
stimulant that had burned my

throat. It was powerful and spread feeling through my arms and stomach,
down to my vitals and my

aching leg. I looked down and this had been bandaged with something white
and far more comforting in

appearance than the sleeve of my sweater. Ore's fishing jacket was wrapped
around me, warm and far

cleaner than anything else I had on.

'I don't want any more of that,' I assured Harlan as he lifted the bottle to my
lips again.

Harlan chuckled. 'Patrol issue is noted for potency.'

'How long have I been out? Of all the silly things to do.'

'Yes, very silly of you,' Harlan agreed amiably. Then both he and Cire laughed
at my expression of

shock. 'That's better.'

He got up.

'Now, Sara, we've got to move on. The planecar did come back and saw the
wreck. What'll happen

now I don't know. Ore says there's been no mention of my escape, so that
planecar may only have been

a routine flight. But the boat's registry number may come ashore with the
wreckage. Then there'll surely

be inquiries made. Ore and I covered our tracks up from the beach to make
them think there were no

survivors… or survivor. But I want to get out of Astolla entirely by the time
an official investigation of the

wreck is made.'

I struggled to my feet.

'You don't like it, but it'll help,' he added proffering the bottle. I looked at him
and then at Ore and

reluctantly steeled myself for another long swig.

'I'll be drunk in no time,' I gasped.

'You'll be walking it off,' Harlan retorted.

I'm not exactly sure 'walk' is what I did. Harlan made me take considerable
quantities of that brew

once he felt me shivering through Ore's jacket. I remember not too clearly the
events following the first

long climb from the shore. I remember putting one foot in front of the other

and talking about it. I

remember complaining because I wanted to sit down and no one would let
me. I remember being carried

and then I remember fighting with someone because they wanted to put me on
a planecar and I knew

that was not right and I shouldn't get on a planecar and I couldn't get away
from Them. The last thing I

do remember is Harlan's voice, angry and arguing.

'By the Deep Cave, she's exhausted, that's all. Naturally she's talking
gibberish. Here, give her to me

a minute.'

Someone was shaking me by the shoulders and I kept trying to get free. Then
Harlan kissed me and I

managed to focus on his face and realized he was the one holding me.

'Sara, Sara, listen to me. We're safe, we made it to Gartly's. Go to sleep now.
It's all right to sleep

now.'

'Well, why didn't someone say so?' I remember saying bad-temperedly. I
heard Harlan laugh and

then I slid down, gratefully, into dark softness and warmth.

For me, time resumed after my legs stopped moving even in my dreams. I
awoke in a comfortable

bed in a pleasantly sunlit room with an indescribably appetizing odor
tantalizing me. I sat right up in bed

and looked around, trying to place my surroundings. The wide bed had had
another occupant from the

dents in the pillows beside mine. I decided I had better ignore speculations in
that direction for the

moment.

It might even be a female Gartly, I told myself, having remembered Harlan's
final words to me. This

pleasant blue room with its heavy wooden furnishings was the antithesis of
the institution asylum cottage.

A long soft gray robe was draped on the chair nearest the bed which turned
my attention on the

nightdress I wore. To my relief, it was utilitarian but feminine. Whatever was
cooking made me ravenous.

I put on the robe and looking around for a bathroom, stumbled over Harlan's
fisher clothes.

'That settles that,' I told myself, both irritated and pleased.

The delicious odor was irresistible and I hurried through the necessary,
noticing in passing the mirror

that I had picked up a nice tan, and that I had lost my eyebrows and singed
my hair shorter in passing the

force screen barrier.

As I opened the bedroom door, I walked out into a hall, half open to the large
room on the level

below. Four men were sitting around a table cluttered with the debris of a
meal. They had been talking

solemnly and their voices died as first one, then another man became aware of
my presence on the

balcony. The oldest, gray-grizzled man glowered up at me fiercely and started
to rise to his feet. I was

about to take refuge in the bedroom when Harlan, laden with a plate of food
and a mug, backed through

a swinging door from the side of the house.

'Hi there, don't run, Sara,' he laughed. 'Come on down.' He noticed Gartly's
expression. 'Gartly

frowns to hide a tender heart and Jessl,' he added, nodding to the man he was
passing on his way to the

table, 'frowns from unfamiliarity with the light of day.' He set his dishes down
and, going to the foot of the

stairs, waited for me to descend. He squeezed my hand reassuringly and led
me to the table.

He was an entirely different person in his joviality, in the obvious affection
towards two of the men,

Jokan and Jessl. The Harlan I had known in the hospital, tense, frustrated,
pensive, the apparently

unconcerned Harlan of the sailboat, had transformed into this admirable
stranger with whom I was not at

ease.

The four men rose gravely in turn as Harlan introduced us, bowing formally,
each bow as different as

the character of the man. Gartly gave me a peremptory bow, his mind
obviously on the business

interrupted by my appearance. His blueing eyes passed over my face with the
light dismissal of an older

man for any younger person.

Jokan, and I remembered he was Harlan's brother, was nondescript in
appearance, totally different

from his brother. But his eyes, a sparklingly clear blue in his rough tanned
face, had a vitality that

detracted from the common-placeness of his features. His bow was leisurely
as he measured my face, my

body, my legs and looking again into my eyes, his lips echoed the greeting in

his brilliant eyes.

Jessl, a stocky, chesty man in his late thirties, was less courtly, checking me
off in his mental catalogue

as woman; intelligence unknown; and unnecessary. But it was he who held
out my chair.

Cire smiled warmly at me. He resembled his father in face and outstripped
him in size by half a foot

but with undeveloped breadth. His bow was jerky, unpracticed, and he flushed
boyishly, yanked out of

the fascinating world of men to which he had so recently been admitted, by
the arrival of a woman his

senior in years.

'How's your leg this morning?' he asked considerately.

'I didn't even remember,' I laughed, kicking my leg from the full robe.

'That's because you've slept nearly two days,' Harlan laughed. 'Ore, I appoint
you chief server to the

exiled court of Harlan and hope I left enough in the pot to fill a very generous
plate for Sara. I've had five

servings, my dear lady,' and I heard Jokan draw his breath in sharply and Jessl
turned around to look at

me queerly, but Harlan continued briskly,'so I'm the guilty one if there isn't
enough. You should, by rights,

be even hungrier than I,' and his light-hearted grin included an ultimate
reference to my abstinence for his

sake.

Ore showed no reluctance to assume his honorary rank and went to get me
food. Harlan took up the

conversation he had left to refill his plate.

'Hindsight, my friends, is of no use to us. We could sit here until the Mil come
again before that would

solve our problem. Don't think for a minute I haven't run from the caves of
Jurasse to the Barren Plains

for believing myself inviolate just because I was Regent. I've succeeded in
making an absolute fool of

myself and unless I'm careful about the next move, I shall compound that
impression and lose any chance

whatever of regaining the Regency.

'I've had a lot of good luck, lately,' his hand touched mine in illustration, 'and
we'll hope it holds until

Stannall can reinforce it. You're sure, Jokan, no one knows of your trip to
Astolla?'

'I made the decision myself on the way to Jurasse and circled the Finger Sea,'
Jokan reassured him.

He kept looking at me, however, not his brother.

Harlan regarded the meat on his fork speculatively, then carefully set the
piece aside, leaning back in

his chair.

'Now, Jessl has not been closely connected with me. Gartly and I had that
quarrel about sector

assignments,' and Harlan's eyes twinkled at Gartly who harrumphed
righteously. 'They won't think of

checking on any of you first. We've got to get Council in session to revoke
Gorlot's temporary Regency.

Ferrill can do it if we can reach him.'

Jokan and Gartly immediately jumped in to elaborate on the young Warlord's
rapid physical decline.

No one had been allowed to see him recently, even such old friends as Gartly
and his uncle, Jokan.

Gorlot intercepted every attempt.

'I did get a few words with Maxil,' Jokan added, 'before that Milbait Samoth
came breathing down

my neck. I shall take great delight in kicking that fattail into so tight an orbit
he's eating…'

'Jo,' snapped Harlan, indicating me. Jokan glared at me for the curtailment of
his invective.

I hadn't been paying too close attention because Cire had brought me the stew.
I was eating with

unladylike speed.

'Well,' Jokan continued, 'I was in the public gardens…"

'You were? How?' Jessl exclaimed.

'Moved in with the sightseers. Lothara's full of Eclipsers, so…'

'Eclipse will be tomorrow night,' Harlan said, startled.

'That's the answer!' Jokan exclaimed.

'Don't be absurd,' Harlan mocked him. 'I couldn't get within ten feet of the
palace wing in any

disguise. With a discreet alarm out for me that would be the most closely
watched place on the entire

planet.'

' You don't need to go,' Jokan grinned, looking at the faces of his friends to see
if they had guessed his

intention.

'You certainly aren't planning to send Jessl in? Or Ore, or old gray-head here?'
Harlan jibed and

stopped, turning as they all did, to look at me. Surprised, I nearly choked on a
much too generous

mouthful. Jokan's grin broadened and he laughed with the gathering
momentum of relief and delight.

'Me? Don't be ridiculous,' I managed to say over my food. 'I wouldn't even
know…'

Gartly stood up abruptly, 'Are you mad? This little country girl? We need
someone like Maritha…'

'Who is so unknown at court,' mocked Jokan. 'Maritha would never do. Her
fondness for Harlan is

well known.'

'It isn't her fondness, Jo, that would worry me,' Harlan remarked wryly. 'It's
the fact that it was at her

table I collapsed under such suspicious circumstances.'

This deflated Gartly into a semishock, for he sat down immediately, his face
rather pale and tight.

'I gather that was never made public,' Harlan continued quietly. 'But Sara can't
go.'

'Sara's perfect,' Jokan went on enthusiastically, winking at me. 'We can think
up some absolutely

idiotic quest for her.'

'Quest?' I asked.

'With that face, she could pass into Gorlot's very room.'

'It is not in Gorlot's room that we want her,' Gartly grumbled primly, eyeing
me with distaste.

My appetite deserted me.

'Aha,' Jokan crowed gleefully at Gartly's expense, 'beauty has the key to any
room.'

'Now, wait a minute,' I demanded, rising. Harlan put a big hand on my
shoulder and gently, but firmly,

reseated me.

'Sara can't go. She has risked enough already,' he said with quiet authority.

'What's the matter with you, Harlan?' Jokan demanded, leaping to his feet, his
eyes flashing his

irritation. 'It's got to be her. It's so simple a ruse it can't possibly fail. All
Eclipsers have the right into the

palace on that night.'

'There has to be someone else,' I insisted, now that Harlan was backing me.

'There is no one else we can reach in the short time we have. And it may be
shorter than we know,'

Jokan insisted, turning to glare at his brother. 'Ferrill may be almost
completely broken down now, Maxil

was worried sick. And we know it's not his constitution that's weak, it's drugs
he's been fed. You know

what drugs can do, Harlan. We've got to reach him and save his life. Or is that
no longer of primary

importance in your life, Harlan?'

Harlan was on his feet, the chair crashing to the floor behind him, as he faced
his brother, stung,

angry, silent.

'Stop it,' I cried, pushing them apart. 'I'll go, Harlan. I've hazarded this much
already. Why not all?' I

turned to Jokan once I saw the bunched muscles relax in Harlan's neck and he
ceased to crouch as

though about to spring. 'Jokan, it's as Gartly says. I'm a little country girl. I've
never even been to

Lothara. But if you'll tell me exactly what I have to do, I'll do my best to do
it.'

Jokan's eyes gleamed down at me and he bowed ceremoniously to me.

'I like the country you're from, Lady Sara, if it breeds courage like yours,' he
said.

Involuntarily I turned for reassurance to Harlan. Did Jokan know of my
origin? Harlan had said I

might tell him if anything went wrong. Had Harlan already done so? Harlan's
imperceptible nod indicated

it was merely Jokan's curious choice of words. He gripped my arm at the
elbow.

'There is more at stake, Sara, than just Ferrill's life,' Harlan said persuasively
as he pushed me gently

back into my chair. 'Which, any indication to the contrary, means a great deal
to me,' he added acidly to

Jokan who shrugged. 'Something very peculiar is happening on Tane if Jessl's
report is as accurate as

they always are.'

Jokan's eyebrows went up in mockery. 'What's peculiar about a war?'

Harlan ignored him. 'It's absurd to maintain that the Tanes would have
initiative enough to revolt.

Those people are no more capable of taking a life or planning a cohesive
rebellion like this than a

restoree.' Harlan's eyes flickered briefly as if he regretted making such a
comparison. His hesitation

allowed Jokan to get in another dig.

'You're prejudiced on behalf of your little protegees, Harlan. You haven't seen
the damage these

"uninitiative" people of yours have been doing. Ferrill's the real urgency.'

Harlan turned angrily on Jokan. 'It's not prejudice, Jokan, and you should
know me better. So drop

that attitude. This supposed uprising masks another purpose. Just as my all
too timely collapse and

Ferrill's suddenly failing health are indications of a Millishly well-laid plan of
far-reaching proportions.

What I cannot understand is Stannall's lack of suspicion. Surely he of all
people must realize something's

drastically wrong. I cannot conceive him selling out to Gorlot or whoever is
behind this treachery. But

one thing I'm sure of, Lothar stands in great peril… of Gorlot getting
complete authority, if he hasn't

already; the truth behind the Tane farce and the loss of a brilliant ruler if
Ferrill should have to be

replaced.'

'He'll be replaced, even if he gets off with his life,' Jokan said dully. 'He's a
ruin already.'

Harlan snapped an angry denial, but there was no support from the others. He
turned back to me

with a hint of the desperation I knew so well.

'Sara, I don't think you'd be in any danger. The idea is so simple, the time so
accommodating. It has

to be you.'

In his eyes were his concern and his fear and a desperate plea. His hand,
warm on mine, gripped me

reassuringly,

'I hope you know what I'm doing,' I said anxiously.

'You know Ferrill, don't you?' Jokan put in, impatiently. 'All you have to do is
tell him that Harlan is

sane and have him convene an emergency session of Council. I assume,' he
began acidly, 'Gorlot has

started no antivirility campaigns of Ferrill.'

Harlan shot him a surprised questioning look which Jokan waved aside, but
Jessl and Gartly snorted

derisively so his reference was known to them.

'Stannall,' Jokan continued, 'will then be able to do what else is necessary… if
he's still with us. He

ought to have far less love for Gorlot than we.'

'There's no other way to get to Ferrill?' I asked plaintively.

'Our faces are known. Yours is not. In the guise of say, the Searcher,' Jokan
improvised and I

remembered that Harlan had called me his Searcher, 'you can gain entrance
into the public garden. Slip

into the palace wing and up to Ferrill's room.'

'No,' Harlan diasgreed on the last detail hastily. 'You said Trenor was sleeping
with him to prevent

another one of these so-called attacks?'

'Yes.'

'Well, Ferrill will have to attend the Starhall festivities, won't he?'

'If he can walk.'

'Then Sara will have a far better cover in that crowd than trying to find her
way to Ferrill's rooms.'

'It's all very well to make her a Searcher, provided you can find a costume at
this late date,' Gartly

grumbled, 'but how are we to get into Lothara at all! Had that entered your
glib plans?'

Harlan and Jokan exchanged glances.

'I do have the planecar,' Cire suggested. 'And I'm not too well known.'

'She can fly in herself,' Jokan said easily.

I grabbed at Harlan's arm. Sail I could, fly no.

'I don't fly,' I blurted out.

'What?' Jokan looked at me startled.

'Never needed to. Lived in Jurasse,' I mumbled and then looked frantically at
Harlan for support.

'The one girl out of how many thousands who never learned to fly when she
reached legal age,' Jokan

said exasperated.

And Harlan wanted me to go right into the middle of the palace. I'd last three
steps inside the gardens

and make another inadvertent mistake.

'I'd be glad to escort her,' Ore repeated and then blushed, 'if Harlan permits?'

'I permit all right, but I just wish there were some way we could all get into
Lothara.'

'As well wish you had a map to the Mils' system,' Jessi snapped gloomily.

'If she's to get into the palace wing at all,' Gartly put in,'she can go in no
shoddy affair. It must be a

rich gown or she'd be turned away.'

'That can be obtained in town,' Harlan remarked easily, dismissing this
objection. Gartly stalked out

of the room, his face reflecting pain and anger.

Harlan watched him leave, shrugged and turned to rummage on a table for a
slate of waxy substance

and a pointed stylus. Sitting next to me, he rapidly sketched in a small plan of
the giant structure that was

the capitol building, war office and palace of Lothar. Except that it resembled
an unrimmed, unevenly

spoked wheel, its function put me in mind of the Pentagon and the unreality
of this adventure bore down

on me again. I had no chance for speculation because Harlan demanded my
complete attention as he

described my route.

One wing of the enormous building was devoted exclusively to the quarters of
the Warlord's family,

intimates and servants. Between the spokes were extensive gardens. Only the
ones adjacent to the

palace wing were fenced in and guarded. Into one of these gardens I must
gain entrance. While Jokan

and Jessl listened absently to what was common knowledge, Harlan explained
in detail what I would

have to know.

'Get to the point, get to the point,' Jokan urged impatiently once.

'Sara has never been to Lothara before and it's easy to become confused in the
dark of the double

Eclipse. We can't afford any mistakes,' Harlan replied calmly and proceeded
with my orientation. Jokan

contented himself by noisily foraging in the kitchen.

Once I was in the gardens, I was to make my way to any one of the ground
floor balconies, enter the

room it adjoined and let myself into the corridor. The personnel of the lowest
floor changed so constantly

I was unlikely to be questioned. Minor courtiers would undoubtedly all be
dancing attendance on their

sponsors in the Starhall. I would follow the corridor to the Hub which was the
Starhall on the fourth level.

I would endeavour to get close enough to Ferrill to give him my message.
Once that was accomplished, I

would merely retrace my steps and join Jokan at the 'Place of Birds'. Any
passenger cab would speed

me there over the confusion of the celebrating. If, however, I did not see
Ferrill and my presence was

being noticed, I was to come back to the apartment and they would try
something else.

I had to agree to the plan's simplicity, but I could not help worry that any plan
undergoes revision in

performance.

'If you find yourself in any trouble, Sara,' Harlan remarked, reading my mind,
'give them one of your

beautiful smiles and I doubt their minds will remain on the question.'

'Oh, nonsense,' I snapped.

Jokan and Jessl grinned knowingly to my further embarrassment.

'What will her quest be?' asked Jessl.

'Well, to get her into the gardens in case there is extra guard on duty, she can
ask for a leaf of the

Burning Shame plant. That's near the palace wing,' Jokan suggested. 'Once in
the palace, she can say she

needs a token from Ferrill to prove she has been claimed. She needs immunity

against a priest she

doesn't like. I've seen that one used often enough to know it's accepted.'
Jokan's grin to Harlan and Jessl

made me suspect that ruse had a double meaning I couldn't understand.

There were too many cryptic remarks passed and references that puzzled me.
Had I known then

what Ferrill told me much later I doubt I would ever have consented to be a
Searcher. My ignorance of

the true story served me well, I admit, and I'm sure Harlan's neglect in telling
me was intentional. The

Searcher was an historically documented lady of good clan who had become
separated from her lover

during a Mil raid. She refused to believe he had been taken, and wandered
over the planet, looking for

him, constantly in danger of being captured either by a priest who coveted her
or by the Mil. She would

reward those who sheltered her with jewels. Eventually the priest caught up
with her. In the joyous

festival interpretation, the girl who played the Searcher very often suggested
to a male friend that he be

the priest to whom she surrendered herself after a token chase. Morals were
totally different on Lothar.

Female continence over a prolonged period was unfavorably viewed since
women were expected to

bear as many children as possible to replace a population constantly lost to the
Mil or the exigencies of

Patrol. Family continuity stemmed from the distaff side with the notable
exception of the Warlordship.

'Let's hope,' Jokan leered humorously, clearing his face when he caught

Harlan's expression, 'there

aren't other priests along the way who want to claim her.'

'That is why her costume is important,' Gartly growled as he re-entered the
room, carrying a wooden

box with stiff tenderness. He laid it on the table and with slow hands
uncovered it, looking at the contents

for a long moment before he stepped back for us to see. Jokan and Harlan
exchanged glances and

Harlan gripped the old man's shoulder in unspoken gratitude. He later told me
the costume had belonged

to Gartly's beloved wife.

I saw only the tissue-fragile fabric, deep greens and golds, the heavy ornate
jewels, the intricately

strapped sandals and the voluminous folds of the glossy emerald-green cloak.

'Why, it's the most beautiful thing I've ever seen,' I gasped, touching the dress
lightly as if it might fall

to pieces.

Gartly grumbled something under his breath and then left the room with quick
steps.

I suppose our concentration on the plans to enter the palace and Gartly's
unexpected, touching offer

had engrossed us. The sound of a knock on the door, at any rate, came like the
knell of terror. We all

whirled to the door as if it had become dangerous. Cire looked expectantly at
Harlan who motioned him

to answer even as Harlan edged quickly back to the kitchen.

'Who knocks?' asked Cire with scarcely a quiver in his young voice.

'Sinnall, Cire,' and before Cire could answer, the door swung open.

If Sinnall had waited but an instant more before entering, Harlan would have
reached the safety of the

kitchen. As it was, he was directly in Sinnall's vision and his hand dropped
from the door to his knife belt.

'Is it really Harlan?' Sinnall gasped. He didn't wait for confirmation but
snapped to attention, saluting

smartly. 'Second Leader Sinnall, sir, reporting.'

I could feel the tension leave the room as if swept out by a brisk wind. Cire,
laughing nervously, threw

an arm around the young officer.

'I appreciate the gesture, Second,' Harlan said with a grin, returning the salute,
'even though I am no

longer acting as Regent.' He beckoned to Sinnall to join the group around the
table.

'My father served with you in Quadrant Five, sir,' he remarked gravely,
coming forward. 'He was

Nallis, First Prime.'

Harlan grinned. 'I recall it as being the other way round,' he remarked and was
rewarded by Sinnall's

tentative smile.

'I can see now why there is an emergency at Lothar,' Sinnall said, and held out
to Harlan a tiny slate.

Harlan glanced at it, his eyebrows raising in surprise. With a burst of relieved
laughter, he passed it to

Jokan.

'My luck is holding,' he practically crowed. 'Sinnall, as a loyal officer in this
sleepy uneventful little

community, has been ordered to bring a loyal picked section to Lothara on
special duty.

'Why should that change plans?' Jessl asked, reaching for the slate from
Jokan.

'Because our orders are to report not later than noon tomorrow at Central
Barracks for assignment. I

can think of no better place for Harlan at the moment than right in the midst
of the men trying to keep him

out of Lothara.'

'That'll get us all in,' Jokan said, grinning broadly.

'Anyone know of your orders?' asked Harlan.

'I only got them an hour ago,' Sinnall replied, 'and I wanted to press Ore into
section duty. I know

he's loyal.'

'To you and Ferrill, that's what Sinnall means,' Cire interjected, his face
intense with pride in his friend.

'Yes, sir,' Sinnall replied earnestly. 'I know what happens to officers who
complain about the new

Regent and the odd things that are happening. That's why I'm here,' and he
grimaced in such a way that I

realized his present post was a form of military exile.

'Well, your orders do specify a "loyal" section,' Harlan said with a mirthless
laugh, 'but they do not

state to whom, do they?'

Sinnall, relaxing even more in Harlan's presence, began to grin broadly.

'No, sir. And if I can find uniforms to fit, I'm going to volunteer all of you
here as "loyal".'

'Room to stow my lady on the trip?' asked Harlan.

My relief that he had undoubtedly abandoned the original idea now that
Sinnall's presence indicated

Harlan would, after all, be able to get into Lothara, was short lived.

Sinnall considered me with surprise. 'Why, I think so.'

'I hope so. I don't wish to leave her behind,' Harlan remarked. 'And Jokan, not
you. You take

yourself and your planecar and plan an accident in the Jurassan Hills.

You've got to have a reason for returning to Lothara, completely unconnected
with me. Gartly, Ore,

Jessl and I will be the section. You wait for Sara at your place. Even if you are
watched, Sara is

unknown and your philandering is legend.'

Jokan objected strenuously to being excluded but was finally convinced he
could not be in the

section.

'Why don't I just take Sara with me now? I'd better use tonight to cover my
return and give me time

for an accident. I could then take her on to Lothara.'

Harlan shook his head. 'No, Sara stays with me.'

'Brother, I'm not about to…'

'She stays. I have my reasons,' he reasserted so firmly that Jokan shrugged
and pressed no further.

What remained of the day was spent in getting uniforms and making what
alterations we could to get

a reasonable fit. Not even the largest issue jacket accommodated Harlan's
breadth of shoulder. The cuffs

were halfway up his arm and, even when I had let down the sleeve all I could,
it hung unmilitarily high

above his big hand. Sinnall decided that regulation issue would be too skimpy
for Harlan's frame in any

event and the discrepancies would pass as back-country inefficiencies. The
assorted ages and sizes of the

four men identified them as provincials. Gartly, with darkened hair and a
day's growth of beard, would

not resemble the correct old soldier.

Cire sprinkled a white powder in Harlan's dark hair and with the lack of
eyebrows (his, too, had been

singed in the barrier crossing), an unmilitary shamble and slouched shoulders,
he looked amazingly unlike

himself. He even demonstrated the witless expression he could assume
whenever necessary.

Hunger and fatigue vied for first place in my attention by late evening and,
when someone

remembered to get some dinner, I could barely eat for weariness.

'Sara, you've barely rested,' Harlan said with concern. 'It's just as well she
doesn't have to be

Searcher tomorrow. She'd fall asleep,' he laughed gently.

'I still think it's a good plan,' Jessl grumbled.

'Sinnall's orders give us a better opportunity. I prefer to take my own risks,'
Harlan said to silence

him. He helped me rise and escorted me up the stairs. 'I'll be right back,' he
assured Gartly and Jessl who

looked after us knowingly.

My face must have been burning when I got into the privacy of the room. I

heard Harlan closing the

door, but all I could see was the big double bed. All I really wanted was to
sleep. And certainly if the

boat was neither time nor place, neither was this with those men downstairs.
My expression must have

shown my thoughts, for Harlan took one look at my face and chuckled.

He took off my robe and led me to the bed, tucking me in.

'Sleep, dear my lady, is what you need right now,' he said softly. 'And I am
relieved you do not need

to go to the palace. That was too dangerous. Too dangerous, though Jokan's
reasoning was good. He

does not know, Sara. Sleep.'

I did.

CHAPTER SIX

Harlan woke me, gently shaking my shoulder. At first the sight of a stranger
in uniform bending over

me was frightening until I recognized Harlan through the powdered hair.

'Fool you?' he grinned.

'Scared me witless,' I grinned back, casting a glance at the dented pillow
beside me.

'Well?' he dared me, 'there are only three bedrooms here and I want it plain
how matters stand

between us. Remember, dear my lady, on this planet it is considered an honor
to share the Regent's bed.'

'I don't want to be in Gorlot's bed,' I smirked at him wickedly.

'Neatly said,' he said respectfully, but still grinning. 'Now rise and dress or I'll
make something more

of that,' and he indicated the bed. 'After all, Sara, we slept together like
innocent babes for who knows

how long?'

Realizing myself topped, I gestured him out of the room. It took me a little
while to figure out the

closures on the green gown. I heartily wished for the simplicity of the zipper.
Strange how easily I

assumed in a mental leap that Earth would be able to supply Lothar with
zippers when I could hardly

understand the spatial distances between the two planets. Paper would be a
boon, too, I continued in my

mental perambulations, instead of the cumbersome Babylonique slates. I was
just picking up the cloak

when Harlan knocked again. I opened the door to him, the heavy jewelry
clinking, tinkling with my

movement. Harlan looked at me with a wondering expression on his face. He
stepped quickly in the

room, closing the door behind him.

'Didn't I put it on right?' I asked with a pang of doubt. 'I know it took the
longest time. I had to figure

things out. Oh, for the lowly zipper.'

Harlan began to smile, slowly.

'You are very different as the Searcher, dear my lady,' he said slowly.

Pleased with the sincerity of his admiration, I pivoted on my toes, only to find
myself locked in his

arms, his face and eyes unbelievably stern.

'Are you still the girl who starved herself for me? The girl who sailed me to
safety? Or are you…'

'Harlan, we've a long trip,' Jessl yelled from below.

Harlan's tone had become almost savage, his arms around me tight and cruel.

'I'm still Sara, no matter what I wear,' I whispered, startled.

'Sara… who?'

'Sara of Estril, Odern Cave, Jurasse,' I whispered, scared.

'We're coming,' Harlan roared, turning his head briefly toward the door.

I thought he would release me but, holding me more tightly still, he bent his
head and kissed me with

rough and demanding lips. I seemed to sink inside him, held up only by his

arms, knowing only the reality

of his bruising mouth.

'HARLAN,' Jessl bellowed and we both heard his steps on the wooden
staircase.

'A map of how to get to Jokan's, from the Barracks' airfield,' Harlan said
hurriedly in a low voice,

thrusting a tiny slate in my hand. 'Anyone else would know. It's not far.'

He opened the door just as Jessl reached it. It was now Jessl's turn to stare at
me.

'Well, well.' He looked nervously at Harlan. 'That's what kept you.'

With as much dignity as I could muster because I was still trembling, I gave
both men a haughty look

and swept out of the room.

Gartly was sitting facing the stair as we descended and he sprang to his feet,
knocking the stool over.

His face was completely expressionless. At first, I thought he must be equally
struck speechless by my

transformation. He turned without a word and left the house. I stared after
him, hurt.

'The costume was his wife's,' Harlan remarked gently. 'She, too, was lovely.'

Young Sinnall appeared in the door and bowed low. As we left the house, Ore
came round the side

of the house, and he too bowed.

'A lot better than stolen fishermen's clothes, hmmm?' I said.

'That is the truth,' Ore said, his eyes wide.

'Hey, where's my breakfast?' I demanded, stopping dead on the path outside
the front door.

'Here,' laughed Harlan, holding up a metal bottle and a small package, cloth
wrapped. 'I'll never let

you starve again,' he remarked, cocking an eyebrow at me.

'Will you two stop that and let's get off the ground?' Jessl snapped, irritably.
'It's a three-hour trip

from this cave-forsaken stretch of soil.'

Laughing, I followed them down to the landing circle where the waiting
official planecar idled its

rotors. Sinnall had rigged a seat of sorts for me in the luggage area,
apologizing profusely for the cramped

accommodations. Ore announced that he would take the uncomfortable seat
until such time as we

encountered official traffic. Consequently I saw a great deal of such
landmarks as the immense pit

quarries of South Motlina, for Ore had been alone in Gartly's house near
Astolla and had taken us south,

away from prying inquiries about the wrecked boat. I saw the oil fields of
Wingar and finally the city of

Astolla itself and the delta we had nearly landed on. Northward into the
mountains of Lothar the ship

climbed.

I realized that Lothar had been lucky in several respects: a common enemy to
unite it early in its

history and the geographical accident which linked its two largest land masses
from the north pole to the

sixty-sixth parallel. At this point the continents split and rapidly separated
east and west, leaving a green

ocean between their land legs, dotted with several large islands and driblets of
isles in the southern

hemisphere. The eastern continent, over which we flew, was more
mountainous and larger, the western

one, a vast rolling plain ringed with bluffs and precipices, periodically
penetrated by navigable rivers and

deep lagoons. The western sea was shallow, spiked with tiny islands,
deepening finally into a great

crevasse of several thousand square miles before the sprawling arm and
exaggerated peninsular fist of the

eastern continent pouted seaward.

Used as I was to the ribbons of roads seen from the air on Earth, it struck me
that Lothar had leapt

from primitive wheels to a form of jet plane, thanks to the accommodating
Mil. The only roads were foot

trails, since most transportation, even by the poorer farmers, was done by air.
Land was too valuable to

be used up in wasteful roads when the whole sky was open for travel. During
the trip I was constantly

amazed by the gigantic craft that carried freight and almost fragile vehicles
that transported a single

passenger: hummingbirds and vultures.

I missed, however, what I had hoped most to see: an airborne view of
Lothara. The excessive

number of aircars above Lothara, official and civil, flying at distressing
proximity, necessitated my retreat

behind the curtain. Sinnall answered and satisfied several official summonses
before he made a turn into a

pattern at the Central Barracks landing field. Here again, we unexpectedly
encountered another touch of

the fabulous streak of luck Harlan enjoyed.

The one unsettled detail was how I was to make my way from the Barracks
airstrip to the city without

detection.

Sinnall had suggested that I remain hidden until nighttime, which meant a
long stretch of hours, waiting

behind the hot cloth.

I had my directions tucked in the top of my dress and was startled when our
planecar was waved off

an obviously overcrowded field and directed to an auxilary civil field.

'As soon as there is no one around, you can just jump out,' Jessl remarked to
me through the curtain.

'Get an aircab to Place of Birds, Sara,' Harlan suggested and passed in a small
bag of coins.

I held it gingerly in my hand, acidly commenting to myself that it did me a
great deal of good. I had

absolutely no idea which coin of this realm meant how much. Just another
little oversight. I would be so

glad to get to Jokan's. I presumed there would be food in his larder, and I was
hungry again. Once on the

field, it seemed we took forever parking and three times Sinnall gave
someone orders to read and I heard

each member of the unofficial section grumble out his name and a batch of
numbers. Harlan, I remember,

gave the name of Landar, in a stupidly high-pitched voice that almost got me
giggling.

Finally, I heard Sinnall give the order to debark.

Harlan thrust his head back of the curtains.

'Gold coins are worth more, the larger the better. Silver, the larger, are alloy-

mixed and worth less.

Take care, dear my lady,' he whispered and cupping my head with one large
hand, kissed me on the lips

with sweet speed. I heard him deliberately bumbling out of the planecar and
then the retreating cadence

calls.

I slipped into the front of the ship and looked cautiously over the windowsills.
There was much

coming and going on the field and many women among the men. Reassured I
climbed out of the planecar.

It was easy to guess which way was the entrance by following the direction of
the crowd of brightly

costumed Eclipsers. I strode forward confidently.

'Are you claimed, lady?' a male voice asked in my ear and whirling, startled, I
saw a medium-tall man

smiling hopefully at me.

'Yes, I most certainly am,' I said and turning, left him standing there.

Two more offers by not as promising companions made me hover close to a
large party of mixed

revelers until I reached the gates. The women were allowed to pass quickly,
but each man was forced to

show identification and every tall man was drawn aside. The hunt was on for
someone answering

Harlan's description.

The novelty of being accosted by admiring males wore off before I got to the
next busy street. There

were plenty of planecars, but they were all aloft and I had no idea how one
signaled them. I suppose I

should have asked someone, but I had been so long away from people, all
sorts and sizes of people, that

faces and forms were entertaining to me. Not so entertaining were shadowy
figures at the edge of the

masses of revelers: blowsy drunken creatures, beggars with hideous purple
scars, whining their pleas.

The section bordering the airfield was obviously poor and I followed the flow
of the crowd towards the

center of the city. Gradually the poor buildings gave way to pleasanter areas
of spiraling walks,

connecting fluted colonnaded buildings in muted colors. Guards were
stationed at crossroads and they

constantly stopped the taller male figures in any group. I smiled to myself at
the secret joke that Harlan

had entered in an official car and been welcomed royally.

I came, finally, into the Great Bazaar, an enormous square with a central park,
comprised of

successively larger squares of shops, one outside the other, like the top view
of a child's nest of blocks.

Only the stores were staggered so that, through the separating alleys, one
caught enticing glimpses of

other treasures. I wandered through the crowds, wide-eyed at the fascinating
stores, trying to imagine the

purpose of this or that; trying on in my mind the gorgeous dresses. I decided
that the jewels I wore were

better than many on display and my dress more becoming.

Thirsty, I stopped at a beverage stand of which there were many, some of the
air of permanence,

some obviously holiday-rigged.

When the counterman looked expectantly for my order, I realized I couldn't
ask for lemonade or

Coke. For a moment I could only stare at him idiotically.

Suddenly, hands covered my eyes. Frantic, I grabbed at them.

'Guess who?' an eager young voice whispered in my ear.

Thinking it was only an Eclipse game, I relaxed.

I'm not good at guessing-games,' I replied finally.

The hands dropped as if my skin had burned them.

'I beg, I beg your pardon, lady,' a stammering voice apologized.

I turned and looked up a long expanse of white overshirt before I came to the
boyish face. There was

a shocked surprise in his eyes and an appeal for understanding the boy did not
expect to find. He was

about sixteen, I guessed, and his frame had shot up before he could
accumulate the flesh to cover it. It

gave him an angular awkwardness; a bag-of-bones appearance to his clothes
and an obvious inferiority.

His gray eyes regarded me with an unspoken plea not to scorn him. He
reminded me so of my brother,

Seth… and someone else I couldn't place… but he did remind me of Seth at
his gawky stage. It was this

quality, this puppyish wistfulness that caught my sympathy.

'I mistook you, Lady Searcher. Really I did and I was so pleased the Lady
Fara… I mean…' and he

trailed off aimlessly.

Quickly I put my hand on his arm to reassure him, for he seemed about to
take off into the crowd.

'No harm done. This is Eclipse, isn't it? And, truly, I am flattered to be
mistaken for the Lady Fara.'

A brief eagerness flared in his eyes and he looked as if he were about to smile,
but his face turned

unnaturally mature.

'Please, buy me a drink and think no more of it,' I said quickly. 'Something…
light,' I added,

indicating two drunken carousers with distaste.

The smile flickered again and was replaced with a guarded expression.

'Two cornades,' he said to the counterman, tossing a coin to the fellow.

‘Thank you, lord, have a safe Eclipse.'

The young boy handed me my drink with the polished grace of a courtier,
totally out of character for

his age.

It was a fruit concoction, tart and cold, and just what I had my mouth set for.
We stood at one side of

the crowded stand, saying nothing because I could think of nothing to say.

At the opposite end of this bazaar mall, there was a sudden commotion,
indistinguishable shouts, a

startled milling of people and then a trio pushed into view. They were not
very sober but not drunk

enough to extenuate their obstreperous actions. The first man, a rough
enormous fellow, charged with the

ferocity of an angry gorilla, his arms pushing way past those who did not
move aside quickly enough. He

looked from right to left, head thrust forward, bellowing at the top of his
voice.

'Maxil, where is that little runt? Maxil, come here or I'll break you. Maxil?
Maxil!' His two

companions followed, likewise yelling for the missing Maxil, stopping people
and demanding to know

where this Maxil was.

I turned to my young man and found him missing from my side, just as the
gorilla charged up to the

stand, beckoning violently to the counterman.

'He was with the lady a moment ago,' the man volunteered, not looking at me,
but obviously

frightened.

The lout turned on me, his liquor-heavy breath offensive, his sweating body
odorous. He put his

hands on my shoulders and started to shake me.

'Get your filthy hands off me, you stupid bully,' I said, seething with anger at
this insult. 'I said, get

your filthy hands off me,' I repeated distinctly in the quiet that had fallen on
the mall. There is some quality

to righteous anger that has great strength in compelling obedience. He did
remove his hands, swaying in

front of me, while his thick drunken senses took in the import of what I had
said.

'Who do you think you are?' the drunk asked.

'Maxil thought she was the Lady Fara,' the counterman said timidly. I shot
him a look I hoped would

silence him completely.

'Fara? Fara here,' the sot said, blinking at me, trying to see me clearly.
'C'mere, Lort,' he beckoned

his two cronies. 'Is this Fara?'

The other two peered at me, hemming me in against the counter.

'Never seen her,' the one not named said. His breath was vile.

'Can't see anything here,' Lort complained.

'He,' and the drunk's finger jerked at the counterman,'said she was with Maxil.
Everyone knows

Maxil's sweet on Fara. Not that it'll do her any good.' He cackled at his own
wit.

Before I realized what would happen, the gorilla had thrown his cloak over
my head and I was

hoisted to his shoulders. I kicked, I scratched, I screamed, and then someone
hit me on the head.

When I came to my senses, it took me a few minutes to recall what had last
happened. My head

ached and my jaw and my arms felt sticky. I think it was a concern for the
beautiful dress Gartly had lent

me that stung me into full consciousness.

I was sprawled on a large bed in an elegantly furnished but barren-looking
room. Somewhere beyond

the windows a great deal of shouting, screaming, laughing and singing was
going on. I rose, carefully

because of my headache, and walked to the window. Below me lay beautiful
gardens, fairylands of

casually riotous blooms, spilling onto the winding paths, nudging against a
variety of unusual trees,

enhancing stonework and sculpture. Beyond the delicate metal filigree I could
see the throngs of revelers

and another wing of the building.

It took very little intelligence for me to assume I was in the palace itself.

'In Gorlot's room?' I asked myself feeling very droll and wondering what I did
now.

Yesterday everything had seemed very simple. This morning the plan had
been foolproof. I sighed

and felt like crying, but that would hurt my head more.

I did seek out the bathroom and washed my face and arms. I also dabbed at
the stains I found on my

lovely robes. When I heard a commotion outside, I hesitated briefly,
wondering if a locked bathroom

might not be preferable to what I would find in the room. I recognized one
raucous laugh as belonging to

the drunken gorilla and that decided me not to play the coward.

He was there, all right, propelling my young friend of the beverage stand into
the room, roaring with

vulgar laughter. I picked up a hairbrush I saw on the dressing table, hefting
the handle, glad it was metal.

'You drunken Milrouser, how dare you,' I cried, and both turned toward me.

The ghastly sick look on the boy's face enraged me as did his incredulous
expression when he saw

me tearing into the gorilla.

'How dare you kidnap me? This may be Eclipse, but there are limits to what is
done. Get out of here,

get out of here and leave us alone.'

I am absolutely positive I was never so mad before in my life. Not even the
time the Travis boys tried

their dirty tricks on an innocent twelve-year-old Sara in their father's old barn.
He had taken care of them

with a razor strop and I took care of this oaf with a metal hairbrush.

If he had been sober, I should never have succeeded, but he and his two
cohorts were definitely

drink-fuddled and their reactions, for they did swing out to hit me, too slow
for me. They howled when

the metal brush contacted their arms and faces, and they backed out of the
bedroom. I didn't have to

chase them across the living room. I stood in the bedroom doorway and threw
whatever came to hand.

As soon as they had exited into the hall beyond, I raced over to the outside
door and slammed it shut,

swinging a heavy bolt in place.

The boy, Maxil, for I was sure it was he, stood, open-mouthed with
admiration, looking at me.

I mastered the trembling in my body, got back my breath and grabbed an
applelike fruit from a bowl

on the table by the door.

'Who was that?' I asked the boy who had started to come over to me, his eyes
still shining with his

respect.

He stopped at my question and pointed inanely at the door. 'You didn't know
that was Samoth?'

'Samoth? No, why should I? I've never had the misfortune to meet him
before.' I took a huge bit out

of the applefruit. It occurred to me that I would probably never not be hungry
again. Most of my waking

time for the last few days had been consumed by eating something.

'Wait'll I get that counterman,' I continued wrath-fully. 'Just wait. D'you

realize he tattled on you to

that oaf?'

'I guessed he'd have to,' Maxil said softly, sadly, looking down at his feet.

'Why?' I asked angrily. 'Is everyone in this city scared of a trio of drunken
bullies?'

Maxil found his ornate sandal very interesting.

'They have reason to be. You must come from out of the city,' he added,
looking up at me quickly

and then away.

'Jurasse,' I replied. 'They thought I was the Lady Fara.'

He looked up guiltily, flushing. 'The counterman overheard us, I guess. I'm
awfully sorry. It was my

mistaking you for the Lady Fara that got you into all this trouble and now
you'll…' his chin quivered and

he turned away abruptly, striding to the window, his whole figure sunk with
dejection.

'Now I'll what?' I urged, trying to keep my impatience out of my voice.

'I can't say it. But it is just horrible you've been dragged here like this. Samoth
and the others'll be

back and they'll… they'll…'he turned toward me again, his face blotched with
an effort to keep back

tears.

'They'll what, Maxil?' I said, going to him in my distress at his conflict.

'They'll say… I'm… impotent,' and with that final dragged-out word he turned
back to the windows,

a pathetic young man.

'Well, of all the despicable, nasty-minded, indecent, incredible things,' I said,
beginning softly and

ending with full vent to my indignation.

The echo of another scene came faintly to my ears and I recalled how I had
helplessly overheard my

four older brothers taunting Seth because he had been unable to 'make it' with
one of the town tarts.

Even at fourteen I had known how cruel and inhibiting such taunting was. I
had been completely unable

to help Seth, but in his name I could try and help this boy.

I took Maxil by the hand and pulled him over the low couch.

'Well, are you?' I asked him point-blank.

He flushed. 'Well, I have,' he said tentatively. 'But not when they're around.'

'I should hope not. There are some things in this world that should be done at
the proper time and

place, in privacy.' And then I, too, was blushing furiously. All I could think of
was my unfortunate

borrowing of one of Marian's phrases and the circumstances under which he
had said it.

'Aw, now don't say you haven't heard what they're saying about me?' Maxil
said, his face still not

quite resigned to tears. 'Gorlot's got it all planned. As soon as he kills Ferrill
off, he'll have me denounced

as unmanly and put that fat-assed gut-stuffer Fernan in as Warlord-elect.'

'Rills Ferrill?' I gasped.

'He's so sick and it's not his constitution. The Harlan clan is not weakening,'
Maxil exclaimed with

pathetic emphasis.

'No, it's not Ferrill's constitution. He's been drugged.'

"That's what I've been trying to…' Maxil gasped and turned to look at me
with startled eyes, 'how did

you know?'

'I know. And further, they drugged Harlan, too.'

Maxil stared at me. He looked at the bolted door. Nervously, he got up and
went to the living-room

balcony, opening the door and looking out suspiciously, before coming back
to sit beside me again.

'I told myself that must have been what happened,' he said in a hoarse
whisper. 'Are you sure it's

true?'

'I'm positive. And furthermore,' I continued, 'he's no longer drugged. He's free
and he's in this city.'

Maxil stared at me as if he thought I had gone mad or he wasn't hearing
properly. He blinked rapidly

at me, swallowed, his Adams apple bobbing just like Seth's did when he was
nervous.

'If you're just saying this,' he growled in a tight, angry voice, ' if you're just
saying this… to… to… I

can still use my authority to…’

I put my hand on his arm, catching his eyes and holding his attention.

'Maxil, I'm telling you the truth.'

Gradually his face changed as he realized I meant what I said. Hope, concern
and then despair

crossed his face. Groaning, he turned from me, again lost in apathy.

'It's too late,' he said sadly. 'It's just too late. And besides,' he turned back to
me again, his eyes

sparkling with anger and a sternness incongruous with his youth, 'you
shouldn't go around saying that

where just anyone could hear you.' He gestured wildly, at the balcony, and the
bedroom and the hall

door, as if overgrown ears would come leaping out of the stonework to us.

'I'm saying it to you.'

'How do you know Gorlot doesn't have me under control?' he argued
violently.

I found myself speaking softer and softer in an unconscious effort to tone him
down.

'Well, I doubt he does if he makes such degrading assertions about you.
Besides, Jokan said you

were terribly worried about Ferrill. You said you hated Samoth. Well, if
Harlan gets the Regency back,

you get rid of Samoth. All I've got to do is to get to Ferrill and tell him what's
happened and have him

convene the Council.'

Maxil regarded me as if I had lost my senses.

'That's all you have to do. Get to Ferrill and tell him to convene the Council,'
he repeated as if

reasoning with an idiot. 'That's all!' Again the broad dramatic gestures.

'I'm in the palace, aren't I? Ferrill lives here, doesn't he?'

It had occurred to me, suddenly, and I felt rather dense it took me so long to
wake up to the

opportunity, that I was in the palace and I might just as well put into effect
Plan A.

'And Ferrill will have to appear in the Starhall tonight if he can walk,' I rattled
on. 'And I presume you

can get into the Starhall?'

'Yes,' Maxil agreed, paying strict attention to me now. 'Yes, I can, and he has
to appear.' He

stopped, dazed, and then his face lit up, his shoulders straightened and his
chin jerked forward. The

frightened, humiliated boy disappeared and the young man stood in his place.

'Do you realize what you've said?' Maxil asked me. 'Do you realize?'

'I gather you're relieved,' I said drolly.

'Relieved, relieved, RELIEVED!' he chorused dramatically. 'I feel alive for
the first time in twelve

months. Nearly a whole year!' he assured me, hooking his fingers in his belt
and striding up and down the

floor.

'In that case, is there any way you can get me some dinner?' I asked as my
stomach impolitely made

noises.

'Dinner? Certainly. Certainly,' he said expansively. He went to the door, shot
the bolt free, and

swung the door open. 'Guard,' he said with a swagger in his voice, 'I want
dinner for two in my rooms.'

I got a glimpse of the startled face of the guard who saluted sloppily just as
Maxil swung the door

closed again.

'I'd bolt the door again, if I were you. I'm not sure I want to tangle with
Samoth when he's cold

sober,' I remarked.

Maxil was not so overconfident as to forget his conditioned response to
Samoth in a half-hour's time.

Indecision showed in his face.

'Look, my friend,' I said seriously, 'I'm glad the news of Harlan relieves you,
but let's not overdo it

until we can get word to Ferrill and start things rolling to get Gorlot and
Samoth out of power.'

'Oh,' Maxil said breezily, 'Samoth was dead drunk. He'll go annoy some of the
ladies before he

comes back here. And then he'll come in with a whole bunch of his clan and
tease me. But he won't be

back till he's sober. And by that time, we'll be gone!' Maxil's eyes flashed
with determination. Then he

pivoted towards me again.

'Just where is Harlan?'

'To tell the honest truth, I don't know. And maybe I'd better not tell you any
more than I already

have.'

'But…' Maxil urged, not to be denied reassurance, '… how did you know he
was drugged? I mean,

how did you get him… out…'

The timid knock at the door interrupted him. He looked at me, eyes scared.

'Dinner,' I whispered to him and then, with sudden inspriation, nestled against
his side, twining one of

his long arms around my shoulders.

'Come,' Maxil said, his voice not quite breaking, his arm crushing my

shoulders as he awkwardly

returned my embrace.

I must say he made a convincing show of someone inconveniently
interrupted. A single man entered, a

mousy fellow, clad in a green apron. He bowed nervously.

'What did you wish for dinner, Lord Maxil?'

'Storner, I want a nice dinner. What had you in mind, Lady…' and he stopped,
realizing he didn't

know my name.

'My name is Sara, darling,' I said, pouting plaintively. 'Had you forgotten,
after…' and I trailed off. I

thought Maxil would explode with laughter. Fortunately his face was turned
from the waiter. 'And I'm

famished. All I want is food.'

'Two of the best… whatever you're serving Gorlot,' and Maxil spat the name
out. From the

expression on Storner's face, he had missed nothing I intended to imply. Nor
Maxil's contempt of the

Regent pro-tern. Whatever the waiter's opinion, he kept his face blank as he
bowed out, promising

dinner in a very few minutes.

'Say,' Maxil breathed, his eyes wide with admiration. 'Did you know what you
were doing?'

I grinned at him, bouncing up off the sofa.

'I hope it's all over the palace, real soon,' I grinned.

'Gee, you're wonderful,' Maxil said sincerely. 'I wish I… I mean, you've…
just…' he was trying to

get something out.

'The Lady Fara?' I asked delicately and was answered by his blush. 'Oh, she's
your girl.'

'She's my dear lady,' Maxil stated firmly. 'At least,' he added,'she would be.
Stannall wouldn't object,

I know. But Godot's not convened Council on the flimsy excuse that the Tane
crisis takes all his time and

it is a time for the Warlord, not the Peace Councils.'

The subject agitated Maxil and he began his restless pacing up and down. The
resemblance struck me

and I realized he was much like a bad copy, a smaller-scale Harlan,
unfinished, unmolded, untempered.

But the resemblance to his uncle was there.

'The Lady Fara is Stannall's daughter?'

'Everyone knows that,' he countered, looking at me.

'I don't. But then, I'm a little country girl,' I added hastily.

'Well, you certainly don't look like it,' Maxil said with unexpected
sophistication. 'As a matter of fact

you do look like my Lady Fara.' He had his uncle's disconcerting way with the
possessive pronoun,

'Same height. Same coloring. And we'd planned to be priest,' he fingered his
white robes, 'and Searcher

this Eclipse. That is, before Harlan had his so-called collapse. Oh, she'd've
had to wait, but we had an

understanding,' he ended with stubborn insistence.

'Won't Stannall be here tonight? I mean, as Councilman.'

Maxil shrugged. 'I don't know. He might be. When I saw you in the bazaar,

and thought for just one

split second you might really be my Lady Fara…' and he left the sentence
hanging. 'But I'm glad it was

you after all,' he said with a very engaging grin.

In spite of all the cruelty he had been subjected to, in spite of worrying, Maxil
was a thoroughly nice

youngster.

'There's not a damn thing wrong with the Harlan clan,' I remarked succinctly
and then smiled for fear

Maxil might take me wrong.

Another knock at the door ushered in our dinner, a welcome diversion for
several reasons.

'Storner,' Maxil said imperiously after our table had been placed before us and
the waiter made ready

to withdraw, 'when is the Warlord, my brother, due at the Starhall?'

'The rumor is he will not come,' Storner said with a blank face.

'I'm not interested in the rumor,' Maxil snapped. 'What has his physician said?'
Maxil's tone showed

his opinion of that gentleman.

'By the tenth hour, my Lord Maxil,' Storner replied in so colorless a voice it
was insolent.

'Oh, marvelous. I promised to get a token from Ferrill,' I giggled. 'To protect
me from a priest I

know,' I said, coyly walking my fingers up Maxil's arm.

Maxil waved Storner out of the room and we continued to make stupid faces
at each other until we

heard the door close. Maxil covered his mouth to smother his laughter,

doubling up with boyish glee.

I waited a moment, then the smell of the dinner, steaming in its metal dishes,
overcame my manners.

'Laugh all you want. I'm hungry,' I announced and started to heap my plate
with food.

'I've never seen a woman eat so much in my life. You pregnant?' he asked
suspiciously.

'What a thing to ask!' I exclaimed, nearly choking.

'Aren't you claimed?'

There was that word again. 'Not exactly,' I said loftily. 'I've an understanding,
though.'

'Oh,' he grunted, mollified.

My sanitarium diet had not prepared me for such gourmandizing as this and I
ate steadily while Maxil

talked. He talked as if it were going out of style. I realized what terrible
tensions he must have been

under. As well as the dramatic enthusiasms and passionate opinions of
adolescence that not even

Samoth's tender attentions had completely subdued, Maxil had a keen insight.
His humor, often with a

bitter edge to it, was wry and delightful. As long as I could keep eating, I
would be able to let him carry

the burden of conversation. I was distressingly aware of my all too limited
acquaintance with the general

framework of life on Lothar. Its everyday banalities, like Joe Dimaggio, hot
dogs, Fourth of July and

hammer murders, were beyond my comprehension.

I gathered that the 'bandsmen' were not orchestra players but groups of

hijackers, burglars or

highwaymen, terrorizing unpatrolled regions, resorting to senseless outrages
of destruction in property

and human life. I had to deduce that such crimes, common enough on earth,
had been completely

unheard of on Lothar. A step more brings the conclusion that the lawless
element usually stayed in the

Patrol where it had an outlet for its energies. The decreased need for active
patrollers had left too many

potential criminals idle. But I was surprised that Maxil had the same
conclusion to make.

I learned that insanity, also a rarity on Lothar, was plotting a dreadful, steep
upward curve of

incidence in medical science. There was no Freud, no Jung, not even a good
common-sense minister to

instruct or analyse. There was no organised religion of any kind on Lothar.
There was only the centuries

old dedication to the absolute destruction of the Mil. This was not enough for
the younger generations of

Lotharians who had had little direct contact with this ageless menace. They
wanted considerably more

out of life than freedom from fear and the stringent safeguards evolved by
ancestors buried hundreds of

years ago.

Perhaps, I thought, Harlan was wrong about not seeking out the Mil now.
Certainly that would

absorb the restless elements. Once Lothar had laid the scourge to rest, she
could progress more

normally. Normally? Was my Earth any more normal with its constant,

useless international bickerings?

At least Lothar had a mighty purpose and pursued it relentlessly, valorously.

As we finished the sweet fruit of our final course, I made a particularly
noticeable blunder.

'Sometimes you act as if you didn't know what I was talking about,' Maxil
commented, frowning.

'And you've got the oddest way of talking. Where do you come from?'

'Jurasse. My mother was from South Cant. I guess that's why I have an odd
way of speaking. Mother

always said Jurassans murder… [I was about to say the King's English]…
human speech.'

'They certainly do,' Maxil agreed, pushing back the table. He belched without
apologizing and I

wondered if this were customary or adolescent. I cleared my throat instead.

We had grown accustomed to the noisy crowds outside the gardens. Now
suddenly a roar of angry

voices drew our attention to the windows. Maxil strode over, beckoning me.

'Another protest on the Tane wars,' he remarked, pointing out banners being
dipped and glided

above the heads of the crowd.

'Damn the Tane wars,' Maxil growled. 'That's all anyone talks of.'

'It masks some other purpose,' I said, remembering Harlan's fears.

'I'll just bet it does. And you know why that war's a farce?' Maxil demanded.
'Because Gorlot's men

command the patrol now. Men,' he sneered, 'like Samoth. All, even the
emergency session of Council

Gorlot calls, they're all his men. He hasn't missed a trick. Not one.'

'Yes,' I contradicted him, 'one. Harlan's escape.'

'That doesn't do any good unless Harlan can appear sane before the Council
and prove it. And I'll

bet Gorlot can think of a way to prove Harlan is as mad as ever.'

'I doubt it. Because Harlan never was mad.'

'I know it. You know it,' he said gloomily.

'Sitting here won't do any good. Seeing Ferrill will. Let's go. It must be near
time now,' I said,

standing up. Maxil's depression was contagious.

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Starhall was the final beauty in the flawlessness of the palace wheel. The
vast dome-ceilinged

room accommodated the throngs of people without seeming in the least
crowded, without being noisy.

The constellations that shone from the darkened ceiling changed perceptibly
as the planet itself turned

round its primary. The mocking lights glittered on hundreds of maskers who
danced, drank and sported

in the gigantic room. I had never seen such a magnificent crowd, nor felt so
dwarfed by a walled

structure. Maxil and I paused, by mutual consent, in one of the five soaring
archways that gave on to the

Hall proper, watching the fantastic revelry.

'Where's Ferrill?' I asked.

Maxil shrugged. 'It's not yet tenth hour. He may not come in until the Eclipse.'
He pointed to the

ceiling where facsimiles of the two satellites closed the gap that separated
them and their rendezvous with

their sun. 'It's a frightfully noisy night for him. Not like other times. Oh, we
had lots of guests but…" His

inference was directed at quality not quantity. 'See that blonde girl over there
by the second archway.

The one in the purple overdress? That's my sister, Kalina.' He grimaced with
distaste. 'She's drunk and

she's got enough face paint on for a Clan Mother. And the other blonde, the
one on the couch under

Ifeaus (a constellation, I later learned), that's Cherez. She's only thirteen. It's
bad enough for Kalina to be

here acting that way. She's already claimed. But for Cherez!'

A servant approached with a tray and paused in front of us. Maxil peered into
the ornate metal

goblets, snorted and waved the man away.

'Gorlot's serving delinade,' he gritted out.

'What's that?' I asked without thinking.

'An aphrodisiac. Don't you know anything?'

I was spared the necessity of replying by the change of expression that came
over Maxil. It was a

combination of fear, hatred, disgust and expectation.

'Where's Samoth?' a cold voice said behind my back and I didn't need to wait
until I was roughly

turned toward the speaker to know it was Gorlot.

'You aren't the Lady Fara,' Gorlot said, staring at me.

'Samoth got drunk,' Maxil said quickly, taking my arm and trying to move
away.

'You are not to leave your tutor. Especially not to pick up prostitutes. As if
they would do you any

good,' Gorlot snapped. 'Go find him.'

'He's supposed to nursemaid me, not me him,' Maxil replied with a show of
more spirit than Gorlot

evidently expected from him.

'I see,' he drawled enigmatically and flicked a hand at the guard behind us.
'Take this trollop out.'

'Immediately,' a feminine voice seconded beyond Gorlot. A woman, elegantly
dressed in a yellow

Searcher's costume joined the temporary Regent. 'I gave explicit orders that I
was to be the only

Searcher here,' she said vindictively. Her eyes narrowed suddenly as she
noticed the flash of my jewels in

the starlight. She peered more closely at the fabric and cut of my gown. Its
rich green made her costume

too glaring a yellow by contrast. 'Who is she?'

'Lady Sara, the Lady Maritha, and, of course, the Lord Regent Gorlot,' Maxil
said with cold

politeness.

'Lady Sara, indeed,' Maritha sneered and snapping her fingers at a passing
traybearer, took an

unladylike gulp of a fresh goblet.

'Lady Sara, indeed,' I replied calmly, bowing as graciously as I could, to make
her rudeness more

apparent. My palms were sweating.

A gleam flickered in Gorlot's eyes as he noticed the exchange. He looked
from Maritha's studied

blonde beauty to me.

'The blonde Searcher and the brunette. An interesting contrast. The Searcher
has always been my

favorite mask, particularly so when I complement it,' Gorlot drawled,
indicating his white priest's robes.

'You make a truly authentic priest,' I murmured, not meaning flattery but

smiling up at him from under

demurely downcast eyes.

'Get her out of here,' Maritha snapped to the guard, her eyes flashing angrily.
'Impertinent wretch,'

and she tossed off the rest of her drink.

Gorlot, to my surprise, canceled that order with a flick of his hand.

'We cannot be so ungracious to Maxil's Searcher,' he said as Maritha glared
first at me, then at him.

She had sense enough to be quiet. 'However, every Searcher knows the priest
who will claim her,

doesn't she?' and his cold eyes flicked once more up and down my body.

Gartly's apparently prophetic words rang in my ears: 'It isn't in Gorlot's room
we want her.'

I took Maxil's arm, more for support against my nervousness, and pulled him
forward, away from

Gorlot. The backward glance I shot him he could interpret any way he chose.
I merely wanted to be sure

he wasn't following me.

I was not the only one shaken by the encounter. Maxil's arm trembled beneath
my hand. He kept his

back straight and his step measured as we walked into the dancers. And there
was more pride and

confidence in his bearing than there had been since I met him.

The dancers and revelers parted around us to catch us up in their whirling
numbers. A fear, deeper,

more intense than the momentary shock of the episode with Gorlot, engulfed
me in choking terror. The

pressing bodies suddenly seemed to compress me in on myself. The various
limbs that brushed against

mine felt wet or cold and I grabbed at Maxil with both hands. He took one
look at my face and brushed

rudely past the maskers to get me on the safe, uncrowded sidelines.

I stammered my thanks, unable to explain my ghastly claustrophobia,
clutching at Maxil as the only

reality in the whole huge room.

He urged me to a brightly decorated buffet table where tall crystal columns
sparkled with liquids.

Culinary masterpieces were decorated to slide down palates dulled by drink.
Maxil indicated an almost

full dispenser of cornade. We were served by a haughty man who gave the
impression of losing dignity

by presenting so mild a brew. I gulped down the tart beverage and its cold
sweetness reassured me out

of my sudden nightmare. I was recovering enough of my senses to see the
surprise on the servant's face

as he was required to serve another goblet of cornade.

'Greetings, Maxil,' said a voice whose cheeriness was another touch with
reality.

Maxil's face lit up first, then flushed. I turned, hopeful of seeing Ferrill but
barely able to cover my

dismay when Maxil grabbed the arm of a well-groomed, wise-faced older
man.

'Stannall,' he cried eagerly.

'Rather to the discomfiture of the Lady Maritha,' Stannall observed.

'The Lady Sara, is it not? I noticed you passing inspection at the door,' and the

First Councilman

bowed deeply, his shrewd eyes not leaving my face. 'Do I congratulate,
Maxil?' he asked.

'No, no,' Maxil said hastily. 'Isn't my Lady Fara here?'

' Your Lady Fara?' Stannall repeated, lightly questioning the possessive
pronoun. 'No, Fara is not

here,' Stannall continued before Maxil had a chance to say anything. Stannall
turned a disapproving face

towards the shrieking revelry beyond us.

'I mean, is she in Lothara at all?' Maxil persisted hopefully.

'Yes,' Stannall said, unbending enough to reassure the boy.

'I'm just filling in for the evening,' I felt constrained to say when I caught
Stannall's austere expression.

'Gorlot called Sara a trollop,' Maxil exploded.

Stannall held up a quieting hand. 'Evidently the… ah… Lady Maritha did,
too. She chooses to forget

she no longer wheedles Harlan but placates Gorlot.'

Maxil and I exchanged glances. I couldn't decide whether to say any more to
Stannall or not.

'Have you seen my brother… Ferrill, Sir Stannall?' Maxil asked anxiously.

Stannall dropped his pose of urbanity and became deeply troubled.

'I have, indeed, and…'

'Where is he?' Maxil interrupted breathlessly.

Stannall ignored the discourtesy and nodded toward a far doorway where two
figures stood watching

the revelry. I could not see distinctly, but I thought I recognized the taller

figure as Ferrill by his stance.

Maxil was about to make a straight-line plunge through the dancers for his
brother, but I twitched his

robe and held him back. Actually, my thought was not caution but a return of
the tongue-drying fear that

had struck me when we had first gone into that weaving mob. We watched as
Ferrill, slowly, almost as if

movement were effort, stepped down into the crowd and was swallowed up.

'I can wait for my token,' I said with forced gaiety, turning to Stannall. 'I need
one from the Warlord

against a priest I don't like.'

'There is no known token for one priest I can name,' Stannall remarked
calmly, adding in a lower

voice that Maxil didn't hear, 'unless, of course, that is your purpose in being
here.'

I smiled at him. 'Sir, it was at this priest's instigation I came and believe me, I
have no intention of

leaving his side this evening.'

Stannall bowed and excused himself. I watched him disappear among the
dancers and wondered,

fleetingly, if I should have mentioned Harlan to him. Still, wasn't he
powerless until Council was

convened? Surely, any attempt of Harlan's to communicate with the First
Councilman would be

intercepted. Yet - I had been in the position to speak.

And how was Harlan even to get into the palace at all? Where was he now?
Did he know I wasn't at

Jokan's?

Maxil touched my arm and led me with a secure grip around the fringe of the
revelers, making toward

the archway where Ferrill had been. We had circled halfway round the room
without a sight of him when

he stepped out of the crowd right in front of me.

I was appalled at the change the last few weeks had made in him. The effort I
had noticed across the

enormous room was tragically obvious close up. His face was very pale, the
skin almost transparent. His

breath came unevenly, his eyes had sunk into his head, the sockets darkened
with pain and sleeplessness.

His voice, no longer vibrant, as it had been at the asylum, shook nearly as
much as his hands. Maxil put

out a quick arm to support Ferrill as the aging young Warlord mounted two
steps and joined us.

'I have been racking my poor brains, dear Searcher,' Ferrill remarked in a
wheezy, rasping voice that

somehow managed to retain a certain forcefulness, 'to remember where I have
seen you before. Not

here, certainly.'

'Your memory is better than Gorlot's,' I replied as casually as I could, for
tension again clutched at

me. 'But I have bettered my condition in the past few weeks.'

Ferrill held up his hand as he searched his memory, Maxil anxiously watching
us and the crowd

simultaneously.

'It was in the company of Harlan,' and I saw the frail shoulders straighten as if
the very name of his

uncle was a tonic. He said nothing. 'I left his company this noontime at the
auxiliary airfield,' I continued,

beginning to share Maxil's anxiety over Ferrill. 'He wants you to convene the
Council. He is sane. He

never was mad. He was drugged just as I imagine they have been drugging
you. Give me a token,

anything, to explain my speaking to you. And have courage.'

Ferrill's breathing became more shallow. He swallowed several times, all the
while maintaining a

politely attentive smile on his face. With a controlled gesture, he took a
dangling medallion from his belt. I

accepted it with a little curtsey.

'He may be too late,' Ferrill wheezed, 'even for Lothar.' He descended three
steps, touched Maxil's

hand affectionately and moved off into the crowd.

'Gorlot saw us,' Maxil said, swiftly, the hangdog expression returning to his
face.

To cover my own fear, I smiled inanely and laughed as if Maxil had amused
me. I searched the crowd

frantically for sight of Stannall, for a doorway with the fewest guards, for
some reprieve from the man

implacably bearing down on us. Maxil whirled me away among a sudden knot
of drunken prancers, back

toward the beverage table where we had last seen Stannall. The fear of Gorlot
met my claustrophobia in

a brief struggle for supremacy and the fear of Gorlot won.

But Gorlot never reached us because a shriek of horror pierced the noise and
music. Shouts of 'The

Warlord… He fell' followed. The entire vast hall was silent for a horrified
minute. Then Gorlot's voice

called cold orders for Trenor, for a stretcher.

We watched, clutching at each other for comfort at this catastrophe as the
limp body of Ferrill was

carried away.

'I've got to get out of here now, Maxil,' I cried. But as we turned to look, all
the doorways were

being blocked by guards with weapons held at the ready.

'Stannall then,' I hissed. Maxil craned over the heads around us and then
pulled me roughly after him.

The First Councilman had been about to leave the hall when Maxil urgently
tugged at his arm, insisting

on a private word. Stannall frowned as Maxil indicated me.

'I've no time to undo your coquetry, miss,' he said severely, drawing away.

'Would you class news of Harlan as coquetry?' I stated.

Stannall turned slowly back. 'What's this? Explain!'

'Harlan was never mad. He's back in Lothara tonight to prove it. At Central
Barracks in the section of

Sinnall, son of Nallis, who is loyal to his Regent,' and I stressed the title, not
daring to continue for the

press of people around us and the sudden approach of two guards.

'The Regent requests the presence of the First Councilman immediately,' one
guard said, saluting.

'He's my brother. I must come, too,' Maxil pleaded.

'Only the First Councilman is required,' the guard said dispassionately.

Maxil's eyes clouded and his lip trembled a moment. 'But he may…'

'Lad,' Stannall reassured him kindly, 'I'll send for you,' and he followed the
guard.

Maxil's face wore the old, bitter mask. I tried to comfort him, but it was the
appearance of his

younger brother, Fenian, drunken, strutting in premature triumph, that
stiffened Maxil's resolve. Looking

at the youngster, his face greasy and swollen with overindulgence, I could
scarcely see why anyone

would choose him over Maxil.

Deliberately Maxil turned his back on Fernan and ignored the whispers we
both heard very plainly.

Gorlot had spread his fiction about Maxil with an efficient hand.

We didn't have long to wait to know why Stannall had been summoned. He,
Gorlot and another man

Maxil said was Trenor appeared in the archway and the maskers quieted
expectantly.

'The Warlord Ferrill has been seriously taken with a heart attack. He is resting
comfortably at the

moment. It is the opinion of his physician that with care and rest he will
recover,' Gorlot's harsh news

rang out into the Hall. 'We have been concerned with his health for some
time. It is our deep regret that

his frailty will prevent him from fulfilling his promise as one of Lothar's great
Warlords.'

'He regrets,' Maxil growled.

Someone was moving through the crowd which parted to make way. As he
stepped up to Gorlot, we

saw it was Fernan. Maxil winced. I saw Stannall beckoning to Maxil and gave
him a prod in the ribs.

Because the boy refused to let my hand go, we both made our way through
the reluctantly parting throng.

I gave Maxil one final push and jerked my hand free as we reached the steps.
Gorlot, however, saw me

and his eyes narrowed. I returned his stare with a defiance I hoped was
convincing.

People began to whisper together and then someone tittered and Maxil,
standing by Stannall, turned

to face the Hall.

'What makes the eunuch think he can be Warlord?' some self-acknowledged
wit quipped from the

safety of the mass. Laughter rippled from all parts of the Hall.

'Eunuch?' I echoed angrily, rising to the first step and turning to face the
direction of the voice.

'Eunuch?' I repeated as the laughter died and attention was centered on me. I
snorted with disgust and

disbelief. 'Can you know,' for the wit had been a man, 'better than I?'

The mutter from the assembled had an entirely different tone now, one of
surprise, and Maxil added

the final touch.

'Sara, not here,' he pleaded, an agonized expression on his furiously blushing
face.

It couldn't have been more perfect. The canary-satiated look vanished from
Fernan's fat face.

Gorlot's eyes narrowed to angry slits and his right hand clenched and
unclenched the knife at his belt.

'In deference to the illness of Ferrill, it is my suggestion that you carry your
revels to another place of

enjoyment,' Stannall announced quietly, motioning to the guards to step aside
from the archways. 'Lord

Maxil,' and Stannall stressed the title,'the Lady Sara, may I ask that you attend
me?'

Gorlot stepped in between Stannall and us.

'As Regent, I would like to ask the Lady Sara a few questions,' he almost
snarled.

There was a hint of a smile on Stannall's calm face as he answered Gorlot.

'Gorlot, you were Regent to Ferrill. Your Regency, a temporary appointment
in any case, has ended

with your acknowledgement of Ferrill's incapacity. The Council will convene
tomorrow to install the new

Warlord-elect and consider the appointment of his Regent.'

Calmly Stannall motioned us to precede him out of the Hall. I couldn't resist
one backward glance

and saw Fernan pulling at Gorlot's sleeve impatiently, his putty face screwed
up with childish petulance.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Stannall brushed aside Maxil's impatient questions about Ferrill. As First
Councilman, Stannall had

apartments on the fourth level of the palace wing. We made a silent progress
down the blue, softly lit

corridor, punctuated with doors and guards, past Maxil's quarters. At the door
of his suite, Stannall

paused, motioning the guard aside. He produced a curiously shaped rod and
pressed it into the small

panel in the center of the door. A low whine was audible and then the door
opened inward. Lights came

up immediately, exposing the graceful main room of the apartment and a
filigree-framed balcony.

When the door was closed, Stannall turned to me sternly and demanded an
explanation of my cryptic

remarks in the Starhall. I gave him an expurgated edition of Harlan's recovery
from the drug, intimating

that'suspicions had existed in certain minds' over the cause of Harlan's
unexpected collapse. I told him of

our escape, my meeting with Maxil and my subsequent abduction. As far as I
knew, Harlan was in

Central Barracks in a detachment from Motlina, under the Second Leader
Sinnall.

'I realize now why I was suddenly invited here for the Eclipse,' Stannall
mused, rubbing the side of his

nose thoughtfully. 'My presence has not been required much lately. Obviously

Harlan could be kept from

seeing me here,' and he nodded toward the guarded door. 'But there are other
problems now to be

surmounted.'

He turned toward Maxil thoughtfully.

'Although… ah… the Lady Sara has already neatly undone much of Gorlot's
plans to undermine your

election,' Stannall began, inclining his head graciously toward me.

'But we… she…' Maxil stammered.

Stannall frowned and looked at me for explanation.

'We met for The first time this afternoon,' I said meaningfully.

'Then the boy could be…'

'Nonsense,' I snapped, regardless of Stannall's position and age. 'He doesn't
think he is and he should

know.'

'My daughter, Fara…'

'You know, sir, Fara and I have had an understanding for just years,' Maxil
blurted out.

Stannall regarded him with a kindly expression. 'I had hoped that would
develop into a constant

feeling.'

Maxil swallowed hurriedly. 'It has. I mean, it would if you'd ever let her come
back to the palace.'

Stannall raised his eyebrows. 'More of Gorlot's machinations clarify suddenly.
Yes, of course, it

wouldn't be to his advantage to have Fara at the palace. Placing you under a

tutor the like of Samoth…'

Stannall shook his head. 'Believe me, I was not in favor of that appointment.
But I felt at the time it was

only for a little while.'

'Little while!' Maxil snorted, revealing the abuse he had endured all too long.

'However,' Stannall said more briskly, 'we shall take care of that little detail
right now. Before

anything else.'

He touched an ornate switch on a bare wall which slid back, revealing a
complicated set of panels,

desk area and closets. Flipping a series of switches, Stannall activated a vision
circuit on which a picture

clarified of an old man, clad in a dressing robe.

Stannall greeted the man as Cordan, explaining the Warlord's collapse and
asking Cordan to contact

Luccill and Mallant and bring them immediately to the palace wing to confer
with Trenor.

'With Trenor?' Cordan shouted indignantly.

'Yes, Trenor,' Stannall reiterated clearly. 'We shall need a full report in the
morning for Council. You

will then insist, I repeat, insist on seeing me, no matter what the hour, to give
me, as First Councilman,

your opinion. I cannot overstress the urgency of this. Do you understand?'

Cordan nodded gravely and Stannall broke the connection. Maxil sighed with
relief and flopped

down into an armchair.

'Why didn't you tell me of Harlan's escape before you rushed off to Ferrill?'

the Councilman asked me

sternly. 'You realize, of course, that the news was too great a strain and
brought about this attack? I

could have effected a convention myself, given your information.'

Maxil turned a horror-stricken face to me.

'I didn't know that,' I said, tears springing to my eyes.

'But, my dear girl, I am the First Councilman. Surely you know the
prerogatives of that office.'

'The Council was not in session,' I argued in defense. 'Harlan didn't dare get in
touch with you at your

holdings.'

'Harlan made a poor choice as messenger, then,' Stannall retorted, anger in his
voice.

'I wasn't even supposed to be a messenger,' I cried. 'I just had the misfortune
to tangle with Samoth

and the next thing I knew I was in the palace and in Maxil's room. I thought it
would help Ferrill to know

Harlan was all right.'

'Please, Sir Stannall,' Maxil interposed, alarmed at my tears. 'I'm the one to
blame. I knew how sick

Ferrill was. And I knew all about Harlan. It's my fault, not Sara's.'

'Oh, my situation is absurd,' I cried in my frustration. 'Accusing me doesn't
heal Ferrill now and it

doesn't get Harlan into the palace and make him Regent again.'

'He couldn't be made Regent anyway,' Stannall reminded us dryly.

'Why not?' Maxil's voice cracked in dismay.

'First, he has to be proved sane. Second, the same condition I cited to Gorlot
applies to Harlan. He

was Regent for Ferrill.'

'But what if I want Harlan as my Regent?' declared Maxil with dawning
comprehension. 'I'm over

fifteen, so I can choose.'

'That's perfectly true’ Stannall replied as if he, too, had only realized this fact.
He brought his hand

down hard on the communicator switch, dialing quickly. He turned to me
again, his eyes blinking rapidly,

his lips pursing in thought. 'There is no doubt of his sanity?'

'Of course not. He never was insane. He was drugged into a semblance of
mental imbalance. If you

are having those physicians here for Maxil, get Harlan here, too. They must
be as qualified to judge

Harlan's sanity as Maxil's… virility.'

A voice declared it issued from 'Central Barracks', but no picture evolved.

"This is First Councilman Stannall,' and the picture came on abruptly. 'I need
additional sections for

special duties at once. Are all assigned?'

'No, Sir Stannall, but the ones available are all provincial reinforcements
called in on special

assignment,' the officer apologized.

'That doesn't matter. Have you any men from my province?'

'No, sir. I could recall those from duty…'

'That would consume too much time. What have you got?'

'Units from Motlina, South Cheer, Banta…'

'Medina. Leader's name?'

'Sinnall.'

'That would be Nallis' son, wouldn't it?'

'I believe so.'

'Fine. Have him report by planecar to my balcony and give him clearance
through all that mess out

front.'

It was too simple. I sat with my eyes closed in relief that Harlan would soon
be here. Stannall, pursing

his lips in thought, brooded over the length of his right foot. Maxil walked
over to the fruit bowl on the

table and chose a piece to munch.

'I wonder,' Stannali mused aloud, 'what else Gorlot has been busy doing.'

'Harlan seemed to think the Tane uprising was covering something up,' I
remarked into the silence.

Stannali shook his head in disagreement. 'I've checked and double-checked
the reports on that from

the first attack. I've interviewed some of the survivors of the first raids. Those
that were paralyzed with

cerol. Wicked stuff that. I suspect some connivance with Glan or Ertoi. They
have always been so

complacent about their role in the Alliance. It isn't natural. And then there's
that treaty concerning the

Tanes that Gorlot has been trying to ram through Council.'

I shrugged, not having heard anything about that. The sound of Maxil's
munching was infectious. I

rarely needed an excuse to eat lately, so I wandered over to have another bite.

We were all expecting it, but when the whir of the planecar's approach
suddenly drowned out the

muted revelry beyond the gardens, we jumped to our feet, startled.

The car hovered, connected with the trelliswork of the balcony and disgorged
its passengers. Stannali

held up a warning hand and allowed the group to file in. The planecar was
closing its slot door when the

door to the hall burst open and the guards rushed in, weapons drawn. The
masqueraders, acting on

reflex, pulled out their own arms. The two forces glared at each other
suspiciously even as Stannall's easy

chuckle dissipated the sudden menace in the room.

'I'm pleased to see such alertness,' he remarked to his guards with that
measured calm of his.

Weapons were sheepishly replaced.

'Mark these men well, guards,' Stannali continued, indicating Sinnall's
section. 'They'll be coming and

going all night. Oh, and when the physicians, Luccill, Mallant and Cordan
arrive, they are to be admitted

immediately. They are expected.'

The guards backed out with one final suspicious glare at the newcomers.

As the door closed behind them, Harlan spotted me where I had been half
hidden by Maxil.

'Sara, how did you get here?' he exclaimed, striding to me.

Stannall snorted. ' That reaction proves he's sane,' he commented almost
sourly. 'You've heard the

news?'

Harlan, one arm around me, turned back to the First Councilman.

'Bad news needs no announcement,' Harlan said heavily.

'Your emissary,' and Stannall gave me a curt nod of his head, 'was too literal
in the discharge of her

duty. In consequence she also robbed you of yours.'

'Stannall, that isn't fair,' Maxil interposed before I could explain anything.

'Sara, you were supposed to get to Jokan's,' Harlan muttered, gripping me
tightly in his concern.

'Best laid plans,' I sighed. 'I ended up here, talking to Ferrill after all.'

Stannall frowned and went into bitter detail of the events leading up to
Ferrill's heart attack.

'Sara wouldn't have known you could help us, Stannall,' Harlan said firmly.
'Had I even the slightest

hope you would be here at Eclipse, I would have…"

Stannall waved off the rest of his sentence. 'You realize, of course, Harlan,
that your Regency also is

terminated by Ferrill's incapacity?'

Harlan nodded, settling himself beside me. I sat there inanely holding the core
of my fruit because I

didn't see anywhere to dispose of it. Behind Stannall's back, Harlan took the
core and tossed it at a

seemingly bare spot in the wall. A slot opened as the core neared and closed
silently behind it. Harlan's

grin and the squeeze he gave my hand mitigated Stannall's scathing
disapproval.

'However,' Stannall continued, pacing, 'young Maxil here is next in line. He

claims he's ready to stand

up and cry for you in front of Council.'

Harlan turned to Maxil, a mixture of emotions on his face and a flurry of
unspoken thoughts muddying

the color of his eyes.

'With thanks for the honor, young Maxil, I'm not at all anxious to be saddled
with the Regency again.'

Everyone in the room turned to stare at Harlan.

'But you were… driving us like cavehunters to get here,' Jessl stammered out.

'To save Fenill's life, yes. It's in good hands now. And neither Gorlot nor I is
Regent.'

'But Harlan, you're the only one who can be Regent,' Maxil cried out, his
voice cracking perilously in

his distress.

Harlan regarded him a moment with tolerance.

'You could certify me for good if I agreed with you, young Maxil,' he said
lightly. 'You'll find dozens

of men eager for the job. I'll give my personal recommendation that you'll be
easy on the new Regent.'

'This levity is uncalled for,' Gartly growled disapprovingly. 'There aren't
dozens of men qualified for

the Regent of the Warlord in these troubled times. And you know it.'

'You're one, friend Gartly,' Harlan pointed out. He rose. 'I had been Regent for
seven years,' he said,

directly to Stannall. 'That's a slice out of a man's life. I've got other plans for
the next six years while

Maxil grows up,' and his eyes slid enigmatically in my direction.

'For instance?' asked Stannall with an edge to his voice.

'You know my preferences well enough, Stannall,' Harlan replied sharply.
'You've vetoed my

requests for more exploratory ships. You've overridden my insistence that we
must find more allies for

the final attack on the Mil homeworlds.'

This seemed to be the prologue for the renewal of an old battle of more than
unusual importance to

both men.

Stannall opened his mouth to reply and then dismissed the subject with a
sharp wave of his hand.

'It does you no good to find new planets for Lothar if she is in the grip of men
like Gorlot and the

petty bullies of his clan. You were, as I recall it,' and Stannall's voice was
heavily sarcastic,'the one who

initiated the colonization policy that would give the run-from-the-Mil his first
chance for independent

holdings…'

'If there were not two but eight, nine, ten planets to divide, there would be no
such struggle,' Harlan

interposed.

Stannall snorted his contempt. 'Of course, it doesn't signify that such men as
Lamar, Newrit, Tellmann

- and I could name a dozen others - are no longer available as prospective
Regents.'

This was news to the others as well as Harlan.

'Yes, that surprises you, doesn't it,' Stannall said with calculated scorn. 'Newrit
and Tellmann were

killed in the Tane revolutions; Lamar and Sosit are in survivor asylums in
pitiful condition. In their places

we have such notable personalities as Samoth, Portale, Losin…'

'Bumbling incompetents,' Harlan exploded. 'I've kept them on the Moonbases
since they aged into

section leaders because they blasted well can't do much harm to raw rock.'

Stannall smiled mockingly. 'Yet they are now quadrant leaders and the only
choice besides Gorlot

that Maxil here would have.'

Harlan glared fixedly, almost sullenly, at Stannall. 'I have already done more
than my duty for Lothar,'

he muttered.

Stannall's eyes narrowed angrily, but he controlled his face into an appearance
of good humor.

'Yes, you have,' he agreed. 'So has Ferrill.'

'I have the right to lead a private life, now,' snapped Harlan, jerking himself
away from Stannall and

stamping over to the balcony.

'How would you lead it under the Regency of a man like Gorlot… or Losin?'

'Gartly qualifies. So does Jokan.'

'Aye, and Gartly's willing,' the old soldier spoke up sternly.

'Jokan's reputation as a philandering dabbler disqualifies him, however,'
Stannall pursued, 'in the eyes

of the conservatives as much as it enhances him in the halls of the liberals.
You know where that would

end: stalemate.'

Harlan stopped pacing and stood, his back to all of us, staring out at the
revelry beyond the palace

and absorbing the quiet of the still gardens. There was resignation and tired
defeat in the set of his

shoulders.

I wondered in the tense silence that fell if his reference to exploration made
me indirectly responsible

for the outburst that had stunned the others. This change of face was unlike
the dedicated man I knew.

He had thought of nothing for the last weeks but to get back to Lothara, be
reinstated as Regent and

save both Ferrill and Lothar from Gorlot's plans. It was incredible that he
would suddenly separate duty

to Ferrill and duty to Lothar when he himself had given me the strongest
impression that the two were

indivisible in his eyes. Hadn't Stannall's revelations impressed on him that
Lothar needed him more than

ever before? Why did he hesitate?

'My friend,' Stannall began in a subtly persuasive tone, 'your return and the
fact that you were really

drugged into insensibility are the final pieces in a puzzle I have been
meditating ten months. Does it not

appear all too propitious that Gorlot should have been in Lothara at the time
of your collapse when you

had ordered him on Rim maneuvers? That three days after your… illness, the
Tane wars break out? That

Socto, Effra and Cheret are replaced within the month, leaving Hospitals, War
Supplies and Records in

the control of Gorlot adherents? That petty officers with records as martinets

and incompetents are

suddenly promoted to quadrant leaders? That Ferrill, whose health has never
been as robust as we could

wish, is suddenly afflicted with a strange debilitating malady and is
successfully treated only by Trenor, a

relatively unknown physician from a back province in Gorlot's holding? That
Maxil is shepherded,

disgraced, shamed, humiliated by a bullying byblow, while Fernan is feted
and cozened? That Council is

left unconvened except for the emergency quota all during a long summer and
that that quota is

composed of those barons who have opposed your reforms? They fit in, these
pieces, don't they?

'And don't think I haven't left a cave unsearched to find out what is really
going on. I've seen every

report from the quadrants, talked with the wounded; seen the shivering
wrecks that were our most

promising patrol leaders and tried to convince myself that nothing was wrong.
Because there has been no

discernible evidence of illicit activity.

'And then, miraculously, you return as sane and hearty as when I saw you in
the Starhall two hours

before your collapse.'

Stannall paused. He looked at Harlan to see what effect his disclosures were
having.

'Tell me,' the Councilman's facile voice changed flavor again, 'have you no
personal quarrel to pick

with Gorlot for taking ten months out of your life? Can he shame you with the
stigma of insanity and not

expect to answer to you? Or are you still insane? The man who tells me his
duty was done with Ferrill's

deposition does not sound like the Harlan I knew ten months ago. It sounds
like a drug-weakened

dreamer, filled with delinade, not guts and blood.'

Instead of being stung by the insults, Harlan turned wearily from the window.
He looked toward me

first, but his face was expressionless.

'You touch a point none of us have brought up, Stannall,' he said slowly,
heavily. 'It is necessary first

to prove I am sane to the Council, to the planet, and to myself.'

Jessl and Gartly exhaled tightly drawn breaths. Stannall allowed no
expression of triumph whatever to

cross his features.

'Harlan,' Maxil burst out, his voice cracking again, 'if you don't want to be
Regent for me…"

Harlan crossed quickly to the boy and threw an affectionate arm across the
rigidly held shoulders.

'My… hesitation… has no reflection on my fondness for you, lad. Or, I should
say, my lord.'

'That, too, has not yet been decided,' Stannall said briskly. He sat down at the
desk by the

communicator and pulled out slates as he continued talking. 'The physicians
will report here after they

make their examinations of Ferrill'

'There's no chance that the initial verdict can…" asked Harlan.

'None,' was Stannall's emphatic answer. 'I presume Gorlot has been merely
biding his time before he

brought up the matter of the lad's health officially. Perhaps he didn't expect
Ferrill to collapse so

completely.'

'But you said he'd be all right,' Maxil said anxiously.

Stannall frowned slightly at this interruption. He turned and looked at Maxil
as if the boy had changed

completely.

'I said he'd live. The extent of his invalidism we'll know when we receive the
full medical report. At

the same time they are here to see you, my lord, they can make a preliminary
examination of Harlan.

Undoubtedly a more extensive one will have to be made at the War Hospital
Clinic at a later date.'

Stannall added a final mark to the slate he had been writing on and handed it
to Sinnall.

'Section Leader, this must be delivered at once to Lesatin. I believe he
planned to be in Lothara for

the festivities, but I doubt he was invited to the palace.' Stannall smiled wryly.
'His sympathies have never

paralleled Gorlot's interests. Once the message is delivered, consider yourself
under Lesatin's orders. Try

first at his town residence, Place of the Triangle Red. Someone there may be
sober enough to remember

where the man went.

'Gartly, I want you to contact every old patroller you know, in town or not.
Jessl, get your younger

friends together. I want word spread that Harlan is back, that he is sane. That
he never was mad. Your

group can spread the news quicker than the Mil can evacuate the city. By the
way, where's that ladies

man, Jokan? I'd've thought he'd be along tonight.'

'He's waiting at his place for Sara. And I think she'd better go there,' Harlan
said.

'On the contrary,' Stannall countermanded, turning to look at me. 'The young
lady must spend the

night in Maxil's suite.'

It was Harlan's turn to frown.

'I don't see the necessity of…'

'You don't see, Harlan,' Stannall interrupted testily,'that she is essential to
counteract Gorlot's

campaign to have Maxil set aside as impotent. In front of the entire Starhall,
she admitted his claim on

her.'

Harlan turned white and stared at me.

'I did not,' I cried, although I didn't understand the undercurrent between
Harlan and Stannall that was

directed at me. 'I said nothing of the kind. And I only met the boy this
afternoon at a cornade stand in the

square. Then…'

Stannall waved me silent. 'That must not be known,' and he pinioned with his
glance everyone in the

room separately, exhorting unspoken compliance with this essential lie. 'The
impression,' and as his voice

underlined the word, he looked squarely at Harlan and then Maxil, 'must
stand.'

'A moment,' Harlan said in a too-quiet voice. 'I had a prior claim.'

Stannall turned to Harlan coldly. 'I cannot help your private plans for the Lady
Sara. The fact remains

unalterable that Lothar must remain under the impression that this girl is
Maxil's lady. That voids Gorlot's

scheme to have Maxil set aside in favor of Fernan. Gorlot neglected to
include an element of chance in

his calculations. We cannot permit his neglect to be unutilized because of
private feelings or dealings. I'm

certain that both Lord Maxil and the Lady Sara are aware of the
circumstances in which they now find

themselves and will conduct themselves accordingly.'

'Sara, I'm sorry,' Maxil pleaded with such adolescent embarrassment that I
swallowed the words that

rushed to my lips.

'There is so much at stake,' I began, directing my plea to Harlan whose jaw
muscles were clenched

with his unspoken anger. 'After all, it is an honor to be the Warlord's lady. If I
ever dreamed a simple

glass of cornade would lead to all this…" and I made an attempt at a carefree
laugh. Maxil gave me a

rather sickly grin of gratitude, but Harlan refused to unbend.

'With your permission,' he grated out between his teeth at Stannall and then
drew me out to the

balcony. Stannall watched us leave and then beckoned to Gartly and Jessl to
leave and for Sinnall and

Cire to join him at the desk.

Harlan was gripping my hand painfully tight. He shut the glass balcony door

and drew me into the

balcony shadow.

'Sara, that gesture may cost you your life,' he began.

'Don't be silly, I've braved the worst that Gorlot could do and…"

'Gorlot is nowhere near as deadly for you as Stannall,' Harlan said in such
earnest my levity failed me.

'You never come right out and explain,' I wailed softly.

He shook his head irritably. 'It is not a simple thing to explain. I don't
understand how you came to let

Maxil claim you. Surely you must realize how little you know of this planet.'

'I couldn't agree more.'

'Then how can you expect to play a part which calls for constant public
appearances where

everything you do and say will be remarked. The tiniest slip will be noticed.
Sara, Sara.'

He took me in his arms, pressing my head against his chest, folding me
carefully but tightly against

him, his lips on my forehead.

'What else could I have done? I've been as backed into a short cave as you
have.'

At my choice of words, he gave a little chuckle, and released me. I could see
his face in the shadow,

his eyes on me were tender.

'There was one chance in several thousand you'd manage to carry off what
you've already done. But

I'd far rather see you safely on my holdings until we find out more about how
you got here. And

preferably, find your world.'

'Is that what you meant when you said you had other things to do with your
life?'

'Yes,' he said sadly. 'Yes. There's more than just finding your world and
helping them defend

themselves against the Mil. But that's scarcely an issue to throw into the
confusion of this mess.'

'But why is my origin so dangerous?'

'It's all wrapped with the horror of restoration,' he said in a tight voice, 'which
I have no time to

explain. But you say you've come from another planet. The only way you can
have got from another

planet that I know of is by way of a Mil ship. And traveling on a Mil ship…
well, it follows that you must

be a restoree. And to almost everyone, a restoree is a horror to be
exterminated at the first opportunity.'

I stared at him, my throat dry.

'But I'm not horrible, am I?' I whispered, scared deep inside me by the
intensity of his voice.

'Dear, my lady,' he said softly, framing my face with both hands, 'has not half
of Lothar acknowledged

your loveliness?'

'But your restoree talk scares me,' I said, biting back my tears. Fatigue, hand
in hand with fright,

seeped past the barriers excitement and novelty had created. I was desperately
tired.

'I know, Sara, but I must scare you enough to make you doubly cautious. I
feel so powerless to

protect you.'

I'm too tired to think,' I groaned, putting my hand to the place on my jaw that
ached.

He opened the door and handed me back into the room.

' My Lady Sara is exhausted,' Harlan said, issuing his challenge at Stannall.

The First Councilman looked up at Harlan for a long moment.

'Maxil, you have heard Harlan's claim.'

'Yes, sir, I have,' Maxil agreed somberly, rising to his feet.

'All right, both of you escort her to Maxil's apartment. Then I want both of
you back here,' Stannall

said with exasperation.

Harlan, bowing slightly to me and then Maxil, gave Maxil my hand and
opened the door to the hall for

us.

There was no doubting the shock of surprise on the faces of the guards as they
recognized Harlan on

the way to Maxil's quarters. Neither Maxil nor Harlan looked right or left.
Maxil palmed open his door

and stood aside to let me and then Harlan pass while the startled hall guard
snapped to attention, his eyes

wide and rolling around to get the closest look at the Regent.

Maxil closed the door and let Harlan lead me to a bedroom, opposite the one
in which Samoth had

dumped me that afternoon. The lights came up immediately in the lovely
room.

'How do you turn them off?' I whispered urgently to Harlan.

He pulled the door to and waved one hand over a panel of darker wood by the
doorway. The lights

went out. I saw the whiteness of his hand move again and the lights came up.

He stared at me fiercely.

'By all the mothers of all the clans, I should have claimed you on that boat
after all. Remember, you

are my lady.'

The incredible possessiveness of his look stayed before my eyes long after he
left. I realized suddenly

what the formality of 'claiming' and using the personal possessive pronoun
must mean. I had got myself

married to Harlan without even knowing it. I fell asleep trying to see all the
ramifications of my

paradoxical situation.

CHAPTER NINE

The next morning when I woke, I felt rested completely and, of course,
hungry. I was torn between a

bath and something to eat. On the bed was a heavy green robe. I glanced at
the other side of the large

bed and assured myself I had been its lone occupant. I rose and belted the
robe and tiptoed to the door.

I peeked out into the living-room, saw a clear path to the fruit on the table and
started for it.

'Lady Sara, I hope I didn't wake you,' and I whirled to see a young blonde girl
in a blue overdress,

her eyes wide and anxious.

'No,' I muttered.

'I am Linnana and at your service. May I draw your bath? There are gowns for
your choosing and, if

I may suggest it, the others will soon arrive for breakfast.' She glanced at the
hall door nervously,

expecting an invasion momentarily.

Beyond her, I saw on the raised level at the balcony door the table set and
awaiting diners. I nodded

but nevertheless grabbed up an applefruit before I returned to my room. I
didn't care what she thought. I

was hungry.

I bathed and then allowed Linnana to show me the clothes she had mentioned.
It was a mistake

because there were far too many of all colors, lengths and fabrics, and a small
chest of jewels as well.

I'm just a simple country girl,' I began finally, as even Linnana showed
impatience at my indecision. 'I

don't know what to choose to wear in the place for breakfast.'

She giggled. 'That's easy. With your permission?'

She held up a knee-length tunic and overdress in contrasting shades of a soft
rust, and took from the

jewels a simple chain of gold with jadelike buttons in the links. When I had
dressed, no longer worried

about unfamiliar closures because she took care of that, she set me down
again and opened a small metal

box. With a brush, she recreated eyebrows for those I lost in the force screen.
She added a touch of

color to my lids and a plush of paint on my lips and studied the effect. When I
glimpsed myelf in the

mirror, my hand inadvertently went to my nose. I snatched it back into my lap
for fear she would interpret

my gesture.

'My pardon, Lady Sara,' and she brought out powder for me.

It was a little reassuring to know that women still used such guiles on Lothar.

Evidently she felt no more was needed and followed me to the door.

When I stepped out into the room, I stopped abruptly on the threshold.
Linnana had neglected to tell

me who had been expected for breakfast and I had not bothered to count the
place settings. It would not

have been so overwhelming if I had known what to expect. Over twenty men
were gathered in that

room, of whom I knew only Stannall, Harlan, Maxil and Jessl. Following
Maxil and Harlan's example,

those seated at the crowded table rose instantly. I believe I was the only one
who saw Harlan prod Maxil

forward to greet me.

Maxil struggled with his embarrassment as he took my hand to lead me to my
place. Our flushing

faces only compounded the desired impression.

A servant came quickly with the steaming chocolaty beverage which was the
Lotharian equivalent of

coffee. It helped clear my head, certainly; hot, tart and stimulating.

'You'll be pleased to know, Lady Sara,' Harlan began formally but with a
wicked twinkle in his

eye,'that the Lord Maxil and I have been cleared of the various physical and
mental deficiencies

attributed to us. And, by the foremost physician of the world, Monsorlit.'

I grabbed frantically to balance the cup in my hand before my trembling
spilled the hot stuff all over

me. Maxil hastily proffered a napkin and a servant materialized to mop up and
produce a fresh cup. I

muttered inanely about hot cups and tried to catch Harlan's eye. His remarks
were addressed to the table

in general and he did not look at me.

'Gorlot was… obviously… mistaken about Maxil,' he continued blithely. A
polite ripple of laughter

forced a bright smile from me. There were no lascivious side-wise looks at
me from the men at the table.

Actually fathers were quick to urge a likely girl to become the unofficial lady

of a Warlord. A child of

such an alliance might well be Warlord-elect if the father died without other,
more legal issue.

'The most exhaustive tests brought by Physician Monsorlit failed to show me
mentally defective but

he's to try his worst this afternoon in that precious Clinic of his. I am,
evidently,' and here Harlan's

laughter was echoed by the others,'to be congratulated on my astounding
return to sanity.'

'Physician Monsorlit,' the name rang in my brain and I couldn't believe it.
Could there be two with the

same name?

'Remarkable luck, that,' said a man standing by the balcony, 'getting one of
Gorlot's own to validate

your sanity.'

Harlan frowned at the comment.

'I say I find it difficult to believe a man of Monsorlit's caliber is connected
with Gorlot. He's too fine a

scientist and physician…'

'Not too fine a man to have dabbled in the vile practice of restoration,'
snapped Stannall with such

massive hate and condemnation in his voice that it filled the room with
tension.

I stared, amazed at the First Councilman for the passion of his denunciation.

'He was severely disciplined for that youthful attempt,' a gray-headed,
senatorial man remarked, 'and

has turned his remarkable energies toward our truly pressing problem of
insanity. Look what he has

achieved with that Mental Clinic of his. He's been able to train useless idiots
to perform simple duties

perfectly.'

Stannall was not impressed.

'He has sought the proper cave in company with Gorlot.'

Then why, I asked myself, did Monsorlit say Harlan was sane. Don't they
realize that Monsorlit was

responsible for Harlan's collapse?

'Gorlot will have difficulty now keeping Maxil from the Warlordship and
Harlan from being appointed

Regent,' someone stated.

'I wouldn't be too sure,' Stannall said sourly. 'Remember, there was little
Monsorlit could do when

three other noted physicians were sincerely convinced of Harlan's recovery.'

'Then you expect trouble tomorrow when the Council convenes?' Grayhead
asked worriedly.

'Of course I do,' Stannall said. 'Do you think Gorlot will simply step aside
because Harlan has

returned unexpectedly? No, the man is incredibly cunning, else we should
have suspected him long ago.

How many of you doubted his report of Maxil's impotency until last night.
How many of us have

questioned any one of his other unusual acts? The appointment of a back-
province physician for Ferrill

instead of Loccan or Cordan?'

'But Trenor effected some relief for the War - the boy,' another voice
interposed. "There was a

definite improvement.'

'Yes, a cessation of whatever drug they used to debilitate the boy,' Stannall
retorted.

'Did the physicians find the residue of any such drug in Fen-ill's body?'
Grayhead asked.

Stannall snorted. "There are many drugs with peculiar properties, my dear
Lesatin, whose traces are

completely absorbed in the system within a few hours. Cordan suggests that
perhaps cerol was used

since Ferrill's motor system has suffered most. But that is confidential
information.'

'Cerol?' Lesatin exclaimed in horror, 'but that's a Tane-grown drug.'

And, I amended to myself, the same thing they used on Harlan.

'Then the Tanes are behind this,' someone blurted out.

'No,' Stannall replied with such calm assurance that the rising hysteria in that
quarter was calmed. 'But

I have good reason to believe that the Tane Revolution masks some intention
other than meets the eye.'

Stannall smiled slyly at the anxious requests for explanation.

'We have already sent… ah… qualified observer,' and Stannall glanced
quickly at Harlan with an

accusatory expression,'to Tane to bring us back a firsthand report of the
situation. I have not been

satisfied with the all too reassuring official reports.'

'Neither have I,' Lesatin asserted loudly. 'They've been… ah… em… too
vague.'

Maxil muttered in my ear, 'Jokan took off on his own last night. Harlan was
fit to tie him to a Mil

Rock. So was Stannall but not for the same reason.'

'But Jokan was supposed to wait for me,' I said inanely.

'That's why Harlan was mad. That Jokan!' Maxil chuckled with delight.

Stannall was continuing smoothly, 'He will return as soon as he has properly
assessed the problem. In

the meantime, it is essential that we delve into every corner of Gorlot's
administration and bring up from

the depths of each cave those inconsistencies which can bring the majority of
Council to its senses with

regard to this tyrant.'

'I should think poisoning Ferrill would be sufficient,' remarked a wiry, black-
headed man later named

to me as Estoder.

Stannall pointed a finger at him, punctuating his words, ' if we had proof of it,
which not even Cordan

can find… except by the process of eliminating other factors. Indeed, without
Marian's miraculous

escape and return, we would not even be possessed of the suspicion. The
action of that new drug is

comparatively unknown, you realize.'

'Just how did Harlan escape, if he'd been so heavily drugged? No one's
clarified that point,' Lesatin

remarked, pointedly staring at me.

Harlan shot me a quick encouraging smile but allowed Stannall to speak first.

'The… ah… Lady Sara,' Stannall had difficulty for some reason in deciding
on my title, 'managed to

penetrate the sanitarium and became assigned as Harlan's attendant.'

'We are doubly indebted to the Lady Sara,' Lesatin remarked, bowing in my
direction.

Lesatin seemed to me to be the sort of person who dotes on being possessed
of the fullest

information on any given subject that attracts his attention. He reminded me
unpleasantly of an officious

junior executive at the agency library who had plagued me unnecessarily for
infinite details about this or

that. I steeled myself for the questions Lesatin, if he bore out the resemblance,
might throw at me.

'Can it be possible to assume,' Estoder spoke before Lesatin could,'that Socto,
Effra and Cheret

were removed from Hospitals, War Records and Supplies more by Gorlot's
intervention than the normal

course of events?'

'Possible, probable and entirely feasible,' Stannall agreed, 'and I suggest we
begin our checking

immediately with these offices with the thoroughness of the ancient
priesthood in examining a novice.'

Everyone now had a question or an opinion or a suggestion. The breakfast
broke up into little groups

of debaters, calling to Harlan or Stannall for approval. Men departed in pairs
or singly. Finally there were

only four of us left. Harlan reached for a heavy surcoat. I tried to catch his eye
so I could tell him about

Monsorlit's visit to the asylum. I was also afraid of being left alone with
Stannall after his remark about

restoration.

Harlan spared time only to grip my arm and mumble about seeing me later.

As the door swung shut

behind him, I felt awfully alone and vulnerable.

'Maxil,' Stannall said, 'I think you had better present yourself to your brother's
quarters.'

'Fenian?' Maxil countered, distastefully.

'No,' Stannall frowned, 'Ferrill. The morning's report is reassuring. The
paralysis of his right side

continues. But last night's examination contradicts the theory of a heart
seizure. It will look well that you

have been to see him. And take the Lady Sara with you. I have assigned four
men as your bodyguard.

Absolutely trustworthy,' and the First Councilman's face relaxed into a
reassuring smile for Maxil. 'You

two,' and he flicked his eyes to me, 'are not to be left unguarded for a
moment. Oh, and when you've

seen Ferrill, your new quarters should be ready. I'll see you at dinner, Lady
Sara,' and he bowed

punctiliously in my direction.

'He doesn't like me, Maxil,' I said when the First Councilman had left.

'Aw,' Maxil shrugged it off. 'He will. Harlan'll see to that and when Fara gets
here,' and Maxil blushed

furiously. 'I mean, aw,' and Maxil rolled his eyes to the ceiling in adolescent
embarrassment.

'I know what you mean, Maxil,' I laughed, patting his arm consolingly. 'It will
be a great pleasure to

step aside for my competition.'

Maxil's face screwed up even more. 'Oh, Sara.'

'Oh, Maxil,' I teased back, trying to reassure him.

A knock at the door disclosed Sinnall, in resplendent Palace Guard uniform,
at rigid attention. Behind

him I could see an equally rigid Cire and two huge guardsmen. Sober-faced
and taking his new position

very seriously, Sinnall saluted.

'My orders, Warlord, are to guard, guide and defend you and the Lady Sara.
May I present

Second-Leader Ore, and Patrolmen Farn and Regel!'

'Second-Leader Cire,' Maxil said, grinning broadly at Cire's good fortune.
Then he hastily cleared his

throat and recalled his new position in life. 'My compliments, Group Leader,
and thanks for your loyalty.

I wish to see my brother, Ferrill.'

Saluting smartly, Sinnall backed out into the hall with his men, waiting at
attention until Maxil and I

started before he signaled his men to fall in behind us.

There was a vastly different atmosphere in the hallways this morning. Perhaps
it was the green sunlight

that flooded the hall from the skylights and balconied alcoves. Perhaps it was
the crisp snapping to of the

guards who saluted as we passed where last night they had insolently glanced
our way. Perhaps it was

the obsequious salutations of the men and women who paused to greet Maxil,
openly eyeing me. Several

would have engaged Maxil in conversation, but he was too nervous to give
them any encouragement and,

to my relief, they tactfully withdrew.

There was a marked difference in Maxil's bearing as we continued. Last night
he had come close to

cringing away from passers-by. Today, his shoulders were erect. He held his
head high and his eyes lost

then-apologetic furtiveness. He was beginning to accept the fact that he was
Warlord-elect; that this

good fortune was his and that he could no longer expect ridicule. No longer
was he Samoth's whipping

boy; nor the 'younger brother' of a promising Warlord, but the heir himself.
And I was proud, too, to see

him conducting himself in what he considered the proper manner.

Leaving our escort outside, we were immediately passed through to the inner
rooms of Ferrill's suite.

At the door of the bedroom, a double guard was posted to whom Maxil issued
his request with

new-found imperiousness. One guard excused himself and entered the
darkened room.

He returned immediately, holding the door respectfully for the man who
entered.

Maxil's confidence disappeared instantly and he muttered a halting request. I
was in no position to

bolster Maxil because I was staring straight at Monsorlit. I trembled with fear
and apprehension. Round

and round in my mind whirled Stannall's words, and the volume of his
revulsion and contempt seemed to

grow with each cycle. I looked frantically around for some exit or something I
could do that would

remove me from Monsorlit's notice.

'Certainly you may see Ferrill, Lord Maxil,' Monsorlit assented smoothly. He

stood courteously aside

to let the boy pass. 'I must, however, caution you to keep your visit short so as
not to tire him.'

'He'll be all right, I mean… that is, he's not going to die or anything, is he?'
Maxil asked anxiously.

Monsorlit shook his head, smiling enigmatically. I turned toward the outer
rooms.

'No, Sara, stay with me,' said Maxil pleadingly.

Monsorlit turned, curious, to me.

He started to incline his head in an acknowledgement, stopped, stared puzzled
for a split second and

then straightened. There was nothing in his expressionless face to indicate
whether he recognized me as

Harlan's whilom attendant or not. I was certain it would be only a matter of
time before he pulled my

identity from storage in his orderly mind. Maxil saw all this, but his
interpretation of Monsorlit's stare

made him flush. I wrenched myself around and escaped into the darkened
bedroom.

A greenish glow, pleasant, restful, fell on the book-piled desk, the panel of
communications screens,

shelves of souvenirs and slates that covered the inward walls of the room.
Against a side wall was

Ferrill's wide bed, flanked by chairs and an austere hospital table with its neat
array of medicines.

'Greetings, Maxil,' said a low voice from the shadowy heaps of pillows.
'Come to view the departed?'

'Aw, Ferrill,' Maxil groaned, dropping on to the bed.

'My lord,' I heard the low hoarse chuckle, 'I couldn't be more pleased at this
turn of events. In all

truth, it's been hard to play Warlord. No idealist, no dreamer like myself
should have to come to grips

with the realities of ruling a world. His heart is not sufficiently armored
against sentiment and suffering for

the strict impartiality essential for the domination of millions. I would soon
have failed Harlan, my father's

memory… and Lothar.'

The voice trailed off into a cough. Maxil, a gangling awkward shape, shook
his head in denial.

'Ferrill, if I'd only known how awfully sick you were, I'd never had let Sara
tell you about Harlan.

Stannall says that's what made you collapse,' Maxil confessed brokenly.

'Good thing she did,' the sick man stoutly reassured his brother. 'The only
thing that saved my life,

believe me, was fainting last night. Otherwise you would really be gazing on
the departed.'

'What do you mean?' cried Maxil aghast.

'Simply that I'm positive Trenor would have administered a lethal dose of his
palliative last night. The

moment Sara told me Harlan was free I could feel the prick of that final fatal
needle in my arm. As it is,

I'm extraodinarily lucky to come out of this with just a mild paralysis. Cerol is
dangerous stuff. I'd've died

a lot sooner did I not come of stout-hearted stock. That heart attack rumor is
false.'

'You mean, you knew you were being poisoned and never told anyone?' Maxil
cried out.

Ferrill snorted. 'Who would have believed me? "The boy's delirious",' he
quipped in an elderly voice.

Cerol, he had said, and that was what they had used on Harlan, but the results
were so different. On

Ferrill they caused debilitation… on Harlan only a senseless stupor.

'Stannall believes you were poisoned.'

'Certainly he believes… now. Who is that lurking in the shadows? Come
here,' Ferrill commanded.

'Ah, the Lady Sara. My harbinger of good news. Again thanks.'

'I'm relieved to know that last night's message was good news to someone,' I
said gratefully. 'Even if

Stannall objects.'

'My dear girl, you ruffled his feelings. Stannall has been thwarted of late, both
personally and

politically. He dislikes most of all being uninformed on curious happenings. A
failing of his, but it makes

him an extraordinarily capable First Councilman. Almost too capable. Gorlot
must have had a paragraph

in his plans for him, too.'

'Have you any idea what Gorlot was building up to?' I asked curiously.

'Apart from complete domination of Lothar,' Ferrill said with a nasty laugh, 'I
have only vague

suspicions.' As I looked down on the gaunt-faced man who had still been a
boy a few weeks ago, it was

difficult to realize that there were only four years between Maxil and Ferrill.
It looked more like forty. 'I

suspect he gave the Tane planets away to those who have backed him. After
Harlan's convenient

sick-leave had been arranged, Gorlot descended on us like a Mil ship that
didn't bother to orbit.

Everyone had a good word for him. Took me a while to come to my senses, I
want to tell you. Then it

was already too late. His men were in strategic positions. The Tane war was
under way and I was kept

almost too sick to care. After that, patient optimism and intestinal fortitude
seemed my only alternatives.'

'Is Monsorlit really helping you now?' I asked, speaking my fears. 'He isn't
just another Trenor for

you?'

Fennill's smile was very knowing and wise. He waggled a weak finger at me.

'Don't doubt our leading authority on nervous diseases, sweet lady.'

'But he's the one who was drugging Harlan in the asylum.

And I know there were others in there just as unwilling as Harlan. And Trenor
was their physician.'

'I don't doubt it.'

'And you still let Monsorlit treat you?' Maxil quavered.

'Yes. For the simple reason that I trust the man.'

I stared at him.

'Why he is allied with Gorlot, I don't know,' Ferrill continued. 'He is an
oblique fellow but it will be a

sorry day for Lotharian medicine when he is gone.'

'But… but…' I stammered.

'Monsorlit is not a proper cave-mate with Gorlot, no matter what the
appearances show,' Ferrill said

with more vigor than you would expect from so frail a person. Then he
frowned at me. 'You are certain

that he drugged Harlan? Monsorlit was not at Maritha's the night Harlan was
taken ill.'

'But I saw Monsorlit give Harlan an injection and he called it cerol. They
thought I was a moronic

attendant. And I know that there are nine other men in that sanitarium,
drugged by Trenor, with the same

scuff as Monsorlit used on Harlan.'

Ferrill raised a thoughtful eyebrow and pursed his lips, a gesture imitating
Stannall.

'That's when you decided to help Harlan?'

I nodded. Ferrill shook his head, frowning as he tried to correlate this
information with his picture of

Monsorlit.

'You must retire now, my lord and lady,' said the soft, respectful voice of
Monsorlit.

I jumped and Maxil got to his feet, for none of us heard the door open. I
waited breathlessly for

Monsorlit to denounce me. 'You will tire the young patient,' was all he said.

But as we passed him on the way out, his eyes glittered at me and I wished
passionately I knew how

much he had overheard.

Maxil turned frantically to me once the door was shut.

'We've got to tell Stannall, Sara,' he said breathlessly.

I shook my head violently. At the moment I didn't know which of the two
men I feared more, the

physician or the statesman.

'Stannall will find out all he needs to know by himself, I'm sure. You know his
opinion of Monsorlit.

And if Ferrill is to recover from this poisoning, Monsorlit is undoubtedly the
only man who can do it. We

can't take away Ferrill's chance of recovery. Let's forget, right now, what we
said in there. Completely.'

Before he could object, I pulled him into the filled entrance room. We were
greeted by queries after

Ferrill's health. Twice Maxil was importuned with unveiled hints for
patronage. At first I thought Maxil

didn't catch them. Once we had reached the quiet of the corridor, he snorted
out a bitter remark.

'You should have seen them laughing yesterday when Samoth dragged me
back with you over

Varnan's shoulder.'

Our guards filed behind us as Maxil led me down the corridor beyond Ferrill's
suite.

'We have the rooms my father and mother had, I think. They're the only ones
vacant I could use.'

There were guards at that doorway, too. Sinnall received the salutes and
replaced them with his own

men. He then opened the door wide, stepped inside and quickly checked each
of the doors leading into

the reception hall. Evidently reassured no assassins or Mils lurked anywhere,
Sinnall threw open both of

the big doors leading into the main room of the suite.

Stannall's charming rooms seemed barren, cramped and cold in comparison
with the spacious

splendor of this four-balconied living room with its various levels. A wide
window overlooked the

riotously blooming gardens, backed by the towers of the city, magically
iridescent in the green sunlight,

sparkling in an incredible panorama to my alien eyes.

Linnana and a white-tuniced young man approached and both bowed.

'My Lord Maxil, I've checked Ittlo's credentials and Stannall has already
approved Linnana,' Sinnall

said with stiff formality. 'Subject, of course, to your approval.'

Whatever comment Maxil may have had was drowned by an uproar outside. I
had heard that bull

bellow only once before, but it had been indelibly engrooved on my eardrum.

My reaction was annoyance. Maxil turned white, his shoulders resumed their
slump and he crouched

as if to hide. I caught him by the arm and gave him a shake. He didn't see or
hear me. Sinnall expressed

his annoyance actively by opening the door with an angry jerk.

'What is the meaning of this disturbance outside the Warlord's suite? Get rid
of that man.'

I doubt that Samoth would ever have passed the guards for all his burly
strength. He was at the

moment impotently raging against their crossed weapons. He quieted a
moment as he saw Maxil and then

began bellowing.

'I'm the Warlord's appointed guardian,' he howled.

'The Warlord's appointed guardian is the Council, not an individual,' Sinnall
answered with a snort at

such ignorance. 'Remove this nuisance,' and he beckoned to two guards
farther down the hallway. 'Hold

him in custody. The only reason he was permitted to remain free was the
generosity of Lord Maxil. This

has been exhausted. Off with him.'

The guards promptly took over and there was a certain overzealousness to the
restraints they applied.

Sinnall cut off the indignant mouthings of Samoth by slamming the door. He
apologized to the stupefied

Maxil for the unwarranted interruption.

'Maxil,' I said in a wicked way, for the boy still looked scared stiff,'think up
something juicy for

Samoth to do. Like decontaminating Mil ships.'

Maxil's eyes began to gleam. Sinnall had difficulty retaining his official face
as the boy's unguarded

expressions showed his reflections on suitable vengeance.

'Maxil,' I began, having wandered around the room, peering into a study, a
small anonymous room, a

room set aside for communication panels, three bedrooms. There wasn't a
bowl of fruit in sight, but there

were plenty of flowers. 'Maxil, I hate to mention this but I'm hungry.'

Maxil looked at me with disgust.

'I've never seen you when you weren't. Are you sure…"

'Maxil, order me some fruit at least,' I pleaded, cutting him off in midsentence
because I knew

perfectly well what he might be going to say.

'My apologies, my lady,' Linnana said, coming forward swiftly. 'A terrible

oversight. I'll remedy it

immediately. Ittlo!' and Linnana gestured the other attendant toward the
communications room with a

fluttery hand.

A knock on the door and a gentleman entered, bowing, followed by boys
carrying a variety of

uniforms and other masculine apparel.

'Ahem,' Sinnall said discreetly behind his hand, 'there will be a formal dinner,
Lord Maxil. If you

please…'

Maxil looked up at the ceiling in dramatic exasperation at such matters but
went obediently into his

bedroom.

We were eating a marvelous lunch when Maxil was called to the
communications room for a call from

Stannall.

'Council will convene tomorrow morning, Lord Maxil,' Stannall said formally.
'Your presence is

required. The Lady Sara will hold herself in readiness to attend the
convention.'

'Yes, sir,' Maxil agreed readily.

'I trust your quarters are satisfactory?'

'Yes, sir,' Maxil agreed enthusiastically.

'You are satisfied with the personnel?'

'Indeed I am,' Maxil replied, grinning broadly at Sinnall and Cire.

'Then until the dinner hour this evening, Lord Maxil,' and Stannall

courteously signed off.

'Formal dinner,' said Maxil gloomily. 'I knew Stannall would put them back
in.'

There was another tap at the door and one of the guards motioned to Sinnall.
There was a brief

conference and then Sinnall went out into the hallway, looking over his
shoulder at Maxil. I moved so I

could see into the hall and caught a glimpse of an anxious young face. It took
me a minute to get the

significance and then I turned to Maxil.

'I'll bet I got a glimpse of Fara in the hall just now.'

'Fara,' and Maxil's face lit up with joy. He ran to the door and yanked it open.
Sinnall and the girl

were deep in earnest conversation. She caught sight of Maxil, her mouth
made a round O and she looked

like she would burst into tears.

'Get her in here,' I hissed at Sinnall.

Poor Fara had no opportunity to run as I was sure she wanted to. Maxil had
her by one arm and

Sinnall by the other. I motioned to Sinnall to close the doors to the inner hall
so that just the five of us

were in the main room.

'Maxil, father will be furious if he knows I'm here,' she wept and then she
gulped back her sobs as she

came face to face with me.

Her emotions were painfully obvious. She had heard all the gossip and had
been hurt by it. She had

been betrayed in her love and denied sight of him by her father whose
political common sense dominated

his personal preferences. She did look like me, even with her eyes red with
her tears and with her hair

disheveled. A younger, prettier, gentler, totally different girl.

What impressed me more than her delicate loveliness was Maxil's tenderness
toward her. He drew

her against him, one hand holding one of hers to his lips, the other arm
drawing her possessively to him.

There was no hint of the gawky adolescent who had clumsily tried to embrace
me the previous night as

we deceived the waiter. He was Romeo to his Juliet, strong and loving, tender
and sure.

'Fara, I'm so glad to see you. What do you mean, your father will be furious
with you? I've asked for

no one else but you,' Maxil was saying.

'But… but… we were sent from the palace and no one would let us come
back and Father wouldn't

let me come to Starhall last night and then…' and she glared at me. She drew
herself up to her full height,

suddenly regal for all her youth.

'You heard those rumors about Lady Sara,' I finished for her.

She swallowed hard, too proud or too hurt to answer.

'Well, Lady Fara, they are only rumors,' I said. 'Lord Harlan has claimed me
as his lady.'

Her eyes widened and she gasped, looking trustingly to Maxil for
confirmation. I don't know how, but

Maxil kept from blushing as he nodded solemnly to Fara.

'Now, will you stop glaring at me and sit down while we tell you the whole
thing?' I suggested. 'I think

I can see why your father was not anxious for you and Maxil to meet right
away,' I added as her

emotions of uncertainty, curiosity and distrust crossed her transparent little
face.

By the time she left in Cire's company to dash back to her suite, we had the
whole thing pretty well

thrashed out. She didn't much like it, but she understood. Maxil was so
relieved I thought he'd explode.

'She'll accept my claim. She'll accept,' he cried, sliding down into his chair
with delight. Stretched out

full length, his long legs stuck out at angles, he sighed deeply and closed his
eyes. Then, slamming both

hands down on the chair arms, he propelled himself up with astonishing force,
careering around the room.

It was obvious from Sinnall's expression he did not consider this proper
behavior for a Warlord-elect.

'Leave him alone,' I laughed at Sinnall. 'You're only this young and in love
once and I've presented a

terrible complication. You must admit that.'

Sinnall shook his head. 'What if they give themselves away?'

'They only have to play along for a few days.' Sinnall still wasn't convinced,
but at that point Linnana

and Ittlo suggested it was time we dressed for dinner.

CHAPTER TEN

Formal dinner meant just that, but it was a formality that very few of the main
participants enjoyed.

Harlan and Stannall, alone, at the head table, behaved as if they were enjoying
themselves.

A portion of the Starhall had become a dining room, with a head table on the
raised circular section

between two of the five archways, while four long tables splayed out from it
on the level below.

I don't know who was more nervous, Maxil or me. His behavior vacillated
between an almost

unbearable imperiousness when addressing his younger brother and sisters to
adolescent sullenness when

he gazed at the table where Fara sat with adult members of Council. Stannall,
of course, was at the head

table between Maxil's sisters. I was seated at Maxil's left, and Lesatin, the
curious councilman, sat on my

left. Harlan sat at the end, too far away from me for the conversation I wanted
to have with him.

It was not a cheerful meal although the food was excellent. Kalina and
Cherez, Maxil's two sisters,

were dressed as befitted their age and station, their pretty faces much sweeter
devoid of last night's

excessive makeup. But they were sullen. Maxil told me that Kalina had been
told she was to deny the

claim of the man Gorlot had mated to her. Fernan, completely cowed by

Stannall's presence and under

Harlan's scrutiny, ate the sparse meal set before him. His glowering fat face
with its pasty pimpled

complexion was not a pleasant sight at dinner. I avoided his direction as much
to keep from seeing him as

to keep myself from Stannall's notice.

I must correct myself. Lesatin thoroughly enjoyed himself. He made
conversation for us to agree with,

commented on one course after the other. I felt terribly conspicuous and
surreptitiously waited until I saw

what Harlan used as silverware. Perhaps I felt a constraint because in Harlan's
presence I was so

conscious of inadvertently tripping over my own ignorance. With Maxil or
Sinnall I could laugh off a slip

or divert attention. But Harlan was so preternaturally concerned with
concealing my origin, I was

unnerved. The menace of Stannall and Monsorlit completed the top-heavy
pyramid of my anxiety.

By the time the entertainers whirled out into the center of the huge hall, I was
weary. My back ached,

my stomach felt overfull and churned with odd tastes and textures. My neck
felt stiff with tension and I

wondered if I could ever relax again.

When we finally filed out of the great hall, I tried to stay by Harlan. He gave
me a warning look as he

handed me over to Maxil. I was furious and frustrated. I desperately needed a
few private words with

Harlan on what to do tomorrow if the Council should actually call me. I was
forced to go to bed without

that reassurance and I was filled with worry, worry, worry.

In the alarm-clock way I had acquired since coming to Lothar, I awoke
suddenly and completely. My

head still ached, the room was unreal in its luxurious appointments and my
body felt logy and disjointed.

Linnana was evidently a skilled keyhole listener because I no sooner stretched
than she appeared to

announce my bath was ready.

I chose the simplest of the rich gowns and a single strand of contrasting beads
as much to forget the

extravagance of last night as to present Council with the'simple country girl' I
had styled myself in jest.

The breakfast table held a surprise for me. Jessl was at it, chatting
companionably to Sinnall, Cire and

Maxil.

The boy had recovered his equilibrium this morning, it seemed, for he rose
with a spring as I entered.

Jessl seated me with a flourish and a flirt. Linnana and Ittlo bustled about with
dishes.

The mood in which I awakened could not linger with such gay breakfast talk.
Jessl insisted on a ribald

recounting of town gossip about Maxil and me and he was so deft with his
recital I couldn't be offended.

Even Maxil, now that he had set himself straight with Fara, laughed. The
morning beverage stimulated me

and unbound the knots of tension at the back of my neck.

'Sara, Harlan said not to worry about Council calling you. Today at least. We
can all watch in the

board room,' Jessl indicated the chamber devoted to communication panels.
'It's a closed circuit into this

room from the Chamber. It will be a real pleasure to follow Gorlot's downfall.'

'You're sure of it?' I queried hopefully.

Jessl scoffed at my unspoken doubts and leaned forward across the table in a
mock conspiratorial

fashion.

'The things we've uncovered about that man would make your skin curl off.
Remarkable, isn't it, how

the slightest breath of scandal on any public figure brings forth previously
forgotten slights and errors.'

'But will these things discredit him as a candidate for Regent?' I wanted to
know.

'Sure, surely,' Jessl agreed expansively. I wondered then if Jessl had been
purposefully sent to allay

Maxil's doubts or whether Jessl was an incurable optimist.

'What's the gossip about Harlan's return from insanity?'

Here Jessl did hedge. 'There's a great deal of controversy about that. I only
wish we had some

conclusive proof that he never had been insane.'

'But he never was,' I insisted forcefully. 'He was drugged. Gorlot and Gleto
drugged him.' Why I

inserted Gleto's name instead of Monsorlit's, I don't know. 'I heard that from
Gleto's lips myself.'

'Does Harlan know that?' asked Maxil anxiously.

'Of course he does,' I assured him.

'Then why doesn't he have you appear before Council today?' the young

Warlord fretted.

'Perhaps you are the main issue today, not Harlan's sanity,' I suggested.

Jessl shook his head.

'No, Maxil's as good as confirmed right now. Stannall had an inspiration and
had the physicians check

Fernan over, too. The kid's heart has suffered from his overeating and he
could never stand even normal

acceleration. Maxil's therefore practically the only choice. But it's the
Regency that's to be the heavy

contest. Don't worry, lad. I mean, my lord,' Jessl said with sincerity. 'Harlan
and Stannall know what

they're doing.'

I fell to mulling over exactly what I had told Harlan concerning himself in the
asylum. I had mentioned

Gleto and his being drugged but not Monsorlit's visit, nor one other, possibly
very important fact.

Yesterday I had told Ferrill that there were others held under drugs at the
sanitarium. If those men all

recovered as Harlan had, and told their stories, it would be definite proof, by
association, that Harlan

never had been insane. I tugged Jessl's arm.

'Has anyone checked into the medical histories of Gleto's other recent
patients? I mean, say other

squadron commanders or men of position who have also suddenly and
unexpectedly gone mad.'

Jessl swiveled around to look at me with dawning comprehension.

'Trenor had nine other patients at that asylum,' I continued. 'At least that's
what Gleto said. If they

could be restored to sanity the way Harlan was, wouldn't that prove that
Harlan, too, had been drugged,

had never been insane? And I know those men were drugged.'

Jessl was at the communicator panel before I finished my hypothesis. The
screen lit to show Stannall's

crowded living-room. Jessl asked Stannall to close his circuit. The
background of the room blurred and

only the first Councilman's face was distinct. Jessl repeated what I had told
him. Stannall's face

quickened with obvious interest.

'How long does it take to recover from the effects of the drug?' he asked,
excited.

'About five days' abstention from the drugged food,' I reluctantly advised him,
knowing how

important the time factor was. 'But maybe there's an antidote or a stimulant.'

'We can try. It would be very interesting to check this. It would implicate
Trenor still further. Can you

identify the patients concerned?'

I couldn't. Stannall pursed his lips over this disappointment. Then he thanked
me with absentminded

courtesy and the screen dimmed. Jessl came thoughtfully back to the table.

'Sinnall,' he asked, 'do you recall anyone going off his orbit recently?'

Maxil came up immediately with one name, a communications man at the
spaceport who had run

berserk all over the flying strip. Then there had been the case of a police
official in the city. Jessl himself

thought of two group leaders. Sinnall suggested a veteran trader on the Tane
routes who had come home

babbling some strange tale before he had been drugged quiet by physicians.

'What kind of a tale?' Jessl asked.

Sinnall frowned. 'Oh, he made a rhyme of it, the way I heard the story.'
Sinnall shuddered at the

memory. 'Went like this:

For a change the Mil can eat The gentle, juicy Tane meat.

Of course, there hasn't been a Mil raid for the last two Eclipses. And only a
few Perimeter skirmishes

reported.' A few skirmishes in two Eclipses: that would mean more than a
year. Was I in one of those

ships? Could I have been on Lothar that long? But Harlan had only been in
the sanitarium ten months.

And the Tane war started a week afterward. When had I been taken? Before
or after? And how? Harlan

could only guess that I must have been transported from Earth to Lothar in a
Mil ship. How then did I get

off the ship; where did I go from there for Monsorlit to change my skin and
my nose? I was certain now

that Monsorlit had been responsible. How did I get into the sanitarium where
I should have been a

patient, not an attendant?

'Sara's thinking. Maybe she knows another official for our missing four men,'
Jessl jibed, startling me

out of my frightening contemplations.

'Me? No, I haven't followed that sort of thing. I was too busy with Harlan.'

'Which reminds me to ask you,' Jessl began forcefully, 'where did you meet up
with our Regent?

Jokan doesn't remember ever meeting you, but he's been on and off Ertoi
gazing into crystals. I've been

underfoot and I don't remember meeting you in our closed circle,' he ended
with a complimentary leer.

'Which should prove to you that Harlan is pretty good at minding his own
business all by himself,' I

hedged archly.

This would not put Jessl off. 'Where do you come from, lady of mystery?
Your accent is slightly

southern, if anything, but your appearance is northern.'

'A girl can't keep anything secret around here,' I laughed.

'The lady minds her business pretty well, too,' laughed Jessl in good part. 'I'll
bet I'll figure you out yet.

That's my speciality.'

Sinnall and Maxil laughed with him. But I could see he was a little piqued at
my continued evasion. I

hoped he wouldn't pursue the subject before I had the chance to talk with
Harlan. Clan, cave and mining

engineering notwithstanding, I had very little knowledge to fortify me against
the determined curiosity of a

friend. Or had he felt that his own would not question the girl who had
restored him from the living dead?

'If you guess correctly, I'll tell you true," I promised easily.

Jessl merely smiled at me queerly and I noticed he was looking at my hands.
It was all I could do to

keep from jerking them into my lap. Harlan had been singularly interested in
my wrists, too. Examine

them as I might, I could find nothing to warrant such scrutiny.

The guard entered to say that Council was assembling.

Maxil rose with an excess of nervous energy, while Jessl, putting a reassuring
hand on the boy's arm,

got more casually to his feet. He guided Maxil to the door and watched him
down the Hall, Sinnall and

Ore flanking him.

In his unguarded face as he returned to the table, I saw the weight of Jessl's
own doubts. He had

been careful to hide them before the boy. The dread that had bothered me on
waking returned in double

measure.

Jessl and I went silently into the board room. I signalled Linnana to bring
more to drink as Jessl

flipped on the screen to the seething Council Hall. He yelled at Ittlo to leave
off clearing the breakfast

table. Then he settled himself beside me on the couch, to stare moodily at the
screen.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Had Harlan and Stannall been aware of how many people Gorlot had touched
in establishing his

massive plans, they would have approached the Council Hall with even more
trepidation that morning.

Gorlot had chosen his victims well.

I know my own sense of foreboding was lulled in the first hour of that crucial
meeting. The very

familiarity of a roll call for the Councilmen as they named their provinces and
districts (the Council

consisted of scientists, military men and landed gentry instead of the
proportional representation practiced

on Earth) was reassuring to me.

Stannall as First Councilman called the session to order with a few words
about the gravity of the

situation and a reassuring report on Ferrill's condition. If it deprived Ferrill of
his birthright, at least it did

not mean his death.

An ancient-looking, heavy collection of tablets was rolled to the front of the
chamber right up to the

raised dais where Stannall and the seven senior Councilmen were seated. (The
significance of the

number'seven' harked back to ancient history and the first Harlan's Seven
Brothers.) An old man

mumblingly read from the tablets the names of Father's children. At a motion

from the floor, Ferrill's name

was ceremoniously canceled as ineligible for the Warlordship. Maxil was
named as next in line and he

was asked to step forward and present his claim. All this was couched in the
floweriest language, with

great gestures and ceremonial pauses.

Maxil came forward, holding his tall gangling figure erect. He bowed
gracefully to the eight in front of

him, to the Council behind him, and presented a much be-medaled slate to the
secretary. A great show

was made of reading it. The legality of his birth was then formally recorded.

Stannall took over and the simplicity of the procedure of investiture was
refreshing. It amused me, for

it sounded so like an Earth marriage ceremony. Stannall asked if anyone
present knew of any just reason

why Maxil, second son of Father, son of Hillel, son of Clemmen, true blood
and seed of Harlan the First,

Defender of the People, should not be Warlord-elect in this, his sixteenth year
of life.

A massive silence prevailed. I gathered that this would have been the
opportunity for Gorlot to bring

up Maxil's supposed impotency.

Stannall's words of formal acceptance of Maxil in the name of the Council
were drowned by the roar

from this august body. The entire room was on its feet, shouting the boy's
name, and saluting

continuously. Maxil smiling nervously accepted the acclaim with poise.

When the furor had subsided, a tense, uneasy restlessness took hold of the

assemblage. Stannall

motioned to Maxil to be seated on the single raised chair to the right of the
eight elders.

'Since our young lord, Maxil, is under the legal age, it will be necessary for
the Council to consider

those men who are qualified to instruct him in the military duties of the
Warlord and, with the aid and

guidance of this Council, in governing and guiding this world toward its great
and recognized goal, the

extermination of the Mil from the skies.'

Stannall consulted a slate in his hand.

'We note that Lord Maxil is over fifteen years of age and therefore considered
to have reached the

age of reasonable discretion. Following the custom of our laws, he has the
right to agree with or disagree

to our choice of Regent, and to propose, if he should have a qualified
candidate, a man sympathetic to his

personality and his welfare.'

Jessl chortled to himself at that speech and I noticed a definite stirring among
the Council members. I

could not see either Harlan or Gorlot.

Stannall turned slightly toward Maxil and the boy rose as if forcibly ejected
from the chair.

'I do have a choice, one acceptable to this Council since he has been Regent to
my brother, Ferrill,'

and Maxil's voice stumbled a little over his brother's name. 'By my legal and
accustomed right, I will

choose Harlan, son of Hillel, son of Clemmen as my Regent, with the

Council's permission.'

'But the man's been mad for months,' a voice from the back of the room
protested quite clearly in the

stunned quiet. Others chimed in with similar sentiments and a general arguing
shout rose in volume.

Stannall folded his arms to ride the noise awhile before he called for order.

'We call Harlan, son of Hillel, son of Clemmen, before this Council.'

The great doors at the opposite end of the Hall opened and Harlan marched in,
looking neither left

nor right. He held himself so proudly, so regally, tears of pride came to my
eyes. Harlan bowed to Maxil,

to the Council, to Stannall. Not all of the seven elders had had a chance to see
Harlan before this

appearance and he was scrutinized carefully. Stannall indicated the empty
chairs drawn up on the left of

the main platform and Harlan, bowing briefly, seated himself there.

'We see that the name of Harlan, son of Hillel, is on the list of those men
eligible by their age, conduct

and military experience to be Regent. We also call before this board the
following men, their merits to be

weighed before Council this day.'

Stannall began to call off his list. The first three names were unfamiliar to me
and at each one a

Councilman arose to ceremonially remind Stannall that so-and-so had died, or
was over the maximum

age. The fourth name was Gorlot, son of someone - I didn't hear because the
name of the implacable

man echoed in my mind harshly. Gorlot strode in, his square face as still as

ever, his square frame devoid

of the grace and litheness that characterized Harlan. He bowed to the young
lord, to the elders, to the

Council and was gestured towards the waiting chairs.

Gorlot hesitated at the chair next to Harlan and then, with deliberation, left
two seats empty between

them. His action had the appearance of being cautionary rather than insulting.
But it was a well-calculated

piece of business. Jessl groaned and cursed with vehement originality.

I started again as Gartly's name was called and this gray warrior stepped
forward. He was but a year

under the maximum age. He took the seat next to Harlan, flicking his cape
contemptuously in Gorlot's

direction. I could have kissed the old grump. Jokan's name, too, was called
and a mutter arose from the

Council. Stan-nail turned to the seven with the comment that Jokan was
absent on a special mission for

the Council. As he was well known, his record would have to speak for hun.

There were other names called, men I remembered Harlan using as examples
for candidates for the

Regency: men who were reported dead or in survivor asylums. I wondered if
any of them were among

the nine unwilling guests at Gleto's. Jessl seemed to have the thought, for he
glanced at me significantly.

At any rate, by the end of Stannall's little list, only three were seated at the left
of the seven. No one

doubted that the contest was between Harlan and Gorlot.

'We are fortunate indeed,' Stannall began with a slight smile,'to have as

candidates two men who have

already had experience in the arduous position of Regent to the Warlord-
elect.' His bow was impartial.

'At the young lord's request, we first consider the eligibility of Harlan, son of
Hillel, son of Clemmen.'

A sigh ran through the Council and was echoed by me. Stannall made a sign
to the secretary who

nervously cleared his throat and read off in a rattling way the personal history
of Harlan. I couldn't always

catch his mumbling or the stilted phrases and ceremonial longhand he spoke.
But it was evident that

Harlan's early career as a fighting man had been brilliant, crowned with the
discovery of the Tane planets

as well as some daring innovations in perimeter patrol techniques.

The secretary came to the last slate of the pile before him, and his voice
noticeably slowed.

'On the twenty-third day of the thirteenth moonset, Regent Harlan was
stricken ill and relieved of his

duties towards the Warlord until such time as his recovery was effected.'

Stannall smiled slightly and there was a loud spate of excited whispering
among the Councilmen. I

wondered who had slipped that helpful phraseology in the document or
whether it had been there all the

time. Stannall raised a hand and the whispering died.

'As is customary, Council asked all candidates to present themselves to the
War Hospital to be

examined as to their physical… and mental fitness. Physician Monsorlit, as
head of that establishment,

may we have your report on Harlan, son of Hillel.'

Stannall stepped aside as Monsorlit, whom I had not previously noticed, rose
from his side seat in the

front row of the Council and took the center of the room. He bowed to Maxil,
to the eight men, to the

Council, to the three candidates. I caught myself holding my breath. Perhaps
now would come the

bombshell to our hopes. Monsorlit's duplicity with Gorlot was certain in my
mind. He may have lulled the

suspicions of others, but would he show his true self now? If restoration were
such a heinous crime as I

gathered it was, Monsorlit would not care to risk Gorlot's exposing him. For
Gorlot certainly must have

known Monsorlit was restoring people.

Monsorlit spoke well and without a plethora of confusing technical terms. He
summarized being called

by Stannall with the other three physicians to determine the state of Harlan's
mental health.

'Even a cursory examination without benefit of special equipment proved that
Harlan had recovered

from the grip of mental disease that prostrated him ten months ago. You can
imagine, gentlemen, how

delighted and surprised my colleagues and I are. No other patient suffering
from similar symptoms has

recovered to such a marked degree.'

I glanced at Gorlot to see what his reaction was and, in spite of the man's
studied carelessness, I

thought I detected a smug satisfaction to his patience.

'Naturally, such a superficial examination was not conclusive proof. Harlan
himself suggested a more

thorough one at the Mental Clinic.' Monsorlit paused to thumb through tissue-
thin metal sheets in his

hand. He finally sorted one to the top. 'I have here the results of our most
exhaustive tests which we

compared with the last physical examination of Harlan, taken shortly before
his illness.' Again he paused

and I took another deep breath. Harlan was looking with obvious but not
anxious intent at Monsorlit.

Gorlot sat, showing that trace of smugness. Maxil fidgeted continually.

'There was a noticeable discrepancy between the two reports,' Monsorlit
continued. Gorlot's smile

broadened slightly. 'It was apparent that the reaction time in certain
coordination tests and in the general

response to spoken and written questions was shorter.'

Gorlot's semi-smile disappeared and there was an agitated rustle in the
Council Hall. Monsorlit had

thrown his bombshell all right but not in the expected direction.

'In short, Harlan is in better general physical health today than he was eleven
months ago, the time of

the last full physical examination.'

'What about mental health?' a voice demanded from the floor, heedless of
protocol.

Monsorlit glanced unperturbed at his notes.

'My colleagues and I are in agreement. On the basis of the most exhaustive
tests in our means, Harlan

is both mentally and physically capable of any duties or offices required of

him by Lothar.'

Maxil clapped a hand to his mouth to suppress his glad shout. Others in the
Concil had no inhibitions

about expressing their approval, but the jubilation was not as widespread as I
had hoped it would be.

Gorlot was glowering now and he watched angrily as Monsorlit resumed his
place, in the front row,

oblivious to any censure from that direction.

Stannall stepped forward again, bowed to Harlan and held up his hand for
silence.

'This is indeed good news for the entire world. I trust that you and your
colleagues are already

working to effect similar recoveries on others of our leaders who have fallen
victim to this new scourge.'

Monsorlit contented himself with bowing his head briefly in assent.

'A question, Sir Stannall,' a loud voice interrupted. Our attention was directed
to a portly individual in

the right rear of the hall.

'You have the floor, Calariz of South Cant,' said Stannall after a very brief
pause.

'I recall the physician for further questions. I, and I am certain there are others
of my mind, am not

sufficiently reassured by this… this glib certification to trust the tender mind
of an untried youth to a man

so recently mad beyond speech.'

Monsorlit came forward again.

'Physician, have there been other recoveries from this form of illness?'

'Yes,' replied Monsorlit blandly, to the consternation of his questioner.

'As complete as Harlan's?'

'No. As I remarked earlier, Harlan is in better condition than before his
collapse. Due, no doubt, to

the rest and quiet with which we find it best to surround our mentally
disturbed.'

'Why then, and particularly since you have been the physician in charge of
Harlan's case, was not the

improvement noted and reported? I believe I am correct in stating that this
Council expressed a deep

interest in being kept abreast of any improvement in our… ah… former
Regent's health.'

Monsorlit did not hesitate with his reply. 'In such cases as we have been able
to observe where an

improvement has been noted, it has been either so gradual as to escape the
untrained eye, or a matter of

instantaneous return to normal.'

'And Harlan's recovery was in which category?' prompted Calariz.

'Instantaneous,' was the bland reply.

'The liar,' I exclaimed.

'What else can he say?' muttered Jessl.

'Ah, very good, I'm sure,' Calariz was saying. 'Were you there?'

'Unfortunately, no. My time has been heavily scheduled by the weight of our
rising mental disease and

the supervision of casualties from the Tane war.'

'Quite so.' A neighbor beckoned to Calariz and had his ear for a moment. The
smile on the face of the

man from South Cant was not pleasant as he straightened.

'Tell me, Physician, is there any guarantee that Harlan will remain sane? I
mean,' and Calariz had to

raise his voice to top the sudden whispered agitation, 'can we be sure that say,
six or seven months from

now, Harlan will not collapse under the stress of the Tane war and the task of
training our new Warlord?'

Jessl and I groaned together over this loaded question. Monsorlit considered
carefully.

"There is no such guarantee.'

Gorlot's face lost its angry blackness. Harlan appeared unmoved, but Maxil's
distress was obvious.

Poor boy, he saw himself with Gorlot as his Regent whether he wanted him or
not. He probably pictured

himself dying slowly of some poison as Ferrill nearly had.

Calariz looked around him triumphantly and sat down. Before Stannall could
take the floor again,

another man rose to be acknowledged.

'You know me, gentlemen, as one who has supported Sir Harlan in many of
his policies and moves,'

this fellow began with the oily ease of one accustomed to long perorations
before arriving at his point. 'I

have stood squarely behind him, as I did behind his brother, our late and much
loved Father. I was the

first to deplore the illness which deprived us of Harlan's brilliant leadership
and I want to be one of the

first to welcome him back officially to our midst. But… I have a serious duty.
For ten long months, this

fine commander and statesman has been out of touch with the struggles and
trials of our daily living. He

has been unaware of our internal battles with mental illness, unemployment,
crime and general unrest. Can

we put upon him the added burden of reassessing past months when we can't
hesitate so much as a

millisecond in forging strongly ahead? Can we ask him to take up again a part
of our world's life that

nearly deprived him of his health and personal happiness forever? That he has
allowed himself to be

drafted to resume the onerous duties of state is indeed a credit to his
patriotism and honor. But… my

friends and worldsmen, is it fair to the man, to Harlan?'

'That old…' and Jessl finished the epithet under his breath. 'He's one we were
certain was loyal to us.

How did Gorlot reach him?'

I slumped down in my corner of the couch, utterly miserable. I got more
depressed as the next hours

were filled with debates for and against Harlan, only more were against. The
text of their arguments were

substantially the same: Harlan had been mad once, he could go mad again.
Harlan was not sufficiently

attuned to the political and social scene and this was made to seem essential.
Others tempered their

views with the feel ing that Harlan had served his world long and well
enough. Other personalities were

needed. There were those who did speak out for Harlan, couching in general
terms their dissatisfactions

with Gorlot's Regency. But it was a negative approach where a positive one

was necessary. One man

used the thinnest possible veil for hints that Ferrill's health had declined
rapidly and concurrently with

Gorlot's Regency. He was shouted down by Calariz and the oily
representative from Astolla.

Stannall finally called a halt to this verbal massacre of Harlan and turned the
discussion to Gorlot's

suitability. The old firebrand, Estoder, who had hinted at Fen-ill's suspicious
illness, rose first to cite

inadequacies in Gorlot's administration and conduct of the Tane war. Calariz
and the Astollan gave him

little time to speak and talked loudly with their neighbors during his remarks.

'Jessl, he'll never win at this rate. What happened?' I wailed.

'It's the insanity angle. A lot of those who would follow Harlan through a Mil
raid are afraid of that.

Frankly, if I didn't know Harlan had been drugged, I'd be worried, too.'

'Then why doesn't someone come out and say he was drugged?' I demanded.
'I can prove it.'

'How?'

'I was there. I saw it done. I heard Gleto talking about it. He said he was
afraid Harlan could throw

off the drug and he wanted to increase the dosage.'

'That isn't proof we can substantiate, unfortunately. It's hearsay. And it would
be ridiculous to stand

you up against the testimony of men like Monsorlit. No, my dear. We'd have
to have a physician's report

that traces of the drug were actually found in Harlan's blood. We tried it, but
his system had absorbed

whatever they used.'

'They used cerol and you know it,' I reminded him sharply.

'And cerol is rapidly absorbed into the system,' Jessl retorted angrily. 'Besides,
all we'd need to prove

to them that Harlan was still unstable would be for us to come out with a
statement that he'd been

drugged all along. We'd be laughed off the planet. If only we had had more
time and could revive one of

those men at the sanitarium.'

'They're setting it to a vote,' Linnana cried out.

I had to watch but it was horrible to witness this defeat.

'But Maxil won't have Gorlot,' I said helplessly.

'He'll have to take him,' Jessl muttered.

'But they can't do that to Maxil,' I insisted. 'He'll be poisoned like Ferrill and
what Gorlot's intended

to do all along will get done and then where will Lothar be?'

The roll was being called with droning fatality to Harlan's chances. I wanted
to break the connection

so I wouldn't have to watch. I was halfway to my feet to shut it off when there
was a commotion at the

hall doors. They burst open suddenly to a scene of struggling guards.

'I am Jokan. I have the right to enter. STANNALL!' a voice rang out above the
scuffling and

shouting.

'Let Jokan advance," Stannall bellowed with more power to his voice than I
imagined he'd have.

Jokan ran up the aisle. He spared no time for ceremonial bowing. Catching
Stannall by the arm, he

spoke softly and urgently. The First Councilman's eyes widened with
disbelief. He backed up, his hand

reaching behind him for the support of the table. Jokan stopped speaking, his
face grim. Stannall stared at

him. He managed to ask a question to which Jokan only nodded slowly and
gravely. You could see the

effort with which Stannall drew himself erect.

'I have grave news. The gravest. I must speak of something I never thought
would be said of a

Lotharian. I must speak of treachery so abominable that the words gag in my
throat.' Stannall's voice did

choke, before he gathered strength and volume and venom. 'There has been
no war on Tane,' he

declared in a tight, measured way. 'And furthermore there are now no more
Tane on their two silent

planets. Why? Because they have been taken by the Mil.'

A concerted gasp of horror rang throughout the Hall.

'How, you may well ask, did the Mil get the Tane? How did they, for that
matter, penetrate so far in

from our Perimeter Patrol? Because the Patrol has been withdrawn from the
Tane sector. 'There is only

one man who has the power to do that. I accuse Gorlot,' and Stannall's finger
pinioned the traitor, 'of the

highest, most gruesome treachery. I accuse him of the foulest…' and here
Stannall was drowned out by

the savage roar that came up from the very floor of the Hall. There was a
mass stampede toward the

traitor.

Jokan had leaped to Godot's side during Stannall's denunciation. His weapon
was pointed at the

man's throat. Ironically enough, it was Harlan who kept Gorlot from being
torn apart alive by the

hysterical Councilmen. It was Harlan who brought the mob under control and
back in their seats while

guards formed a tight ring around Gorlot.

It was Harlan who called squadron outposts along the Perimeter to report their
positions. It was he

who reassigned them and called up additional units from the spaceport to rush
to unprotected areas. It

was Harlan who kept his head, the man they considered unsafe to trust with
their government.

But it was Stannall who recalled the business of the day long enough to insist
on a re-vote which was

dispatched with unanimous haste. Harlan was again Regent!

CHAPTER TWELVE

I had a sampling of the general reaction to this startling news from the three
people in the room with

me. Linnana started to weep hysterically, throwing herself at Jessl's feet and
imploring him to take her to

the Vaults where she would be safe from the Mil. She evidently supposed the
Mil to be on their way

from Tane to Lothar although this had not even been hinted. Ittlo cursed
monotonously, alternating his

curses with 'How did he do it? How could he do it?' This was substantially
what Jessl wanted to know.

First he managed to calm Linnana by reminding her that the inner network of
alarms gave them a full

day's warning before the Mil could possibly land on Lothar. There was no
possibility of Gorlot's

tampering with those sentinels. She continued to weep quietly, falling into a
little lump on a chair, until I

thought to have her go with Ittlo to get quantities of the stimulating beverage.
I had a feeling we'd need it.

With something to do, both Ittlo and Linnana were in better shape. The door
flung open and Fara

came racing in, her eyes wide in her white face.

'I had to come, I had to come. Maxil will be so upset,' she pleaded with me.

Jessl and I exchanged looks. She was, of course, quite right. True, I didn't
realize that tradition would

require a sixteen-year-old boy to be on the flagship of the fleet that would
undoubtedly meet the Mil the

next time they came thundering down on Tane.

Her concern for this crisis and its effect on the boy was instinctive and
creditable to the unselfishness

of her devotion to him. I felt ashamed. All I had considered was the fact that
Gorlot was finally exposed

and Harlan vindicated.

'Help me get to him,' Fara cried, looking first to me, then to Jessl, gesturing at
the pandemonium in the

Council Hall.

'Harlan will bring Maxil back here, I'm sure,' I said encouragingly. 'And I
don't think anyone could get

through to him right now. Look.'

Fara and Jessl turned to the hectic picture on the panel. Harlan, Stannall and
Maxil were easing

themselves out of the Hall, all the while directing various agitated groups of
Councilmen. The comic relief

was supplied by the secretary. He was trying to keep his unwieldy table of
tablets from being upset in the

push and shove. He kept jumping up and down on one leg, weeping in
distress at the ghastly news he

must record.

Ittlo's questions, 'How did he do it? How could he do it?' were answered in
the course of the next

few violent days. But there were a lot of other questions that were never
adequately answered.

The perfidy toward the gentle Tane who had so recently been reviled as

expendable savages shocked

Lotharians of all degrees out of their petty squabbles and united them once
more in their ancient crusade

against the Mil.

'How could he do it?' was answered by the blazing personal ambition of the
man Gorlot, who had

correctly assessed the greed of barons and patrol dissidents, seizing upon the
unrest of the time to

implement his scheme. There were many who had wanted the Tane planets as
their own playgrounds, or

for their business monopolies. They were not especially interested in having
the Tane there. They gave

Gorlot the support he needed in Council when he needed it, in return for his
extravagant promises of

large grants when his colonization reforms went through. His choices of
squadron leaders were promoted

through rigged military boards and the incumbents thrown out, moved up, or
liquidated in one manner or

another. In return for their explicit, blind obedience, Gorlot substituted in all
key Perimeter positions the

incompetent men who had formerly been denied promotion. The few who
went along only far enough to

get suspicious of Gorlot's ultimate goal or who found out inadvertently were
silenced. Some ended up as

mental cases, others as complete paralytics doomed to a short and useless life
in the thrall of cerol,

conscious but unable to blurt out the frightful truths held locked in their
brains.

Gorlot had withdrawn the Perimeter defenses on the Tane sector, creating a

funnel down which the

Mil, encouraged by the lack of resistance, headed towards their new prey. The
routine engagements

Gorlot reported during his period as Regent were actually those few Mil ships
he had had to destroy to

control. Some of the men supposedly in cerol shock from Tane attacks had
been captured by the Mil.

Frantic appeals, like the case of the rhyming trader, had been put down to the
ever-mounting toll of

mental health. I wondered how Gorlot, once the Tanes' planets were stripped,
planned to turn back the

Mil the next time they approached the funnel. Or would the Mil know they
had had all the life those two

ill-fated planets bore? Would Gorlot have risked a Mil raid on Lothar? My
private opinion was yes, he

would have dared, particularly if he could be the hero of the occasion.
Perhaps he meant ultimately to

discard the 'weakened line' of Harlan and start a new dynasty, the vigorous
'line of Gorlot'.

The real miracle in the affair was Jokan's role. He had started back for the
north and staged a realistic

crash in the mountains as planned. The men who rescued him were patrollers
on leave. They recognized

Jokan as the man who had been experimenting on Ertoi with the crystals.
These crystals had enabled the

Ertoi to keep the Mil off their planets long before the Alliance. The sonic
vibrations of the crystals were

powerful enough to disrupt the cellular construction of the Mil and reduce
them to a battered jelly. The

Ertoi were a much oldet race than the Lotharians.

Thanks to the magnetic storms with which their planet abounded they had
early found a means of

defending themselves against the depredations of the Mil.

Jokan had worked for several years on a project to incorporate similar
electromagnetic crystals on

every Lotharian ship. Laboratory tests had proved that the crystals were
effective if the Mil victim could

be encircled. It was this new weapon that had given Harlan the hope that
Lothar might seriously consider

attacking the Mil home planet. However, there was as yet no adequate way to
shield humans against the

effect of the crystals. A man, because of his relatively denser cell
composition, could stand a much higher

frequency than the Mil. But man still suffered from the vibrations emanating
from this weapon.

Jokan's patrollers mentioned that all the ships they had seen or served on
recently were now

equipped with the crystal resonators. There was considerable secrecy attached
to these installations.

Jokan was deemed the permissible exception. He had, after all, been
instrumental in their development.

But Jokan had not known that the installation of the crystals was so
widespread. He was immediately

concerned and questioned the men closely. What he learned was enough to
send him back to Lothar to

make his desperate and successful attempt to get to the Tane planets. He had
left word at his apartment

of his intentions, believing me soon to arrive safely there.

The patrollers had also told him they had been in maneuvers off Tane, using
the crystals on Mil type

transports, driving the ships toward Tane. There had been several of these
'war games', combined with

expeditions on the Tanes in which the'rebellious' Tanes were herded into
cantonments to await

punishment for their 'offenses' against Lothar.

I don't know where Gorlot was taken immediately after the fiasco at the
Council Hall because it had

to be a well-kept secret. The palace was mobbed by endless throngs and
deputations, screaming for

possession of the traitor.

Numerous attempts to invade the palace by force to seize Gorlot were
repulsed.

Fara's concern for Maxil was just. He returned from the Council Hall in grim
silence. He made

continual appearances on the balcony overlooking the great Square,
reassuring the people that the Mil

were not lurking in the clouds above, ready to swoop down and depopulate
Lothar. With a sternness

astonishing for his relative youth, he assured them of punishment for the
traitor. The only reason for a

delay in dealing with Gorlot was to discover how far-reaching his plans had
been. However, it became

necessary late that night to bring Gorlot from his prison and show him to the
frenzied mobs before they

could be made to disperse.

Someone had started a rumor that he had been rescued or was going to be
rescued. What group of

zealots might do such a mad thing no one ever said. But Maxil showed them a
Gorlot, manacled with

ship-anchor chains, bruised and bloodied, quite a different man from that
morning.

The enflamed people had to be satisfied with effigies of Gorlot which were
burned, tortured,

dismembered, tied to Mil Rocks all over the planet, thousands of times
throughout the night. Vengeance

was easy to accomplish by pointing fingers at those who had enjoyed Gorlot's
favor during the past ten

months.

Maxil proved himnself a true descendant of Warlords, carrying himself with
great dignity during his

trying personal appearances. I appeared with him, as did Fara, Stannall, Jokan
and Jessl. But I think it

was Fara's presence that steadied him most. Once Stannall recognized this, at
my insistence, there was

no longer any problem about Fara remaining in the Warlord's suite.

I think all the arrogance and imperiousness went out of Maxil that day. The
glamorous trappings, the

little dignities and privileges that went with his position had been brutally torn
aside to show him the ugly

mechanics underneath. It was a frightening initiation into manhood.

The Regent and the First Councilman seemed to be on strings, in and out,
back and forth. Jessl

stayed with Maxil but apart from one public appearance with Maxil, Jokan
was not in evidence. He

joined us very late that night as Jessl and I sat up, listening to the disturbed
sleep of the new Warlord, far

too keyed up to rest ourselves. The noise from the streets was still audible. I
was, as usual, eating. I'll say

that for my participation in events that day: it was I who remembered that
people had to eat occasionally,

particularly people under stress. And I made everyone have dinner, including
Stannall and Harlan.

Jessl took one look at his half-brother and did not offer food. He poured him a
full cup of a potent

patrol brew. Jokan showed every minute of the forty sleepless hours of his trip
to and from Tane. He was

no longer the debonair man-of-the-world, playboy and wit. Jokan was too
dead-tired to play any role.

He had lost the last of his few illusions. Jessl and I waited as he drank, his
legs sprawled out from the

chair, his chin on his chest, one arm limp over the back of the chair, the other
cradling the tumbler against

his cheek between gulps.

'You know, Jessl,' he said finally, 'I circled those damned planets and I
quartered them. I went to

every sacred grove on both Tanes. They were fenced round with forcers. Only
the forcers were off and

there wasn't anyone around. Used to be, there was always someone in a grove.

'And quiet? You've never been on such a quiet world. Those Tanes were
always making some kind

of noise, that silly croon of theirs. You always heard it. But there was always
some kind of noise. I tell

you, it was the weirdest thing I ever felt. And those burned-out acres where
the Mil ships had landed.

You could smell them. It made me sick. I was sick until I couldn't stand and

crawled back to the ship on

my hands and knees.'

I noticed that he wasn't exaggerating. The knees of his now disheveled flying
suit were torn and

mud-caked.

'Jessl, if I hadn't been there,' he continued, miserably, his eyes filling with
tears, 'I wouldn't've believed

a man, a Lotharian who knows what the Mil do, who's been brought up to kill
the rotting species, could

conceive such a scheme.' He shook his head and drained the rest of his cup,
holding it out for Jessl to

refill.

'Didn't you find any Tanes?' asked Jessl hopefully.

Jokan shook his head slowly from side to side, from side to side. 'A whole
race of gentle natural

people who never hurt anyone, who didn't suspect treachery in others until it
must have been too late. A

whole race wiped out. By one man. One man.'

Draining his cup again, Jokan flung it viciously against the wall. It clattered
and bounced noisily onto

the carpeting. Jokan sat there looking at the battered cup with narrowed eyes.
Jessl reached for another

tumbler, filled it and passed it over to his brother. He and I watched until
Jokan drank himself into a

complete stupor. Then we put him to bed.

I went to sleep in the final hours of that night, listening to the dull rumble of
public frenzy which

showed few signs of dying down from sheer inertia. There was no less noise
than there had been the

previous night with Eclipse festival going full blast. But there was a different
feel in the air now… a feeling

of hate so strong it smelled, so tense it pressed against you like heavy fog and
made breathing difficult.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

When I awoke at my usual hour the next morning, I felt oddly refreshed by
the short sleep and

curiously alert. I was up well before Linnana this morning, I thought with a
grin. She didn't even appear

when I drew my own bath. In a way it was a pleasure to be alone, feeling as I
did, and I hummed to

myself as I bathed. Gorlot had done his worst and it had backfired on him.
The yoke of apprehension

was lifted from the back of my neck. Somehow, to me at any rate, the Mil did
not seem as terrifying as

Gorlot had.

I threw on a robe and walked out onto my balcony. The gardens lay below
me, trampled and

battered by yesterday's surging mobs. Beyond, the city was preternaturally
quiet, the way New York

could be, early Sunday mornings. A sudden muted drone caught my attention
and I located the sound

from the trail the ship made as it needled upward into the greenish morning
sky. The trail was barely

thinning when another roar split the air and a second, a third, a fourth line of
smoke spurted upward. I

watched this exodus for some time before the knock on the door roused me.

Harlan came in and motioned to me to stay on the balcony where he joined
me. There were circles

under his eyes and fatigue lines drawing down the corners of his mouth. But
his step was quick and his

voice firm.

'Good morning to you, Regent Harlan,' I said and gave him a full court
curtsey.

'Very graceful,' he grinned back and gave me a hand to steady my rising. 'I
didn't hope to find you up.

But I took a, chance. Jokan is far beyond wakening.'

'He was very tired last night,' I tendered.

'He was also very drunk,' Harlan remarked, teasing me. 'Hardly blame him.
Wish I had the chance.'

I could think of nothing witty or apt to say because Harlan's very masculine
presence disturbed me.

He leaned against the wall, facing me, folding his arms across his chest,
regarding me with

disconcerting directness.

'What is all the activity at the spaceport?' I asked, nervously gesturing at the
smoke trails.

Harlan didn't bother to glance over his shoulder. 'Sending out replacements
and technicians for the

Perimeter. Have to replace nearly every man Gorlot appointed with someone
competent. He did a

thorough job of removing, permanently or temporarily, every able man in
Patrol unsympathetic to him.'

'You are afraid the Mil are coming back in force.'

Harlan frowned at me intensely. 'There is always that possibility.'

'It's what everyone seems to fear.'

'Well, they might. Gorlot gave the Mil a wide-open field with Tane. What's to
prevent them from

assuming that the entire section isn't wide open? Especially since we've
always maintained such a vigil.'

Harlan moved to the balcony railing, looking out over the battered gardens.
Then he turned back to

me, leaning against the iron support.

'Have either Jessl or Jokan been after you? About your origin?' he asked
anxiously.

'Jessl calls me the lady of mystery,' I laughed lightly.

Harlan frowned.

'I can't keep both of them away from you and they're curious. Look, I'll send
you some vision tapes

about Jurasse. You can't read Lotharian yet, I gather? Hmmm. That's too bad
and there's no chance to

teach you. Well, you'll have to assimilate as much from the historical and
vision tapes as you can.'

Harlan stared into space, scrubbing his chin thoughtfully.

I noticed he must have just bathed, for his hair gleamed damply in the rising
sun. His lean profile stood

in bold relief against the green sky, emphasizing the strength in his rough
features. I put that picture into a

special corner of my memory for easy reference. He turned back toward me
suddenly. The wry grin on

his face set as he caught my absorbed expression.

'I've never thanked you, have I, Sara?' he said gently. 'If you hadn't had the
courage of…'

I shook my head to stop him.

'You forget, you were the only way I had of getting out of that ghastly place.'

He reached for my right hand, raising it to his lips without taking his eyes off
mine. Then he pulled me

slowly toward him.

'Maxil's Fara has joined him,' Harlan said with a meaningful grin. His arms
held me tightly against him

and his eyes compelled me to look only into his face. 'Maxil is as eager to
claim his lady as I am to claim

mine.'

Slowly he bent and lifted me into his arms, his eyes never leaving mine. I
could feel the warmth of him

through the thin fabric of his overtunic and hear the beating of his heart, fast
and strong. I felt I must be

only one loud, frantic pulse beat. He put me on my feet by the side of the bed,
his eyes warm and intense

with feeling.

'This is not a smelly fishing boat, dear my lady,' he said softly as his hands
unfastened my robe. 'And it

is much too early for anyone to be up and looking for the Regent.' He shed his
own tunic and I

swallowed hard with nervousness. Quick concern crossed his face and he
framed my head with gentle

hands. 'Is this body you cared for so long offensive to you?' he asked softly.
'You know it so well.'

'I know it well, yes, but not the man within it,' I whispered.

He smiled then, a wonderful tender possessive smile.

'When the man I am is within you, you will know all of me well and I, all of
you. And you will no

longer be afraid of me.'

My arms, of themselves, slid up around his neck and our bodies touched. I
couldn't control my

trembling.

'Dear my lady Sara,' he said very softly, his voice rough with passion. 'I'm
claiming my own. Now!'

A long time later, I heard his soft chuckle in my ear.

'You know, you were untouched after all. Those bully boys Gleto used as
guards weren't above

rape.'

'I know,' I said in a very small whisper into his chest, 'I was terrified they
might have when I wasn't in

possession of my senses.'

He tipped my head up so I had to look him straight in the eye.

'Afraid of me now?' he asked gently. He wouldn't let me duck my head and he
grinned at my furious

blushing. 'I can see you aren't and I'm glad.' He kissed me quickly and settled
me against him. 'I'll do

better by you next time, sweeting. But I can't give a guess when that'll be.
This is stolen time.' He sighed

deeply and the lines loving had lifted briefly settled back into place.

'You look so tired, Harlan,' I murmured, worried, touching the raggedy scar
on his cheek.

'I feel a lot better now than I have for some time,' he grinned wickedly at me
and kissed my breasts.

His hands tightened on me roughly. When he looked up at me, his face had
changed completely. 'If

anything should happen to you now…' He sat up abruptly, his strong back to
me. I could hear him slap

one fist against the other palm.

One long arm reached out for the overdress he had dropped to the floor. In
one fluid movement he

had thrown it over him and buckled it into place. He looked down at me.

'That's why I can't stand to have you stay on here. Too many people get to see
you. You've too

unusual a face to be easily forgotten. Someone who knows where you were
before you were made my

attendant is going to remember you. But…' and he sighed deeply,'there's no
possible chance of whisking

you away to a less public place.'

'Nothing will happen, Harlan. Surely someone would have come forward by
now. I've been seen so

much,' I reassured him. 'And I've been doing quite well. I've had to.'

'You've recalled no memories, not even fragments that would give us a lead?'

'None I want to remember,' I said, suppressing a shudder.

He bent to kiss my forehead in apology for stirring up those memories.

'By the way, we got those nine men out of Gleto's tender care,' he said, sitting
down beside me. He

took my left hand in both his, stroking my wrist gently. 'They're coming round
and furthermore, we found

enough cerol in Gleto's medicine room to supply an army. There wasn't much
of that stuff available

before the Tane wars, too new a drug, so it was obvious someone has been
importing it in quantities.

We'll find out who soon.'

'Then you can prove to anyone that you never were insane in the first place.
Not that it matters now.'

'It still matters,' Harlan assured me. 'But what is more important, we should be
able to learn from

those nine when the Mil first got to the Tanes… in what force…"

'Can't you get Gorlot to tell you?'

'We're working on him, too,' Harlan said grimly. 'We've had more success
with his cronies in Records

and Supplies, but they don't know the total plan.'

'What about Monsorlit?' I asked hopefully. It would be nice to be rid of one
menace.

Harlan looked at me questioningly.

'He drugged you, after all. And Gorlot appointed him,' I argued, not
understanding his reluctance to

indict the physician.

'No. Monsorlit has always been in charge of the staff at War Hospital,' Harlan
said quickly. 'Gleto has

been accused,' he added to pacify me. 'But other than Gleto's counter
accusation there is no proof

Monsorlit was involved. Gleto's such a wretched cave-blocker his word
doesn't go for much.'

'But mine does,' I replied, trying to ignore the fear that sank like lead into the
pit of my stomach.

'Look,' and Harlan closed strong hands around my shoulders. He gave me a
little shake to make me

look at him. 'We'll have to forget Monsorlit's duplicity. If restoration is once
brought into this, you'll be

killed just as if you were any other restoree. Monsorlit must have done the
restoration. He's the only one

who would dare or who could do such a superb job. But how he did it and
when, I am not interested in

finding out. And neither, dear my lady, should you be. By the mother of us all,
Sara,' and he threw his

hands out in an exasperated gesture as I stared at him, unconvinced,'do you
want to be discovered?'

'Monsorlit has covered all traces in this affair,' and Harlan swung off the bed
to pace restlessly up and

down the room, 'just as delicately as he covered all trace of restoration on
your body.'

He turned and pointed his stumpy finger at me. 'If his hospital ship had once
been on Tane at any

time, we could accuse him of hiding treasonable information or of direct
collusion with Gorlot. But he's

clever. He kept his ships in orbit one hundred miles above the planet. The
wounded were ferried up to

him by small rocket. We can't pin a thing on him.

'There's just enough cerol in his hospitals for experimentation. And his staff is
so cave-bound loyal to

him they wouldn't spit unless he said to. How can we pin anything on him that
would remove him as a

danger to you?

'He's got Ferrill back on his feet and to top it all, he's come up with an
antidote for cerolosis. That

makes us grateful to him. And his clinics for mental health all over the planet
have touched too many little

people for us to try to defame him.'

'But he drugged you,' I insisted inanely.

Harlan shrugged. 'I can do nothing that won't endanger you.'

'What if Monsorlit remembers me?' I pleaded, desperately afraid.

Harlan dropped to my side again. 'Sara, Sara, please. Go on making yourself
into a Lotharian. It's

safer.' He smiled plaintively and kissed me tenderly. 'You're one now anyway.
But remember, fear of a

restoree is almost as deep as fear of the Mil and to many… you heard
Stannall… just as hideous.'

I was about to say something when a gentle knock startled us.

'Just be careful, dear my lady,' he whispered urgently as the door opened to
admit Linnana.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

I often felt in the next few days as if I lived in the old Grand Central Station.
Harlan and Stannall

conducted much of their business in Maxil's living-room and board-room,
including Maxil in all

discussions. The boy would reel to bed late at night exhausted, rise the next
morning and grimly plunge

back into the tedious reports from Councilmen and Patrolmen, or broadcast
reassuring messages to the

planet. The palace seethed with feverish activity and the air was punctuated
day and night by the blasts of

shuttling rockets and great ships.

A full report of the death of the Tane was partially cushioned by a discovery
of a lone group of sixty

badly frightened, suspicious survivors.

All Patrol reserves were recalled for reexamination and assignment. The
fiction that this was due only

to a reshuffling following the collapse of the Gorlot Regency was not fooling
many, but it kept hysteria

under control. Every available ship, no matter what size, was being refitted
with Jokan's

electro-magneto-resonators. Busy as the spaceport beyond Lothar was, Maxil
assured me that the

Moonbases were bedlam. Jokan spent most of his time with Ertois and Glans
although I didn't get to see

any of these extraplanetary allies until later. Jessl was occupied with some
radical planetary defense

system and appeared only once at the formal dinners that Stannall insisted be
continued for public

morale.

Maxil announced plans for a speeded-up colonization of one of the Tane
planets. Applications from

all walks and trades would be acceptable. With a wry afterthought, it was also
announced that both Tane

planets were being equipped with the Ertoi defense crystals to prevent a
return of the Mil. I realized then

that that must be what occupied Jessl, the erection of a similar last-gasp
defense for Lothar itself. To have

admitted this publicly would have crystalized everyone's nightmare.

My public appearances as Maxil's companion continued, but I insisted that
Fara also be included.

Maxil always felt more at ease with her than with me although I know he
liked me. But I was eight years

his senior and, as Harlan had made plain he had a prior claim, Maxil was
uncomfortable when the three

of us were together. With both Harlan and Maxil bringing pressure on him,
Stannall finally conceded that

people would be too concerned with the Mil crisis to worry about such 'minor
details'.

However, members of the palace circle soon took advantage of the fact that
Maxil had made no

formal claim on me and pressed their attentions. Stannall would not, however,
permit Harlan to make his

formal claim public, which infuriated the Regent.

If Linnana ever mentioned finding Harlan in my room that first morning he
claimed me, she never

passed the information along. I was deeply grateful to her and she became
very helpful in dissuading

importunate suitors who tried to enter my room.

My private time I spent listening to the tapes Harlan had sent me until I felt I
knew Jurrasse intimately

and could tour its eighteen hills blindfolded. Fara and I went to the Great
Bazaar and I listened to the talk

of the crowds, shopping, watching, familiarizing myself as much as I could
with Lotharian ways.

Lothar was an odd contrast of technical advances and primitive inventions.
There were no land

vehicles other than animal-drawn carts of the crudest type. Women baked on
wood stoves while the land

Patrol and the palace cooked with a form of thermal energy in gigantic ovens.
There was radiant lighting,

but a crude type of radiant heating. Cloth was all handloomed. There was
efficient refrigeration but no

canned supplies. No paper but the awkward slates or thinly extruded metal
sheets for more permanent

records. Widespread television existed and recording tapes but nothing
approximating typewriters or

printing presses. Epic poems were sung by skilled bards using stringed
instruments and drums, but there

were no dramas other than mummeries. Glass and high-grade plastics but no
china, porcelain or clay.

My days were busy, but I waited impatiently for the few hours Harlan could
spare to be with me. He

would come late at night, waking me from sleep, or early in the morning as I
could not break my habit of

early rising. If he came at dawn, he would bring cups of beverage and fruit,
teasing me about my

ravenous appetite.

'When do you ever sleep?' I asked him, half anxious, half amazed at his
inexhaustible vitality.

He rolled onto his side and ran a caressing hand the length of my body.

'Here and there,' he answered absently. He stroked my wrist softly.
'Remember, I had months of

sleep in the asylum and,' he added with an engaging leer, 'as long as I have
access to the greatest of all

restoratives, I'm doing fine. When I think of the time I wasted in that asylum,
the opportunities I was

oblivious to…'

'You are absurd,' I protested, laughing.

'And you are delightful, dear my lady,' and we would be off again.

He never completely forgot my exposed position and my lack of background.
But I became more at

ease and lost my fear of self-betrayal. I was full of confidence.

The communicator panel, which was always busy, flashed on one morning
just as I was rousing from

a post-breakfast stupor. Harlan had been with me late that night. Jokan said
the call was for me.

I recognized the speaker as Councilman Lesatin. In most courteous terms he
asked me to attend a

meeting in half an hour at Stannall's office beyond the Great Hall in the
administration wing.

My curiosity, not my concern, was aroused. Lesatin had been a dinner partner
twice and I dismissed

the man as an amiable, exaggerating character. He happened to be the
representative of the mining

interests in Jurasse and we had chatted about my coming from there. The only
question I hadn't been able

to answer was what shaft my father had worked in. I had fobbed that off by
confessing to a sudden lapse

of memory. Very silly, I had said airily, to forget a title I knew as well as my
own clan. Lesatin had

helpfully named a few shafts and I had picked one eagerly. He had not
seemed unduly concerned with

my forgetfulness.

When I reached the office, not only Lesatin was there but also Stannall and
several other senior

Councilmen whom I knew by sight. I still had no apprehensions.

I was greeted most courteously and asked to be seated.

'One purpose of this meeting,' Stannall began in his most formal tone of
voice, 'is to acquaint you with

the public approval of this Council and the citizens of Lothar for the
considerable part you played in

exposing the traitor, Gorlot. Had you not suspected and been able to effect
Harlan's release, we might

have discovered all too late the perfidy planned against the entire Alliance.
Our gratitude takes this

material expression,' and Stannall handed me a much decorated slate. I
glanced at it with what I hoped

was intelligent comprehension and thanked them most fervently.

'We feel we can never adequately recompense you for the danger in which
you voluntarily placed

yourself.'

I muttered something to cover my embarrassment.

Stannall's official countenance relaxed into as pleasant a smile as he had ever
directed to me. The

other five men beamed paternally at me. I wondered if Stannall had now
forgiven me my various sins. He

had been less curt, certainly, since Fara had joined Maxil's suite. Perhaps she
had championed me.

'We would be interested in knowing just when you first suspected Harlan was
being drugged. Also

anything you can remember that would lead to the apprehension of other
traitors.'

'There's Gleto, of course, and his armed guard.'

Stannall nodded and remarked that they had been in custody for some time.
'Gleto makes some odd

charges,' Stannall added absently, 'which we are unable to substantiate.'

'Oh?' I remarked hopefully, not at all suspicious of this line of questioning.

'He had involved several men of prominent position whom many would like
to see cleared of such

basely derived suspicions,' the First Councilman continued smoothly.

'I'm not sure I could give you any help. I was shut up constantly in the one
cottage. I had no

opportunity to overhear or see any visitors of consequence. Except when
Ferrill came to see Harlan. I

think that was the first inkling I had of irregularity,' I said truthfully.

'Oh?'

'Ferrill asked particularly to be informed of any change in Harlan's condition,
you see,' I continued,

goaded by Stannall's noncommittal reception. 'Gorlot made a sign to Gleto
and he smirked. I mean,

Gorlot was plainly indicating that Gleto should not inform Ferrill if Harlan
got better.'

This was considered and commented on.

'Did Physician Monsorlit ever attend Harlan at the asylum in your presence?'

My throat dried up suddenly and I coughed evasively. The truth, the truth is
one thing you never

stumble over. But I couldn't tell the whole truth. Not now when I saw what
Stannall was after: an

indictment against Monsorlit. But they all knew that Monsorlit had been the
attending physician.

'Yes, he came,' I admitted slowly.

'What did he do?' Stannall seemed to leap on my confirmation.

'Made a routine examination of Harlan, administered a drug and left.'

'Did you have any idea what drug?' Stannall snapped.

I swallowed and claimed ignorance. Stannall stared at me with such a
menacing intensity it was very

difficult to act unconcerned. My throat was parched.

'Tell me,' Stannall began casually, turning his back on me for a moment,
fiddling with slates on his

desk. 'How did you obtain the position as attendant to Harlan?'

'The usual way.'

'Which is through Monsorlit's Mental Defectives Clinic, according to the
records,' Stannall retorted,

wheeling back to me with blazing eyes.

'Well, certainly,' I replied with mock amazement that he should consider this
remarkable.

My admission confused him and Lesatin muttered something to one of his
colleagues.

'You admit having gone through the Clinic?'

'Certainly,' I was forced to reconfirm. 'Mental Defectives Clinic' I heard my
mind echoing and an icy

finger twisted deep into my stomach. I fought the sudden panic. I must think
clearly now. I must. I had

just admitted to having been insane… no, no, I was seriously disturbed, that's
all. It meant I would be

shielding Monsorlit whom I wanted to expose. It meant, more certainly, I
hadn't given the proper thought

to my background story at all. No one was asking me how many hills Jurasse
had nor the position of the

Odern Cave Vaults nor the placement of the inner labyrinths. Nor what shaft
my father had worked in.

'Why were you in the Clinic?' Lesatin asked into that chill silence. I looked at
him and realized that

this affable man with the insatiable curiosity was quite capable of correlating
odd pieces of information

into logical theory.

'I went there for help,' I said slowly. 'You see, I'd had several very bad
experiences that upset me.

Some friends thought I might get help there.'

'I went there for help,' I said slowly. 'You see, I'd had several very bad
experiences that upset me.

Some friends thought I might get help there.'

'What kind of experiences?' Lesatin urged gently.

'Remember the apartment near the sign of Horn? The ones that collapsed in
the earth fault? Well, I

was trapped in my room for hours before they could get me out. Then my
father was one of the men who

was killed in the fault. I didn't have any relatives and I never could get to see
my Clan Officer. I'd have

these terrible nightmares,' that was true enough, 'and finally, I went to the
Mental Clinic.'

I wondered if neurotics were acceptable in this Clinic. Certainly in terms of
earth psychiatry, those

two traumatic shocks were sufficient to cause a psychosis… if you tended to
be psychotic. I looked

pleadingly in each face to see the reception of my fabrication. I was relieved
to see sympathy replace

skepticism and suspicion.

'Then you are naturally grateful to Monsorlit for curing your… ah…
nervousness and nightmares,'

Stannall suggested.

'Well, not Monsorlit, certainly. I wasn't a very unusual case and you had to be
pretty bad to get his

attention what with the Tane war.'

This was not the answer Stannall hoped for, I knew, but it was plausible.

'Did you ever see anything… unusual… while you were in the Clinic
undergoing treatment?' asked

Stannall conversationally.

'Unusual?'

'Yes. Cases where men were perhaps completely bandaged from head to foot.
Patients with scars on

their wrists, ankles or necks?'

'Oh, no,' I replied hastily. I knew now what he was driving at. He wanted to be
able to accuse

Monsorlit of restoration. And here was Stannall's proof sitting in front of him.
'Oh, no, no. No restorees,

only men he had repossessed,' I blurted out without thinking.

'Repossessed!' and Stannall snapped the word up hungrily and turned
triumphantly to the others.

'What exactly do you mean?' asked Lesatin anxiously.

'I don't exactly know,' I stalled. 'I mean, the other girls in the sanitarium were
called "repossessed"

and some of the technicians too.' I recalled the conversation Monsorlit had
had with Gleto about

restorees and repossessed. 'I guess I mean people who have been ill mentally
and he has repossessed

them of their senses. People he's trained to do certain things. I guess you
could almost call Harlan

repossessed, except that he was never really insane.'

The qualification had an effect on the Councilmen. They talked quietly among
themselves.

'Perhaps we have been wrong in our suspicions,' Lesatin began without his
usual pomposity. 'The two

terms, repossessed and restored, have similar meanings. This young lady's
statement bears out what we

already know. And we have certainly examined every hospital record and
each patient carefully. I have

found no evidence of restoration.'

Stannall turned angrily toward Lesatin. I gathered he wished Lesatin had not
been so outspoken.

Lesatin shrugged off the silent reprimand.

'All we have is the word of a low Milbait like Gleto against the innumerable
proofs to the contrary

from unimpeachable sources,' Lesatin said. 'Surely, Sir Stannall, you must
realize the splendid

contributions Monsorlit has made toward the insidious problem of insanity…'

'I realize that Monsorlit, in some way, despite all oral and written proof to the
contrary, aided and

abetted Gorlot in his treachery. If just one, just one of those casualties had
been capable of speech, we

would have discovered this obscene plot. Why couldn't one of them speak?'

'Monsorlit received all casualties in the orbital hospital ship. There was ample
opportunity for

someone like Trenor, who has admitted his complicity, to silence them
effectively with cerol,' Lesatin

pointed out.

'Can't you help us?' Stannall said fiercely to me, his eyes blazing with a
fanatical hate. ' Won't you help

us?' His intensity startled me so that nothing could have made me speak out. I
comprehended too well

the logic behind Harlan's advice to forget Monsorlit's part in his incarceration.

Stannall advanced to me, to my growing terror, for the mild-mannered First
Councilman was as one

possessed, his face gray with emotion, his wiry body trembling with rage.

Harlan burst in the door. At sight of him, I cried out in relief. Harlan's
entrance was explosive, not

casual. The news he blurted out with no preamble cleared the room of all
other interests.

'The Mil are coming,' he cried in a tight voice. Striding to the communicator
wall, he snapped on the

picture to a scene of complete confusion. A gasping older man in uniform was
shrieking out his message.

'The Mil! THE MIL ARE COMING!'

'Report position, report position,' Harlan said in a controlled voice, forcing
comprehension through

the man's hysterical repetition of his ghastly message. I could see the
squadron commander, for I realized

this was a ship's signal room, gulping for control. The slate he held in his
hand shook violently, but his

voice lowered.

'I beg to report," he gasped, seizing on the inanities of protocol to reassure
himself, 'infiltration past the

first ring. Twenty-three Mil ships, fifteen Star class, five Planet, with three
attendant satellite trailers.

Moving directly Taneward at equatorial intersection.'

'Twenty-three,' Stannall murmured incredulously. 'The largest force in three
centuries. And moving

toward Tane.'

'Spur infiltrations?' Harlan demanded, his voice metallic with command.

'No, sir. Just the direct route unless…' and the squadron commander's hand
shook more noticeably,

'they break off later.'

'What is their pace rate and interception potential for supreme task force?'

'Base is working on it now, sir,' a shadow voice put in.

'Proceed with Prime Action, and, Commander, are all your ships equipped
with the new

electromagnetic crystals?'

'Yes, sir, they are, sir. But we've had no test runs.'

'No matter. Maintain surveillance but under no circumstances, repeat, under
no circumstances,

attempt standard delaying tactics. My respect to you and your squadron,
Commander. You will receive

additional orders shortly.'

The picture faded as Harlan punched another dial. Before the picture had been
fully established, I

heard a piercing wail outside, the eerie panther-cry of a warning siren.
Stannall and the others left the

room, walking stiffly as people in the midst of a horrible dream. I heard
Harlan's voice, calm, unhurried,

the usual metallic burr of command adding its harsh note, as he announced to
the planet total, immediate

mobilization and complete civilian evacuation.

I listened stunned through this electrifying broadcast. Then he switched with
unhurried sureness to the

vast globular room I identified as the Moonbase Headquarters of the Patrol.
Here also was the

unfumbling dispatch of trained men reacting to an emergency that had been
theory for three generations

and was now, unexpectedly, grim actuality.

I saw Gartly and Jessl among the men in the Moonbase and, for the first time,
representatives of the

Alliance planets, Ertoi and Blan. The former were as humanoid as a saurian
species can appear,

complete with gills and scaled armor. The second, the Glan, were willowy
skeletons with three digits and

an opposing thumb. Their bodies were covered .with a fine down, their faces,
long and narrow, were

sensitive. Their apparently ineffectual bodies were deceptive for the Glan
were structurally twice as

strong as Lotharians and equal to their scaly space neighbors, the Ertois.

From them, Harlan received the news that their entire force was speeding
toward the penetration

point. I thought this was excellent cooperation until I saw the spatial tank and
realized that their relative

position had a great deal to do with such all-out collaboration. Spatially
speaking, they were above and

beyond Tane and Lothar but only as the apex of an isosceles triangle is above
and beyond its base

points. It was to their advantage to deflect any further penetration of the Mil
at Tane or Lothar, for the

angle of the Mil advance made the triangle two-dimensional and therefore
Ertoi and Glan were not

galactically far from Lothar.

The Alliance contingent, however, had the farthest to come and there
remained the calculation of

experts to determine if it were better to wait for their reinforcing navy before
joining battle or whether to

attempt it with only the Lotharian fleet. That decision ultimately rested with
Harlan as Regent and, in this

emergency, the de facto Warlord.

The decisive figures were not to be completed for several hours and Harlan
signed off with the advice

that he would presently board his command ship. All further communications
were to be forwarded

there. He made one more call and I saw the startled boy-scared face of Maxil.
He was being dresed in a

shipsuit by a grim Jokan.

'It is my duty to inform my lord,' Harlan began formally,'that Lothar is in
gravest danger. I must now

assume all rights, responsibilities and privileges. Will you accompany me on
board the flagship?'

'What do I say?' Maxil asked, his voice steady.

Harlan gave him a reassuring grin.

'You acknowledge the danger, relinquish to me your rights and responsibilities
and say you'll join me.

You're a little young for this, lad, but I don't think you'd want to miss it. And,
if you're feeling scared,

you're not alone. I'll see you in half an hour. Now, please let me speak to
Jokan.'

Maxil nodded and stepped aside.

'Jokan, you'll take Sara along with Ferrill to the Vaults. Stannall and the
Council will be assembling

there presently. I've got the power so they can't object to any emergency
measure I propose. Space help

us if Maxil and I go down together. I'm ordering you alternate Regent this

time,' and he snorted at his

behindsight.

'Now wait a minute, Harlan, I'm going with you…' Jokan objected, his eyes
flashing angrily.

'No, Jokan. You can't,' Harlan said with absolute finality. 'It could be more
important to Lothar's

future to have you alive if something goes wrong with our attack plan. I
haven't more time to explain now.

Jo, you know I wouldn't ask it if I didn't have to.'

Jokan glared helplessly, searching for an argument strong enough to sway his
brother.

'Jokan, I count on you. I can't trust anyone else,' Harlan repeated, his voice
tight with the desperate

urgency of his appeal.

Jokan set his teeth and bowed his head once in stiff resignation.

'Where's Sara?' Harlan asked.

'Here,' I reminded him.

Harlan whirled around and stared at me fiercely for a moment. I didn't know
whether to be amused

or hurt he had forgotten I was there.

'Jokan, I call you to witness that I claim the Lady Sara to be my lady,' he said
formally, drawing me

by the hand into the range of the vision screen.

'I accept the claim of Harlan, son of Hillel,' I said proudly and Harlan kissed
my hand formally. Even

now his thumb paused over my wrist.

'Jokan, I'll give Sara the alternate commission of Regency. And Jo, if
something should happen, guard

Sara. If I don't come back, she has something very important to tell you. Now
get Maxil off to the

spaceport. I'll meet the boy there.'

He flicked the panel to one more station, ordering his planecar brought to the
balcony of the office in

twenty minutes. Turning away from the set, he looked at me with such avid
hunger in his face I had to

turn my eyes away from his naked desire.

When I looked up at the slam of a drawer, I saw he was swiftly styling a slate.
I sat down and

watched him as he wrote, thinking with a sense of despair that this might be
the last time I ever saw him. I

memorized his face so that my mind would be able to recall the image
faithfully should I never see the

original again. It was difficult to reconcile the fierce and gentle lover I knew
best with this grim warrior,

urgently writing last-minute instructions for the safety of a world he might
never walk again. He finished

one slate quickly, tossing it aside with a clatter to clear space for the next.
This, too, he wrote quickly.

The third one, however, did not come as readily and he frowned as he wrote,
blended out, and restyled.

He punctuated this final message noisily and flipped a protecting film over it
which he sealed. He gathered

the three together and then stood up.

He came toward me and I rose to meet him. I had lead in my stomach and I
needed iron in my thighs

which did not seem strong enough to support me as I stood. In a few moments
he would go out the

balcony windows and…

He put his strong fingers on my shoulders and gave me a little shake to make
me concentrate on what

he had to say. His face had softened its grim expression and his eyes
wandered lovingly over my face.

'If I don't come back… but I will,' he reassured me quickly as I gasped at his
fatalism, 'give the third

slate to Ferrill. To no one else. Ferrill is the only one who would be able to
help and stand up to Stannall.

Jokan can guard you because I have pledged him to it, but only Ferrill can
help against Stannall. Stay

with those two as long as I'm gone and watch that quick tongue of yours.'

'Harlann.'

He gave me another little shake to hush.

'If I were a soldier/ on your world and going to battle… but maybe your world
doesn't have wars…

pretend, anyway. How… Oh Sara,' and he pulled me into his arms, holding
me tightly. 'I have known

you such a short, little time.'

I threw my arms around his neck, choking back a sob.

'Not with a tear, Sara,' he reprimanded me gently. 'Surely not with tears?'

'No, not with tears,' I denied, crying, lifting my lips to his kiss.

I clung to him desperately, for the passion that his slightest caress evoked in
me welled up to meet his.

Abruptly he took his mouth from mine and held my head fiercely against his

shoulder, burying his lips in

my hair.

Slowly he released me, holding my hands gently as I struggled to hold back
my tears.

'Honor my claim to you, dear my lady.'

A horn blasted outside and I saw the hovering aircar. I felt his hands pressing
mine around the slates

and, through my tears, saw him stride out to the balcony and into the car. I
watched until I could no

longer see it over the arc of the palace gardens.

My head ached with the pressure of stifled grief and my body from the
stimulus of his caresses. I

would always associate the mingled odors of car-fuel, fresh slate wax and
mid-morning musty heat with

that scene.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

I carried the slates, holding them stiffly in both hands just as Harlan had
placed them there. I walked

down corridors that were obstacle courses of hustling men and equipment.
There was no panic, just

urgent dispatch. No hysterics, only grim determination. But I was oblivious.
Their haste, their muttered

apologies bounced off the numb shell of my exterior.

I don't think I had quite accepted the fact that Harlan really cared for me. I
accepted the fact that he

was grateful to me; that he found me useful in sailing a ship; that he liked to
be seen with me; that he liked

to go to bed with me, but not that his emotions were involved. I knew he was
concerned for my safety,

but I had irrationally connected that with the fact that only I could recognize
my own home planet in

space and Harlan keenly wanted more allies to help overthrow the Mil. It was
just difficult for me to

assimilate the knowledge. I was Harlan's lady, me, Sara Fulton, late of
Seaford, Delaware and New

York City.

It seemed an age before I reached Maxil's suite where a pacing Jokan waited.
He looked at me

sardonically, the muscles along his jaw working. I handed him the slates and
he glared down at them as if

they, too, were enemies in the alliance to keep him planet-bound when all his
soul wanted to be in space

with the fleet. He handed one slate back to me brusquely.

'That one's for Ferrill, not me,' he said with no courtesy. He scanned one
quickly and placed it in his

belt. The other he read, his frown deepening. He glanced at me twice during
the reading and then sat

down. His anger drained out of him and a hopeless impatience took its place.

'Oh, sit down, Lady Sara. I won't eat you,' he said kindly, seeing me still
standing in the same spot.

I sat down and promptly burst into tears, gulping out apologies as I sobbed.
He leaned over and

roughly patted my shoulder, muttering reassurances. When I didn't stop, he
fetched a drink and made me

get it down.

'Patrol issue,' I choked.

'Of course, we're pretty lucky,' he said with no prelude. 'Harlan's the most
brilliant commander we've

ever had. We're better prepared for this sort of thing than ever before in our
history. Never thought there

would be a Prime again, but we've got it and there's no panic. It's not as if the
Mil were able to swoop

down on us with no forewarning the way they used to. It could be a lot worse,
you know. We could

have Gorlot as our Regent and I bet we might just as well skin ourselves if he
were. But he isn't. It's

Harlan and he'll save our skins if anyone can. Because, my dear brother's lady,
right now we can

annihilate the Mil in the sky.'

It was not the words he said but the way he said them that stopped my
senseless weeping; I looked

up at him in amazement because there was triumph in his voice; a certainty
that exceeded the trivial

phrases of his verbal assurance.

'I hope so,' said a wry voice from the doorway. We both turned to see Ferrill
there, supported by

two men. 'I'm being conducted to the Vaults,' he said, indicating the escort
with amusement. 'Coming?'

Ferrill's smile, oddly mocking, made his old-man's face younger.

'There's really no need for me to be bulwarked by all the ingenuity of the
Vaults. The Mil wouldn't

bother a wreck like me,' Ferrill continued amiably. 'I gather,' and his face
grimaced ruefully at Jokan,

'Harlan has made you stay behind to guard the sacred persons of the Warlord's
progeny. You've worked

as hard for this contingency as he. Pity you can't witness it. But I'm glad it's
you that's here!' Fen-ill's

sincerity reached Jokan through his bitterness.

'It is my honor, sir,' he replied in a neutral voice, but the bow he made the ex-
Warlord was deep and

respectful.

Jokan indicated I was to precede him to the Hall. I hesitated at the doorway so
that Ferrill might

precede me as I felt his due. He bowed slightly and I continued. We made our
way to the down-shaft

through hurrying people who stopped and stepped aside respectfully to let

Ferrill's party pass.

'Nuisance to be sent scurrying down so early,' Ferrill commented as we
reached the shaft, 'Nothing

will happen for a day or so.'

'True,' Jokan conceded, 'but they have activated the spatial tank below and set
up the remote

connections there rather than in the Council Hall. It's more reassuring to the
general public to vault

themselves anyway. Too much has happened to unsettle them. They fancy
themselves more Tanes, I'm

told.'

'Hmm. That's reasonable,' Ferrill replied thoughtfully.

When we reached the cellars of the palace, we passed a six-foot-thick section
of wall that would

swing up into place, closing off the entrance to the Vaults beneath the palace.
Huge guards saluted as we

passed this impenetrable lock.

We walked down a short corridor to an enormous, low-ceilinged room where
partitions blocked off

working, resting and eating areas. The busy occupants spared Ferrill a grave
smile or bow. The next

corridor was doubly sealed by more six-foot sections. The precautions were
so formidable I wondered

what kind of attack armament the Mil mounted which could penetrate such
fortifications. Maybe the

effect of the doors was more psychological than necessary.

'I haven't been in the Vaults in years,' Ferrill remarked. 'I often wondered who
dusted them and how

frequently.'

Jokan gave a mirthless snort at such a fancy while I surprised myself with a
genuine laugh at such

drollery.

We paused before a final heavy door and were admitted by guards into the
innermost section, the

retreat of the Council and the Warlord's family.

The huge room, which appeared to be as large as Starhall, was dominated by
a spherical tank some

ten feet in diameter. I did not have the chance to examine it because Stannall
approached us from one of

the cubicles beyond. He bowed gravely to Ferrill, glanced at me curiously and
clasped Jokan's arm in

welcome.

'Sir Ferrill, your quarters are prepared in Room Seven. I regret you must share
them with your

attendants and your brother Fernan but…"

Ferrill shrugged off the inconvenience and excused himself. He rested more
heavily on his helpers

although he had moved along the public corridors with a semblance of vigor.

'I had not expected the Lady Sara,' Stannall said severely.

'Lord Harlan has claimed the Lady Sara in my presence,' Jokan said bluntly. 'I
have, here, an

alternate commission of Regency,' and Jokan handed over the slates to
Stannall, 'as well as Harlan's

official record of claim and acceptance.'

The First Councilman glanced quickly through both, scowling at me again

with intense irritation.

'Very well,' Stannall acknowledged sourly.

'You mean my appointment as Regent,' Jokan said pointedly.

'No, of course not. I approve of that heartily.' He looked up, conscious of
Jokan's stare. I had not

exactly expected Jokan to come to my defense, particularly against Stannall,
so his attitude was very

reassuring. 'My congratulations, Lady Sara. I know the Lady Fara will be glad
to see you.'

'Did Maxil…' Jokan began.

'Fara accepted the honor,' Stannall said quickly.

'Congratulations all around then,' Jokan said with a wry smile.

'Maxil claimed Fara?' I repeated, hoping that at least one area of irritation
might be erased between

Stannall and me.

'Thank the mother of us all for that,' Jokan muttered. 'Room Four?' he asked
and when Stannall

nodded, he drew me off to the side where I saw numbered doors, closed
against the noise of the main

room.

'There is much for me to order, Lady Sara,' Jokan said, opening the door for
me.

'And I am tired.'

A droning voice muttering unintelligible syllables in a room beyond
penetrated my sleep and woke me,

startled, in an unfamilar darkness. Frightened, I lay still until the mounds of
shadow became

distinguishable as Fara, Linnana and two empty beds.

The drone continued and I had been so startled on awakening that my ability
to sleep was gone. I

rose and stumbled across to the bathroom.

The lights of the main hall and the muted conversations that blended under
the theme of the droning

voice were a shock after the dim quiet of the sleeping room. I stood in the
doorway, looking over the

bustle for Jokan or Ferrill. Stannall was standing in front of the cubicle that
was his office, his slight body

slumped with weariness. While he talked to a Councilman, his eyes were
fixed on the space tank and the

measured tread of the blips within it. There were few in the room who did not
glance frequently at the

tank, frequently and apprehensively.

I located the drone as issuing from one of the twelve big screens at the top of
the room. A

communications man was talking, calling off sector units and parsec figures.
In turn, clerks noted down

these figures at tables that circled the screen and tank area. From the other big
hall messengers came and

went, officials in patrol uniform or Council robes met and conversed quietly
in the linking corridor. Their

voices were pitched lower than that continuous drone.

Jokan came striding down the corridor and up to Stannall. Ferrill, walking
slowly from Stannall's

office, joined them.

The Councilman who had been talking to Stannall bowed and moved away.

Jokan was arguing and

Stannall was objecting, shaking his head dubiously. Ferrill added a sentence
and Stannall regarded the

ex-Warlord with a long scowl. The three of them moved over to the tank and
Jokan pointed, scribing a

circle with his hands and indicating its position in the spatial reference. A
messenger came up and handed

Jokan a slate. This had a bearing on his argument because he pointed out
several lines for Stannall to

read. The First Councilman shrugged, shook his head again. When Ferrill
added his comment, Stannall

lifted both arms in a gesture of exasperation. Jokan bowed formally and went
to the main communication

screen, one that looked in on the giant refitted Mil ship that was Harlan's
command vessel.

My attention was abruptly diverted from Jokan by a touch on my arm. To my
concern, I saw

Monsorlit standing beside me, regarding me with a cold impersonal interest
tinged with some private

amusement.

'Lady Sara,' he said, making a mockery of the title with a flick of his eyes, 'for
a moron, you've made

remarkable conquests. I've reread your dossier and find it fascinating.'

'Moron? I'm no moron,' I said with all the disdain I could muster. I turned
from him, but his hand, as

cold as his expression and as strong as his personality, closed round my wrist.

'As I was saying, I have examined your history and I find it differs
considerably from the public

version of your origin.'

'Against Harlan's word, what can you prove?' I demanded.

He smiled blandly, his eyes wandering over my face and body with clinical
dispassion.

'Against Harlan's word, I have the facts and witnesses. Facts that would prove
extremely interesting

to the First Councilman, to young Maxil. And, certainly to Harlan himself,
unless you are more of an

innocent than you appear.'

'I don't know what you mean,' I gasped, trying to twist my hand free.

He looked down at my wrist, holding it up and stroking it with his thumb.
Then he glanced

suggestively into my face. I had no strength to hide the shock that gesture
gave me.

The smile which was no smile cut across his thin face.

'You are unique, Lady Sara. Absolutely unique and as a serious scientist, I
cannot allow the originality

to go unremarked. I intend to have you back in the Clinic and I give you
warning. You may come of your

own free will, explaining your request to your protector any way you wish.
Or, I will force you to come,

by edict of the Council. I doubt you like that alternative.'

'Physician,' said Ferrill's soft voice at my side. Monsorlit looked up and
bowed to the invalid.

'Do not overexert yourself in this excitement, Sir Ferrill,' Monsorlit advised
sternly.

'Exert myself? Oh, not likely. I have accepted the role of passive observer.
That requires no exertion

at all.'

So saying, Ferrill neatly turned me away from Monsorlit and guided me
toward an unused table in the

dining area. He motioned me to sit and gave an order for hot drinks to the
servant who appeared.

'Why does Monsorlit terrify you?' he asked quietly, his eyes slightly
narrowed.

'He's… he's so cold,' I blurted out, still trembling with the shock of the
encounter.

Fen-ill's eyebrows raised questioningly but, at this moment, the waiter
returned. I drank hastily, the

comfort of the warm beverage dissipating my inner chill. When I raised my
eyes over my cup, Ferrill was

regarding me with curious intentness. He reached over and lifted my right
hand, turned it over and rubbed

one finger across my wrist. I jerked my hand away and sat staring at Ferrill in
a sort of helpless horror.

Ferrill smiled to himself and then included me in that smile.

'Lady Sara,' he began with a rueful grin, 'for the short time you have been in
our circle, you have

managed to elicit an amazing amount of talk. You succeed in antagonizing
one of the most powerful men

on the planet for some obscure reason and you stand in petrified terror before
our leading scientist. You

appear out of nowhere in Maxil's keeping, deliver me from evil, and now I
understand that our noble

Regent, who has kept remote from all permanent entanglements, has claimed
you as his lady.' He shook

his head in mock consternation. 'I can dismiss a good ninety percent of the

talk about you as the

fabrications of envy. I have a good idea of the basis for the antagonism, but I
am at a complete loss to

explain the terror.'

I did not trust myself to answer him. Instead, I pulled out the slate Harlan had
given me for him and

thrust it across the table. Ferrill took it with a brief glance at the outer
inscription and shoved it into his

belt.

'Surely it's not restoration that makes you fear Monsorlit. The punishment is
the same for the operator

as the victim.'

I looked nervously around to reassure myself no one could overhear us.

'As I told Monsorlit,' Ferrill continued, 'I am merely an interested bystander. I
consider myself

qualified to make all kinds of deep, penetrating observations which, to project
my new image, I like to

think are acute and perceptive. I have had much time for passive reflection,
you know.

'Monsorlit is a great artist, a genius in his field. He is interested in achieving
perfection, to which I say

"well done". But he must have allowed himself to be carried away with his
zeal, if he can be said ever to

be carried away by anything.' Fen-ill's grin was a bit malicious. 'For he
neglected one axiom of nature…

which prohibits her from duplicating anything… even two sides of the same
face.' He stopped and,

narrowing his eyes, stared keenly at me. Pointing negligently to my wrists, he

continued, 'He was

exceptionally deft in disguising the graft joints. I gather he has done a great
deal of work on that crucial

spot. But he made your features too symmetrical. If a mirror were handy, I
could easily prove that both

sides of your face are the same, except for your eyes. The left one droops a
trifle at the outside edge. I

wonder if that irked him in his search for perfection,' and Ferrill chuckled.
'However, if he had been able

to change that, I do believe he would have ruined the total effect. That slight
imperfection gives your face

a touch of humanity it would otherwise lack.'

I wasn't sure I understood all he was talking about. His tone was so light, so
conversational, that his

disclosures were robbed of their gravity.

'Still,' and he frowned thoughtfully, 'I doubt anyone has the time for the close
scrutiny my conclusions

require. And, since Monsorlit has conveniently done away with the one weak
spot, the one detectable,

unmistakable weakness in a total restoration, what do you have to fear?

'I should say he has proved his point. And Monsorlit doesn't care for the
approbation of the multitude

as long as he has satisfied his own curiosity. As you know, he has always
maintained that restoration itself

did not cause mental vegetation. As he expresses it,' and Ferrill evidently did
not agree completely with

the theory, 'it is our ancient fear and superstition that breaks the mind. He says
we had so many centuries

of passive acceptance of death under the godlike Mil that a man
unconsciously wills himself to die when

he is captured, whether his body dies or not.'

His words began to make some reassuring sense to me and I started to relax.
After all, Harlan had

said that Ferrill was the only one who would or could understand and help
me. Had he guessed that

Ferrill knew I had been restored? At least, Ferrill did not regard me with
horror and revulsion. I sipped

my cup and the warm liquid ran down my throat, spreading its comfort to my
fingers.

'That's better,' Ferrill said with a grin. I realized he had been talking as much
to put me at ease as to

tell me of his theories.

'I gather,' he continued, 'Monsorlit's new techniques of shock treatments
worked on you to bring you

out of the mental death. You certainly are a far cry from the ghastly parodies
that gave restoration its

death sentence. I shall suggest to Harlan that he repeal that law quietly if
you're the result of the latest

techniques of restoration. Or should I say "repossession"?' Ferrill's smile
mocked the semantic

hairsplitting. 'So you see, you don't have anything to fear from Monsorlit.
Anything.'

'But I do,' I protested. 'He wants me to go back to that horrible Clinic of his.
He said he'd make me if

I didn't come willingly.'

'He can do nothing to you,' Ferrill said blithely. 'For one thing… well, Harlan
knows you've been

restored, doesn't he? Well, he won't permit it.'

'But… if Harlan doesn't…’ I stammered and couldn't finish the sentence.

Ferrill tapped his chest with a thin finger. 'Then I won't let you go back. Oh, I
may be a frail invalid,

my dear, but I am still Ferrill,' he announced, his voice ringing.

'I'm so terribly sorry…' I began but Ferrill waggled an admonishing finger to
silence me.

'At the risk of repetition, I owe you my life, Lady Sara, or whatever is left of
it. Besides, I wouldn't be

very good at that sort of thing,' and his gesture indicated the spatial tank.
'Now, Maxil, as is the habit of

younger brothers, has always been a scrapper. You never saw a boy keener on
spaceships. Right now, if

he isn't free-fall sick, he's having the time of his life. By the way, there's
Harlan on the screen now.'

I rose hastily, peering over the obstructing partition for the best view of
Harlan. I ignored Ferrill's

chuckle.

Harlan was addressing his remarks to Stannall, Jokan and the elder
Councilmen, continuing an

argument that must have been going on for several minutes.

'Sir,' said Harlan, stressing the title as one whose patience is also stressed. 'I
know it hasn't been tried

before. But neither have we had the equipment or the emergency. I insist, and
so do my commanders,

that the gamble is worth the game. We are fortunate that so many of our ships
were equipped with the

electromagnetic crystals during my disability. We may thank Gorlot for that at

least,' and Harlan

permitted himself a wry smile at the shocked distaste occasioned by his
remark.

'That is enough to make me distrust that innovation completely,' Stannall said
stiffly, looking for

agreement among his fellow Councilmen. Several of them sided with him by
their nods of disapproval.

'You forget, sir,' Jokan put in, defending a system he had developed,'that it
was Harlan's innovation, a

development of war research under my guidance. And you forget that it was
Fathor who thought the

Ertoi planetary defense mechanism might be adapted to shipborne armament.
Gorlot was at least

strategist enough to recognize its value as a weapon when no one else
considered it more than a toy.'

'Sir Harlan,' expostulated Lesatin pompously, 'a decision of this magnitude
cannot be made in so

off-hand a manner.'

'By my Qan Mother,' Harlan exploded, 'your own committee of specialists
approved the installation

of the magnetos two years ago, Lesatin. Why all this time-consuming chatter?
I've not asked for your

decision. I've already made it for you. I'm telling you what I'm going to do.
The battle plan remains as I

have outlined it.'

'The responsibility,' Stannall said forcefully, 'of the people lies on our
shoulders, too, not yours alone.

Your disregard of time-proved successful action…'

'Time-proved in the jetwash,' snapped Harlan impatiently, 'life-wasting, you
mean. The resonant

phenomenon produced by the electromagnets can crush the Mil with greater
personnel safety, less risk

and loss of ships and lives than any improvement in our battle tactics since we
refitted the first Star-class

ship. By all that lies in the stars, I will use the resonant barrage if we have to
form before Lothar itself.

'What you grandly ignore, good sirs, in your preference for these time-proved
orthodox methods is

the plain and simple fact that we've never had such a concentration of Mil
against us. You ignore the

recorded facts that it takes the concerted action and an eighty-five percent
casualty of twenty ships to

disable… with luck… a Star-class vessel. We have fifteen out there in the
black speeding toward our

puny four Stars. And whether we form before Lothar or at the first circle of
defense, the casualties from

your "time-proved tactics" will be the same.'

Jokan had been writing furiously on a slate. He passed the results to the most
disturbed Councilmen.

They grouped around him, their voices rising in the excitement his figures
aroused. Harlan glanced down

at the confusion, at first with annoyance, until he saw the change of attitude in
these skeptics.

'We are approaching communication limit. If I don't come back, you can skin
me in effigy. If I do, it

will be as a victorious commander and we'll debate the ethics involved. In the
meantime, Jokan has as

many answers as I since he's been in charge of the project. You have the
benefit of his talents and I do

not. Jokan, get it into their thick heads, will you?' Harlan urged. 'I'll beam you
at zero hour and, unless

you like the noise, you'd better cut the sound on all screens,' he warned.

'You technicians got the spatial coordinates now?' he asked the clerks in the
banks around the tank.

They raised right hands in reply. Harlan's eyes left the immediate foreground
and scanned the space

above the Councilmen's heads. I made myself as tall as I could in the hope he
might be looking for me,

but the expression on his face, set, cold, tired, did not change. The picture
began to waver. Harlan

looked off to his right in the control room, then back to the Councilmen.

'We're at the limits, sirs. My respects to you all,' and the picture dissolved into
blurs.

The droning voice had ended, too. The big room was strangely silent for what
seemed a long, long

time. As if everyone found the quiet unbearable, everyone began to talk at
once. The Councilmen turned

on Jokan with intense expressions and garrulous queries. Messengers began to
move back and forth

around the room. I sat down, confused by all the discussion and disheartened
by its tone. Ferrill

appeared disinterested and I drew some courage from his attitude.

'What was that all about?' I asked, abandoning any pretense of knowledge.

My request did not surprise Ferrill. He leaned forward, planting his forearms
on the table comfortably

as he enlightened me.

'The Ertois are workers of crystal and quartzite. They had developed a
primitve form of energy,

electricity, they called it, long before the Mil descended on them. Our force
screens are an adaption of

their electricity. They discovered, by what freak chance I don't remember, that
the Mil cannot stand

electrical currents or sonic vibrations. They ringed their planet with gigantic
electromagnetos, activating

them in case of Mil attack. The metal of the Mil ships became a conductor
and the Mil were

electrocuted. Now, we had to figure a way to adapt this principle to use in
space. Sound doesn't travel in

the vacuum, of course, but regulate the frequency of the electromagnetic
radiation and you produce a

resonant phenomenon in the ship hulls that literally tears the Mil cell from
cell. Ironically, though the Mil

are much larger than we, they are easy victims to a weapon that we can
endure.

'My father was very interested in this application of resonators. You see,
we've never had an

offensive weapon. That's why our casualties have always been so high. The
only advantage we have had

over the Mil in battle has been our ability to take higher accelerations and
make sharper maneuvers. It's a

pretty slim advantage.

'This project has been going on for several decades. It's been expensive and
was discontinued when

Father died. Council had an attack of conservatism and the Mil were quiet on

the Rim. Harlan reinstated

the project under Jokan who is one of our few creative geniuses.

'The reason our skeptics have been so upset is that they have never seen what
the resonators can do

to a simulated Mil protoplasm. I have seen it and, granted it was under ideal
laboratory conditions, the

results were incredible.' His eyes narrowed. 'There is a minor theory going
around, which I am inclined to

support, that Gorlot used the resonators to herd the Mil into Tane. It's the only
way he could have

managed to control their direction.'

'Why didn't Harlan mention that?' I asked. 'Didn't he know?"

Ferrill shrugged. 'Where the Mil are concerned, logic is sometimes useless.
Particularly right now.

Look what's happened. The Mil have actually been allowed past the
Perimeter. They have been allowed

to wipe out an entire race. For seventy-five years, they haven't been able to
penetrate the Pum defenses

for more than a few parsecs.

'Our ancestors were used to the menace of the Mil in their skies. As
accustomed as one is able to get

to such a thought. But we aren't. Stannall may be our leading Councilman and
a very intelligent fellow, but

the mere thought of the possibility of the Mil coming back into Lotharian
skies turns him into a quivering

mass of ancient fears and superstition. And Harlan has just blithely assured
him that he will wait to reform

before Lothar itself in order to test this new weapon!'

'Why does he have to wait?' I asked confused.

'Because, Lady Sara,' Ferrill explained patiently,'the beam attenuates with
distance, losing its strength.

The maximum effect is gained at close quarters - spatially speaking - from an
encirclement, so that each

resonator is equidistant from the target, setting up the resonating phenomenon
at maximum efficiency.'

'If they can't encircle?' I asked, perceiving some of the dread with which
Stannall and the others

received Harlan's gamble.

'The usual tactics, only we will have a ringside seat,' and Ferrill gestured
heavenward.

'What are the usual tactics?' I insisted.

Ferrill regarded me seriously for a moment.

'You really don't know, do you?' he remarked with amazement. 'We have
discovered only two ways

to dispose of a Mil ship. Both are dangerous to the attacker because we lack
an offensive weapon other

than speed and maneuverability. We must either knock out their control room,
which means a

close-range assault with nucleonic weapons that match theirs, or we must
make a direct hit on their fuel

source. The first is preferable because it leaves us a new recruit for our fleet…
after decontamination, of

course. The second method blows up the ship.'

'You heard Harlan mention eighty-five percent casualties, didn't you?' Ferrill
continued and I nodded.

'He means just that. There are only four Star-class cruisers in our fleet, eighty-

five planet weight and forty

satellite variety plus about fifty rider suicide ships. Figure out your eighty-
five percent against a force of

twenty-three Mil ship, fifteen of them Star-class, and you can see why Harlan
is going to gamble on our

new offensive weapon.'

My mental arithmetic was not up to estimating the odds, but eighty-five
percent was obviously a

Pyrrhic victory.

'Back in my great-grandfather's day, we once had a force against us of one
Star-class, four planet

and a satellite. We had, at the time, eighty ships. Nine returned. We disabled
two planet-types and the

satellite. That was the biggest force we have ever attacked until now. The Mil
usually send a group of

planets and satellites. With their consistent losses in this area of the Great
Starry Wheel, you'd think the

Mil would have left us alone long ago.'

'You mean some of their ships still get through?'

Ferrill looked startled. 'No! We destroy enough so that they retreat. But there
is always a terrific loss

of life for us.

'To knock out the control room, a suicide rider with nine men must approach
to maximum penetration

range of the nuclear missiles. That's about one hundred land miles. That's too
close to a Mil, believe me.

The ships are nothing but speed and one long cannon. Their success depends
jointly on the skill and

diversionary tactics of the pilot and the accuracy of the gunner. Very often, the
suiciders are crushed by

the impact of their own blast. All too often, the Mil gunners get the range
first. And sometimes,' and

Ferrill shuddered,'the riders are grappled and pulled inboard. Even if we do
disable the Mil ship, those

men are lost.'

'Why?' I asked without thinking.

Ferrill clicked his tongue at me. 'One, if the men haven't as yet been touched,
they've gone mad by the

time we reach them. Two, if they have been skinned, Council's edict about
restoration makes euthanasia

imperative.'

'Skinned,' he had said. I had been'skinned', alive! I fought the rising nausea
and the shaking that

gripped my diaphragm.

'I'll wager that's why!' Ferrill said with a note of triumph in his voice.

'Why what?' I managed to say, pushing to the back of my mind his last words.

'Why Monsorlit tied in with Gorlot'; and he leaned forward so that our
conversation could not be

overheard. 'Gorlot knew some ships and men would fall into Mil hands. He
had to have someone to

make perfect restorations on the victims so they would seem to be no more
than Tane casualties. And

Monsorlit went one step better. He pulled those restorees out of shock so there
could be no suspicion

whatever of the men having been Mil victims. To prove his point, Monsorlit
would take a far greater risk.'

'I'll tell Harlan you're trying to dishonor his claim,' said Jokan's voice behind
me.

Ferrill grinned up at his uncle with a deprecating laugh. Jokan pulled up a
chair and signaled a server.

'Did you manage to reassure the skeptics?' Ferrill demanded with an
affectation of disinterest.

Jokan shrugged expressively and threw the slate he carried toward Ferrill who
cocked his head

sideways to read the slate without having to pick it up.

'The odds are favorable,' he said with some surprise. 'Even if a trifle close to
home. Don't they see

that?'

'What they see is the space tank and the proximity of the Mil to Lothar,' Jokan
scoffed. 'I believe the

older one gets the more the fears and superstitions we should have abandoned
centuries ago cloud the

thinking.'

'Don't they realize that the older one gets the less valuable he becomes to the
Mil?' Ferrill pointed out

cold-bloodedly. 'No fat. No meat. No smooty hide.'

Jokan did not hide his distaste of Ferrill's observation.

'I'm not concerned,' he said stiffly. Then grinned as he added, 'But then, I'm
under the largest pile of

reinforced rock and metal on the planet. I also remind myself what the
resonators can do to the Mil…"

'Under ideal laboratory conditions,' Ferrill inserted maliciously.

'Under ideal laboratory conditions,' Jokan assented without rancor, 'which
Harlan, with the

reinforcement of the Ertoi and Glan, can reproduce.'

'If the Ertoi and Glan arrive in time,' Ferrill amended.

Jokan's eyes sparkled angrily. 'Are you through qualifying the odds against
us?'

Ferrill flashed a look at Jokan but thought better of what he was about to say
and hitched one

shoulder negligently.

'I'm realistic, my dear uncle. Also I find an element of humor in the situation.'

Jokan snorted with disgust at this observation.

'Your humor was never so warped before, my dear nephew.'

'Nor was my life,' Ferrill added quietly, then added too brightly, 'Monsorlit
has been frightening

Harlan's Sara.'

'Ha. He's in no position to frighten anyone. Stannall's after him again.
Monsorlit had best look to his

own defense. And you have the strongest protection, Lady Sara,' Jokan said
stoutly.

He had finished his quick meal as we talked and now rose.

'You two can exchange insults if you wish,' he said as he glanced at the large
time dial above the

space tank, 'but there are precisely eight hours and thirty-two seconds before
encirclement and I intend

to use it in sleeping. I relinquish our mutual ward into your safekeeping,
Ferrill.' He bowed to the

ex-Warlord and then to me, with a touch of his old insouciance, and departed.

'He's sure about Stannall being after Monsorlit?' I asked hopefully.

Ferrill shrugged. 'Stannall has been after Monsorlit for years. Never did know
why. Some old quarrel.

Stannall has a capacity for grudges that is astonishing.'

'Didn't I hear Jokan call you nephew?' I asked after a pause.

'He is, after all, my uncle.'

'Well, why isn't he a candidate for Warlord, instead of Maxil?'

'He and Harlan are only half-brothers to my father, Father. But you should
remember that only my

father's line can inherit under the old laws. If Father had died without issue,
and he certainly waited long

enough to claim his lady, it would have been different. It's a pity, too, because
Jokan shows the real

Harlan strain.'

'Doesn't Harlan?' I demanded, piqued.

Ferrill chuckled and I realized his omission had been intentional. 'Obviously.
But Harlan's real mission

in life is to find more and more new planets. The Tane success went to his
head. He's got jet-itch.

Besides he's got nowhere near the deviousness of Jokan.'

'Then,' I demanded, confused by the intricacies of Lotharian governmental
structure, 'Why wasn't

Jokan made Regent instead of Harlan?'

Patiently Ferrill explained that Harlan had been a Perimeter Commander.
Jokan had never reached

that rank nor intended to. Unfortunately, such military experience was the
prime requisite for the

Regency.

'Is that how Gorlot got in instead of Jokan when Harlan was drugged?'

'Naturally,' Ferrill assented, his eyes glittering angrily. 'The system has too
many faults and this affair

should make it obvious to the Council that a revision of the old laws must be
made. We are too

hampered by age-old superstition and pre-Perimeter contingencies.' He
snorted derisively. 'It's absurd to

assume that only a direct descendant of the original Harlan can lead us to
victory over the Mil. It's

ridiculous to bind the genius of modern military tactics to planet-bound
traditions. Just like that argument

over there!' and he indicated the group of Councilmen arguing vehemently
around the space tank.

'Would they really censure Harlan for disregarding them?'

'How can they?' Ferrill scoffed. 'At the moment, he is Warlord. That's why he
was picked as Regent,

in the event of a military emergency an inexperienced stripling could not
handle. His plan is law: it's just

typical of Harlan to wish to have Stannall's agreement. It is preferable to have
the First Councilman agree

with you if you are Regent or Warlord.'

He rose abruptly.

'Jokan's suggestion is contagious. We've hours yet before the crucial test of
Harlan's revolutionary

tactics. Sleep passes time admirably. But first, join me for a glance at the
tank?'

Ferrill and I stood a little removed from the others. He rightly assumed I
needed an explanation. The

science behind the tank's projection he did not bother to expatiate. Its physical
presence, however, was

awesome enough. It was composed of an amber, transparent liquid or gas with
no apparent material

enclosing its circumference. It stood ten feet high and wide in the center of
the room it dominated. A coil

of wires at its foot was the sole connection to the machines and computers
that formed a semicircle at its

base. Beyond them, built obliquely from the ceiling, were the now blank
screens. Only one panel on the

boards below the screens was active, the master panel to which each ship in
action was hooked. If the

light which identified the ship went out, the ship had been destroyed. The
technician could also tell by the

color variation and pulsations the extent, in theory, of damage to any given
vessel. At the computers the

clerks were still busy. In all the room, no one's eyes stayed long away from
the mesmeric quality of the

slowly moving masses in the tank.

Guardedly, Ferrill indicated Lothar, a green ball in the approximate center of
the tank. Above and

beyond were Ertoi in blue and Glan's yellow. Below and away from the other
three systems was the red

of the two Tane planets.

From Ertoi and Glan, lancing downward and bypassing Lothar were the light
points of the Alliance

ships, speeding to their rendezvous with Lothar's fleet. Beyond Ertoi and
Glan, I saw eight tiny points of

light at regular intervals; far, far apart. Ferrill said they were the skeletal

Perimeter Patrol that would be all

Glan would have to defend it from the Mil if they broke through. Ertoi relied
still on its sonic barrier.

'Why doesn't Glan have it, too?' I asked, thinking that would have freed eight
more ships.

'They never considered it necessary with the protection the Alliance has
afforded them up till now.'

Speeding out from Lothar and converging from other points around the
remaining quadrants of the

tank was the fleet, moving not as swiftly as the Alliance ships but as
inexorably. From the bottom of the

tank, approaching with what I thought appalling comparative speed were'the
invading lights of the Mil.

The alarm of the Councilmen was no longer a verbal fear that Jokan's
assurances and Ferrill's amused air

could dispel. It took no technician to estimate how near to Lothar that battle
would take place. And the

Mil's ominous approach was aimed at the equator of the seemingly doomed
Tanes.

'Would the Mil land on one of the Tane?' I asked.

Ferrill shook his head in a quick negative response.

'The Mil would never land with such a force approaching them. They could
be blown off a planet and

our casualties would be light. We overused those tactics a few centuries ago.
No. They'll meet Harlan in

space. They're pretty contemptuous of us in space, you know. I doubt they'll
remain so long.'

We watched, as others did, in hypnotized silence as the blinking lights made
their almost

imperceptible way. Finally, Ferrill touched my arm lightly and we both retired
to our sleeping quarters.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

A gentle tickling on my feet roused me. The room was lit and I could see
Ferrill grinning mischievously

as he gave my foot one last brush.

'I used to wake Cherez like that and she'd throw a fit,' he grinned. 'I thought
you'd like to be in on the

fun. Harlan's brave gamble is about to start.'

I scrambled out of the cot, took time to dash cold water in my eyes and comb
back my hair before

joining Ferrill. I wouldn't have needed Ferrill's comment to know that the
climax was at hand. The entire

room watched the screen, some standing on chairs or desks for better views of
the all-important spatial

tank. The computers were silent. Conversation was limited to terse low
whispers. The tension, fear and

apprehension in the main room was like a physical blow after the sleeping
quarters. Ferrill had paused at

the threshold and we both drifted through the watchers until we found Jokan.
He was standing behind

Stannall and Lesatin. Jokan looked around irritably as I brushed against him
to make way for Ferrill. He

gave us the sketchiest of acknowledgements before turning back to the tank.

I had to make myself look at the sphere. Its story dried up the saliva in my
mouth. I was certain the

pounding of my heart would be audible.

Tane had been bypassed. Empty space separated the struggling Lothahan
space fleet from the home

planet. The blips of light that were our defenders resembled a tiny crystal
string of beads thrown casually

on a jeweler's velvet around a pendant of twenty-three bright diamonds in
random pattern. The beads

circumscribed no circle; one end, the Ertoi and Glan contingent being too far
out to complete even the

roughest circular formation. Fen-ill's groan was not noted by anyone.

At first I wondered why the Mil would let themselves be even so loosely
encircled. Then I

remembered that the Mil in space would wreak terrible losses, so they could
be arrogant about our puny

trap. I watched the beads, still loose, but slowly, slowly perfecting their circle.
They drifted at the same

time with such snail slowness toward Lothar. Ertoi and Glan became
stationary, being uppermost to

Lothar; below and beyond it, I could see the barely larger blips that were the
four Star-class Lothar

battlewagons in their major compass-point positions. The pendant moved
inexorably and the rear

quadrants moved still closer, the uneven beads gradually gradually settling
into a rough circle.

I had been so fascinated with the fleet movement that I had not noticed the
movements of the Mil

pendant. Once a mass of light, it now began to lose its compactness and to
string out into a rough line.

Jokan groaned and twisted his tense body in an unconscious effort to punch
the Mil ships back into

their former position. Stannall covered his face for a moment, with a shaking
hand. When he turned to

Jokan, I was aghast at the exhaustion and hopelessness of his expression.

'That maneuver, doesn't it decrease the effectiveness of the resonant barrage?'
he asked, hoping to

hear the contrary.

'It depends, sir, it all depends.'

'On what?' Stannall demanded fiercely.

'On how much our men can stand the backlash from the electromagnetos that
generate the resonance.

If we can saturate the Mil ships with enough force, their belated dispersal
means nothing.' Jokan clenched

his jaws grimly. 'I wish we had had time to develop effective shielding for the
power-bleed. At the

moment,' he continued in answer to Stannall, 'we can be sure of this section
being completely paralyzed,'

and his finger stabbed at the center of the Mil pendant. 'Partial disability on
either end and, with luck, our

normal tactics can take care of the rest.'

'If they string out farther?' Stannall dragged the words from his mouth.

'The decrease in total disability is proportional. Individual engagements
increase.'

Stannall's expression was desperate and his lips, thinned by fatigue to white
lines, closed obdurately

over his teeth.

We waited. Glances at the time dial were more frequent. It lacked by a few
moments of the hour set

for the barrage. Jokan was counting off nervously to himself and someone
else on the other side of the

room counted out loud. I was not the only one to mouth the seconds in
concert.

Zero hour!

The tank remained unchanged. I don't know what I expected to happen. How
much of a time lag

there was between the ships and the tank I didn't know but the next moments
or minutes seemed

eternities.

A new voice broke the stillness. Glancing up I saw that a patroller was
standing before the master

panel that checked the condition of the ships. His voice, dispassionate and
measured, brought us no

consolation.

'No casualties. Two minutes and no casualties. All ships functioning. Three
minutes and no casualties.'

No casualties, my brain echoed. What an odd war. Bloodless, remotely
fought, remotely observed.

Would death, too, seem remote to the dying? Fear, however, was not remote.
It laid lavish hands on

everyone in that room, on everyone, I was sure, on those ships and on the
planet of Lothar.

'No casualties,' the drone continued.

The intervals between his litany lengthened and suddenly, unable to watch the
unchanged picture

longer, Stannall whirled on Jokan.

'Nothing has happened. How long does it take?' he cried in tense, strident

tones that echoed through

the fear-filled room with piercing audibility. Someone started to sob and
stopped, choking the sound

back.

'The maximum vibrations for the Mil should build in no less than six minutes,'
Jokan said tonelessly.

'The beam is played across the ship for maximum effect. We count on the fact
that the Mil cannot initiate

evasive tactics at high acceleration speeds as we can. The longer they remain
within the effective range of

the beam, the quicker the resultant destructive resonance is reached.'

Someone was counting the seconds again. Still the formation of the ships, all
the ships, remained the

same, a circle of beads tightening slowly around the menacing gaggle of Mil
ships. The man had counted

to ten minutes past the zero hour before a voice, in the anguish of waiting,
shrieked for him to stop. The

circle of beads tightened, drifting ever upward toward the system of Lothar.

'It isn't working, that's what's wrong,' a beefy Councilman snapped, his voice
trembling. 'That puny

electricity doesn't work. Fathor stopped that research. He must have had a
reason. They don't work,

that's what, and we'll all...

'All ships functioning,' the official voice, calm and deliberate, broke in. 'No
casualties.'

'Look, look,' someone cried, gesticulating toward the tank.

The string of beads was breaking up, splitting into smaller circles, driving for
the ends of the Mil line.

'They're using the suicide ships now. The resonators didn't work at all. We're
lost. The Mil will be

here,' a man beyond Stannall blubbered.

Stannall strode to his side in three swift paces and, although the fellow was
younger and heavier, the

First Councilman fetched him four sharp cracks across the face and turned
defiantly to face the room.

'If the Mil should come, we will be ready with the courage and fortitude
which have brought us so far

along the road to freedom from their awful raiding. Let no one else forget his
valiant heritage.'

'One suicide ship casualty,' the announcer droned. 'All others functioning.'

On the tank, a small expanding glow appeared and then one bead blinked out.
One light obediently

darkened on the master panel. But the tank also told another story. The mid-
section of the Mil line

proceeded unharried by the ships which concentrated their efforts on the ends.
The tiniest blips flashed in

with unbelievable speed compared with the lumbering efforts of others. The
upper end reflected a brief

glow and the announcer tallied another casualty.

"They're attacking only the ends,' someone cried in dismay. 'The rest are
coming straight at us.'

'NO!' shouted Jokan, his voice ringing with triumph. He sprang to the side of
the spatial tank. 'The

mid-section is totally disabled. The resonators did their work. Look, would
that big a detachment allow

the others to be attacked without firing? See, here, here and here, our
positions would be vulnerable to

their range and yet there are no casualties. I tell you, that weapon works. It
does. It does! And see,

there's one of the lead Mil ships going up.'

One of the larger Mil lights at the head of the line flared and died. The
announcer gave us no death

notice for a defender.

'See what Harlan is doing,' Jokan continued excitedly. 'We have plenty of time
to disable the far end.

He's tried two passes with the riders to the foremost Mil and is blasting them
out of the sky. That means

they must be partially disabled. No Mil will set down on Lothar!' His words
rang through the big room

and set off a cheering, shouting, weeping roar of hysterical relief.

Jokan, grinning so broadly his face seemed to split, tears in his eyes, looked
around, thrilled at the

sight of hope where despair had so long enervated morale.

I, too, was caught up in the emotional backlash, weeping not so much with the
relief of salvation as

with the knowledge that Harlan would return, in honor and unharmed. The
fear of the others did not

touch me as deeply, I suppose, because I had not lived with fear of the Mil all
my life. Vicariously I was

caught up in that joyous hysteria until I noticed Stannall. He was clutching
wildly at his chest. His face

was gray, his lips blue, his breath shallow, eyes pain-filled and he grabbed
wildly at me in his weakness.

Glancing around for someone else to help me, I was even grateful to
Monsorlit who must have seen

Stannall's seizure from across the room. The physician was fumbling in his
belt as he pushed through the

milling, shouting, jumping men. He reached us, jammed a hypodermic needle
into Stannall's arm and

smoothly reinforced my grip around the First Councilman.

Jokan, aware of Stannall's distress, pushed through and lifted Stannall easily
into his arms. Bawling for

passage, he carried the ailing Councilman to his sleeping room. Monsorlit
ordered me to get his

instruments from Room 21 and I ran with no respect for dignities.

When I returned with the case, Stannall was pillowed into a sitting position.
Although he was sweating

profusely, his breath came with less effort. Monsorlit grabbed the bag I
opened and seized a stethoscope

device. Jokan was joined by Ferrill now. Monsorlit's examination relieved
him, for he gave a barely

audible sigh and reached with less haste for his bag. He picked a vial
carefully, filled a new needle and

administered the medication.

'Good sir,' Monsorlit said in such low tones only I could hear,'there are too
few of your fiber for us to

be deprived of you. This time you will have to listen to me.'

He rose from the bedside and, as he turned, I caught the flickering of the only
expression I ever saw

on Monsorlit's face. It was the more astonishing to me, this combination of
fear, relief, worry and

compassion, since there was no doubt of Stannall's trenchant disapproval of
Monsorlit. The physician

glanced at me briefly, his features composed in their usual coldness. He
passed me and motioned all of us

out to the corridor.

Ferrill and Jokan, instantly the door closed, demanded the diagnosis with
impatient concern.

'A heart attack,' Monsorlit said dispassionately, replacing his stethoscope with
care, rearranging a vial

or two precisely before closing the bag. 'Natural enough with such intense
strain and inadequate rest. I've

administered a sedative that should keep him asleep for many hours. He must
be kept absolutely quiet for

the next weeks and complete bedrest is indicated for the next few months. Or,
we shall have to elect a

new First Councilman. I believe Cordan is his personal physician. He should
attend our Council Leader

immediately. To reassure all of us.' Monsorlit permitted himself the vaguest of
wry grins at his

afterthought.

'But Stannall's presence is…" Jokan began, gesturing toward the tank.

'…is required in his bed and asleep,' Monsorlit finished with bland authority.
'I do not care what

duties he leaves unfinished. There are certainly enough qualified men to make
decisions until Harlan

returns. Unless, of course, you wish to commit Stannall to the Eternal Flame
tomorrow?'

With that, Monsorlit turned on his heel and walked away.

By now the jubilation had subsided sufficiently for the drone of the announcer
to be heard. The score

of casualties had mounted, but only nine lights were out on the master panel.
Two flickered weakly, eight

pulsed, but the strength of the light indicted only minor damage. Jokan, after a
glance at the picture in the

tank, strode across the room to the knot of anxious Councilmen. Stannall's
collapse had been noted as

well as the exchange between Jokan and Monsorlit.

'I think,' commented Ferrill thoughtfully,'that the situation is now under the
efficient control of Jokan.

Will you join me for some refreshment, Lady Sara?'

'Shouldn't someone stay with Stannall?' I protested.

'Monsorlit seems to have taken that into account,' Ferrill said and directed my
attention to the brisk

figure coming from the farthest sleeping rooms. The woman, a large,
efficient-looking person, stopped at

Stannall's door. She opened it with a quick practiced gesture and entered. A
pair of guards

simultaneously took positions on either side of the door.

There was little time for Ferrill and me to refresh ourselves. Food and drink
grew cold before we

could eat. Ferrill, though no longer Warlord, still had all the knowledge of his
former position. He was,

furthermore, privy to the confidential matters of the high position and the
offices of both Regent and First

Council-men. In this emergency he set aside his affectation of disinterest and
made quick, clear decisions,

gave orders with an easy authority that controlled the quicktempered and
calmed the hysterical.

Messengers crowded around the table, waiting turn. Councilmen oppor-tuned
and only Jokan could

claim precedence. The little people, too - messengers and technicians -
stopped to ask about Stannall or

say something, shyly, to Ferrill.

Ferrill remained cool and detached, casual and unconcerned by the rush. At
first, he answered the

Council-men's and Jokan's questions with a little self-amused smile. But
gradually, I could see the

grayness of fatigue conquering the slight color in his face. I urged him
anxiously to rest.

'Rest? Not now, Sara. I want to know every detail of the stimulating events. I
shall record them in a

personal history I shall now have time to write. The firsthand impressions of
an ex-Warlord about an

emergency and triumph of this magnitude will certainly carry historical
weight.'

'If you're not careful, the only historical weight you'll carry is a fancy
monument,' I snapped.

He regarded me with the expression he had used so effectively on Monsorlit,
but I was too

concerned for him and stared him down. He changed his tactics and reassured
me that he knew the limits

of his strength.

'I have made no move from this table. I let everyone seek me.'

'I thought you didn't care anymore. I thought you were just going to be the
bystander,' I goaded him.

His eyes flashed angrily. Then he smiled in recognition of my baiting. He
reached for my hand and

pressed it firmly.

'I am still the bystander, shoveling out bystandorial advice by the shipload.
But I am the only one who

can answer many of these questions in Stannall's absence. Jokan certainly has
no practical experience as

either Warlord, Regent or First Councilman, and he is all three right now.'

I made one of the messengers go for Monsorlit who appeared just as Jokan
also reached our table.

Jokan did not care for Monsorlit's presence. Ferrill's smile mocked me for my
interference.

'Ferrill is exhausted,' I said before Ferrill or Jokan could send Monsorlit away.

'Give me a shot of something salutary,' Ferrill commanded the physician,
proffered his thin,

blue-veined arm, daring Monsorlit as well as Jokan and me.

'All of you need stimulants to keep on at this pace,' the man observed quietly
and issued us five

tablets apiece. 'An effective compound but harmless,' he continued as Jokan
eyed the pills dubiously.

'One every three hours will be sufficient. I do not recommend taking more
than five. That gives you fifteen

more hours of peak efficiency. Then no one will have trouble getting you to
rest.'

He moved off briskly. Ferrill took his pill down quickly and Jokan, shrugging,
followed his lead. I

waited and then saw Ferrill watching my indecision with such amusement I
tossed it down waterless.

'I never really know what to make of him,' the ex-Warlord commented to no
one in particular.

Jokan uttered a growling sound deep in his throat and then launched into the
reason for his coming to

the table.

Monsorlit did not underestimate his potion. It did keep us going for the next
fifteen hours. I watched

Jokan and Ferrill as their eyes brightened, reddened and teared with fatigue,
knowing I was no better off.

Jokan took to shouting for me if he could not come to us and I became a
liaison between Jokan and

Ferrill.

As I listened to conversations concerning the resumption of the planet's
normal activities, the hurried

rearrangements of landing facilities and refueling schedules, I watched the
tank. Everyone did. And I, too,

did not push the announcer's assessments of the casualties from my conscious
hearing. On the tank, I saw

the mid-section of the Mil fleet continue blindly on its course for nowhere
while Lothar picked off

additional enemies. I watched as the helpless section was set upon by a
double row of our vessels,

turned into a new course as Ertoi and Glan pilots penetrated to the control
rooms and altered the courses

for the naval satellite bases and the one planetary space installation in the
southern sea. Landed,

decontaminated, the ships would ultimately be refitted and recommissioned
into the Alliance force. I saw

other Mil ships join this passive group. I saw a Lothar squadron drop down
and turn toward the rim of

the spatial tank, taking up Perimeter positions until it seemed that the tank

was lightly sprinkled with

diamond beading on its periphery. I watched as the main body of the fleet
turned homeward, catching

and passing the convoy of cripples, pushing on toward Lothar. Then I, too,
turned my hopeful attention

to the screens, waiting for the time when the communication limit was
reached and we might have a

detailed description of the victory from her triumphant commander.

Of the great navy that had set out to meet the invader, only twelve were not
returning, a statistic which

brought another wild burst of exultation. Of the twenty-three invaders, once
arrogant and feared, nineteen

were carefully shepherded toward exile. Never, never, I heard it shouted, has
so great a victory been

achieved in the annals of recorded history. And, to crown this feat with more
glory, fourteen of the fifteen

Star-class ships had been taken.

Now we waited, as we had waited for particular moments so often these last
violent days, for the

screens to reflect the images we wished most to see. So tensely was the first
ripple anticipated, a

concerted gasp echoed in the room when the picture was abruptly before us,
clear and unmuddied.

It was Maxil we saw; a Maxil as changed as only a boy can be who has
abruptly survived a brutal

initiation to manhood. His voice, harsh with fatigue and physical strain, broke
the communication silence.

Harlan was nowhere in sight.

'Men and women of Lothar, I bring you victory. I bring home all but twelve of
our valiant ships. I

bring you news of an offensive weapon against which the Mil have been
powerless. The day is not distant

when we can reach out and find the home of these vicious marauders and
destroy them forever.'

But where is Harlan? I whispered to myself.

Maxil paused and licked his lips, glancing off to his right. Then he smiled and
continued.

'I am not responsible for this victory. I doubt any of us would have returned
today if it had not been

for Harlan. He's done the impossible today. He has made the Mil fear MS. All
Lothar must recognize

their debt to him.'

A cheer, as loud and sincere as it was spontaneous, sprang from the throats of
the watchers as Maxil

pulled a reluctant Regent to his side.

I could see how tired Harlan was, his shoulders slumped down even as he
tried to hold himself erect.

His ship-suit was mottled with a white dust, and it was torn at the sleeve. I
saw no sign of damage in the

control room, but other officers coming and going in the background wore
torn or burned tunics as well

as bandages. But Harlan was all right.

'I don't see Sir Stannall, my lord,' Harlan commented.

Maxil peered out at the crowd and frowned. Jokan stepped forward and
formally bowing to the

young Warlord, explained the circumstances. Jokan continued to advise what

had been done, Maxil and

Harlan both questioning and advising further steps.

I don't recall much of what they said. I was content to look at Harlan and
know he was safe and

coming back. The multiple perils that threatened were dispersing: Gorlot's
perfidy, the Mil, and now

Stannall was sick. He couldn't resume his deadly questioning so I needn't fear
his drive for revenge on

Monsorlit. I only had the physician to deal with and Harlan would never let
him overwhelm me. A weary

exultation filled my tired body. Even the ghastly announcement that Gorlot,
chained to the Rock for the

Mil as their traditional first victim should they arrive, had been hacked to
pieces alive by hysterical

Lotharians, did not touch me.

The reprieve from fatigue granted by Monsorlit's pellets expired all at once. I
was weary to the very

marrow of my bones. I turned from the screen that no longer held Harlan.
Ferrill had fallen foward across

the table, unnoticed by anyone. I touched his hand, fearfully. It was damp
with perspiration, but the slow

pulse was steady in his wrist. I sat looking at him for a little while, I think.
Then it occurred to me that I

should get someone to take him to bed, but I didn't have the energy to open
my mouth to call. So I put

my head down on the table, too.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

I did not see the victorious return of Lothar's flagship. Nor did I see the
triumphant parade of Maxil

and Harlan back to the palace, I did not see Maxil publicly acclaim Fara as his
lady from the balcony of

his apartment. My presence there might not have been appreciated by the
public. I did not see Harlan

and that I cared about. I should have given him a proper soldier's welcome.
But I was dead to the world

and so were Ferrill and Jokan. Monsorlit had threatened the servants with dire
vengeance if they did

attempt to wake us.

What finally awoke me was, as usual, hunger. What roused me was the
unfamiliarity of my

surroundings. The dim room appeared to be all wrong to my sleep-dulled
faculties. For one thing, the

balcony was to the left of my bed instead of to the right. For another, the
window hangings were a deep

crimson. The furnishings, the heavy chairs and chests, were the wrong shapes
and there were enormous

shields on the walls, their metallic designs picking up what light there was. A
gentle snuffling set me bolt

upright in the bed reaching for the light panel in the headboard. The soft glow
fell on Harlan's sleeping

face and I immediately waved it off. Exhaustion was etched deeply on his
face. He had fallen on to the

bed, still dressed in the torn, creased shipsuit. His right arm dangled in the air
above the floor and his right

leg was off the bed entirely.

I hoped he had seen me before he fell into unconsciousness, that he at least
knew I was here, where I

belonged. It worried me that he might have felt I slighted him by not being a
part of the welcome he was

certainly due.

My eyes accustomed themselves to the dim room and I looked down at the
tired warrior. How often

I'd looked at his sleeping figure in the asylum, wondering what he was realiy
like. I certainly had had

more of his unconscious company than was necessary. There was so much I
wanted to know about this

man. One day, we would both have to make time to be together when both of
us were awake, in the

same room, at the same time.

My hunger could no longer be denied. I eased out of the bed, a needless
caution with Harlan in the

depths of the deepest sleep of exhaustion. He'd wake soon, uncomfortable in
that awkward position, I

decided. Placing his arm across his chest, I turned him so that all of his body
was supported by the bed. I

removed his boots, loosened his shipsuit and covered him.

I found the bathroom and discovered that my clothes had again followed me
while I played suite

hopscotch around the palace wing. I dressed quickly and went out into the
next room.

This was a study, deserted but apparently well-used by Harlan to judge from
the clutter of slates and

film cans. As I reached the door in the far wall I heard the subdued mutter of
voices.

'I received my orders from Harlan himself,' an irate man in patrol uniform was
saying to Jokan who

had placed himself between the patroller and the door to the study.

'Harlan is not to be wakened,' Jokan was saying firmly. The Patrolman saw
me at the door and tried

to edge around Jokan.

'Lady Sara, is the Regent awake?'

Jokan gave me a quick high-sign.

'No, sir, he is not! Nor could anything wake him. He is completely dead to the
world and will be for

some hours more, I'm sure,' I said with a firmness that matched Jokan's.

'My orders were definite,' the poor officer kept insisting desperately.

'I'm sorry, sir,' I replied unapologetically. 'But I cannot feel that there is any
matter so urgent that it

needs the attention of an exhausted man. Surely Jokan here, who is alternate
Regent…'

The officer was adamant.

'No, my orders are for the Regent only.'

'Well, you may certainly join us while we wait,' Jokan suggested amiably. He
took the officer by the

arm and led him, resisting all the way, to the far side of the living-room.

The two Councilmen and Jessl at the breakfast table rose as I approached.
Linnana came bustling in

from the pantry, wreathed with smiles and looking very well pleased with
herself. She greeted me

effusively and set my hot cup down in front of me.

'Hungry, Sara?' Jokan said with good-natured raillery.

'I still have several weeks of eating to make up,' I replied tartly. 'And I don't
think I ever will.'

'You missed all the excitement,' one of the Councilmen said.

'A matter of opinion. The Vaults were exciting enough for one lifetime. I was
never so tired in my life

as I was last night,' I declared.

Jokan exchanged amused glances with Jessl and Linnana giggled.

'You mean the day before yesterday,' Jokan corrected me.

I stared at him, suspecting him of teasing. But everyone else was grinning at
my disbelief.

'I was very tired,' I repeated emphatically, refusing to be annoyed. 'No wonder
I'm so hungry. I've

missed eight meals,' I exclaimed suddenly.

Even the thwarted officer joined in the laughter.

'Don't worry. There are films to be seen.'

"Then when,' I asked with concern,'did Harlan get to bed?'

'Approximately six hours ago,' Jokan said with a nasty look at the officer who
squirmed on his seat

uncomfortably. 'He and Maxil got in about sixteen hours ago. The rest of the
fleet keeps trailing in.' He

continued, nodding toward the crisscrossing of plume trails in the sky, 'Harlan
and Maxil were touched,

patted, kissed by everyone in Lothar. I'm surprised the noise didn't wake you.'

'Barbarous not to let him rest sooner. He must have been weaving for lack of
sleep,' I exclaimed,

outraged. 'Why wasn't I wakened? I'd've…'

'We had our orders about you, too,' Jokan laughed, his eyes dancing wickedly.
'From Monsorlit.'

I hastily covered the initial start his name gave me.

'Did you explain to Harlan why I…'

'Several times,' Jokan assured me dryly. Jessl snorted his disgust. 'He insisted
on seeing both you and

Ferrill. But he woke me up!' Jokan looked so sour I couldn't help laughing.

If I hadn't been so shocked by the fatigue in Harlan's face, I would have taken
pity on the officer

during the long hours that followed. He sat stolidly, watching the door and
waiting. Not all Jokan's

cajoling could budge him from his post or elicit the message he brought. We
finally gave up.

About noontime, Maxil came in. He looked tired still, the shadows of his
grueling experience lurking

in his eyes, but his step was resilient. He gave me a glad smile and took both
my hands in his, squeezing

them affectionately.

'We missed you. Harlan was fit to be tied,' he said. 'Made everyone wait while
he checked with

Monsorlit about you and Ferrill. Oh, and Stannall, too. Did you know about
Fara and me?'

'That's all I heard about the first day in the Vaults,' I said.

'Yes, I guess so,' and Maxil, although he looked sheepish, did not blush. We
had strolled over to the

balcony, apart from the others.

'That Marian's got real nerve,' Maxil said quietly, slamming one fist in the
palm of the other hand,

imitating his hero. 'You know, he waited and waited to throw on the
resonators until we were so close to

Lothar even seasoned spacers were green. And then, those resonators,' and
Maxil gave his head a

respectful shake, drawing his breath in with a hiss. 'You don't expect to be
able to hear again. And it's

not exactly a noise… it's a whine inside your skull that jars your teeth loose.'
His eyes briefly reflected the

pain he had endured. 'And when it stops… it's like there'll never be any noise
again in the world.' He

shook his head and added with a smile, 'But he did it and we'll never have to
fear the Mil ever again.

'You know, it's funny how things work out. Gorlot had those installations
made on every ship we had

in service. But, if he hadn't used them during the Tane business, we'd've got
every single ship without a

casualty of our own. Every time I remember I ate in the same room, breathed
the same air as that… that

unrestored unprintable did, I get sick. Sick.'

His choice of adjective had the same effect on me. I tried to fasten my
thoughts on Maxil's explosive

maturation. For he was no longer an adolescent. He had found himself in his
baptism under fire. I think

Ferrill was wrong when he felt that Jokan was the only one who showed the

true Harlan strain.

'Have you seen Ferrill yet?'

'Oh, yes,' Maxil assured me solemnly. 'Just come from there.' Then he grinned
at me broadly, a touch

of the boy showing. 'He said you were marvelous, Sara. When Stannall
collapsed, when everyone was

running around cave-hunting, you were so calm and controlled.'

'Ferrill gave you a description of himself, not me,' I laughed, nevertheless
flattered. I wondered if

Ferrill might be indulging in some subtle sarcasm. 'He's recovered? He had no
business working under

such pressure for so long. I was very worried about him.'

'No. He's… he's… Ferrill,' Maxil ended lamely as suitable comparison failed
him. 'Say, what's Talleth

doing here? He looks as if he's sitting on… something hard.'

I tried not to giggle as Maxil changed phrases mid-sentence.

'He keeps telling us, every hour on the hour, that he has orders to report
immediately to the Regent.

He has some burning message he'll only give to Harlan. And we won't wake
Harlan up.'

'You shouldn't,' Maxil agreed. 'He sent me off not long after we managed to
get through the crowds

to the palace. I was asleep before I could kiss Fara.'

He beckoned to Talleth who, after a quick glance at the study door, rose
obediently and came over.

'What's the problem, Talleth?'

'I was given a commission by Regent Harlan,' Talleth began patiently. 'When I

had accomplished it, I

was to report directly to Lord Harlan. I've been waiting for five hours and ten
minutes, sir.'

'When did Harlan get to bed, Sara?'

'Approximately ten hours and ten minutes ago,' I replied keeping my face
straight.

'He'll be up soon, then,' Maxil said easily and, nodding to Talleth, indicated he
could resume his post.

I thought Maxil was just saying that, so no one, except Talleth, was more
surprised than I when fifteen

minutes later, Harlan himself opened the door to the study.

He swept the occupants of the room with a swift glance, smiled briefly at me
but held up his hand as I

started to come to him. Instead, to my chagrin, he beckoned Talleth into the
study and closed the door.

'Close your mouth,' Maxil suggested in an aside. 'I guess he really did want to
see Talleth after all.'

Ignoring the slight as best I could, I hastily ordered Linnana to get warm food.
Maybe Harlan was

annoyed with me because I had been asleep when I should have been there to
greet him. Linnana

interrupted my nattering by asking what she should order for the Regent's
breakfast. I realized I didn't

know what Harlan liked to eat. Certainly the asylum fare was no criterion.

'Plenty of meat, he'll be hungry,' I temporized.

Whatever business Talleth had with Harlan, it was brief. The officer exited,
saluted Maxil respectfully,

glanced at me with a worried frown and left the apartment. Harlan did not

appear.

Hot food came up from the kitchens and no sign of him. It was too much for
me. Trying to appear

casual, I went through the empty study to the bedroom. Just I entered, he
emerged from the bathroom,

buckling on a uniform overtunic.

'Harlan, are you… displeased with me?'

He gave a little laugh and came over to embrace me, his face slightly damp,
smelling cleanly of soap

and fresh linens. 'No, you please me tremendously, except when you keep my
officers waiting.'

He released me quickly, for I was left standing, kissless. He strode over to the
big chest to one side

of the study door and rummaged through a top drawer, stuffing several objects
in his belt pouch.

'I'm hungry,' he announced, his smile making his words an intimate reminder.

'It's hot from the kitchen,' I assured him as he ushered me out to the living-
room.

Although he had reassured me verbally that he was not displeased with me, it
seemed he was not at

ease somehow. As if he held himself from me purposefully. As if there were
something between us,

separating us. With Jokan and Jessl, Maxil and the two Councilmen as well as
the servants, it was

impossible for me to pursue the subject of my unrest or set it at ease.

Harlan pulled me to the chair beside him at the table but, as he talked to the
others, cheerful, rested,

he never once glanced at me. He gave Jessl some instructions about putting

their fastest Star-class ship in

readiness for a long trip. He all but pushed Jessl through the door to get him
started on the assignment.

Once Jessl had left, he turned earnestly to the two Councilmen.

'I appreciate your waiting on me like this, although I had expected to be
awake long before this hour,'

and he shot a humorously accusing glance at me.

'I did it,' Jokan interposed, taking full blame.

‘I’d've preferred you returned the compliment I paid you when I got in,'
Harlan said so caustically

Jokan looked surprised. 'However, Talleth brought me word I hoped against
hope he would have. For

the first time, we have captured, intact, Mil star maps, complete with primary
notations and time

symbols.'

Jokan and the Councilman exclaimed excitedly and leaned forward eagerly as
Harlan continued.

'I don't say we now have the route to their home-world. It is impossible to tell
whether they were on

an outward or inward orbit. The holds were barely half full,' he added,
dropping his voice and

swallowing. I guess I wasn't the only one who looked ill. There was no longer
any question in my mind

what those holds carried.

'However, I believe it is important for us to retrace their route, starting from
the notation that is the

Tane group and working backward.'

The sound of a planecar right on top of us made me glance up startled. Talleth
was at the controls. He

secured the craft to the landing balcony and stood waiting.

'I have a quick trip to make, gentlemen, after which I will explain myself in
greater detail. If you will

excuse me,' and Harlan rose.

'You have to go right away?' I murmured, deeply disappointed. I was positive
now there was

something separating us.

'Will you come with me, Sara?' Harlan asked. There was a quality, a pleading
in his voice, that I had

never heard before.

'Certainly.'

The fact that he wanted my company, coupled with his unsettling look, was
not altogether reassuring.

But, perhaps during the flight I would have time to get to the bottom of the
problem.

This aim was soon thwarted completely when I realized that this plane, fast as
it was, was also small.

Talleth, stolidly piloting, was no father away from me than my outstretched
arm. This was scarcely the

time or place for an important private discussion.

The trouble with public life, I thought bitterly, is that it is so damned public. If
I had to put up with six

years of this while Maxil grew to his majority, I would be a frustrated woman.

Harlan's unaccountable nervousness was obvious in many ways as the trip
progressed. He kept up a

superficially agreeable conversation, inquiring about the events after the
attack, the reactions of the most

skeptical Council-men once the resonators were proved effective.

'Where are we going?' I asked as casually as I could when our forced
conversational gambits were

exhausted.

'To Nawland," Harlan said crisply.

'What's that?' I persisted.

I obviously should have known because Talleth jerked his head as if to look at
me, but changed his

mind and kept facing the instrument panel.

'The Space Research Station,' Harlan answered in a tone that brooked no
further questions.

But my own terrible worries were more than I could contain, even faced with
his unresponsiveness.

'Is Monsorlit there?'

Harlan looked at me, startled. 'Of course not. He has absolutely nothing to do
with this.'

I was too relieved that Monsorlit had not made good the threat he had made in
the Vaults. The

fleeting impression that Harlan considered Monsorlit a lesser evil than the
installation at Nawland did not

occur to me until later.

A taut silence settled in the little cabin. Marian's jaw and the feeling that he
had again withdrawn from

me were inhibiting to the point that all I felt free to do was stare out the
window at the sea.

We were flying swiftly over a long tail of islands in shallow water. In the
distance, a smudge across

the horizon, loomed the purple shadow of a land mass. Above it, a lance
against the darkening evening

sky, I saw a rocket blast off. Several miles away was another airborne plane,
heading toward our mutual

goal.

The sight of a fishing boat, similar to the one Harlan and I had escaped in,
sent a stab of pain through

me. I blinked back the tears that came to my eyes at the memories that sail
evoked. Sitting in silent

sorrow, I waited passively for this journey to end.

Space Research Station conjures a picture of purposeful activity, launching
pads, half-erected

gantries, waiting spaceships. But Talleth circled round the island, away from
just such a scene, coming in

across a quiet cove to an almost deserted strip of slab rock and sand. Two
enormous hulls, all their

airlocks open like terrible wounds to the setting sun, rested untended on the
strip. A smaller rocket was

parked to one side of the giant ship Talleth hovered near. Both he and Harlan
peered out their side of the

plane, searching for something. I noticed that Talleth's face had a greenish
tinge and he was sweating

profusely.

Then I noticed there were huge tubes, several feet in diameter, plugging the
entrances to three of the

locks. A variety of equipment, tubing and wires, was carefully stacked against
the curve of the huge ship's

hull, half observed by shadow.

'Number Three,' Harlan muttered savagely.

Wordlessly Talleth guided the plane down the length of the ship to an open
lock, tubeless, in which

stood three tall Ertoi figures, one beckoning to us.

Talleth set the plane down, the sweat pouring off his face. It hadn't seemed
that the plane required

that much effort to fly and the temperature was mild.

'I must ask you to come, Sara,' Harlan said in a terse, hard voice. Glancing at
him, I was startled to

see he, too, was sweating and constantly swallowing. He opened the plane
door. An awful smell

overwhelmed us and I coughed wildly to clear my lungs of the stench.

I heard Talleth groan, but Harlan had a hand under my elbow and was urging
me out onto the sand.

'What's that stink?' I asked, covering my nose and mouth with a fold of my
tunic.

Harlan didn't answer. His face showed great distress. Relentlessly he guided
me quickly up the

rampway to the open lock, the three Ertois moved quietly aside to let us enter.

'This way,' one of them thrummed in an incredibly deep voice.

Harlan didn't answer and now I felt his hand trembling even as his fingers
took a firmer grip on my

elbow. Now, I was scared, too.

'We have put samples in the nearest chamber,' our guide boomed hollowly, his
voice echoing and

echoing down the long dim corridor. 'The others have been disintegrated.'

The Ertoi stopped by an oddly shaped orifice and nodded his head gravely to
Harlan.

Harlan looked ghastly, the sweat pouring down his face, his jaw muscles
working furiously as he

swallowed. He gave every indication of someone about to be violently ill and
mastering the compulsion

by sheer will-power.

The moment I stepped through that orifice a scream tore from me. Only
because the Ertoi and Harlan

were holding me fast did I stay on my feet. I knew why Harlan looked ill. I
knew what that smell was. I

knew where I was. I was on a Mil ship and I had been in such a room before. I
had been in such a room

and what I had seen there had sent my mind reeling into the deepest shock.

'They do not look like you, the Ertoi say,' Harlan managed to say between his
teeth. 'I have to make

you look.'

He and the Ertoi half carried me to the long high frame where several sheeted
mounds lay still. One of

the other Ertoi very carefully pulled back the top of the sheets and the first
face was visible to me.

I didn't want to look down. But I had to. With that dread fascination horrible
accidents have for you.

No matter how ghastly, you have to look to assure yourself it is just as bad or
worse than you have

already imagined. He was Chinese or at least some Oriental… his race didn't
matter beyond the fact that

he had once lived on my planet. I was propelled to the next victim and this
was infinitely worse. Because

it was a blonde girl with the fresh misty complexion of an Englishwoman.
Her hair had been shorn off

close to her scalp and her face was contorted in the horrible rictus of death.
There was no skin on her

neck, only raw red flesh, the muscles and neck tendons exposed. I gave the
covering a twitch and saw,

as I instinctively knew I should but nevertheless had to confirm, that all skin
had been flayed from her

body. Skin, golden skin, my new golden skin. I, too, had once been flayed
and… restored with golden

skin. How much skin can a human lose and live? I stood swaying, my eyes
unable to leave her face until I

spun away to retch in deep terrible spasms.

I knew it was Harlan who picked me up and carried me out of that charnel
place, I felt skin not scales

under my hands as I struck out wildly, intent only on inflicting pain on him
who had led me, all unwitting,

back into horror. I must have acted like a madwoman, shrieking, flailing with
arms and legs. Then the

pressure around me and in me was relieved as I felt the tart freshness of
uncontaminated air around me

and the smell was gone from my nose and throat and lungs. I was conscious
of the sound of surf, the

unlimited sky above me and then a sharp prick in my arm.

A scaly hand thrust an aromatic under my nose, but it only caused my
stomach to heave again.

A hand, gentle for all it was scaly and hard, held my head as I vomited,
stroking my streaming wet

hair back from my face.

As the convulsive dry retching subsided, I became aware that I was propped
against the scaly leg of

one of the Ertoi. Another Ertoi was shielding my face from the brilliant
sunset, his saurian face kind and

compassionate as he bathed my face and hands.

Beyond my line of vision, I could hear someone else being violently ill and
the thrumming voice of the

third Ertoi talking quietly.

I don't know how long it took before we recovered from the experience but it
was already full dark

when Harlan came over to where I lay, still propped against the patient Ertoi,
too weak and spent to

move.

'Are they people from your planet, Sara?' Harlan asked with sad weariness.

'Yes.'

And I knew why he had subjected me to that horror. I knew, too, what
incredible courage it must

have taken him to accompany me, knowing what he would see, knowing what
he must put me through,

and unwilling, despite the cost to himself, to let me go to that little death
alone.

'You may proceed with orders, Ssla,' Harlan murmured.

One Ertoi saluted Harlan and then me and went back to the ship. In a minute
or so I heard the

chirropp, chirrop of the planecar.

Harlan managed to get into the plane himself, but the two Ertoi had to lift me
in. Harlan held me in his

lap, my head against his chest, both of us too exhausted to move.

Talleth took off at top speed. He, too, had had more of that stretch of Nawland
than he could endure.

Whatever injection had been given me, the lassitude it produced spread
through my body. Although I

feared for a sleep that might be punctuated with the nightmare of revived
terrors, I felt myself slipping

without volition into the black velvet well of unconsciousness.

The first thought that crossed my mind on wakening was that it wasn't hunger
that roused me. It was a

soft light, diffused on the wall above the bed. I turned my head to see Harlan,
propped up, writing quietly

but quickly on a thin metal slate. It was the slip of the stylus across the metal
that had penetrated my

sleep.

At my movement, Harlan turned, his expression anxious and hopeful,
changing quickly to a hesitant

smile as our eyes met.

'You were so still. So deeply asleep…'he said.

'No, I'm all right,' I assured him, giving his hand a reassuring pat. He caught
my hand, squeezing so

tightly I gave a little cry.

He put down his writing and turned on his side toward me, his eyes still
concerned.

'They have a saying on Earth,' I began, trying to lighten his mood,'the
criminal always returns to the

scene of the crime. Then the law catches him. In this case, it was the victim
who returned.'

Harlan groaned and dropped his head down to the bed, hiding his face from
me.

'Frankly,' I continued, around the tightness in my throat, 'I think it did the
victim good. By all rights, I

should have had horrible nightmares and I didn't.'

Harlan grabbed me by the shoulders, shaking me, his face twisted with
emotion.

'How can you forgive me? How can you ever forget what I have done to you?
Forcing you to face

that unspeakable horror?'

'Harlan,' I said, ' You went with me. It must have been ten times worse for
you.'

He stared at me blankly, as if I had lost my mind.

'You're incredible. It must have been ten times worse for me?' he repeated,
shaking his head in

disbelief at my words. 'For me? For ME!' He gave an explosive snort of
laughter and then hugged me so

fiercely I cried out. 'I'll never understand you. Never. Never.' And he began to
laugh, rocking me back

and forth in his arms, laughing, I realized, in sheer relief.

'Well, it wasn't very funny,' I reminded him, nonplussed at his reaction.

'No, not funny at all,' and Harlan continued to laugh, softer now, with silly
tears coming to his eyes.

The strained look of worry had lifted from his face when he held me off a
little to look at me. His eyes

and mouth held traces of his laughter, but his look was intensely proud and
possessive.

He brushed my hair back from my forehead tenderly and settled me against

him, my head on his

chest.

'I have several things to tell you, Sara,' he began in a more normal voice.
'One, I was honestly afraid

you would wake mad or hating me. No, don't interrupt,' and he placed a finger
on my lips. 'I never

expected you to understand why I had to subject you to that ordeal. I said be
quiet,' and his voice was

stern, more like himself. 'I had only a short time to get you there for the
identification. If you remember, I

told Jokan and the two Councilmen that we had discovered undamaged star
maps from which we could

retrace the routes of the Mil. From certain procedures we know they follow,'
and he swallowed

suddenly, 'Ssla is of the opinion that their last touchdown was at the planet
from which those people

came.' He held me tightly as I inadvertently began to tremble again.

I took several deep breaths and nodded at him to continue, to ignore my
reactions.

'The Star-class I ordered Jessl to refit will carry Jokan and Talleth to your own
world with such help

as we can give.' He paused and then added in a low voice, 'I was going to
suggest that you return with

them.'

'You were going to.' I pushed away from his chest so I could see his face.

'I don't want you to leave, but I felt, in view of what happened yesterday, I
owed you the choice.

There may be someone on your world you would prefer to be with.'

I turned in his arms, looking him squarely in the face. His expression was
grave but gave me no

indication of his thoughts.

'Are you trying to get rid of me?' I asked, amazed at the hoarseness of my
own voice. 'I've made a

pest of myself, I know. First I tag along on that escape. You could have got
away much faster by

yourself.'

'But I don't sail.'

'And you should have left me at Gartly's. That would have made much more
sense.'

'True. But you'd not have encountered Maxil and got into the palace.'

'Where I caused Ferrill to collapse completely.'

'Which meant Council automatically convened, exactly what I hoped to
effect.'

'But I angered Stannall so.'

'And got yourself into an untenable position as Maxil's woman.' I saw a flare
of anger in his eyes.

'I got myself involved with everyone!' I said, sunk in miserable reflection.

'Causing Harlan to complicate his own life unnecessarily by claiming you
before anyone else dared."

'I'll unclaim you any time you want,' I said wildly in my dejection.

'Do you really think I'd let you?' Harlan laughed, half frowning, half smiling.
'I haven't known a

moment's peace since you half starved me in that asylum. For the sake of the
clan mothers, do you love

me, Sara?'

'Yes, of course. Isn't that obvious?' I gasped, astonished. 'I've been madly in
love with you since you

propositioned me on the boat.'

His face relaxed into such an expression of tenderness and entreaty I thought
my heart would stop.

'Love me, Sara!' he commanded softly. His hungry mouth claimed mine in a
giving and taking that was

complete fulfillment for us both, a release from the uncertainties and terrors
of the past few days and a

promise of richness and peace to come.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

'I hate to wake you, Sara, but Jokan's pounding at the door,' said Harlan's
voice in my ear. I felt a

feather kiss on my eyes. I stretched with delicious languor as Harlan
continued, 'and I want him in here

where we can be private.'

'Well,' I prompted agreeably.

Harlan, standing at the side of the bed, looked down at me quizzically.

'You have nothing on, dear my lady, and while he is my brother…" and
Harlan threw my robe in my

face. 'Put it on. He's got to keep his mind on what you're saying.' Harlan
laughed at the face I made at

him.

I drew the robe on and accepted the hot drink Harlan handed me before he
called Jokan in.

'You want me in here?' Jokan asked pointedly, glaring at me. I learned later
that such intimacy was

unusual in Lothar where men were extremely possessive of their ladies.

Harlan indicated Jokan should close the door. Shrugging, Jokan approached
the bed and took the

chair Harlan pointed to.

'Well?' Jokan asked helpfully, looking from one to the other of us.

'Ssla discovered that the latest Mil victims," Harlan began quietly, sitting
down on the edge of the bed

beside me, one arm loosely on my shoulders, 'are people very similar to us.
From certain indications,' I

noticed Jokan also swallowed rapidly, wiped his forehead nervously,'the last
planet was not far away. I

want you, with Talleth as captain, to take the Star-class command ship and
retrace that route, establish

relations with these people and give them whatever scientific and military
experience we have to share.

Provided,' and Harlan held up his hand,'they will agree to joining forces with
us to track the Mil to their

lair and destroy them.'

Jokan snorted, shaking his head at the orders his brother had given him.

'Just orbit in, in a ship no different from the ones raiding them, land in the
midst of the poor barbarians

with their spears or swords and say, look here, I'm friendly.'

I was conscious of Harlan's hesitation.

'Use one of the smaller rockets,' I suggested and Harlan's hand pressed my
arm in approval. 'You'll

need it to get past the satellites and to take evasive action against the nuclear
missiles that, I assure you,

will be launched.'

'To get past what?' Jokan asked, blinking in surprise.

'The planet in question has atomic energy, has landed robot ships on the moon
and orbited its nearest

space neighbors.'

Jokan glanced, wide-eyed, at Harlan for confirmation. Then turned his
incredulous blue eyes to stare

at me.

'Oh, and we already have electrical power in quantities. So once you explain
the Ertoi defense

mechanisms, I'm sure they can be put in place very quickly. If someone hasn't
worked out an even better

defense already.'

Jokan made an attempt to rise from his chair and then sat back, stunned.

'I came from that planet, Jokan.'

A look of horror replaced the surprise in Jokan's face and he turned to his
brother with an angry

accusation. At first all I could trunk was he was revolted by the natural
conclusion that I was a restoree.

'You took Sara with you to Nawland yesterday?' he rasped out, his eyes
flashing.

Harlan nodded slowly.

'I had to identify the victims,' I said hurriedly, taut with strain for his reaction.

'But you… you're… not…' and Jokan stared at me.

'Yes,' I said slowly, because Jokan's good opinion mattered. 'I am a restoree.'

'Sara!' Harlan snapped, anxiously.

'No,' I countered, watching Jokan's face as he struggled with his emotional
reactions. 'I think Jokan

should know. I don't like to deceive him.'

Jokan continued to scrutinize me, not masking traces of revulsion because he
had them subdued

quickly. He looked at me with great interest and finally, rubbing his hands
slowly up and down his thighs,

he began to smile at me.

'While I went into deep shock,' I continued hastily, 'not from restoration, but
from… what I saw, I

came out of it gradually. That's how I met Harlan. I must have been taken to
Monsorlit's Mental

Defectives Clinic sometime during the early part of the Tane wars when a Mil
ship was disabled, either

on Tane or in space. I guess Gorlot's people thought me a Tane colonist. At
any rate, there I was. When

I overheard Monsorlit and Gleto talking, I realized Harlan had been drugged.
And, well,' I ended lamely,

'you know what started happening then.'

Jokan expelled all the air from his lungs in a deep sigh. He began to relax,
nodding his head slowly up

and down.

'Well,' he said briskly, slapping his thighs,'that explains a great many things,
doesn't it?'

'It should,' Harlan agreed, a faint smile on his lips. I could feel he was still
tensely waiting for

something.

'It's very reassuring to learn, however, that your people are not hiding in
caves,' Jokan remarked in a

completely different tone of voice. He rose, drawing a slate out of his belt
pouch, and sitting down on the

bed beside me, asked if I could draw a map of my world.

The tension left Marian's body and I realized he had been waiting, hoping that
Jokan would do

something of this order, proving that my restoration did not render me

physically revolting in his eyes.

That he had hoped Jokan, too, could put aside the conditioned reaction toward
a restoree.

'I'll be glad when you bring back paper,' I muttered, struggling awkwardly
with a stylus.

'What's that?' Jokan asked, sharply inquisitive.

'It is made of wood pulp combined with rags, pressed flat and thin. It can be
made quickly and

cheaply and is much easier to write on.'

'Wood pulp, rags?' Jokan repeated. 'Doesn't seem very durable. I've been
using the pocket slate for

years. Can you use the same piece of… what did you call it… paper… for
years?'

'Well, no,' I demurred, 'but you people are backward in a lot of other things.'

Both Harlan and Jokan rose up in concerted protest.

'Just because you have space travel - which you inherited, you didn't develop
it - don't go looking

down your noses at my world. We had to start from scratch to get off our
planet. There are plenty of

things on Lothar where it'd be better if you started all over again with a clean
slate.' I stopped, bemused

by my pun. 'You see,' I told Jokan archly, 'we gave up slates a century ago.'

'All right, all right,' Harlan chuckled. 'Draw.'

I had the general outlines sketched in when a vagrant thought came back to
me.

'You know, getting you on Earth is going to be a problem,' I said with
concern. 'You're right in that

you can't just touch down. Particularly not in a Mil-design ship. You see, we
have a radar network that

would spot you miles up and while I don't know what the Mil may have done
to the internal politics of

Earth, you're sure to meet a barrage of nuclear missiles. And a Star-class is
just too big to miss.'

'The rider ships are not Mil-designed,' Jokan suggested.

'That doesn't mean they won't be shot at.'

'What kind of communication systems does your planet have? They must
have some if they are

experimenting in space flight,' Harlan put in.

'Telstar!' I cried with sudden inspiration. 'Why you'd reach every country in
the world!' Then I got

deflated just as quickly. 'No, I wouldn't even know how you could jam it or
interpose your broadcast on

it.'

'What is it?' Jokan prompted hopefully.

I explained as best I could and Jokan beamed at me patronizingly.

'We may still be using slate, dear sister, but in space we are completely at
home. It's a simple matter

to locate this Telstar of yours on our equipment, well out of the range of your
radar screens and

defensive missiles. Interfere and use its transmission for our purposes. That's
an excellent idea.'

'Fine,' I agreed tartly. 'I grant you can do it. Then what?' I demanded acidly.
'No one there speaks

Lotharian.'

I couldn't help laughing at the expression on their faces.

'Now, get me a tape recorder and I will introduce you. I speak enough of our
languages to get across

what I mean. The point is to get you down to Earth and let the linguists take
over from there.'

'Good,' Harlan put in, his face echoing his prideful pleasure in possessing me.
'Sara has a curious habit

of supplying our need. Did you know she can sail boats?'

'I believe you've mentioned that, Harlan,' Jokan remarked with dry testiness.
It was my first

indication, however, that Harlan had ever mentioned me to anyone. He had
seemed so concerned I

shouldn't arouse any attention at all.

'You can see why she's so important,' Harlan commented.

'Because she can sail?' Jokan retorted with an innocent look.

'I'm surprised,' Harlan continued, ignoring his brother, 'it hasn't come up in
conversation so far this

morning,' and he regarded me suspiciously, 'but I'm hungry. And I'm going to
break my fast.'

'Why didn't someone say breakfast was ready?' I exclaimed sitting straight up.

Jokan jumped to his feet. 'We'll all work better after eating. Less snarling at
each other.' And he

grinned boyishly at both his brother and me.

'Jo,' and Harlan stopped his brother with a hand on his shoulder,'do I need to
caution you about

revealing Sara's Jokan shook his head solemnly from side to side.

'She's just infernally lucky it was you,' he commented. 'But I'd suggest that

you in your official

capacity as Regent, redirect Stannall's campaign to put Monsorlit on the Rock
as a collaborator. Sara

could be implicated.'

'Yes, the day the Mil invaded, Stannall was trying to get me to accuse
Monsorlit,' I added, and fear of

the cold physician, never far from my consciousness, returned. If Jokan had
also noted Stannall's

preoccupation, I had not misinterpreted my danger.

Harlan put an arm around my waist comfortingly. 'I also know Monsorlit and,
despite everything I've

heard, I don't think Sara has anything to worry about from him.'

'Well, I'd rather find a deep cave I didn't need than not have one when I did,'
Jokan remarked

pointedly and, turning on his heel, started for the main room.

Harlan gave me another reassuring hug before we joined him.

There were just the three of us at breakfast this morning. A very unusual
occurrence in itself, for

breakfast was the hour of the patronage seekers or intense political
conferences. The intimacy we three

shared was therefore an unusual and unexpected respite. Because of Linnana
and Harlan's servant,

Shagret, we couldn't talk about Jokan's mission. And, as soon as breakfast
was over, the communicator

lit up. Harlan was called to meet the Councilmen in charge of Jokan's mission,
so he left for his offices in

the administration wing to get the necessary clearances.

Jokan and I retired to the study with closed doors and I taped a message that
he would, he assured

me, be able to transmit over Telstar. I started to give him a brief summary of
our world history and

decided it was useless to predispose him. The menace of the raiding Mil
might well have consolidated

and changed everything. Instead I spent the morning giving him some basic
English phrases and such

terms as he might need to effect a safe landing. I suggested that Cape
Kennedy or the new Dallas Space

Center would be able to accommodate the huge Star-class ship. I showed him
these centers on my rough

map, sighing at such inadequate cartography.

It was as if a cork had been pulled out of me that had damned up my Earth
past. I talked and talked

while Jokan listened, directing me occasionally with questions about his own
areas of interest. My work

as a librarian in a huge advertising agency had forced me to acquaint myself
with a broad index of

references, so I had a thin understanding of many facets of industry and
technology. But I was painfully

lacking in the details he needed or wanted so that he groaned over the
tantalizing snips and snatches I

held out to him. I talked until I was hoarse. Then Jokan covered up his slates
and announced he was

going to see what progress Harlan was making in ramming through the
expedition.

Jokan was able to leave two days later, a big coup for Harlan who had indeed
rammed the clearance

through any opposition in Council. He attributed his success to the fact that
Lesatin, thoroughly shaken by

the Tane disaster and the Mil penetration, was more than willing, as Acting
First Councilman, to expand

the Alliance. Stannall, Harlan remarked privately to me, would have delayed
until he 'had given the matter

mature consideration'.

'However,' Harlan said with a grimace, 'I did have to agree to take a
committee of Councilmen to the

Tanes to see first hand what has happened there.' He covered my hands with
his, smiling ruefully. 'I'd

take you along if I could…'

'I'm all right. How long will you be gone?'

'Two, three days, depending on how much convincing they take. And one of
them is Estoder.'

'I remember him from the Regency debate,' I said sourly.

'So do I,' Harlan remarked in a thoughtful way.

So he left and the first day I occupied myself with the mechanics of getting
my Council grant in order.

The much bemedaled slate Stannall had given me the day of the Mil invasion
turned out to have

considerably more value to me personally than a mere official propitiation.
Harlan had read it to me and

explained that I had been given a lifetime income from three iron-producing
shafts in Jurasse. Someday I

would have to inspect these but in the meantime this income was a tidy sum.

'It's enough for you to be comfortably placed if you were still unclaimed,'
Harlan explained, then his

eyes twinkled wickedly. 'It also provides that, if you die while you are
unclaimed, the income devolves to

your issue until they reach their majority.'

I glared at him. I had a lot to figure out about the complicated marital and
extramarital and post-,

pre-, and ante-marital mores of this world where women are expected to
produce children and no one

asks who is the father.

'However, you are very much claimed and I will provide for your issue,
making certain it is all mine.'

I held him off for he started to wrestle me and I didn't want to be diverted
quite yet from this subject.

'Are you rich, Harlan?'

'Yes, I guess so,' he said. 'I have the family holdings, of course, as my mother
is dead. There are the

prerogatives and privileges of my position. I haven't used much of my income
and neither has Jokan. I

had intended,' and he grinned one-sidedly at me,'to finance a private
expedition. However, my lady

Sara,' and his smile broadened, 'as usual, chose to come from a very
interesting planet so Lothar is the

outfitter.'

'Then, with that settled, I'll go out tomorrow and spend it all on my back,' I
declared.

'I like your back the way it is right now,' Harlan murmured and he started to
make love. A thrifty man,

Harlan.

At any rate, while Harlan was on his way to Tane, I took my slate to his estate

agent. This gentleman,

one Lorith, was very polite and helpful. I was extremely pleased with myself
that I made no blunders in

our interview over matters I should have understood. One thing, however, I
decided I must get Harlan to

do immediately on his return from Tane was to teach me how to write at least
my own name. Lorith

would start the proceedings to secure the grant, but there would be many
things for my signature in a few

days.

Consequently I was not in the least apprehensive the next morning when
Lesatin asked me to attend

an informal meeting in his chambers.

I had not expected, considering the wording of his invitation, to see the large
committee room filled

with Councilmen, including four of the Elder Seven and a woman and seven
doctors, by then-overdress.

I was also surprised to see Ferrill enter. He nodded at me and sat beside me at
one end of the large

room.

Lesatin was scanning the faces of the assembled when Monsorlit entered. I
glanced, apprehensive for

the first time, at Ferrill. He smiled noncommittally and I settled back,
reassured. As far as I could tell,

Monsorlit did not so much as glance in my direction. The woman, however,
constantly looked at me.

'We are met today to assess accusations made against Physician Monsorlit,'
Lesatin began in a formal

opening of the session. 'These charges included complicity with the
archtraitor Gorlot in the genocide of

the Tanes; furnishing drugs capable of inhibiting and demoralizing certain
officials in our government

and…' Lesatin glanced at his note slate, 'illicit surgery.'

I pulled at Ferrill's arm nervously. Illicit surgery meant restoration. Monsorlit
was unruffled by these

charges and Ferrill only patted my hand.

Lesatin first called various hospital officials and technicians who had been in
charge of the victims

taken off Tane. They testified that the early wounded to arrive at the hospital
were invariably in some

stage of paralytic cerolosis. Cerol, in unadulterated form, could produce total
paralysis of the body and

its functions, resulting in death. Complete and immediate blood transfusions
would lessen its deadly

effects, but too often brain and nerve centers were affected. Monsorlit had
developed a series of cold

and hot baths as shock treatments, a radical new approach in Lotharian
medical practice, to rouse the

sluggish cerolized areas. Two physicians who testified did not entirely
approve of such a rigorous course

of treatment although they admitted Monsorlit's techniques effected partial
cures that were considered

miracles. Patients were able to do for themselves, perform duties and relieve
society of the burden of

their care.

Yes, it had been Monsorlit's idea to place a hospital ship so near the Tane
planets for prompter care

of the injured. No, they could not say that any of the men appeared to have
been restored. Of course, at

that time, no one looked for such evidence because no one had realized that
the Mil were in any way

involved. Yes, they had heard Monsorlit use the expression'repossessed' often.
One surgeon had called

him to account because of the word's unfortunate similarity with the
unpopular practice of restoration.

Monsorlit had replied that the men were actually repossessed, repossessed of
their faculties disabled by

cerol.

Had Monsorlit practiced any total restorations since the edict against it? Yes,
two operations had

been performed with official sanction on burn victims in a satellite yard fire.
What were the results? A

reconstruction so perfect as to defy detection.

I found myself unconsciously stroking one wrist and hastily clasped my hands
firmly together. Looking

up, I was aware of Monsorh't's eyes on me. He had caught my gesture and
smiled slightly.

I knew then that he had merely bided his time. That I had been foolish to
think myself immune. I

wondered if he had planned this trial to coincide with Harlan's absence. I
hoped desperately that

someone else beside myself could incriminate him; that his own preference
for life would keep him from

disclosing my restoration.

Lesatin continued his investigation with further questions about the illegal
restoration.

Was it possible that total restoration could be detected? Only by a check of
cell coding within a

month of restoration and, even so, there would still be room for doubt.

Lesatin asked for an explanation of cell coding. It was so long and technically
detailed I paid no

attention.

'I fail to understand its application to restoration,' Lesatin prompted patiently.

Before restorations had been ruled illegal twenty-five years ago, intensive
research had tried to

perfect ways in which a total body graft could be undetected. It had been felt
that the unsightly scars at

wrist, ankle and neckline contributed to the revulsion caused by restorees. A
high fever was induced in

the patient by a virus injection for the purpose of changing the cell coding of
the body so that it would

accept new skin from any donor. The new skin would bond properly,
assimilating and overgrowing what

original epidermis remained, leaving undetectable the restoration.

Well, that explained the golden tinge to my skin, I thought. I'd wondered how
they'd accomplished

that.

In cases of plastic surgery, this technique was often applied with detection-
defying results.

I managed to keep my hand from my nose.

Lesatin continued doggedly. Was it possible for any of the so-called Tane
wounded to have been

restorees? Possible, but not probable, for the men admitted to the War
Hospital had been unquestionably

suffering from acute cerolosis. Most were now able to take care of themselves
and were employed in

routine jobs. By common definition, they could not be restorees, as it was
well known that a restoree

was incapable of any independent action.

Crewmen on the hospital ship that Monsorlit had sent out were questioned.
They gave detailed

descriptions of cases they had handled. They confirmed in every way the
information already given.

Lesatin paused and then asked several men how long they had worked for
Monsorlit. They had,

without exception, been trained by the physician, had served him since their
certification and were,

admittedly and vehemently loyal to him. Lesatin dismissed them, having
made a point.

From Lesatin's questioning and bland manner there was no indication whether
he was out to clear

Monsorlit or convict him. But I knew clearly what I would do. I would speak
out against Monsorlit. I

would tell them he had perfected the drug that had been used on Harlan and
the others. I would tell them

all I knew and remove Monsorlit from a position in which he could threaten
and terrify me.

Lesatin issued an order I didn't overhear and the side door opened to admit a
chained, shrunken,

groveling Gleto, flanked by two strong guards.

Lesatin turned to Monsorlit with an apologetic gesture.

'This is one of your accusers, physician,' he said. 'Gleto has sworn that you
developed the drug, cerol,

into several compounds which were used to depress Harlan, Japer,

Lamar, Sosit, to name only a few. That you were completely aware of the
perfidy against the Tane

race and knew that the supposed casualties you handled in your hospital were
victims of the skirmishes

with the Mil ships. That you have actually performed illegal restorations to
cover evidences of Gorlot's

treachery.'

Lesatin smiled deprecatingly and he was joined by the four Elders who were
plainly telling Monsorlit

that the source of these accusations was very suspect.

'Gleto has also gone on to insist that your personal fortune has swelled to
enormous proportions. That

you have secretly continued your abominable research on human beings.'

Monsorlit nodded calmly. It was well known that Gleto's personal fortune had
also swelled to

enormous proportions. The physician arose and presented a thick pile of slates
to the first Councilman at

the table.

'Sealed and documented records of all my personal financial affairs,' he said.
'I beg pardon for such a

bulky package but my income is heavily involved with my experimental work
at the Mental Clinic.'

Lesatin acknowledged this and motioned the Councilmen to examine the
slates.

'As to the secret and abominable research on humans,' Monsorlit continued,
addressing the

Councillors, 'my colleagues will tell you that some of my work is done in

secret, behind closed doors and

the results are in locked files. That is the only way to protect the privacy of
our patients, some of whom

are well placed in life, despite their inner uncertainties. Yes, the research we
have been conducting lately

might once have been called abominable, but the results have been a return to
health for many. Very

often a medicine tastes abominably, but that does not mean its efficacy is
affected.

He spoke so glibly, his explanations so pat, yet nothing he had said sounded
rehearsed or insincere.

'As to my developing cerol compounds, I could scarcely deny so well
publicised a fact,' and

Monsorlit smiled pleasantly. 'My laboratories have been aware of its
effectiveness… if properly and

abstemiously used… in restraining mental cases, in the stimulation of certain
muscular center, in… ways

too numerous to list. It is a remarkably versatile base for a wide range of uses.
It will be some time

before we reach the end of its potentialities.

'But, as the man who invented our slates cannot control what we, centuries
later, write upon them, I

cannot control the uses to which the discoveries in our laboratories have been
put,' and with a shrug

Monsorlit resumed his seat. Lesatin exchanged low comments with several of
the Councillors.

'Did you, physician, at any time suspect you were being used by Gorlot to
cover up his treachery

against the Tane?'

That to me was the silliest question yet. But Monsorlit considered it gravely
before answering.

'I am not a politician, gentlemen, but a serious scientist. It was my duty under
Regent Gorlot to

perform such services as he required of me in my capacity as Head Physician
of the War Hospital. If I

had any doubts as to the authenticity of the afflictions, I had little time to
pursue them due to the extreme

pressure of work and the speed with which it is necessary to treat acute
cerolosis.'

'Does not acute cerolosis parallel the symptoms of restoration madness in so
far as the mental

processes of the patient are concerned?' snapped Lesatin.

I gasped and so did others at the sting of the question. But it reassured me that
Lesatin must be after

Monsorlit.

Monsorlit pondered this question calmly.

'Yes, it does,' he said deliberately, still in thought. 'There is an absolute
paralysis of mental centers,

sluggish reactions, no independent action. But, as you gentlemen are aware,
the shock treatments we

have used have brought the patients back to as normal a pursuit of life as
possible, considering the

irreparable damage done by the cerol in some cases.'

There was an unfinished quality to his statement that reached me if no one
else.

'You are noted for your skill in restoration, Physician Monsorlit,' Lesatin
continued. Monsorlit

accepted the implied compliment as his just due. 'Are there other surgeons
today capable of such

technical perfection?'

'If you mean partial restorations due to common accidents, yes. My
techniques, as published in the

Medical Library, are effective for partial as well as complete restorations. I
could name dozens of

surgeons capable of performing undetectable restorations. Partial ones, of
course.'

'Could Physician Trenor perform undetectable restoration?'

Everyone waited for Monsorlit's reply and again I wondered if Lesatin were
for or against Monsorlit.

'It is entirely possible although I have never observed the physician in
question in the operating arena.'

Had it been Trenor all along and not Monsorlit? Had I been mistaken? No, no,
that wasn't possible.

Something vital assured me of that.

'Thank you, physician.' Lesatin consulted his slate. 'May I call the Lady Sara?'

I stood up nervously.

'You were Lord Harlan's attendant during his… stay at the asylum, weren't
you?'

I confirmed this.

'Monsorlit was Harlan's physician, I believe,' and Lesatin looked first at
Monsorlit, who confirmed

this and then at me. 'Did he attend Harlan at the sanitarium?'

'Yes.'

Lesatin knew this, for he was referring to slates he must have made during the

inquiry Stannall

conducted.

'Did you ever have occasion to suspect Harlan was being mistreated?
Drugged into insensibility,

rather than helped to regain his sanity?'

'Yes, I did.'

'What aroused your suspicions?"

'A conversation between Gleto and… Monsorlit,' I announced, looking
accusingly at the physician

who merely watched.

'Really?' Lesatin appeared sincerely surprised. 'Can you remember this
conversation?'

'Yes, I most certainly can. Gleto had called Monsorlit to examine Harlan
because he was afraid

Harlan would revive from the drug.'

'The drug was named?'

'Yes. Cerol. Monsorlit said that there was no need to increase the dosage. He
told Gleto to have a

weekly absorption rate taken and that would give an indication when more
would be needed. Gleto said

he didn't have the personnel and Monsorlit offered to send him a repossessed
technician who could

perform the test on Harlan. Monsorlit also said that Gleto had better do the
same for the nine men who

were Trenor's patients.' My story came out in a rush because I was afraid of
being interrupted and

because I wanted desperately to say it before I lost my nerve.

Lesatin turned with anxious concern to the Councilmen. They whispered
agitatedly among themselves.

'Why didn't you bring this conversation to light in the earlier investigation?' I
was asked.

'I never got the chance. The Mil came,' I defended myself.

Monsorlit's voice asked for the right to question me and permission was given
him.

'How did you obtain the position as Harlan's attendant?' he asked me
pleasantly.

'I was placed there from the Mental Clinic.'

'Oh. You'd been a patient there?'

Watching every muscle in his controlled face, I nodded.

'How long were you a patient at the Clinic?'

'I don't remember exactly.'

'Accuracy to the minute is not required. A rough estimate is all that is
necessary.'

'Two months,' I blurted out because that number came to my mind first. It was
wrong. I could see

that in the gleam in Monsorlit's eyes. He drew out another bundle of slates
and passed them to Lesatin.

'The Councilmen will see the documented record indicates a stay of over five
months.'

He's covered up here, too. All I have to do is not get rattled. He can't beat me.
I'm right and he's

wrong. He's dangerous. They've got to believe me.

'Lady Jena,' and Monsorlit turned to the other woman in the room, a gray-
haired, gentle-faced lady,

'was the ward nurse in Lady Sara's early days with us.'

'I was indeed, poor thing.'

'Describe her condition.'

'Sir, she couldn't speak at all. She didn't seem to understand anything. They're
like that sometimes,

poor dears. Especially the civilians who came to us from Tane. But it took her
longer to understand even

the simplest things. Her early achievement tests are just too low to be
possible. I have included them in

the records.'

Lesatin hemmed and cleared his throat, looking at me with an expression
close to anger and

resentment. I saw that I had been wrong. Lesatin really wanted to clear
Monsorlit and here was my

incriminating testimony to confuse the issues already settled in his mind.

'The Lady Sara seems quite able to make herself understood now,' one of the
Elders pointed out

dryly.

'Notice, however,' Monsorlit said smoothly,'that odd labial twist. Notice the
aspiration of the hard

consonants, as if there were difficulty in controlling the speech centers.'

'A personal quirk?' asked my champion.

'Possibly,' Monsorlit admitted, but there was no conviction in his voice. 'Lady
Sara,' and he spaced

his syllables oddly, 'what is the capital of Ertoi?'

'I don't know,' I replied quickly. 'Do you?' and I directed my question to one of
the Councilmen. He

bunked at me for my insolence.

Monsorlit laughed. "They can be very shrewd.'

'Sir,' Lesatin began angrily, 'your line of questioning is irrelevant and
offensive. Lady Sara's

contribution to Lothar is great and you must be careful of your aspersions.'

'She isn't careful of hers,' Monsorlit answered tolerantly. 'They often aren't
tactful. But she is very

beautiful, isn't she?' he added kindly.

I held my breath. He couldn't be going to…

'She has only to smile,' Monsorlit continued, 'and be admired. Beautiful
women know that intelligence

is not required of them and conduct themselves accordingly. However, the
fact remains that the Lady

Sara was a patient in the Mental Defectives Clinic and she fails to remember
how long. She does not

know the capital of Ertoi and there isn't one. Here, Lady Sara, write me a few
lines. Write your name.

Even beautiful women who have attended our Mental Clinic can write.'

Monsorlit thrust a slate and stylus at me.

'I protest this preposterous treatment,' I cried.

'That's a good sentence to write, isn't it?'

The slate was put in my hands. I didn't know what to do. Lesatin and the
others were waiting with

increasing impatience. It was such a simple thing and I couldn't do it.

'I cannot write,' I said finally.

'Of course not,' Monsorlit said, turning to the Councillors. 'Her records show

that she was incapable

of learning anything except the most routine duties. How to dress herself
neatly, keep clean, act

cooperatively. That's why she was in a mental-home attendant's position. She
can learn anything by rote.

Anything.'

'You certainly cannot insist that Lady Sara has responded to rote lessons
today?' my champion

asked.

'Not entirely. I most gladly admit she has improved tremendously since she
left the Clinic. She shows

more promise of complete recovery than those records indicate possible. She
must be allowed every

opportunity to grow toward complete mental health, to restore her lost
knowledge. I suggest,

Councilman Lesatin, that she be returned to my Clinic to complete a recovery
so auspicious.'

Someone must contradict this diabolical man. I turned anxiously toward
Ferrill and saw to my horror

that his seat was empty. How could he leave me? Now, when I needed a
friend most? I burst into tears

and tried to draw back from Monsorlit as he placed a proprietary arm around
my shoulders and began to

lead me from the room. I resisted, but the man was unbelievably strong. He
led me out a side door into a

small anteroom while, in the chamber behind, the Councilmen burst into
angry questions and discussion.

'You should have come of your own accord. I did not wish so public a
humiliation for you,' Monsorlit

chided.

'You know I'm no defective. Harlan will be back and you'll be sorry.'

'Threats. Threats. Harlan can return when he wishes, but you will go back to
the Clinic and stay until

my treatments bring about a full recovery.'

'No! I am recovered. I don't need more treatment.'

'You do. One day I'll have a complete success with my technique of
restoration,' and his eyes were

fixed at a point above my head, 'mind and body. There will be no mental
blocks such as you have in the

memory synapses. It will be a complete cure.'

I stared at him. He didn't know either. I had always assumed he did. He
thought I was a Lotharian

and just didn't remember. He really believed I had been a colonist on Tane
when the first Mil attack

came. He had collaborated with Gorlot so he could prove, to himself if no one
else, that restoration itself

did not cause the mental deterioration.

'You're mad,' I cried. 'And you're wrong.'

The door opened wider and Lesatin and several other Councilmen entered.

'The charges against you are dismissed, Monsorlit,' he said gravely. 'And you
have our permission to

take this… girl with you. For all our sakes I hope you do effect a complete
cure for her.'

'It's a pity she had been so closely connected with the young Warlord. I
wondered why Harlan

tolerated her.'

'Harlan has always liked a pretty face. Look at Maritha. And then, too, Harlan
is probably grateful.'

'No, no, no,' I shouted at their pitiless faces. 'That isn't it!'

Monsorlit took my arm in one steel-fingered hand.

'She's done remarkably well considering her early ineptitude,' he said. 'I can't
imagine who could have

turned her against me.'

'No one,' I shrieked at him, trying to twist free. 'I'm not defective. I can't write
Lotharian because I

don't even come from this planet. I came from Earth, the place those corpses
on the Star-class Mil ship

came from, the planet Jokan has gone to find. I'm not from Lothar. I'm from
Earth,' I screamed

desperately, for Monsorlit was fumbling in his belt pouch and I knew what he
was seeking.

'What's this about Jokan's expedition?' 'Another planet?' 'Who's been
babbling?' The Councilmen all

asked at once.

'Delusions,' Monsorlit reassured them, smiling at me as he got the needle out
of his pouch.

'On the contrary,' a new voice said from the hall doorway. Ferrill pushed
through. 'On the contrary,

she is telling the truth. And here is a slate, written by Harlan before he left for
the Battle of Tane. It is

addressed to me. Lesatin, I suggest you read it to everyone. You see, in this
corner is the date, hard and

fast.'

Monsorlit dropped my hand as if it burned him. Even he looked his

incredulous surprise at Ferrill's

news. I ran to the ex-Warlord, weeping with relief, clinging to him. He put an
arm around me with

awkward but very reassuring gentleness.

Lesatin mumbled the phrases Harlan had written and the others peered over
his shoulder. When they

had read, they stared at me in complete confusion.

'How did you get here?' Lesatin roused himself to ask.

'Evidently on a Mil ship,' I said. 'I… don't really know. I was in shock. I'm
here. I'm me. I'm not

mentally ill.'

'But those tests we were shown? Jena is a very reliable person. A woman of
her background and

breeding would have no reason to fabricate lies,' Lesatin stopped.

'The tests were undoubtedly accurate,' Ferrill suggested sensibly. 'I doubt any
of you could

understand her language so how could you expect her to understand ours…
particularly after having been

so nearly… skinned alive.'

Monsorlit's eyes blazed as if I had suddenly changed into another person.

'How did she get here?' Lesatin repeated, dumbfounded.

'She was brought into my base hospital along with several other cases,'
Monsorlit interjected

smoothly, but there was a curious look of triumph on his face. 'I assumed at
the time she was one of the

colonists who had been attacked by the Tane. There was no reason to suppose
otherwise at the time.

We know that Gorlot had several brushes with loaded Mil ships. Some were
disabled. Undoubtedly she

was on one of them.'

'In what condition was she brought to you?' demanded Lesatin with fierce
urgency. I clutched at

Ferrill for support.

'In a state of complete shock.'

'No, no. Physically,' demanded the Councilman.

Monsorlit looked at Lesatin with surprise, then back at me as if comparing
two pictures in his mind.

'Why, much the same as she is now,' he replied unhurriedly. 'Much the same.'

'Could she have been restored?' my old champion demanded, bluntly.

Monsorlit pursed his lips. 'How could she have been? She is as rational as any
of us,' and to my

amazement he smiled at me.

'A few moments ago, you assured us she was mentally incompetent,' Lesatin
reminded him, eyes

narrowing.

I could see that Lesatin was not entirely sure my comments were rote lessons.

'My remarks on her apparent defectiveness are still valid,' Monsorlit pointed
out. 'She does not read

or write Lotharian. She does not know simple facts our children do. She still
talks with an odd accent.

But she does not know how long she was at my clinic. She most assuredly
had the violent nightmares

such as were recorded. She most certainly was incapable of anything but the
simplest, most routine tasks.

She has been in deep shock and by some miracle has survived and regained
complete mental control.

When she gained it, I do not know.' He stressed the conjunction deliberately.
'Therefore I can clinically

doubt her recollections of a conversation such as she reported here today.'

He paused to see the effect of his words. I was about to contradict him, but
Ferrill shook me quickly

and silenced me with a glance.

'But, gentlemen,' and his voice rose above the interruptions of the others,'she
presents an

incontrovertible proof that I have tried for years to have recognized. That it is
the capture by the Mil, not

the restoration, that produces deep shock. We have completely restored burn
victims and they did not go

into shock. It has been our own fears that kill us. She never heard of the Mil.
She went into deep shock,

true, but she has recovered. I believe that any Mil victim can recover, if
properly treated. Restoration has

nothing to do with it. Can you realize that?' he demanded triumphantly. '
There is your proof.'

I sagged wearily against Ferrill at the end of my strength.

'As you can see by that slate,' Ferrill drawled, 'Harlan, our beloved Regent,
has entrusted the Lady

Sara to my care. She needs it right now. You will excuse us,' and he led me
from that room.

I remember hearing Monsorlit's voice rising above the arguments of the others
as the door closed. I

had been forgotten and I was glad.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Contents <> - Prev <>

Ferrill marshaled me down the halls and back to my apartment without
stopping for anyone.

He called Linnana to bring a stiff drink and then propelled me to my bed. He
propped me up,

covering me with a shaggy blanket, took the drink from a startled Linnana
and shooed her out of the

room.

I gulped at the stimulant gratefully, disregarding the raw bite on my throat.

'Don't leave me, Ferrill,' I whispered as he turned from the bed.

'My dear aunt, not even a surprise attack by the Mil could stir me from my
post,' he said with

complete sincerity. He brought a chair to the bedside and settled himself
comfortably.

'My curiosity is boundless and you won't get rid of me until I hear everything
I want to know about

your fascinating recent past. Really, Sara, I consider it immensely rude of you
not to have relieved my

tedium these past days with this exciting disclosure. A planet, full, I hope, of
other enticing females? My,

my! Jokan will have fun. I do hope he returns with another homegrown
variety.'

His absurd raillery was more effective than any tenderly delivered
conciliations. The drink diffused its

heartening warmth and it was ridiculous to think events would not turn my

way with Ferrill putting them

into their proper perspective.

The door exploded inward and I cried out, trembling all over even after I saw
it was only Jessl.

'Who's been knocking caves down?' Jessl demanded, glaring fiercely at me.

'Easy,' snapped Ferrill, holding up a warning hand, his eyes flashing
authoritatively. 'If you've come

storming in here, you know as much as you should.'

'The Councilmen are in panic. I thought we were to leave Monsorlit alone.
And I thought news of that

new planet was to be strictly confidential. What on earth possessed you…'

'Hold your tongue, Jessl, Ferrill ordered with such force in his tone that Jessl
eyed the ex-Warlord in

respectful silence. 'Sit down.' Jessl complied.

'Now,' Ferrill continued, more calmly. 'Sara has had good cause to be
frightened of Monsorlit.

Harlan, in his infinite wisdom, chose to ignore it and none of us had the facts
to understand her concern.

During the Alert, Monsorlit threatened her that she must return to the Clinic.'
Jessl started to interrupt,

staring at me suspiciously. Ferrill held up an imperious hand, his eyes
flashing, his pose of bored

bystander forgotten. 'Don't interrupt me! That's better.

'Even if she weren't Harlan's lady, that establishment has little to recommend
it to the healthy-minded.

Consequently Sara found herself placed in an untenable position at the
meeting. I had no chance to warn

her what it was all about because I only found out by accident Lesatin had
scheduled the hearing today. I

was under the impression Harlan was to preside. You are, I believe, aware of
the terrible strain Sara has

been under,' and Ferrill's face was stern. 'I sympathize with her completely. I
doubt I could have

maintained such control were I in a similar position, struggling to survive on
her planet.'

'Then what Lesatin was saying…" Jessl stared at me anew, 'you are from
another planet?'

I nodded.

'Then what… they say about Monsorlit doing restorations,' Jessl began in a
hoarse voice, his attention

riveted to my face.

'… is nonsense,' Ferrill said in an airy voice not echoed by the tense
expression on his face. 'Her

planet is so close to the Tanes that she hadn't so much as a mark on her. She
was, understandably so, in

deep shock. Monsorlit's team discovered her and assumed she was a Tane
civilian casualty, she was

processed along with the others through the Clinic and ended, so fortuitously
as far as Lothar is

concerned, as Harlan's attendant.'

Ferrill's easy explanation gradually reassured Jessl who began to untense and
ceased looking as if he

wished he were anywhere but in the same room with me.

'But, if she were never a mental defective, then her testimony about
Monsorlit's complicity is valid,'

Jessl said.

Ferrill shook his head in exasperation. 'It is useless and wasteful to implicate
Monsorlit. No one,

except Stannall or Gleto, really wants to indict him. He's done too much
among the little people of our

world. And just as much for the rich who might want a new face. He is too
well established in people's

sympathies. His entire hospital staff worships the ground he touches. No real
evidence can be found

against him. Except Sara's testimony. And because she cannot establish when
she came out of shock,

Monsorlit has cleverly convinced the session that her recollection of a
conversation in her recovery

period is probably faulty.'

'But I can establish the moment I recovered,' I contradicted. 'It was the day
you visited Harlan with

Gorlot and four other men. We were all walking in the gardens and you said,
"Harlan, to see you this

way." Gorlot told you you had to keep your mind clear for the evening's work
and you told him he could

control your decisions but not your heart.'

'You were sane then and didn't speak out?' cried Ferrill, stunned.

'That was the day everything cleared up. Before it had all been so confused.
But I didn't know where

I was or what I was doing so I just kept quiet.'

'Continue to do so,' Ferrill suggested with authority.

'But,' and I had another horrible thought, 'if the Council-men now know I'm
from another planet,

won't they wonder about restoration?'

Ferrill shrugged this suggestion off.

'Why should they? Monsorlit has testified you weren't and he should know.'

'Loyalty? Statesmanship - better to say I wasn't, even though I was, from top
to toe, a restoree?' I

said.

'I feel certain,' said Ferrill firmly,'that the incident is closed. Council has
something of great moment to

concern itself with… preparations to attack the homeworld of the Mil itself.'

Jessl rose slowly, nodding his agreement with Ferrill's pronouncement.

'My apologies, Lady Sara, but I was deeply concerned,' he said. He bowed
respectfully to Ferrill and

left.

Ferril waited till he heard the outer door close. Then he got to his feet, smiling
broadly.

'Yes, my dear Aunt Sara, Council is going to be very busy. They'll leave you
alone and Monsorlit

alone.'

'You're sure Monsorlit will leave me alone? That I won't have to go back to
that ghastly Clinic of his

to prove anything more to him?'

'Yes, Sara, I'm sure. You don't have to fear Monsorlit any more,' and Ferrill
grinned with his secret

knowledge. 'Don't you realize why?'

'No.'

'The only reason he wanted you back was he thought he had failed in a

complete recovery. Now that

he knows you have all your old memories, now that he had proved to himself
that capture by the Mil

does not, in itself, produce insanity unless the victim has been taught to
expect it, he doesn't need you

anymore. Your case is closed as far as he's concerned. So,' and he shrugged
his thin shoulders, 'you have

nothing to fear from Monsorlit.'

I stared at Ferrill as the logic of his argument dispelled the last vestiges of my
apprehension. He was

quite right. Monsorlit had proved his point. I didn't have to worry about
returning to the Clinic. Or about

my restoration.

Ferrill had pulled the draperies back from the window. The Young Moon, the
faster nearer satellite,

was rising in the early afternoon sky, a ghostly globe on the green horizon.

'Ironic, isn't it, Sara?' he commented into the companionable silence that had
fallen. 'We've finally

dispersed the last shadow of our fears of the invincibility of the Mil. We can
stand free of any

subconscious taint of sacrilege after two thousand years at war with ourselves
and our old gods. Our

weapons can paralyze their strong armadas. Our science is conquering
superstition and releasing the last

captives from the thrall of the Mil just when no Lotharian will ever have to
fear being captured. Our

envoy speeds to bring us a new ally.'

He looked out over the city. I threw off the blanket and joined him.

'One of my planet's great statesmen said, at a very crucial time in our history,
the only thing we need

to fear is fear itself.'

Ferrill looked around, pointing a finger at me.

'"The only thing we need to fear is fear itself." I like the sense of that. It is
very sensible, you realize

from your own recent experience with fear.' Then he laughed, mockingly. 'Of
course, it doesn't make

allowances for cowards like myself.'

'Ferrill,' I said angrily,'don't give me that nonsense about being a bad Warlord
and you're glad Maxil's

got it now because…'

'But I am glad,' Ferrill objected strenuously. 'Something I can't seem to
convince you, Maxil, Harlan,

everyone… except Jokan who understands completely…' and he broke off.
He snorted, annoyed he had

risen to my baiting.

He laughed and, taking my hand, led me from the balcony.

'It's going to be an exciting era for both our planets, Sara, and I'm going to be
a part of it… even a

bystander can enjoy that much. But right now,' and his eyes danced as he
waggled his finger at me, 'I'm

afraid,' he chuckled, I'm afraid I'm hungry. Aren't you?'

I burst out laughing, dispelling the last shadows of my weeks of fearful
doubts and uncertainties.

'Have you ever known me when I wasn't?'

THE END

