VIRAGO 

MODERN CLASSICS 

Barbara Pym

Barbara Pym (1913–1980) was born in Oswestry, Shropshire. She was
educated at Huyton College, Liverpool, and St Hilda’s College, Oxford,
where she gained an Honours Degree in English Language and Literature.
During the war she served in the WRNS in Britain and Naples. From 1958–
1974 she worked as an editorial secretary at the International African
Institute. Her first novel, Some Tame Gazelle, was published in 1950, and
was followed by Excellent Women (1952), Jane and Prudence (1953), Less
than Angels (1955), A Glass of Blessings (1958) and No Fond Return of
Love (1961).

During the sixties and early seventies her writing suffered a partial

eclipse and, discouraged, she concentrated on her work for the International
African Institute, from which she retired in 1974 to live in Oxfordshire. A
renaissance in her fortunes came in 1977, when both Philip Larkin and Lord
David Cecil chose her as one of the most under-rated novelists of the
century. With astonishing speed, she emerged, after sixteen years of
obscurity, to almost instant fame and recognition. Quartet in Autumn was
published in 1977 and was shortlisted for the Booker Prize. The Sweet Dove
Died followed in 1978, and A Few Green Leaves was published
posthumously. Barbara Pym died in January 1980.

OceanofPDF.com

Also by Barbara Pym

Excellent Women
Jane and Prudence
Less than Angels

A Glass of Blessings

No Fond Return of Love

Quartet in Autumn

The Sweet Dove Died
A Few Green Leaves

Crampton Hodnet

An Unsuitable Attachment

An Academic Question

OceanofPDF.com

COPYRIGHT

Published by Hachette Digital

ISBN: 9780748131525

All characters and events in this publication, other than those clearly in the
public domain, are fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or

dead, is purely coincidental.

Copyright © Barbara Pym 1950

Introduction copyright © Mavis Cheek 2009

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the

prior permission in writing of the publisher.

Hachette Digital

Little, Brown Book Group
100 Victoria Embankment

London, EC4Y 0DY

www.hachette.co.uk

OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Also by Barbara Pym

Copyright

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER ONE

CHAPTER TWO

CHAPTER THREE

CHAPTER FOUR

CHAPTER FIVE

CHAPTER SIX

CHAPTER SEVEN

CHAPTER EIGHT

CHAPTER NINE

CHAPTER TEN

CHAPTER ELEVEN

CHAPTER TWELVE

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

CHAPTER NINETEEN

CHAPTER TWENTY

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

JANE AND PRUDENCE

NO FOND RETURN OF LOVE

OUR SPOONS CAME FROM WOOLWORTHS

A FAR CRY FROM KENSINGTON

OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION

From the opening line of Some Tame Gazelle you are safely and deliciously
in Pym Country. ‘The new curate seemed quite a nice young man, but what
a pity it was that his combinations showed, tucked carelessly into his
socks.’ The curate in question is visiting Belinda and Harriet Bede,
unmarried, middle-aged sisters living in the heart of a village parish. Plump
Harriet likes to tuck young, pale, thin curates under her substantial wing,
while the more circumspect Belinda potters through her life, comfortably
loving the Archdeacon from afar.

Harriet is much more flamboyant than her sister, and given to wearing

fashionable frocks in which she is well buoyed up by corsets. (Barbara Pym
is awfully good at writing about clothes.) These corsets, under constant
strain, frequently need mending, and are often to be found thrust beneath a
cushion when an unexpected visitor comes to call. Harriet is loved,
unrequitedly, by an adoring Italian count who asks for her hand in marriage
on a regular basis and which, on a regular basis, is declined. Both seem
quite content with this.

Belinda, who little cares for fashion, asks for nothing more than to

continue to adore the handsome, self-satisfied Archdeacon from afar, and to
loyally support him as he bemoans the heavy workload of his parish duties
which, in fact, are mostly absorbed by said pale, young curates. It is
Belinda’s task and delight, she feels, to support and explain the
Archdeacon’s sermons, which are often of great length, and totally obscure.
Here, one of the Pym trademarks is used to great effect – the sharp and
skilful quoting of poetry and various texts. Barbara was extraordinarily
well-read and could find the perfect quotation for any occasion. Robert
‘Jock’ Liddell wrote that she had ‘a genius for quotation which has
probably never been equalled’. When the Archdeacon finishes a particularly
long and unintelligible sermon, she has him quote Edward Young (a poet
also known for his somewhat lengthy and disconnected texts):

Say dreamers of gay dreams,

How will you weather an eternal night,
Where such expedients fail?

The bored congregation, she says, ‘had been dreaming gay dreams most of
the morning … and had only allowed their thoughts to wander when it had
passed beyond their comprehension.’

Belinda often compares herself, unfavourably, to Archdeacon Hoccleve’s

capable and more literary wife. Agatha is cool, elegant, and unsympathetic.
She is the kind of woman who is a glad martyr to her rheumatism, and takes
the waters at Karlsbad for her holidays. And she is based on someone
Barbara knew and disliked at Oxford. This is another of Barbara Pym’s
authorial characteristics: she loved to include real people in her books. Even
the sisters, Harriet and Belinda, are loosely based on herself and Hilary, her
elder sister. When she began writing Some Tame Gazelle in 1934, at the
astonishingly young age of twenty-one, she imagined them both, she said in
her diary, ‘as spinsters of fiftyish’.

Barbara was a great one for falling in and out of love as often, and

usually as hopelessly, as possible – and a great one for using her
experiences in her books. Archdeacon Hoccleve is also based on a real
person, an old flame who rejected Barbara at Oxford. One can only wonder
on whom the famous librarian, Nathaniel Mold, and the visiting bishop
from Africa, Theodore Grote, are based when they make their unsettling
and unwelcome visits to each of the sisters in turn. The sense of glee she
shows in the writing of these characters is practically palpable. Beware!
Thus fall all miscreants in a sharp-eyed novelist’s life – eventually.

High comedy the book may be but perhaps one of her greatest gifts as a

novelist is that she puts her own hand up to the frailties and foibles, the
affectations and absurdities that her characters contain and endure. As with
all the best writers of comedy, she is non-judgemental and, though beady-
eyed, she is also sympathetic, particularly in matters of the heart and how
foolishly they can make us behave. From the very first she proved herself to
be an accomplished novelist of sharply observed comedies of manners
where, though life appears to be carrying on calmly and evenly, beneath its
façade lie dark undercurrents, hidden desires and unsuitable attachments.

Barbara wrote in her diary that she ‘must work at my novel, that is the

only thing there is and the only way to find any happiness at present … I

want Liebe but I would be satisfied if my novel could be published.’ That
novel was Some Tame Gazelle, and it set the pattern for all the rest.

Some tame gazelle, or some gentle dove:
Something to love, oh, something to love!

After many drafts Some Tame Gazelle was finally published by Jonathan
Cape in 1950. Her friend from Oxford, Jock Liddell, who read it in its first
incarnation and in its last before she offered it to publishers said, ‘The
wonderful thing is that you haven’t spoiled it – it is still the book we knew
and loved – and yet it is tidy and shapely, and every blot removed.’

It was received with ecstatic reviews. The Observer said, ‘She creates a

small well-bred Eden, but contrives to insert a little old Adam as well.’ The
Daily Telegraph wrote, ‘Miss Pym’s sharp fresh fun is all her own’, while
the Manchester Guardian called it ‘An enchanting book about village life,
but no more to be described than a delicious taste or smell.’ And the Church
Times, which might be expected to be a little sour, given the harsh light her
books shone upon the life and ways of the clergy, had nothing but praise for
it: ‘We needn’t bring Jane Austen into it, but Miss Pym is writing in a great
tradition and she knows it.’ Yes, she most certainly does. She knows exactly
how to take a small community of folk and make its story timeless,
universal and very, very funny.

Barbara went on to publish a further five critically well-received novels

before, in 1963, with quite extraordinary lack of foresight, Cape’s Tom
Maschler refused to publish her next, An Unsuitable Attachment. Many
years later she wrote to Philip Larkin that she and her sister Hilary had
invented a pudding which they called ‘a Maschler – a sort of milky jelly’ –
which is just the kind of thing that might happen in a Barbara Pym novel.

When Philip Larkin, perhaps Barbara’s greatest fan and champion,

discovered that Cape had rejected her, he was outraged at the Maschler
decision, writing to her that:

I can’t understand why the publishers are taking this line … it seems a
sad state of affairs if such tender, perceptive and intelligent work can’t

see the light, just because some tasteless chump thinks it won’t ‘go’ in
paperback.

Suffice it to say that when An Unsuitable Attachment did get published,
posthumously in 1982, it was received with rave reviews.

But to begin at the beginning … For those readers who have yet to

discover Miss Barbara Pym, this debut novel will be full of delights and
surprises; for those of us who have read and loved her books for years, this
new edition of the first of her novels is a fitting tribute to her brilliant,
humorous story-telling and the enduring charm of her writer’s eye. Some
Tame Gazelle is still my personal favourite for its sparkling high comedy
and its treasury of characters, but rereading the entire canon, ten novels in
all, has been pure bliss. She makes me smile, laugh out loud, consider my
own foibles and fantasies, and, above all, suffer real regret when I reach the
final page. Of how many authors can you honestly say that?

Mavis Cheek

November 2008

OceanofPDF.com

Some tame gazelle, or some gentle dove:
Something to love, oh, something to love!

THOMAS HAYNES BAYLY

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER ONE

The new curate seemed quite a nice young man, but what a pity it was that
his combinations showed, tucked carelessly into his socks, when he sat
down. Belinda had noticed it when they had met him for the first time at the
vicarage last week and had felt quite embarrassed. Perhaps Harriet could
say something to him about it. Her blunt jolly manner could carry off these
little awkwardnesses much better than Belinda’s timidity. Of course he
might think it none of their business, as indeed it was not, but Belinda
rather doubted whether he thought at all, if one were to judge by the quality
of his first sermon.

‘If only we could get back some of the fervour and eloquence of the

seventeenth century in the pulpit today,’ she had said to her sister Harriet, a
plump elegant spinster in the middle fifties.

‘Oh, we don’t want that kind of thing here,’ Harriet had said in her

downright way, for she had long ago given up all intellectual pursuits, while
Belinda, who had never been considered the clever one, still retained some
smattering of the culture acquired in her college days. Even now a light
would shine in her mild greenish eyes, so decorously hidden behind horn-
rimmed spectacles, at the mention of Young’s Night Thoughts or the dear
Earl of Rochester’s Poems on Several Occasions.

Neither she nor Harriet had ever married, but Harriet was making her

usual fuss over the new curate and was obviously prepared to be quite as
silly over him as she had been over his predecessors. She was especially
given to cherishing young clergymen, and her frequent excursions to the
curates’ lodgings had often given rise to talk, for people did like a bit of
gossip, especially about a respectable spinster and church worker like Miss
Harriet Bede. There was naturally nothing scandalous about these visits, as
she always took with her a newly baked cake, some fresh eggs or fruit – for
the poor young men always looked half starved – or even a hand-knitted
pullover or pair of socks, begun by her in a burst of enthusiasm and usually

finished, more soberly, by Belinda. And then of course she would ask them
to supper.

Was it tonight he was coming? Belinda wondered vaguely. It must be

tonight, she decided, catching sight of a bowl of exceptionally fine pears on
the little table by the window, and expensive bought chrysanthemums in the
vases when there were perfectly good Michaelmas daisies in the garden.
Dear Harriet, she wasn’t really extravagant, only rather too lavish in her
hospitality. The Reverend Edgar Donne was surely a simple young man and
would not expect much. Naturally one did not think of the clergy as
expecting anything in the way of material luxuries … Belinda paused, for
she was remembering the vicar, Archdeacon Hoccleve, and how one
couldn’t really say that about him. But then dear Henry was different, in
some ways not like a clergyman at all. For although Belinda had loved him
faithfully for over thirty years, she sometimes had to admit that he had very
few of the obvious virtues that one somehow expected of one’s parish
priest. His letter in this month’s parish magazine, announcing the arrival of
the new curate, had a peevish and condescending tone that a stranger might
have thought not quite the thing for an archdeacon. But the village was used
to it.

‘The Reverend Edgar Donne – the name is of course pronounced Dunne

– will be with us by the time you read these words’, he wrote. ‘Nobody will
be more glad to welcome him than I myself, for whom these last few weeks
have been more trying than any of you can possibly imagine. Without a
curate it has been impossible for me to take the holiday I so badly need and
I have been forced to cancel some of the services because I have not felt
equal to taking them, as the ready help I looked for from fellow priests in
neighbouring parishes has not been forthcoming…’

the Archdeacon so much, and as he had quarrelled with Canon Glover what
could he expect? thought Belinda, almost wishing that she were Deaconess
Bede and could enter the pulpit herself. But even a deaconess was not
permitted to celebrate Holy Communion – it was of course the early
services which had been cancelled – whereas in the Nonconformist
churches, she believed, women ministers had equal status with men…

‘B’linda!’ Harriet’s impatient voice interrupted her thoughts, ‘it’s nearly

seven and Mr Donne will soon be here.’ Harriet appeared in the doorway,

wearing only a celanese vest and knickers, as if her actual presence in the
room would make Belinda realize more fully how late it was.

‘Why, Harriet, the curtains aren’t drawn,’ exclaimed Belinda in an

agitated tone. ‘Anybody might see into the room! And you know I never
take as long to get ready as you do.’

‘All the same Mr Donne will probably be punctual,’ said Harriet, ‘and it

would be terrible if neither of us was ready. I’ve borrowed your lace scarf,
as I must have something to cover up the neck of my green frock. Perhaps it
would have been better if I hadn’t tried to alter it to a Vee.’

‘Yes, dear.’ Belinda spoke rather absently, for by now she was occupied

with the problem of what she should wear. She hoped that Harriet had not
also borrowed her black velvet bridge coat, as she wanted it herself on these
late September evenings. But then Harriet was probably too stout for it,
although she liked her clothes to fit tightly and always wore an elastic roll-
on corset.

In her room Belinda took out her blue marocain, a rather dim dress of the

kind known as ‘semi-evening’. Quite good enough for the curate, she
decided, though if the Archdeacon had been coming as well she would
probably have worn her velvet. She did hope that Harriet wouldn’t put on a
lot of lipstick, it was so unsuitable…

At that moment there was a ring at the bell and an agitated call from

Harriet.

‘Belinda, you go! I haven’t finished doing my hair.’
‘But surely Emily will go?’ said Belinda. She was wondering whether to

wear her little seed-pearl brooch or not.

‘No, Emily can’t go. She’s putting the sauce on the chicken.’
Belinda hurried downstairs without the little brooch. She felt flustered

and incomplete.

The figure on the doorstep might have been any of the other curates,

except that Mr Donne favoured a rather unfashionably high clerical collar.
He doesn’t remember me, thought Belinda, as she replied to his rather
puzzled greeting.

‘This is Miss Bede’s house?’ he asked, hesitating on the threshold.
‘Yes, I am Miss Bede,’ said Belinda with simple dignity, ‘but I expect

you know my sister better.’

‘Ah, you must be Miss Belinda Bede,’ he announced, triumphant at

having placed her. ‘I’ve heard a lot about you from the Archdeacon.’

eager.

curate primly.

almost unpleasant. If that was what he had really said, of course. It didn’t
sound at all like the Archdeacon, who never said the sort of things
clergymen ought to say. It was so odd to think of him as being a clergyman
at all … Belinda’s thoughts slipped back to her college days when they had
been students together. Most odd … and yet there was no sadness or
bitterness in her mind as she thought of him. It was obvious that poor
Agatha had a very difficult time with him, although by her scheming she
had made him an archdeacon. Their cook had told the Bedes’ Emily who
had told Harriet that the Archdeacon was very difficult to get up in the
mornings, and of course one knew that he always made his curates do the
early services which was really rather slack, because it wasn’t as if he were
very old or weak in health. And yet he had such charm, even now…

The curate coughed nervously and ventured a remark about the weather.
‘Yes, I love September,’ agreed Belinda, guilty at having let her thoughts

wander from her guest. ‘Michaelmas daisies and blackberries and
comforting things like fires in the evening again and knitting.’

room as if he already expected to see the beginnings of a pullover for
himself. But all that Belinda’s cretonne work bag contained was a pink
lacy-looking garment, a winter vest for herself. It was so annoying of Miss
Jenner not to have any more ‘Perliknit’ left. She had had to buy a slightly
thicker wool of a rather brighter pink to finish it off.

firm step was heard on the stairs and Harriet came into the room, radiant in
flowered voile. Tropical flowers rioted over her plump body. The
background was the green of the jungle, the blossoms were crimson and
mauve, of an unknown species. Harriet was still attractive in a fat Teutonic
way. She did not wear her pince-nez when curates came to supper.

The curate sprang up eagerly and seemed suddenly to lose some of his

shyness

‘Good evening, Mr Donne,’ said Harriet, ‘I’m afraid I haven’t my sister’s

punctual ways, but I’m sure she has been entertaining you better than I

could have done. I had a classical education and it isn’t a very good training
for scintillating conversation.’ She sat down rather heavily on the sofa
beside him. ‘Now we must not forget that the name is pronounced Dunne,’
she declared roguishly.

don’t pronounce it that way. I can’t imagine why the Archdeacon thought I
did.’

‘He was of course thinking of the seventeenth-century poet of that name,’

said Belinda stoutly. The truth was, of course, that dear Henry could never
resist a literary allusion and was delighted, in the way that children and
scholars sometimes are, if it was one that the majority of his parishioners
did not understand.

Harriet. ‘I should like to see the Archdeacon having to climb down.’

‘It makes one feel quite odd to have one’s name mispronounced or

misspelt,’ said Belinda evenly. ‘Almost like a different person.’

‘Oh, yes,’ agreed Harriet, ‘like Gorringe’s catalogue.’
The curate looked politely interested but puzzled.
‘You see,’ Harriet explained, ‘they once sent me a catalogue addressed to

Miss Bode, and somehow I’m so lazy that I never bothered to correct it. So
now I have a dual personality. I always feel Miss Bode is my dowdy self,
rather a frumpish old thing.’

‘She must certainly be most unlike Miss Bede,’ blurted out Mr Donne

with surprising gallantry.

Harriet protested amid delighted giggles. Belinda felt rather left out and

found her eyes fixed on the curate’s combinations, which still showed.
Surely it was much too warm for such garments, unless perhaps he wore
them all the year round?

During the short silence which followed, the tinkling of a cowbell was

heard. The sisters had brought it back from a holiday in Switzerland and it
was now used as a gong.

‘Ah, dinner,’ said Harriet. ‘Come, Mr Donne, you shall take me in,’ she

added with mock solemnity.

Mr Donne was quite equal to the occasion, for he had all the

qualifications of a typical curate. Indeed, his maternal grandfather had been
a bishop.

other, with the curate in the middle. Harriet carved the boiled chicken
smothered in white sauce very capably. She gave the curate all the best
white meat.

came to supper for the first time? Belinda wondered. It was certainly an
established ritual at their house and it seemed somehow right for a new
curate. The coldness, the whiteness, the muffling with sauce, perhaps even
the sharpness added by the slices of lemon, there was something
appropriate here, even if Belinda could not see exactly what it was.

very kindly promised me some apples.’

Harriet looked rather annoyed. ‘Their apples haven’t done at all well this

year,’ she said, ‘and I always think those red ones are rather tasteless. You
must take some of our Cox’s Oranges with you when you go.’

The curate murmured grateful thanks.
‘How is Mrs Hoccleve’s rheumatism?’ asked Belinda.
‘Not very much better,’ he replied. ‘I hear she is going to Karlsbad in

October. Apparently the waters there are very good.’

‘Nettles are an excellent thing, I believe,’ said Harriet.
‘Indeed?’ Mr Donne looked so interested that he must have found it quite

a strain. ‘How should they be used?’

‘Oh, I don’t really know,’ Harriet beamed. ‘Just nettles. Boiled, perhaps.

People will try all sorts of odd remedies,’ she added, with the complacency
of one who is perfectly healthy.

‘Poor Agatha,’ murmured Belinda, although she could not really feel

very sympathetic.

There was a slight lapse in the conversation.
‘I hear you are a rowing man,’ said Belinda, with what she felt was rather

forced enthusiasm.

been with any piece of information. ‘I can just imagine you stroking an
eight.’

‘Well, actually, I haven’t done any for some time, but I used to be very

keen.’ The curate looked down at his chicken bone as if he would like to
take it up in his fingers and gnaw it. He was not very well fed at his
lodgings and the evening meal was particularly scrappy.

on Mr Donne and said brightly, ‘Like Queen Victoria, you know, so much
more sensible and convenient.’

He followed her example eagerly. Belinda looked on with some distaste.

If only Harriet could see how foolish she looked. The white sauce was
beginning to smear itself on her face.

‘I expect you are quite bewildered meeting so many new people,’ she

said, leading the conversation back into suitable channels.

‘Yes, in a way I am, but I find it fairly easy to remember them so far. I

came across Miss Liversidge this afternoon in the village and have
persuaded her to address a meeting of the Mothers’ Union. She seems to
have had a great many interesting experiences.’

Belinda smiled. The idea of Edith Liversidge addressing the Mothers’

Union amused her. One never knew what she might say to them and she
would hardly set them a good example of tidiness. Dear Edith, she was
always such a mess.

‘She’s a kind of decayed gentlewoman,’ said Harriet comfortably,

helping the curate to trifle.

‘Oh no, Harriet,’ Belinda protested. Nobody could call Edith decayed and

sometimes one almost forgot that she was a gentlewoman, with her cropped
grey hair, her shabby clothes which weren’t even the legendary ‘good
tweeds’ of her kind and her blunt, almost rough, way of speaking. ‘Miss
Liversidge is really splendid,’ she declared and then wondered why one
always said that Edith was ‘splendid’. It was probably because she hadn’t
very much money, was tough and wiry, dug vigorously in her garden and
kept goats. Also, she had travelled abroad a good deal and had done some
relief work after the 1914 war among refugees in the Balkans. Work of
rather an unpleasant nature too, something to do with sanitation. Belinda
hoped that Harriet wouldn’t mention it in front of Mr Donne. ‘Of course she
has made a home for poor Miss Aspinall, who’s a kind of relation,’ she said
hastily. ‘I always thinks it’s very unselfish to have a comparative stranger to
live with you when you’ve been used to living alone.’

with rather disagreeable unctuousness.

‘Oh, Mr Donne, I can’t imagine you sharing your home with Connie

Aspinall,’ Harriet burst out, ‘she’s so dreary.’

Mr Donne smiled. ‘Well, perhaps I didn’t mean to be taken quite

literally,’ he said.

talk of nothing but the days when she used to be companion to a lady in
Belgrave Square who was a kind of relation of one of Queen Alexandra’s
Ladies-in-Waiting.’

‘She plays the harp very beautifully,’ murmured Belinda weakly, for poor

Connie was really rather uninteresting and it was hard to think of anything
nice to say about her.

one time she had wanted to call it the lounge, but Belinda would not hear of
it. She had finally won her point by reminding Harriet of how much their
dear mother would have disliked it.

sofa with the curate and Belinda in one of the armchairs. Belinda took out
her knitting and went on doing it rather self-consciously. It was beginning
to look so very much like an undergarment for herself. The curate’s
combinations must be ‘Meridian’, she thought. It was nice and warm for
pyjamas, too, in fact Harriet herself wore it in the winter. The close fabric
fitted her plump body like a woolly skin.

While they were drinking their coffee, Harriet went to the little table by

the window and took up the bowl of pears which Belinda had noticed
earlier in the evening.

‘Now you must have a pear,’ she insisted. ‘Do you know, when we were

children our mother used to say that we could never keep fruit on the
sideboard.’

Belinda would have liked to add that they couldn’t now, and that it was

only because they had been having the curate to supper that there had been
anything more than a withered apple or orange in the bowl this evening.
Harriet’s appetite was just as rapacious in her fifties as it had been in her
teens.

The curate helped himself to a pear and began to peel it. He seemed to be

getting rather sticky and there was some giggling and interchange of large
handkerchiefs between him and Harriet.

Belinda went on quietly with her knitting. The evening promised to be

just like so many other evenings when other curates had come to supper.
There was something almost frightening and at the same time comforting

about the sameness of it all. It was odd that Harriet should always have
been so fond of curates. They were so immature and always made the same
kind of conversation. Now the Archdeacon was altogether different. One
never knew what he might say, except that it was certain to be something
unexpected and provocative. Besides, it was really more suitable to lavish
one’s affection on somebody of a riper age, as it was obviously natural that
one should lavish it on somebody. Indeed, one of Belinda’s favourite
quotations, taken from the works of a minor English poet, was

Some tame gazelle, or some gentle dove:
Something to love, oh, something to love!

Belinda, having loved the Archdeacon when she was twenty and not having
found anyone to replace him since, had naturally got into the habit of loving
him, though with the years her passion had mellowed into a comfortable
feeling, more like the cosiness of a winter evening by the fire than the
uncertain rapture of a spring morning.

Harriet’s tittering laugh disturbed Belinda’s quiet thoughts. ‘Oh, Mr

Donne, I’m not quite as stupid as you think! I used to know some Latin. Ah
quotiens illum doluit properare Calypso,’ she retorted, flinging at him
triumphantly the last remnants of her classical education.

Can she be hinting at me to go? he wondered, but then decided that she

had probably long ago forgotten the meaning of the line. All the same it was
getting late. He mustn’t outstay his welcome and the elder Miss Bede had
yawned once or twice, although she stifled it very politely.

Despite protests from Harriet, they were soon in the hall and the curate

was putting on his overcoat. Harriet was fussing round him like a motherly
hen.

‘Why, of course, it’s the garden party tomorrow,’ said Belinda, suddenly

feeling very tired. ‘There will be such a lot to do.’

The curate sighed with an affectation of weariness. ‘I shall be almost glad

when it is over,’ he said. ‘These functions are always very tiring for us.’

Harriet smiled understandingly, as if including herself in the select

brotherhood of the clergy. ‘Never mind,’ she said, ‘there will be the coconut
shies. I always love them. And you’ll get a good tea. I am in charge of the
tea garden.’

Belinda was able to slip quietly into the background. She went into the
drawing-room and began to tidy it, plumping up the cushions and removing
the remains of the pears they had eaten. She put her knitting into its
cretonne bag and took the parish magazine to read in bed. There was a nice
new serial in it, all about a drunken organist and a young bank clerk, who
was also a lay reader and had been wrongfully accused of embezzlement.
And of course the Archdeacon’s letter was always worth a second reading.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWO

Although the Misses Bede had a maid they were both quite domesticated
and helped her in various small ways, clearing away the breakfast things,
dusting their own bedrooms and doing a little cooking when they felt like it.
On this particular morning, however, which was the day of the vicarage
garden party, Belinda decided that she could miss doing her room with a
clear conscience, as there were so many more important things to be done.
It was unlikely that Miss Liversidge would be visiting them and putting
them to shame by writing ‘E. Liversidge’ with her finger, as she had once
done when Emily had neglected to dust the piano. Typical of Edith, of
course, going straight to the point with no beating about the bush. Not that
she could talk either, with dog’s hairs all over the carpet and the washing-up
left overnight.

This morning, as she went about humming God moves in a mysterious

way, Belinda wondered what to do first. She had to arrange for some deck-
chairs they had promised to be taken over to the vicarage. The cake she had
made to be raffled – the Archdeacon was broad-minded and didn’t
disapprove of such things – must be finished off with its mauve paper frill.
The seams of Harriet’s crêpe de Chine dress had to be let out, as Harriet
seemed to have grown stouter since she had last worn it. Perhaps that was
the most important thing of all, for Harriet intended to wear it that
afternoon.

While she was sewing, Belinda began to wonder what everyone would be

wearing at the garden party. Agatha Hoccleve would of course wear a nice
suitable dress, but nothing extreme or daring. As the wife of an archdeacon
she always had very good clothes, which seemed somehow to emphasize
the fact that her father had been a bishop. Then there was Edith Liversidge,
who would look odd in the familiar old-fashioned grey costume, whose
unfashionably narrow shoulders combined with Edith’s broad hips made her
look rather like a lighthouse. Her relation, Miss Aspinall, would wear a
fluttering blue or grey dress with a great many scarves and draperies, and

she would, as always, carry that mysterious little beaded bag without which
she was never seen anywhere. Undoubtedly the most magnificent person
there would be Lady Clara Boulding, who was to perform the opening
ceremony. It was of course fitting that this should be so, as she was the
daughter of an earl and the widow of their former Member of Parliment, an
excellent man in his way, although he had never been known to speak in the
House except on one occasion, when he had asked if a window might be
opened or shut.

her sister, who twitched about impatiently, while Belinda ran round her with
her mouth full of pins.

Harriet was having one of her tirades against the Archdeacon.
‘All that nonsense in the parish magazine about him needing a holiday,’

she stormed. ‘If that’s so, why doesn’t he go to Karlsbad with Agatha?
Unless she wants a holiday away from him – you could hardly blame her if
she preferred to go alone. I certainly would.’

‘But surely Agatha isn’t going to Karlsbad alone?’ asked Belinda

eagerly.

‘Well, their Florrie told Emily that she and cook aren’t looking forward to

managing the Archdeacon by themselves, so it looks as if he isn’t going
with her. I think it would be nicer if he went too, then we might have a good
sermon for a change. I never heard anything so depressing in my life as that
horrid thing he read last Sunday – all about worms, and such stilted
language. Edith Liversidge walked out in the middle, and’ – Harriet
chortled at the memory of it – ‘one of the churchwardens ran after her with
a glass of water, thinking she felt faint or something.’

‘But Harriet,’ said Belinda gently, ‘Henry was reading a passage from

Urn Burial, I thought he read it magnificently,’ she sighed. Of course the
real truth of the matter was that poor Henry was too lazy to write sermons
of his own and somehow one didn’t think of him as being clever in a
theological kind of way. That is, no scholarly study of any of St Paul’s
Epistles had as yet appeared under Archdeacon Hoccleve’s name, although
he had once remarked to Belinda that he thought the Apocalyptic literature
remarkably fine.

Harriet continued her tirade. ‘If it weren’t so far to walk,’ she said, ‘I

should certainly go to Edward Plowman’s church; he does at least preach
good homely sermons that everyone can understand. He works

systematically through the Ten Commandments and the Beatitudes, I
believe; much the most sensible thing to do. Besides, he’s such a nice man.’

biretta and has incense in the church. It’s all so – well – Romish.’ Broad-
minded as she was, Belinda was unable to keep a note of horror out of her
voice.

Harriet became defiant. ‘Edward Plowman is such a fine-looking man,

too,’ she declared. ‘Like Cardinal Newman.’

‘Oh, no, Harriet,’ protested Belinda. ‘Cardinal Newman had a much

bigger nose. And besides, he really did go over, you know, and I’m sure
Edward Plowman would never do that.’

‘Oh, then I must have been thinking of somebody else,’ said Harriet

vaguely. ‘Anyway,’ she went on, ‘Mr Donne could certainly preach better
sermons than the Archdeacon, I’m sure.’ She pulled the dress off over her
head. ‘You needn’t bother to oversew the seams – they won’t show.’

When Belinda had finished the sewing she decided that she had better go

over to the vicarage to see if she could help Agatha in any way. It did not
take her long to reach the vicarage gate, as it was very near her own house.
When they had finally decided to spend their old age together, Harriet had
insisted that they should be well in touch with the affairs of the parish.
Belinda had not felt so strongly about it, although when Archdeacon
Hoccleve had been made vicar she was naturally glad that their house was
so near his. She imagined friendly poppings in and out but somehow, dear
Henry not being quite like other clergymen, it hadn’t worked out like that.
And then of course there was Agatha. It was difficult to be completely
informal with her, either because of her father having been a bishop or for
some more subtle reason, Belinda had never been quite sure which.

the picturesque and would have liked a haha, a ruined temple, grottoes,
waterfalls and gloomily overhanging trees. He fancied himself to be rather
like one of those eighteenth-century clergymen suffering from the spleen,
but Agatha was a practical woman, who liked neat borders and smooth
lawns, flowers in the front garden and vegetables at the back. So the
vicarage garden, as Belinda saw it on this September morning, was
admirably suited to a garden party but there were no grottoes.

Belinda walked up to the front door, but before she had time to ring the

bell Agatha appeared, carrying many bundles of brightly coloured paper.

She was wearing a plain but well-cut dress of striped Macclesfield silk and
looked rather harassed.

‘How are you, Agatha?’ asked Belinda. ‘I’ve come to see if there’s

anything I can do to help and I must see the Archdeacon about the Sunday
School children’s recitations.’

‘Henry is having a bath,’ said Agatha shortly.
Surely rather late? thought Belinda. It was past eleven and oughtn’t an

archdeacon to rise earlier than that?

‘So of course you can’t see him now,’ continued Agatha in the same tone

of voice, which implied that she had the privilege not allowed to Belinda of
seeing an archdeacon in his bath. ‘You will have to wait,’ she concluded,
with a note of something like triumph in her voice.

formidable in the mornings. In the evenings she was often quite affable and
would talk about begonias and the best way to pickle walnuts.

‘You seem very busy,’ said Belinda, moving towards Agatha as if to help

her. ‘Can’t I do something while I’m waiting for the Archdeacon?’

stall,’ she said, thinking that Belinda Bede was rather a nuisance although
she no doubt meant well. ‘You might help me to pin the coloured paper
round it. I thought green and orange and perhaps red would show off the
vegetables rather nicely.’

‘What lovely marrows!’ exclaimed Belinda, catching sight of them

among a heap of miscellaneous garden produce. They were gleaming
yellow and dark green, with pale stripes. Surely the poor soil of the vicarage
garden could not have produced such beauties?

‘Yes, they are fine,’ agreed Agatha. ‘They are from Count Bianco’s

garden. He brought them round himself early this morning.’

‘Poor old Count Bianco,’ said Belinda gently. Ricardo Bianco was an

Italian count, who for some unexplained reason had settled in the village
many years ago. He was a gentle melancholy man, beloved by everyone for
his generosity and courtly manners and he had admired Harriet Bede for
more years than could now be remembered. He had the habit of asking her
to marry him every now and then, and Harriet, although she always refused
him, was really very fond of him and often asked his advice about her
gardening problems. Gardening and his childhood in Naples were his chief
topics of conversation, though he would occasionally enjoy a melancholy

talk about his old friend John Akenside, who had been killed in a riot in
Prague, when he had just been sitting at an open-air café taking a glass of
wine, as was his custom in the evening, doing no harm to anybody.
‘Ricardo is so devoted to Harriet,’ said Belinda, giving the words a full
meaning which was not lost on Agatha Hoccleve.

Agatha went rather pink and said angrily, ‘Count Bianco comes of a very

old Italian family. I always think he and Lady Clara Boulding would be
very suited to each other, but of course her father’s earldom was only a
nineteenth-century creation,’ she mused.

would be at all suited to each other,’ she said, repeating his Christian name
with triumph. ‘Harriet and Ricardo have a great many tastes in common,
especially gardening. Why, whenever he comes to our house he nearly
always brings with him some roots or seeds …’ here Belinda broke off,
aware that this sounded rather ridiculous, but Agatha did not seem to have
noticed. She was just opening her mouth to say something else, when their
attention was diverted by somebody calling out in a loud voice.

Belinda recognized the voice as that of the Archdeacon. He was leaning

out of one of the upper windows, calling to Agatha, and he sounded very
peevish. Belinda thought he looked so handsome in his dark green dressing-
gown with his hair all ruffled. The years had dealt kindly with him and he
had grown neither bald nor fat. It was Agatha who seemed to have suffered
most. Her pointed face had lost the elfin charm which had delighted many
and now looked drawn and harassed. She had rheumatism too, but Belinda
realized that she would have to have something out of self-defence and
perhaps with the passing of the years it had become a reality. One never
knew.

The voice went on calling. It seemed that the moths had got into the

Archdeacon’s grey suit and why had Agatha been so grossly neglectful as to
let this happen? The tirade was audible to anyone in the garden or in the
road beyond.

Belinda turned away from the window and began to hang festoons of

green paper along the top of the stall. The gardener, who was weeding one
of the flower beds nearby, also turned away. He could not bear the
Venerable Hoccleve, as the servants called him. He was a bit mad in his
opinion, wanting yew trees on the lawn and something he called a ha-ha,
which no gardener had ever heard of.

Eventually Agatha returned to the business of decorating, looking

extremely annoyed, but not mentioning the incident. She began to take
down all Belinda’s decorations and arrange them another way. Belinda
thought it better to say nothing, so they went on with their work in silence.
At last Belinda, who felt rather uncomfortable, drew Agatha’s attention to
the arrangement of the marrows.

‘I think they would look rather effective in a kind of pyramid, if it could

be managed,’ she suggested, thinking to herself that it would obviously be
better if Agatha were to humour dear Henry a little more. But of course
Belinda could hardly give an archdeacon’s wife a few hints on how to
manage her husband.

At that moment one of the marrows fell over and the pyramid had to be

rebuilt. While they were doing this, the Archdeacon came out on to the
lawn.

‘Good morning,’ he said, ignoring his wife. ‘I see that I have kept you

waiting, but so many annoying things have happened that it was quite
impossible to be ready any sooner.’ He darted a quick, angry glance at
Agatha.

Belinda spoke hastily in order to change the subject.
‘I’ve brought a list of the recitations the children have learnt, so you can

choose which ones you think best from it,’ she said, knowing perfectly well
that he would find fault with the pieces and ask why they had not been
taught more Middle English lyrics or passages from Gower and Chaucer.

He smiled with an affectation of weariness and then sighed. ‘Ah, yes.

There is so much to be done before this afternoon. I haven’t been able to
sleep for thinking about it. Nobody can possibly know how much I have to
do,’ he went on, with another meaning glance at Agatha.

called you at eight. I was up at seven.’

The Archdeacon laughed and began to pace about the lawn with his

hands in his pockets. Belinda was embarrassed and began to walk slowly
towards the house. Eventually the Archdeacon followed. They walked
together into his study. He was smiling to himself in a sardonic way that
Belinda found very disconcerting. It was unsuitable for a clergyman to look
sardonic. Perhaps Harriet was right to prefer the more conventional Mr
Plowman and Mr Donne.

to flattery.

very fine and you read it so well.’

‘Ah, yes. Do you remember when I used to read Milton to you?’ he said,

his thoughts going back to the days when Belinda’s frank adoration had
been so flattering. By this time he had forgotten how bored he had been by
her constancy. Agatha never asked him to read aloud to her when they were
alone together in the evenings. ‘Do you remember the magnificent opening
lines of Samson Agonistes?’ he asked, warming to his subject and looking
dangerously on the brink of reminding her of them. Indeed, the first words
were already out of his mouth when Belinda interrupted him, and directed
his attention to the matter in hand. There was of course nothing she would
have liked better than to hear dear Henry reciting Milton, but somehow with
Agatha outside and so much to be done it didn’t seem quite the thing. Also,
it was the morning and it seemed a little odd to be thinking about poetry
before luncheon.

‘Now,’ she said, ‘what about these recitations? I have a list of the ones

they know, so I think perhaps you’d better let me choose the most suitable
ones. I know you must be very busy with other things,’ she added
soothingly, ‘and even though Mr Donne can help you, I know that you like
to see to everything personally.’

‘I doubt whether our friend Donne will be much help,’ said the

Archdeacon. ‘His sermons are very poor. He and Edward Plowman are
about a match for each other.’

‘Oh, but one must be tolerant,’ said Belinda, ‘and many people prefer a

simple sermon. I’ve heard people say that Edward Plowman is considered
quite a saint in his parish.’

The Archdeacon laughed rather bitterly. ‘Do you wonder when his parish

consists almost entirely of doting spinsters?’ he said. It was one of the
Archdeacon’s grievances that people never made a fuss of him as they did
of Father Plowman or of the younger curates, although he pretended to
despise such adulation. And then too, Lady Clara Boulding, whose country
seat lay midway between the two villages, had chosen to attend Plowman’s
church rather than his. The Archdeacon could not help feeling bitter about
this, for although Belinda might put a pound note into the collection bag on

Easter Sunday, it was hardly the same as Lady Clara’s five or ten. In these
days of poverty the spirit in which it was given counted for very little.

mockery. ‘After all, it isn’t always our fault …’ she stopped in confusion,
fearing that he might make some sarcastic retort.

‘No, women like to have something to dote on,’ he said mildly enough, ‘I

have noticed that. And we in the Church are usually the victims.’

‘We are all in the Church,’ said Belinda gently. ‘I think I should go out

into the garden again and help Agatha. There must still be a great deal to
do.’

for she was popular among the church workers because of her distinguished
ecclesiastical connections, had finished decorating and arranging the
garden-produce stall.

The vicarage garden was beginning to look like a fairground. Stalls,

coconut shies, bran-tubs and even a fortune-teller’s booth had taken root on
the lawn. The Archdeacon always hated this annual garden party and tried
to have as little to do with it as possible, although he had to put in an
appearance to fawn on the more distinguished visitors. There was always a
possibility that Lady Clara Boulding might decide to come to his church,
which was really nearer if one walked across the fields, although it was
difficult to imagine anyone as impressive as Lady Clara doing that.

‘It looks as if everything is finished,’ said Belinda. ‘I don’t feel as if I

have done my share.’

‘You have put up with my ill-humour for ten minutes,’ said the

Archdeacon, ‘which is more than anyone else could have done.’

Belinda flushed with embarrassment and secret pleasure. She felt herself

to be somehow exalted above the groups of busy women, who had been
arranging pyramids of apples, filling bran-tubs and decorating stalls with
coloured paper. Once, she knew, she had been different, and perhaps after
all the years had left her with a little of that difference. Perhaps she was still
an original shining like a comet, mingling no water with her wine. But only
very occasionally, mostly she was just like everyone else, rather less
efficient, if anything. Even her paper decorations had been taken down and
rearranged. There was nothing of her handiwork left on the garden-produce
stall.

curious compliment, ‘there’s Edith Liversidge. Whatever is she doing?’ For
Miss Liversidge, looking even more dishevelled than usual, was pushing
her way through a thick clump of rhododendrons on the opposite side of the
lawn.

I’ve been looking everywhere for you.’

‘Well, Miss Liversidge, I hardly see why you should have expected to

find me in the rhododendrons,’ he said.

some of the clues. We shall have everybody tied up in knots this afternoon.’

‘That will certainly be diverting,’ said the Archdeacon politely, ‘but I had

imagined it was only for the younger people.’

‘Oh, nonsense, everyone will be encouraged to join in. Now, what I

really wanted to see you about was the cloakroom arrangements.
Lavatories, you know. What has been done?’ Edith rapped out the question
with brusque efficiency.

Belinda turned away in embarrassment. Surely Edith could have asked

Agatha and need not have troubled the Archdeacon with such an unsuitable
thing? But he appeared to be enjoying the conversation and entered into the
discussion with grave courtesy.

‘I cannot really say. I had imagined that people would use their own

discretion,’ he ventured.

‘Children are not noted for their discretion,’ said Edith bluntly, ‘and even

grown-ups aren’t angels.’

would claim to be quite that. Perhaps you can help us, Miss Liversidge, we
all know your experience in these matters.’

‘Yes, but of course it wasn’t at all the same thing in the Balkans after the

war,’ said Edith, perhaps unnecessarily. ‘Still, I have been thinking things
over. We must have clear notices put up. I’ve got Mr Matthews from the Art
School at work on them now.’

‘Poor Matthews, a prostitution of his talents, I feel,’ said the Archdeacon.

‘I think Gothic lettering would be most suitable. What is your opinion, Miss
Bede?’

Poor Belinda, confused at being drawn into the conversation, could only

murmur that in her opinion the largest and clearest kind of lettering would

obviously be the best.

Miss Liversidge looked from one to the other impatiently. ‘I thought the

ladies should use the ground-floor cloakroom and the gentlemen the place
behind the toolshed.’

‘The Place Behind the Toolshed, what a sinister sound that has,’ mused

the Archdeacon. ‘I’m sure your arrangements will be admirable, Miss
Liversidge, though perhaps hardly necessary.’

‘We shall see about that,’ she said in a dark tone, and then stumped off in

search of her relative, Miss Aspinall, calling her as if she were a dog,
‘Connie! Connie! Come along! Time to go home to lunch.’

Miss Aspinall, who had been enjoying a snobbish little talk with Agatha,

hurried after her. She could never keep pace with Edith and was always a
few steps behind her.

‘I think Edith Liversidge is really disgusting,’ said Harriet indignantly.

‘Mr Donne and I could overhear what she was saying from the tea garden.
He seemed most embarrassed.’

‘Ah, what it is to be young,’ sighed the Archdeacon. ‘Or perhaps he is

what the higher orders of the clergy would not claim to be. One never
knows.’

‘He is an excellent preacher,’ said Harriet stoutly, if irrelevantly, ‘and he

seems to have the coconuts very well organized. Now Mr Donne,’ she
called, bringing him into the group, ‘don’t forget that you promised to let
me win a coconut.’

‘Ah, Miss Bede, I’m sure your skill will win the biggest one of all,’ said

Mr Donne gallantly.

At this point Belinda thought it would be as well if they went home to

luncheon. They would need to reserve all their strength for the afternoon,
she explained.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER THREE

‘Don’t you think you would be more comfortable in low-heeled shoes,
dear?’ suggested Belinda tentatively. ‘One’s feet always get so tired
standing about.’ She glanced down at her own – long, English
gentlewoman’s feet she always thought them, sensibly clad in shoes that
were rather too heavy for the printed crêpe de Chine dress and coatee she
was wearing.

Harriet glanced down too. ‘I always think low heels are so dowdy,’ she

said. ‘Besides, high heels are definitely the fashion now.’

‘Yes, I suppose they are,’ agreed Belinda, for Harriet always knew things

like that. And yet, she thought, at our age, surely all that was necessary was
to dress suitably and if possible in good taste, without really thinking of
fashion? With the years one ought to have grown beyond such thoughts but
somehow one never did, and Belinda set out for the afternoon conscious
that she was wearing dowdy shoes.

As they walked to the vicarage, Belinda regulating her normally brisk

step in consideration for Harriet’s high heels, they were overtaken by Count
Bianco, who was escorting Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall, both of
whom were dressed exactly as Belinda had anticipated. Count Bianco wore
a light grey suit and a panama hat. He carried a stick and grey gloves and
there was a fine rose in his buttonhole. As they came together he gave them
a courtly bow, which from anybody else might have seemed exaggerated.

‘How charming you are looking, Miss Harriet,’ he said, ‘and you also,

Miss Belinda,’ he added, as a courteous afterthought. ‘Poor old John
Akenside,’ he went on meditatively, ‘how he loved the hot weather.’

‘Nonsense, Ricardo,’ said Edith Liversidge, ‘he always went as red as a

lobster in the sun.’ She had known the Count’s friend in what she called her
Balkans Days and it was rumoured that he had been very fond of her, but
had been too shy to declare himself. It seemed odd to think that anyone
could have loved Edith, who seemed a person to inspire fear and respect
rather than any more tender emotion, but, as Belinda had once suggested,

perhaps the unpleasant nature of her work in the Balkans had hardened her
and she had once been more lovable.

They walked on to the lawn where a group of people had assembled.

Belinda could see the Archdeacon standing at the top of the front-door
steps, against a background of Victorian stained glass, the vicarage being
built in the Gothic style. She thought he looked splendid, and somehow the
glass set off his good looks.

Lady Clara Boulding was to open the garden party officially at half-past

two and as she had now arrived, there seemed no reason why she should not
get on with it at once. But the crowd was obviously waiting for something.
Agatha Hoccleve, who was standing by her husband, nudged him and said
in an agitated and audible whisper, ‘Henry, a prayer.’

The Archdeacon started. He had been wondering whether Lady Clara

would give some definite contribution to the church-roof fund as well as
buying things at the stalls. He cleared his throat.

‘Let us ask for God’s blessing on our endeavours,’ he said, in a loud

voice which quite startled some people.

so much more suited to the occasion than her own.

The Archdeacon began to recite a prayer. O Lord God, who seest that we

put not our trust in anything that we do, mercifully grant that by Thy Power
we may be defended against all adversity …

Harriet looked at Belinda and frowned. The Archdeacon always chose

such unsuitable prayers. Prevent us O Lord in all our doings, was the
obviously correct one for such an occasion. These little departures from
convention always annoyed her.

Belinda, on the other hand, was thinking loyally, what an excellent

choice! It strikes just the right note of humility. When Henry prays for
defence from adversity, he must mean too much confidence in our own
powers. One knew that pride often came before a fall. Or perhaps he was
not referring to the garden party specifically, but taking in the larger sphere
of life outside it … here Belinda’s thoughts became confused and a doubt
crept into her mind, which was quickly and loyally pushed back. For it
could not be that dear Henry had just said the first prayer that came into his
head…

There was a short pause. Count Bianco replaced his panama hat and

everyone began to move, relieved to be normal once more.

parties and bazaars. Indeed, apart from attending memorial services in
fashionable London churches, it was her chief recreation. She stood on a
grassy bank, slightly raised above the rest of the crowd. She was still a
handsome woman, and if her speech contained rather too much of her late
husband’s meaningless parliamentary phraseology, her voice was
nevertheless pleasant and soothing. Miss Aspinall, who had detached
herself from Miss Liversidge in order to be among the foremost of the little
group who would go round the stalls with Lady Clara, was listening with a
pathetically eager expression on her thin face. Nobody knew how much
Edith got on her nerves and how different it all was from the days when she
had been companion to Lady Grudge in Belgrave Square. Treated like one
of the family, such kindness … Connie’s eyes filled with tears and she had
to turn away.

At last Lady Clara stepped down from her grassy platform and made her

way towards the stalls, accompanied by Agatha and the Archdeacon, who
had a particularly ingratiating smile on his face. At a respectful distance
behind them came Miss Aspinall with a group of lady helpers, who were
hurrying to get to their places at the stalls. Lady Clara’s progress was slow
and stately but profitable. She bought some jam, two marrows, half a dozen
lavender sachets, a tea cosy, a pair of bed socks, some paper spills in a
fancy case and an embroidered Radio Times cover.

Belinda, now busy at the garden-produce stall, was wondering whether

she ought to wrap Lady Clara’s marrows up, and if so what was the best
way of doing it. They had only newspapers for wrapping, so she chose The
Times as being the most suitable and made them up into a rather clumsy
parcel. Lady Clara’s chauffeur was to collect them later.

helpers by rearranging them and collecting all the money together into one
tin, so that they were all tumbling over each other to get change instead of
each one having her own little pile.

‘What’s this?’ asked Agatha sharply, pointing to the Times-shrouded

parcel which Belinda had put into a corner.

‘Oh, that’s Lady Clara’s marrows,’ Belinda explained.
‘Wrapped in newspaper?’ Agatha’s tone was expressive. ‘I’m afraid that

won’t do at all.’ She produced some blue tissue paper from a secret hiding-
place and began to undo Belinda’s parcel.

Belinda in confusion. ‘I saw them lying there and I thought perhaps they
ought to be wrapped up and put aside in case anybody sold them by
mistake.’

evenly. ‘They were the two finest marrows on the stall, I chose them
myself.’

‘Oh, well …’ Belinda gave a weak little laugh. All this fuss about two

marrows. But it might go deeper than that, although it did not do to think
so.

‘Perhaps you would like to go and have tea,’ said Agatha, who was

having difficulty with the bulk of the marrows and the fragility of the tissue
paper and did not want Belinda to see. ‘We may as well go in turns.’

‘Well, yes, if it isn’t too early,’ said Belinda.
‘Oh, no, Lady Clara is already having hers. She has gone with Count

Bianco.’ Agatha stood up and reached for a ball of string.

Belinda felt herself hurrying away, routed was perhaps the word, Agatha

triumphant. It was a pity they sometimes had these little skirmishes,
especially when Agatha was so often triumphant. All over two marrows,
even if they were the finest on the stall.

Belinda looked around to see if she could find Harriet. She felt that she

wanted to tell somebody about the marrows and perhaps laugh over them.
Harriet’s healthy indignation would do her as much good as a cup of tea,
she thought. But Harriet was nowhere to be seen. And where was the
Archdeacon? It would be just like him to retire to the house and have a
bath. But he had already had one today, as Belinda knew, so she guessed
that he was probably attending on some of the more distinguished visitors.

curate. Harriet was handing him a plate of cakes and urging him in her
penetrating voice to try one of the pink ones which she had made specially
for him. Perhaps it will be better if I don’t disturb them, thought Belinda,
turning round to look for a vacant place at one of the other tables. And then
she came face to face with the Archdeacon. He also wanted his tea, and as
they had so often had tea together in the past what could be more natural
than that they should have it together this afternoon?

They sat down at a table for two. Belinda began to be assailed by various

doubts. What would people think to see her having tea with the Archdeacon

while his wife was still working tirelessly at the garden-produce stall? It
was a pity really to worry about what people thought, but, Belinda flattered
herself, she wasn’t entirely old and unattractive, even in her sensible shoes,
and she still had the marrows on her conscience, although she did not feel
that she could tell the Archdeacon about them.

He on the other hand had no such scruples. Belinda began to wish that he

wouldn’t talk so loudly, for although she knew that it was only one of his
little oddnesses to complain about his wife, other people might not realize
this. So she put two lumps of sugar into his tea, and tried as tactfully as she
could to change the subject of the conversation.

the concert tonight,’ said Belinda in a low voice. ‘She can’t see to
everything at once.’ Raising her voice, she went on, ‘Speaking of the
concert reminds me that Harriet is still undecided as to what she is going to
play. Of course she has a large repertoire, but one must choose something
suitable and not too long …’ Belinda babbled on. ‘… she’s very anxious to
play a Brahms intermezzo, but it may be a little heavy for a village concert.
I thought perhaps some Mendelssohn, some of the Songs without Words are
so charming …’ She looked at the Archdeacon anxiously, to see if he had
yet forgotten Agatha’s negligence in letting the moths get into his grey suit.

His face betrayed that he had not. In fact all the bright conversation about

the concert seemed to have been wasted on him. ‘I don’t think you’d have
done that,’ he said thoughtfully, gazing at a piece of bread and butter on his
plate.

Belinda saw that it was no good trying to change the subject yet. He must

be humoured out of it. She seemed to be having a difficult afternoon
altogether, what with the episode of the marrows and now having to
humour the Archdeacon. Archdeacons ought not to need humouring, she
told herself angrily. Supposing Henry were a bishop, could one still expect
no improvement?

‘What are you smiling at?’ asked the Archdeacon crossly. ‘People look

very foolish smiling at nothing.’

‘I wasn’t smiling at nothing,’ retorted Belinda. ‘I was wondering if you’d

still make such a fuss about unimportant trifles if you were a bishop.’

‘Unimportant trifles! The only good suit I have ruined, and you call it an

unimportant trifle.’

unconvincingly.

to the problem. We may as well face the facts. Agatha ought not to have let
the moth get into that suit. It was her duty to see that they didn’t. I am sure
that you would have seen that it was put away with moth balls …’ the
Archdeacon’s voice had now grown so loud that people at the other tables
were beginning to look at them with interest and amusement. Belinda felt
most embarrassed.

‘It would have smelt of camphor then and you would probably have

disliked that,’ she said, almost in a whisper.

The Archdeacon gave a shout of laughter at this. Suddenly he was in a

good temper again, fell on a plate of cakes and began to eat ravenously. ‘I
was too busy to have any luncheon,’ he explained. ‘So many tiresome
things to do.’

‘It will be nice for you to go away for a holiday,’ ventured Belinda.
The Archdeacon sighed heavily. ‘Ah, if only I could.’
‘But now that Mr Donne is here, surely it can be managed?’
‘One cannot leave the flock without a shepherd,’ said the Archdeacon in

a mocking tone.

‘But he said – I mean we heard – that Agatha was going to Karlsbad in

October,’ said Belinda, urged on by curiosity. ‘Surely you will be going
too?’

‘Alas, no.’ The Archdeacon finished the last cake. ‘And even if I were, it

would hardly be a holiday for me.’

Belinda could think of no reply to make to this and none seemed to be

expected. She could neither agree nor protest, she felt, but did what seemed
to her the best she could by getting up. from the table and saying that she
really must get back to the stall. ‘I must go and relieve Agatha,’ she said. ‘I
see she hasn’t been for her tea yet.’

‘It will please her not to have any,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I wonder that

you have had any. I thought women enjoyed missing their meals and
making martyrs of themselves.’

‘We may do it, but I think we can leave the enjoyment of it to the men,’

said Belinda, pleased at having thought of an answer. But Henry was really
too bad, there was no knowing what he might say next. And he was not
going to Karlsbad … She hoped nobody had overheard their conversation.

It had really been most unsuitable, but somehow she felt better for it and
had almost forgotten the episode of the marrows.

Back at the garden-produce stall, Belinda saw Agatha, looking rather

tired and flustered, bundling what remained of the flowers, fruit and
vegetables on to the front of the stall.

‘Oh, there you are,’ she exclaimed, making Belinda feel that she had

been away too long.

‘Yes, you must be longing for your tea, but surely you could have gone

before now? Wouldn’t Miss Liversidge or Miss Aspinall have taken charge
of the stall?’ said Belinda, doing the best she could.

have taken quite a lot of money.’

‘Yes, and the tea garden has been crowded. The Archdeacon was still

there when I left,’ Belinda added, thinking that this might encourage
Agatha.

‘I have had no luncheon,’ she said. ‘I shall really be glad of a cup of tea.’
‘Oh, dear, I wish I’d known that, then you could have gone first,’ said

Belinda. Had there been no luncheon at all at the vicarage today? Surely a
bad arrangement, or had the Archdeacon and his wife wished to outdo each
other in self-denial?

‘Well, Belinda, I expect you enjoyed your tea,’ said Harriet, advancing

towards the stall.

cakes were lovely,’ she said.

‘You and the Archdeacon looked so cosy. Having a nice conversation

about moth balls, too, most domestic. What a pity it is about Agatha. They
have really nothing in common.’

intelligent woman. She knows a great deal about medieval English
literature. And then there’s palaeography,’ she continued, as if her emphatic
tone would explain its importance in the married life of Agatha and the
Archdeacon.

‘Oh, yes, that’s about apes, isn’t it?’ said Harriet, losing interest in the

subject. ‘Do you think a fur cape would be too hot for the concert this
evening? The gold lamé jacket doesn’t really go so well with my blue as the
white fur. Besides, it’s rather severe and needs something to soften it.’

agreed that she looked very handsome, although one of the more spiteful
Sunday School teachers whispered to her friend that she suspected it was
not real ermine, but only shaved coney.

clerical evening dress, made a charming little speech. He seemed to have
recovered completely from his bad temper of the afternoon, because they
had made a splendid lot of money at the garden party and there was a good
attendance at the concert. He beamed on the crowd of zealous church
workers, as he praised their untiring efforts, and they in their turn were so
greatly carried away by his charm that they forgot all his annoying oddities
and began to think themselves fortunate to have such a distinguished-
looking vicar.

Belinda was sitting by Count Bianco. She had seldom seen him so

animated. He did not refer even once to the sad death of his friend John
Akenside. After Harriet had played her Brahms intermezzo, he declared in
an enthusiastic mixture of English and Italian that for him everything would
be an anticlimax after this.

Belinda found herself thinking, as she often did, that it would be an

excellent thing if Harriet would marry the Count. He was wealthy and he
had a beautiful house and garden: and, moreover, as Agatha had remarked
that morning, he came of a very old Italian family. Belinda was sure that he
would have no objection to Harriet making cakes and other dainties for the
curates. He was such a kind-hearted man.

In the meantime a child was reciting, rather too fast, but Belinda caught

one or two lines.

In dingles deep and mountains hoar
They combatted the tusky boar.

She tried to remember why the Archdeacon had been anxious to include
this, for it was not a particularly suitable poem. Then she realized that it
was in order that he might explain to an audience not really interested in
such linguistic niceties, the history of the rare word dingle. How it is first
known in the twelfth or thirteenth century in a work called Sawles Warde;

then it is revived by the Elizabethans, who gave it to Milton – you
remember it in Comus, of course…

The Reverend Edward Plowman, sitting in the front row by Agatha,

listened to the explanations jealously. How like Hoccleve to show off his
knowledge on such an unsuitable occasion! Father Plowman, as he was
called by his devoted parishioners, was not a clever man. He had failed to
take Honours in Theology, but he worked hard in his parish and the
elaborate ritual of his services was ample compensation for the intellectual
poverty of his sermons. He was greatly beloved by his flock and one
Christmas he had received so many pairs of hand-worked slippers that he
gave the Archdeacon a pair. The gift was accepted rather grudgingly,
especially as they were a size too small. This evening Father Plowman was
not wearing his usual costume of cassock and biretta and his evening dress
was less well cut than the Archdeacon’s. He shifted uneasily, reflecting that
even the best seats were hard. But soon there would be an interval. Would
there be refreshments? he wondered. He tried to remember whether they
had had refreshments at the last concert. He could hardly ask Mrs Hoccleve.
These recitations were really rather heavy going, though this was better.
Time wasted is existence, used is life … one might almost use a line like
that for a text. He began to meditate on the theme, although he did not
really approve of these literary sermons. Still, he had no doubt that he could
do them as well as Hoccleve.

In the interval, during which he enjoyed some excellent coffee and cakes,

Father Plowman talked to the elder Miss Bede about the death-watch beetle
and gave her a short dissertation on its habits. This put Belinda into an
elegiac mood and somehow prepared her for the next item on the
programme, which was a harp solo by Miss Aspinall. There was certainly
something elegiac about poor Connie. Her thin, useless hands, her fluttering
grey dress – surely a cast-off from Belgrave Square? – even the instrument
itself with its Victorian association, made Belinda think of past glories, of
more elegant gatherings than this one, at which Connie might have played.
The little beaded bag came with her on to the platform and she took out of it
a little lace-edged handkerchief, on which she wiped her hands before she
started to play. What she played Belinda hardly knew, but it had a
melancholy air and the applause which greeted it was restrained though
sincere. The village people thought poor Miss Aspinall was not quite right
in the head and considered it very clever of her to be able to play at all.

appeared last on the programme and had a sensational success. Belinda read
in her programme that he was to sing Believe me if all those endearing
young charms and The Lost Chord, both very suitable songs and particular
favourites of hers. Like all sentimental people she cherished the idea of
loving a dear ruin, and found her eyes filling with tears as he sang the
affecting words. Count Bianco too was very much moved, except that he
thought of himself as the ruin, perhaps being loved by Harriet.

feeling that he was a little displeased at the tumultuous applause which
greeted Mr Donne’s songs. Some of the rougher members of the audience,
accommodated on benches at the back of the hall, were even stamping their
feet and whistling. There was no doubt of his success and popularity.

‘The Archdeacon was looking quite annoyed,’ said Harriet with

satisfaction, as they drank their Ovaltine before going to bed that evening.
‘Imagine him singing, though. I think Agatha was pleased at Mr Donne’s
success, she would do anything to disagree with the Archdeacon.’

Belinda was too tired to argue. ‘I thought poor Connie played very

nicely,’ she said.

seems to think the whole success of the garden party was due to her
arrangements. I didn’t see anybody disappearing behind the toolshed
though, did you, Belinda? At least, nobody we know, that is.’

‘No, Harriet, I did not,’ said Belinda in a weary but firm tone. ‘After all,

most of us were there only two or three hours.’

‘Yes, I suppose that’s really nothing,’ said Harriet yawning.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FOUR

‘I thought we might have a cauliflower cheese for lunch today,’ Harriet
announced at breakfast one morning. ‘We shall only need a light meal as we
are having the duck this evening.’

‘Oh, of course, Mr Donne is coming again, isn’t he,’ said Belinda. ‘I

think perhaps it’s a mistake to ask him too often, you know. It seems no
time since he was last here.’

‘Why, Belinda, it’s nearly three weeks,’ said Harriet indignantly.
‘Yes, I suppose it must be. How quickly the time goes.’ Belinda began

piling up the plates, scraping fish bones from one to another. Suddenly she
stopped, and an expression almost of horror came over her face. ‘But
Harriet,’ she said, ‘Miss Prior is coming today. Had you forgotten that?’

‘Yes, I had, but I don’t see what difference it makes,’ said Harriet. ‘It’s

rather a good thing, really. She’ll be able to patch that chair cover that’s
getting so worn, and perhaps start on my new velvet dress.’

‘But, Harriet, we can’t give her only cauliflower cheese,’ went on

Belinda with unusual persistence. ‘You know how she enjoys her meals and
we always give her meat of some kind.’

‘You surely aren’t suggesting that we should have the duck for lunch, are

you?’ asked Harriet with a note of challenge in her voice.

‘Well, I don’t know, really …’ Belinda hesitated. She was a little afraid

of her sister sometimes. ‘Would it matter if we gave Mr Donne cauliflower
cheese? I’m sure he wouldn’t mind. We could have some soup and a fairly
substantial sweet, and with coffee afterwards it would be quite a nice little
meal. I’m sure I would think it very nice. After all, when we had supper
with Edith Liversidge on Friday we only had baked beans and no sweet, as
far as I remember, just some coffee and biscuits …’ poor Belinda
floundered on, disconcerted by Harriet’s stony silence.

‘Miss Prior will just have to put up with cauliflower cheese,’ said Harriet

firmly. ‘If you expect Mr Donne to, why shouldn’t she?’

every time she comes,’ said Belinda. ‘But one feels that perhaps Miss
Prior’s whole life is just a putting up with second best all the time. And then
she’s so easily offended. I suppose it’s cowardly of me, but I do hate any
kind of atmosphere.’

The trouble was that Miss Prior wasn’t entirely the meek person one

expected a little sewing woman to be. Belinda had two feelings about her –
Pity and Fear, like Aristotle’s Poetics, she thought confusedly. She was so
very nearly a gentlewoman in some ways that one felt that she might even
turn out to be related to a clergyman or something like that. She could never
have her meals with Emily in the kitchen, nor would she presume to take
them with Belinda and Harriet. They must be taken in to her on a tray. She
was so touchy, so conscious of her position, so quick to detect the slightest
suspicion of patronage. One had to be very careful with Miss Prior.

She arrived at ten o’clock punctually, a little dried-up woman of

uncertain age, with a brisk, birdlike manner and brown, darting eyes. Her
dress was drab and dateless, but immaculate, and she wore what appeared
to be rather a good cameo brooch at the neck.

She did her work in the little morning-room on the ground floor, where

Belinda usually did the flowers. This was generally tidied beforehand, but
today, on showing her in, Belinda noticed to her dismay that it had not been
done. Everything looked dusty, there were bits of cotton on the carpet, and
worst of all, two vases of dead chrysanthemums. Their stems showed black
and slimy in the yellow water.

‘Good morning, Miss Prior,’ Belinda’s tone was bright and welcoming,

but she looked a little harassed, wondering why Emily had not dusted the
room and how the dead flowers could have been forgotten. She had taken
them out of the drawing-room hastily the day before, when Lady Clara
Boulding had been seen coming to the door.

‘I think I would like the window open,’ declared Miss Prior. ‘I’m afraid

the smell of chrysanthemums always upsets me.’

‘I’m so sorry …’ Belinda moved in the direction of the window.
‘Oh, don’t trouble, Miss Bede, I can manage perfectly well.’ To Belinda’s

anxious eyes Miss Prior looked unusually fragile as she lifted the heavy
frame.

glanced round the room, alert and birdlike. ‘And perhaps I could have a

duster?’

‘Oh, dear …’ Belinda was almost speechless with confusion. ‘I’m afraid

Emily doesn’t seem to have done it this morning’ – that was obvious – ‘and
I know how particular you are.’

Miss Prior smiled. ‘Well, I wouldn’t like to say that, Miss Bede. I can

hardly afford to be in my position, but I think we all work better in bright,
clean surroundings, don’t you?’

‘Yes, of course, I’m so sorry …’
‘That’s quite all right, Miss Bede. You will make me think I am being a

nuisance.’ Miss Prior went to the sewing machine and drew off the cover
with a brisk movement. ‘Now, what is it to be this morning?’

new bathroom curtains and some sheets to be put sides to middle …’
Belinda went on rapidly, as if speaking quickly would make the work seem
less, ‘and my sister was wondering whether you could start on a dress for
her out of some brown velvet she’s got. Perhaps you could begin to cut it
out?’

‘Very good, Miss Bede, I will commence with the chair covers,’ said

Miss Prior.

who strode into the room with a bundle of silky velvet in her arms.

‘Good morning, Miss Prior,’ she said. ‘Now I want you to start on this

dress first of all, if you will.’

Belinda waited rather fearfully, but she need not have been afraid, for

Miss Prior seemed much meeker with Harriet and began to admire the stuff
and ask her what kind of style she had in mind.

‘Oh, I’ve bought a Vogue pattern,’ said Harriet, ‘size 38, so you can just

follow that.’

Miss Prior darted a doubtful upward glance at the bulk of Harriet

towering over her. ‘I wonder if it’s going to be big enough on the hips?’ she
ventured. ‘That’s where you usually need it, isn’t it?’ She took out her
familiar tape-measure which was in a little case shaped like a frog. ‘Lady
Boulding on the bust, Miss Harriet on the hips, that’s what I always say to
myself,’ she chanted brightly.

Belinda laughed. ‘Don’t you say anything for me, Miss Prior?’
‘Oh, well, Miss Bede, you never wear very fitting dresses, do you, if you

see what I mean? A few inches here or there doesn’t make much

difference.’

‘No, I suppose it doesn’t,’ said Belinda, depressed by this picture of

herself in shapeless, unfashionable garments.

‘Now, Mrs Hoccleve,’ went on Miss Prior, turning the knife in the

wound, ‘she has got some lovely things. Not that I make much for her, you
know, except a few summer dresses, like I do for Lady Clara. But her
clothes are from the best houses. She’s just got a lovely navy two-piece
with a lemon blouse …’ Miss Prior’s voice trailed off into a kind of rapture.

It isn’t right, thought Belinda indignantly, for a clergyman’s wife to get

her clothes from the best houses. She ought to be a comfortable, shabby sort
of person, in an old tweed coat and skirt or a sagging stockinette jumper
suit. Her hats should be shapeless and of no particular style and colour. Like
my old gardening hat.

‘Would you like a cup of tea, Miss Prior?’ she said aloud. ‘I am just

going to make some.’

‘Thank you, Miss Bede, I was just thinking I should like a cup. I find I

can start my work better after a cup of tea. There’s quite a nip in the air
these mornings and I had to breakfast earlier than usual today.’

Miss Prior’s tone was uncomplaining, even bright, but Belinda felt she

could bear no more and hurried out of the room to put the kettle on.

‘I don’t think today is going very well,’ she remarked to Harriet, when

they were alone drinking their own tea. ‘First of all the room wasn’t dusted
and I’d forgotten to throw away those dead chrysanthemums, and then Miss
Prior made me feel as if I really ought to have offered tea sooner. I wonder
whether she would have preferred cocoa?’ Belinda looked worried. ‘It’s
more sustaining if one has had an early breakfast. Still, she is having a piece
of cake with her tea.’

‘She came to me just now, so confidential. I couldn’t think what she was
going to say.’

‘Oh, dear,’ sighed Belinda, ‘I meant to get some more toilet rolls

yesterday.’

‘I just gave her an old Church Times,’ said Harriet airily.
‘Oh, Harriet, I wish you hadn’t done that. I feel Miss Prior is the kind of

person who wouldn’t like to use the Church Times. And I’m still not quite
happy about giving her cauliflower cheese.’

she herself supervised the laying of the tray which Emily was to take in to
her.

‘It certainly looked very nice,’ she said, helping herself to a rather

smaller portion of the cauliflower cheese than she had given to Miss Prior,
‘and I asked Emily to be sure to wash the cauliflower very well and to put
plenty of cheese in it.’

Harriet helped herself liberally and ate with enjoyment.
‘I think the damson flan will make quite a good contrast,’ went on

Belinda. ‘I know she will like that.’

exasperation.

‘I think I will just look in and see if she is all right,’ said Belinda when

she had finished her meal. ‘I expect she would like some coffee.’

Belinda hesitated for a moment outside the door of the morning-room.

She could hear the whirr of the sewing machine inside, but Miss Prior never
spent very long over her meals. She did not like to be seen in the act of
eating or drinking, it seemed to make her more conscious of her position.

tray on the little table, for although everything else had been eaten, the
cauliflower cheese had been pushed to one side of the plate and was almost
untouched.

‘Oh, dear, I’m afraid you haven’t enjoyed your lunch, Miss Prior,’ said

Belinda, who now felt near to tears. ‘Don’t you like cauliflower cheese?’

‘Oh, yes, Miss Bede, I do sometimes,’ said Miss Prior in an offhand tone,

not looking up from her work.

Belinda went on standing in the doorway watching Miss Prior

negotiating an awkward bit of chair cover. Then she looked again at the
tray, wondering what she could say next. And then, in a flash, she realized
what it was. It was almost a relief to know, to see it there, the long, greyish
caterpillar. Dead now, of course, but unmistakable. It needed a modern poet
to put this into words. Eliot, perhaps.

Belinda burst into a torrent of apologies. How careless of Emily not to

wash the cauliflower more thoroughly! How unfortunate that it should have
been Miss Prior who had got the caterpillar!

‘I’m afraid I didn’t feel like going on with it after that,’ said Miss Prior

almost smugly.

really understand. If this had happened to her in somebody else’s house she
would have pretended she hadn’t seen it and gone on eating. It might have
required courage, but she would have done it. ‘You must be hungry still,’
she went on, ‘perhaps you would like a poached egg, or two poached eggs?
Emily could easily do them.’

Miss Prior gave a little laugh. ‘Well, no, Miss Bede, thank you all the

same. It would seem funny to have a meal the wrong way round like that,
wouldn’t it? You wouldn’t fancy that yourself now, would you?’

‘If I were really hungry I don’t think I should mind,’ said Belinda

bravely. ‘But you must have an egg with your tea. Perhaps that will make
up for it.’

‘Thank you, Miss Bede, that would be very nice. I am going to the

vicarage tomorrow,’ Miss Prior went on conversationally, putting down her
work for a moment. ‘Mrs Hoccleve wants one or two things done before
she goes away.’

‘I’m sure you wouldn’t get a caterpillar in your cauliflower cheese there,’

said Belinda lightly.

Miss Prior made a noise like a snort. ‘It might be about all I would get,’

she said. ‘Very poor meals there.’ She lowered her voice, ‘Between
ourselves, Miss Bede, Mrs Hoccleve doesn’t keep a good table. At least, I
never see any proof of it. An old dried-up scrap of cheese or a bit of cottage
pie, no sweet, sometimes. I’ve heard the maids say so, too, you know how
these things get about. Scarcely any meat except at the weekend, the
Sunday roast, you know. You always have such nice meals, Miss Bede, and
you give me just the same as you have yourselves, I know that. After all, it
might just as easily have been you or Miss Harriet that got the unwelcome
visitor today,’ she concluded with a little giggle.

moments of joy that sometimes come to us in the middle of an ordinary day.
Her heart like a singing bird, and all because Agatha didn’t keep as good a
table as she did and Miss Prior had forgiven her for the caterpillar, and the
afternoon sun streaming in through the window over it all. ‘You’re doing
that chair cover beautifully, Miss Prior,’ she said warmly, ‘and how well
you’ve got on with Miss Harriet’s dress.’

‘It really does pay to show her a little consideration,’ she said to Harriet

afterwards. ‘I’m sure she works better when one does. Besides, I’m afraid

she’s sometimes made to feel inferior, poor soul. Next time she comes we’ll
have something really nice for lunch, perhaps even a chicken,’ she mused.

But Harriet’s thoughts were already with Mr Donne and the duck they

were to have that evening. Could they perhaps have something original
served with it, like the orange salad they had had at Count Bianco’s? One
wanted to give people really interesting food.

‘It was a good idea to give Miss Prior an egg for her tea,’ went on

Belinda, ‘I think it made up for the caterpillar.’

‘Of course, Mr Donne may prefer apple sauce, though it would be more

ordinary,’ said Harriet thoughtfully.

thought. But at last they found themselves in agreement on the subject of
Harriet’s brown velvet dress. It was going to be very successful and the new
bracelet-length sleeves were most becoming. ‘Not even Agatha has a dress
with the new sleeves,’ said Harriet proudly.

Belinda felt a little depressed at being reminded of Agatha and her

clothes from the ‘best houses’, but soon brightened up when she
remembered Miss Prior’s remarks about her poor table.

‘Do you know, Harriet,’ she said, ‘Miss Prior told me that the only time

they have meat at the vicarage is at the weekend? I can’t believe that, really,
and yet I’ve always had a suspicion that Agatha was just the tiniest bit
mean.’

‘Well, it’s a good thing Mr Donne doesn’t have to live there,’ said Harriet

stoutly.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FIVE

One afternoon Harriet set out for the curate’s lodgings, carrying a large
basket. Besides a cake and some apple jelly, she was taking some very
special late plums which she had been guarding jealously for the last few
weeks. She hurried along, hoping that she would not meet anybody on the
way, as she and Belinda were going to tea with Count Bianco and she had
not much time. She therefore felt very annoyed when she saw the
Archdeacon coming towards her, and would have hurried on, had they not
come face to face on the pavement.

The Archdeacon had been visiting a rich parishioner, who was thought to

be dying. The poor were much too frightened of their vicar to regard him as
being of any possible comfort to the sick, but the Archdeacon liked to think
of himself as fulfilling some of the duties of a parish priest and there was
something about a deathbed that appealed to his sense of the dramatic. He
had also taken the opportunity of visiting the workhouse that afternoon and
was altogether in a pleasant state of melancholy.

‘When I visit these simple people,’ he said affectedly with his head on

one side, ‘I am reminded of Gray’s Elegy.’ He began to quote:

Far from the madding crowd’s ignoble strife
Their sober wishes never learn’d to stray;
Along the cool sequester’d vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.

‘Oh, quite,’ agreed Harriet, annoyed at being delayed. ‘One of the finest
poems in our language,’ she pronounced, hoping that there the matter would
end.

But the Archdeacon had had a tiring afternoon and was in no hurry to

return to his good works.

‘Indeed it is,’ he agreed. ‘Johnson’s criticism of it is so apt, as you will

remember – “Sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo.”’

remarked, and moved off, leaving the Archdeacon puzzling over what she
meant. He thought it unlikely that it would be a literary quotation and yet it
seemed somehow Elizabethan. Perhaps Belinda would know it. She often
wasted her time reading things that nobody else would dream of reading.

Harriet walked away in the opposite direction. It would be very annoying

if the curate was out, although she supposed she could always leave the
things in his sitting-room with a note. His lodgings were situated in what
Harriet considered one of the more sordid streets of the village, a row of
late Victorian red brick villas called Jubilee Terrace. Every window had its
lace curtains and she imagined that she detected stealthy movements behind
them as she walked along to the house where the curate lodged. Well, let
them watch her and gossip about it too if they liked, she thought stoutly, it
would do some of them good to realize that charity began at home. That
Miss Beard, a Sunday School teacher too, pretending to be watering the
ferns in the front room – Harriet called out ‘Good afternoon!’ to her, and
was pleased to see her scuttle furtively back into the shelter of the lace
curtains.

The curate’s house was called ‘Marazion’. Harriet walked up the little

path bordered with shells and rang the front-door bell. Mr Donne himself
answered it. He expressed himself delighted to see her and was quite
overwhelmed with gratitude when she presented her gifts.

before, but then recovered sufficiently to show Harriet into his sitting-room.
This was quite a nice room, not as meanly furnished as Harriet could have
wished, though Belinda was relieved that they did not have to provide the
curate with furniture as well as food. Harriet looked eagerly round,
searching for those personal touches that make a room interesting. Other
curates had lodged here, but this was the first time Harriet had visited Mr
Donne and there were bound to be differences of detail. The first thing she
noticed was a large oar, fastened on the wall over the mantelpiece, with
photographs of rowing groups hanging underneath it.

‘Ah, now which one is you?’ she asked, going up to one of the groups

and peering at it. They all looked so alike but at last she discovered Mr

Donne and he pointed out to her his best friend who was a curate in London
and another who had been called to the Mission Field.

‘Oh, dear,’ she said, her face clouding, ‘I hope you will not go overseas. I

mean, you aren’t commanded to go by your bishop, are you?’

explained Mr Donne, rather red in the face.

Harriet seemed satisfied with this explanation and turned her attention to

his books, which were not a particularly original selection. Shakespeare,
some standard theological works, a few paper-backed detective novels and
the Oxford Book of English Verse.

how harmful it is to read in a bad light, like Milton or whoever it was,
although of course he went blind, so perhaps his eyes were weak to begin
with. Oh, good, you have a reading-lamp – I was thinking that I could let
you have one that we don’t use very much.’

Mr Donne thanked her for the kind thought. ‘As a matter of fact,’ he

assured her, ‘I don’t work very much in the evenings, except when I’m
preparing a sermon. The Boys’ Club and the Scouts take up most of my
time.’

Scouts seemed to remind Harriet that she had thought of knitting him a

pair of socks or stockings.

‘That’s very kind of you,’ he said, ‘I wear them out terribly quickly and

can never have enough. I’ve just had two pairs sent me today, so I shall be
quite well off.’

Harriet bristled with indignation. ‘Oh? Who made those for you? Your

mother or an aunt perhaps?’ These occurred to her as the only people who
could legitimately be allowed to knit socks for a curate whom she regarded
as her property.

‘No, as a matter of fact, it was a relation of Mrs Hoccleve’s, she was up

at the University when I was, at least she was doing research. She’s a kind
of female Don.’

‘Oh, I see.’ Harriet was a little pacified, but the whole thing was

unsatisfactory and needed to be looked into. It was not somehow natural for
a female Don to knit for a curate, especially as she sounded to be quite a
young woman.

‘Her name’s Olivia Berridge and she’s awfully nice,’ said the curate in a

kind of burst.

‘Well, I shall have to be going now,’ said Harriet, putting on her gloves.

‘My sister and I are going to tea with Count Bianco.’

with her. Nevertheless Harriet could not help feeling that the visit had been
disappointing. This Olivia Berridge knitting socks for him, that was the
trouble. Harriet wondered if there could be anything more between them
than that. Of course there had been no photographs other than the rowing
groups in his sitting-room, though she had not been able to see his bedroom.
There might well be a photograph of Miss Berridge there. And yet it
seemed that she must be several years older than he was, so perhaps there
was nothing in it after all. Mr Donne was so very young, not more than
twenty-three or four, and there was really nobody here in whom he could
confide. Agatha was so unsympathetic and the Archdeacon was definitely
peculiar, perhaps even the tiniest bit mental. He had that odd sloping
forehead which was supposed to be a sign of mental deficiency. Harriet had
read about it in Harmsworth’s Encyclopaedia. She let her thoughts wander
at random on this interesting point, but by the time she reached home the
worry of Olivia Berridge was again uppermost and as soon as she saw
Belinda she asked her what she knew about ‘a relation of Agatha
Hoccleve’s doing research at the University’.

Belinda frowned. ‘I believe she has a niece who does research in Middle

English,’ she said. ‘Something to do with The Owl and the Nightingale, I
think, but I’m not sure what aspect. Of course there is still much that is
obscure in that poem and several disputed readings…’

Harriet interrupted her impatiently. ‘Oh, I dare say,’ she said, ‘but how

old is this girl?’

‘Oh, I don’t think she’s very young,’ said Belinda, ‘at least, she’s about

thirty, I think, which is young really, isn’t it?’

Harriet seemed satisfied and hurried away to change for tea at Count

Bianco’s. She came downstairs again looking very elegant in a green suit
with a cape trimmed with monkey fur. She had decided to break in her new
python-skin shoes.

After some delay, because Harriet couldn’t walk very fast in her new

shoes, they arrived at Count Bianco’s house.

They had tea almost at once. The Count had ordered his cook to make all

Harriet’s favourite cakes and there were four different kinds of jam.

time they visited Ricardo’s house, Belinda was struck by the excellence of
everything in it. The house itself was an interesting continental-looking
building with a tower at one end and balconies and window-boxes, filled at
all times of the year with suitable flowers. And the garden was delightful,
with its perfectly tended herbaceous borders and rockeries, a grove of lime
trees and some fine Lombardy poplars. The joys of the vegetable garden,
too, were considerable. Belinda wondered how anybody could remain
unmoved at the sight of the lovely marrows, and the magnificent pears,
carefully tied up in little cotton bags, so that they should not fall before they
were ripe or be eaten by the birds. At the bottom of the vegetable garden
was a meadow, which Ricardo had planted with such of his native Italian
flowers as could be induced to grow in the less sunny English climate. This
part of the garden was his especial delight, and on fine evenings he would
sit for hours in a deck-chair reading Tacitus or Dante, or brooding over the
letters of his friend John Akenside.

This afternoon he was anxious that they should see a fine show of

Michaelmas daisies, eight different varieties, each one a different colour
and one a particularly rare one, which he had brought back from the south
of France, when he was there in the spring. And he was thinking of having a
pond made, for water-lilies and goldfish, and where did Harriet think would
be the best place to have it?

‘Oh, Ricardo, how lovely!’ said Harriet, in raptures at the thought of the

pond. ‘Will you swim in it? If it had a nice concrete bottom it would be
quite clean, and so romantic to swim in the moonlight with the fishes.’

Ricardo didn’t do romantic things like that. ‘Leigh Hunt writes rather
charmingly about a fish’, she said aloud, ‘Legless, unloving, infamously
chaste’; she paused. Perhaps it was hardly suitable, really, and she was a
little ashamed of having quoted it, but these little remembered scraps of
culture had a way of coming out unexpectedly.

‘Swans would be nice,’ Harriet went on, ‘or would they eat the fishes?’
Ricardo was uncertain, but said that he had thought of getting some

peacocks, they would look so effective on the terrace.

Harriet agreed that they would, and they moved off together, leaving

Belinda bending over the Michaelmas daisies. She did not want to listen to
another proposal of marriage and probably a refusal as well. It was some

months since Ricardo had last proposed to Harriet and Belinda could feel
that another offer was due.

been disappointed. It seemed a suitable time to talk about Ricardo’s old
friend John Akenside, and how he must miss him, even after all these years.

Yes, indeed, Ricardo wondered at times whether his own end was near.

Would Belinda come into his study and see the photograph which he meant
to have as the frontispiece to his long-awaited edition of the letters of John
Akenside?

gardener.

Ricardo’s study gave the impression that he was a very studious and

learned man. The walls were lined with very dull-looking books and the
large desk covered with papers and letters written in faded ink. His task of
collecting and editing the letters of his friend took up most of his time now,
and it was doubtful whether he read anything but a few lines of Dante or a
sentence of Tacitus.

A large photograph of John Akenside stood in a prominent position on

the desk, showing him in some central European court dress. He looked
uncomfortable in the white uniform and faintly ridiculous, like something
out of a musical comedy. Perhaps his collar was crooked or the row of
medals too ostentatious to be quite convincing, for there was something
indefinably wrong about it, which marred the grandeur of the whole effect.
Belinda never minded laughing at this photograph, because she felt that
somehow John would understand. Indeed, as she looked at the face, she
thought she detected a twinkle in the eyes, which seemed to look slyly
round the corners of the rimless glasses, and the mouth was curled into a
half smile, self-conscious, but at the same time a little defiant.

Together Belinda and Ricardo studied the portrait and for some minutes

neither spoke. Then Ricardo said rather sadly, ‘I think he would have
wished the world to see this one.’

Belinda agreed. ‘Yes, perhaps you’re right. And yet he never sought

worldly glory, did he …’ she mused sentimentally. ‘He was always so
humble – hardly downtrodden,’ she added hastily, remembering his rather
shambling gait and his fingers stained with red ink, ‘but I think he never
realized his unique gifts, from which we, who were privileged to be his
friends, received so much benefit …’ Belinda stopped, rather tied up in this

sentence of appreciation. She felt as if she were writing his obituary notice
in The Times. Being with Ricardo often made her talk like this. Of course,
she thought, I believe John Akenside had a finger in nearly every European
political pie at the time of his death, and yet one had never been sure what it
was that he actually did.

the letters,’ he said, ‘which will also contain a short biographical memoir, I
am going to quote that beautiful opening sentence from the Agricola of
Tactitus – Clarorum virorum facta moresque posteris tradere, antiquitus
usitatum, ne nostris quidem temporibus quamquam incuriosa suorum aetas
omisit …’ he recited solemnly in his quaint Italian pronunciation.

Belinda waited patiently while Ricardo finished the complicated Latin

sentence. She had never been much of a classical scholar.

that it was nearly seven o’clock and at that moment Harriet came into the
room, bustling and cheerful, and carrying a basket full of rare rock plants.
Her appearance seemed to cheer Ricardo and they began to talk about the
care of woolly-leaved alpine plants, a conversation in which Belinda was
glad to join.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SIX

On the way home Belinda decided to call at the vicarage to see Agatha.
Harriet, calculating that the curate would probably not be there, went home
to make some sardine eggs for supper, as it was Emily’s evening out.

Belinda found Agatha sitting in the drawing-room, mending the

Archdeacon’s socks. It was a gloomy, unhomely kind of room, though
Belinda could never quite decide why she did not like it. The electric light
was too dim or the chair covers too drab or perhaps it was just that Agatha
was there and that behind her was a bookcase, where, behind glass, was a
complete set of the publications of the Early English Text Society. Belinda
noticed rather sadly that the crimson socks Henry had bought in Vienna
were not among the pile on Agatha’s sewing table. But how stupid of me,
she thought, socks don’t last thirty years, and how could a man in Henry’s
position wear crimson socks! The ones Belinda noticed tonight were of the
most sober archidiaconal colours. She wanted to say, ‘Oh, Agatha, let me
help you,’ but thought better of it. Agatha might consider it a reflection on
her darning, and certainly would not care to be reminded that Belinda had
darned socks for Henry before she had ever set eyes on him. ‘Never
interfere between husband and wife’, as Belinda remembered her dear
mother telling her, and one could not be too careful, even about an
apparently trivial thing like a sock.

Agatha seemed pleased to see her and they began to talk of parish

matters. There would be a great deal to do when Agatha went away, indeed,
she was beginning to wonder whether it would be possible to go after all.

Belinda reflected on the truth of the saying that husbands and wives grow

to be like each other, for it might almost have been Henry talking. So badly
in need of a holiday, and yet who could be left in charge of the Mothers’
Union and there was that rather delicate affair of the altar brasses and the
unpleasantness between Miss Jenner and Miss Beard … listening to her
Belinda began to feel very gloomy indeed. It seemed almost as if Agatha
had decided not to go.

doubtfully, aware that she was not a mother and was far too much of a
moral coward to deal satisfactorily with even the slightest unpleasantness. ‘I
often go into Miss Jenner’s shop to buy knitting wool,’ she added, ‘perhaps
I could say a word…’

To Belinda’s surprise, Agatha seemed grateful for her offer of help and

they found themselves talking about Mr Donne and what a great asset he
was to the parish, after which it was the most natural thing in the world for
Belinda to ask after the Archdeacon.

Agatha smiled indulgently. He was well, considering everything, she

said.

Considering what? Belinda wondered, and ventured to remark that men

were really much more difficult to please than women, who bore their
burdens without complaining.

Agatha nodded and sighed. There was a short pause during which Agatha

seemed to be intent on finding a piece of wool to match the sock she was
mending. Belinda took up the Church Times and began glancing idly
through the advertisements. A priest’s cloak for sale, 44-inch chest –
clerical evening dress, tall, slim build, never worn – she paused, wondering
what story, sad or dramatic, lay behind those words. She had just turned to
the back pages and was wondering whether Harriet would care to spend
part of their summer holiday at a Bright Christian Guest House at Bognor,
when the door opened and the Archdeacon came in.

He kissed Agatha in a hasty, husbandly way, which rather surprised

Belinda, who had not thought that any outward signs of affection ever
passed between them. Perhaps it distressed her a little, too, but he seemed
so genuinely pleased to see her that she soon recovered and was listening
happily to his account of how he had spent the afternoon, visiting a
deathbed and then going on to see the old people in the workhouse.

‘These humble people remind me of Gray’s Elegy,’ he said affectedly

with his head on one side.

that they listened with respectful interest while he quoted the appropriate
verse. Nor were they in a hurry to be gone, as Harriet had been, and so did
not say ‘Oh, quite’ when he had finished but enlarged intelligently on the
charming theme. Agatha was reminded of Piers Plowman, Belinda of the
poetry of Crabbe, which she could not remember very exactly, but she felt

she had to be reminded of something out of self-defence, for Agatha had
got a First and knew all about Piers Plowman. Indeed, she seemed about to
quote from it and would probably have done so had not the Archdeacon
suddenly been reminded of Wordsworth and some suitable lines in The
Excursion. Then he began to read from The Prelude. Belinda thought
Agatha looked rather bored and fidgety, but she herself was delighted and
lived happily in the past until the entry of Mr Donne brought her back into
the present.

addressing Belinda, ‘and some homemade cake and jelly. I’m afraid I’m
getting quite spoilt.’

The Archdeacon looked envious. The plums in their garden hadn’t done

particularly well this year and Agatha was always too busy with parochial
work to make jelly or cakes or even to ask the cook to make them.

‘Ah, well, you won’t always be a curate,’ said Belinda indulgently.
‘That doesn’t follow at all,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘Look at Plowman and

all the gifts he gets. I suppose it has something to do with celibacy.’

need of these things,’ she said.

‘I will bring you some of the plums tomorrow,’ said the curate nobly.
‘Now, you see, I have given Donne a chance to be unselfish,’ said the

Archdeacon, ‘so good comes out of everything.’

and whether she would have the courage to bring the Archdeacon a pot of
the blackberry jelly which she herself had made a week or two ago. Perhaps
when Agatha went away … a cake, too, perhaps with coffee icing and
filling and chopped nuts on the top, or a really rich fruit cake…

‘We really must do something about the Harvest Festival,’ said the

Archdeacon wearily. ‘I suppose I shall have to get Plowman to preach. A
pity Canon Harvey is such a difficult man, he’s really a better preacher.’

‘Ah, yes,’ Agatha nodded sympathetically.
Belinda did not join in the conversation. She remembered that the

Archdeacon and Canon Harvey had a long-standing quarrel about the use of
Songs of Praise in church, which the latter considered ‘savoured of
Pantheism in many instances’. They had had a heated correspondence about
it in the local paper.

farming,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘That is some advantage.’

kind of worship and that we get nearer to God by digging. At least, it may
not be exactly that,’ he stammered in confusion, ‘but of course one does
feel that the countryman is nearer God, in a way.’

‘Nature’s cathedral,’ retorted the Archdeacon scornfully. ‘One sees what

you mean, of course.’

‘I think Mr Donne was remembering the Latin colere, which has the

double meaning of dig and worship, as in cult and agriculture,’ said Agatha
helpfully. ‘You explained it so well in your sermon about the spiritual
meaning of harvest time,’ she added, turning to her husband. ‘It would be
nice to hear that again.’

The Archdeacon nodded and looked pleased. ‘Yes, I think that may be

the solution,’ he said. ‘I felt at the time that it was perhaps too subtle for
some of the congregation.’

Belinda was silent with admiration. What a splendid wife Agatha was!

She could never have dealt with him half so cleverly herself, she thought
humbly. She remembered the sermon, of course, but it had been so obscure,
that even she had been forced to abandon all efforts to understand it.

‘Oh, Mrs Hoccleve,’ burst out the curate eagerly, ‘I nearly forgot to tell

you, I had a pair of hand-knitted socks from Olivia Berridge. Wasn’t it nice
of her?’

‘Yes, she mentioned you the last time I heard from her,’ said Agatha

thoughtfully, and then began to explain to Belinda that Olivia Berridge was
a niece of hers whom Mr Donne had met when he was an undergraduate.

the acquaintance sound respectable, even dull, Belinda thought.

excellent work on certain doubtful readings in The Owl and The
Nightingale.’ She sighed, and looked down at the sock she was mending. ‘I
envy her that opportunity.’

‘Well, my dear, there is no reason why you shouldn’t get down to

something like that yourself,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I am sure you have
more time to spare than I have.’

‘I do so admire people who do obscure research,’ said Belinda. ‘I’m sure

I wish I could.’

‘Of course I have done a good deal of work on Middle English texts

myself in the past,’ said Agatha, smiling.

the Archdeacon. ‘After all, academic research is not everything. We must
remember George Herbert’s lines:

A servant with this clause
Makes drudgery divine,
Who sweeps a room as for Thy laws,
Makes that and the action fine.

‘Yes, they are comforting,’ Belinda agreed. ‘And yet,’ she went on

unhappily, ‘I don’t sweep rooms, Emily does that. The things I do seem
rather useless, but I suppose it could be applied to any action of everyday
life, really.’

‘Oh, certainly, Miss Bede,’ said Mr Donne, with curately heartiness. ‘We

cannot all have the same gifts,’ he added, with what Belinda felt was an
insufferably patronizing air.

‘Olivia is a very forceful young woman,’ said the Archdeacon, ‘and

rather a bluestocking in appearance. What do you think, Donne?’

‘Well, I can’t say that I’ve really noticed,’ said the curate. ‘I mean, it’s

what a person is that matters most, isn’t it?’

‘Ah, yes, the clergy at any rate should feel that,’ said the Archdeacon

sardonically. ‘It might be an idea for one of your sermons, Donne. You
could take the lilies of the field text and work it out quite simply. I’m not
sure that I won’t take it myself, though. It might be a way of reaching the
evening congregations, they like something of that kind. Never waste your
erudite quotations on them, they don’t appreciate or understand them.’

The curate murmured something about not really knowing any erudite

quotations, at which the Archdeacon nodded and looked satisfied.

Agatha rolled up the last pair of socks, and there was a pleasant silence,

during which Belinda became rather sentimental as she contemplated the
cosy domestic scene. Agatha, surrounded by the socks and her affectionate
husband, dear Agatha, almost; it was very seldom that Belinda was able to
think of her like that. We really ought to love one another, she thought
warmly, it was a pity it was often so difficult. But as she walked home, her

thoughts took a more definite and interesting turn. She began to wonder if
perhaps Mr Donne loved Olivia Berridge. By the time she had reached her
own house, however, she had decided that the whole idea was so upsetting
that it could not possibly be so. In any case, he would not have the chance
of seeing her very often, and a few pairs of socks through the post could not
really do very much.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SEVEN

When the day came for Agatha to go away, Belinda and Harriet watched her
departure out of Belinda’s bedroom window. From here there was an
excellent view of the vicarage drive and gate. Belinda had brought some
brass with her to clean and in the intervals when she stopped her vigorous
rubbing to look out of the window, was careful to display the duster in her
hand. Harriet stared out quite unashamedly, with nothing in her hand to
excuse her presence there. She even had a pair of binoculars, which she was
now trying to focus.

The sisters had said goodbye to Agatha the day before. Belinda was sure

that she would rather be alone on her last morning to say goodbye to her
husband, and there were always so many last-minute things to see to that
the presence of strangers could be nothing but a hindrance, she thought. She
really felt quite unhappy to think of Agatha and the Archdeacon being
parted, for the cosy domestic scene which she had witnessed on her last
visit to the vicarage had made a deep impression, and she felt that she ought
to keep reminding herself of it. Of course they did have their little
differences, there was no denying that, but it was equally certain that they
were devoted to each other and that Agatha was an admirable wife.

Belinda and Harriet had been at their posts by the window for about ten

minutes before there was any sign of life at the vicarage. Harriet had
suggested that they should be there early, as, according to her calculations,
Agatha would have to start for the station at least twenty minutes before the
train went at half-past eleven. To watch anyone coming or going in the
village was a real delight to them, so that they had looked forward to this
morning with an almost childish excitement. And yet it was understandable,
for there were so many interesting things about a departure, if one could
watch it without any feeling of sorrow or regret. What would Agatha wear?
Would she have a great deal of luggage or just a suitcase and a hat-box?
Would the Archdeacon go with her to the station in the taxi, or would he be
too busy to spare the time? If he did not go to the station would he kiss

Agatha goodbye before she got into the taxi, or would he already have done
that in the house? Belinda and Harriet were busy discussing these
interesting questions when Harriet gave a little cry of pleasure and
amusement.

‘Oh, look,’ she exclaimed, ‘the curate in his shirt-sleeves!’
Belinda looked. It was indeed the curate, wearing no coat and carrying a

large round hat-box. As far as she could see he looked flushed and
dishevelled.

peering anxiously through the field-glasses. ‘He looks rather tired.’

The next person to appear in the drive was the Archdeacon. He was

carrying a suitcase and looking round him uncertainly, as if he did not know
what to do with it. But at this moment a taxi appeared, so he advanced
towards it with a threatening air.

‘That old car of Palmer’s!’ exclaimed Harriet in disgust. ‘All the

stuffing’s coming out of the seats! I suppose the Archdeacon was too mean
to order Haines.’

Haines was engaged for this morning, and anyway, I don’t think Palmer is
any cheaper.’

expect the Archdeacon wants to make quite sure she doesn’t miss the train.
I expect they’ll be glad to get away from each other for a bit,’ she added.

Belinda was about to contradict her sister and remind her of what a

devoted couple the Hoccleves were, when Agatha herself appeared,
carrying a fur coat over her arm and a small dressing-case.

‘Oh, that’s the case with gold fittings, isn’t it?’ said Harriet. ‘I always

think it must be so heavy, though. I don’t like her hat very much, it makes
her face look too sharp.’

Belinda suddenly felt that there was something indecent about their

curiosity and turned away to clean the brass candlesticks on the
mantelpiece. But nothing would move Harriet from the window. She kept
up a flow of comments on Agatha’s clothes, the behaviour of the
Archdeacon and the curate. Belinda only hoped nobody could see her, with
the field-glasses glued to her eyes. It would look so bad, somehow, though
she did not doubt that others in the village were doing exactly the same
thing.

telling herself that it was not right that she should feel relieved because
Agatha was going away. Of course she was glad that Agatha was to have a
well-deserved holiday and the waters would undoubtedly help her
rheumatism, so there was room for gladness, but she ought not to have to
tell herself this after the first thought that came into her mind had been how
nice it would be to be able to ask Henry in to tea or supper without having
to ask Agatha as well.

startled Emily, who was reading the Daily Mirror over her mid-morning
cup of tea.

‘Oh, Emily, I hoped you would have got on to the silver by now,’ she

said. ‘Miss Harriet and I have done the bedrooms’ – she paused guiltily –
‘and I think I will see to the lunch myself. I am going to make a risotto out
of the chicken that was left over.’

‘Yes, Miss Bede.’ Emily began to assemble the materials for silver

cleaning. ‘I see Mrs Hoccleve’s gone,’ she remarked.

‘Oh, yes, it was today she was going,’ said Belinda casually.
‘I hope she won’t come to any harm, you never know with foreigners, do

you?’ said Emily.

‘An English gentlewoman can never come to any harm,’ said Belinda,

more to herself than to Emily.

‘But you do hear of people having nasty things happen to them,’

persisted Emily. ‘I’ve read it in the papers. But of course Mrs Hoccleve’s
elderly, really, isn’t she, so its different?’

Belinda was silent. She felt she could hardly agree that Agatha was

elderly when she herself was a year older and thought of herself as only
middle-aged. And yet, middle-aged or elderly, what was the difference
really? Calm of mind, all passion spent … she had known that before she
was thirty. ‘Don’t waste the Silvo like that, Emily,’ she said with
unaccustomed sharpness, ‘you won’t get a better polish. It’s the rubbing that
does it.’

The sound of heavy footsteps on the stairs told Belinda that Harriet had

finished her business there, and as the kettle was boiling, she made a pot of
tea and took it into the dining-room.

‘I think I shall see if I can alter my black coat and make the sleeves like

Agatha’s,’ Harriet was saying, half to herself. ‘Do you think there is

anything to let out on the seams?’

‘Your coat is so nice as it is,’ said Belinda doubtfully, for she had had

experience of Harriet’s attempts at alteration. ‘Altering a coat is so much
more difficult than a dress.’

that leopard-skin trimming though and put it on the cuffs and pockets. That
would be a change, and sleeves are going to be important this winter, I
believe.’

‘Have they got Agatha away safely?’ asked Belinda casually.
‘Oh, yes,’ said Harriet, in a more cheerful tone of voice. ‘Mr Donne went

in the taxi with her. I suppose he would see her off at the station. And do
you know,’ she leaned forward eagerly, ‘the Archdeacon didn’t even kiss
her. He just waved his hand, like this.’ Harriet gave a rather improbable
imitation of how the Archdeacon had said goodbye to his wife.

‘I expect they said their real goodbyes in the house,’ said Belinda. ‘After

all it’s rather upsetting, isn’t it, a parting like that?’

‘The Archdeacon didn’t look in the least bit upset,’ said Harriet. ‘After

the taxi had gone he stood in the drive grinning and rubbing his hands,
looking as pleased as Punch.’

arguing, they drank their tea and were just finishing it when there was a cry
from Harriet, who pointed in the direction of the window.

‘Look,’ she cried, for she had been so absorbed in her task of

‘strengthening’ a pair of corsets with elastic thread that she had not noticed
the Archdeacon creeping up the drive. Neither had Belinda, but she was less
observant and sharp.

‘I thought I would take you by surprise,’ he said. ‘I am glad to find you

both engaged in the trivial round, the common task.’

bundling the corsets under a cushion in one of the armchairs. Belinda
noticed to her horror that they were imperfectly hidden and planted herself
firmly in front of the chair. It was too bad of Harriet to make these little
embarrassments. The two cats were curled up in the basket-chair on the
other side of the fire, so it was quite a problem to know where to seat the
Archdeacon. But Harriet recovered her composure more quickly than
Belinda, turned out the cats with a quick movement and offered him the
chair.

‘I’m afraid we have annoyed them,’ said the Archdeacon, ‘they are

looking positively baleful. And yet I feel that I need rest more than they
do.’ He sighed and stretched out his hands to the warmth of the fire.

‘We always call them the brethren dwelling in unity,’ said Harriet.

‘Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren, to dwell together in
unity,’ she quoted, as if by way of explanation. ‘The psalm, you know…’

‘Of course he knows,’ said Belinda rather sharply, and yet it was odd

how one sometimes felt that he might not. She began to wonder why he had
come; it was unusual for him to call in the morning.

‘I expect you know Agatha has just gone,’ said the Archdeacon, in

answer to her thoughts. ‘Such a business getting her to the station, I really
feel quite exhausted. These departures are always more tiring for those who
are left behind.’

‘Oh, dear, we should have offered you some tea,’ said Belinda reflecting

that it was in fact Mr Donne who had gone to the station with Agatha. ‘We
had ours some time ago so it won’t be very nice. I’ll get Emily to make you
some more.’

said the Archdeacon. ‘I really felt justified in having something.’

Belinda nodded sympathetically, but she could see Harriet looking

scornful and so began talking quickly about the Harvest Festival and the
decorations which were to be done the next day.

‘We must have more corn this year,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘Corn is an

essential part of harvest, perhaps the most important part of all.’

‘Ah, yes, bread is the staff of life,’ said Harriet solemnly. ‘But we mustn’t

forget the other fruits of the earth. Ricardo Bianco has some very fine
marrows and pumpkins, and bigger things really show up better.’

‘The church always looks very nice,’ said Belinda, fearing they were

going to have an argument.

‘Yes, there are always plenty of willing helpers,’ said the Archdeacon

complacently.

‘I do hope there won’t be any unpleasantness this year,’ said Belinda, her

face clouding. ‘Last year there was the embarrassment of Miss Prior, if you
remember.’

‘The Embarrassment of Miss Prior,’ said the Archdeacon, savouring the

words. ‘It sounds almost naughty, but I fear it was not. I cannot recall the
circumstances.’

found that somebody else had already done the lectern and she’s always
done it for the last twenty years or more.’

‘Yes, poor little soul,’ said Belinda reminiscently, ‘she was rather late.

She had been finishing some curtains for Lady Clara Boulding – you know,
those heavy maroon velvet ones in her morning-room – and she was nearly
crying. She does so enjoy doing the lectern and making a bunch of grapes
hang down from the bird’s mouth. Of course the only disadvantage is that
they do distract the Sunday School children’s attention so; last year they
were very much inclined to giggle – Miss Jenner and Miss Smiley had a
very difficult time with them.’

‘If only they would try to teach them that it is perfectly right and fitting

that we should bring the fruits of the earth into God’s House at Harvest
Time,’ said the Archdeacon rather peevishly.

‘But children don’t understand things like that,’ said Belinda, ‘and in any

case young people are so prone to giggle. I can remember I was.’

reveal it when asked.

Eventually the Archdeacon stood up to go and Belinda was about to

hurry to the kitchen to start preparing the risotto, when Harriet pointed
towards the Archdeacon’s left foot and exclaimed loudly, ‘Oh, you’ve got a
hole in your sock!’

‘Damn,’ said the Archdeacon firmly and unmistakably. ‘I suppose it was

too much to hope that my clothes would be left in order.’

‘I expect Agatha doesn’t like darning,’ said Harriet tactlessly. ‘I’m not at

all fond of it myself, so I can sympathize.’

hastily. ‘It doesn’t look a very big one. Perhaps it could be cobbled together
…’ she was already rummaging in her work basket for some wool of the
right shade. ‘I’m afraid this grey is rather too light,’ she said, ‘but I don’t
think it will show very much.’

‘Oh, that doesn’t matter,’ said the Archdeacon impatiently. ‘What a fuss

it all is over such a trifling matter.’

Belinda smiled as she threaded her needle. Dear Henry, he was so

inconsistent, but perhaps a hole in a sock was hardly as important as moths
in a suit. ‘I think it would be best if you put your foot up on this little chair,’
she said, ‘then I can get at your heel to mend the sock.’

will, and there was one anxious moment when Belinda inadvertantly
pricked him with the needle and it seemed as if he would lose his temper.

Harriet did her best to divert him with conversation and eventually he

recovered his good humour and began to ask her the origin of her elusive
quotation about the Apes of Brazil. He thought that it might be Elizabethan,
it reminded him of that poem with the lines about making Tullia’s ape a
marmoset and Leda’s goose a swan.

‘I don’t remember anything about the Apes of Brazil,’ said Belinda

anxiously, for the darning of the sock was an all-engrossing occupation.

Harriet. ‘That’s not a quotation, that’s natural history.’ She laughed
delightedly.

The Archdeacon seemed surprised and Harriet began to explain.
‘It’s quite simple, really,’ she said. ‘When the Apes of Brazil beat their

chests with their hands or paws, or whatever apes have, you can hear the
sound two miles away.’

‘Oh, Harriet,’ said Belinda, as if reproving a child, ‘surely not two miles?

You must be mistaken.’

‘Two miles,’ said Harriet firmly. ‘Father Plowman told me.’
The Archdeacon laughed scornfully at this.
‘It was at Lady Clara Boulding’s house,’ said Harriet indignantly. ‘We

were having a most interesting conversation, I can’t remember now what it
was about.’

‘I cannot imagine what the subject of it can have been,’ said the

Archdeacon, ‘and I did not know that Plowman had ever been in Brazil.’

echo,’ said Harriet, ‘so I naturally thought of the Apes of Brazil.’

‘I think the minds of the metaphysical poets must have worked

something like that,’ said Belinda thoughtfully. ‘Donne and Abraham
Cowley, perhaps.’

understand the revival of interest in his works.’

‘I think the hole is mended now,’ said Belinda. ‘It doesn’t look so bad

now; of course the wool is just a little too light.’

‘My dear Belinda, you have done it quite exquisitely,’ said the

Archdeacon. ‘I must take care to be passing your house every time I have a

hole in my sock.’

Belinda smiled and went quite pink with pleasure and confusion. She

went with him to the front door and then returned to the dining-room where
Harriet had collapsed heavily into a chair and was fanning herself with the
parish magazine.

manages to put up with him all the time. No wonder she’s gone away.’

‘Harriet, do speak more quietly,’ said Belinda in an agitated whisper, for

Emily had just come into the room to lay the table. ‘I must go and start the
risotto,’ she said and went into the kitchen, where she walked aimlessly
about in circles trying to assemble all the ingredients she needed. For
somehow it was difficult to concentrate. The mending of the sock had been
an upsetting and unnerving experience, and even when she had made the
risotto she did not feel any pleasure at the thought of eating it.

‘Nearly twenty past one!’ said Harriet, as they sat down to their meal.

‘The Archdeacon has delayed everything. I suppose he imagined Emily
would be cooking.’

Belinda, ‘they just expect meals to appear on the table and they do.’

‘Of course Emily usually does cook,’ went on Harriet, ‘it’s only that she

can’t manage foreign dishes.’ She took a liberal second helping of risotto.
‘This is really delicious.’

‘It was Ricardo’s recipe,’ said Belinda absently.
‘We really must go and get some more blackberries soon,’ said Harriet.

‘Although in October the devil will be in them. You know what the country
people say.’

Belinda smiled.
‘Mr Donne is very fond of blackberry jelly,’ said Harriet. ‘Apparently he

very much enjoyed the apple jelly I took him. He said he really preferred it
for breakfast – instead of marmalade, you know.’

‘I wonder what it would be like to be turned into a pillar of salt?’ said

Belinda surprisingly, in a far-away voice.

of that? Potiphar’s wife, wasn’t it, in the Old Testament somewhere?’

‘I think it was Lot’s wife,’ said Belinda, ‘but I can’t remember why. I

should imagine it would be very restful,’ she went on, ‘to have no feelings
or emotions. Or perhaps,’ she continued thoughtfully, ‘it would have been

simpler to have been born like Milton’s first wife, an image of earth and
phlegm.’

cheese. You are hopelessly inattentive. When Mr Donne was here the other
night you never passed him anything. If it hadn’t been for me he would
have starved.’

Belinda came back to everyday life again. How many curates would

starve and die were it not for the Harriets of this world, she thought. ‘I’m
sorry, dear,’ she said. ‘I must try not to be so absent-minded. Today has
been rather trying, hasn’t it really – too much happening.’

‘Yes,’ agreed Harriet. ‘Agatha going and the Archdeacon coming. Who

knows what he may be up to now that she’s gone?’

‘Oh, Harriet, I wish you wouldn’t talk like that,’ said Belinda. ‘It’s really

most unsuitable. And besides,’ she went on, half to herself, ‘what could he
be up to when you come to think of it?’ Her voice trailed off rather sadly,
but she rose from the table briskly enough and spent the afternoon doing
some useful work in the garden.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER EIGHT

The next day Belinda had a letter from Dr Nicholas Parnell, a friend of her
undergraduate days and the Librarian of her old University Library. He
wrote of the successful tour which Mr Mold, the deputy Librarian, had
made in Africa. ‘He has penetrated the thickest jungles,’ wrote Dr Parnell,
‘where no white man, and certainly no deputy Librarian, has ever set foot
before. The native chiefs have been remarkably generous with their gifts
and Mold has collected some five thousand pounds, much of it in the form
of precious stones and other rareties. I suspect that a great many of them
have not the slightest idea to what they are contributing, but, where
Ignorance is bliss…’

Belinda sighed. Dear Nicholas was really quite obsessed with the Library

and its extensions. She wished he would remember that the two things
which bound them together were the memory of their undergraduate days
and our greater English poets. She turned to the end of the letter, where she
found more cheering news. The Librarian thought he might be able to come
and spend a few days with the Archdeacon while Agatha was away. Perhaps
Mr Mold would come too. ‘The Library can safely be left in charge of old
Mr Lydgate,’ he concluded. ‘He is a little wandering now and is continually
worrying about the pronunciation of the Russian “l”. However, his duties
will be light.’

How nice it would be to see dear Nicholas again, thought Belinda, eating

her scrambled egg and feeling happy and proud that she, a middle-aged
country spinster, should number famous librarians among her friends. At
least, the Library was famous, she emended. Dear Nicholas had rather sunk
into obscurity since his scholarly publications of twenty years ago, and now
that he had definitely abandoned all intellectual pursuits, she assumed that
no more in that line was to be expected from him. Still, Floreat Bibliotheca,
and she was sure that under his guidance it would. And, what was perhaps
even more important, the Library would be adequately heated and the
material comfort of the readers considered. For who can produce a really

scholarly work when he is sitting shivering in a too heavy overcoat,
struggling all the time against the temptation to go out and get himself a
warming cup of coffee?

The same afternoon Belinda went into the village to do a little shopping.

She had to give an order at the grocer’s and the butcher’s, and, if there was
time, she would go and choose some wool to make Ricardo Bianco a nice
warm pair of socks. She wondered if he had tried taking calcium tablets for
his chilblains; they were supposed to be very good.

She entered the wool shop, kept by Miss Jenner, who was also a Sunday

School teacher. She always liked going to Miss Jenner’s as the attractive
display of different wools fired her imagination. Harriet would look
splendid in a jumper of that coral pink. It would be a good idea for a
Christmas present, although it was impossible to keep anything secret from
Harriet owing to her insatiable curiosity. And here was an admirable clerical
grey. Such nice soft wool too … would she ever dare to knit a pullover for
the Archdeacon? It would have to be done surreptitiously and before
Agatha came back. She might send it anonymously, or give it to him
casually, as if it had been left over from the Christmas charity parcel. Surely
that would be quite seemly, unless of course it might appear rather ill-
mannered?

‘This is a lovely clerical grey,’ said Miss Jenner, as if sensing her

thoughts. ‘I’ve sold quite a lot of this to various ladies round here –
especially in Father Plowman’s parish. I was saying to the traveller only the
other day that I knew this would be a popular line. He even suggested I
might knit him a pullover’ – she laughed shrilly – ‘the idea of it!’

silly with the travellers that it was quite embarrassing to be in the shop
when one of them arrived. Still, poor thing, Belinda thought, the warm tide
of easy sentimentality rising up within her, it was probably the only bit of
excitement in her drab life. She was getting on now, and with her sharp,
foxy face and prominent teeth had obviously never been pretty. Living over
the shop with her old mother must be very dull. And perhaps we are all silly
over something or somebody without knowing it; perhaps her own
behaviour with the Archdeacon was no less silly than Miss Jenner’s with
the travellers. It was rather a disquieting thought, especially when Miss
Jenner, with a smirk on her face, began to tell her that eight ounces was the
amount of wool that ladies usually bought.

‘I think I will have nine ounces, in case I decide to make long sleeves.’
After all, she might make a jumper for herself, now that she came to think
of it she was certain that she would, either that or something else equally
safe and dull. When we grow older we lack the fine courage of youth, and
even an ordinary task like making a pullover for somebody we love or used
to love seems too dangerous to be undertaken. Then Agatha might get to
hear of it; that was something else to be considered. Her long, thin fingers
might pick at it critically and detect a mistake in the ribbing at the Vee neck;
there was often some difficulty there. Agatha was not much of a knitter
herself, but she would have an unfailing eye for Belinda’s little mistakes.
And then the pullover might be too small, or the neck opening too tight, so
that he wouldn’t be able to get his head through it. Belinda went hot and
cold, imagining her humiliation. She would have to practise on Harriet,
whose head was fully as big as the Archdeacon’s. And yet, in a way, it
would be better if Harriet didn’t know about it, she might so easily blurt out
something … Obviously the enterprise was too fraught with dangers to be
attempted and Belinda determined to think no more about it. God moves in
a mysterious way, she thought, without irreverence. It was wonderful how
He did, even in small things. No doubt she would know what to do with the
wool as time went on.

This afternoon Belinda had naturally hoped that she might meet the

Archdeacon, but it was now nearly teatime, and although she had been
through the main street and all the most likely side streets, Fate had not
brought them together. She decided that there was nothing for it but to go
home; after all, there would be many more opportunities.

wandering about among the tombstones, with his hands clasped behind his
back and an expression of melancholy on his face. It was, of course, the
Archdeacon. But what was he doing in the churchyard when it was nearly
tea-time? Belinda wondered. This would hardly be a suitable time to
interrupt his meditations by telling him that she had had a letter from
Nicholas Parnell and that she did hope they would both come to supper
when he came to stay. She began to walk rather more slowly, uncertain
what to do. She looked in her shopping basket to see if she had forgotten
anything. She remembered now that the careful list she had made was lying
on top of the bureau in the dining-room, so she could hardly expect to check

things very satisfactorily. There was no reason why she should not hurry
home to tea.

‘they must be hundreds of years old.’

Belinda looked up from her basket. The Archdeacon had now come to

the wall.

‘Oh, good afternoon,’ she said, hoping that he had not noticed her

obvious reluctance to go home. ‘You quite startled me. I didn’t see you,’
she added, hoping that she might be forgiven or at least not found out, in
this obvious lie.

The Archdeacon smiled. ‘I was thinking out my sermon for Sunday,’ he

said. ‘I find the atmosphere so helpful. Looking at these tombs, I am
reminded of my own mortality.’

underneath it. ‘Yes, indeed,’ she said, hoping that the gentle melancholy of
her tone would make amends for her trite reply.

‘I have lately been reading Young’s Night Thoughts,’ went on the

Archdeacon, in his pulpit voice. ‘There are some magnificent lines in it that
I had forgotten.’

Belinda waited. She doubted now whether it would be possible to be

back for tea at four o’clock. She could hardly break away when the
Archdeacon was about to deliver an address on the mortality of man.

He began to quote:

We take no note of time

But from its loss. To give it then a tongue
Is wise in man. As if an angel spoke,
I feel the solemn sound. If heard aright
It is the knell of my departed hours …

‘I thought of those lines when I heard the clock strike just now,’ he
explained.

‘It must be wonderful, and unusual too, to think of time like that,’ said

Belinda shyly, realizing that when she heard the clock strike her thoughts
were on a much lower level. She suspected that even dear Henry was guilty
of more mundane thoughts occasionally. At four o’clock in the afternoon,

surely the most saintly person would think rather of tea than of his departed
hours? She stood silent, looking into her basket.

‘Not that Young was a great theologian, or even a great poet,’ the

Archdeacon went on hastily. ‘Much of the Night Thoughts consists of
platitudes expressed in that over-elaborate and turgid style, which the minor
eighteenth-century poets mistakenly associated with Milton.’

‘Oh, yes, the style is certainly rather flowery,’ said Belinda, doing the

best she could, for she was beginning to be uneasily conscious of Harriet
waiting for her tea, the hot scones getting cold and Miss Beard, that
excellent church worker and indefatigable gossip, passing by on the other
side of the road.

‘That may be, but I do find in it a little of the wonder and awe which is

generally supposed to be absent from the literature of that age.’ The
Archdeacon stood looking at Belinda with his head on one side, as if he
expected her to agree with him.

But Belinda said nothing, for she was thinking how handsome he still

was. His long pointed nose only added to the general distinction of his
features. There was quite a long pause until the clock struck a quarter past
four.

‘Tea,’ said the Archdeacon, suddenly human once more. ‘I’m all by

myself,’ he said rather pathetically. ‘Won’t you come and share my solitary
meal? I don’t know if there will be any cake,’ he added doubtfully.

Belinda started. ‘Oh, no,’ she said, drawing back a little, and then

remembering her manners, she added: ‘Thank you very much but Harriet
will be expecting me.’ She did not dare to invite him to share their
undoubtedly more appetizing meal and almost smiled when she pictured
what Harriet’s reaction would be were she to bring him home unexpectedly.
All the same it would have been very nice to have had tea with him, she
thought regretfully, quite like old times. Perhaps he would ask her again,
though it was the kind of spontaneous invitation that comes perhaps only
once in a lifetime. ‘You must come to tea with us some time,’ she said,
doing her best to assume a light, social manner. ‘I will ask Harriet what is
the best day, though,’ she added hastily, ‘I expect you are very busy.’

‘Ah, yes,’ he sighed, ‘nobody can possibly know how busy.’
‘Then I mustn’t keep you any longer,’ said Belinda, moving away.
‘Well, the tombs are always with us,’ he replied enigmatically, raising his

hat with a sweeping gesture.

home very quickly. As she had expected, Harriet was waiting impatiently in
the drawing-room. The tea was already in, and the hot scones stood in a
little covered dish in the fireplace.

‘Oh, Belinda, when will you learn to be punctual,’ she said, in a

despairing voice.’

four, but I met the Archdeacon.’ She looked about her rather helplessly for a
place to put her coat. ‘I’m sorry you waited tea for me.’

make me enjoy it all the more. What meat did you order?’

‘Mutton,’ said Belinda absently.
‘But we haven’t any red-currant jelly,’ said Harriet. ‘One of us will have

to go out tomorrow morning and get some. Mutton’s so uninteresting
without it.’

Belinda sat down by the fire and began to pour out the tea.
‘Where did you see the Archdeacon?’ asked Harriet.
‘In the churchyard,’ said Belinda. ‘He was walking about among the

tombs.’

Harriet snorted.
‘But, Harriet,’ Belinda leaned forward eagerly, ‘he asked me to go to tea

with him, but of course I couldn’t very well have gone.’

‘I don’t see why not,’ said Harriet. ‘I can’t believe you didn’t want to.’
‘No, it wasn’t exactly that,’ said Belinda slowly. ‘I didn’t really mind one

way or the other,’ she lied, ‘but I knew you would be expecting me back
and I thought you might wonder where I was. And then Florrie and the cook
might have thought it funny if I went there the minute Agatha was out of
the house. You know how servants gossip, especially in a small place like
this. I don’t want to be silly in any way, of course there would have been
nothing in it, but I decided it would be better if I didn’t go.’ She put the rest
of her scone into her mouth with an air of finality.

Harriet was obviously disappointed. ‘I do wish you’d gone,’ she

lamented. ‘So little of interest happens here and one may as well make the
most of life. Besides, dear,’ she added gently, ‘I don’t think anybody would
be likely to gossip about you in that old tweed coat.’

‘No, you’re quite right. I suppose it will have to go to Mrs Ramage next

time she comes.’ She got up and rang the bell for Emily to clear away the

tea things. When she was going out with the tray, Emily turned to Harriet
rather nervously and said, ‘Excuse me, m’m, but would you mind if I just
slip out to the post?’

‘Oh, no, Emily,’ said Harriet firmly, ‘there’s no need for that. I shall be

writing some letters myself, so I can take yours as well. There is plenty for
you to do here.’

Emily went out of the room with a sulky expression on her face, and was

heard to bang the tray rather heavily on the table in the passage.

‘She only wants to go and gossip with the vicarage Florrie,’ said Harriet,

triumphant at having frustrated her. ‘And we can’t have that, can we?’ she
said turning to Belinda for support.

But Belinda was not listening. She was wondering what they would have

talked about if she had gone to tea, or rather what Henry would have talked
about. It had started to rain outside, and the soft patter of the rain in the
leaves, combined with the rapidly falling darkness, made her feel pleasantly
melancholy. She wondered if Henry were looking at the twilight, missing
Agatha, she thought dutifully, or even regretting that she had not stayed to
tea. It would have been nice to go … Belinda put down her knitting and sat
dreaming. Of course there was a certain pleasure in not doing something; it
was impossible that one’s high expectations should be disappointed by the
reality. To Belinda’s imaginative but contented mind this seemed a happy
state, with no emptiness or bitterness about it. She was fortunate in needing
very little to make her happy.

She was still sitting idly with her knitting in her lap, when the front door-

bell rang, and Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall were shown into the
room.

‘We were just passing and thought we’d drop in,’ Edith explained.
They stood in the doorway, a tall drooping figure and a short stout one,

both wearing mackintoshes, and that wet-weather headgear so unbecoming
to middle-aged ladies and so incongruously known as a ‘pixie hood’.

‘Do take off your wet things,’ said Belinda rousing herself.
‘You had better stay to supper,’ said Harriet rather too bluntly. ‘It won’t

be very much but we shall be having it soon.’

Why yes, it will be a good chance to repay the baked beans, thought

Belinda. She wondered whether they ought perhaps to open a tin of tongue
and get Emily to make a potato salad. Or would a macaroni cheese be

better? With some bottled fruit and coffee to follow that should really be
enough.

‘I think I’ll just go and tell Emily about supper,’ she said.
‘Oh, please don’t trouble to make any difference for us,’ said Connie.

‘Bread and cheese or whatever you’re having will do for us, won’t it,
Edith?’

Edith gave a short bark of laughter. ‘Well, I must say that I should like to

feel an effort was being made, even if only a small one,’ she said in a
jocular tone. ‘I think we all like to feel that.’

and she said in a low voice, ‘We think we have a piece of news.’

‘News? What kind of news?’ asked Harriet rather sharply.
‘We have heard that Mr Donne is engaged,’ said Edith, in a loud

triumphant tone.

‘To a niece of Mrs Hoccleve’s, a Miss Berry,’ chimed in Connie.
‘Miss Berridge, I think, if it’s the niece who’s doing research,’ said

Belinda, looking rather fearfully at her sister.

‘Oh, I don’t think that can be true,’ declared Harriet indignantly. ‘She has

made him a pair of socks, but I don’t think there is anything more than that
between them.’

‘Miss Prior told us,’ persisted Edith, ‘and she is usually very accurate.

She has been a good deal at the vicarage lately, getting Mrs Hoccleve’s
clothes ready to go away. She may very well have heard something.’

‘But Miss Berridge is some years older than Mr Donne,’ said Harriet,

equally persistent. ‘It would be a most unsuitable marriage. Besides,’ she
added, her tone taking on a note of disgust, ‘she’s doing some research or
something like that, isn’t she, Belinda.’

‘Yes, on some doubtful reading in The Owl and the Nightingale. It

doesn’t seem a very good training for a wife,’ said Belinda uncertainly,
thinking of Agatha and her inability to darn. ‘Still, if she has knitted him a
pair of socks perhaps she is not entirely lacking in the feminine arts.’

Edith gave a snort. ‘I believe some of these old poems are very coarse, so

she may not be such a bluestocking as we think.’

There was a short silence during which the front-door bell rang again and

Mr Donne was shown into the room carrying a bundle of parish magazines.

‘Miss Jenner couldn’t manage to deliver them this month,’ he explained,

‘so I am doing it.’

‘Just the person we wanted to see,’ said Harriet. ‘Now, you can surely tell

us. Is it true that you are engaged to be married?’ The words rang out as a
challenge.

‘I – engaged?’ Mr Donne made a kind of bleating noise and a movement

with his arms which scattered the parish magazines all over the floor. ‘It’s
certainly the first I’ve heard of it,’ he went on, recovering something of his
usual manner. ‘Who is the fortunate lady?’

‘Miss Berridge,’ said Edith Liversidge firmly.
‘Miss Berridge?’ he echoed in a puzzled tone. ‘Well, of course, she’s a

very good sort, and I like her very much …’ he hesitated, perhaps feeling
that he was being ungallant.

‘But you think of her more as an elder sister, I expect,’ prompted Harriet

with determination.

‘Well, yes, I suppose I do,’ he agreed gratefully. ‘Anyway she’s much too

clever to look at anyone like me.’

‘Is she beautiful?’ persisted Edith.
‘Well, not exactly beautiful,’ he said, looking embarrassed, ‘but very nice

and so kind.’

Ah, had she been more beauteous and less kind,
She might have found me of another mind.

thought Belinda, but decided it might be better not to quote the lines.

‘Well, that’s that,’ said Harriet. ‘There is no truth in the rumour. Isn’t it

amazing how people will gossip?’

‘I never thought there was,’ said Connie to Belinda. ‘I think Mr Donne

will marry some pretty young thing.’ She sighed and her eyes bulged
sentimentally.

‘I may not get married at all,’ said Mr Donne almost defiantly. ‘Many

clergymen do not.’

‘No, a single curate is in many ways more suitable,’ said Belinda

thoughtfully. ‘More in the tradition, if you see what I mean. And then of
course there’s the celibacy of the clergy isn’t there?’ she added quickly.

‘Is there?’ said Edith scornfully. ‘I thought St Paul said it was better to

marry than burn.’

‘Well, it is hardly a question of that,’ said Belinda in a confused way. ‘I

mean, of burning. One would hardly expect it to be.’ She felt rather
annoyed with Edith, who must surely know less than anybody about what
St Paul had said, for introducing this unsuitable aspect of the question.

speaking, now came back with the news that supper was ready.

beaming smile. ‘I’m afraid it won’t be much of a meal …’ she waved her
hands deprecatingly.

Edith Liversidge moved into the dining-room with a confident step. They

would all benefit from Mr Donne’s presence, she knew, and noted with
sardonic approval that there was a large bowl of fruit salad on the table and
a jug of cream as well as a choice of cold meats.

Oh dear, thought Belinda, recognizing tomorrow’s luncheon, surely the

tin of tongue would have been enough?

‘Let’s all have a glass of sherry,’ said Harriet, going over to the

sideboard, where a decanter and glasses had been set out on a tray. ‘After
all, we might have been going to drink to Mr Donne’s engagement.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER NINE

‘I suppose they really have come,’ said Harriet doubtfully. ‘Emily is usually
quite accurate in her information and she had this from the vicarage Florrie,
who ought to know if anyone does. She told her that two gentlemen had
arrived to stay at the vicarage last night, but of course we have no proof that
it is Dr Parnell and Mr Mold. It might be two clergymen coming to see the
Archdeacon about something.’

‘Yes, I suppose it might be,’ said Belinda, ‘but somehow clergymen don’t

come to see him about things, do they? I don’t know why.’

‘They came by night,’ declared Harriet, ‘like Nicodemus. Isn’t Mr Mold

called Nicodemus?’

‘Oh, no, Harriet, his name is Nathaniel.’
‘Nathaniel Mold,’ said Harriet, trying it. ‘Nat Mold. I think that sounds

rather common, doesn’t it?’

‘Well, we shall just call him Mr Mold,’ said Belinda, ‘so I don’t think we

need worry. I believe Nicholas always calls him Nathaniel. He hates
abbreviations.’ She got up from the table and went to the window. ‘It seems
quite a nice morning after all that heavy rain,’ she said. ‘I think I shall go
out into the village a little later on. I expect Nicholas will be taking a stroll
and I am so looking forward to seeing him. Perhaps we shall meet.’

‘I won’t come with you,’ said Harriet nobly. ‘After all, he is really your

friend, not mine, and I expect you will have a lot to talk about.’ Privately,
Harriet thought him rather a boring little man, but she hoped for great
things from Mr Mold, who was reputed to be something of a ‘one for the
ladies’. This piece of information had also been gleaned from the vicarage
Florrie, but Harriet had thought it wiser not to tell her sister. She wondered
how Florrie, a plain, lumpish girl, had managed to find it out in so short a
time.

Belinda was fortunate enough to come face to face with Dr Parnell before

she had gone very far, and as they were just outside the Old Refectory, a tea
shop run by gentlewomen, it seemed a good idea to go inside and have a

cup of coffee. Dear Nicholas looked rather cold and peevish, she thought,
wondering if he had had an adequate breakfast at the vicarage.

‘I don’t suppose you are really in need of anything,’ she said, as they sat

down, ‘but morning coffee is a pleasant, idle habit, I always think.’

‘Good morning, Miss Bede.’ Mrs Wilton, a pleasant-faced woman with

rather prominent teeth, and wearing a smock patterned with a herbaceous
border, stood before them. She stared at Dr Parnell with frank interest and
then at Belinda. Nicholas Parnell was small and bearded and did not
somehow look the kind of person one would marry, Belinda realized. All
the same, she felt proud of his distinction and could not resist introducing
him to Mrs Wilton, who was, after all, a canon’s widow.

‘Oh, the Library,’ said Mrs Wilton in a reverent tone. ‘My husband used

to read there when he was an undergraduate. I’ve heard so much about it.’

have been great improvements in the last ten years or so. We also have a
Ladies’ Cloakroom in the main building now,’ he added, his voice rising to
a clear, ringing tone. ‘That is a very great convenience.’ He chuckled into
his beard as Mrs Wilton went away to fetch their coffee. ‘I do not approve
of this hushed and reverent attitude towards our great Library. After all, it is
a place for human beings, isn’t it?’

some of the strange people who used to work there in her undergraduate
days, many of whom could hardly have been called human beings if one
were to judge by their looks.

‘These are excellent cakes,’ said Dr Parnell, eating heartily, ‘although I

had such a late breakfast that I can hardly do them justice. I must say I was
surprised that dear Henry was not up before me. I had quite expected that
there would be a Daily Celebration. Now that I come to think of it, I
distinctly remember seeing ‘D’ against the church in Mowbray’s Guide. I
hope I shall not have to write and correct them.’

is always a Daily Celebration but I expect Mr Donne – he’s the curate –
would be taking it. Probably Henry thought it would be more courteous to
breakfast with you on your first morning here.’

‘Ah, Belinda, I see you have not changed. We did not breakfast until half

past nine, so your argument falls to pieces. I left poor Henry in the

churchyard, as I came out just now. He said the tombs put him in mind of
his own mortality.’

‘And did he quote Young’s Night Thoughts to you?’ asked Belinda,

suddenly disloyal.

‘Indeed, he did. I left him because he was so tiresomely melancholy. And

then he has been trying to make me subscribe to some fund for the church
roof,’ said Dr Parnell.

… but perforated sore,

And drill’d in holes the solid oak is found
By worms voracious, eating through and through …

he quoted solemnly, so that Belinda could hardly help smiling, although she
knew it was very naughty of her. As they walked out of the Old Refectory
towards the church she tried to remember what it was that Father Plowman
had told her about the death-watch beetle and its habits, as if to make
amends for her lapse. But before she had got very far, they had reached the
churchyard wall and Belinda could see that the Archdeacon was sitting in
his favourite seat under the yew trees. She felt a faint irritation to see him
sitting there in the middle of the morning when so many people, women
mostly, were going about their household duties and shopping. She
supposed that men would be working too, but somehow their work seemed
less important and exhausting.

‘What is he doing in the churchyard, I wonder?’ she asked Dr Parnell, but

she did not really expect him to be able to tell her. The Archdeacon’s
affected eighteenth-century melancholy failed to charm her this morning.

‘I think he’s meditating on his sermon for Sunday morning,’ said Dr

Parnell. ‘I understand that it is to be something rather out of the ordinary.’

When the Archdeacon saw them he smiled benevolently, but at the same

time condescendingly. It was as if he were letting them see how fortunate
they were to be able to stroll in the village on a fine October morning, while
he was condemned to sit among the tombs thinking out his sermon.

‘Isn’t that seat rather damp?’ inquired Belinda sharply. ‘We had some

very heavy rain during the night, and you know how easily you catch cold.’
She felt that as Agatha was so many miles away she was justified in
adopting this almost wifely tone towards him.

He looked up irritably; Belinda had spoilt the romance of his

environment. It was just the kind of remark that Agatha would make and,
now that he came to think of it, he supposed the seat was rather damp. He
felt a distinct chill striking up through his bones and began to wonder if he
were perhaps catching cold. He would never have noticed it if Belinda had
not put the idea into his head. He rose rather ungraciously and came
towards them.

‘It seems impossible to find peace and quiet anywhere,’ he remarked. ‘I

had settled down in my study after breakfast when the girl came in with the
vacuum cleaner and drove me into the churchyard. Now I am interrupted
again.’

Belinda smiled at this picture. ‘I’m sorry if we have disturbed you,’ she

said. ‘I think we should really have walked past if you had not got up and
come to us.’

‘That would have been most unfriendly,’ said the Archdeacon

unreasonably. ‘Besides, it is not every day that we have visitors. We should
really make some effort to entertain them.’

excellent cup of coffee and introduced me to a charming lady who showed
great reverence when the Library was mentioned. It is really rather
gratifying. I should be delighted to show her round,’ he added. ‘She would
find every convenience. The next thing will be to have some kind of a
restaurant where readers can take luncheon or tea together. Do you know,’ –
he tapped his walking stick on the ground – ‘I have had to have notices
printed requesting readers not to eat in the Library? One would hardly have
thought it possible.’

During this time an idea had been taking shape in Belinda’s mind, and it

was one which she knew her sister would approve. The talk about eating
had made her think how nice it would be if they had a little supper party on
Sunday evening. So, with unusual boldness, she issued the invitation,
though she realized that her own rather timid way did not compare with
Harriet’s careless joviality. ‘If you have no other engagement on Sunday
evening,’ she began, ‘I was wondering if perhaps … I mean, would you
care to come to supper at our house after Evensong? And Mr Mold too, of
course.’

‘That would be delightful,’ said Dr Parnell. ‘One feels somehow that

Sunday evening should be spent away from a vicarage if at all possible.’

Sunday will be particularly so. I intend to preach myself both morning and
evening. These people are so sunk in lethargy that they do not know their
own wickedness.’

Belinda looked a little startled. ‘I know,’ she said inadequately. ‘I mean,

one is.’ All the same it was uncomfortable to be reminded of one’s
sinfulness in the middle of a bright morning.

‘Sloth and lethargy,’ said Dr Parnell, with relish. ‘But I take it you will

accept Belinda’s invitation, I know Nathaniel will want to.’

‘I shall come if I possibly can,’ said the Archdeacon, passing his hand

over his eyes with a gesture of weariness, ‘but it may be that I shall be
completely exhausted by the evening.’

want to know the numbers. It makes some difference with the catering, the
arrangement of the table and that kind of thing.’

‘Ah, yes, I do not understand these mysteries,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I

think you can take it that I shall come,’ he added, turning to Belinda with
almost a smile.

‘You would hardly believe what I found Henry doing when we arrived

last night,’ said Dr Parnell, in an easy, conversational tone.

Belinda, who was of a credulous nature, refrained from making a guess.
‘Playing Patience on the floor of his study,’ he went on. ‘A complicated

variety called Double Emperor.’

‘Patience is a very intelligent relaxation,’ said Belinda, her usual loyalty

coming to the rescue. ‘You don’t realize how hard Henry works. I mean,’
she added obscurely, ‘there are things to do in a country parish that people
don’t know about unless they live in one. Your work in the Library has its
fixed hours, but a clergyman is at everybody’s beck and call.’ Of course,
she reflected sadly, people would never dare to trouble the Archdeacon with
their worries; they would go hurrying along Jubilee Terrace to Mr Donne.
Still, the smile that Henry gave her made her realize that being a little
untruthful sometimes had its compensations.

The church clock struck half past twelve.
‘Ah, lunch-time,’ said the Archdeacon, and the party broke up to return

to their respective houses.

When Belinda got home she found Harriet in a state of great excitement.
‘Oh, Belinda,’ she said, in a loud voice, ‘he really is charming.’

they were settled at the table before she made any further inquiries.

own curiosity prevented her from saying any more. ‘Who’s charming?’ she
asked.

‘Why, Mr Mold,’ declared Harriet with enthusiasm. ‘I saw him this

morning.’ Should she tell Belinda that she had seen him coming out of the
Crownwheel and Pinion? she wondered. Better not, perhaps, and yet it
would spoil the story to leave out such a piece of information.

‘But, Harriet, how could you have seen him?’ asked Belinda rather

impatiently. ‘I understood from Nicholas that he was tired and was
spending the morning in bed.’

‘Well, he must have got up because I saw him in the street,’ said Harriet

defiantly. She wished Belinda would not always behave quite so much like
an elder sister. She decided that she would not tell her story in full. ‘I spoke
to him,’ she declared.

Belinda was incredulous. ‘But, Harriet, you don’t know him,’ she said.
‘Oh, of course he didn’t realize who I was,’ she explained. ‘I met him

coming out of the Crownwheel and Pinion, and he asked me the way to the
Post Office; and as I happened to be going along to buy some stamps, we
walked there together.’ She paused, triumphant.

Belinda put down her knife and fork in astonishment. The Crownwheel

and Pinion in the morning! Surely Harriet had been mistaken? It sounded as
if she had been ‘picked up’ by some commercial traveller. Most distasteful.

‘I don’t think it can have been Mr Mold,’ she declared, looking very

worried. ‘After all, I’ve only met him once many years ago and you’ve
never met him. I don’t think it can have been him,’ she repeated, with a
puzzled frown on her face.

‘It was Mr Mold,’ said Harriet patiently. ‘He said he was a stranger here,

and that he had arrived last night and was staying at the vicarage.’

been Mr Mold. But for a deputy librarian to go to the Crownwheel and
Pinion in the morning … surely it was unthinkable! And yet perhaps it was
not so surprising, when one came to consider it, for after all Mr Mold was
not quite … He had started his career in the Library as a boy fetching books
for readers, and although one didn’t want to be snobbish and his ability had
undoubtedly brought him to a distinguished position, it was certainly true

that lack of breeding showed itself. Belinda could not help wishing that it
had not been Harriet who had seen Mr Mold. She would be sure to tell
people and the whole situation was so embarrassing. She wondered if
Nicholas knew, because really he was to blame for bringing such a man to
the village.

‘Of course,’ she said, more to herself than to Harriet, ‘he may have felt ill

or something. One must be careful not to judge people too hardly and, I
dare say that in a town there is really no harm in a man going into a public
house for a pint of beer in the morning, but these things are regarded rather
differently in a village and I should have thought he would have realized
that.’

‘He certainly didn’t look ill,’ said Harriet, ‘in fact quite the contrary.

Rather a rosy complexion really and a well-built figure, not fat, of course …
his suit was very well cut, a dark blue with a narrow stripe and a maroon
tie. He didn’t look at all flashy, though.’

‘Oh, no,’ said Belinda, ‘one would hardly expect an official of one of the

greatest libraries in England to look flashy.’

‘And he had the most delightful manners,’ Harriet went on. ‘He didn’t try

to take advantage of me in any way,’ she explained.

Had she not thought it would be rather indelicate, Belinda would have

laughed at this remark. The idea of anybody taking advantage of a
respectable spinster, plumply attractive it must be admitted, in the main
street of a respectable village in daylight, struck her as being rather
ridiculous. But she thought it wiser not to let Harriet see that she was
amused. Instead, she went on to tell her how she had invited the
Archdeacon and his visitors to supper on Sunday evening.

that they did not do enough. ‘I will see if Mr Donne is free,’ she said. ‘I
expect he would like to come.’

‘Yes, if you like,’ said Belinda doubtfully, ‘but I had thought it would be

nice to ask Ricardo, then we shall all be more of an age, as it were.’

Harriet.

‘We shall be rather short of women of course,’ said Belinda. ‘I suppose

we could ask Edith and Connie. I have a feeling Edith and Nicholas would
get on rather well together. They are both interested in the same kind of
thing.’

‘What, in lavatories?’ asked Harriet bluntly.
Belinda, who had been going to say ‘conveniences’, was forced to agree

that this was what she had in mind, and told Harriet about his pride in the
Ladies’ Cloakroom which had recently been added to the Library.

Harriet, ‘and we certainly don’t want to encourage Edith. Mr Donne was so
embarrassed when she was talking like that to the Archdeacon on the
morning of the garden party. And then poor Connie is so dreary, isn’t she?
Does it really matter if we don’t have equal numbers? After all I can
manage Ricardo and Mr Donne and you can have the Archdeacon and Dr
Parnell.’

‘Well, we shall have to think about it,’ said Belinda. ‘After all, Edith and

Connie are always free and don’t mind being asked at the last minute. The
Archdeacon is preaching rather a special sermon on Sunday morning,’ she
added, getting up from the table, ‘and he said he was preaching in the
evening too and will be very tired. So I should like the supper to be
particularly nice.’

‘Oh, of course,’ Harriet agreed, ‘but whatever we give him will be better

than what he would get at the vicarage. We must be careful not to have the
same as we had the last time Mr Donne was here.’

‘I know Henry is fond of chicken,’ said Belinda thoughtfully. ‘Perhaps

that would be the best.’

‘I really must look it up in my diary,’ said Harriet, ‘but I think we had

chicken the last time Mr Donne was here.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TEN

It was on the next Sunday morning that the Archdeacon preached his
famous sermon on the Judgment Day.

The day had begun as other Sundays did. After breakfast Belinda had

consulted with Emily about the roast beef, and together they had decided
what time it ought to be put into the oven and how long it ought to stay
there. The vegetables – celery and roast potatoes – were agreed upon, and
the pudding – a plum tart – chosen. In addition, the chickens for the supper
party were to be put on to boil and Emily was to start making the trifle if
she had time. The jellies had been made on Saturday night and were now
setting in the cool of the cellar. Belinda had suggested that they might have
a lighter luncheon than usual, as there was so much to do, but Harriet was
not going to be cheated of her Sunday roast, and had managed to persuade
her sister that there would be plenty of time to get things ready in the
afternoon and early evening. If was of course out of the question that either
of them should attend Evensong.

At half past ten Harriet began to prepare herself for church. This morning

she was taking particular care with her appearance. On ordinary Sundays
she had to look nicer than Agatha, as well as wearing something that would
cause Count Bianco to burst into ecstatic compliments, and she liked the
curate to see that his generation still had something to learn from hers in
matters of elegance and good taste. But this Sunday was a particularly
important one, for Dr Parnell and Mr Mold would be among the
congregation and it was most important that she should make a good
impression. She could not help regretting that when she had met Mr Mold
in the village and directed him to the Post Office, she had been wearing
rather a countrified tweed coat, as was perhaps only to be expected on a
weekday morning in a country village. This morning she was determined to
make amends for this. Mr Mold would hardly recognize the plump woman
he had met outside the Crownwheel and Pinion in the elegant creature he

was to see this morning. Once or twice, though, she felt a twinge of anxiety.
Supposing he were not there?

or a Methodist, is he?’

should want to know. Perhaps Harriet had some doctrinal difficulty to be
solved, although she had never before betrayed any interest in that
direction. The Church of England had been good enough for a long line of
dear curates; it would have been presumptuous of her to attempt to go
further than that.

‘What I meant, was, will he be in church this morning?’ Harriet

explained.

‘Oh, surely,’ said Belinda. ‘I expect everyone will want to hear the

special sermon.’

to church to hear the Archdeacon preach.

‘Henry is very particular about the observance of Sunday,’ Belinda went

on. ‘I’m sure he wouldn’t like anyone staying at the vicarage not to attend
Divine Service.’

Harriet, who had got to the stage of arranging the veil on her hat, was too

preoccupied to make any answer, but she could not help wondering if
Belinda had forgotten one occasion when the Archdeacon himself had not
been in church, and had later been seen in the vicarage garden, obviously in
excellent health.

By ten minutes to eleven Harriet was ready, and waiting impatiently in

the hall.

‘Belinda!’ she called in an agitated voice. ‘If you don’t hurry up

somebody might take our pew.’

Belinda reflected unhappily that the church was never likely to be full

enough for that to happen, unless there was a bishop or somebody very
special preaching, like that time when, she could only imagine through
some mistake, they had had a handsome Brother from a religious
community, obviously intended for Father Plowman’s church. She looked
quickly in her bag to see if she had a half-crown and a clean handkerchief,
picked up her prayer book, and hurried downstairs.

scolding meekly and was still silent when Harriet, quite kindly of course,

began to criticize the clothes she was wearing.

‘You ought to have tied your scarf in a bow,’ she said, ‘it’s much smarter,

and you know that hats are turning up at the back this winter, don’t you?’

could wear one like that myself.’

angle which Belinda considered a little too rakish for church, ‘but you’d
have to have your hair curled up at the back,’ she added.

arranged ringlets. But I doubt whether Henry would like me any better, she
thought.

was as yet no sign of the important visitors. Harriet looked in at the gate
rather anxiously; of course it was not quite five minutes to eleven, there was
plenty of time for them to appear. It would perhaps be better to be settled in
their own pew before they arrived. She hurried Belinda into the church.

Harriet waited until she had arranged her bag and umbrella, removed her
gloves and loosened her silver-fox fur. The next moment Belinda found
herself being nudged by her sister, who whispered rather loudly, ‘Here they
come, they’re going to sit by Ricardo.’

When they were sitting down again, Harriet assured Belinda

triumphantly that she had not been mistaken, it had been Mr Mold whom
she had seen in the village. It was rather difficult to study them at all
intently, because they were sitting behind Harriet and Belinda, but it was
possible to do it not too obviously by putting your umbrella in the stand
behind and taking some time in doing it. When Harriet had gone through
this process, she was able to inform Belinda that Dr Parnell was wearing a
dark tie and that Mr Mold had on the same suit she had seen him in before.

The service began quite uneventfully with one of the usual morning

hymns, New every morning is the love. As they sang, Belinda noticed that
the Archdeacon was not joining with them, but looking rather sternly round
the church. As she did not want to catch his eye, Belinda looked down at
her prayer book and concentrated on Keble’s fine lines

Through sleep and darkness safely brought,

Restored to life, and power and thought.

Not that she ever thought of herself as having much power, but she was
certainly alive and might be considered capable of a small amount of
thought. She could at least thank God for that. The curate was joining
heartily in the singing and Belinda hoped he was saving enough voice to
read the lessons.

Obviously the Archdeacon was out to impress his visitors, for the Te

Deum and the Benedictus were sung to elaborate, unfamiliar settings, which
the congregation could not attempt and which seemed rather beyond the
choir at some points. The Archdeacon himself read the first lesson and the
curate the second. The Archdeacon also intoned many of the prayers and his
voice went up and down in the oddest way. Of course the voice should go
up or down, Belinda couldn’t quite remember which, at the end of a line,
but there seemed to be something wrong somewhere and so much
disturbance was caused among the choir boys that Mr Gibson, the organist,
had to hurry out of his place to control them.

Belinda thought that as the Archdeacon was going to preach, he was

perhaps doing too much of the service himself, and what with the curious
intoning and the curate’s church voice, which was like nothing so much as a
bleating sheep’s, it was difficult for Belinda to keep from smiling. And even
she was forced to admit to herself that they were getting a little too much
for their money, when she realized that they were going to have the Litany.

Just before he went to the Litany desk, the Archdeacon glanced round the

congregation with what appeared to be a look of malicious amusement on
his face. At least, that was how it must have seemed to most people, but
perhaps it could hardly have been amusement. Indulgence for his sinful
flock was more likely and certainly more fitting. Everyone knelt down
rather angrily. They had had the Litany last Sunday and the Archdeacon
never made any attempt to shorten it. As he could not sing, he made up for
it by making his voice heard as much as possible in other ways.

Belinda was trying hard to concentrate on her sins, but somehow the

atmosphere was not very suitable this morning and she was at last forced to
give it up. Staring at the Archdeacon’s back, she reflected that he was still
very handsome. Perhaps he would read aloud to them when he came to
supper tonight, though, as she would be the only person who wanted to

listen, it might be rather difficult to arrange. Harriet could play the piano
and the curate might be asked to sing, but the main entertainment of the
evening would be the conversation. Dear Nicholas was so delightfully witty
and Mr Mold would no doubt be able to tell them many interesting things
about the Library. By the time the Archdeacon had ascended the pulpit
steps, Belinda had forgotten all about the special sermon, and settled herself
comfortably in her pew, as did the rest of the congregation, having just sung
with great vigour that the world was very evil.

a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away.

Harriet looked at her watch. She supposed they would have to endure the

Archdeacon for at least twenty minutes, possibly twenty-five minutes or
even half an hour. She sighed and tried to listen to what he was saying. It
was some consolation that he was preaching a sermon of his own
composition instead of one of those tedious literary things that Belinda said
he read so magnificently.

with too much complacency,’ he declared.

Oh, well, thought Harriet, clergymen are always saying things like that.
‘But do we realize all that must happen before we can hope to share in

this bliss? If indeed, we are found worthy. I say again, do we realize? Have
we any idea at all?’ The Archdeacon paused impressively and peered at his
congregation; a harmless enough collection of people – old Mrs Prior and
her daughter, Miss Jenner, Miss Beard and Miss Smiley in front with the
children, ever watchful to frown on giggles or fidgets – the Bank Manager,
who sometimes read the lessons – the Misses Bede and the guests from the
vicarage – Count Bianco – Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall – of course
they did not realize but he was going to tell them. ‘The Judgment Day,’ he
almost shouted, so loudly that Harriet had to take out her handkerchief to
stifle her inappropriate amusement, and old Mrs Prior let out a kind of
moan. ‘That day may be soon,’ he went on, ‘it may even be tomorrow.’

The congregation shifted awkwardly in their seats. It was uncomfortable

to be reminded that the Judgment Day might be tomorrow.

‘Dies Irae,’ he continued, lingering on the words with enjoyment.

Belinda saw Edith Liversidge purse her lips disapprovingly at this Romish

expression. ‘Day of Wrath,’ he translated. ‘And what a terrible day that will
be!’

that of course such a thing couldn’t really happen. Why, scientists told us
that it would take millions of years for the sun to move sufficiently far away
from the earth for life to become extinct. At least it was perhaps not exactly
that, but something very like it. They knew enough to realize that the
Archdeacon was being ridiculous and that the Judgment Day could not
possibly be tomorrow. When the first uncomfortable shock had passed they
were able to laugh at themselves. How could they have been so silly as to
be alarmed!

But even as they were thinking thus, the relentless voice from the pulpit

was pouring scorn on those scientists who thought they knew how the
world had begun and how it would end. How could they know? These
matters were incomprehensible mysteries known to God alone. The
Judgment Day was as likely to be tomorrow as at any time in the far distant
future. The world was indeed very evil, as they had just been singing in that
fine hymn translated from the Latin, the times were waxing late. All
through our literature poets had been haunted by the idea of the Last Day
and what it would be like…

The congregation suddenly relaxed. It was just going to be one of the

Archdeacon’s usual sermons after all. There had been no need for those
uncomfortable fears. They settled down again, now completely reassured,
and prepared themselves for a long string of quotations, joined together by a
few explanations from the Archdeacon.

He began at the seventeenth century. Belinda reflected that if he had gone

back any further, the sermon would have assumed Elizabethan proportions.
As it was, it promised to be longer than usual. She listened admiringly. The
Archdeacon was quoting Thomas Flatman’s lines written in 1659, to show
how poets of the latter half of that century had imagined that the Judgment
Day was near.

’Tis not far off; methinks I see
Among the stars some dimmer be;
Some tremble as their lamps did fear
A neighbouring extinguisher …

And curiously enough one of the oldest inhabitants of the parish had
remarked to him only the other day that the stars did not seem to be as
bright as they were when he was a boy. It was very significant. The
Archdeacon liked the sound of his own voice and so did Belinda, and she
was delighted to hear him read about thirty more lines of Flatman’s poem.

Those of the congregation who were still listening – Harriet’s attention

had long since wandered – smiled complacently. That had been in 1659,
they thought, and nothing had come of this man’s noticing that some of the
stars were dimmer. Why even the Archdeacon himself was forced to admit
it! 1659. 1660. What had happened in 1660? His hearers resented this
history lesson. The Restoration. Everyone knew that. But here was the
Archdeacon trying to tell them that the Restoration was itself a kind of
Judgment Day.

Belinda tried hard to follow, but she found this point rather obscure. She

was frowning slightly with the effort of concentration. Harriet was looking
at the curate, but he had sunk so deeply into his stall that very little of him
was visible. By looking out of the corner of her left eye and turning her
head slightly, she could see Dr Parnell and Mr Mold. Mr Mold was looking
at his watch and Dr Parnell appeared to be smiling at some private joke.
Count Bianco, sitting in front of Dr Parnell, had long ago given up any
attempt to follow the sermon. A Roman Catholic by upbringing, he still
found the service confusing and only attended the Archdeacon’s church
because he felt it might bring him nearer to Harriet. This morning she had
looked in his direction; she had distinctly turned her head. Could it be that
she was looking at him?

When the Archdeacon reached the eighteenth century, the going was a

little easier. Several people smiled at the lines he quoted from Blair’s poem
The Grave:

When the dread trumpet sounds, the slumb’ring dust,
Not unattentive to the call shall wake,
And ev’ry joint possess its proper place,
With a new elegance of form unknown
To its first state. Nor shall the conscious soul
Mistake his partner …

Archdeacon had already been preaching for nearly half an hour, and she
began to worry about the beef. It would be roasted to a cinder by now,
unless Emily had had the sense to turn down the oven. Harriet did so like it
underdone, and they were usually well out of church and sitting down to
their meal by half past twelve. And Henry had only got as far as the
eighteenth century without yet having mentioned Edward Young, who was
sure to be brought into the sermon somehow. She had rather lost the thread
of what he was saying now, but suddenly felt herself on safer ground when
she heard him mention the Night Thoughts. He seemed to be implying that
each person listening to him this morning was little better than the unknown
Lorenzo, for whose edification the poem had been written. Even Belinda
thought the Archdeacon was going a little too far when he likened his
congregation to such as ‘call aloud for ev’ry bauble drivel’d o’er by sense’.
Whatever it might mean it certainly sounded abusive. He concluded his
reading from Young by flinging a challenge at them.

… Say dreamers of gay dreams,
How will you weather an eternal night,
Where such expedients fail?

He paused dramatically and the sermon was at an end. There was quite a
stir in the congregation, for some of them had been dreaming gay dreams
most of the morning, although many of them had given the sermon a
chance, and had only allowed their thoughts to wander when it had passed
beyond their comprehension. They now fidgeted angrily in bags and
pockets for their collect-money. One or two even let the plate pass them,
waving it on with an angry gesture.

Belinda soon recovered from her first feeling of shocked surprise. Of

course dear Henry had not really meant to insult them. He had obviously
been carried away by the fine poetry, and naturally he must have meant to
include himself among those he condemned. It had really been one of the
finest sermons she had ever heard him preach, she told herself loyally, even
if the ending had been rather sudden and unusual. It didn’t do people any
harm to hear the truth occasionally. We were all inclined to get too
complacent sometimes. She thought rather vaguely of great preachers like

Savonarola, Donne and John Wesley. No doubt they had not spared the
feelings of their hearers either, but as she was unable to think of anything
that any one of them had said, she could not be absolutely sure. As they
were singing the last hymn Ye servants of the Lord, Belinda tried to think of
some intelligent criticisms, for she did not want her praise of dear Henry to
be lacking in discernment. He might welcome intelligent criticism, she
thought, knowing perfectly well that he would not. Perhaps there had been
rather too many literary quotations, and she had the feeling that it was not
quite the thing to read bits of Restoration drama in church … but it had
certainly been a fine and unusual sermon. She could not help wondering
whether he would continue it this evening, going through the Victorians and
the modern poets and so bringing it up to date. But that would hardly be
suitable for the evening congregation, who, as he had admitted himself,
liked simpler stuff.

and Mr Mold, but Belinda hurried Harriet away before they could get
involved in conversation. Mr Mold’s manner seemed very free and he had
looked almost as if he were going to wink at Harriet. Ricardo, who was
hovering hopefully by a tombstone, saw her whisked away before he could
do more than bow and say good morning. But he comforted himself with
the prospect of seeing her that evening.

‘I was sorry not to stop and talk to Ricardo,’ said Belinda, ‘but we are so

late as it is.’

‘Yes,’ said Harriet, ‘I expect many people’s Sunday dinner will be ruined.

I wonder what they are having at the vicarage?’

‘I think they are having duck,’ said Belinda. ‘At least, I saw one in

Hartnell’s on Saturday which was labelled for the vicarage. And of course,’
she said thoughtfully, as she watched her sister carve the over-cooked beef,
‘duck needs to be very well done, doesn’t it? It can’t really be cooked too
much.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER ELEVEN

The guests were due to arrive at about eight o’clock, by which time
Evensong would be over. Both Belinda and Harriet had of course been
much too busy with their preparations to attend it. Belinda had felt very
much tempted, indeed, the thought of missing one of the Archdeacon’s
sermons was almost unbearable, but she consoled herself with the reflection
that looking after his material welfare was just as important as her own
spiritual welfare, if such it could be called, and that she was making the
sacrifice in a good cause.

A very nice supper had been prepared. It had to be so, for not only must

the Archdeacon be pleased, but Harriet had thought the curate needed
feeding up as he had been looking especially thin and pale lately. She could
only hope it was nothing to do with that Miss Berridge. There were to be
cold chickens with ham and tongue and various salads, followed by trifles,
jellies, fruit and Stilton cheese. An extra leaf had been put in the dining-
room table as, much against Harriet’s will, Belinda had decided to invite
Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall. She really thought that five men and
two women was a little disproportionate and such a party might give rise to
talk. Emily would think it so funny. It was rather an undertaking to have
seven people to supper, but as most of the food was cold and could be
prepared well in advance there was no reason why everything should not go
very well.

Harriet was a little inclined to worry about what they should drink. Mr

Mold would be used to living in style, she thought, and would surely expect
whisky or gin.

‘But we have a very good sherry,’ said Belinda. ‘I am sure that is quite

correct, and there will be the hock and afterwards port.’ Whisky was to
Belinda more a medicine than a drink, something one took for a cold with
hot milk or lemon. It was not at all suitable for a Sunday evening supper
party at which there were to be clergymen and ladies present.

‘We must be sure that the hock is chilled enough,’ said Harriet. ‘Not iced,

of course that would be a serious error; I shouldn’t like Mr Mold to think
that we didn’t know about wine.’

librarian should be, I think. Good wine and old books seem to go together.’

‘And of course the Archdeacon likes a drop,’ said Harriet rather vulgarly.

‘We shall have to watch him. I don’t suppose Agatha lets him have much.
Good heavens, it’s nearly seven o’clock. We must go and change.’

Harriet was determined that this evening should see the climax of her

elegance and only lamented the fact that she could not wear full evening
dress. Still, her new brown velvet would be magnificent with her gold
necklace and long ear-rings. Belinda had decided to wear her blue chiffon.
Henry had once said that he liked her in pale colours, and although that had
been over thirty years ago it was possible that he still might. Her crystal
beads and ear-rings went quite well with it, and when she had put on a little
rouge the whole effect was rather pleasing. She went into the bathroom
where Harriet was splashing about in the bath like a plump porpoise. Her
curls were protected by a round cap of green oilskin and the room was filled
with the exotic scent of bath salts.

‘but I think I should use some more lipstick if I were you. Artificial light is
apt to make one look paler.’

‘Oh, no, Harriet, I don’t think I can use any more,’ said Belinda. ‘I

shouldn’t really feel natural if I did. Thou art not fair for all thy red and
white,’ she quoted vaguely, leaving Harriet to wallow in her bath.

waiting for somebody to arrive. She was sitting in a chair by the fire with a
book on her knee, which she was not reading. It was something by an old
friend of Harriet’s – a former curate – Theodore Grote, now Bishop of
Mbawawa in Africa. Dear Theo, he had certainly done splendid work
among the natives, at least, that was what everyone said, although nobody
seemed to know exactly what it was that he had done. Certainly they still
looked very heathen, grinning away in their leafy dress. But perhaps that
was before he converted them. She opened the book with a view to finding
out, but she could not settle to reading and walked restlessly round the
room, moving the flowers, rearranging the cushions and altering the
position of chairs. She brought out a photograph of Nicholas Parnell in his

academic robes and put it on the mantelpiece; she also displayed on a small
table a little pamphlet he had written about central heating in libraries. It
was prettily bound and had a picture of a phoenix on the cover with a Greek
inscription underneath it. Something about Prometheus, Harriet had said,
for Belinda was like Shakespeare in having little Latin and no Greek.

minute or two later Emily showed the Archdeacon, Dr Parnell, Mr Mold
and the curate into the room. Belinda shook hands with them rather
formally. The Archdeacon advanced towards an armchair by the fire and
sank down into it rather dramatically, as if exhausted. Dr Parnell took up his
own pamphlet and said that he was glad to find somebody who had cut its
beautiful pages.

‘I’m afraid you’re hardly a best seller,’ said Mr Mold jovially. ‘Nor even

as much ordered in the Library as Rochester’s poems,’ he added.

usual eager interest, what poems those were.

‘I am afraid they are rather naughty,’ said Dr Parnell. ‘We have had to

lock them away in a special place, together with other books of a similar
nature. All the same, they are quite often asked for by our readers.’

‘Oh, well, I suppose people have to study them,’ said Belinda, handing

round cigarettes and wondering how she could change the subject.

‘We should not like to think that they ordered them for any other reason,’

said Dr Parnell, chuckling and rubbing his hands in front of the fire.

Belinda was greatly relieved when Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall

arrived and she was able to introduce them. She was so afraid that Nicholas
and Edith would discover their common interest in sanitary arrangements
too soon, that she resolutely kept them apart. It was all very difficult and
she wished Harriet would hurry up and come in. Only the curate was
making what Belinda considered to be suitable conversation for the
awkward interval between arriving and sitting down to eat.

this evening? I shouldn’t be surprised if we had frost.’

‘And the later the frost the harder the winter,’ said a cheerful voice in the

background. ‘I do hope you’re all wearing warm underclothes.’

It was Harriet, ready far sooner than Belinda had hoped was possible,

looking splendid too, in her brown velvet and gold ornaments.

The curate laughed heartily and assured her that he had his on.

for the Archdeacon, who went on reclining in the armchair, not speaking.

heard any comments on the sermon yet.’

The Archdeacon roused himself. ‘It was a continuation of this morning’s,

brought up to date as it were,’ he explained.

‘Oh, it was beautiful,’ gushed Connie Aspinall, ‘I did so enjoy it.’
The Archdeacon looked pleased. ‘I had feared it might be rather too

obscure,’ he said. ‘Eliot is not an easy poet.’

Belinda gasped. Eliot! And for the evening congregation! But it must

have been magnificent to hear him reading Eliot. ‘Perhaps you will give the
sermon again,’ she suggested timidly, ‘for the benefit of those who were not
at Evensong.’

have been considering giving a course of sermons on Dante,’ he mused.
‘Not of course in the original – Carey’s translation, perhaps.’

‘It would be a fine and unusual subject,’ said Belinda doubtfully.
‘Well, you can count me out,’ said Edith bluntly. ‘I couldn’t make much

of the sermon this morning. Too full of quotations, like Hamlet.’ She gave
her short barking laugh.

‘I think people prefer the more obvious aspects of the Christian

teaching,’ said Nicholas regretfully. ‘I mean, I am afraid that they do.
Simple sentiments in intelligible prose. A great pity really. I can see how it
limits the scope of the more enterprising clergy.’

‘Sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo,’ said the Archdeacon.

‘Yes, one appreciates that, and yet, why shouldn’t Eliot express those
sentiments?’

‘Do the bosoms of people nowadays return any echo?’ said Mr Mold.

‘One wonders really.’

‘Well, if they do, it certainly isn’t as loud as the echo made by the Apes

of Brazil,’ chortled Harriet, and in response to a very pressing appeal by Mr
Mold, she began to explain it all over again.

‘Can the sound really be heard two miles away?’ said Connie, whose

voice held just the same note of rapt awe as when she had praised the
Archdeacon’s sermon. ‘Isn’t that wonderful?’

The Archdeacon looked rather annoyed. ‘Oh, it is nothing very unusual,’

he said shortly, so that Belinda began to wonder whether he was about to

embark on some tale of his own. But he lapsed into silence again, so that
she was forced to continue the conversation with a bright and rather
insincere remark about Agatha, and what a pity it was that she was not with
them that evening.

is getting on quite well speaking Anglo-Saxon and Old High German in the
shops.’

‘Ah, well, Agatha is so clever,’ said Belinda, without bitterness. ‘I’m

afraid I’ve forgotten all my Anglo-Saxon. But surely the vocabulary is
rather limited?’

Italy.’

‘Why, Ricardo isn’t here yet,’ said Belinda. ‘What do you say to a glass

of sherry while we are waiting?’

‘I say yes,’ said Mr Mold promptly.
‘Yes please, Nathaniel,’ Dr Parnell reminded him. ‘We should not like it

to be thought that an official of our great Library was lacking in manners.’

‘I feel that I have been lacking in manners for not offering it sooner,’ said

Belinda quite sincerely, thus taking upon herself the blame for all the little
frictions of the evening. But it was so obvious that women should take the
blame, it was both the better and the easier part, and just as she was pouring
out the sherry, Ricardo arrived, with such profuse and gallant apologies for
being late that everyone was put into a good humour. He was a little
encumbered by a magnificent pot of chrysanthemums, which he presented
with a ceremonious gesture.

Shortly after this they went into supper, Edith and Harriet followed by

Mr Mold and the curate, making for the dining-room with what Belinda
considered indecent haste. But even those who followed more slowly
moved with confident anticipation. Belinda had taken care to arrange the
table so that Harriet should sit between Ricardo and Mr Mold, when she
might see how superior dear Ricardo was. Belinda herself sat by the
Archdeacon and Dr Parnell, while Miss Liversidge and Miss Aspinall were
fitted in where there happened to be spaces.

‘Why, the table is groaning!’ exclaimed Dr Parnell. ‘I like that expression

so much, but one is hardly ever justified in using it or even expecting it.
Certainly not at Sunday supper.’

never see why Sunday supper should be the dreary meal it usually is. I
mean,’ she added hastily, remembering that they had had just such a dreary
Sunday supper at the vicarage a few weeks ago, ‘that it can sometimes be.’

‘We always have cold meat with beetroot and no potatoes,’ said the

Archdeacon, as if reading her thoughts. ‘Nothing could be more
unappetizing.’

‘Of course the servants are often out on Sunday evening,’ said the curate,

‘and one likes to feel that they are having an easier time.’

‘I don’t feel that at all,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I like to feel that somebody

has taken a little trouble in preparing a meal for me. I think we deserve it
after the labour of Sunday.’

‘Especially after that magnificent sermon this morning,’ murmured

Belinda loyally, giving him some of the best of the chicken.

‘All that reading must be very tiring,’ said Dr Parnell spitefully.
‘It was some very fine poetry,’ said Ricardo vaguely, for he had not

grasped much of the sermon apart from the bare fact that it was supposed to
be about the Judgment Day.

‘We certainly thought it magnificent, didn’t we, Harriet?’ said Belinda,

turning towards her sister rather urgently. It was tactless of Harriet not to
have made any comment. But then she herself was rather to blame for
introducing the subject when they had already discussed it once. It was a
pity that her loyalty had got the better of her.

I’m not a theologian,’ she added, with a brilliant smile.

Mr Mold laughed at this and so did Dr Parnell, but the Archdeacon

looked rather annoyed.

‘Few of us are true theologians,’ said the curate sententiously. ‘But after

all, the real knowledge comes from within and not from books.’

Belinda looked at him rather apprehensively. She hoped the wine wasn’t

beginning to have its effect on him. White wine wasn’t really intoxicating
and he had only had one glass of sherry.

‘That is rather a disconcerting thought,’ said Dr Parnell. ‘You are

preaching sedition. I maintain that the true knowledge comes from books. It
would be a poor prospect for me and for Nathaniel if everybody thought as
you do.’

dear friend John Akenside used to say that he learned more about the
political situation in central Europe in those quiet moments with a glass of
wine at a café table than by all his talks with Pribitchevitch’s brother.’

‘Oh, yes, I can believe that,’ said Edith Liversidge, ‘John liked his glass

of wine.’

‘But surely the intrigues of Balkan politics can hardly be compared with

the true knowledge that comes from within?’ Dr Parnell protested. ‘I hardly
think it is the same thing.’

argue the point. Perhaps it was a mistake to have any kind of serious
conversation when eating, or even anywhere at all in mixed company. Men
took themselves so seriously and seemed to insist on arguing even the most
trivial points. So, at the risk of seeming frivolous, she turned the
conversation to something lighter.

‘I can never think of Belgrade without thinking of the public baths,’ she

said.

amusing than the knowledge that comes from within.

most unlikely.’

‘Oh, well,’ said Belinda, who hadn’t really a story to tell, ‘I once heard

somebody describing them and I thought it was rather funny. A lot of old
men all swimming about in a pool of hot water,’ she concluded weakly,
hoping that somebody would laugh.

Most of them did, especially the Archdeacon, who seemed to be in a

good temper again.

‘I never heard of there being any hot springs in Belgrade,’ said Ricardo

seriously.

‘Oh, I expect the water was artificially heated,’ explained the curate,

turning earnestly to Belinda for further information on this interesting point.

Belinda felt rather flustered at the interest which everyone was taking in

her silly little story. ‘I don’t really know,’ she said. ‘I’ve never been to
Belgrade myself, and even if I had I don’t suppose I should have visited the
public baths.’

‘Not the ones with the old men in them, we hope,’ said Mr Mold, with

almost a wink.

much. Of course one didn’t want to be snobbish, but it really was true that
low origin always betrayed itself somewhere.

‘Oh, Belinda never remembers where she’s been,’ said Harriet, hardly

improving the situation. ‘Now, Mr Mold, do have some more trifle,’ she
said, favouring him with a brilliant smile.

‘Perhaps I may have some too,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘It really is

delicious. I don’t know when I’ve tasted anything so good.’

Nicholas had always encouraged Mr Mold too much as a boy, although one
would have thought that moving in a cultured intellectual society would
have cured him of any tendency to make jokes not quite in the best of taste.
And yet, she thought doubtfully, the Library, great though it was, did not
always attract to it cultured and intellectual persons. Nicholas himself,
obsessed with central heating and conveniences, was perhaps not the best
influence for a weak character like Mr Mold. Belinda began to wish that she
were in Karlsbad with dear Agatha, helping her to get cured of her
rheumatism. She imagined herself in the pump-room, if there was one,
drinking unpleasant but salutary waters, and making conversation with
elderly people. Perhaps taking a gentle walk in the cool of the evening with
an old clergyman or a retired general…

All around her the conversation buzzed pleasantly. Mr Mold’s little lapse

was quite forgotten, if indeed it had ever been noticed by anyone except
Belinda. Harriet was asking Ricardo if it was true that the fleas on the Lido
were so wonderful. She had heard that they bounced balls and drew little
golden carriages.

‘Indeed, they are,’ said Ricardo gravely. ‘I have seen them myself.’
The curate leaned forward eagerly. ‘It is wonderful what things animals

and even insects can be made to do if they are trained with kindness,’ he
said, his face aglow with interest.

as to observe that it was also true of people.

‘I should love to go to Venice,’ said Belinda. ‘I think there is something

very special about Italy. It is so rich in literary associations.’

‘Ah …’ Ricardo put down his spoon and was obviously on the point of

bursting into a flow of Dante, but the Archdeacon was too quick for him
and got in first with Byron.

I stood in Venice on the Bridge of Sighs
A palace and a prison on each hand:

he quoted, and remarked that he had thought of visiting Italy in the spring,
but that of course it was almost impossible for him to take a holiday
however much he might need it.

‘Oh, but I don’t see why you shouldn’t,’ said Harriet, loudly and

tactlessly. ‘It isn’t as if you had a frightful lot to do, and I’m sure Mr Donne
could manage perfectly well when you were away.’

There was an uncomfortable silence.
‘You know, you really should take a holiday,’ said Edith Liversidge. ‘A

change does everyone good. Everyone would benefit.’

‘You would feel you were doing good to others as well as yourself,’ said

Dr Parnell, ‘so you would have a double satisfaction.’

‘I doubt whether I could allow myself that luxury,’ said the Archdeacon

quite good humouredly. ‘Of course a change can sometimes be a good
thing. I have often wondered whether I ought to have a town parish. There
is more scope for preaching.’

‘Oh, yes,’ Connie Aspinall broke in eagerly. ‘I remember when Canon

Kendrick was rector of St Ermin’s there wasn’t a vacant seat at Evensong –
you had to be there half an hour before it started. He said some very
shocking things.’

‘Well, of course people like that,’ said Dr Parnell. ‘Kendrick was a

contemporary of mine. He got a very poor degree, I believe, but he found
out what his line was and made a success of it.’

‘What a cynical way to talk,’ said Harriet indignantly. ‘He was probably

a very sincere man.’

‘Oh, he was,’ said Connie, ‘but I suppose he thought it his duty to say

those things, unpleasant though they were.’

‘Yes, there is evil even in Belgravia,’ said Dr Parnell.
‘There is evil everywhere,’ said the curate.
Belinda looked around her uncomfortably as if expecting to find the devil

sitting at the table, but by the time they were drinking their coffee in the
drawing-room that solemn subject had somehow been forgotten and
Ricardo, talking about the picturesque costume of the ancient Etruscans,
was the centre of the little group. Belinda marvelled at the way conversation

rushed from one subject to another with such bewildering speed, but
decided that this was one which could give offence to nobody and was
therefore to be encouraged. So she appeared interested although she knew
nothing whatever about the ancient Etruscans. It was hardly the kind of
thing one would know about, unless one had had the advantage of a
classical education, as Nicholas and Ricardo had.

‘Was their dress anything like that of the Germanic tribes?’ she asked. ‘I

mean the ones Tacitus described in his Germania,’ she added vaguely, for it
was a long time since she had taken her first University examination in
which it had been one of the set books.

Harriet let out a cry of joy, as if she had suddenly come upon something
which she had long ago given up for lost.

Locupletissimi veste distinguuntur, non fluitante …

she paused appealingly, and waved her plump hands about, searching for
the rest of the quotation. While she did so, Belinda and Dr Parnell began to
laugh, the curate and Miss Aspinall looked amazed and expectant, while the
Archdeacon smiled a little doubtfully, for he was not a very good Latinist,
nor had he known his Tacitus very well as an undergraduate. Mr Mold
looked frankly bored, although he could not help thinking that Harriet
looked very attractive, waving her hands about in the air.

Ricardo was frowning, but only for a moment. How terrible it would be if

he were to fail her! He cleared his throat…

non fluitante sed stricto et singulos artus exprimente,

he recited.

Really, reflected Belinda, Ricardo’s faculty for quoting Tacitus is quite

frightening!

‘I suppose veste means vest,’ said the curate earnestly, with an expression

of painful intelligence on his face.

‘Hardly in the modern sense, perhaps,’ said Ricardo thoughtfully,

‘although it was a tight-fitting garment, as you hear from the description.’

have looked rather comic.’

‘Yes, it is strange that the rich men should have been distinguished by the

wearing of underclothes,’ said Belinda thinking that the conversation was
getting more than usually silly. She was herself smiling, as she could not
help thinking of the curate’s combinations. It was a good thing, she felt,
when Ricardo suggested that Harriet might honour them by playing
something on the piano.

on the sofa by Belinda. ‘She would be an asset to any household,’ he
declared pompously.

could think of nothing without being disloyal to her sister. Certainly she
looked very splendid sitting at the piano; it was not surprising that he
should admire her.

The first chords of The Harmonious Blacksmith jangled forth. Belinda

wondered why Harriet had chosen this particular piece, and began to be a
little anxious about the later variations, which she knew were rather tricky.
But Harriet avoided this difficulty by playing only the first two variations.

‘I don’t want to bore you with the whole lot,’ she said, and broke into a

gay Chopin mazurka.

There was now an atmosphere of peace and contentment in the room.

Everyone had eaten well, there was a good fire and comfortable chairs. The
Archdeacon, in the best chair, was nodding now. Miss Aspinall had found a
polite listener in the curate, who was asking her just the kind of questions
she liked about the past glories of her life in Belgrave Square. Dr Parnell
and Miss Liversidge were talking, but in a low voice, about the
‘improvements’ in the Library and what further ones could conveniently be
made. Ricardo and Mr Mold were both admiring Harriet and vying for her
attention. Only Belinda was unoccupied, but she was quite happy in the
knowledge that the party had really been quite successful. Of course, if the
Archdeacon had not been asleep, she could have had some conversation
with him, but it was nice to know that he felt really at home, and she would
not for the world have had him any different.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWELVE

The next day Harriet could talk of nothing but Mr Mold. At breakfast she
declared that he was remarkably young-looking for his age.

‘I suppose he must be in the early fifties, but that’s really the Prime of

Life, isn’t it?’ she said to Belinda, who had not so far contributed anything
to her sister’s eulogy apart from the observation that he certainly had rather
a high colour. Harriet repeated ‘the Prime of Life’, and went on eating her
sausage.

‘Yes, I suppose he is,’ agreed Belinda, but rather doubtfully, for she was

not really sure what the Prime of Life was. She had always thought that her
own prime was twenty-five, so that by her reckoning Mr Mold must be
nearly thirty years past it. ‘Personally he isn’t a type that appeals to me very
much,’ she added, remembering the joke about the public baths in Belgrade.

‘Oh, I know he isn’t always quoting Gray’s Elegy,’ said Harriet

pointedly, ‘but he’s so amusing, such a Man of the World,’ she added
naively. ‘I wonder how long he will be staying?’

‘I expect he will have to get back to the Library soon,’ said Belinda. ‘Old

Mr Lydgate is in charge now, but I should think he is hardly up to the work
really, though,’ she added irrelevantly, ‘he had some very interesting
experiences in Ethopia.’

With that she went upstairs, thinking that it would really be a good thing

when both the Librarian and Mr Mold went back. Although it was nice
seeing different people, especially if they were old friends as dear Nicholas
was, Belinda found it rather unsettling. The effort of trying to talk to so
many people last night and keep them at peace with each other had quite
exhausted her. But there was some satisfaction mixed with her tiredness, for
she felt it had been quite a successful party. Edith and Connie had obviously
enjoyed both the food and the company, and as inviting them had been
something in the nature of a duty, one could feel special satisfaction there.
Nicholas and Edith had had a very full conversation about conveniences
and he had invited her to come for a personally conducted tour of the

Library, where her advice on certain points would be much valued. The
curate, Count Bianco and Mr Mold had seemed quite happy, though perhaps
the word was scarcely applicable to the Count, who preferred his gentle
state of melancholy which must have been enriched by Harriet’s attentions
to Mr Mold and the curate. Belinda’s only fear was that the Archdeacon had
been bored, though she had decided that his going to sleep showed rather
that he felt at home in her house and she was determined to go on thinking
so. As she dusted her dressing-table, she broke into Addison’s noble hymn,
The spacious firmament on high.

In Reason’s ear they all rejoice … How admirable that was! Belinda

began to think rather confusedly about the eighteenth century, and what in
her undergraduate essays she had called its ‘Rationalism’. Had not her
favourite, Young, said something about his heart becoming the convert of
his head? How useful that must have been! Belinda began to look back on
her own life and came to the regretful conclusion that she had admired the
great eighteenth-century poet without really taking his advice. She
comforted herself by reflecting that it was now too late to do anything about
it, but as she opened a drawer she came upon some skeins of grey wool, the
wool she had bought to knit the Archdeacon a pullover. She knew now that
she would never do it. She would make a jumper for herself, safe, dull and
rather too thick. Surely this was proof that her heart had now become the
convert of her head? Or was it just fear of Agatha?

live this day as if her last. As it was a nice bright morning, she felt that it
would be a good opportunity to do some gardening, and later, if she had
time, she might write a letter to poor Agatha, who was probably feeling
rather lonely all by herself in Karlsbad. It was quite a luxury to be able to
think of her as ‘poor Agatha’; it showed that absence could do more than
just make the heart grow fonder.

Belinda went downstairs and put on her galoshes and an old mackintosh.

She decided to put some bulbs in the beds in the front garden and then
move round to the back. If people came to the door it was more likely that
they would come later, and by then she would be out of sight. She began to
plant tulip bulbs in between the wall-flower plants. They would make a
pretty show in the late spring. She noticed how splendidly the aubretias had
done; they were spreading so much that they would soon have to be
divided. Belinda remembered when she had put them in as little cuttings.

They had had a particularly hard winter that year, so that she had been
afraid the frost would kill them. But they had all lived and flourished. How
wonderful it was, when one came to think of it, what a lot of hardships
plants could stand! And people too. Here Belinda realised how well her
own heart, broken at twenty-five, had mended with the passing of the years.
Perhaps the slave had grown to love its chains, or whatever it was that the
dear Earl of Rochester had said on that subject. Belinda was sure that our
greater English poets had written much about unhappy lovers not dying of
grief, although it was of course more romantic when they did. But there was
always hope springing eternal in the human breast, which kept one alive,
often unhappily … it would be an interesting subject on which to read a
paper to the Literary Society, which the Archdeacon was always threatening
to start in the village. Belinda began to collect material in her mind and then
imagined the typical audience of clergy and female church workers, most of
them unmarried. Perhaps after all it would hardly be suitable. She must
consider, too, what was fitting to her own years and position.

By this time she had planted most of the bulbs, and her back was aching.

She stood up to rest herself, and looked idly over the wall. The road was
deserted and there was no sign of life at the vicarage, but of course it was
barely half past ten, and in the village the best people did not appear till
later, when they would start out to do their shopping or to meet a friend at
the Old Refectory for coffee. Belinda leaned her arms on the wall,
apparently lost in thought. It did not occur to her that she would look odd to
anyone passing by. Absent-mindedly she scraped the moss off the wall with
a trowel. She would rest for a few minutes and then put some scyllas in the
rockery. It was nice to think that she had the whole morning before her. She
must go into the cellar and see if the bulbs she had planted in bowls were
showing any shoots yet. It would be fatal if they were left in the darkness
too long…

She looked up from the moss and glanced in the direction of the vicarage,

to see if anything had happened since she last looked. In the next instant she
knew that a great deal had happened. Mr Mold had come out of the gate and
was walking rapidly towards her.

He must be coming here, thought Belinda, in a flurry of agitation. For

some seconds she wondered whether she ought to go and warn Harriet, but
even now she could hear his step on the pavement. How quickly he walked!

It would be as much as Belinda could do to hide herself before he came
through the gate and walked up the drive.

She looked around frantically. There was no time to run back to the

house, as he would see her, and even if he did not recognize her in her
gardening clothes it would look so conspicuous. So Belinda concealed
herself as best she could behind a large rhododendron bush, which grew on
one side of the little drive leading up to the front door. She was fully aware
how foolish she would feel if she were discovered in this undignified
crouching position, but she could not imagine that Mr Mold would take the
trouble to penetrate the thickness of the bush before he rang the bell and
announced himself. She wished he would hurry, for it was very
uncomfortable behind the bush and rather dirty. Also, Belinda felt like
laughing and it would indeed be terrible if Mr Mold were startled on the
doorstep by a sudden burst of laughter coming out of a bush.

The crunching of the gravel told Belinda that her ordeal was nearly over.

From her hiding-place she could observe him quite well, and she noticed
that he looked unusually smart. He seemed to be dressed all in grey and
carried very new gloves and a walking-stick. Belinda could not see whether
he had a flower in his buttonhole or not, but she thought it was not unlikely.

When he was safely in the house, Belinda took the opportunity to run as

fast as she could into the back garden, where she arrived rather out of
breath. She sat down on an upturned box in the toolshed and began to
consider the situation.

What could bring him to their house so early in the day? It seemed

unlikely that he was the kind of person who would call to thank them for
the supper party. It was more probable that he had come to demand a
subscription for the Library extensions. It might be that he was calling on
several people for this purpose and had come to their house first because it
was nearest. Belinda hoped Harriet was not going to be disappointed. She
seemed to have taken quite a fancy to Mr Mold, and it would be so
unfortunate if she got any ideas about him. For Belinda was sure that if Mr
Mold ever did decide to marry he would choose for his bride some pretty,
helpless young woman, perhaps a reader in the Library, who asked him in
appealing tones where she could find the Dictionary of National Biography.
In any case, he was certainly not good enough for Harriet, who would soon
tire of his florid complexion and facetious humour. Also, he was not really a

gentleman; that seemed to matter a great deal. All the same, it would be
interesting to know why he had called.

Harriet, who had been sitting over the fire in the dining-room at her usual

task of ‘strengthening corsets’ with elastic thread, had not been so slow in
finding an answer to this important question. It was quite obvious that he
had come to see her. She had no time to go into this question more deeply,
for almost immediately after she had heard the front-door bell, Emily had
come into the dining-room and announced Mr Nathaniel Mold.

corsets and putting them under a cushion. It would never do for him to see
her with her face all flushed and shining from sitting over the fire. ‘Oh, and
Emily, I hope you have switched on the electric fire in the drawing-room?’

elegant, her face rather heavily powdered and her hair neatly arranged.
There was no need to hurry, she decided, as she paused for a moment in the
hall to take a final look at herself in the mirror.

She opened the drawing-room door quietly. Mr Mold was standing with

his back to her. At Harriet’s entry he turned round, rather startled. He was
holding in his hand a copy of Stitchcraft, in which he had been reading how
to make a table runner. It is always difficult to know how one ought to be
occupied when waiting for a lady in her drawing-room, and he had resisted
the temptation to probe into the pigeon holes of the large desk, which stood
invitingly open. Stitchcraft was dull but safe, he felt.

‘Good morning,’ said Harriet, advancing towards him with hands

outstretched in welcome and a brilliant smile on her face. ‘I’m so sorry to
have kept you waiting. I’m afraid you didn’t find anything very interesting
to read, but it must be a change for you to look at a frivolous feminine
paper.’

‘A very pleasant one,’ he said gallantly, ‘but of course we do take all

these papers in the Library. I was in charge of cataloguing them at one time.
I learnt quite a lot about needlework and beauty culture.’

‘How wonderful – to think that these papers are preserved,’ said Harriet,

laughing. ‘But I suppose you would be much too important to have
anything to do with them now.’

‘Oh, no!’ Mr Mold smiled and laughed and looked generally rather

coltish.

very nice of you to have called,’ she went on, hoping that he would soon
give her some clue as to why he had come.

She was even more handsome in daylight than she had been in the

evening, he decided, which was indeed very surprising. He had almost
expected to be disappointed at their second meeting and had planned an
alternate course of action should this happen.

‘It is a very great pleasure to see you again,’ he said rather stiffly. ‘I felt I

wanted to call and thank you and your sister for the very delightful party
last night. I enjoyed it immensely.’

‘Oh, I’m afraid my sister is out in the garden,’ said Harriet, half rising,

‘but I’m sure she would like to see you.’

‘Oh, well perhaps you could convey my thanks to her. I expect she is

busy and I shouldn’t like to bother her,’ said Mr Mold quickly. He had not
been at all taken with the sister, and the last thing he wanted was to have to
sit making conversation with her.

There was quite a long pause. Mr Mold began to feel rather

uncomfortable. This was not at all his usual style. Perhaps it would have
been better if he’d had a whisky before he came out, though half past ten
was a little early even for him. Still, it might have given him courage,
though he could not help feeling that he might be more successful if there
were a certain diffidence or nervousness about his bearing. He could not
draw upon his experience in such matters because he had never before
proposed marriage to anyone. His intrigues had been mostly with the kind
of women who would hardly make suitable wives for the deputy Librarian
of one of England’s greatest libraries; nor had they ever been considered as
such.

like his usual self, in fact he seemed quite nervous, almost like poor Ricardo
when he was about to propose to her. She determined to put him at his ease,
so she said in a light joking way, ‘Now, I do hope you haven’t come to say
goodbye. It will be very naughty of you to run off and leave us so soon.’
She found this way of talking very good with curates and it certainly
seemed to make Mr Mold less shy.

‘Unfortunately my work demands that I should go back this afternoon, or

tomorrow at the latest,’ he said, gaining courage from her manner. ‘But

before I went I hoped I should be able to have a talk with you.’ He looked
at her plump, handsome profile expectantly.

Very much what I expected, thought Harriet complacently, but she was

pleased and flattered to discover that she had been right. It was gratifying to
feel that such a Man of the World as Mr Mold obviously was should want to
marry her. But should she accept him? When it came to the point, Harriet
found herself surprisingly undecided, considering how well she had spoken
of Mr Mold to Belinda. She began to see that there were many reasons why
she should refuse his offer when it came. To begin with she had known him
for such a short time; indeed, this morning was only their third meeting.
Harriet was not the kind of person to believe with Marlowe that

Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
Whoever loved, that loved not at first sight?

Obviously that was quite ridiculous. How could one possibly know all the
things that had to be known about a person at first sight? Belinda had said
she believed Mr Mold had a very nice house, but then poor Belinda was so
vague, and for all that the house might be semi-detached and not at all in an
advantageous position. If Mr Mold were very much in love with her it
might be unkind to hurt his feelings – Harriet did not stop to consider how
many times she must have hurt the feelings of her faithful admirer Count
Bianco – but a smart and floridly handsome admirer in the Prime of Life
would be much more acceptable to her than a husband of the same
description. In her girlhood imaginings Harriet had always visualized a tall,
pale man for her husband, hence her partiality for the clergy. People of Mr
Mold’s type could never look well in a pulpit. And finally, who would
change a comfortable life of spinsterhood in a country parish, which always
had its pale curate to be cherished, for the unknown trials of matrimony?
Harriet remembered Belinda once saying something about people preferring
to bear those ills they had, rather than flying to others that they knew not of,
or something like that. It had been quite one of Belinda’s most sensible
observations.

Thus Harriet’s mind was practically made up to refuse Mr Mold’s offer

when it came. In the meantime, she waited for him to declare himself. He

was nearly as slow as poor Ricardo, who always took so long to come to the
point that Harriet sometimes found herself helping him out.

There was a pause. Harriet sighed. Perhaps even Mr Mold needed to be

helped a little; she had thought he might be better at coming to the point
than Ricardo.

‘How I envy you living in that lovely town,’ she said, looking at him

rather intensely. ‘Your house is in the Woodbury road, isn’t it? I always
think that’s the very nicest part.’

garden than the others.’ Again there was a short pause, then Mr Mold burst
out with rather forced joviality, ‘You know, I feel that you and I have so
much in common…’

comparing them with those that Mr Mold might be supposed to have. A
certain standard of living, comfort, good food, all these they might share,
but as before her mind went back to what was undoubtedly her greatest
interest – curates. Perhaps she did not define it in that one simple word, but
the idea was there, and with it the suspicion that Mr Mold was the kind of
person who was not entirely at his ease with the clergy.

Encouraged by her silence Mr Mold went on: ‘What I mean to say is, that

I think we should be very happy if we married. My house is large and
comfortable and my financial position is sound … and,’ he added, rather as
an afterthought, ‘I loved you the moment I saw you.’

Harriet almost laughed when she remembered their first meeting in the

village, when she had been wearing that awful old tweed coat, too! It was
really amazing how blind love made people. Nevertheless, she was
disappointed. Proposals from Ricardo several times a year had accustomed
her to passionate pleadings, interspersed with fine phrases from the greater
Italian poets. Besides, Ricardo never proposed sitting down. Always
standing or even kneeling, indeed, his courtly manners had often caused
Harriet some amusement. Compared with Ricardo, Mr Mold sounded so
prosaic and casual. He didn’t sound as if he really cared at all. She glanced
at him hastily; little beads of sweat were glistening on his forehead and his
face was crimson. Harriet could not help remembering that Ricardo always
looked pale, and although these differences were rather trivial, they seemed
somehow to add themselves to the list of reasons why she should not accept
Mr Mold’s proposal.

she was not yet used to rejecting him, and did not know how he would take
it. ‘It is really charming of you to say such kind things, and I am deeply
honoured by your proposal, but I feel I cannot accept it. It would not be fair
to you,’ she added hastily, not wishing to appear unkind.

Mr Mold looked genuinely disappointed. ‘Of course I know this must be

a shock to you,’ he ventured. ‘Perhaps you would like to wait a few days
and decide after thinking it over?’

was so tiring, and really there was nothing to think about. The more she
considered it, the less attractive the prospect of this marriage seemed to be.
He had been so jolly last night, that was what she had liked. Perhaps that
was because he had been a little drunk? And somehow he didn’t look so
handsome at close quarters. Was it possible that he was just past the Prime
of Life? she wondered.

So she smiled at him very charmingly and repeated that although she was

flattered and deeply touched by his proposal she thought it would be kinder
to give him his answer now.

‘I’m afraid my sister and I are very confirmed spinsters,’ she added, in a

lighter vein.

well, for he was now annoyed rather than hurt at her refusal, and did not
consider that she had sufficiently realized the compliment he had paid her in
asking her to be his wife. He muttered something about it being a great pity,
and then Harriet said she hoped that he would have a pleasant journey back;
the afternoon train was a very convenient one and she believed there was a
restaurant car on it. Dr Parnell would be staying a little longer, perhaps? It
was such a real pleasure for them to see visitors as they lived such
uneventful lives in this quiet village. She did hope that Mr Mold would
come and see them again next time he was in the neighbourhood.

As he stood on the front doorstep, Mr Mold extended a cordial invitation

to her to come and visit him some time. ‘You’ll always find me in the
Library,’ he added jovially, almost his old self again.

‘Reading Stitchcraft, I suppose,’ said Harriet, on a teasing note.
As he went out of the gate, he even waved one of his new gloves at her.

Perhaps after all the Librarian was right when he said that marriage was a
tiresome business and that he and Mold were lucky not to have been caught.

He looked at his watch. There would be plenty of time for a chat with the
landlord of the Crownwheel and Pinion before lunch. Marriage might put a
stop to all that kind of thing.

While Mr Mold’s proposal was being rejected in the drawing-room,

Belinda was in the dining-room, writing a letter to Agatha. ‘We have had
remarkably mild weather lately,’ she wrote, ‘and I have been able to do a lot
of gardening, in fact I have just been putting in the last of the bulbs. I have
noticed your pink chrysanthemums showing buds, which is very early for
them, isn’t it?

‘The Archdeacon preached a very fine sermon on Sunday, about the

Judgment Day. We were all very much impressed by it. You will be glad to
hear that he is looking well and has a good appetite.’

Here Belinda paused and laid down her pen. Was this last sentence

perhaps a little presumptuous? Ought an archdeacon to be looking well and
eating with a good appetite when his wife was away? And ought Belinda to
write as if she knew about his appetite?

She turned to the letter again and added ‘as far as I know’ to the sentence

about the appetite.

coming here for a quiet holiday. He brought the deputy Librarian, Mr Mold,
with him. I don’t know whether you have met him? Personally, his type
does not appeal to me very much. He is supposed to be a great ladies’ man,
and is too fond of making jokes not always in the best of taste. Harriet saw
him coming out of the Crownwheel and Pinion in the morning, which I
thought a pity.’

Mold? She had allowed herself to get so carried away by her own feelings
about him that she had rather forgotten she was writing to Agatha, in whom
she did not normally confide.

‘Still, I daresay he is a very nice man,’ she went on, ‘when one really

knows him.’

This last sentence reminded Belinda that he had now been closeted in the

drawing-room with Harriet for some considerable time. Belinda had not yet
been able to decide why he had come, indeed, she had rather forgotten
about the whole thing. Nothing was further from her mind than a proposal
of marriage, and had she known what was going on, she would probably
have rushed into the drawing-room, even if she had still been wearing her

old gardening mackintosh and galoshes, and tried her best to stop it, for one
was never quite sure what Harriet would do. Especially after her apparent
admiration of Mr Mold and her continual harping on the Prime of Life.
Belinda went so far as to go into the hall, but could not bring herself to
listen at the drawing-room door. From where she stood she could hear a low
murmur of voices. It was no use being impatient, and the last thing she
wanted was to see Mr Mold herself, so she went back to her letter. Writing
to Agatha was not easy, more of a duty than a pleasure, but Belinda felt that
she might like to hear some of the details of the parish life which the
Archdeacon probably would not give her, so she wrote about the autumn
leaves and berries they had used to decorate the church, the organist’s
illness and Miss Smiley’s brave attempt to play at Evensong, the success of
the Scouts’ Jumble Sale and other homely matters.

At last she heard the sound of a door opening, then conversation and

laughter. Harriet and Mr Mold had come out of the drawing-room. Belinda
waited until she judged him safely out of the front door and then went
eagerly into the hall to hear the result of his visit.

She found Harriet standing in front of the mirror, rubbing her hands

together and looking pleased with herself. Her face was rather red and she
looked more elegant than was usual at such an early hour of the day.

‘Well,’ she said, with a hint of triumph in her voice, ‘that’s that.’
‘Yes,’ said Belinda, ‘but what? I hope you didn’t promise him anything

for the Library Extension Fund. There are far more deserving causes in the
parish.’

‘But, Belinda, surely you guessed why he had come?’ said Harriet

patiently, for really her sister was very stupid. ‘He came to ask me to marry
him,’ she declared, smiling.

‘Oh, Harriet …’ Belinda was quite speechless. She might have known

that something dreadful like this would happen. As if he would bother to
come and ask for a subscription to the Library funds! Her supposition
seemed very vain and feeble now. Still, as Belinda would not have to live
with them, perhaps she need not see very much of her over-jovial brother-
in-law – that would be some consolation, though it would hardly make up
for the loss of her sister. Of course, she supposed, she could always have a
companion to live with her, some deserving poor relation like Connie
Aspinall, or she might advertise in the Church Times; somebody with
literary interests and fond of gardening, a churchwoman, of course. Belinda

shuddered as she thought of the applications and the task of interviewing
them; she was sure she would never have the strength to reject anyone,
however unsuitable. Perhaps, after all, it would be better to live alone.

‘Of course, I couldn’t accept him,’ said Harriet, rather loudly, for she had

expected Belinda to show real interest, instead of just standing and staring
at the floor.

The look of relief that brightened Belinda’s face was pathetic in its

intensity.

‘Oh, Harriet …’ again she was speechless. However could she have

thought for a moment that her sister would do such a thing?

you remember what Shakespeare said about when lovely woman stoops to
folly …’ she made a significant gesture with her hand.

Belinda frowned. ‘I don’t think it was Shakespeare, dear,’ she said

absently. ‘I must ask Henry. I have an idea it may be Pope.’ But what did it
matter? Belinda was so overcome with joy and relief at Harriet’s news that
she kissed her impulsively and suggested that they should have some
meringues for tea, as Harriet was so fond of them.

Together they went into the dining-room, where Harriet with many

ludicrous and exaggerated imitations, gave a demonstration of how Mr
Mold had proposed to her.

‘Oh, Harriet, you mustn’t be so unkind!’ protested Belinda, in the

intervals of laughing, for her sister was really much funnier than Mr Mold
could possibly have been. They laughed even more when the corsets were
discovered under a cushion.

them while he was waiting. Or if the Archdeacon had when he came the
other day,’ chortled Harriet.

about it all that one could associate with Mr Mold but hardly with the
Archdeacon.

‘I expect he’s consoling himself in the Crownwheel and Pinion,’ said

Harriet, ‘so we needn’t really pity him.’

She was perfectly right; so much so that, when he arrived at the vicarage

rather late for lunch, Dr Parnell was constrained to whisper to his friend the
Archdeacon, ‘I fear poor Nathaniel is not entirely sober.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

As Mr Mold settled himself comfortably in his first-class corner seat he
decided that he had probably had a lucky escape. And indeed, he reflected,
Love is only one of many passions and it has no great influence on the sum
of life, as the Librarian was so fond of quoting.

A few days later Belinda and Harriet were invited to tea at the vicarage.

It was hardly surprising that Mr Mold’s proposal, which appeared to be
known to the Archdeacon and Dr Parnell, should be the chief topic of
conversation.

Dr Parnell was inclined to think it a pity that Harriet had refused his

colleague, for although he had always been of the opinion that it must be
very tiresome to be married, he did not deny that it was an interesting state.
Indeed, he often regretted that the Archdeacon was the only one of his
friends who had a wife. As a young man Dr Parnell had looked forward to
the time when Belinda would come to him for advice on the trials of
matrimony. In those days he had hoped that she might marry the
Archdeacon, and was almost as disappointed as she had been at her failure
to captivate him. He had never liked Agatha, but he could not help admiring
her skill, and when by her powers her husband was raised to the dignity of
archdeacon, Mr Parnell, as he then was, had aptly remarked that Henry was
indeed fortunate in having won the love of a good woman. Nevertheless, he
considered himself almost equally fortunate in not having done so, and
often used to remark to John Akenside that he did not think poor Henry was
quite as free as he had been.

But there was no denying that Harriet and Mr Mold would have made an

admirable couple. They had both reached an age when temperament and
character were settled, and instead of one dominating the other they would
have been able to live in comfortable harmony. Besides, there would be
plenty of money, so that if there had been love, which Dr Parnell rather
doubted, it would have been less likely to fly out of the window, as he had
been told it did when poverty came in at the door.

problem.

careful thought,’ said Dr Parnell, ‘but I should be the last to admit
impediments to the marriage of true minds, and it seems to me that you and
Nathaniel have a great many tastes in common.’

Harriet denied this indignantly: perhaps she was still thinking of curates.

‘The only thing we have in common is a love of good food,’ she said,
thinking that Dr Parnell was being more than usually interfering. ‘I could
never marry Mr Mold.’

most lasting things you could possibly have in common with anyone,’
argued Dr Parnell. ‘After all, the emotions of the heart are very transitory,
or so I believe; I should think it makes one much happier to be well-fed
than well-loved.’

Belinda did not trouble to contradict this statement, romantic and

sentimental though she was. She was feeling much too happy and peaceful
to indulge in any argument. For here she was sitting on the sofa with the
person she had loved well and faithfully for thirty years, and whom she still
saw as the beautiful young man he had been then, although he was now
married and an archdeacon. And as if this were not enough, had she not just
escaped having a brother-in-law who was not really a gentleman, and made
jokes not always in the best of taste? When one reached middle age it was
even more true that all change is of itself an evil and ought not to be
hazarded but for evident advantage. She smiled at Dr Parnell indulgently,
but said nothing. The Archdeacon in his turn smiled affectionately at her,
and thought what a nice peaceful creature she was, so different from his
own admirable wife, with her busy schemes for his preferment.

Dr Parnell was still regretting Harriet’s hasty action, and suggested that

she might write Mr Mold a letter giving him some hope for he had heard
that even hope was better than nothing.

But Harriet, who knew she was being teased, merely listened with a

smile on her face and said with dignity that she believed she could do a
great deal better for herself. She looked at the three of them rather
mysteriously, and Belinda wondered whether she could be making plans to
captivate Dr Parnell.

harping on the same subject.

she leaned forward confidentially, ‘I believe he drinks …’ she said,
pronouncing this last word in a suitably hushed whisper.

towards Mr Mold, ‘I don’t think you should say that. We all like to take
something occasionally, a drink can be a great comfort at times.’

‘I am glad to hear that you are so broad-minded,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I

remember Agatha being quite shocked when I said something of the kind to
the Mothers’ Union once.’

might abuse the comfort of drink.’

‘Whereas we know how to be moderate,’ said Harriet primly.
‘I cannot imagine Agatha taking too much,’ said Dr Parnell. He

chuckled. ‘No, I’m afraid I can’t.’

Belinda gave him a shocked glance. ‘Have you heard from Agatha

again?’ she asked the Archdeacon brightly.

‘Yes, as a matter of fact I had a letter by the lunch-time post,’ he said.

‘You can read it if you want to,’ he added, taking a letter out of his pocket
and handing it to her.

Belinda took the letter rather gingerly, thinking it odd that he should hand

it to her so willingly. But when she came to read Agatha’s neat handwriting,
she saw that the letter contained nothing private. It seemed to be a long list
of things he must not forget to do. It was admirably practical, but
unromantic. And yet, after so many years of being married to a charming
but difficult man like the Archdeacon, perhaps it was rather too much to
expect that Agatha should dwell on the desolation of life without him. All
the same, Belinda could not help remembering her own letters, and she was
sure that even now she could have found something a little more tender to
write about than Florrie’s and cook’s wages and the Mothers’ Union tea.
She was just going to hand the letter back when she noticed that there was a
postscript over the page.

‘I forgot to tell you that among the people staying here is the Bishop of

Mbawawa. I believe the Bedes know him. He is a delightful man, so
friendly, and he tells many interesting stories about the splendid work he

has been doing among the natives. I am trying to persuade him to come
home with me, as I am sure everyone would be interested to meet him.’

she said, ‘who do you think is there?’

Harriet, who was quietly enjoying a substantial tea, looked up and asked

who was where.

‘In Karlsbad,’ said Belinda.
‘I don’t know,’ she said, not very interested. ‘It’s the sort of place where

King Edward VII might be, only of course it could hardly be him.’

‘It’s an old friend of yours,’ said Belinda.
‘Is he an old friend?’ asked the Archdeacon.
‘I should like to number bishops among my friends,’ said Dr Parnell.
Harriet seemed to brighten up at this. ‘Bishops? Well, of course I know

quite a number,’ she mused. This was not really surprising, for after all
every bishop has once been a curate. ‘It couldn’t be Willie Amery, I
suppose or Oliver Opobo and Calabar – isn’t that a lovely title? – no, he’s in
Nigeria, I believe. Of course it might be Theo Grote, Theodore Mbawawa,
as he signs himself,’ she smiled to herself. ‘That would be the nicest of all.’

interested to hear that.’

face. ‘I believe we are going to see some old broth being warmed up. I like
to see that.’

‘Agatha talks of bringing him to stay here,’ said the Archdeacon

distastefully. He disliked other members of his calling.

Clean sheets on the spare bed and a tin of biscuits on the little table in

case he should feel hungry in the night, thought Belinda irrelevantly.

have been doing a little calculation. ‘It will be nice to see dear Theo again.’

‘On the threshold of sixty,’ mused Dr Parnell. ‘That’s a good age for a

man to marry. He needs a woman to help him into his grave.’

‘But that’s just the Prime of Life,’ said Harriet indignantly. ‘I’m sure we

shan’t find Theo at all doddery.’

Belinda began to suspect that Harriet regarded the Bishop as a possible

husband. She had certainly been very much in love with him when she was
a schoolgirl and he a willowy curate in the early twenties. Belinda had often
thought that the reason why Harriet made so much of Mr Donne was

because he reminded her of dear Theo Grote. And then Belinda had often
heard her say that a bishop needed a wife to help him with certain intimate
problems in his diocese, things which a woman could deal with better than
a man. It seemed a little hard, Belinda thought, that this new menace should
appear, just when she was so relieved at having escaped Mr Mold, but she
would just have to leave Harriet to her schemes. Belinda trembled for the
unmarried Bishop of Mbawawa if he did not feel inclined to enter into that
blessed state.

‘Shall I read aloud to you?’ suggested the Archdeacon hopefully. He

went over to the bookshelves and invited requests for what anyone would
like. But Dr Parnell suddenly got up from his chair and announced that he
thought he had better do his packing. It was so tiresome to have a rush at
the last minute. Harriet, too, had suddenly remembered that she was to
deliver some parish magazines and was already halfway out of the door,
thanking the Archdeacon for a delightful tea party, and inviting him to drop
in at four o’clock any afternoon. She and Dr Parnell hurried out of the room
together, the latter remarking that he wondered Henry could spare the time
from his parochial duties to listen to the sound of his own voice.

happily.

The Archdeacon turned towards her with a volume of Spenser in his

hand. ‘I think it would be pleasant to have something from the Faerie
Queene,’ he declared.

The clock struck half past five. Belinda settled herself comfortably in her

chair. She felt rather drowsy and the Faerie Queene was such a soothing
poem. It just went on and on.

agreed that this would be very nice. She had always been so fond of The
Prelude.

At half past six Belinda began to murmur something about being sure

that she was disturbing the Archdeacon, who must have a great deal to do.

Well, yes, he supposed that she was disturbing him really, but it was very

pleasant to be disturbed occasionally, especially when there were so many
tiresome things to do.

‘Do you know,’ he said suddenly, with the air of one who has made an

important discovery, ‘this reminds me of the old days. I used to read aloud
to you then. Does it remind you?’

Whatever did he imagine that it reminded her of? ‘Oh, yes, it’s quite like
the old days,’ she said at last, and then tried to think of something more
intelligent to continue the conversation.

apt to wander back into the past and remember it so vividly that it became
more real than the present. Unless she fixed her attention on something
definite, she might find herself saying the wrong thing. Her eyes lighted on
a set of Bible commentaries. Well, nobody could expect her to talk about
them. She must try again. The mantelpiece is dusty, she thought. Florrie
needs keeping up to the mark, and I don’t believe she’s used the Hoover on
this carpet since Agatha went away. Agatha. There was something definite.
There was nothing vague or nebulous about an archdeacon’s wife, even
when she wasn’t there. I loved you more than Agatha did, thought Belinda,
but all I can do now is to keep silent. I can’t even speak to Florrie about the
dusty mantelpiece, because it’s nothing to do with me. It never was and it
never will be.

Archdeacon, seeing where Belinda was looking.

‘No, things always go wrong in a house when there’s no woman at the

head of things,’ agreed Belinda. ‘I mean, it’s different when Agatha’s
away.’

The Archdeacon sighed. ‘Yes, it is different,’ he agreed. ‘But there it is.

We can’t alter things, can we?’

he meant. She was just wondering what would happen if she led the
conversation round to more personal things than dusty mantelpieces, when
the door opened and in came Dr Parnell, complaining that he was hungry
and asking if they were never going to have anything to eat.

‘Why, yes, it must be nearly supper-time,’ said Belinda, starting to put on

her gloves. ‘I must go.’

‘Oh, but I insist that you stay,’ protested the Archdeacon.
‘I really couldn’t,’ said Belinda mechanically. ‘Harriet will be expecting

me.’

‘Please, dear Belinda,’ he said coaxingly. ‘You know I asked you to tea

the other day and you wouldn’t come. The least you can do is to stay now.
For the sake of old times,’ he added, with uncharacteristic heartiness.

‘Really, Henry, I think you might have put it better,’ said Dr Parnell. ‘I

should hardly imagine that poor Belinda can really wish to be reminded of
old times.’

But Belinda only smiled. ‘All right, I will stay,’ she said. ‘I shall never

understand women,’ said Dr Parnell complacently.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Belinda arrived home that evening feeling very happy. It had been so nice
having supper at the vicarage without the restraining presence of Agatha,
the efficient wife and good philologist. During those few hours Belinda had
almost imagined herself back in her youth. As she had listened to the
Archdeacon giving a short dissertation on the Beast Fable in the Middle
Ages, she had found herself looking at her watch and thinking that she
would have to be back at her college by half past ten if she did not want the
Principal to ask any awkward questions. When the Archdeacon had gone on
to discuss the sources of his Judgment Day sermon, she had realized
regretfully that the Principal of whom she had stood in awe had been in her
grave at least ten years.

It was not until she reached her own front door that Belinda began to feel

a little uneasy, and wonder if it had been quite the thing for her to spend a
whole evening at the vicarage without Agatha or Harriet to chaperone her.
For although Dr Parnell had been there, he wasn’t quite the same as some
respectable middle-aged woman. And yet why should not she be allowed
her occasional joys, such very mild ones, which were mostly remembrance
of things past?

Sound of hearty laughter came from the drawing-room. The curate was

there. Perhaps he had dropped in after Evensong, as Harriet had so often
told him to, and had stayed to supper. Belinda was glad that he was there,
as. his presence would save her a little from Harriet’s ruthless cross-
examination, which was bound to come sooner or later.

Belinda went upstairs to take off her hat and coat and then into the

middle of the cheerful noise.

Harriet and the curate were sitting on the sofa, deeply engrossed in a

book. The curate leaped up and expressed himself delighted to see her.
Belinda thought it a little unnecessary of him to welcome her to her own
house, but she said nothing.

‘I suppose you’ve had supper?’ asked Harriet.

‘Yes,’ said Belinda, ‘I stayed at the vicarage. I hope you didn’t wait for

me?’

this.’

Belinda laughed rather uncomfortably. ‘What are you reading?’ she

asked, hoping to change the subject.

‘We were reading Catullus. I really don’t know how we got on to it,’ said

Harriet merrily. ‘Mr Donne’s so good at Latin but of course it’s quite thirty
years since I read a word of it.’

‘Oh, come,’ said the curate playfully. ‘I can’t believe that.’
Belinda took up her knitting. She remembered Dr Parnell saying that he

thought Catullus rather too indelicate for a young girl to read. If this were
so, for Belinda’s scanty knowledge of Latin would not enable her to find
out for herself, how much more indelicate must the great Roman poet be for
a young curate! ‘There is a pretty translation of one of his poems by
Thomas Campion,’ she said vaguely, ‘but I suppose it’s not like reading the
original.’

‘No, my friend Olivia Berridge always says that. You remember perhaps,

she’s Mrs Hoccleve’s niece,’ explained the curate.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Harriet, ‘she knows Anglo-Saxon and things like that,

doesn’t she? And of course she made you those socks. I thought the toes
were not very well grafted, in that grey pair you showed me. It’s quite easy
to do, really. You just say knit and slip off, purl and keep on – or it may be
the other way round.’

knows that.’

got up to go.

‘Perhaps you would like to borrow some books?’ suggested Belinda,

seeing that he was looking at the shelves. It was a little difficult to guide his
choice, but eventually he went away with some thrillers and the selected
poems of the Earl of Rochester, a volume of which Belinda was particularly
fond. It had been given to her by Dr Parnell on her twenty-first birthday.
Belinda felt that it would not be likely to harm Mr Donne’s morals, as it
professed to be a collection of such pieces only, as may be received in a
vertuous court, and may not unbecome the Cabinet of the Severest Matron.

Belinda and said, ‘Now tell me all, about it.’

protested, ‘there’s really nothing to tell. Henry read aloud to me and then
we talked a bit and then he persuaded me to stay to supper, which I did. But
I don’t know whether I ought to have done that,’ she added rather
unhappily. ‘I mean, I shouldn’t like Agatha to think…’

‘No, no, of course not,’ said Harriet soothingly. ‘Now wouldn’t you like a

nice cup of Ovaltine?’ she said, fussing round Belinda like a motherly hen.

milky drink was needed to bring her down to earth but it seemed an
unromantic end to the evening.

Harriet had already gone into the kitchen and soon returned with the

Ovaltine and a selection of biscuits and cakes.

‘Now,’ she said, as if speaking to an invalid, ‘drink it up while it’s hot

and don’t try to talk till you’ve finished. There’ll be plenty of time for you
to tell me all about it.’

‘But what is there to tell?’ protested Belinda, rousing herself. ‘I’ve told

you what we did.’

asking you to elope with him!’ she declared triumphantly.

‘Oh, Harriet, how dreadful you are!’ said Belinda, unable to help

laughing at this monstrous suggestion. ‘As if a clergyman, let alone an
archdeacon, would do a thing like that.’

‘Then he’s been telling you that he’s very fond of you, and hinting that he

wishes he’d married you instead of Agatha,’ went on Harriet, gallantly
persevering.

for the Ovaltine had loosened her tongue. ‘I mean, it’s a bit late for anything
like that, isn’t it? Henry is always loyal to Agatha and feels quite differently
about her,’ she added hastily, in case her sister should take her up wrongly.

she said, ‘but there’s no reason why he shouldn’t be fond of you as well.
Clergymen are always saying that we should love one another.’

that isn’t at all the same kind of thing. But of course Henry and I have
always been friends and I hope we always will be.’

Harriet sighed. Poor Belinda was so unworldly, so sentimental.
‘Of course he is fond of you,’ she declared boldly. ‘Anybody can tell that

by the way he keeps smiling at you, when he thinks nobody’s looking.’

love. But hadn’t one of our greater English poets said something about Pity
being akin to Love? Or had she made it up herself? A vague recollection of
Aristotle’s Poetics came into her mind. But that was Pity and Fear, rather
like her feeling for Miss Prior, not at all the same thing…

‘I’m sure everyone knows,’ persisted Harriet, nothing daunted by her

sister’s unwillingness to confide in her and determined to make something
interesting out of Belinda’s evening at the vicarage.

‘Knows what?’ asked Belinda, rather startled.
‘Why, that you love each other,’ beamed Harriet, as if she were giving

her blessing to a young couple, instead of making rather a scandalous
suggestion about a married archdeacon and a respectable spinster.

Belinda was now rather agitated and could not think of anything to say.
‘Don’t deny that he’s making the most of Agatha’s absence,’ Harriet went

on, ‘and anyway everybody knows that you knew him long before Agatha
did.’

claim people on that basis.’

the time?’

‘No, not all the time.’ Belinda smiled as she remembered their

conversation. ‘We talked about the dust on the mantelpiece.’

‘Oh, Belinda, surely …’ Harriet searched vainly in the tin for another

chocolate biscuit.

at the head of things,’ Belinda went on. ‘I mean, servants neglect their duty
and that sort of thing. I think I said, “It’s different when Agatha’s away”, or
something like that.’

‘Oh, Belinda, wasn’t that rather obvious?’
Belinda looked startled. ‘Oh, I meant things in the house, naturally. He

surely couldn’t have taken it any other way?’

remember?’

years of it. It’s a pity I don’t remember other things so well. He said, “Yes,
it is different, but there it is. We can’t alter things, can we?”’

Harriet let out a cry of joy. ‘Go on,’ she said. ‘What happened next?’
‘Oh, then Nicholas came in and we had supper.’ Belinda paused. ‘Well,

dinner really, because there was soup, though I think it was tinned. Still, it
was very nice, mushroom or something. It had little bits of things in it.’

‘Oh, Belinda, I don’t want to hear about the soup,’ said Harriet. ‘How

sickening that Nicholas should have come in just at that moment. Just like
him,’ she grumbled. ‘To think of it, the moment you’ve been waiting for for
thirty years!’ She paused dramatically.

right to.’

to alter things?’ said Harriet. ‘He meant he’d rather have you than Agatha,
only of course he couldn’t put it quite as crudely as that.’

‘We never mentioned ourselves,’ said Belinda hopelessly. ‘We were

talking about his study not being dusted.’

‘Now if only he were a widower,’ mused Harriet.
‘But he isn’t,’ said Belinda stoutly.
‘No, and Agatha’s very tough in spite of her rheumatism,’ lamented

Harriet. ‘And soon he won’t even be a grass widower because she’s coming
back.’

‘Yes, she’s coming back,’ said Belinda, even more stoutly. How odd if

Henry were a widower, she thought suddenly. How embarrassing, really. It
would be like going back thirty years. Or wouldn’t it? Belinda soon saw
that it wouldn’t. For she was now a contented spinster and her love was like
a warm, comfortable garment, bedsocks, perhaps, or even woollen
combinations; certainly something without glamour or romance. All the
same, it was rather nice to think that Henry might prefer her to Agatha,
although she knew perfectly well that he didn’t. It was one of the
advantages of being the one he hadn’t married that one could be in a
position to imagine such things.

Belinda gave a contented sigh. It had been such a lovely evening. Just

one evening like that every thirty years or so. It might not seem much to
other people, but it was really all one needed to be happy. But Harriet was
saying something, so she could not indulge in such thoughts for long.

she said. ‘Although he did say that he was definitely not engaged to her, one
never knows.’

‘He doesn’t sound as if he were in love with her,’ said Belinda

doubtfully. ‘But of course Miss Berridge may have made up her mind to
marry him. She sounds a bit like Agatha,’ she added.

‘But Mr Donne is nothing like the Archdeacon,’ said Harriet indignantly.
‘No, I don’t think anybody is quite like the Archdeacon,’ said Belinda

quietly.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

During the next week or so the village began to look forward to the
homecoming of the Archdeacon’s right hand, as many of the church
workers called Mrs Hoccleve. They were conventional enough to use this
expression, which they had often heard, without troubling to ask themselves
whether it could really be applied here. It was a known thing that the wives
of clergy often were their right hands, and even if the Hoccleves were
sometimes rather snappy with each other there was no doubt that she was
the power behind him. The news that she was to be accompanied by the
Bishop of Mbawawa had spread rapidly, and little groups of eager Sunday
School teachers could be seen talking about it. Some had heard that he was
black, a real African bishop, but Harriet soon put them right on this point
and achieved a new importance through having known him as a curate.
Belinda did not share in this glory, for after so many years she found it
difficult to remember which of the many curates her sister had cherished
was Theodore Grote.

‘He was thin and dark, wasn’t he?’ she said anxiously. ‘But somehow I

can’t see his face.’ There was a blank above the clerical collar, as it were,
for so many had been thin and dark.

‘Oh, Belinda, you must remember him at that Whist Drive,’ said Harriet

smiling tenderly, for she had no difficulty in recalling him as one of the
most sought-after curates in the history of the Church of England. In his
heyday there had been quite a procession of doting women towards his
lodgings, carrying cooked pheasants and chickens, iced cakes, even jellies
in basins … Harriet sighed over her reminiscences and then remarked in a
regretful tone of voice that she did not think Belinda had really made the
most of Agatha’s absence.

Belinda could not but agree, for Harriet was perfectly right. And yet, how

could one make the most of the absence of an archdeacon’s wife. It was a
thing no truly respectable spinster could or would do. She pointed this out

to Harriet, who refused with characteristic obstinacy to understand and
merely remarked that we none of us got any younger.

that might have been a pullover for the Archdeacon, that was it. She thought
about it so seldom but now she became melancholy at the realization that
the fine madness of her youth had gone. She was no longer an original
shining like a comet, indeed, it would have been unsuitable if she had been.
Change and decay in all around I see … All, all are gone, the old familiar
faces … Dear Nicholas was back in the Library, John Akenside was in
heaven, while his earthly remains rested in an English cemetery in the
Balkans, and if Harriet married Theodore Mbawawa, even she would be
gone … Who was there apart from the forbidden Archdeacon? One’s
women friends, of course, people like Edith Liversidge and Connie
Aspinall, but they were a cold comfort. Belinda grew even more
melancholy, and then she remembered Count Bianco. There was always
Ricardo. Perhaps they could read Dante together and find some consolation
in the great Italian poet. She did not think she would be equal to reading
Tacitus.

In the meantime Belinda had promised to go to the station with the

Archdeacon to meet Agatha and the Bishop. On this day she was classed
with Agatha’s nearest and dearest in a way which seemed to her rather
ironical. Who but a man could be so lacking in finer feelings as to think of
such a thing? she wondered. But of course she said she would go.

‘After all, you both love the Archdeacon,’ Harriet had explained, and

Belinda supposed that it was true, though one could hardly admit it even to
oneself. Possibly, thought Belinda, I love him even more than Agatha does,
but my feeling may be the stronger for not having married him.

As they waited on the station, Belinda decided that her sister had been

wise to stay at home, for it was bitterly cold. Harriet liked her comfort and
had decided that she would appear to better advantage in a less bleak
setting.

‘The Bishop will surely find our climate very different from that of the

tropics,’ remarked the curate, as they were stamping their feet on the
platform to keep warm.

Belinda thought this remark to be so obvious as not to require an answer,

so she turned to the Archdeacon and said that she thought his watch must be
fast, as they seemed to have been waiting a long time.

‘Oh, no, but the train is late,’ he said, with a superior smile. So Milton’s

Adam must have smiled on Eve. He was not pleased at the prospect of
having to entertain the Bishop for an indefinite length of time, but
nevertheless he was looking forward to it with a kind of grim relish. He
remembered certain minor discomforts about the spare room at the vicarage
as he stood there on the cold platform. It was a gloomy room with a
northerly aspect and a tall, dark monkey-puzzle growing close to the
window, which looked out on to an old potting-shed, full of flower-pots and
dried-up roots and bulbs. And in addition, although the Archdeacon had not
personally made the bed, he knew that there were sides-to-middle sheets on
it, for Florrie had come into his study that morning, very agitated because
all the whole sheets were still at the laundry. The Archdeacon was
delighted. He seemed to remember also that the mattress was a particularly
lumpy one, worn into uncomfortable bumps and hollows by a variety of
visiting clergy, and that the bedside lamp did not work. All the same he had
taken pleasure in making a suitable selection of books for the bedside table
– a volume of Tillotson’s sermons, Klaeber’s edition of Beowulf, the Poems
of Mrs Hemans, an old Icelandic grammar, and, as a concession to the
Bishop’s connection with Africa, a particularly dull anthropological work,
which had been included with some other books he had bought at a sale.
The Bishop would naturally want thrillers – the clergy always did, he found
– but he was keeping his own supply locked up in his study.

Belinda saw him smiling to himself and wondered whether it could be

because Agatha was coming home. Naturally it must be, as she knew he
was not pleased at the prospect of the Bishop. Prospect of bishops, she
thought, liking the phrase, but at that moment the curate espied the train
coming round the bend into the station.

Agatha’s face had appeared at the window.

‘I thought you would be travelling at the rear. I didn’t look for you at the

front,’ said the Archdeacon rather reproachfully.

He kissed his wife, not very affectionately, Belinda thought, but she had

kept herself rather in the background, waiting for this reunion of nearest and
dearest to be over. There was a forced smile on her face to be used when
needed. She looked about her and saw emerging from the railway carriage
what she imagined must be the Bishop of Mbawawa. He too was looking as
if he did not quite know what to do with himself.

remember me,’ she said, smiling rather awkwardly. Nor did she remember
him, if it came to that, for she could have sworn that she had never seen him
in all her life. Could a beautiful curate have grown into this tall, stringy-
looking man, with a yellow, leathery complexion? His expression reminded
Belinda of a sheep more than anything; his face was long, his forehead
domed and his head bald. He was even rather toothy, a thing that Harriet
abhorred. Could it be the same person? she wondered.

‘But I certainly do remember you,’ he was saying. ‘You knitted me a

beautiful scarf when I was a curate.’

Belinda was decidedly taken aback. She had always thought it rather

wonderful that she had never done anything of the kind. He must have been
thinking of Harriet or another of his many admirers.

the Bishop to be assailed with doubts.

‘You did such splendid work with the Guild of St Agnes,’ he went on,

less certainly.

daresay you remember my sister better,’ she ventured, ‘Harriet, you know.’

‘Ah, yes.’ His face cleared. ‘I shall look forward to renewing my

acquaintance with her,’ he said politely. ‘She was always interested in
missions, if I remember rightly.’

‘Oh, yes, she was,’ said Belinda, thinking that she might as well agree for

a change. ‘She is looking forward to seeing you so much.’

The Bishop was just saying something about the pleasure of meeting old

friends and looked as if he might almost be about to quote some Mbawawa
proverb, when Agatha came over to them and Belinda found herself
shaking hands cordially and telling her how well she looked.

in the face and seemed in very good spirits. Belinda was shocked to find
herself wondering whether a month’s absence from her husband could have
anything to do with it.

walk as he had to call and see one of the church wardens. So Belinda found
herself sitting by Agatha, while the Bishop and the Archdeacon squatted
rather incongruously on the little folding seats.

of her old sharpness, so that Belinda felt that it was her fault.

‘Oh, I think he’s quite well really,’ said Belinda quickly. ‘A little tired,

perhaps, but then he’s had so much to do while you’ve been away.’

The Archdeacon was unable to resist joining in this interesting

conversation, so he rather rudely interrupted the Bishop, who was telling
him something about the organization of his diocese, to remark that he was
really quite exhausted and did not know how he was going to get through
the rest of the winter.

‘Oh, I expect you’ll manage all right,’ said Agatha lightly. ‘I’m sure

Bishop Grote will be only too glad to help with some of the services.’

‘Indeed I shall,’ said the Bishop, ‘and I daresay my own experience in

organizing a large diocese will be of use to you. My African priests are
dear, good fellows, but they sometimes need a helping hand.’

Belinda did not dare to look at the Archdeacon’s face, but she could feel

the blackness of his look and she wondered if her own indignation on his
account could be seen in her face. To class an English archdeacon with
African priests! Surely that was going too far? Not, she hastened to assure
herself, because they were Africans: she was certain that, as the Bishop had
said, they were dear, good fellows, but she was surprised that he should
have so little sense of what was fitting to the occasion.

far, but it was long enough for Belinda to realize that the Bishop and the
Archdeacon had taken an instant dislike to each other. This was in some
ways rather unlucky, as it was essential to the success of Harriet’s plans that
the Bishop should stay some time, and if the Archdeacon were really rude
to him, as he might very well be, there was no knowing what might happen.
Of course Harriet might not feel so enthusiastic after she had seen the
Bishop. Belinda hoped that this might be so, as she did not think she would
like him as a brother-in-law and she certainly did not want her sister to
leave her and go to Africa.

door.

‘Belinda will stay to tea, of course,’ said the Archdeacon quickly.
‘Oh, yes, certainly,’ said Agatha. ‘We want to hear all the parish news.’
‘I should like a little moral support,’ said the Archdeacon in a low voice.

‘I am not sure that tea will be enough.’

them, but the Archdeacon stayed behind to supervise the unloading of the
luggage.

‘I hope it isn’t inconvenient,’ said Belinda in her usual apologetic

manner.

‘Not at all,’ said Agatha coolly. ‘One extra for tea is no trouble at all – I

never find that it is.’

‘Oh, no, nor do I,’ said Belinda, floundering deeper. She was quite

grateful to the Bishop for turning the conversation to the Mbawawa hunting
customs, by which it appeared that when an animal was killed unlimited
hospitality was extended to all neighbouring tribes.

‘What a nice custom,’ said Belinda inadequately, ‘but I imagine they

would have to have more than one animal, wouldn’t they?’

‘Oh, it is a ritual eating,’ the Bishop explained. ‘The meat is not actually

consumed.’

‘Well, I hope our tea will be a little more satisfying,’ said Agatha, smiling

indulgently at the Bishop. ‘Where is Harriet, by the way?’ she asked
Belinda, in a sharper tone. ‘She couldn’t come to the station,’ said Belinda
evasively. After all it was none of Agatha’s business where Harriet was. She
could hardly have told the assembled company that Harriet preferred to wait
for some more elegant occasion before renewing her acquaintance with the
Bishop. She had visions of herself advancing towards him graciously in her
brown velvet or wine crêpe de Chine, and such clothes would hardly have
been possible at the station on a cold winter afternoon.

‘I hope she is quite well? said Agatha politely.
‘Yes, thank you,’ said Belinda. ‘She was doing something else, as a

matter of fact.’

‘With Ricardo, perhaps?’ suggested the Archdeacon helpfully.
‘Is she married then?’ asked the Bishop. ‘I did not know.’
‘Oh, no,’ said Belinda confusedly. ‘Ricardo isn’t her husband. He is an

Italian count,’ she added quickly, as if that did away with any possibility of
a misunderstanding. ‘One of our oldest friends here.’

charming man, most friendly. I ought not to gossip, I know, but I don’t think
anybody would be surprised if he were to marry Lady Clara Boulding, the
widow of our former Member of Parliament,’ she explained for the
Bishop’s benefit.

Archdeacon, ‘but I think a great many people would be surprised if things
happened as you suggested. I had an idea that Ricardo’s fancy lay in quite
another direction.’

At this the Bishop directed a rather coy glance towards Belinda, who

began talking quickly about missions and the very interesting preacher they
had had one Sunday evening, from the diocese of Ndikpo, or some such
name.

‘Ah, yes, Ndikpo,’ the Bishop shook his head. ‘The labourers are indeed

few in that field. They have no African priests there.’

‘I mean it takes some time before the natives are ready to be ordained.’

whether the Archdeacon gave out collecting boxes for missions to his
parishioners.

‘No,’ replied the Archdeacon shortly. ‘We have a collection at Mattins

every now and then.’

suggested the Bishop. ‘You would find that the spirit of friendly rivalry
would increase the amount considerably. You might publish the results in
the parish magazine when the boxes were opened. I have always found that
the best way.’

‘It wouldn’t work here,’ said the Archdeacon emphatically.
‘I think it’s an excellent idea,’ said Agatha. ‘Miss Smiley does it for the

Zenana Mission, you know.’

anything about it myself, I am much too busy, as you will realize when you
have been here a little longer, my dear Bishop.’

Belinda could only wonder how he was to be made to realize this, but,

loyal as ever, she agreed that the Archdeacon was much too busy and, much
to her own surprise and dismay, heard herself offering to take on the
organization and distribution of the boxes.

‘I knew it!’ said the Bishop. ‘As soon as I saw Miss Bede, I said to

myself “here is one of us – that splendid work for the Guild of St. Agnes” –
do you know, Archdeacon, she even denied that she had been connected
with it?’

Belinda was by now covered with confusion and began to wonder

whether she had indeed worked splendidly for the Guild of St Agnes; after
all, her memory was not always completely reliable. Perhaps she had also
knitted the Bishop a beautiful scarf. She felt that it was time to be going.

‘Oh, Belinda is a very excellent person altogether,’ said the Archdeacon

with casual charm. ‘I don’t know what we should do without her.’

Belinda reflected a little bitterly on these words as she walked home, but

the sight of Ricardo and Edith Liversidge, deep in conversation, soon turned
her thoughts to other matters. She could guess what they were talking about
and was not surprised to hear Ricardo saying that he had hoped the
tombstone would be of white marble rather than commonplace grey stone.

‘Well, as long as he’s dead I don’t see that it matters what his tombstone

is like,’ said Edith very sensibly, but with a lack of feeling regrettable in
one who had lost her love so tragically. ‘I’m sure John wouldn’t mind,’ she
went on jovially. ‘He was never all that particular about appearances.’

‘A mind and spirit as great as his needed no outward decoration,’ said

Ricardo solemnly.

Belinda waited until he had gone before interrupting with an invitation to

Edith to come in for a cup of tea.

still be having hers.’

‘Well, if it isn’t a nuisance,’ said Edith, with unusual consideration.
‘Oh, one extra for tea is no trouble at all,’ said Belinda gaily. ‘I never

find that it is.’

‘It might quite easily be,’ said Edith. ‘If there were only a small piece of

cake left, for instance.’

quite ready to forget that she had had her own tea at the vicarage. After the
little strains and awkwardnesses there she felt that she deserved a second
tea and was able to do full justice to the potato cakes and her favourite
Belgian buns.

At tea they were all very gay, in the way that happy, unmarried ladies of

middle age often are. Naturally they talked about the Bishop. Try as she
would, Belinda could not give a flattering description. After several
attempts to soften the blow, she burst out, ‘Well, Harriet, there’s no getting
away from it, he reminds me of a sheep!’

haven’t seen him for many years, but people don’t alter all that much, and
he was such an exceptionally good-looking curate.’

‘Are you sure you’re thinking of the same one?’ suggested Belinda

timidly. ‘You’ve known so many …’

anyway,’ she went on stoutly, to justify herself in case of a possible
disappointment, ‘you can’t judge a person by his face.’

‘No, of course not,’ Belinda agreed. ‘I’m sure he’s an excellent man,’ she

said doubtfully. ‘Have you ever heard of the Guild of St Agnes, by the
way?’

‘Oh, I don’t think so,’ said Harriet. ‘There’s the Society of St Monica, but

that’s for widows, I believe.’

‘You mean you have to be a widow?’ said Belinda. ‘I think it could

hardly be that.’

‘I know,’ said Edith suddenly, ‘it does work among Fallen Women –

Connie’s patroness was the President I believe. They used to have teas and
sales of work in the house in Belgrave Square.’

‘So that’s it,’ said Belinda, who hardly knew what advice she could give

to a Fallen Woman, let alone what kind of splendid work she could have
done. She explained the connection and they all laughed very heartily.

When they had finished tea Edith suddenly began doing a Balkan folk

dance which encouraged Harriet to give a very ludicrous imitation of Mr
Mold’s proposal. But as Belinda laughed she found herself almost wishing
that Harriet were even now Mrs Nathaniel Mold. Then at least there could
be no danger of having the Bishop of Mbawawa for a brother-in-law.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

It was the morning after the Bishop’s arrival and there was a feeling of
suppressed excitement in the air. At the Misses Bede’s house the morning
passed in the usual way until just before luncheon, when the front-door bell
rang. Before Belinda and Harriet could begin to guess who it was, Emily
had announced the Archdeacon.

It was at once evident that he was in a good temper, which Belinda

thought rather surprising, although there was a certain relish in disliking
somebody, she supposed, which might account for it.

‘I hope the Bishop is well?’ she ventured.
‘Oh, tolerably well, I think,’ said the Archdeacon, rubbing his hands in

front of the fire. ‘I believe he did not sleep very well, but our spare bed is
notoriously uncomfortable.’

‘We could easily have him here,’ said Harriet, ‘our spare bed has a new

mattress and is really most comfortable. I have tried it myself.’

‘That is kind of you,’ said the Archdeacon, ‘but the clergy are used to

discomfort. They even enjoy it, you know.’

Belinda looked at him doubtfully, but he appeared to be quite serious.
‘I hope you are writing to poor Nathaniel Mold,’ he said, seeing that

Harriet was seated at the writing-desk.

‘Oh, no,’ said Harriet, thinking it rather interfering of the Archdeacon.

‘That is all finished. I was writing to Gorringes’ for a new winter dressing-
gown.’

‘Well, they say that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush,’ declared

the Archdeacon.

‘I’m not sure that I understand your meaning there,’ said Harriet coyly.

‘What do you mean by two in the bush?’

‘Why, Ricardo and the Bishop,’ said the Archdeacon slyly.
Belinda felt inclined to add that poor Ricardo was almost as good as in

the hand, but she said nothing as she thought the conversation rather
unbecoming. It would have been quite another matter if Edith or Connie

had been there instead of the Archdeacon, but for somebody of Harriet’s
age to discuss her suitors with the vicar of the parish seemed to Belinda
hardly the thing.

‘But I haven’t seen the Bishop for over thirty years,’ protested Harriet,

enjoying herself very much.

‘Then you will see him tonight,’ said the Archdeacon.
‘Tonight?’ echoed the sisters incredulously, as if it were the most unlikely

thing in the world.

with slides, and I wanted to know if you would be good enough to work the
lantern,’ said the Archdeacon, turning to Harriet.

‘Why, I should love to,’ said Harriet, for she had an unexpected genius

for working the lantern and had done it for many years now.

‘It should be an unusual experience,’ said the Archdeacon, ‘to renew

your acquaintance with the Bishop over a slide put in upside down.’

Harriet went off into a peal of delighted laughter.
‘What’s the lecture to be about?’ asked Belinda, thinking that somebody

ought to show an intelligent interest in it.

‘Oh, his natives I believe,’ said the Archdeacon rather scornfully. ‘Songs

and dances and that kind of thing!’

‘It should be very interesting,’ ventured Belinda.
‘And amusing too,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘The Bishop was practising this

morning.’

‘The songs or the dances?’ asked Harriet.
‘Oh, the songs, as far as I could hear. I daresay it will not be possible to

demonstrate the dances.’

about these native dances it did not seem as if they were the sort of thing
that could properly be performed in a parish hall.

Moved by a sudden impulse of friendliness, Harriet asked the

Archdeacon if he would stay to luncheon. ‘We’re having pheasant,’ she
added temptingly.

Otherwise nothing could have given me greater pleasure.’

‘Yes, that’s the worst of having a wife,’ said Harriet jovially.
‘It is really much wiser for a man to stay single,’ said the Archdeacon,

‘and then it doesn’t matter if he’s late for lunch.’

might have discovered that there were even greater advantages, but she
soon changed the subject, and began asking Belinda’s opinion about her
hair. Should she leave the back in a neat roll or comb it out into fluffy curls?

determined to have the fluffy curls, and wondered whether she herself
should wear her blue marocain or an old wool dress. The parish hall was
inclined to be draughty and she had no particular wish to impress the
Bishop. On the other hand, the Archdeacon would certainly be there and
she did not wish to appear dowdy before him. It was a difficult problem.
Harriet had already decided that she would wear her brown velvet, and
possibly her fur cape, though working the lantern she would probably be
warm enough without it.

given her a most glowing account of the Bishop. He had apparently given
her some very pretty African beads and a wooden comb, carved by one of
his native converts.

‘Putting silly ideas into her head,’ Harriet had said to Belinda after

hearing this. ‘Theo ought to be careful,’ she said ominously.

The lecture was to begin at eight o’clock, but Harriet insisted that they

should be in good time as she had all sorts of things to do in connection
with the lantern, which was inclined to be temperamental.

‘And you will want to get a good seat,’ she said.
‘Oh, not particularly,’ said Belinda. ‘I don’t suppose the hall will be very

full and all the chairs are equally hard.’

The problem of where to sit was settled by their meeting Miss Liversidge

and Miss Aspinall at the door of the hall.

Edith.

Belinda agreed that she would also like to sit somewhere at the back,

although she did not give any such crude reason for her preference. Poor
Miss Aspinall would have liked to sit nearer the front, in case Lady Clara
Boulding should be there, but she knew it was no use saying so, and sat
meekly on Belinda’s other side, glancing hopefully back at the door when
anybody came in. Harriet was looking very important, perched up on a
table, manipulating the lantern and trying out some specimen slides.
Canterbury cathedral, a field with cows, and the head and shoulders of a

bearded clergyman followed one another in quick succession: the lantern
was obviously working well.

Bishop could be seen threading his way among the chairs towards Harriet,
carrying a box of lantern slides. Belinda craned forward eagerly, yet as
unconcernedly as she could, to witness their reunion after so many years.
Edith Liversidge did the same and even went so far as to stand up for a
better view.

‘How many years did you say it was?’ she inquired.
‘I can’t remember exactly, but I think it must be nearly thirty,’ said

Belinda in a more subdued tone of voice, for she did not want Miss Beard
and Miss Smiley, who were sitting in front of them with a group of fellow
teachers, to hear all their conversation. Things half heard were apt to be
wickedly exaggerated and Miss Beard, in spite of being an excellent
Sunday school teacher, was very much inclined to gossip.

‘What a long time!’ breathed Connie. ‘There is something very

wonderful in meeting a friend again after many years.’

much rather not meet.’

‘Although one doesn’t really know what a person is going to be like after
thirty years.’

up at her. She bent graciously and extended her hand as if to take his, but
received instead the box of lantern slides. Belinda was indignant. How rude
and casual of him! she thought. How like a bishop! she went on and then
stopped, realizing the injustice of this generalization. For she was certain
that Willie Amery or Oliver Opobo and Calabar would not have behaved
like this. Theodore Grote was cold, a cold fish as she remembered their dear
mother calling him. Legless, unloving, infamously chaste, she thought
detachedly, remembering Ricardo’s goldfish, and was then ashamed of
herself for thinking of it. There could be no excuse, for Leigh Hunt was not
even one of our greater poets. Still, there was something fishlike about
Bishop Grote. Fish and sheep. Was that possible?

‘I do wish I knew what they were saying,’ said Connie, ‘though of course

it’s the most unpardonable curiosity. Meetings like this ought to be really
sacred.’

‘Connie is much too romantic. I suppose she thinks he ought to be quoting
poetry.’

‘Well, he might,’ said Belinda, ‘if he were that sort of a person, which I

doubt. He didn’t even shake hands, otherwise he might have quoted that
nice line of Cleveland’s, where he describes a lady’s hand tender as ’twere a
jelly gloved … I always like that, but somehow it doesn’t apply to peoples’
hands now.’

Edith looked down complacently at her own fingers, gnarled and stained.

‘Not in the country,’ she said, ‘though Connie’s always fussing about hers,
rubbing them with lotion and all that sort of nonsense. I always tell her that
nobody’s likely to want to hold her hand now, so why bother.’

Belinda thought this rather unkind and sympathized with Connie. It

wasn’t exactly that one hoped to have one’s hand held…

‘Look, there’s the Archdeacon and Father Plowman,’ said Connie. ‘I

suppose it must be going to begin.’

‘I imagine one can smoke here?’ said Edith, producing a squashed paper

packet of Woodbines and offering it to Belinda.

‘No, thank you,’ said Belinda. She felt that it would be unbecoming for

her to smoke, though it seemed right that Edith should do so. Anything that
she did seemed to be in character. Her appearance tonight in a homespun
skirt with white blouse and Albanian embroidered waistcoat made Belinda
feel dowdy and insignificant, one of the many thousand respectable middle-
aged spinsters, the backbones or busybodies of countless parishes
throughout the country.

The Archdeacon had mounted the platform and was introducing the

Bishop in a short and almost gracious speech.

‘I, for one, am eagerly looking forward to hearing more about this

fascinating country and its people,’ he said. ‘Many of us will envy Bishop
Grote his unique opportunities. It may even be that I too shall feel the urge
to labour in a foreign field,’ he concluded, with what Belinda could only
think was sarcasm, for nothing more unlikely could be imagined.

The audience settled down on the hard chairs. Belinda noticed that

Agatha was wearing a becoming new dress, dark green, with little pleated
ruffles at the shoulders and neck. From the best houses, she thought, with
sad resignation.

the Bishop, waving his pointer vaguely in the air.

palms in the foreground. Belinda had seen the same type of picture on the
covers of dance tunes about the South Sea Islands.

‘When I say temperate,’ went on the Bishop, ‘I dare say many of you

might find it rather hot.’ He paused and tapped his pointer vigorously on the
floor.

dressed in bunches of leaves and garlands of flowers. Some members of the
audience were inclined to giggle at these, but the Bishop hastily explained
that the pictures were of the natives as they used to be.

keeping with Christian ideas of morality,’ he said. Another slide followed,
showing the natives clad in this way. ‘I should like to add here,’ he went on,
‘that we are often very much in need of garments for our people and should
welcome gifts of clothing or material – light cotton materials, of course,
nothing elaborate or costly.’

indignantly, if the church workers fell so much in love with the Bishop that
they forgot about all the other more deserving charities such as the Clothe-
Our-Children League and the Society for helping the Poor in Pimlico to
which they were accustomed to contribute. She could already notice in the
half darkness the beaming looks of approval on their faces, as they nodded
and smiled to each other, planning working parties and schemes to raise
money. Of course the Mbawawa were a deserving cause, she supposed, but
were they not happier in their leaves and flowers? Naturally one wished
them to have the benefits of Christianity; it was rather difficult to see where
one should draw the line. They could hardly appear at a service in a dress of
leaves, she reflected, when she herself felt that a short-sleeved dress was
unsuitable. But need they wear those shapeless cotton garments? Perhaps
the architecture of the church had something to do with it: one’s style of
dress ought to be somehow in keeping … her thoughts wandered on against
a background of bleating Bishop’s voice. He had somehow got on to the
subject of music.

pleasing, vowels and liquid sounds predominating. You may be interested to

hear that the alphabet contains only eighteen letters,’ he went on, ‘and I
think that if you saw it written you would hardly call it an alphabet at all.
Such an odd collection of letters with long tails and squiggles! You see, the
Mbawawa had never written their language down until a few years ago,
when missionaries attempted it. Then some clever people in London,
experts in African languages, made up this alphabet, and I think nobody
was more surprised than the Mbawawa themselves!’ The Bishop laughed
heartily and wiped his brow. ‘But I haven’t come here tonight to tell you
about the alphabet. I think we can safely leave that to the clever people in
London,’ he added, with what Belinda felt was insufferable patronage,
considering the distinction of his audience, which contained at least four
University graduates, five, if one counted Father Plowman’s failed B.A.

‘Their chief musical instrument is the Mhamha, M-H-A-M-H-A,’ he

spelled the word out and one of the Sunday school teachers could be seen
fumbling in her handbag for pencil and paper. There now followed another
slide of grinning natives holding musical instruments.

‘I dare say some of you would like to hear what the language sounds

like,’ said the Bishop, ‘so I am going to sing a few verses of a song which
the Mbawawa adapt to many occasions, birth, marriage, death, all the great
events in this mortal life have their own form of it.’ He paused, as if
wondering which was most suited to a gathering in a parish hall. ‘Let me try
and give you a gay marriage song,’ he said. ‘Imagine yourselves taking part
in a Mbawawa wedding.’

‘I do not feel myself equal to that,’ whispered Edith to Belinda. ‘Death

would have been a better choice, or even birth.’

The voice of the Bishop rang out through the hall in song. Many

handkerchiefs were taken out hastily, especially among the younger
members of the audience, for the noise which filled the hall was quite
unexpected. Even Belinda, who had heard the Bishop sing as a curate, was
a little unprepared. And yet perhaps the Mbawawa did have voices like that
and it was wrong to feel that one wanted to laugh. Belinda glanced at
Harriet to see how she was reacting. As far as it was possible to see, she
was displaying remarkable self-control, for she was very prone to giggle,
and appeared to be gazing at the Bishop with rapt attention. Most of the
audience were stirring uneasily. Even Agatha was smiling a little, but she
managed to make it look as if she were not really amused, but pleased and
approving, which was quite another matter.

clapping.

singer is particularly gifted he can go on almost indefinitely; I have known
the marriage song go on all night, but I fear I should find the hall empty if I
attempted that.’

During the laughter which followed he tapped his pointer on the floor

and another slide clicked into place.

Hmwoq, spelled H-M-W-O-Q.’

now appeared on the screen. It was certainly a very peculiar shape and there
was more giggling from the back of the hall. It could hardly be what it
seemed to be, thought Belinda doubtfully, though one knew that among
primitive peoples one might find almost anything. The anthropologist who
went among them must go with an open mind…

he advanced towards the edge of the platform and said in a loud clear voice,
‘I think that slide is upside down.’

at having such attention drawn to her. Indeed, Belinda could not be
absolutely sure that her sister had not purposely put the slide in upside
down.

hall. ‘How stupid of me,’ she said, smiling most charmingly into the
darkness.

too stupid to explain the picture unless it were the right way up, and his
explanation was very confused even, when the slide was correctly shown.
Leaving it rather hurriedly, he produced a large sea shell from an inner
pocket and applied it to his lips.

By this time his hearers knew more or less what to expect, so that they

were able to bear the strange sounds which came out of the shell with more
composure. The noise seemed to be a hollower and more resonant version
of the Bishop’s own singing voice.

‘Wonderful how he does it, isn’t it?’ whispered Father Plowman to

Agatha Hoccleve, who could not but agree that it was indeed most

wonderful.

‘This instrument is used particularly in agricultural rites,’ explained the

Bishop, ‘where the ceremony of propitiating the earth goddess is carried
out.’

‘Phallic,’ murmured Edith, nodding her head. ‘Quite the usual thing.’
Fortunately the Sunday school teachers did not know the word, thought

Belinda, or they would most certainly have turned round. It was rather like
Edith to show off her smattering of anthropological knowledge, she felt,
particularly if it were something rather embarrassing.

After the music came more slides of wedding and funeral scenes, and

finally one of the Bishop himself in gaiters and leafy garlands, at which
everyone clapped vigorously. It was a relief to be able to let off steam, for
much laughter had been bottled up. But the climax came when he turned his
back on the audience, fumbled in a suitcase and reappeared facing them in a
huge painted wooden mask, with hinged beak, large round eyes and
hanging raffia mane, which completely covered his head and shoulders.
This brought the house down and there was laughter and clapping from the
front seats, stamping and whistling from the back benches.

All that followed was inevitably an anticlimax. The Bishop went on to

give a list of rather stray facts which he might have got out of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica. He mentioned that they tattooed little, that the
native chiefs sometimes weighed as much as one hundred and eighty
pounds, and that although infanticide was prevalent, cannibalism was
almost unknown. They lived chiefly on yams and millet, but rats and mice
were also eaten. Beer was brewed from guinea corn; fire was made from a
paste of salt, pepper and lizard dung.

who may be listening to me, I may as well state that the basic social unit is
an exogamous patrilineal kindred or extended family or even clan. I don’t
think we need worry overmuch about that.’

Hearty laughter greeted these remarks. There was no anthropologist in

the audience.

Father Plowman mounted the platform and began to propose a vote of

thanks.

‘I for one shall never forget this fascinating lecture,’ he said. ‘I am sure

that after tonight there will be many who will be eager to visit this beautiful
country and see all these wonders for themselves.’

wrong, for one of the Sunday school teachers was even at that moment
toying with the idea of asking the Bishop whether he could find a place for
her in his Mission, and even Miss Aspinall was wondering whether it might
not be possible to go out there to teach the gentler arts.

‘Truly the wonders of this world are without number. Let us thank God

for His goodness to us,’ concluded Father Plowman, and everyone agreed
that it was a most fitting end to the evening.

It was a little spoilt by the Archdeacon rising to his feet and saying that

he was sure everyone would wish him to thank Miss Harriet Bede for her
admirable working of the lantern, without which the lecture would not have
been half so enjoyable. Of course it was right that she should be thanked,
but several people felt that Father Plowman’s words should have been the
last. Only Belinda was pleased, both because of his acknowledgment of her
sister and because no evening was complete for her which did not include a
few words from the Archdeacon.

‘So like him, that kind thought,’ she said to Edith, ‘remembering Harriet

when the Bishop never said a word, nor Father Plowman for that matter. I
knew the Archdeacon wouldn’t forget.’

her mannish navy blue overcoat. ‘What happens now?’

have refreshments at the vicarage with the Bishop. They’ll probably have
coffee and sandwiches or something light.’

‘Oh, I hate standing about balancing a cup and plate and making

conversation,’ said Edith. ‘Come along, Connie,’ she called, turning round,
‘we’re going home.’

of grey draperies, had hurried towards the front of the hall, where she could
be seen among the little cluster of people waiting to shake hands with the
Bishop.

‘Don’t make her come away,’ pleaded Belinda. ‘She would probably like

to go to the vicarage with the others.’

‘Well, come and take pot luck with me,’ said Edith roughly. ‘Just coffee

and baked beans – you know our kind of supper.’

‘That will be lovely,’ murmured Belinda.

them, his muddy paws scrabbling against their coats and stockings, and
inside the living-room, for it could hardly be called a drawing-room,
everything was so primitive and comfortless that Belinda felt really
sympathetic towards poor Connie. After Belgrave Square too … Her harp,
shrouded in a holland cover, seemed out of place in the untidy room with its
smell of dog and cigarette smoke.

Belinda stood uncertainly on the threshold of the little kitchen, watching

Edith cutting bread and scooping the beans out of their tin into a saucepan.

seen a grey wedge of ash drop into the beans. ‘Drat it,’ she said. ‘Too late.
Hope you don’t mind?’

‘Of course not,’ said Belinda nobly, remembering Miss Prior and the

caterpillar. Perhaps there was something after all in being a gentlewoman.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

When Belinda awoke next morning, she decided that she did not feel very
well. She was not sure whether this was because of the ash in the baked
beans, the half-empty bottle of Empire port that Edith had found in the back
of a cupboard or the damp walk home, in rather thin shoes. She was
inclined to think it must be the last, for what else could have given her such
an unromantic, snivelling cold?

‘Oh, dear,’ said Harriet, sitting down heavily on Belinda’s bed, ‘the

Bishop was coming to tea and I suppose I shall have to put him off if you’re
going to be ill.’

‘Why?’ asked Belinda stupidly.
‘Well, really, what would people think?’
‘They needn’t know I’m in bed, and after all, it’s only a matter of time,’

said Belinda, who was in no mood to humour her sister’s coy scruples.

‘Yes, perhaps it is,’ agreed Harriet, but rather doubtfully. ‘He asked

particularly if you would be here, though.’

‘Did he? Well, we certainly can’t have tea in my bedroom,’ said Belinda

plaintively.

‘No, of course not,’ Harriet agreed. ‘Now are you sure you couldn’t

fancy a little sausage?’ she said brightly. ‘Emily will have cooked enough
for both of us.’

Belinda did not think she fancied anything at all, but was persuaded to try

some weak tea and a piece of toast. And would Harriet be very kind and
bring her the Oxford Book of Victorian Verse? She might feel like reading
later on.

Harriet went downstairs and came back with a tray and the book.
‘Isn’t it rather heavy to read in bed?’ she ventured. ‘I’ve brought you

something smaller as well. Here’s the Fourth Book of Virgil. I know you
like the part about Dido and Aeneas. It’s such a nice thin little book.’

‘Oh, Harriet, how kind. But it’s all in Latin, and you know I can’t read it.’

‘Never mind, dear,’ said Harriet soothingly. ‘I shouldn’t read at all, if I

were you. Just try and rest.’

‘I can’t think how I caught this cold,’ said Belinda.
‘I’ll go and get you some whisky from the Crownwheel and Pinion,’

declared Harriet. ‘I shall go as soon as it’s open.’

‘Oh, Harriet, don’t go there,’ said Belinda, rather concerned. ‘I’m sure

you could get some at Abbot’s, and anyway I don’t think I really need it. If I
stay in bed and keep warm I’m sure to be better in a day or two. Hot lemon
is really a much nicer drink.’

‘You never know when you may need whisky,’ said Harriet mysteriously.

‘It’s just as well to have it in the house.’

‘I seem to remember a recipe in Tried Favourites – a sort of substitute for

whisky,’ said Belinda. ‘I dare say it would be quite easy to make.’

‘I think our guests would hardly thank us if we offered them that,’ said

Harriet.

‘Our guests?’ Belinda sank back weakly on to her pillows, unable to face

the idea of guests who needed to be entertained with whisky. ‘I think I’ll
just rest until lunch-time,’ she said. ‘I dare say I shan’t read after all.’

people and told each one about her sister’s indisposition, making little or
much of it according to the status of her hearer. To the Archdeacon she gave
the most exact details, thinking that somehow he ought to be possessed of
all the facts.

‘She had weak tea and dry toast for breakfast,’ said Harriet

confidentially, ‘and then she asked for the Oxford Book of Victorian Verse.’

‘She called for madder music and for stronger wine,’ said the

Archdeacon, but Harriet was not familiar with our great Victorian poets and
so the quotation passed over her head.

She pointed out rather sharply that strong wine was the last thing that

should be given to an invalid, although a little brandy might be helpful in
cases of biliousness.

‘But of course Belinda isn’t bilious,’ she said hastily. ‘Nothing like that.’
‘Poor Belinda, I am really extremely sorry. Do tell her how very sorry I

am. I only wish I could go and see her.’

‘Oh, she’s not at all seriously ill,’ said Harriet. ‘Just a little chill. I’m sure

it would alarm people if you were seen going to the house. People always
think the worst when they see a clergyman.’

‘Dear me, I hardly know how to take that,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘I

should have liked to think that we brought comfort to the sick.’

difficult to convey that it all depended on the clergyman.

‘I must look out some books for her to read,’ said the Archdeacon.
‘Thank you very much, but she really has plenty to read.’
‘All the same, there might be something she’d like,’ persisted the

Archdeacon. ‘I sometimes wish that I could afford to be ill so that I could
read some of the things I normally never have time for.’

said at last. ‘I still have quite a lot of shopping to do.’

better.

‘I saw the Archdeacon,’ said Harriet triumphantly. ‘He seemed quite

concerned to hear that you were ill and almost suggested coming to see you,
but I soon nipped that in the bud.’

Belinda gathered her faded pink bed-jacket more closely round her

shoulders. ‘Oh, no, I couldn’t have him coming to see me,’ she said. ‘Not
without warning, anyway.’

for a clergyman to visit the sick in his parish. But perhaps that’s only for the
poor people really, to see if they have all they want and so on.’

‘Yes, I suppose I have everything I want,’ said Belinda rather sadly.
‘Naturally if you were seriously ill or dying it would be another matter,’

went on Harriet reassuringly.

‘But I’m not,’ said Belinda regretfully, thinking of Henry reading Samson

Agonistes to her on her death-bed.

After lunch she settled down to her own thoughts. Harriet had brought up

a light novel from the circulating library and this lay with the Oxford Book
of Victorian Verse on the eiderdown. But Belinda did not feel like reading.
She was quite enjoying her illness now that she felt a little better and could
allow her thoughts to wander at random in the past and future without the
consciousness that she ought to be more profitably employed. She had no
doubt that there would soon be another proposal of marriage in the
drawing-room, perhaps even this afternoon, although she judged the Bishop
to be a more prudent man than Mr Mold. He had certainly not behaved very
cordially to Harriet at the lecture, but Belinda was sure that he would not be

able to hold out long against her charms. Nor had Harriet seemed as
enthusiastic as might have been expected. Could it be that she had found
him less attractive than she anticipated, or was it the very depth of her
feeling that kept her from speaking of it? Belinda puzzled over this for
some time and then fell to thinking of her own life.

There was very little new to be said or thought about it, she decided. She

had loved dear Henry for so many years now that she no longer thought of
her love as a hopeless passion. Indeed, Belinda felt that no spinster of her
age and respectability could possibly have such a thing for an archdeacon.
The fierce flame had died down, but the fire was still glowing brightly.

My very ashes in their urn,
Shall like a hallowed lamp for ever burn …

How much more one appreciated our great literature if one loved, thought
Belinda, especially if the love were unrequited! She touched the books
affectionately but made no effort to read either of them. As Harriet had said,
the Oxford Book of Victorian Verse was rather heavy to hold, and many of
the poems in it were uncomfortably sentimental for afternoon reading.

Suddenly there was a noise in the hall. Belinda sat up in bed and listened.

At first she thought it must be the Bishop arriving rather too early for tea,
but then she realized that it was a woman’s voice. It sounded almost like
Agatha’s. She crouched under the bedclothes and began to wonder whether
she had a temperature after all and ought not to see people. It was surely not
normal to have a sudden longing to hide under the bedclothes when one
heard the vicar’s wife in the hall, even if one did love her husband better
than she did?

Belinda sat up bravely and took out her hand-mirror. She knew that she

looked most unattractive and thought what a good thing it was that she was
not seriously ill or dying. Her hair was out of curl, her cheeks were pale and
her nose needed powdering. She would not have liked Henry to see her like
this, even on her death-bed.

Agatha was all too soon in the room, saying, ‘Poor Belinda, I was so

sorry when Henry told me you were ill. I thought I’d come and see how you
were.’

murmured that it was very kind of Agatha and that she was feeling much
better.

‘And now,’ said Agatha, rather too briskly, ‘what has been the matter

with you?’

‘Perhaps I was sitting in a draught at the Bishop’s lecture,’ she ventured,
feeling ashamed of not knowing exactly what was the matter with her and
why. ‘The lecture was most interesting, wasn’t it?’

‘Oh, yes, fascinating,’ said Agatha. ‘The Bishop is such a dear man, so

kind and amusing.’

He must be especially pleasant to Agatha, thought Belinda, who had not

formed at all that impression of him. Indeed Agatha was quite animated
when she spoke of him and even looked a little flushed.

‘He asked where you were last night after the lecture,’ she went on. ‘We

had quite a little gathering at the vicarage, you know.’

‘I thought you would probably have enough people there without me,’

said Belinda weakly, feeling as she so often did with Agatha that she had
somehow done the wrong thing. ‘I went to supper with Edith Liversidge.
I’m surprised that he should have remembered me at all.’

‘My father had a wonderful memory for names and faces.’

‘Yes, I suppose they meet so many people,’ said Belinda, feeling rather

damped. Not that she wanted the Bishop to remember her particularly, but it
was like Agatha to take away any illusions she might have cherished.

‘It’s some years since you last met, isn’t it?’ said Agatha

conversationally.

we? Timor mortis conturbat me,’ murmured Belinda, staring straight in
front of her.

Agatha looked at her sharply. Sometimes she wondered whether Belinda

was quite all there. She said such odd things.

There was a short pause, but before it had time to become awkward a

hearty voice was heard outside the door and Edith Liversidge strode into the
room, followed by Connie Aspinall. Their arms were full of books and
parcels.

‘I must be going now,’ said Agatha, who disliked Edith. ‘Too many

visitors at once will tire you.’

alone with Edith and Connie.

‘We’ve brought you some books,’ said Edith. ‘And Connie’s made you a

sponge cake. You know I’m no hand at that kind of thing.’

‘Oh, how kind…’
‘I thought you might like to see some copies of The Gentlewoman,’ said

Connie. ‘There’s a picture of Lady Grudge’s daughter in one of them.’

‘How interesting, I shall look forward to reading them,’ said Belinda.

‘You must point her out to me.’

At this moment the front-door bell rang. ‘That must be the Bishop

arriving,’ said Belinda.

‘The Bishop?’ asked Edith, rather surprised.
‘Yes, he is coming to tea today.’
‘Does he know you’re ill or is he expecting to see both of you?’
‘Oh, I’m supposed to be there too, but I suddenly woke up ill,’ said

Belinda pathetically. ‘So Harriet will have to entertain him alone.’

‘Alone?’ said Edith. ‘I don’t think he’ll like that.’
‘Why ever not?’ asked Belinda, rather worried. Life was quite difficult

enough without Edith making disturbing suggestions. Harriet was going to
marry the Bishop and Belinda would be left in her old age to die a lonely
death, or with nobody but a paid companion to cheer her last hours. Surely
that was enough? She had been trying to prepare herself for the worst and
did not wish to be unsettled.

Meanwhile Edith expounded her ideas of what a bishop would think

quite proper. ‘I don’t think Harriet will get him,’ she said bluntly.

was inclined to disagree. After all, dear Edith had had little or no experience
of bishops, although poor John had been a very good man in his way.

even Harriet will be able to catch him,’ she went on. ‘I know his sort.’

Belinda thought this rather a vulgar way of putting it, though it could

hardly be denied that it was what Harriet intended to do.

she ventured. ‘In one of Lyly’s plays, Endimion, I think …’

you?’

‘I really couldn’t say,’ said Belinda plaintively. ‘I think I should like a

drink of barley water. It’s on the little table.’

a copy of The Gentlewoman in her hand. ‘This is Lady Joan Grudge,’ she
said eagerly, indicating a group of people enjoying a joke at a race meeting.

‘Yes, she’s very pretty, isn’t she,’ murmured Belinda, and was then

informed that she had been looking at the wrong girl, for nobody could call
Lady Joan pretty. ‘Such a nice expression,’ she emended. ‘She looks very
jolly.’

‘Yes, she is a very sweet girl…’
Downstairs Harriet had just made the discovery that Bishop Grote never

ate anything for his tea.

Now this was exceedingly awkward, for how can any real contact be

established between two persons when one is eating and the other merely
watching? For some minutes Harriet did not know what to do. Her
recollections of the Bishop as a curate had included cream buns and hot
buttered toast, with licking of fingers. Eventually she had to resort to the
kind of arch scolding, which was really more suitable for very young
curates than for bishops.

‘Now, that’s naughty of you,’ she said. ‘I expected you to have a really

good appetite. I shall be much too embarrassed to eat alone,’ she added,
liberally spreading a piece of buttered toast with strawberry jam.

‘I am really very sorry,’ said the Bishop complacently, but with no

intention of changing his habits even to be polite to his hostess. ‘But your
sister will be eating something, won’t she?’ he inquired, looking anxiously
towards the door for a sign of the elder Miss Bede.

‘Oh, I forgot to tell you,’ said Harriet airily, ‘poor Belinda is in bed today.

She isn’t well.’

contagious, I hope?’ he asked, rather too eagerly.

‘No, no,’ Harriet smiled reassuringly, but at the same time a little

dangerously, so that the Bishop knew that there was as yet no possibility of
escape. ‘Just a slight chill,’ she explained, ‘but one can’t be too careful.’

The Bishop murmured some words of regret but he found it difficult to

keep a note of displeasure out of his voice. So might he have rebuked a

rebellious African who appeared at Divine Service in his flowery but
inadequate native costume. To begin with, he was not sure that he believed
this story about Belinda’s illness. People didn’t suddenly become ill like
this, he told himself angrily, and Belinda had seemed quite well at the
lecture last night. If she were really indisposed why hadn’t Harriet written
or sent a message, changing the invitation to another day? She could so
easily have done this. That nice maid who had answered the door would
have been only too willing to take a message to the vicarage. It was only a
few minutes away. Besides, he wanted to see Belinda. He thought her much
nicer than Harriet and she had knitted him such a beautiful scarf when he
was a curate, however much she might deny it. Harriet must indeed be
heartless to leave her sister lying alone and ill upstairs while she entertained
guests – the Bishop’s indignation had got the better of his accuracy – in the
drawing-room.

Harriet interrupted his thoughts by asking if his tea were too strong.
‘Oh, no, it is very nice, thank you,’ he said quite civilly.
‘Perhaps you would like some more sugar in it?’ she persisted.
‘No, thank you. I never take more than one lump.’
There was a pause while Harriet, who was finding dear Theo not at all as

she had imagined, racked her brains for something to say. Surely he had lost
some of his charm of manner? she asked herself anxiously. It went without
saying that he had once had charm of manner, but what had happened to it
now? He did not appear to be enjoying himself at all and was behaving
almost as if this visit were a duty rather than a pleasure. She stretched
forward and helped herself to another piece of buttered toast. And how
extremely irritating this not eating was. It was impolite, too, most impolite.

‘I suppose it was in Africa that you got into the habit of not eating any

tea?’ she asked brightly.

‘Oh, no, it was when I was a minor canon,’ he replied seriously. ‘I found

that it interfered with Evensong.’

stored it up to tell Belinda. But the Bishop’s sheep’s face hardly altered its
expression.

‘A minor canon,’ she giggled. ‘Now when you were a deacon I seem to

remember you eating crumpets for tea,’ she said, trying to bring back to him
the remembrance that he had once been a typically charming curate with
endearing human weaknesses. ‘Sic transit gloria mundi,’ she added.

thought Harriet an extremely silly woman and was wondering how soon he
could decently get away. It was in vain that Harriet asked him intelligent
questions about the flora and fauna of the Mbawawa country and tried to
draw him out on the missionaries’ attitude towards polygamy. He seemed
disinclined for conversation and at five o’clock got up to go.

down the stairs from Belinda’s room.

thought her looking not at all well.’

‘Rubbish,’ said Edith. ‘It’s only a chill. She’ll be up and about in a day or

two.’

‘I am indeed sorry to hear this,’ said the Bishop. ‘Will you give her my

very kindest regards and good wishes for a speedy recovery? In my diocese
we have a special song for such an occasion. It is almost entirely on one
note.’

The three ladies looked up expectantly.
‘Perhaps I had better not sing it now,’ said the Bishop. ‘It might disturb

Miss Belinda. The African temperament is not quite like ours.’

‘Oh, Belinda, he’s so stupid and dull!’ Harriet burst out, when the visitors

had gone. ‘He sent you his kindest regards. I don’t think he really believed
you were ill until he saw Edith and Connie.’

‘I’m sorry he was such a disappointment,’ said Belinda, ‘but perhaps he

will improve on further acquaintance. He is really quite the opposite to Mr
Mold, isn’t he? I mean, perhaps he doesn’t have all his goods in the shop
window.’

Harriet laughed scornfully and became absorbed in looking at The

Gentlewoman.

‘It was kind of Connie to bring these,’ said Belinda. ‘It makes one feel so

secure to look at a paper like this.’ She pointed out Lady Joan Grudge,
enjoying a joke with friends at a race meeting, a group at a dance held in
Eaton Square for somebody’s debutante daughter, a party of titled people at
a night club and other comforting unrealities. Lulled in security and
contentment, they passed the next half-hour very pleasantly until there was
a ring at the front door and the sisters started up in agitation.

‘Oh, dear, I wonder who that is?’ said Harriet, hastily squeezing her feet

into the elegant shoes which she had kicked off after the Bishop had gone.

‘I really don’t think I can do with any more visitors tonight,’ said Belinda

feebly. ‘What is it, Emily?’ she asked, as the maid appeared in the doorway.

of blue tissue paper. ‘Flowers for the invalid, Miss Belinda,’ she said
brightly, in a nurse’s tone.

Harriet rushed forward. Nobody ever sent Belinda flowers, but the

florist’s label was clearly addressed to Miss Belinda Bede. Harriet
unwrapped the tissue paper to reveal a dozen beautiful chrysanthemums,
bronze and white.

Belinda’s heart leapt. They were from Henry. Harriet had seen him that

morning, so he knew she was ill, but in any case Agatha would probably
have told him.

‘There doesn’t seem to be a card with them,’ said Harriet, fumbling with

maddening deliberation. ‘Oh, yes, here we are.’ She tossed the little
envelope over to Belinda, who tore it open eagerly.

When one has reached Belinda’s age, and even before, one takes these

small disappointments calmly. Of course the flowers were not from the
Archdeacon, how could they have been? It would have been most
unsuitable, unless, of course, Agatha had joined in the gift, Belinda told
herself, as she struggled to decipher the unfamiliar handwriting.

‘With best wishes for a speedy recovery – Theodore Mbawawa.’ she read.

‘Oh, Harriet, from the Bishop!’ she sank back weakly on to her pillows. ‘I
really don’t think I can bear any more today. Theodore Mbawawa …
doesn’t that sound odd … I suppose it’s what he calls himself…’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Belinda did not keep to her bed for very long, and was soon about again.
The Bishop stayed on at the vicarage, though it was evident that he and the
Archdeacon disliked each other. Agatha, however, seemed to prefer his
company to that of her husband, and Belinda could not help noticing the
way she beamed at him when beaming was certainly not one of her normal
expressions. Perhaps she felt naturally more at ease with bishops, as her
father had been one, and it may have been a disappointment to her that her
husband was only an archdeacon. Certainly she and Bishop Grote made a
very suitable couple, if only because there was something slightly
unpleasant about each of them. Belinda began to weave a little fantasy in
which they somehow ‘came together’ and the Archdeacon was left alone
and in need of comfort. How this was to come about she did not know, as
divorce was against her principles and the Archdeacon’s too, she imagined,
and she would hardly have wished the Archdeacon to be removed by death
and so put beyond the reach of her comfort. It was somehow out of the
question, even in a fantasy, that Agatha should die. People like Agatha
didn’t die. It might of course be discovered that the marriage of Henry and
Agatha had not been legal, but that happened only in the novels of Mrs
Henry Wood. And supposing Henry were to be left alone and apparently in
need of comfort, and did not turn to Belinda? How was that to be borne? It
might well be that he would find Agatha’s absence comfort enough. When
she got to this point, Belinda was firm with herself and set to work helping
Emily with the mincemeat and Christmas puddings, for it was already
December and it was even rumoured that the Bishop was to spend
Christmas at the vicarage.

Soon Christmas cards began to arrive and every post brought something.
‘A Happy, Holy Christmass,’ said Harriet, reading from Father

Plowman’s card. ‘Very nice wording, and such a pretty picture of the
Nativity. I think Christmass is rather nice, Belinda. The Archdeacon’s card

is very ordinary, just A Happy Christmas and a Bright New Year, from
Agatha and Henry Hoccleve, and no picture at all.’

have wanted some quotation, but it was probably cheaper without. Of
course Christmass is rather High, isn’t it, I mean, the use of the word mass.
It always looks like a mis-spelling to me.’

‘I wonder what Mr Donne’s will be like,’ said Harriet anxiously. ‘I hope

he will remember us.’

sister and the many delicacies she had prepared for him. ‘He has been here
so much.’

‘He might even send a calendar,’ mused Harriet. ‘That’s one degree

better than a card.’

for every day. I always think it’s nice to have one in some convenient place
so that you can read it at the beginning of the day. And yet the thoughts they
choose are often so depressing, aren’t they, as if Great Thinkers were never
cheerful.’

bristling. ‘It shall go in the dining-room, where we can read it at breakfast.’

‘Yes, dear, that’s what I mean.’
But Mr Donne upset their plans by calling round in person with his

present, or rather presents, an expensive looking box of chocolates with a
coloured picture of Hampton Court on the lid which the sisters felt he could
ill afford, and a photograph of himself which he gave to them rather shyly,
obviously embarrassed by Harriet’s cries of joy.

‘Oh, how lovely! And how good of you! Belinda, isn’t it good of Mr

Donne?’ She thrust the photograph at Belinda; who was rather at a loss, as
it looked so exactly like any of the other photographs of curates in Harriet’s
collection upstairs that she could hardly think what to say.

clerical collar. ‘So often a photograph is spoiled by bad lighting. You look
very serious,’ she added, with what was for her a forced note of playfulness.
‘Almost as if you were thinking out a sermon.’

for the Archdeacon, contrary to his normal practice, had been trying out a
course of sermons on the evening congregation, sermons written in so-

called ‘simple language’ and full of sentiments to which every bosom might
be expected to return an echo, though he had not, of course, mentioned
Harriet’s Apes of Brazil. Some of his hearers had found the sermons almost
too simple and were even beginning to wonder whether the Archdeacon
himself were not returning to his second childhood.

‘Oh, no, Bishop Grote is to preach on Sunday morning,’ said the curate.
‘Well, I suppose he must keep his hand in,’ said Belinda. ‘I expect it will

be about Christmas as it’s so near.’

weather’s so mild.’

with satisfaction. ‘I dare say some old people will be taken.’

expect that.’

They were silent for a moment, until Belinda, not liking to see his young

face clouded over, said, ‘I really can’t think of any old people who are
likely to die at the moment. Besides, it’s the weather after Christmas that
we have to fear, isn’t it?’

‘Oh, yes, if it’s mild at Christmas it will be cold afterwards,’ agreed

Harriet. ‘It makes one feel very anxious.’

Belinda, looking at Harriet’s sturdy figure, could hardly help smiling.
When Sunday came it occurred to Belinda that perhaps the Bishop had

his uses after all. For when the Archdeacon came to give out the notices of
the Christmas Services it appeared that Bishop Grote and Mr Donne were to
take the seven and eight o’clock Celebrations of Holy Communion, while
the Archdeacon himself was to preach at Mattins and conduct the
Celebration afterwards at twelve, for the benefit of the elderly and lazy. He
took the opportunity to say a few words of warning to those who intended
to go to Midnight Mass at Father Plowman’s church, dwelling darkly on the
dangers they might meet there and pronouncing the word Rome with such
horrifying emphasis that many of his hearers were quite alarmed, and those
who had thought of doing such a thing began to tell themselves that perhaps
the parish church was more convenient after all.

The Bishop’s sermon, when it came, was not particularly suited to the

season, being very much like his lecture suitably adapted for the pulpit. He
had chosen for his text a verse from the psalms, In them hath he set a

tabernacle for the sun, which cometh forth as a bridegroom out of his
chamber, and rejoiceth as a giant to run his course.

Belinda hoped that Harriet would not be upset by the reference to

bridegrooms, but she appeared to be quite unmoved and it was evident that
she had very sensibly put away any hopes she might once have had. She
even whispered to Belinda that he certainly wasn’t the preacher he used to
be, though he still had that same way of gripping the edge of the pulpit
when he wished to emphasize a point.

The text seemed to have little reference to the sermon, although the more

intelligent of the congregation saw it as referring to the Bishop himself. He
was the giant and his course was the Mission Field. Belinda noticed,
however, that when he prayed for his flock he gave the impression that they
were so entirely heathen that she began to wonder whether dear Theo had
done such wonderful work among them after all. What if the whole of his
life had been so taken up with avoiding designing spinsters and widows that
no other work had been possible? It was an interesting idea and one which
she was able to follow up that evening, when she and Harriet were invited
to supper at the vicarage.

Belinda was not sure why they had been asked, but it seemed as if

Agatha had decided to dispose of several people to whom she owed
invitations, for the company included, besides themselves, the Bishop,
Father Plowman, Mr Donne and Miss Aspinall, who had been asked at the
last minute instead of Lady Clara Boulding, who had suddenly decided to
spend Christmas in Switzerland with her married daughter. Miss Aspinall
was radiant, or as near it as she could be, glittering with beads and chains
and agreeing rapturously with everything that everybody said. This was
rather difficult with four clergymen present, as, with the exception of the
curate who hardly ventured an opinion on anything, they tended to disagree
with each other wherever they could.

It was such a pity, Belinda reflected, that clergymen were so apt to bring

out the worst in each other, especially with the season of Peace and
Goodwill so near. As a species they did not get on and being in a small
country village made things even more difficult. These embarrassments
would not arise in London where the clergy kept themselves to themselves
in their own little sets, High, Broad and Low, as it were. It was so odd to
hear Father Plowman calling the curate Father Donne, though the curate
himself did not appear to think it so. On the contrary, he had that evening

preached a most successful sermon in Father Plowman’s church on the text
We heard of the same at Ephrata and found it in the wood, and had been
very much impressed by the elaborate service. He would discuss it with
Olivia Berridge some time; she was always so sensible and would be sure to
give him good advice. He would be seeing her in the New Year as he had
been invited to stay for a few days with the chaplain of his old college, in
whose rowing he still took a very keen interest. When there was a suitable
pause in the conversation, he ventured to mention this visit.

‘Oh, if you should see Mr Mold, do give him my very kindest regards,’

said Harriet, fingering her long rope of cultured pearls.

are a poor substitute for the deeper feelings. I hear that the poor fellow is in
quite a bad way as it is.’

hastened to turn the conversation to Olivia, and how glad she would be to
see Mr Donne. ‘She is generally up during the vacation, you know,’ she
explained. ‘She does a good deal of reading then.’

Olivia again,’ he said heartily. ‘I expect we shall go for some walks
together. She’s very keen on walking.’

‘Has she made you any more socks?’ asked Belinda innocently.
‘Yes, indeed, and a pullover too,’ said Mr Donne. ‘She’s really awfully

good.’

‘Belinda could show her.’

‘Olivia is a very clever girl,’ said Agatha. ‘I’m sure she is quite equal to

it.’

suppose women like to think of themselves as girls long after they are
thirty.’

‘Oh, Olivia is only thirty-one or two,’ said Agatha impatiently, ‘and her

work on The Owl and the Nightingale has really been a most substantial
contribution to Middle English studies.’

‘All the same, it is important to know how to graft a toe,’ persisted

Harriet. ‘What is it, Belinda, knit and slip off, then purl and keep on? I
never can remember.’

saying with a reminiscent sigh, ‘Ah, the socks I had knitted for me when I
was a curate!’

‘I know,’ agreed Father Plowman, ‘some small, some large, some short,

some long, but all acceptable because of the goodwill that inspired the
knitters.’

‘I should have thought a sock was very little use unless it was the right

size,’ said the Archdeacon sourly.

knitting him a pullover and went cold with horror at the thought of what she
had escaped. For there would surely have been something wrong with it.
She attended to her soup, straight out of a tin with no subtle additions, she
decided. Perhaps only one tin among so many, watered down or with potato
water added. It certainly had very little taste.

‘What delicious soup, Mrs Hoccleve,’ said Miss Aspinall timidly. ‘Such a

delicate flavour.’

‘It reminds me of our native fermented porridge,’ said the Bishop. ‘The

flavour is somewhat similar.’

‘Oh, how interesting,’ said Connie. ‘How is it made?’
‘My dear Bishop, I hope you will remember that we are at the dinner

table and spare us a detailed description,’ broke in the Archdeacon.

‘Yes, I suppose these natives are very disgusting,’ said Harriet

complacently. ‘It is better not to know too much about them.’

‘Many of them will be celebrating the festival of Christmas on Tuesday,

just as we shall be doing,’ said the Bishop on a faint note of reproach.
‘Perhaps it will not be exactly the same in detail, but their feelings will be
as ours.’

‘I suppose it is because of your work there that they will be able to,’ said

the curate.

The Bishop smiled and was about to answer when the Archdeacon gave a

short bark of laughter and exclaimed, ‘Ah, no, that’s where you’re wrong.
The Romans were there first. Father Vigilio of the Padua Fathers, I believe.’

England Mission among the Mbawawa,’ said the Bishop, ‘though the
Roman Catholics were there before me.’

‘What a shame,’ said Harriet indignantly, but Belinda felt that her wrath

was directed not so much towards the Church of Rome as the rather dry-

looking rissoles, cabbage and boiled potatoes which were now set before
them. Rissoles! Belinda could imagine her sister’s disgusted comments
later. At least one would have expected a bird of some kind, especially
when there was a bishop present, when indeed all the gentlemen were in
Holy Orders.

convert to Roman Catholicism,’ Belinda ventured. ‘I mean, one knows their
love of bright, gaudy things,’ she added rather unfortunately. ‘The Church
of England might seem rather plain to them.’

‘Bright and gaudy?’ said Father Plowman, on a pained note. ‘Oh, Miss

Bede, surely you cannot mean that?’

‘I’m sorry,’ said Belinda, in confusion, ‘naturally I didn’t mean to

imply…’

jovially. ‘I don’t think he need take your remarks so personally.’

Belinda chewed her stringy cabbage and listened gratefully to dear Henry

talking about Frazer and The Golden Bough, which he thought remarkably
fine.

‘At one time I had the idea of giving a course of sermons based on it,’ he

said, ‘but I came to the conclusion, regretfully I must admit, that with a
congregation of limited intelligence it would be too dangerous.’

back in Victorian days, when a father might forbid a book ‘inimical to the
faith of the day’ to be read in his house.

‘How debased anthropology has become since Frazer’s day,’ sighed the

Bishop, ‘a mere matter of genealogies, meaningless definitions and jargon,
words, words, words, as Hamlet has it; lineage, sib, kindred, extended
family, ramage – one doesn’t know where one is. Even the good old term
clan is suspect.’

‘What is a sib?’ asked Harriet. ‘It sounds a nice, friendly kind of thing, or

it might be something to eat, a biscuit, perhaps.’

The Bishop shook his head and said nothing, either because he did not

deign to be associated with present-day anthropological terminology or
because he did not really know what a sib was.

The Archdeacon recalled the Anglo-Saxon meaning of the word, and

talked for some minutes about the double meaning of peace and
relationship, but Harriet had lost interest and soon they were all in the

drawing-room, drinking coffee made with coffee essence. When the
gentlemen joined them it was suggested that Harriet should play the piano
and she gave a showy performance of Manuel de Falla’s Pantomime. Then
the Bishop sang an unaccompanied Mbawawa Christmas carol, which
everyone agreed was very moving. When he had finished, Father Plowman
suggested with admirable good manners that the Archdeacon should read
aloud to them.

The Archdeacon was so surprised at this that for some minutes he could

not even think of anything to read.

thinking of an occasion when the Archdeacon had insisted on reading
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales with an attempt at the original pronunciation.

There was a pause, nobody liking or perhaps wishing to make any

suggestion, until Miss Aspinall timidly ventured the observation that Keats
had written some very lovely poems. She was, of course, remembering
Lady Grudge’s ‘evenings’ in Belgrave Square, when Canon Kendrick used
to read aloud to them.

‘Ah, yes, we will have Hyperion,’ said the Archdeacon. ‘Remarkably

fine.’

There was a murmur of assent, during which Harriet could be heard

asking the curate if Hyperion were a very long poem; she had quite
forgotten.

Belinda turned to the Bishop and made a chatty remark about always

having liked the lines about Sorrow more beautiful than Beauty’s self.

The Bishop nodded and gave her what Belinda thought was rather an

intimate smile. ‘I am sure that any poem you admire must be very fine,’ he
said in a low voice.

correctly. ‘I’m afraid I like what I remember from my student days,’ she
said. ‘I hardly ever read anything new.’ Hyperion had no memories for her,
as the Archdeacon had never read it to her then, so that she was able to
listen to it quite dispassionately and join with the polite murmurs that
followed his performance.

‘And yet I think I prefer the earlier Keats,’ she said rather boldly, ‘I was

always very fond of Isabella when I was a young girl.’

of course, Isabella is rather a young girl’s poem, isn’t it?’

‘Oh, yes, completely,’ agreed Belinda. ‘It is many years since I read it.’ It

would indeed be an ominous sign if she felt drawn to it at her time of life,
she felt.

‘What a fine poem Young’s Night Thoughts is,’ said the Bishop. ‘I have

been reading it every night myself. I have a most interesting collection of
books in my room,’ he went on. ‘There is an Icelandic grammar among
them and I have been comparing that language with the Mbawawa.’

‘But do you find any similarity?’ asked Agatha doubtfully.
‘Oh, none whatever,’ said the Bishop almost gaily, ‘but it is a fascinating

study, fascinating …’ his voice trailed off on a bleating note.

‘I am surprised and gratified that you find the books interesting,’ said the

Archdeacon. ‘I made the selection myself, but I had no idea of your tastes.’

The evening ended with a song from the curate. Harriet, who

accompanied him, was anxious that he should try an Elizabethan love song,
and after a rather faltering beginning he sang quite charmingly, Belinda
thought, but without much conviction.

Love is a fancie,
Love is a frenzie,
Let not a toy then breed thee such annoy …

Perhaps there was no frenzy in his feeling for Miss Berridge, and love

was hardly a toy. Surely Count Bianco’s affection for Harriet could not be
so described, or Belinda’s for the Archdeacon? And yet tonight she had the
feeling that there might be some truth in what the poet said. It was excellent
advice to those of riper years, especially when the imagination became too
active. That intimate note in the Bishop’s voice, for example, and the way
he had seemed to look at her during the reading of the poem. It might just as
easily have been Connie Aspinall he was looking at. Belinda had been
forced to mention the fact that the chrysanthemums he had sent her were
still lasting very well. She almost wished that they might die, and noticed
with relief when she got home that some of the foliage was tinged with
brown. Suddenly she took them out of their vase and, although it was dark,
went out with them to the dustbin. They were dead really and one did not
like to feel that flowers from the wrong person might be everlasting.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER NINETEEN

‘I must go and see Ricardo,’ declared Belinda, one morning early in the
New Year. ‘Edith tells me that he has a slight attack of gout which keeps
him in the house. It’s rather difficult to know what to take him, though.’

‘Yes, you have to be very careful with gout,’ said Harriet. ‘No beef or

strawberries or port wine. Do you think I ought to go as well?’

‘That would certainly do him more good than anything, but you mustn’t

come with me. I’m sure he’d prefer to see you alone.’

‘Yes, I really will go,’ said Harriet. ‘You may tell him to expect me,’ she

added graciously.

Now that Harriet’s plans about the Bishop were clearly not likely to come

to anything, Belinda was determined to bring Count Bianco and her sister
together as much as possible. She felt this to be her duty, and although she
was not particularly anxious that Harriet should marry and leave her alone,
she thought that if a marriage had been arranged in heaven she would prefer
Ricardo to be the happy man. He was devoted to Harriet and they had many
tastes in common: he came of an ancient Italian family and was very
comfortable financially. The only thing that might possibly be against him
was that he was not in the Church, but even this was not as great a
drawback as might at first appear, for would there not always be tender
curates in need of sympathetic attention and perfectly baked cakes?

So Belinda reasoned within herself as she walked up the drive to

Ricardo’s house. She walked slowly, for she was thinking rather
sentimentally of how Ricardo had loved her sister well and faithfully for
many years. Surely he deserved some reward for his constancy? She herself
had loved the Archdeacon even longer, but naturally there was no hope of
any reward for her now, at least not in this world, she reflected piously, and
we are given to understand that we shall be purged of all earthly passions in
that other life.

The Count was in and would be delighted to see her. Belinda had been

careful to announce herself as Miss Belinda Bede, with special emphasis on

the Christian name, for she did not want Ricardo to expect Harriet and then
be disappointed.

His gouty foot was bound up and rested on a low stool. Beside him on a
little table was a pile of letters, which Belinda guessed to be those of his
friend, the late John Akenside. There was also a Serbo-Croatian dictionary
and the works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson.

The Count greeted Belinda with a sad smile. ‘It is indeed kind of you to

call,’ he said, attempting to get up, but Belinda put her hand on his arm and
said how sorry she had been to hear about his gout.

‘It is an inconvenience,’ he said, ‘but I am accustomed to it.’
Touched by his patience and resignation, Belinda wondered how she

could show her sympathy. She found it a little difficult to make
conversation with Ricardo at the best of times, and could do no more than
touch on various matters of general interest. It was inevitable that they
should find themselves talking about the Bishop, who showed no signs of
moving from the vicarage, where he had now been for nearly two months.

tone.

‘Oh, surely not!’ exclaimed Belinda, wondering how it was possible that

Ricardo should come out with a piece of news that she and Harriet knew
nothing of. ‘We haven’t heard anything, and I can’t really imagine that
anybody would want to marry him.’

‘I heard that your sister was to marry him,’ said Ricardo pathetically.
Belinda now laughed aloud for joy, all the more because it might so

nearly have happened. In fact, she told herself soberly, there was still time;
but she could at least reassure Ricardo.

‘It certainly isn’t true at the moment,’ she said, ‘and I think it most

unlikely that it ever will be. Wherever did you hear such a thing?’

Ricardo could not remember exactly; perhaps his manservant had heard it

somewhere, or it may have been the Archdeacon who had told him when he
called a few days ago. Yes, he was sure now that it must have been the
Archdeacon. He had seemed quite certain that he was not misinformed.

The wicked liar, thought Belinda angrily. An archdeacon making

mischief and spreading false rumours, that was what it amounted to.
Although, she told herself hastily, it was possible that Ricardo had

misunderstood him, had read too much into a hint or taken a joke too
seriously.

did so that the Bishop was not at this moment in their drawing-room asking
Harriet to be his wife. ‘Harriet does not really care for him at all,’ she went
on boldly.

Ricardo smiled and looked almost happy, but then his face clouded as he

asked if the Bishop were still at the vicarage?

‘Yes, he is still there,’ said Belinda, ‘but I do not think he will stay much

longer. He will have to be getting back to his diocese.’

be asking her.’

Belinda shifted uneasily in her chair. Of course one never knew for

certain what Harriet might be up to, or the Bishop, for that matter. She was
grateful when Ricardo’s manservant appeared with sherry and biscuits on a
silver tray.

‘Have you been working on the letters this morning?’ she asked,

indicating the pile on the table.

knew what would happen there; no man understood the Balkan mind as he
did.’

‘No, I’m sure they didn’t,’ said Belinda inadequately, for she was never

quite clear as to what had happened there except that poor John had been
killed in a riot.

There was a silence, during which Belinda racked her brains for

something intelligent to say. But she was too late to stop Ricardo from
getting back on to the subject of Harriet.

there is something she does not wish to tell me.’

The warmth of the room and the unaccustomed effect of sherry in the

morning were beginning to make Belinda feel a little vague and carefree, in
the mood to make rash promises.

that.’

‘She will never marry me, she does not love me,’ said Ricardo as if

speaking his thoughts aloud.

know she is fond of you and even if she will not love you, always
remember’ – her eyes lighted on the works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson – ‘that
it is better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all. I always
think those lines are such a great comfort; so many of us have loved and
lost.’ She frowned: nobody wanted to be one of many, and she did not like
this picture of herself, only one of a great crowd of dreary women. Perhaps
Tennyson was rather hackneyed after all.

But Ricardo did not appear to think so. ‘You are so kind and

understanding,’ he said. ‘I feel that there is a great bond between us.’

that she was sure that some day everything would be just as Ricardo
wished.

looking as if he were about to quote Dante or Tacitus at any moment;
probably the former, Belinda thought, for it seemed unlikely that there
would be anything suitable in Tacitus.

‘Yes, Ricardo, do,’ she said, ‘but not yet. Wait until the spring, when the

daffodils are out in your meadow.’

‘If I am spared till then,’ said Ricardo sadly, looking down at his

bandaged foot. He then went on to talk of the fine new bulbs that he had
planted in the meadow and to calculate when they would be at their best.

Belinda left the house feeling that she had done good, and with a picture

of daffodils and scyllas in her mind. She saw Harriet, the radiant Countess,
picking grapes in the conservatory, adorning the head of Ricardo’s dinner
table, opening a garden fete or bazaar. But all this was in the distant future.
For the present Belinda was glad that she had been able to cheer Ricardo
and to give him a little hope. What a good thing it was that hope sprang
eternal in the human breast! What would she herself have done without
hope? Even if nothing came of it, she thought obscurely, for she could not
have said exactly what it was that she hoped for now. It would be enough if
things could return to normal and be as they were before Mr Mold and the
Bishop had appeared in the village. They could get on very well without
them.

Belinda took out her shopping list and stopped for a moment, deep in

contemplation of it. Coffee, rice, steel wool, kitchen soap, written in her
own hand and then, in Harriet’s, tinned peaches, sponge cakes, sherry (not

cooking), set of no. 14 knitting needles (steel) … Belinda frowned. They
had plenty of knitting needles of all sizes and did they really need sherry or
peaches or sponge cakes? Perhaps Mr Donne was coming to supper again.

first recognize as Agatha’s, calling to her from the other side of the narrow
street.

‘Good morning,’ Belinda called back, and was just moving on when she

saw that Agatha was hurrying across to speak to her.

‘Isn’t it a lovely morning?’ she said, beaming with such unusual good

humour that Belinda stared at her quite curiously, wondering what could
have happened to bring about this change.

‘Yes, isn’t it. Really quite mild,’ murmured Belinda expectantly.
‘I have some great news for you,’ said Agatha, smiling.
‘News? For me?’ All kinds of wild ideas rushed through Belinda’s head,

most of which she rejected hastily. Henry had been made a dean or a
bishop, that was it. It seemed unlikely, in a way, and yet what else could it
be?

and Edgar are to be married – quite soon.’ She paused and peered so
intently and beamingly at Belinda that the latter drew back, a little
embarrassed.

‘Edgar?’ said Belinda stupidly. ‘Do I know him?’
‘Why, of course you do! Our curate, Mr Donne,’ said Agatha with some

of her usual impatience which made Belinda feel more at home. ‘Such a
suitable thing altogether, I’ve been hoping all along that it would happen
like this.’

‘But isn’t she a lot older than he is,’ said Belinda tactlessly.
‘Oh, well, a year or two, but Mr Donne needs an older woman. Besides,

he’s rather shy and an older woman can often help things along, you know.’

‘How do you mean?’ asked Belinda. ‘I suppose if young people want to

marry, they will. I mean if they both do.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said Agatha, ‘but there is often a natural hesitation on the part

of the man, especially if he feels, as I know Edgar does, that a woman is far
superior to him intellectually.’

might well hesitate in those circumstances,’ she said aloud.

dropped a hint to Olivia.’

‘I’ve often wondered if it was done very much. I suppose it must be done a
good deal more than one realizes.’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Agatha casually, ‘it is not at all unusual. Men are

understandably shy about offering what seems to them very little and when
a woman realizes this she is perfectly justified in helping him on a bit, as it
were.’

At this moment an idea came into Belinda’s head. At first it seemed

fantastic, then quite likely, and finally almost a certainty. Agatha had
proposed to Henry. Why had this never occurred to her before? And now
that it had, what was the use of it? Belinda could not answer this, but she
knew that she could put it away in her mind and take it out again when she
was feeling in need of comfort.

‘Yes, I suppose it can happen like that,’ she agreed calmly. ‘There is no

reason why it shouldn’t. And yet,’ she ventured, ‘I don’t think I should ever
feel certain enough to take on that responsibility myself. I know men have
to take it, but supposing one met somebody else afterwards …’ she stopped
in confusion.

‘Ah, yes,’ Agatha’s face seemed to soften for a moment, ‘That can

happen too. One wonders how often it does happen when one knows that it
can.’

Belinda hurried home in a great turmoil. So many exciting things to tell

Harriet and somehow the curate’s engagement seemed to be the least
exciting of them all. Nevertheless, she could not help wondering how her
sister would take the news. Not that one could say it had really been a
‘disappointment’ to Harriet in the usual sense, but what would she do
without a curate to dote upon? It was unlikely that Miss Berridge – perhaps
they would soon be calling her Olivia – would approve of anybody else
doting on her husband, for Harriet would not like it to be suggested that she
was too old and unattractive for there to be any danger, which led Belinda
to speculate upon the age at which a single woman could safely have a
curate to live with her without fear of scandal. She feared that whatever the
age might be, seventy-five or even eighty, it would be many years before
Harriet would attain it. What a solution it would be! Belinda sighed as she
walked through the gate, fearful of what might happen.

she was rather upset, her attitude was rather one of indignation and pity for
Mr Donne.

news. Of course it’s obvious that she’s been after him for a long time. I
expect she proposed to him.’

think she proposed to Henry, and now she finds that she prefers the Bishop.
At least,’ she added, feeling that she had gone rather too far, ‘she might not
necessarily have meant that, but she did hint at it.’

proposing, Belinda.’

would be to be refused. I sometimes wonder how men can bear it, though
they usually go off and ask somebody else, don’t they, all except Ricardo,
that is. But I think it’s much better not to have asked, not to know definitely
that one wasn’t wanted,’ said Belinda hastily. ‘I always feel that a man
should do his own proposing.’

‘Yes, and then he can be blamed for the results,’ said Harriet stoutly.
‘Perhaps clergymen feel that they ought not to ask people to marry them,’

said Belinda. ‘The celibacy of the clergy, you know,’ she added vaguely.

‘It’s much better for a curate not to marry. Just imagine, a married

curate,’ said Harriet in disgust.

‘Ricardo has given me the recipe for ravioli,’ said Belinda. ‘He seemed

rather low, I thought, and I promised that you would go up and see him.’

‘Oh, yes, I really ought to go,’ said Harriet, ‘perhaps this afternoon,’ she

added, brightening up a little, as if the thought of the Count’s admiration
would do something to make up for the prospect of a married curate. ‘No,
this afternoon won’t do. I shall go tomorrow after I’ve had my hair done.’

‘All right, but let it be soon,’ said Belinda. ‘It would cheer him up so

much. I think I shall make some ravioli for supper; it seems quite easy.’

‘Yes, that would be nice. We have some cold meat, haven’t we, for the

filling?’ Harriet suddenly chuckled. ‘I wonder if Agatha does prefer the
Bishop to Henry,’ she said. ‘How ironical life is; he sent you those flowers
and you weren’t at all pleased.’

Belinda looked startled, almost as if she expected to see the

chrysanthemums still there. But the place where they had stood was

reassuringly filled with dried Cape gooseberries and honesty.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWENTY

Belinda always liked working in the kitchen when Emily was not there and
was glad that she had decided to make the ravioli on her afternoon out.
Emily always seemed so critical, though generally in a silent way which
was far more unnerving than if she had put it into words. Belinda could feel
her scornful, pitying glances as she creamed butter and sugar or rubbed fat
into flour. For this reason she usually chose some foreign dish of which
Emily would be unlikely to have knowledge.

This afternoon she felt a great sense of freedom and spread the things

around her in a most wanton manner, though the recipe did not need
complicated ingredients. The secret seemed to lie in the kneading or rolling,
which was to be carried out for a full half-hour or until the paste was quite
smooth and ‘of the consistency of the finest chamois leather’, as the
Count’s translation of the Italian read.

When Belinda had been kneading and rolling for about ten minutes she

felt she must rest. It was exhausting work, and the paste was nowhere near
the desired consistency yet. It was sticky, full of little lumps and greyish
looking – not at all like any kind of chamois leather.

Harriet was bustling in and out of the kitchen as she was expecting a visit

from Mrs Ramage, the wardrobe woman. She had spread practically the
whole of Belinda’s wardrobe out on the floor, and was quite ruthless in
brushing aside Belinda’s feeble protest on seeing a nearly new green crêpe
afternoon frock among the things to be sold.

‘Oh, but Harriet, I rather like that dress,’ said Belinda, ‘and there’s still a

lot of wear in it. I’m sure Miss Prior could bring it up to date in some way,
if it needs it. Perhaps a little lace collar or a contrasting jabot,’ she
suggested uncertainly.

‘Neither lace collars nor jabots are being worn at the moment,’ said

Harriet firmly, ‘and I’ve always thought it rather a trying shade of green. It
makes you look yellow.’

Belinda paused in her kneading, remembering the many times she had

worn the dress. Had she always looked yellow in it? It was a disturbing
thought. ‘I suppose that old tweed coat is past wearing,’ she went on sadly,
‘but I’ve always liked it so much.’

‘It’s no use being sentimental about things,’ said Harriet. ‘You shouldn’t

keep a clutter of clothes you never wear just because you once liked them.’

Belinda made no comment on this, for she was thinking that Harriet’s

words might be applied to more serious things than clothes. If only one
could clear out one’s mind and heart as ruthlessly as one did one’s
wardrobe…

not take more than two or three things in at once. I shall start by asking £5
for your green dress.’

‘What a good thing you are seeing her,’ she added, thinking also that it was
just as well that Harriet had something to take her mind off Mr Donne’s
engagement. ‘I’m afraid I never have the courage to ask a big price but just
agree to what she offers.’

Harriet snorted. ‘She’d probably offer a pound for the lot if you asked

her.’ The front-door bell rang. ‘There, that must be her now.’ Harriet strode
out with a purposeful step, carrying Belinda’s old tweed coat and an old
jumper suit of her own over her arm. She would lead up to the green crêpe
dress artistically and not bring it out until the last moment.

Belinda returned to her kneading and rolling. The paste still did not seem

quite right. Perhaps it was too sticky. She sprinkled more flour on the board
and on her hands and went on rather grimly. Her back was aching a little
now and she was startled when the front-door bell rang again, and stood for
a moment undecided what to do. It was no use expecting Harriet to answer
it and she herself with her floury hands and generally dishevelled
appearance was really in no fit state to go. But of course it probably
wouldn’t be anybody who mattered. It certainly wouldn’t be the
Archdeacon at ten to three in the afternoon.

The bell rang again, a long ring, as if it had been firmly pressed. Belinda

wiped her floury hands on her apron and hurried into the hall.

A man’s figure showed through the frosted glass panel of the front door.

A tall figure, but definitely not the Archdeacon’s. It was probably a man
selling something. A suitcase would be opened on the doorstep, full of

combs, cards of safety pins and darning wool, packets of needles … Still,
such things were useful, one could always do with them, thought Belinda
opening the door, for she felt much too sorry for the men not to buy
something.

‘Ah, Miss Bede, good afternoon.’ It was an unctuous voice, a

clergyman’s voice, a Bishop’s voice. Why was it that they were so
unmistakable? Only the Archdeacon’s was different.

‘Oh, dear, Bishop Grote.’ Theodore Mbawawa. Belinda rubbed her hands

vigorously on her grey tweed skirt – for her apron was already too floury to
be of much use – and backed into the hall. ‘I’m afraid I’m hardly in a fit
state to receive visitors, but do come in.’ She edged towards the drawing-
room door and put out a still floury hand to open it.

simultaneously with hers. For one panic-stricken moment she even
imagined that it lingered for a fraction of a second, but then dismissed the
unworthy thought almost before it had time to register in her mind. She was
in an agitated state, and she had read somewhere that in any case middle-
aged spinsters were apt to imagine things of this kind…

advanced towards the fireplace, where a fire was laid but not yet lit. He
made a remark about the weather, observing that it was a raw and chilly
afternoon. In his diocese, he added, they would be enjoying some of the
hottest weather now.

‘It must be a lovely climate,’ said Belinda, fumbling in the Toby jug on

the mantelpiece for a box of matches. ‘I’m so sorry about there being no
fire. We usually light it just before tea.’ She wondered if she could perhaps
offer him a cup now. It was certainly a little early, but it would at least fill in
the time until Harriet had finished with Mrs Ramage and would also give
Belinda an opportunity to slip away and make herself more presentable. ‘I
will go and tell my sister that you are here,’ she said crouching over the fire
and setting a match to a corner of the Church Times. ‘She will be so pleased
to see you.’

come to see.’

Belinda stood up. ‘Oh?’ Whatever could he want? ‘Me? Please sit down,

won’t you? I must apologize again for my untidiness, but I was doing
something in the kitchen.’

The Bishop smiled. ‘And doing it admirably, I’m sure.’
Belinda smiled uneasily. She began to wonder whether she had thanked

him enough for the flowers, though that was some weeks ago now, and was
just going to make a remark about them when he began to speak in a
hurrying way, as if he were not quite sure of himself.

my preference for you above all the other ladies of the village,’ he said, and
peered at her so intently that Belinda – they were sitting together on the
sofa – drew back, considerably alarmed.

‘No, I don’t think I have,’ she said anxiously. ‘In any case you can hardly

know me very well or you would realize that there is nothing very special
about me.’

‘Ah, well, one hardly looks for beauty at our time of life,’ he said, with a

return of some of his usual complacency. ‘She is not fair to outward view …
how does Wordsworth put it?’

‘Not Wordsworth,’ said Belinda automatically. ‘Coleridge, Hartley

Coleridge, I think.’ She felt rather annoyed. Not even a middle-aged
spinster likes to be told in so many words that she is not fair to outward
view. Besides, she felt that the Bishop had taken an unfair advantage of her,
calling on Emily’s afternoon off, when she had had no opportunity to tidy
herself. ‘Although I am not beautiful myself and never have been,’ she went
on, ‘I must confess that I like to see beauty in other people.’

see.’

‘No, I mean beauty of person,’ said Belinda obstinately.
The Bishop smiled. ‘Then perhaps you will not be so ready to accept

what I have to offer,’ he said, though it was obvious that he really thought
quite otherwise.

‘Offer?’ said Belinda in a startled tone. ‘I don’t think I understand.’ The

man on the doorstep opening his suitcase was simpler and less alarming
than this. She hardly dared to let herself guess what the Bishop meant; it
was too fantastic and terrible to be thought of.

‘Or perhaps it is some time since you last had one? After all, this is a quiet
country village; it is unlikely that you would meet many strangers.’

‘That may be,’ said Belinda feeling very angry, ‘but I think I can say that

I have had my share, in the past, that is. Naturally not lately,’ she fumbled,

her natural honesty getting the better of her.

‘I think I had better speak more plainly,’ the Bishop went on. ‘I am

asking you to marry me.’

There was a short but awkward silence, and then Belinda heard herself

stammering out the first words that came into her head, ‘Oh, but I couldn’t
…’

‘My dear, you are equal to being the wife of a bishop,’ he said kindly,

making a movement towards her. ‘You need have no fears on that account.
When I was a younger man I held views about the celibacy of the clergy,
young curates often do, you know,’ he smiled indulgently, ‘it is a kind of
protection, if you see what I mean. But a man does need a helpmeet, you
remember in Paradise Lost …’

Belinda interrupted him with a startled exclamation. ‘Paradise Lost!’ she

echoed in horror. ‘Milton …’

‘things are different, aren’t they?’

A man needs a woman to help him into his grave, thought Belinda,

remembering a remark Dr Parnell had made. Well, there would be plenty
who would be willing to do that.

‘I’m afraid I can’t marry you,’ she said, looking down at her floury

hands. ‘I don’t love you.’

saying. ‘We need not speak of love – one would hardly expect that now.’

see,’ she went on, ‘I did love somebody once and perhaps I still do.’

‘Ah …’ the Bishop shook his head, ‘he died, perhaps? A very sad thing.’
They were both silent. He died, yes, it was better that the Bishop should

think that, it sounded more suitable; there was even something a little noble
about it. She never marred … Belinda began to see herself as a romantically
tragic figure.

‘Of course, as Lord Byron says,’ began the Bishop, and then paused.
Could Lord Byron have said anything at all suitable? Belinda wondered.

When we two parted in silence and tears? Possibly, though the poem was
not really applicable. ‘Do tell me,’ she said, her literary curiosity driving
other thoughts from her mind. ‘What did Lord Byron say?’

would be able to stay for tea, although Belinda was not conscious of having

offered it. ‘I think it is perhaps a little early for tea, Miss Bede, and I have
still another call to make.’

‘Oh, I expect you will get tea there,’ said Belinda in a full, relieved tone.

‘Now that I come to think of it, we have only very little cake, just a small
piece of gingerbread, I believe. When one has guests one likes to have
rather more than that to offer them.’ She frowned, wishing she had not used
the word ‘offer’, but the Bishop did not seem to be at all upset, or even,
indeed, to have noticed. ‘I’m so sorry,’ said Belinda ambiguously. ‘I am
really most honoured that you should have felt … but I’m sure you will
understand how it is.’

‘Do not give it another thought, Miss Bede,’ he said briskly, ‘I assure you

that I shall not. After all, we must remember that God moves in a
mysterious way, His wonders to perform.’

‘Yes, certainly,’ agreed Belinda, feeling a little annoyed that he should

quote her favourite hymn. But perhaps it was presumptuous to suppose that
God would be more likely to reveal His ways to her than to the Bishop. She
did not quite see how the lines applied here, no doubt he had something else
in mind. Perhaps he would come another day and ask Harriet? At all events
he was not going to give her refusal another thought, so he could not care
very much. It was not very flattering to her, though she supposed that as she
was not fair to outward view she could hardly expect anything else.

It was not until they were in the hall that she realized that she had been

offered and refused something that Agatha wanted, or that she may have
wanted, for the hint she had given had been very slight. She wondered if the
Bishop had any idea of it.

‘It is nice that you have been able to stay so long here,’ she said, with

unaccustomed guile. ‘I expect the Archdeacon and Mrs Hoccleve will miss
you when you go back.’

‘Yes, I think I can say that they will.’ The Bishop smiled to himself. ‘I

have been able to give the Archdeacon a few tips, although a small country
parish hardly presents the same problems as a large African diocese.’

‘No, of course not,’ said Belinda. ‘Nobody would imagine that it did.’
‘Mrs Hoccleve has been most kind in helping me to buy various things

that I need to take back to Africa with me. She has also knitted me some
socks.’

socks.’

‘No, indeed, there isn’t. Particularly when they are not quite long enough

in the foot.’ The Bishop laughed with a silly, bleating noise. ‘Quite between
ourselves, of course,’ he added.

‘Of course,’ repeated Belinda, closing the front door behind him. She felt

that she could almost love Agatha as a sister now. The pullover that she
might have made for the Archdeacon would surely have been wrong
somewhere, but as it had never even been started, it lacked the pathos of the
socks not quite long enough in the foot. To think of Agatha as pathetic was
something so new that Belinda had to sit down on a chair in the hall, quite
overcome by the sensation. She began to find ways of making things better
and more bearable. Agatha couldn’t really have meant that she cared for the
Bishop; nobody could love a man like that. She almost longed to see
Agatha and to be crushed by one of her sharp retorts, to know that she was
still the same.

At last she remembered the ravioli, and was almost glad of an excuse to

stop thinking about these disturbing matters. She paused for a moment by
the looking-glass and studied her wispy hair, flushed face smeared with
flour and faded blue overall. Looking like that one could not feel even a
romantic figure whose lover had died.

The sound of raised, almost angry, voices came from behind the closed

door of the dining-room. It was a clash of wills between Harriet and Mrs
Ramage, but Harriet would win in the end. It was known that the Misses
Bede had ‘good’ things – though hardly of the same standard as Mrs
Hoccleve – and Mrs Ramage would be unwilling to leave without buying
them.

Belinda went quietly back to the kitchen and sat down. She wished

Harriet would come, so that she could tell her all about it. After all, she
supposed, it was something to have been considered worthy to be the wife
of a bishop, even if only a colonial one. There was something rather sad
about the kitchen now. It was beginning to get dark, and the greyish mass of
dough on the table reminded Belinda of the unfinished ravioli. Twenty
minutes more kneading, and perhaps it would be of the consistency of the
finest chamois leather.

The trivial round, the common task – did it furnish quite all we needed to

ask? Had Keble really understood? Sometimes one almost doubted it.
Belinda imagined him writing the lines in a Gothic study, panelled in pitch-
pine and well dusted that morning by an efficient servant. Not at all the

same thing as standing at the sink with aching back and hands plunged into
the washing-up water.

waving the notes in her hand. ‘She was pleased with your green dress, but
she wondered how you could ever have worn it. “Not at all Miss Bede’s
colour”, she said.’

Belinda. ‘Perhaps it is hardly surprising that Bishop Grote does not think
me fair to outward view, though I think I was wearing my blue marocain
that evening at the vicarage, and I always think I look quite nice in that.’

‘Oh, was it Theo who called just now?’ asked Harriet. ‘What did he

want?’

‘He wanted me to be his wife,’ said Belinda, enjoying the dramatic

simplicity of her announcement.

relief at having her sister spared to her more than made up for it. ‘What a
pity you and Agatha can’t change, though,’ she lamented. ‘But of course he
can’t really care for her very much or he wouldn’t have asked you, would
he?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Belinda, who was beginning to think that she did not

understand anything any more. ‘Anyway I don’t suppose Agatha really
cares for him. I ought not to have told you what she said.’ She felt that she
could not tell even Harriet about the socks and was glad when she left the
subject and came out with a piece of news of her own. Mrs Ramage, in the
intervals of bargaining, had told her that she had heard that Mr Donne had
been offered a ‘post’ at his old University – chaplain in the college or
something like that.

here, won’t it?’

‘Oh, yes, of course,’ said Harriet casually. ‘But don’t you see, we shall

get a new curate? The Archdeacon will never be able to manage by
himself.’

‘No, of course not,’ agreed Belinda fervently, ‘he couldn’t possibly

manage by himself. He will certainly have to get a new curate.’

‘This is really a place for a young man,’ said Harriet.
‘Well, I don’t know. A young man might want more scope, a more active

parish with young people. Something in the East End of London, perhaps,’

Belinda suggested. ‘I should think this curacy might very well suit an older
man.’

are nearly always young.’

‘Not necessarily,’ said Belinda, feeling that she ought to help her sister to

face up to the problem from every possible angle. ‘Sometimes a man in
middle life suddenly feels called upon to take Holy Orders. I always feel it
must be so awkward and upsetting for his family.’

that.’

‘I’m not saying it will be, but it could be,’ said Belinda. ‘I think the

Archdeacon would prefer a young man, though.’

‘Yes, working with the Archdeacon must be a great experience,’ said

Harriet obscurely. ‘A young man of good family, just ordained, that’s what
we really want. Do you suppose the Archdeacon will advertise in the
Church Times?’

smiling.

‘They sometimes say “genuine Catholic” or “prayer-book Catholic”,’

mused Harriet, ‘but of course we should hardly want that here.’

‘Oh, Harriet, look!’ Belinda held up the sheet of ravioli she had been

rolling.

‘But, Belinda, it’s just like a piece of leather. I’m sure that can’t be right,’

protested Harriet.

leather.’

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

The next few weeks were entirely taken up with preparations for the
curate’s wedding. It may be said without exaggeration that it was the only
topic of conversation in the village at this time, and many a church worker’s
dingy life had been brightened by the silver and white invitation card,
which was prominently displayed on many mantelpieces. The marriage of
their dear Mr Donne was something in which all could share, for had he not
at some time or another been to meals at all their houses? Many were the
chickens which had been stuffed and roasted or boiled and smothered in
white sauce in his honour.

One afternoon, a few days before the wedding, there was a gathering at

the parish hall, the object of which was to make a presentation to Mr Donne
and his fiancée. Miss Berridge was to stay at the vicarage and be married
from there, as her parents were dead and Mrs Hoccleve, perhaps because of
her niece’s substantial contribution to Middle English studies, had always
been particularly fond of her.

There was great excitement in the hall for nobody had yet seen Miss

Berridge, though Edith Liversidge had caught a glimpse of her coming from
the station the previous evening. As it had been a very dark night she had
not been able to give a satisfactory description, except to say that she had
been wearing a fur coat, a dark, rather bushy fur, musquash, she thought,
and that she was very tall, perhaps taller than Mr Donne, who was only of
middle height for a man.

‘Taller than he is,’ said Harriet in a disgusted tone, as they sat waiting for

the proceedings to begin. ‘What a pity! I always think it looks so bad.’

‘Yes,’ agreed Belinda, ‘but of course it can’t be helped. I mean, there are

other things more important.’

‘Tall women always droop,’ said Edith sharply. ‘I’m always telling

Connie to hold herself up. It never had any effect until Bishop Grote said
something about liking tall women – she’s been better since then.’

minded what people looked like – or expected much from people of our
age, anyway.’

‘Bishops ought not to mind or expect,’ said Edith, ‘but I suppose they’re

human. Besides, don’t forget all those native women …’ she paused darkly.
‘He was describing their costume or lack of it when he came to tea with us
the other day. Poor Connie was quite embarrassed.’

‘Well, he’s gone now,’ said Belinda comfortably, ‘and he’ll probably be

quite glad to be back among those dear, good fellows.’

‘Agatha was sorry to see him go,’ said Harriet. ‘That was obvious. Ah,

quotiens illum doluit properare Calypso – Ah, how many times did Calypso
grieve at his hastening.’

‘Connie was sorry too,’ said Edith. ‘If it hadn’t been that she was due for

her annual visit to Belgrave Square she would have been very low.’

Harriet, ‘she wouldn’t want to miss his speech, I’m sure.’

‘Her train is due in at a quarter to three, so I suppose she should be here

for most of it – in at the death, you know.’

‘Poor Mr Donne,’ sighed Harriet, ‘one almost feels that it is a death.’
At this moment there was a stir among the rows of waiting women, and

the door on to the platform opened. Agatha Hoccleve, in a black tailored
costume of good cut, came in, followed by a tall, pleasant-looking woman
in the early or middle thirties, in a blue tweed costume of rather less good
cut. She had a pale, rather long face and wore spectacles. Her hair was
neatly arranged at the back of her head, though this was rather difficult to
see as her navy felt hat was pulled down at a sensible angle.

and good, heavy silk stockings.

Miss Berridge was followed by Mr Donne, looking rather sheepish,

Father Plowman, whose parish had wished to join in the presentation, and,
finally, the Archdeacon, smiling sardonically and bearing in his arms a large
square object shrouded in a cloth which he placed on a small table at one
side of the platform.

‘She is taller than he is,’ whispered Harriet, ‘and she looks much older.

What a pity! She’s rather plain, too, isn’t she? Why doesn’t she use
lipstick?’

was a confident public speaker and this afternoon’s audience of parish
women with a few churchwardens and choirmen held no terrors for her. ‘It
gives me great pleasure to introduce my niece, Miss Berridge, soon to be
Mrs Donne, to you all. I only wish she were going to stay longer with us,
but we must not – I am sure we do not – grudge her to Mr Donne and I am
equally sure that he’ – she gave a sideways glance to where the curate was
sitting looking down at his shoes – ‘will not grudge us the opportunity of
getting to know her while she is here. Of course I know her already,’ she
added with a little laugh, and sat down amid the mild clapping which
followed.

platform where the shrouded object stood and seemed about to uncover it,
but he was prevented by an agitated gesture from Father Plowman. The
situation was saved by Agatha stepping forward and saying in a loud voice,
‘Before the Archdeacon makes the presentation, I think Mr Plowman has
something to say.

‘Father Plowman,’ giggled Harriet.
‘Yes, indeed I have,’ said that clergyman with a grateful glance at Agatha

and a rather baleful one at the Archdeacon. ‘My parishioners and I felt that
we could not let this opportunity pass without adding our good wishes and
our widow’s mite, as it were, towards this gift. I think we shall not soon
forget Father Donne’s gifts to us. I mean,’ he added, sensing a faint
bewilderment among his hearers, ‘his Sunday evening sermons. I can see
him now, walking across the fields in the evening sunshine, his cassock and
surplice over his arm …’ Mr Donne himself now looked a little startled as
Father Plowman’s church was some seven or eight miles away and he had
always gone over on his bicycle … ‘pausing perhaps to drink in the beauty
of our old church seen in that gracious evening light, pondering his message
to us that evening, the gift he was bringing us.’ Father Plowman paused, a
little overcome by his eloquence. ‘May he, with the help of Miss Berridge,
go on from strength to strength, as I am sure he will. From glory to glory
advancing, we praise Thee, O Lord.’ He bowed his head. ‘And now a
prayer, Prevent us O Lord in all our doings …’

The obvious prayer, of course, thought Belinda, who had noted with

anxiety the expression of irritation on the Archdeacon’s face. Perhaps
Father Plowman ought not to have said a prayer at all – it should have been

left to the last speaker – the Archdeacon – who was now advancing once
more towards the shrouded object.

not so much on the parish’s loss, though he did mention that Mr Donne’s
going would mean a great deal of extra work for him, as on the difficulties
that Mr Donne might be expected to encounter in his new life. ‘The
University is a stony and barren soil,’ he declared in a warning tone, ‘one
might almost say that the labourers are too many for the scanty harvest that
is to be reaped there. The undergraduates are as in Anthony à Wood’s day,
much given over to drinking and gaming and vain brutish pleasures.’ He
looked as if he were warming to his subject, and Belinda began to fear that
he might quote other and more unsuitable passages from that crabbed
antiquary, but after a short pause he left the subject and went on. ‘It is to be
hoped that Mr Donne may succeed where others have failed. Indeed, with
the help of Miss Berridge’ – he gave her a most charming smile – one feels
that he may. I am certain too that with her considerable linguistic gift, she
will be a great help to him if ever he feels called upon to labour in the
Mission Field.’

There was a visible stir in the audience at these words and some

indignant whispering.

From Greenland’s icy mountains
From India’s coral strand …

‘It is not so very long since we were singing Bishop Heber’s fine hymn in
our fine old church.’ The Archdeacon paused as if to let the significance of
his words sink in and then began to fumble with the cloth which shrouded
the square object.

‘Isn’t it the table cloth out of the morning-room at the vicarage?’

whispered Harriet. ‘How unsuitable!’

We take no note of time but from its loss.
To give it then a tongue is wise in man …

The Archdeacon paused – ‘Edward Young, the eighteenth-century poet and
divine wrote those words nearly two hundred years ago. Not a great poet,
you may say, no, one would hardly call him that, but I think his words are
still true today. That is why we are giving this chiming clock to Mr Donne
and Miss Berridge as a wedding present.’ He flung aside the cloth with a
dramatic gesture that Belinda thought very fine, if a little too theatrical for
the occasion. ‘May it do something to ease the burdens they will be called
upon to bear in their new life.’

life than they have been here,’ murmured Edith, ‘but I suppose the
Archdeacon cannot bear to think of anybody without some kind of burden.’

‘Well, we know that life is never without them,’ said Belinda loyally. ‘It

is perhaps just as well to remember that. And even if we appear to have
none we really ought to have …’ her voice trailed off obscurely, for Miss
Berridge had come forward and was making a speech of thanks. Her voice
was clear and ringing, as if she were used to giving lectures or addressing
meetings. What an excellent clergyman’s wife she would make with this
splendid gift!

‘Edgar and I are simply delighted …’ there was comfort in the words, as

if she were protecting Mr Donne in a sensible tweed coat or even woollen
underwear. It was obvious that she would take care of him, not letting him
cast a clout too soon. She would probably help with his sermons too, and
embellish them with quotations rarer than her husband, with his Third Class
in Theology, could be expected to know. A helpmeet indeed.

what he will say.’

Mr Donne’s speech was very short. ‘Olivia has said exactly what I would

have said,’ he began. Here again the use of Christian names gave a cosy,
intimate feeling. Agatha and Father Plowman were smiling and even the
Archdeacon was looking benevolent.

Mr Donne concluded on a serious note. ‘I think we shall both remember

what the Archdeacon has said about the burdens we may have to bear in our
new life. I hope we may not be found wanting at the testing time. And now,
let us pray…’

prayer when Father Plowman had rather unfairly used the obvious one
already. But she had to admit that his choice was an admirable one. Lord,

we pray Thee that Thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and make
us continually to be given to all good works … She bowed her head and
could see out of the corner of her eye Miss Prior and Miss Jenner, creeping
in through a side door carrying a tea-urn. When they realized that a prayer
was being said, they stood stiffly with the urn, like children playing a game
of ‘statues’.

The prayer ended, and after a decent pause Miss Berridge and Mr Donne

– or Olivia and Edgar as they had now become in the minds of their hearers
– came down from the platform and moved among the audience, shaking
hands and chatting.

from a plate which seemed to have got into her hand. She felt a glow of
warm friendliness towards her, perhaps because of her rather plain, good-
humoured face, her sensible felt hat, her not particularly well-cut tweed suit
and her low-heeled shoes. Nothing from the ‘best houses’ here – all was as
it should be in a clergyman’s wife.

‘Where 
will 
you 
live?’ 
Belinda 
asked. 
‘I 
suppose 
suitable

accommodation is provided for married chaplains even in a place that is in
other ways as old-fashioned as our University.’

‘Oh, we’ve already taken a very nice house, rather Gothic in style, but I

think it will be comfortable and it has a large garden,’ said Olivia. ‘And
Edgar will have rooms in college as well, of course. I hope you and your
sister will come and see us when we are settled in. Edgar tells me you have
been so good to him.’

Belinda managed to stop herself saying, ‘Oh, it was really Harriet, my

sister, she dotes on curates,’ and asked instead whether it was decided who
should come in place of Mr Donne. ‘Will he be a young man or an older
one who needs the quiet and country air of a little place like this?’ she
asked.

‘Both, in a way,’ said Olivia. ‘He is young, but he has recently been ill –

I think you’ll like him very much. I believe he’s a Balliol man and he’s
certainly very handsome, dark and rather Italian-looking, really. Edgar
looks quite plain beside him.’ She laughed affectionately. ‘Anyway, you’ll
see him at our wedding.’

‘How splendid! My sister will be delighted,’ said Belinda with unguarded

enthusiasm. ‘She has such a respect for Balliol men,’ she added hastily.

‘Yes, it still maintains its great tradition of scholarship,’ agreed Olivia. ‘I

had an idea that Archdeacon Hoccleve was a Balliol man.’

preacher. His knowledge of English literature is quite remarkable for a
clergyman.’

‘His sermons are full of quotations,’ said Harriet bluntly. ‘I consider Mr

Donne a much better preacher.’

‘I think that English Literature and Theology can be very happily

combined,’ said Olivia gracefully. ‘I daresay I shall find myself
encouraging Edgar to write more literary sermons.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said her fiancé, ‘I expect Olivia will help me to outdo even the

Archdeacon with obscure quotations from the Ormulum.’

‘Whatever is that?’ asked Harriet. ‘It sounds very learned.’
‘A kind of moral treatise, I believe.’
‘Oh, well, I hope you won’t listen to her,’ said Harriet. ‘I suppose people

liked things like that in the old days.’

‘And I hope that we in these days may still be said to like “things like

that”,’ said Father Plowman, smiling indulgently at Harriet, as if she were a
naughty child.

‘Perhaps we would like them better if we could understand them,’ said

Belinda. ‘I mean the language, of course.’ She spoke rather hastily as she
could see the Archdeacon approaching and thought it might be as well to
change the subject before he came. ‘I wish somebody would have another
cake,’ she said, offering the plate which she was still holding. Harriet took it
from her and began to encourage Mr Donne to eat a cake with pink icing,
much to the amusement of Olivia, who did not appear to mind Harriet’s
proprietary attitude in the very least.

Belinda, feeling that she had monopolized the young couple for quite

long enough, withdrew quietly and found herself near the tea-urn over
which Miss Prior and Miss Jenner were presiding.

‘Would you like another cup, Miss Bede?’ asked Miss Prior. ‘I know

you’re one for tea, like I am.’

classification. ‘I’m sure we need plenty of tea after all this excitement.’

‘We certainly do,’ agreed Miss Prior. ‘Miss Aspinall, too! That news was

a surprise, I can tell you. A shock, you might almost say.’

shrill, arch voice. ‘I said to mother only the other day that something would
come of it.’

‘Come of it?’ asked Belinda, looking over to where, as she now realized,

Connie Aspinall, fresh from Belgravia, was standing in the centre of a little
crowd. She looked almost happy and was talking with unusual animation.
Even Belgrave Square could hardly have made such a change in her. ‘I
don’t quite understand,’ Belinda went on, ‘has something happened to Miss
Aspinall? Is she getting married as well?’

‘Didn’t you know?’ Miss Jenner almost shrieked. ‘Miss Aspinall’s got

engaged to Bishop Grote. You remember, Miss Bede, he was staying at the
vicarage not so long ago.’

she was able to indicate that she did remember Bishop Grote. ‘But this is
amazing, wonderful,’ she emended, ‘news. I must go and congratulate her
immediately.’ She put down her cup and made her way over to Miss
Aspinall’s corner.

‘My dear Connie,’ she said, ‘I’ve just heard your wonderful news. I am

glad.’

‘Yes, I’m so happy,’ said Connie. ‘Theodore told me that as soon as he

came here he felt that he was destined to find happiness, and that when he
saw me he knew it was to be.’ She gave a mysterious emphasis to these last
words.

Belinda was silent for a moment in thankfulness and wonder. She did not

now resent the Bishop’s quoting of her favourite hymn God moves in a
mysterious way. It was manifest that He did.

‘But how did you come to meet again?’ she asked, curiosity taking the

place of wonder. ‘Did he visit you in Belgrave Square?’

‘No, we met one afternoon in the Army and Navy Stores,’ said Connie.

‘That was the wonderful part of it. I had gone into the garden-furniture
department to buy a trowel and I was standing looking at a sweet little bird
bath – you know they have such pretty carved stone ones – when I heard
footsteps behind me – the place was quite deserted – I happened to look
round and there was Theodore.’

‘How extraordinary!’ said Belinda, imagining the shock she herself

would have felt.

take back to Africa and found himself in the garden-furniture department by
mistake. The man he asked had misdirected him or the department had been
moved, I believe.’

‘How extraordinary life is,’ Belinda interposed. ‘To think that the moving

of a department, if it had been moved…’

was a Fuller’s teashop quite near and he proposed to me over tea.’

‘Did you have that lovely walnut cake?’ asked Harriet, who had now

joined them.

dear, I’m so glad for you. I hope you will be very happy. I’m sure you will,’
she added, feeling that she may have sounded doubtful.

‘Well, I think we shall be,’ said Connie. ‘At first I naturally felt rather

nervous – the importance of the position, you see – but Theodore assured
me that I was quite equal to being a bishop’s wife.’

‘Yes, I am sure he did,’ said Belinda, remembering. ‘Are you to be

married here or in London?’

very kind and is most interested in the splendid work Theodore’s been
doing.’

Harriet walked home together, ‘but I’m very glad she’s so happy. Perhaps
they really do love each other, though he may have told her not to expect
that. But perhaps it was only I who was not to expect love,’ she added
rather sadly.

‘And being married from Belgrave Square!’ said Harriet, who was in

high spirits. ‘One feels that is almost the best thing about it. Hymen Io!’ she
chanted, producing a most appropriate leftover fragment of her classical
education. ‘That is suitable for weddings isn’t it?’

course there are many beautiful Epithalamia in the English language, but
one reels somehow that they are more for young people.’

But Harriet had lost interest in Connie and the Bishop. She was

remembering Olivia Berridge’s description of the new curate. ‘Balliol and
rather Italian-looking,’ she breathed, ‘and just recovered from an illness.
Oh, Belinda, he will need such special care!’ Later that evening she could

be seen studying a book of Invalid Cookery, and was quite annoyed when
Belinda pointed out that he would probably be eating with a normal appetite
by the time he came to them.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Fortunately the wedding day was fine, one of those unexpected spring days
that come too soon and deceive one into thinking that the winter is over.
Belinda had great difficulty in restraining Harriet from casting off her
woollen vest, and was only successful after she had pointed out, with great
seriousness, that the curate would surely not be so foolish as to leave off his
winter combinations in February.

‘Oh, I suppose Miss Berridge would see to that,’ said Harriet sulkily. ‘It’s

quite obvious that she’s going to fuss over him and turn him into a molly-
coddle.’

Belinda could think of no answer to make to this, but could only wonder

at the shortness of Harriet’s memory. It seemed such a little time since she
had thought of nothing but knitting and cooking special dishes for Mr
Donne.

By many deeds of shame
We learn that love grows cold,

thought Belinda. Did the author of that fine hymn realize how often his
lines had been frivolously applied? She turned to her prayer-book and saw
that he had died in 1905: so he was beyond the realization. No doubt we are
more frivolous now than we were then, she thought, feeling in her jewel-
box for her little seed-pearl brooch The neck of her new dress – a soft shade
of blue that could not possibly make her look yellow – needed something to
relieve its severity. Miss Prior had really made it very well; it even fitted
quite closely as a result of Belinda’s timid and carefully phrased request for
something a little less shapeless than usual. Harriet had ordered a creation
from Gorringe’s which Belinda considered an unnecessary expense. She
had not, however, mentioned this to her sister as she realized that the loss of
a dear curate was something of an occasion and this was, as far as she could

remember, the first time one had been lost by marriage. Usually it was the
Mission Field or the East End of London that claimed them, or, more rarely,
a comfortable living in the gift of a distant relative…

‘Belinda! Are you ready?’ Harriet stood in the room, magnificent in furs

and veiled hat.

Harriet. I wonder if a veil would suit me? One feels that it’s kinder
somehow – not that your complexion needs to be hidden, of course, but I
sometimes think that for me … and yet, I don’t know …’ she broke off,
wondering whether it would really make any difference now if she were to
appear with her face softened by clouds of veiling. Henry knew the face
underneath and would not be deceived and that was all that really mattered.

‘Yes, I think it’s one of my most successful hats,’ said Harriet. ‘Yours is

nice too,’ she added kindly. ‘I think I should wear it just a little further
back, though.’

Belinda adjusted it without looking in the mirror and they went

downstairs.

‘It’s really a perfect day,’ said Harriet, ‘amazingly mild.’
‘But I’m glad you kept on your vest,’ said Belinda, ‘it would have been

most unwise to leave it off. It’s certainly mild compared with what it has
been, but it may be colder tonight.’

As they passed the vicarage she drew Harriet’s attention to an almond

tree in full blossom.

every year, so beautiful that one can hardly bear it.’

Harriet looked at her sister apprehensively. She hoped Belinda wasn’t

going to cry too much at the wedding. They did not have many weddings in
the village and it would hardly be surprising if Belinda began to distress
herself by remembering that if Fate had willed otherwise she herself might
have married the Archdeacon thirty years ago. She was relieved when
Belinda went on to talk about ordinary things, whether it would be wise to
take more than one glass of champagne at the reception, always assuming it
were offered, what Agatha would be wearing and whether the new curate
would be at the church.

carefully. Harriet looked round quite unashamedly to watch people coming
into the church. Belinda occasionally turned her head, but most of the time

she sat quietly with her hands folded in her lap, though she could not help
showing her interest and even whispering to Harriet when Agatha came in,
very elegant in dark red, with a fur coat and wide-brimmed hat. A group of
nondescript-looking women – possibly relatives or friends of the bride,
fellow workers in the field of Middle English studies – came behind Agatha
and they sat together in one of the front pews.

Dr Nicholas Parnell had unfortunately not been able to come down for

the wedding as he had to welcome to the Library some distinguished
Russian visitors who were bringing with them a number of interesting
relics. Mr Mold had recently left for China, where he was to make a tour of
libraries and a special study of the heating systems employed in them.
There was, however, to be one distinguished visitor, the University
Professor of Middle English, who was to give the bride away.

‘Perhaps he wanted Miss Berridge too,’ Harriet had suggested, ‘but

hadn’t the courage to speak.’

‘Oh surely not,’ said Belinda, ‘or how could he bear to come to the

wedding?’ She could certainly not have attended Agatha and Henry’s.

In the meantime the church was filling up. Count Bianco, whose gout

was well enough now to allow him to go out, had chosen his seat carefully
so that he could have a good view of Harriet. Edith Liversidge came in
alone, for Connie Aspinall was in Belgravia, preparing for her own wedding
in a few weeks time. Edith had honoured the occasion by wearing her best
purple dress, and a kind of toque on her head, a little like a tea-cosy but
dignified for all that. How dear John would have loved to see her, thought
Belinda sadly. Being in church often made her think of John and his tragic
death in Prague. They said it was a golden city, but how much more golden
must it be from its associations with him.

She began to study the white and silver leaflet, announcing the marriage

of Olivia Mary Berridge with Edgar Bernard Amberley Donne. The young
couple had not chosen God moves in a mysterious way among the hymns,
indeed, Belinda had hardly hoped for that. Their selection, except for a
Middle English lyric to a setting by a relative of the bride’s, was
conventional. Gracious Spirit, Holy Ghost and The voice that breathed o’er
Eden were very suitable. It was true that the latter was often sung to the
tune of Brief life is here our portion, but it did no harm to be reminded of
that. Brief life was here our portion … Belinda’s eyes strayed to the rows of

memorial tablets to past vicars. She could hardly bear to think that one day
Henry’s would be among them and that she might be there to see it.

his best man, a stocky, red-haired young clergyman, a typical rowing man,
as Harriet whispered to Belinda.

Shortly afterwards the bride entered on the arm of the Professor of

Middle English, a tall, thin man, ill at ease in his formal clothes. Belinda
wondered whether Henry and Agatha were remembering their own wedding
day. She had heard that people did on these occasions unless they were in a
position to look forward rather than back. Count Bianco might be looking
forward, but more quietly and with less rapture than a younger man. Was
there anybody in the church without some romantic thought? Possibly Miss
Prior, sitting with her old mother, was more interested in the bride’s dress
which, Belinda noticed with approval, was not white but sapphire-blue
velvet, the kind of thing that would ‘come in’ afterwards and could if
necessary be dyed and worn for years. She really looked very nice, almost
pretty and not as tall as she had seemed to be at the presentation.

‘If I’m ever married I shall certainly have a fully choral ceremony,’ said

Harriet enthusiastically as they filed out of the church. ‘Or is there a special
one for those of riper years?’

Belinda said nothing because she had been crying a little and could not

trust herself to speak yet.

‘No, that’s only baptism,’ said Edith cheerfully. ‘I believe Connie and the

Bishop are having quite an elaborate affair. You will be getting your
invitations soon. She’s having a dress made at Marshall’s – embossed
chenille velvet – though goodness knows what use that will be in the
tropics,’ she snorted.

course he won’t be Bishop of Mbawawa all his life. I suppose he may retire
and write a book about his experiences. They often do, don’t they?’

knows the kind of thing only too well.’

‘What a beautiful day,’ said a gentle voice behind them. ‘It is quite like

Naples.’

‘My dear Ricardo,’ said Edith, looking round, ‘where in Naples would

you see such a very odd-looking crowd of people as are now coming out of
this church?’

‘It can’t be the best man, can it? Nobody would call him Italian-looking.
Ricardo, Italians don’t ever have red hair, do they?’

unknown in Italy,’ he pronounced at length, ‘but I do not think you would
say that it is characteristic of the Italians. In the north of course it is
sometimes found, but,’ he paused impressively, ‘I do not remember that I
ever saw a red-haired man in Naples.’

‘Oh, that’s good,’ said Harriet perfunctorily, ‘it can’t be him then. But I

did hope he was going to be at the wedding.’

‘We shall probably find that he is at the reception.’

village, so that the vicarage drawing-room would hardly have contained
them. The bride and bridegroom were in the doorway to shake hands with
the guests as they filed in.

but she heard Harriet laughing loudly with Mr Donne, so that she wondered
rather fearfully what her sister could have said. She found herself standing
by Agatha and confronted by a tray of glasses of champagne which one of
the hired waiters was holding in front of her.

‘I must just have a sip, to drink their health, you know,’ she said

apologetically, feeling Agatha’s eyes on her.

‘Oh, certainly,’ said Agatha. ‘It is quite the thing.’
‘I’m not really very used to drinking champagne,’ Belinda admitted.
‘Aren’t you?’ Agatha gave a little social laugh, which would normally

have crushed Belinda and made her feel very gauche and inferior. But today
she did not mind. She was almost glad to be able to see Agatha as her old
self again. The socks not quite long enough in the foot, which the Bishop
had so unkindly mentioned, had been worrying Belinda. She had suddenly
seen Agatha as pathetic and the picture was disturbing. Now she knew that
there could never be anything pathetic about Agatha. Poised and well-
dressed, used to drinking champagne, the daughter of a bishop and the wife
of an archdeacon – that was Agatha Hoccleve. It was Belinda Bede who
was the pathetic one and it was so much easier to bear the burden of one’s
own pathos than that of somebody else. Indeed, perhaps the very
recognition of it in oneself meant that it didn’t really exist. Belinda took a

rather large sip of champagne and looked round the hall with renewed
courage.

Most of the guests were known to her, although some people from

neighbouring villages had been invited. She noticed Father Plowman, near
the food and with a well-filled glass, Lady Clara Boulding, putting a small
vol-au-vent whole into her mouth, and a group of Sunday School teachers,
Miss Beard, Miss Smiley and Miss Jenner, standing in a corner by
themselves and looking suspiciously into their glasses. Agatha had left her
now and was greeting some of the guests, so Belinda moved over to where
Miss Prior and her mother were standing.

direction.

enjoying themselves. I like to see that.’

‘Mother was saying she wished there was a cup of tea,’ said Miss Prior in

a low voice, ‘but we’ll have one when we get home. You see, Miss Bede,
we’re not really used to drinking champagne. It’s different for you of
course.’

‘Well, I don’t often have it,’ Belinda admitted, feeling that she must stand

midway between Agatha and the Priors in this matter, ‘but of course we all
want to drink the health of the bride and bridegroom in it.’

‘Yes, of course,’ Miss Prior agreed. ‘She looks very sweet, doesn’t she?

That Vogue pattern makes up well in velvet, it was in the December book.
Your dress has turned out quite nicely, too, Miss Bede. I had such trouble
with the sleeves, you wouldn’t believe it. I found I’d put them in the wrong
way round!’ Miss Prior laughed rather shrilly and took a gulp of
champagne.

‘Are they the right way round now?’ asked Belinda.
‘Oh, of course, Miss Bede. I took them out again. I couldn’t let you wear

a dress with the sleeves in the wrong way round.’

‘No,’ said Belinda, feeling all the same that this kind of thing might very

well happen to her. ‘Mrs Hoccleve’s dress is very smart, isn’t it?’ she
ventured, feeling that it was not at all the thing to discuss the guests’ clothes
with Miss Prior but being unable to resist the temptation. Perhaps, she
thought, Miss Prior’s profession will excuse me.

‘Smart, yes, that’s what I would call it too,’ said Miss Prior. ‘But red’s

not her colour. The material’s good, I can see that, but you take a look at the

seams inside – you won’t find them finished off like mine are.’

‘No, I dare say not,’ said Belinda, realizing that she would certainly

never have the opportunity of examining the dress so minutely, but feeling,
none the less, that Agatha’s splendour was considerably diminished.

‘Pray silence for the Venerable Hoccleve,’ she giggled.

The champagne was having a different effect on Belinda, who was now

gazing very sentimentally at the Archdeacon, thinking how nice he looked
and what a clever speech he was making, not at all obvious or vulgar as
wedding speeches so often were. She had really no idea what he was talking
about, but there were a great many quotations in it, including one from
Spenser which really seemed to be quite appropriate, something about love
being a celestial harmony of likely hearts

Which join together in sweet sympathy,
To work each others’ joy and true content …

He was not saying anything about Burdens or sudden calls to the Mission
Field.

The curate replied very nicely after the health had been drunk and was

followed by the Professor of Middle English, who made an unintelligible
but obviously clever little speech about The Owl and the Nightingale,
embellished with quotations from that poem. Agatha and Olivia were
smiling knowledgeably at each other, and Belinda turned away to meet
Harriet, who was moving towards her through the crowd. Her face radiated
joy and happiness. How nice it is that Harriet is entering so whole-heartedly
into their feelings, thought Belinda, for she had been so afraid that her sister
might be made unhappy by the curate’s marriage and departure.

‘The third from the left,’ whispered Harriet eagerly.
Belinda looked about her, rather puzzled. Then she saw what her sister

meant, for in a corner she saw five curates, all young and all pale and thin,
with the exception of one, who was tall and muscular and a former Rugby
Blue, as she afterwards learned.

The third from the left. How convenient of the curates to arrange

themselves so that Belinda could so easily pick out Harriet’s choice. He was
dark and rather Italian-looking, paler and more hollow-cheeked than the

others. Now Belinda understood her sister’s joy and suddenly she realized
that she too was happier than she had been for a long time.

characters Mr Mold and Bishop Grote appeared in the village. In the future
Belinda would continue to find such consolation as she needed in our
greater English poets, when she was not gardening or making vests for the
poor in Pimlico.

Harriet would accept the attentions of Count Bianco and listen patiently

and kindly to his regular proposals of marriage. Belinda did not go any
further than this in her plans for the future: she could only be grateful that
their lives were to be so little changed. It was true that the curate on whom
Harriet had lavished so much care and affection was now a married man
and lost to them, but another had come in his place, so like, that they would
hardly realize the difference, except that he was rather Italian-looking and
had had a nervous breakdown.

Then she fretted, ah, she fretted,
But ’ere six months had gone past,
She had got another poodle dog
Exactly like the last …

thought Belinda frivolously, but the old song had come into her head and
seemed appropriate. Some tame gazelle or some gentle dove or even a
poodle dog – something to love, that was the point.

‘I think I’ll ask him after the reception, although it’s rather soon. But we

do want to make him welcome at once, don’t we?’ Harriet was speaking
eagerly to her sister.

Belinda smiled. ‘Of course, dear.’ Asking the new curate to supper

seemed a particularly happy thought.

‘I knew you would agree,’ said Harriet, making boldly for the curates’

corner.

Belinda was looking round the room to see if she could find some

sympathetic person to whom she could say that Dr Johnson had been so
right when he had said that all change is of itself an evil, when she saw
Harriet approaching with the new curate.

utter a suitable platitude, Harriet had burst in with the news that the young
man was coming to supper with them on his first Sunday evening in the
village, which would be in about a fortnight’s time.

‘He says he is fond of boiled chicken,’ she added.
Belinda laughed awkwardly and hoped that the new curate would not be

embarrassed by Harriet’s behaviour.

But he seemed completely at ease as Harriet confided to him that she

always liked to eat chicken bones in her fingers.

‘Like dear Queen Victoria used to,’ she sighed.
‘Now, I’m sure you don’t remember Queen Victoria,’ he said gallantly.
‘We older people remember a great deal more than you think,’ said

Harriet coyly.

weak as a result of his long illness, Belinda was overjoyed to hear that it
had the authentic ring.

OceanofPDF.com

JANE AND PRUDENCE

Barbara Pym

‘Barbara Pym is the rarest of treasures; she reminds us of the heartbreaking

silliness of everyday life’ Anne Tyler

If Jane Cleveland and Prudence Bates seem an unlikely pair to be walking
together at an Oxford reunion, neither of them is aware of it. They couldn’t
be more different: Jane is a rather incompetent vicar’s wife, who always
looks as if she is about to feed the chickens, while Prudence, a pristine
hothouse flower, has the most unsuitable affairs. With the move to a rural
parish, Jane is determined to find her friend the perfect man. She learns,
though, that matchmaking has as many pitfalls as housewifery …

‘Over the years, as Barbara Pym replaced Nancy Mitford, Georgette Heyer,
even Jane Austen, as my most loved author, I devoured all her books, but
Jane and Prudence remains my favourite. Even an umpteenth reading this
weekend was punctuated by gasps of joy, laughter, sympathy and wonder
that this lovely book should remain so fresh, funny and true to life’ Jilly

Cooper

OceanofPDF.com

NO FOND RETURN OF LOVE

Barbara Pym

‘She has a unique eye and ear for the small poignancies and comedies of

everyday life … [her novels] are miniatures, perhaps, but will not diminish’

Philip Larkin

Dulcie Mainwaring is always helping others, but never looks out for herself
– especially in the realm of love. Her friend Viola is besotted by the alluring
Dr Aylwin Forbes, so surely it isn’t prying if Dulcie helps things along?
Aylwin, however, is smitten with Dulcie’s pretty young niece. And perhaps
Dulcie herself, however ridiculous it might be, is falling, just a little, for
Aylwin. Once life’s little humiliations are played out, maybe love will be
returned, and fondly, after all …

‘One of her very best – comic, heartrending, brave; in short, like life itself’

Shirley Hazzard

‘A splendid humorous writer’ John Betjeman

OceanofPDF.com

OUR SPOONS CAME FROM WOOLWORTHS

Barbara Comyns

Marry in hast, repent at leisure.

Sophia is twenty-one years old, carries a newt – Great Warty – around in
her pocket and hastily marries a young artist called Charles. Swept into
bohemian London of the thirties, Sophia is ill-equipped to cope. Poverty,
babies (however much loved) and her husband conspire to torment her.
Hoping to add some spice to her life, Sophia takes up with the dismal,
ageing art critic, Peregrine, and learns to repent her marriage – and her
affair – at leisure.

But in this case virtue is more than its own reward, for repentance brings an
abrupt end to a life of unpaid bills, unsold pictures and unwashed crockery
…

‘An off-beat humour’ Graham Greene

OceanofPDF.com

A FAR CRY FROM KENSINGTON

Muriel Spark

‘One of Muriel Spark’s most liberating, liberated and meditative novels.

Spark is a writer who can take the meditative and make it mercurially

funny, playful and mischievous’ Ali Smith

When Mrs Hawkins tells Hector Bartlett he is a ‘pisseur de copie’, that he
‘urinates frightful prose’, little does she realise the repercussions. Holding
that ‘no life can be carried on satisfactorily unless people are honest’ Mrs
Hawkins refuses to retract her judgement, and as a consequence, loses not
one, but two much-sought-after jobs in publishing. Now, years older,
successful, and happily a far cry from Kensington, she looks back over the
dark days that followed, in which she was embroiled in a mystery involving
anonymous letters, quack remedies, blackmail and suicide.

‘The divine Spark is shining at her brightest … Pure delight’ 

Claire Tomalin, Independent

‘An outstanding novel … A Far Cry from Kensington has an effortless,

translucent grasp of the spirit of the period’ 

Observer

‘Wonderfully entertaining – full of absurd, comical, engaging characters

and written with typical wit, elegance and aplomb’ 

Sunday Telegraph

OceanofPDF.com

