Table of Contents

Title Page

Praise

one

two

three

four

five

six

seven

eight

nine

ten

eleven

twelve

thirteen

fourteen

fifteen

sixteen

seventeen

eighteen

nineteen

twenty

The Accidental Tourist

A Conversation with Anne Tyler

A Reader’s Guide

Reading Group Questions and Topics for Discussion

About the Author

By Anne Tyler

Copyright Page

“INDISPUTABLY HER BEST BOOK . . .

It leaves one aching with pleasure and pain.”

—The Washington Post

“Hilarious . . . and touching . . . Anne Tyler is a wise and perceptive writer

with a warm understanding of human foibles.”

—St. Louis Post-Dispatch

“Comic . . . Sweetly perverse . . . A novel animated by witty invention and

lively personalities.”

—Time

“Anne Tyler [is] covering common ground with uncommon insight. . . .

Convincingly real.”

—People

“Engaging . . . Gripping . . . Irresistible.”

—The New York Review of Books

“TENDER AND COMPELLING . . . A VERY FINE

NOVEL.”

—Philadelphia Inquirer

“Genuinely funny . . . If anything could be said against The Accidental

Tourist, it’s that it’s almost too complete an entertainment package, laughter

and tears all tied together.”

—Vanity Fair

“Anne Tyler is not merely good, she is wickedly good.”

—JOHN UPDIKE

“Imbued with a warmth and wisdom about human nature. Funny, poignant,

compassionate and true.”

—Publishers Weekly

“Delightful . . . Charming . . . Full of surprises and wisdom. All of Tyler’s

novels are wonderful; this is her best yet.”

—Library Journal

“Luminous, tone-perfect, and probably her best to date . . . A delicate

sounding of the odd and accidental incursions of the heart.”

—Kirkus Reviews

one

the heart for it and they decided to come back early. Macon drove. Sarah sat
next to him, leaning her head against the side window. Chips of cloudy sky
showed through her tangled brown curls.

Macon wore a formal summer suit, his traveling suit—much more logical

for traveling than jeans, he always said. Jeans had those stiff, hard seams and
those rivets. Sarah wore a strapless terry beach dress. They might have been
returning from two entirely different trips. Sarah had a tan but Macon didn’t.
He  was  a  tall,  pale,  gray-eyed  man,  with  straight  fair  hair  cut  close  to  his
head, and his skin was that thin kind that easily burns. He’d kept away from
the sun during the middle part of every day.

Just past the start of the divided highway, the sky grew almost black and

several enormous drops spattered the windshield. Sarah sat up straight. “Let’s
hope it doesn’t rain,” she said.

“I don’t mind a little rain,” Macon said.

Sarah sat back again, but she kept her eyes on the road.

It  was  a  Thursday  morning.  There  wasn’t  much  traffic.  They  passed  a

pickup  truck,  then  a  van  all  covered  with  stickers  from  a  hundred  scenic
attractions.  The  drops  on  the  windshield  grew  closer  together.  Macon
switched his wipers on. Tick-swoosh, they went—a lulling sound; and there
was a gentle patter on the roof. Every now and then a gust of wind blew up.
Rain flattened the long, pale grass at the sides of the road. It slanted across the
boat lots,  lumberyards,  and  discount  furniture  outlets,  which  already  had  a
darkened look as if here it might have been raining for some time.

“Can you see all right?” Sarah asked.

“Of course,” Macon said. “This is nothing.”

They arrived behind a trailer truck whose rear wheels sent out arcs of spray.

Macon swung to the left and passed. There was a moment of watery blindness
till the truck had dropped behind. Sarah gripped the dashboard with one hand.

“I don’t know how you can see to drive,” she said.

“Maybe you should put on your glasses.”

“Putting on my glasses would help you to see?”

“Not me; you,” Macon said. “You’re focused on the windshield instead of

the road.”

Sarah continued to grip the dashboard. She had a broad, smooth face that

gave an impression of calm, but if you looked closely you’d notice the tension
at the corners of her eyes.

The  car  drew  in  around  them  like  a  room.  Their  breaths  fogged  the

windows. Earlier the air conditioner had been running and now some artificial
chill remained, quickly turning dank, carrying with  it  the  smell  of  mildew.
They shot through an underpass. The rain stopped completely for one blank,
startling  second.  Sarah  gave  a  little  gasp  of  relief,  but  even  before  it  was
uttered,  the  hammering  on  the  roof  resumed.  She  turned  and  gazed  back
longingly at the underpass. Macon sped ahead, with his hands relaxed on the
wheel.

“Did you notice that boy with the motorcycle?” Sarah asked. She had to

raise her voice; a steady, insistent roaring sound engulfed them.

“What boy?”

“He was parked beneath the underpass.”

“It’s crazy to ride a motorcycle on a day like today,” Macon said. “Crazy to

ride one any day. You’re so exposed to the elements.”

“We could do that,” Sarah said. “Stop and wait it out.”

“Sarah, if I felt we were in the slightest danger I’d have pulled over long

ago.”

“Well, I don’t know that you would have,” Sarah said.

They  passed  a  field  where  the  rain  seemed  to  fall  in  sheets,  layers  and

layers  of  rain  beating  down  the  cornstalks,  flooding  the  rutted  soil.  Great
lashings  of  water  flung  themselves  at  the  windshield.  Macon  switched  his
wiper blades to high.

“I don’t know that you really care that much,” Sarah said. “Do you?”

Macon said, “Care?”

“I  said  to  you  the  other  day,  I  said,  ‘Macon,  now  that  Ethan’s  dead  I

sometimes wonder if there’s any point to life.’ Do you remember what you
answered?”

“Well, not offhand,” Macon said.

“You said, ‘Honey, to tell the truth, it never seemed to me there was all that

much point to begin with.’ Those were your exact words.”

“Um . . .”

“And you don’t even know what was wrong with that.”

“No, I guess I don’t,” Macon said.

He  passed  a  line  of  cars  that  had  parked  at  the  side  of  the  road,  their

windows opaque, their gleaming surfaces bouncing back the rain in shallow
explosions.  One  car  was  slightly  tipped,  as  if  about  to  fall  into  the  muddy
torrent that churned and raced in the gully. Macon kept a steady speed.

“You’re not a comfort, Macon,” Sarah said.

“Honey, I’m trying to be.”

“You  just  go  on  your  same  old  way  like  before.  Your  little  routines  and

rituals, depressing habits, day after day. No comfort at all.”

“Shouldn’t I need comfort too?” Macon asked. “You’re not the only one,

Sarah. I don’t know why you feel it’s your loss alone.”

“Well, I just do, sometimes,” Sarah said.

They were quiet a moment. A wide lake, it seemed, in the center of the

highway crashed against the underside of the car and slammed it to the right.
Macon pumped his brakes and drove on.

“This  rain,  for  instance,”  Sarah  said.  “You  know  it  makes  me  nervous.

What harm would it do to wait it out? You’d be showing some concern. You’d
be telling me we’re in this together.”

Macon  peered  through  the  windshield,  which  was  streaming  so  that  it

seemed  marbled.  He  said,  “I’ve  got  a  system,  Sarah.  You  know  I  drive
according to a system.”

“You and your systems!”

“Also,” he said, “if you don’t see any point to life, I can’t figure why a

rainstorm would make you nervous.”

Sarah slumped in her seat.

“Will you look at that!” he said. “A mobile home’s washed clear across that

trailer park.”

“Macon, I want a divorce,” Sarah told him.

Macon braked and glanced over at her. “What?” he said. The car swerved.

He  had  to  face  forward  again.  “What  did  I  say?”  he  asked.  “What  did  it
mean?”

“I just can’t live with you anymore,” Sarah said.

Macon went on watching the road, but his nose seemed sharper and whiter,

as if the skin of his face had been pulled tight. He cleared his throat. He said,
“Honey. Listen. It’s been a hard year. We’ve had a hard time. People who lose
a child often feel this way; everybody says so; everybody says it’s a terrible
strain on a marriage—”

“I’d like to find a place of my own as soon as we get back,” Sarah told him.

“Place of your own,” Macon echoed, but he spoke so softly, and the rain

beat  so  loudly  on  the  roof,  it  looked  as  if  he  were  only  moving  his  lips.
“Well,” he said. “All right. If that’s what you really want.”

“You can keep the house,” Sarah said. “You never did like moving.”

away sharply. Macon switched his right blinker on. He pulled into a Texaco
station, parked beneath the overhang, and cut off the engine. Then he started
rubbing  his  knees  with  his  palms.  Sarah  huddled  in  her  corner.  The  only
sound was the drumming of rain on the overhang far above them.

two

Instead, he felt more crowded. The windows shrank. The ceilings lowered.
There was something insistent about the furniture, as if it were pressing in on
him.

Of  course  Sarah’s  personal  belongings  were  gone,  the  little  things  like

clothes and jewelry. But it emerged that some of the big things were more
personal than he’d imagined. There was the drop-leaf desk in the living room,
its  pigeonholes  stuffed  with  her  clutter  of  torn  envelopes  and  unanswered
letters. There was the radio in the kitchen, set to play 98 Rock. (She liked to
keep  in  touch  with  her  students,  she  used  to  say  in  the  old  days,  as  she
hummed  and  jittered  her  way  around  the  breakfast  table.)  There  was  the
chaise out back where she had sunbathed, planted in the only spot that got any
sun at all. He looked at the flowered cushions and marveled at how an empty
space could be so full of a person—her faint scent of coconut oil that always
made him wish for a piña colada; her wide, gleaming face inscrutable behind
dark  glasses;  her  compact  body  in  the  skirted  swimsuit  she  had  tearfully
insisted on buying after her fortieth birthday. Threads of her exuberant hair
showed  up  at  the  bottom  of  the  sink.  Her  shelf  in  the  medicine  cabinet,
stripped, was splashed with drops of liquid rouge in a particularly plummy
shade that brought her instantly to Macon’s mind. He had always disapproved
of her messiness but now those spills seemed touching, like colorful toys left
on the floor after a child has gone to bed.

The house itself was medium-sized, unexceptional to look at, standing on a

street of such houses in an older part of Baltimore. Heavy oak trees hung over
it, shading it from the hot summer sun but also blocking breezes. The rooms
inside were square and dim. All that remained in Sarah’s closet was a brown
silk  sash  hanging  on  a  hook;  in  her  bureau  drawers,  lint  balls  and  empty
perfume bottles. Their son’s old room was neatly made up, as sleek as a room
in a Holiday Inn. Some places, the walls gave off a kind of echo. Still, Macon
noticed he had a tendency to hold his arms close to his body, to walk past
furniture  sideways  as  if  he  imagined  the  house  could  barely  accommodate
him.  He  felt  too  tall.  His  long,  clumsy  feet  seemed  unusually  distant.  He

ducked his head in doorways.

incongruous little jolt of interest. The fact was that running a house required
some sort of system, and Sarah had never understood that. She was the sort of
woman who stored her flatware intermingled. She thought nothing of running
a dishwasher with only a handful of forks stacked inside. Macon found that
distressing.  He  was  opposed  to  dishwashers  in  general;  he  believed  they
wasted energy. Energy saving was a hobby of his, you might say.

He started keeping the kitchen sink filled at all times, adding some chlorine

bleach for disinfectant. As he finished using each dish, he dropped it in. On
alternate days he pulled the plug and sprayed everything with very hot water.
Then  he  stacked  the  rinsed  dishes  in  the  empty  dishwasher—which  had
become, under his new system, a gigantic storage area.

When he hunkered over the sink to let the spray attachment run, he often

had the feeling that Sarah was watching. He sensed that if he slid his eyes just
slightly to the left, he would find her with her arms folded across her chest,
her head tipped and her full, curved lips meditatively pursed. At first glance
she was simply studying his procedure; at second glance (he knew) she was
laughing at him. There was a secret little gleam in her eyes that he was all too
familiar with. “I see,” she would say, nodding at some lengthy explanation of
his; then he’d look up and catch the gleam and the telltale tuck at one corner
of her mouth.

In this vision of her—if you could call it a vision, considering that he never

did glance over at her—she was wearing a bright blue dress from the early
days of their marriage. He had no idea when she had given that dress up, but
certainly it was years and years ago. He almost felt that Sarah was a ghost—
that she was dead. In a way (he thought, turning off the faucet), she was dead,
that young, vivid Sarah from their first enthusiastic apartment on Cold Spring
Lane. When he tried to recall those days, any image of Sarah was altered by
the  fact  that  she  had  left  him.  When  he  pictured  their  introduction—back
when they were barely out of childhood—it seemed nothing more than the
beginning of their parting. When she had looked up at him that first night and
rattled the ice cubes in her paper cup, they were already moving toward their
last edgy, miserable year together, toward those months when anything either
of them said was wrong, toward that sense of narrowly missed connections.
They were like people who run to meet, holding out their arms, but their aim
is  wrong;  they  pass  each  other  and  keep  running.  It  had  all  amounted  to

nothing,  in  the  end.  He  gazed  down  at  the  sink,  and  the  warmth from the
dishes drifted gently up into his face.

Well, you have to carry on. You have to carry on. He decided to switch his

shower  from  morning  to  night.  This  showed  adaptability,  he  felt—some
freshness of spirit. While he showered he let the water collect in the tub, and
he stalked around in noisy circles, sloshing the day’s dirty clothes underfoot.
Later he wrung out the clothes and hung them on hangers to dry. Then he
dressed  in  tomorrow’s  underwear  so  he  wouldn’t  have  to  launder  any
pajamas. In fact, his only real laundry was a load of towels and sheets once a
week—just two  towels,  but  quite  a  lot  of  sheets.  This  was  because  he  had
developed  a  system  that  enabled  him  to  sleep  in  clean  sheets  every  night
without the trouble of bed changing. He’d been proposing the system to Sarah
for years, but she was so set in her ways. What he did was strip the mattress
of all linens, replacing them with a giant sort of envelope made from one of
the seven sheets he had folded and stitched together on the sewing machine.
He  thought  of  this  invention  as  a  Macon  Leary  Body  Bag.  A  body  bag
required no tucking in, was unmussable, easily changeable, and the perfect
weight  for  summer  nights.  In  winter  he  would  have  to  devise  something
warmer, but he couldn’t think of winter yet. He was barely making it from
one day to the next as it was.

At moments—while he was skidding on the mangled clothes in the bathtub

or  struggling  into  his  body  bag  on  the  naked,  rust-stained  mattress—he
realized that he might be carrying things too far. He couldn’t explain why,
either. He’d always had a fondness for method, but not what you would call a
mania. Thinking then of Sarah’s lack of method, he wondered if that had got
out of hand now too. Maybe all these years, they’d been keeping each other
on  a  reasonable  track.  Separated,  demagnetized  somehow,  they  wandered
wildly off course. He pictured Sarah’s new apartment, which he had never
seen, as chaotic to the point of madness, with sneakers in the oven and the
sofa  heaped  with  china.  The  mere  thought  of  it  upset  him.  He  looked
gratefully at his own surroundings.

Most of his work was done at home; otherwise he might not have cared so

about the mechanics of the household. He had a little study in the spare room
off the kitchen. Seated in a stenographer’s chair, tapping away at a typewriter
that  had  served  him  through  four  years  of  college,  he  wrote  a  series  of
guidebooks  for  people  forced  to  travel  on  business.  Ridiculous,  when  you
thought about it: Macon hated travel. He careened through foreign territories

on a desperate kind of blitz—squinching his eyes shut and holding his breath
and hanging on for dear life, he sometimes imagined—and then settled back
home with a sigh of relief to produce his chunky, passport-sized paperbacks.
Accidental Tourist in France. Accidental Tourist in Germany. In Belgium. No
author’s name, just a logo: a winged armchair on the cover.

He covered only the cities in these guides, for people taking business trips

flew into cities and out again and didn’t see the countryside at all. They didn’t
see  the  cities,  for  that  matter.  Their  concern  was  how  to  pretend  they  had
never  left  home.  What  hotels  in  Madrid  boasted  king-sized  Beautyrest
mattresses? What restaurants in Tokyo offered Sweet’n’Low? Did Amsterdam
have a McDonald’s? Did Mexico City have a Taco Bell? Did any place in
Rome  serve  Chef  Boyardee  ravioli?  Other  travelers  hoped  to  discover
distinctive  local  wines;  Macon’s  readers  searched  for  pasteurized  and
homogenized milk.

As much as he hated the travel, he loved the writing—the virtuous delights

of organizing a disorganized country, stripping away the inessential and the
second-rate, classifying all that remained in neat, terse paragraphs. He cribbed
from other guidebooks, seizing small kernels of value and discarding the rest.
He  spent  pleasurable  hours  dithering  over  questions  of  punctuation.
Righteously,  mercilessly,  he  weeded  out  the  passive  voice.  The  effort  of
typing made the corners of his mouth turn down, so that no one could have
guessed how much he was enjoying himself. I am happy to say, he pecked
out,  but  his  face  remained  glum  and  intense.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  it’s
possible now to buy Kentucky Fried Chicken in Stockholm.Pita bread, too , he
added as an afterthought. He wasn’t sure how it had happened, but lately pita
had grown to seem as American as hot dogs.

“Of course you’re managing,” his sister told him over the phone. “Did I say

you weren’t? But at least you could have let us know. Three weeks, it’s been!
Sarah’s been gone three weeks and I only hear about it today. And by chance,
at that. If I hadn’t asked to speak to her, would you ever have told us she’d
left you?”

“She didn’t leave me,” Macon said. “I mean it’s not the way you make it

sound. We discussed it like adults and decided to separate, that’s all. The last
thing I need is my family gathered around me saying, ‘Oh, poor Macon, how
could Sarah do this to you—’ ”

“Why would I say that?” Rose asked. “Everybody knows the Leary men

are difficult to live with.”

“Oh,” Macon said.

“Where is she?”

“She’s got a place downtown,” he said. “And look,” he added, “you don’t

have  to  bend  over  backwards,  either,  and  go  asking  her  to  dinner  or
something. She does have a family of her own. You’re supposed to take my
side in this.”

“I thought you didn’t want us to take sides.”

“No, no, I don’t. I mean you shouldn’t take her side, is what I’m trying to

say.”

“When Charles’s wife got her divorce,” Rose said, “we went on having her

to dinner every Christmas, just like always. Remember?”

“I remember,” Macon said wearily. Charles was their oldest brother.

“I suppose she’d still be coming, if she hadn’t got remarried to someone so

far away.”

“What?  If  her  husband  had  been  a  Baltimore  man  you’d  have  gone  on

inviting them both?”

“She and Porter’s wife and Sarah used to sit around the kitchen— this was

before  Porter’s  wife  got  her  divorce—and  they’d  go  on  and  on  about  the
Leary  men.  Oh,  it  was  the  Leary  men  this,  the  Leary  men  that:  how  they
always had to have everything just so, always so well thought out beforehand,
always clamping down on the world as if they really thought they could keep
it  in  line.  The  Leary  men!  I  can  hear  them  still.  I  had  to  laugh:  One
Thanksgiving Porter and June were getting ready to leave, back when their
children were small, and June was heading toward the door with the baby in
her arms and Danny hanging onto her coat and this load of toys and supplies
when Porter called out, ‘Halt!’ and started reading from one of those cash-
register tapes that he always writes his lists on: blanket, bottles, diaper bag,
formula out of the fridge . . . June just looked over at the other two and rolled
her eyes.”

“Well, it wasn’t such a bad idea,” Macon said, “when you consider June.”

“No,  and  you  notice  it  was  alphabetical,  too,”  Rose  said.  “I  do  think

alphabetizing helps to sort things out a little.”

Rose  had  a  kitchen  that  was  so  completely  alphabetized,  you’d  find  the

allspice next to the ant poison. She was a fine one to talk about the Leary
men.

“At any rate,” she said. “Has Sarah been in touch since she left?”

“She’s come by once or twice. Once, actually,” Macon said. “For things she

needed.”

“What kind of things?”

“Well, a double boiler. Things like that.”

“It’s an excuse, then,” Rose said promptly. “She could get a double boiler

at any dimestore.”

“She said she liked ours.”

“She was checking to see how you’re doing. She still cares. Did you talk at

all?”

“No,” Macon said, “I just handed her the double boiler. Also that gadget

that unscrews bottle tops.”

“Oh, Macon. You might have asked her in.”

“I was scared she’d say no,” he said.

There was a silence. “Well. Anyhow,” Rose said finally.

“But I’m getting along!”

“Yes, of course you are,” she told him.

Then she said she had something in the oven and hung up.

Macon went over to his study window. It was a hot day in early July, the

sky so blue it made his eyes ache. He rested his forehead against the glass and
stared out at the yard, keeping his hands stuffed deep in the rear pockets of his
khakis. Up in one of the oak trees, a bird sang what sounded like the first

three notes of “My Little Gypsy Sweetheart.” “Slum . . . ber . . . on . . .” it
sang.  Macon  wondered  if  even  this  moment  would  become,  one  day,
something he looked back upon wistfully. He couldn’t imagine it; he couldn’t
think of any period bleaker than this in all his life, but he’d noticed how time
had a way of coloring things. That bird, for instance, had such a pure, sweet,
piercing voice.

He  turned  away  from  the  window,  covered  his  typewriter,  and  left  the

room.

He didn’t eat real meals anymore. When he was hungry he drank a glass of

milk,  or  he  spooned  a  bit  of  ice  cream  directly  from  the  carton.  After  the
smallest snack he felt overfed and heavy, but he noticed when he dressed in
the mornings that he seemed to be losing weight. His shirt collar stood out
around  his  neck.  The  vertical  groove  between  his  nose  and  mouth  had
deepened so that he had trouble shaving it. His hair, which Sarah used to cut
for him, jutted over his forehead like a shelf. And something had caused his
lower lids to droop. He used to have narrow gray slits of eyes; now they were
wide and startled. Could this be a sign of malnutrition?

Breakfast:  Breakfast  was  your  most  important  meal.  He  hooked  up  the

percolator  and  the  electric  skillet  to  the  clock  radio  on  his  bedroom
windowsill. Of course he was asking for food poisoning, letting two raw eggs
wait all night at room temperature, but once he’d changed menus there was no
problem. You had to be flexible about these matters. He was awakened now
by the smell of fresh coffee and hot buttered popcorn, and he could partake of
both without  getting  out  of  bed.  Oh,  he  was  managing  fine,  just  fine.  All
things considered.

But his nights were terrible.

It wasn’t that he had trouble getting to sleep in the first place. That was

easy. He’d watch TV till his eyes burned; then he’d climb the stairs. He would
start the shower running and spread his clothes in the tub. At times he thought
of skipping this part, except there was such a danger in falling behind with
your system. So he carried out each step: hanging the laundry, setting up the
breakfast things, flossing his teeth. He couldn’t go to bed without flossing his
teeth.  For  some  reason,  Sarah  had  found  this  irritating.  If  Macon  were
condemned to death, she’d said once, and they told him he’d be executed by
firing  squad  at  dawn,  he  would  no  doubt  still  insist  on  flossing  the  night
before. Macon, after thinking it over, had agreed. Yes, of course he would.

Hadn’t  he  flossed  while  in  the  depths  of  pneumonia?  In  the  hospital  with
gallstones? In a motel the night his son was killed? He checked his teeth in
the mirror. They were never entirely white, in spite of all his care. And now it
seemed his skin was taking on a yellowish cast as well.

He turned off the lights, moved the cat over, helped the dog up onto the

bed. The dog was a Welsh corgi, very shortlegged, but he did love to sleep in
a  bed,  and  so  every  night  he  stood  erect  and  propped  his  elbows  on  the
mattress and gazed at Macon expectantly till Macon gave him a boost. Then
they’d all three settle themselves. Macon slipped into his envelope, the cat
fitted her shape to the warm spot under his arm, and the dog plopped down
near his feet. Then Macon closed his eyes and drifted off.

But eventually he found himself conscious of his dreams—not borne along

by  them  but  tediously  constructing  them,  quibbling  over  details.  When  it
dawned on him that he was awake, he would open his eyes and squint at the
clock radio. But it was only one a.m. At the latest, two. There were all those
hours still to be survived.

His brain buzzed with little worries. Had he left the back door unlocked?

Forgotten  to  put  the  milk  away?  Made  out  a  check  for  his  bank  balance
instead of his gas bill? He remembered all in a rush that he’d opened a can of
V-8 juice and then put the can in the icebox. Oxidation of the metal seams!
Resulting in lead poisoning!

The  worries  changed,  grew  deeper.  He  wondered  what  had  gone  wrong

with  his  marriage.  Sarah  had  been  his  first  and  only  girlfriend;  now  he
thought  he  should  have  practiced  on  someone  else  beforehand.  During  the
twenty years of their marriage there’d been moments—there’d been months—
when  he  didn’t  feel  they  had  really  formed  a  unit  the  way  couples  were
supposed  to.  No,  they’d  stayed  two  distinct  people,  and  not  always  even
friends.  Sometimes  they’d  seemed  more  like  rivals,  elbowing  each  other,
competing over who was the better style of person. Was it Sarah, haphazard,
mercurial? Was it Macon, methodical and steady?

When  Ethan  was  born,  he  only  brought  out  more  of  their  differences.

Things they had learned to ignore in each other resurfaced. Sarah never got
their son on any kind of schedule at all, was lax and unconcerned. And Macon
(oh, he knew it, he admitted it) had been so intent on preparing him for every
eventuality that he hadn’t had time to enjoy him. Ethan at two, at four floated
up  into  his  vision  as  clearly  as  a  color  film  projected  upon  the  bedroom

ceiling. A chortling, sunny little boy, he’d been, with Macon a stooped shape
above him wringing his hands. Macon had been fierce in teaching him, at age
six,  how  to  swing  a  bat;  it  would  have  wrenched  his  soul  to  have  Ethan
chosen last for any team. “Why?” Sarah had asked. “If he’s chosen last, he’s
chosen last. Let it be, why don’t you.” Let it be! Life was so full of things you
couldn’t do anything about; you had to avert what you could. She laughed
when Macon spent one fall collecting Wacky Packs, which had these jokey
stickers inside that Ethan liked to plaster his bedroom door with. He’d have
more than anyone in the whole third grade, Macon vowed. Long after Ethan
lost interest, Macon was still doggedly bringing them home. He knew it was
absurd, but still, there was this one last sticker they had not yet managed to
get hold of . . .

Ethan went away to camp when he was twelve—a year ago, almost exactly.

Most boys started earlier, but Macon had kept delaying it. Why have a child at
all,  he  asked  Sarah,  if  you  were  only  going  to  ship  him  off  to  some
godforsaken spot in Virginia? By the time he finally gave in, Ethan was in the
top age group—a tall blond sprout of a boy with an open, friendly face and an
endearing habit of bouncing on the balls of his feet when he was nervous.

Don’t think about it.

He was murdered in a Burger Bonanza his second night at camp. It was one

of  those  deaths  that  make  no  sense—the  kind  where  the  holdup  man  has
collected his money and is free to go but decides, instead, first to shoot each
and every person through the back of the skull.

Ethan wasn’t even supposed to be there. He had snuck away from camp

with a cabinmate, who waited outside as a lookout.

Blame  the  camp  for  not  supervising.  Blame  Burger  Bonanza  for  poor

security. Blame the cabinmate for not going in too and altering, perhaps, what
took  place.  (Lookout  for  what,  for  God’s  sake?) Blame Sarah for allowing
Ethan  to  leave  home;  blame  Macon  for  agreeing;  blame  even  (hell,  yes)
Ethan. Blame Ethan for wanting to attend that camp and for sneaking off from
it, and for entering Burger Bonanza like some headstrong fool while a holdup
was in progress. Blame him for so meekly moving to the kitchen with the
others, for placing his hands flat against the wall as he was ordered and no
doubt bouncing slightly on the balls of his feet . . .

Don’t think about it.

driven to Baltimore to tell them in person. Then he’d driven them back to
Virginia. Macon often recalled that director. Jim, his name was, Jim Robinson
or maybe Robertson—a burly, white-whiskered man with a crew cut, wearing
a  suit  coat,  as  if  in  respect,  over  a  Redskins  T-shirt.  He’d  seemed
uncomfortable  with  silence  and  did  his  best  to  fill  it  with  abrupt  little
fragments of chitchat. Macon hadn’t listened, or he’d thought he hadn’t; but
now  all  the  fragments  came  back  to  him.  How  Jim’s  mother  had  been  a
Baltimorean  herself,  born  the  year  Babe  Ruth  was  playing  for the Orioles.
How Jim’s tomato plants had been acting queerly, producing only tiny green
marbles  that  fell  off  the  vines  before  they  ripened.  How  Jim’s  wife  was
terrified  of  driving  in  reverse  and  avoided  any  situation  that  required  it.
Macon gave a lot of thought to that now, lying in his bed at night. Could you
really drive a car without reversing? What about at intersections, where a bus
driver pokes his head out his window and asks you to roll on back a few yards
so he can turn? Would she refuse? Macon imagined her, staunch and defiant,
glaring  straight  in  front  of  her  and  pretending  not  to  notice.  The  driver
escalating into curses, horns blowing, other drivers shouting, “Aw, lady!” It
made a nice picture. He kept it firmly in mind.

Finally  he  would  sit  up  and  wriggle  out  of  his  sheet.  The  dog,  sighing,

roused himself and dropped off the bed to pad downstairs behind him. The
floorboards were cool underfoot, the kitchen linoleum cooler still; there was a
glow from the refrigerator as Macon poured himself a glass of milk. He went
to  the  living  room  and  turned  on  the  TV.  Generally  some  black-and-white
movie  was  running—men  in  suits  and  felt  hats,  women  with  padded
shoulders. He didn’t try to follow the plot. He took small, steady sips of milk,
feeling the calcium traveling to his bones. Hadn’t he read that calcium cures
insomnia? He absently stroked the cat, who had somehow crept into his lap. It
was much too hot to have a cat in his lap, especially this one—a loose-strung,
gray  tweed  female  who  seemed  made  of  some  unusually  dense  substance.
And the dog, most often, would be lying on top of his feet. “It’s just you and
me, old buddies,” Macon would tell them. The cat made a comma of sweat
across his bare thighs.

At last he would slip out from under the animals and turn off the TV. He

would  put  his  glass  in  the  chlorine  solution  in  the  kitchen  sink.  He  would
climb  the  stairs.  He’d  stand  at  the  bedroom  window  looking  over  the
neighborhood—black branches scrawled on a purple night sky, a glimmer of
white  clapboard  here  and  there,  occasionally  a  light.  Macon  always  took

comfort  if  he  found  a  light.  Someone  else  had  trouble  sleeping  too,  he
assumed.  He  didn’t  like  to  consider  any  other  possibility—a  party,  for
instance, or a heart-to-heart talk with old friends. He preferred to believe that
someone else was on his own, sitting up wide awake fending off his thoughts.
That made him feel much better. He returned to his bed. He lay down. He
closed his eyes and without even trying, he dropped off the edge into sleep.

three

from the dining room.

“Navy blue rug,” Macon repeated. (He was stalling for time.)

“I wouldn’t mention it except you never liked it,” Sarah told him. “You said

it was a mistake to have a rug where people were eating.”

Yes, he had said that. A crumb catcher, he’d said. Unsanitary. Then why did

he feel this sudden, wrenching need to keep the rug for himself?

“Macon, are you there?”

“Yes, I’m here.”

“So would you mind if I came and got it?”

“No, I guess not.”

“Oh, good. My apartment has these bare floors and you’ve no idea how—”

She would stop by for the rug and he’d invite her in. He’d offer her a glass

of sherry. They would sit on the couch with their sherry and he would say,
“Sarah, have you missed me?” Or no, he’d say, “I’ve missed you, Sarah.”

She would say . . .

She said, “I thought I’d drop over Saturday morning, if that’s convenient.”

But people don’t drink sherry in the morning.

And  besides:  He  wouldn’t  even  be  here  then.  “I  leave  for  England

tomorrow afternoon,” he said.

“Oh, is it time for England again?”

“Maybe you could come this evening.”

“No, my car’s in the shop.”

“Your car? What’s wrong with it?”

“Well, I was driving along and . . . you know that little red light on the

lefthand side of the dash?”

“What, the oil pressure light?”

“Yes, and so I thought, ‘Well, I’ll be late for the dentist if I stop and see to

it now and anyway, the car does seem to be running all right, so—’ ”

“Wait. Are you saying the light lit up? And then you went on driving?”

“Well, nothing sounded any different and nothing acted any different, so I

figured—”

“Jesus, Sarah.”

“What’s so terrible about that?”

“You’ve probably ruined the engine.”

“No, I did not ruin the engine, for your information. I just need this single,

simple repair job but unfortunately it’s going to take a few days to do it. Well,
never mind. I’ve got a house key. I’ll just let myself in on Saturday.”

“Maybe I could bring the rug over.”

“I’ll wait till Saturday.”

“That  way  I  could  see  your  apartment,”  Macon  said.  “I’ve  never  been

inside, you know.”

“No, it’s not fixed up yet.”

“I don’t care if it’s fixed up.”

“It’s a disaster. Nothing’s been done.”

“How could nothing be done? You’ve been living there over a month.”

“Well, I’m not so wonderfully perfectly efficient as you are, Macon.”

“You wouldn’t have to be efficient to—”

“Some days,” Sarah said, “I can’t even make it out of my bathrobe.”

Macon was silent.

“I should have agreed to teach summer school,” Sarah said. “Something to

give some shape to things. I open my eyes in the morning and think, ‘Why
bother getting up?’ ”

“Me too,” Macon said.

“Why bother eating? Why bother breathing?”

“Me too, sweetheart.”

“Macon, do you suppose that person has any idea? I want to go see him in

prison,  Macon.  I  want  to  sit  on  the  other  side  of  the  grid  or the screen or
whatever they have and I’ll say, ‘Look at me. Look. Look at what you did.
You didn’t just kill the people you shot; you killed other people besides. What
you did goes on and on forever. You didn’t just kill my son; you killed me;
you killed my husband. I mean I can’t even manage to put up my curtains; do
you understand what you did?’ Then when I’m sure that he does understand,
that he really does realize, that he feels just terrible, I’m going to open my
purse and pull out a gun and shoot him between the eyes.”

“Oh, well, sweetheart—”

“You think I’m just raving, don’t you. But Macon, I swear, I can feel that

little kick against my palm when I fire the gun. I’ve never fired a gun in my
life—Lord, I don’t think I’ve ever seen a gun. Isn’t it odd? Ethan’s seen one;
Ethan’s had an experience you and I have no notion of. But sometimes I hold
my hand out with the thumb cocked like when kids play cowboy, and I fold
my trigger finger and feel what a satisfaction it would be.”

“Sarah, it’s bad for you to talk like this.”

“Oh? How am I supposed to talk?”

“I mean if you let yourself get angry you’ll be . . . consumed. You’ll burn

up. It’s not productive.”

unproductive.”

Macon massaged his forehead. He said, “Sarah, I just feel we can’t afford

to have these thoughts.”

“Easy for you to say.”

“No, it is not easy for me to say, dammit—”

“Just shut the door, Macon. Just walk away. Just pretend it never happened.

Go rearrange your tools, why don’t you; line up your wrenches from biggest
to smallest instead of from smallest to biggest; that’s always fun.”

“Goddammit, Sarah—”

“Don’t you curse at me, Macon Leary!”

They paused.

Macon said, “Well.”

Sarah said, “Well, anyhow.”

“So I guess you’ll come by while I’m gone,” he said.

“If that’s all right.”

“Yes, certainly,” he said.

Although  he  felt  a  curious  uneasiness  when  he  hung  up,  as  if  he  were

letting  a  stranger  come.  As  if  she  might  walk  off  with  more  than  just  the
dining room rug.

For his trip to England, he dressed in his most comfortable suit. One suit is

plenty, he  counseled  in  his  guidebooks,  if  you  take  along  some  travel-size
packets of spot remover.  (Macon  knew  every  item  that  came  in  travel-size
packets, from deodorant to shoe polish.) The suit should be a medium gray.
Gray not only hides the dirt; it’s handy for sudden funerals and other formal
events. At the same time, it isn’t too somber for everyday.

He packed a minimum of clothes and a shaving kit. A copy of his most

recent guide to England. A novel to read on the plane.

Bring only what fits in a carry-on bag. Checking your luggage is asking for

trouble. Add several travel-size packets of detergent so you won’t fall into the
hands of foreign laundries.

exactly, but to collect himself—like a man taking several deep breaths before
diving into a river.

The furniture was all straight lines and soothing curves. Dust motes hung in

a slant of sunlight. What a peaceful life he led here! If this were any other day
he’d be making some instant coffee. He would drop the spoon in the sink and
stand sipping from his mug while the cat wove between his feet. Then maybe
he’d open the mail. Those acts seemed dear and gentle now. How could he
have complained of boredom? At home he had everything set up around him
so he hardly needed to think. On trips even the smallest task required effort
and decisions.

When it was two hours till takeoff, he stood up. The airport was a thirty-

minute drive at the most, but he hated feeling rushed. He made a final tour of
the house, stopping off at the downstairs bathroom—the last real bathroom
(was how he thought of it) that he’d see for the next week. He whistled for the
dog. He picked up his bag and stepped out the front door. The heat slammed
into him like something solid.

The dog was going with him only as far as the vet’s. If he’d known that, he

never  would  have  jumped  into  the  car.  He  sat  next  to  Macon,  panting
enthusiastically, his keg-shaped body alert with expectation. Macon talked to
him in what he hoped was an un-alarming tone. “Hot, isn’t it, Edward. You
want the air conditioner on?” He adjusted the controls. “There now. Feeling
better?” He heard something unctuous in his voice. Maybe Edward did, too,
for he  stopped  panting  and  gave  Macon  a  sudden  suspicious  look.  Macon
decided to say no more.

They rolled through the neighborhood, down streets roofed over with trees.

They turned into a sunnier section full of stores and service stations. As they
neared Murray Avenue, Edward started whimpering. In the parking lot of the
Murray  Avenue  Veterinary  Hospital,  he  somehow  became  a  much  smaller
animal.

Macon got out of the car and walked around to open the door. When he

took hold of Edward’s collar, Edward dug his toenails into the upholstery. He
had  to  be  dragged  all  the  way  to  the  building,  scritching  across  the  hot
concrete.

The waiting room was empty. A goldfish tank bubbled in one corner, with a

full-color poster above it illustrating the life cycle of the heartworm. There
was a girl on a stool behind the counter, a waifish little person in a halter top.

“I’ve brought my dog for boarding,” Macon said. He had to raise his voice

to be heard above Edward’s moans.

Chewing her gum steadily, the girl handed him a printed form and a pencil.

“Ever been here before?” she asked.

“Yes, often.”

“What’s the last name?”

“Leary.”

“Leary.  Leary,”  she  said,  riffling  through  a  box  of  index  cards.  Macon

started filling out the form. Edward was standing upright now and clinging to
Macon’s knees, like a toddler scared of nursery school.

“Whoa,” the girl said.

She frowned at the card she’d pulled.

“Edward?” she said. “On Rayford Road?”

“That’s right.”

“We can’t accept him.”

“What?”

“Says  here  he  bit  an  attendant.  Says,  ‘Bit  Barry  in  the  ankle,  do  not

readmit.’ ”

“Nobody told me that.”

“Well, they should have.”

back and they handed him over.”

The girl blinked at him, expressionless.

“Look,” Macon said. “I’m on my way to the airport, right this minute. I’ve

got a plane to catch.”

“I’m only following orders,” the girl said.

“And  what  set  him  off,  anyhow?”  Macon  asked.  “Did  anyone  think  to

wonder? Maybe Edward had good reason!”

The girl blinked again. Edward had dropped to all fours by now and was

gazing upward with interest, as if following the conversation.

“Ah, the hell with it,” Macon said. “Come on, Edward.”

He  didn’t  have  to  take  hold  of  Edward’s  collar  when  they  left.  Edward

galloped ahead of him all the way across the parking lot.

In  that  short  time,  the  car  had  turned  into  an  oven.  Macon  opened  his

window and sat there with the motor idling. What now? He considered going
to his sister’s, but she probably wouldn’t want Edward either. To tell the truth,
this wasn’t the first time there had been complaints. Last week, for instance,
Macon’s brother Charles had stopped by to borrow a router, and Edward had
darted in a complete circle around his feet, taking furious little nibbles of his
trouser cuffs. Charles was so astonished that he just turned his head slowly,
gaping down. “What’s got into him?” he asked. “He never used to do this.”
Then when Macon grabbed his collar, Edward had snarled. He’d curled his
upper lip and snarled. Could a dog have a nervous breakdown?

Macon wasn’t very familiar with dogs. He preferred cats. He liked the way

cats kept their own counsel. It was only lately that he’d given Edward any
thought at all. Now that he was alone so much he had taken to talking out
loud  to  him,  or  sometimes  he  just  sat  studying  him.  He  admired  Edward’s
intelligent  brown  eyes  and  his  foxy  little  face.  He  appreciated  the  honey-
colored whorls that  radiated  so  symmetrically  from  the  bridge  of  his  nose.
And his walk! Ethan used to say that Edward walked as if he had sand in his
bathing suit. His rear end waddled busily; his stubby legs seemed hinged by
some more primitive mechanism than the legs of taller dogs.

Macon  was  driving  toward  home  now,  for  lack  of  any  better  idea.  He

wondered what would happen if he left Edward in the house the way he left
the cat, with plenty of food and water. No. Or could Sarah come see to him,
two or three times a day? He recoiled from that; it meant asking her. It meant
dialing that number he’d never used and asking her for a favor.

MEOW-BOW ANIMAL HOSPITAL, a sign across the street read. Macon

braked and Edward lurched forward. “Sorry,” Macon told him. He made a left
turn into the parking lot.

The  waiting  room  at  the  Meow-Bow  smelled  strongly  of  disinfectant.

Behind the counter stood a thin young woman in a ruffled peasant blouse. She
had  aggressively  frizzy  black  hair  that  burgeoned  to  her  shoulders  like  an
Arab headdress. “Hi, there,” she said to Macon.

Macon said, “Do you board dogs?”

“Sure.”

“I’d like to board Edward, here.”

She leaned over the counter to look at Edward. Edward panted up at her

cheerfully. It was clear he hadn’t yet realized what kind of place this was.

“You have a reservation?” the woman asked Macon.

“Reservation! No.”

“Most people reserve.”

“Well, I didn’t know that.”

“Especially in the summer.”

“Couldn’t you make an exception?”

She thought it over, frowning down at Edward. Her eyes were very small,

like caraway seeds, and her face was sharp and colorless.

“Please,” Macon said. “I’m about to catch a plane. I’m leaving for a week,

and I don’t have a soul to look after him. I’m desperate, I tell you.”

way. “Can’t you leave him home with your wife?” she asked.

He wondered how on earth her mind worked.

“If I could do that,” he said, “why would I be standing here?”

“Oh,” she said. “You’re not married?”

“Well, I am, but she’s . . . living elsewhere. They don’t allow pets.”

“Oh.”

She  came  out  from  behind  the  counter.  She  was  wearing  very  short  red

shorts; her legs were like sticks. “I’m a divorsy myself,” she said. “I know
what you’re going through.”

“And  see,”  Macon  said,  “there’s  this  place  I  usually  board  him  but they

suddenly claim he bites. Claim he bit an attendant and they can’t admit him
anymore.”

“Edward? Do you bite?” the woman said.

Macon realized he should not have mentioned that, but she seemed to take

it in stride. “How could you do such a thing?” she asked Edward. Edward
grinned up at her and folded his ears back, inviting a pat. She bent and stroked
his head.

“So will you keep him?” Macon said.

“Oh, I guess,” she said, straightening. “If you’re desperate.” She stressed

the word—fixing Macon with those small brown eyes—as if giving it more
weight than he had intended. “Fill this out,” she told him, and she handed him
a form from a stack on the counter. “Your name and address and when you’ll
be back. Don’t forget to put when you’ll be back.”

Macon nodded, uncapping his fountain pen.

“I’ll most likely see you again when you come to pick him up,” she said. “I

mean if you put the time of day to expect you. My name’s Muriel.”

“Is this place open evenings?” Macon asked.

“Every evening but Sundays. Till eight.”

“Oh, good.”

“Muriel Pritchett,” she said.

Macon filled out the form while the woman knelt to unbuckle Edward’s

collar. Edward licked her cheekbone; he must have thought she was just being
friendly. So when Macon had finished, he didn’t say good-bye. He left the
form  on  the  counter  and  walked  out  very  quickly,  keeping  a  hand  in  his
pocket to silence his keys.

On  the  flight  to  New  York,  he  sat  next  to  a  foreign-looking  man  with a

mustache. Clamped to the man’s ears was a headset for one of those miniature
tape recorders. Perfect: no danger of conversation. Macon leaned back in his
seat contentedly.

He approved of planes. When the weather was calm, you couldn’t even tell

you were moving. You could pretend you were sitting safe at home. The view
from the window was always the same—air and more air—and the interior of
the plane was practically interchangeable with the interior of any other.

He accepted nothing from the beverage cart, but the man beside him took

off  his  headset  to  order  a  Bloody  Mary.  A  tinny,  intricate,  Middle Eastern
melody came whispering out of the pink sponge earplugs. Macon stared down
at the little machine and wondered if he should buy one. Not for the music,
heaven knows—there was far too much noise in the world already—but for
insulation. He could plug himself into it and no one would disturb him. He
could play a blank tape: thirty full minutes of silence. Turn the tape over and
play thirty minutes more.

They landed at Kennedy and he took a shuttle bus to his connecting flight,

which wasn’t due to leave till evening. Once settled in the terminal, he began
filling  out  a  crossword  puzzle  that  he’d  saved  for  this  occasion  from  last
Sunday’s New York Times. He sat inside a kind of barricade—his bag on one
chair, his suit coat on another. People milled around him but he kept his eyes
on the page, progressing smoothly to the acrostic as soon as he’d finished the
crossword.  By  the  time  he’d  solved  both  puzzles,  they  were  beginning  to
board the plane.

His seatmate was a gray-haired woman with glasses. She had brought her

own  knitted  afghan.  This  was  not  a  good  sign,  Macon  felt,  but  he  could
handle it. First he bustled about, loosening his tie and taking off his shoes and
removing a book from his bag. Then he opened the book and ostentatiously
started reading.

The name of his book was Miss MacIntosh, My Darling, and it was 1,198

pages long. (Always bring a book, as protection against strangers. Magazines
don’t last. Newspapers from home will make you homesick, and newspapers
from elsewhere will remind you you don’t belong. You know how alien another
paper’s typeface seems.) He’d been lugging around Miss MacIntosh for years.
It had the advantage of being plotless, as far as he could tell, but invariably
interesting, so he could dip into it at random. Any time he raised his eyes, he
was  careful  to  mark  a  paragraph  with  his  finger  and  to  keep  a  bemused
expression on his face.

There  was  the  usual  mellifluous  murmur  from  the  loudspeaker  about

seatbelts,  emergency  exits,  oxygen  masks.  He  wondered  why  stewardesses
accented such unlikely words. “On our flight this evening we will be offering
. . .” The woman next to him asked if he wanted a Lifesaver. “No, thank you,”
Macon  said,  and  he  went  on  with  his  book.  She  rustled  some  little  bit  of
paper, and shortly afterward the smell of spearmint drifted over to him.

He refused a cocktail and he refused a supper tray, although he did accept

the milk that was offered with it. He ate an apple and a little box of raisins
from his bag, drank the milk, and went off to the lavatory to floss and brush
his teeth. When he returned, the plane was darker, dotted here and there with
reading lamps. Some of the passengers were already asleep. His seatmate had
rolled her hair into little O’s and X-ed them over with bobby pins. Macon
found it amazing that people could be so unselfconscious on airplanes. He’d
seen  men  in  whole  suits  of  pajamas;  he’d  seen  women  slathered  in  face
cream. You would think they felt no need to be on guard.

He angled his book beneath a slender shaft of light and turned a page. The

engines had a weary, dogged sound. It was the period he thought of as the
long haul—the gulf between supper and breakfast when they were suspended
over the ocean, waiting for that lightening of the sky that was supposed to be
morning  although,  of  course,  it  was  nowhere  near  morning  back  home.  In
Macon’s opinion, morning in other time zones was like something staged—a
curtain painted with a rising sun, superimposed upon the real dark.

He let his head tip back against the seat and closed his eyes. A stewardess’s

voice,  somewhere  near  the  front  of  the  plane,  threaded  in  and  out  of  the
droning of the engines. “We just sat and sat and there wasn’t a thing to do and
all  we  had  was  the  Wednesday  paper  and  you  know  how  news  just  never
seems to happen on a Wednesday . . .”

Macon  heard  a  man  speaking  levelly  in  his  ear.  “Macon.”  But  he didn’t

even turn his head. By now he knew these tricks of sound on planes at night.
He saw behind his eyelids the soap dish on the kitchen sink at home—another
trick, this concreteness of vision. It was an oval china soap dish painted with
yellow roses, containing a worn-down sliver of soap and Sarah’s rings, her
engagement ring and her wedding band, just as she had left them when she
walked out.

“I got the tickets,” he heard Ethan say. “And they’re opening the doors in

five minutes.”

“All right,” Macon told him, “let’s plan our strategy.”

“Strategy?”

“Where we’re going to sit.”

“Why would we need strategy for that?”

“It’s you who asked to see this movie, Ethan. I would think you’d take an

interest in where you’re sitting. Now, here’s my plan. You go around to that
line on the left. Count the little kids. I’ll count the line on the right.”

“Aw, Dad—”

“Do you want to sit next to some noisy little kid?”

“Well, no.”

“And which do you prefer: an aisle seat?”

“I don’t care.”

“Aisle, Ethan? Or middle of the row? You must have some opinion.”

“Not really.”

“Middle of the row?”

“It doesn’t make any difference.”

“Ethan. It makes a great deal of difference. Aisle, you can get out quicker.

So if you plan to buy a snack or go to the restroom, you’ll want to sit on the
aisle. On the other hand, everyone’ll be squeezing past you there. So if you
don’t think you’ll be leaving your seat, then I suggest—”

“Aw, Dad, for Christ’s sake!” Ethan said.

“Well,” Macon said. “If that’s the tone you’re going to take, we’ll just sit

any damn place we happen to end up.”

“Fine,” Ethan said.

“Fine,” Macon said.

Now he did turn his head; he rocked it from side to side. But he kept his

eyes tightly closed, and in time the voices stopped, and he found himself in
that edgy twilight that passes for sleep when you’re traveling.

At dawn he accepted a cup of coffee, and he swallowed a vitamin pill from

his bag. The other passengers looked frowsy and pale. His seatmate dragged
an entire small suitcase off to the lavatory and returned all combed, but her
face was puffy. Macon believed that travel causes retention of fluids. When he
put  his  shoes  on,  they  felt  too  tight,  and  when  he  went  to  shave  he  found
unfamiliar  pillows  of  flesh  beneath  his  eyes.  He  was  better  off  than  most
people, though, because he hadn’t touched salted food or drunk any alcohol.
Alcohol  was  definitely  retained.  Drink  alcohol  on  a  plane  and  you’d  feel
befuddled for days, Macon believed.

The stewardess announced what time it was in London, and there was a stir

as people reset their watches. Macon adjusted the digital alarm clock in his
shaving kit. The watch on his wrist— which was not digital but real time,
circular—he left as it was.

They landed abruptly. It was like being recalled to the hard facts—all that

friction suddenly, the gritty runway, the roaring and braking. The loudspeaker
came on, purring courteous reminders. The woman next to Macon folded her
afghan. “I’m so excited,” she said. “I’m going to see my grandchild for the
very first time.” Macon smiled and told her he hoped it went well. Now that

he didn’t have to fear being trapped, he found her quite pleasant. Besides, she
was so American-looking.

At  Heathrow,  there  was  the  usual  sense  of  some  recent  disaster.  People

rushed  about  distractedly,  other  people  stood  like  refugees  surrounded  by
trunks  and  parcels,  and  uniformed  authorities  were  trying  to  deal  with  a
clamor  of  questions.  Since  he  didn’t  have  to  wait  for  his  luggage,  Macon
sailed through the red tape far ahead of the others. Then he exchanged his
currency and boarded the Underground. I  recommend  the  Underground  for
everyone except those afraid of heights, and even for them if they will avoid
the following stations, which have exceptionally steep escalators . . .

While the train racketed along, he sorted his currency into envelopes that

he’d  brought  from  home—each  envelope  clearly  marked  with  a  different
denomination. (No fumbling with unfamiliarcoins, no peering at misleading
imprints,  if  you  separate  and  classifyforeign  money  ahead  of  time.)  Across
from him a row of faces watched. People looked different here, although he
couldn’t say just how.  He  thought  they  were  both  finer  and  unhealthier.  A
woman with a fretful baby kept saying, “Hush now, love. Hush now, love,” in
that clear, floating, effortless English voice. It was hot, and her forehead had a
pallid shine. So did Macon’s, no doubt. He slid the envelopes into his breast
pocket. The train stopped and more people got on. They stood above him,
clinging not to straps but to bulbs attached to flexible sticks, which Macon on
his first visit had taken for some kind of microphone.

He was based in London, as usual. From there he would make brief forays

into  other  cities,  never  listing  more  than  a  handful  of  hotels,  a  handful  of
restaurants  within  a  tiny,  easily  accessible  radius  in  each  place;  for  his
guidebooks were anything but all-inclusive. (“Plenty of other books say how
to see as much of the city as possible,” his boss had told him. “You should say
how to see as little.”) The name of Macon’s hotel was the Jones Terrace. He
would have preferred one of the American chain hotels, but those cost too
much.  The  Jones  Terrace  was  all  right,  though—small  and  well  kept.  He
swung into action at once to make his room his own, stripping off the ugly
bedspread and stuffing it into a closet, unpacking his belongings and hiding
his bag. He changed clothes, rinsed the ones he’d worn and hung them in the
shower stall. Then, after a wistful glance at the bed, he went out for breakfast.
It  was  nowhere  near  morning  back  home,  but  breakfast  was  the  meal  that
businessmen most often had to manage for themselves. He made a point of
researching it thoroughly wherever he went.

He walked to the Yankee Delight, where he ordered scrambled eggs and

coffee. The service here was excellent. Coffee came at once, and his cup was
kept constantly filled. The eggs didn’t taste like eggs at home, but then, they
never  did.  What  was  it  about  restaurant  eggs?  They  had  no  character,  no
backbone. Still, he opened  his  guidebook  and  put  a  checkmark  next  to  the
Yankee Delight. By the end of the week, these pages would be barely legible.
He’d  have  scratched  out  some  names,  inserted  others,  and  scrawled  notes
across  the  margins.  He  always  revisited  past  entries—every  hotel  and
restaurant. It was tedious but his boss insisted. “Just think how it would look,”
Julian said, “if a reader walked into some café you’d recommended and found
it taken over by vegetarians.”

When  he’d  paid  his  bill,  he  went  down  the  street  to  the  New  America,

where he ordered more eggs and more coffee. “Decaffeinated,” he added. (He
was  a  jangle  of  nerves  by  now.)  The  waiter  said  they  didn’t  have
decaffeinated. “Oh, you don’t,” Macon said. After the waiter had left, Macon
made a note in his guidebook.

His third stop was a restaurant called the U.S. Open, where the sausages

were so dry that they might have been baked on a rooftop. It figured: The
U.S. Open had been recommended by a reader. Oh, the places that readers
wrote in to suggest! Macon had once (before he’d grown wiser) reserved a
motel  room  purely  on  the  strength  of  such  a  suggestion—somewhere  in
Detroit  or  was  it  Pittsburgh,  some  city  or  other,  for  Accidental  Tourist  in
America. He had checked out again at first sight of the linens and fled across
the street to a Hilton, where the doorman had rushed to meet him and seized
his bag with a cry of pity as if Macon had just staggered in from the desert.
Never again, Macon had vowed. He left the sausages on his plate and called
for his bill.

In  the  afternoon  (so  to  speak),  he  visited  hotels.  He  spoke  with  various

managers and inspected sample rooms where he tested the beds, flushed the
toilets, squinted at the showerheads. Most were maintaining their standards,
more or less, but something had happened to the Royal Prince. The fact was
that  it  seemed  .  .  .  well,  foreign.  Dark,  handsome  men  in  slim  silk  suits
murmured in the lobby while little brown children chased each other around
the spittoons. Macon had the feeling he’d got even more hopelessly lost than
usual and ended up in Cairo. Cone-shaped ladies in long black veils packed
the revolving doors, spinning in from the street with shopping bags full of . . .
what? He tried to imagine their purchasing stone-washed denim shorts and

thigh-high  boots  of  pink  mesh—the  merchandise  he’d  seen  in  most  shop
windows. “Er . . .” he said to the manager. How to put this? He hated to sound
narrow-minded,  but  his  readers  did  avoid  the  exotic.  “Has  the  hotel,  ah,
changed ownership?” he asked. The manager seemed unusually sensitive. He
drew  himself  up  and  said  the  Royal  Prince  was  owned  by  a  corporation,
always had been and always would be, always the same corporation. “I see,”
Macon said. He left feeling dislocated.

At  suppertime,  he  should  have  tried  someplace  formal.  He  had  to list at

least one formal restaurant in every city for entertaining clients. But tonight
he wasn’t up to it. Instead, he went to a café he liked called My American
Cousin. The diners there had American accents, and so did some of the staff,
and the hostess handed out tickets at the door with numbers on them. If your
number was called on the loudspeaker you could win a free TV, or at least a
framed color print of the restaurant.

Macon  ordered  a  comforting  supper  of  plain  boiled  vegetables  and  two

lamb chops in white paper bobby socks, along with a glass of milk. The man
at the next table was also on his own. He was eating a nice pork pie, and when
the waitress offered him dessert he said, “Oh, now, let me see, maybe I will
try  some  at  that,”  in  the  slow,  pleased,  coax-me  drawl  of  someone  whose
womenfolks have all his life encouraged him to put a little meat on his bones.
Macon himself had the gingerbread. It came with cream, just the way it used
to at his grandmother’s house.

By eight o’clock, according to his wristwatch, he was in bed. It was much

too  early,  of  course,  but  he  could  stretch  the  day  only  so  far;  the  English
thought  it  was  midnight.  Tomorrow  he  would  start  his  whirlwind  dashes
through other cities. He’d pick out a few token hotels, sample a few token
breakfasts.  Coffee  with  caffeine  and  coffee  without  caffeine.  Bacon
underdone  and  overdone.  Orange  juice  fresh  and  canned  and  frozen.  More
showerheads,  more  mattresses.  Hair  dryers  supplied  on  request?  110-volt
switches  for  electric  shavers?  When  he  fell  asleep,  he  thought  anonymous
rooms were revolving past on a merry-go-round. He thought webbed canvas
suitcase  stands,  ceiling  sprinklers,  and  laminated  lists  of  fire  regulations
approached and slid away and approached again, over and over all the rest of
his  days.  He  thought  Ethan  was  riding  a  plaster  camel  and  calling,  “Catch
me!” and falling, but Macon couldn’t get there in time and when he reached
his arms out, Ethan was gone.

It was one of Macon’s bad habits to start itching to go home too early. No

matter how short a stay he’d planned, partway through he would decide that
he  ought  to  leave,  that  he’d  allowed  himself  far  too  much  time,  that
everything  truly  necessary  had  already  been  accomplished—or  almost
everything, almost accomplished. Then the rest of his visit was spent in phone
calls to travel agents and fruitless trips to airline offices and standby waits that
came to nothing, so that he was forced to return to the hotel he’d just checked
out of. He always promised himself this wouldn’t happen again, but somehow
it always did. In England, it happened on his fourth afternoon. What more
was there to do? he started wondering. Hadn’t he got the gist of the place?

Well, be honest: It was Saturday. He chanced to notice, entering the date in

his  expense  book,  that  at  home  it  was  Saturday  morning.  Sarah  would  be
stopping by the house for the rug.

She would open the front door and smell home. She would pass through the

rooms where she’d been so happy all these years. (Hadn’t she been happy?)
She would find the cat stretched out on the couch, long and lazy and languid,
and she’d settle on the cushion next to her and think, How could I have left?

Unfortunately, it was summer, and the airlines were overbooked. He spent

two days tracking down faint possibilities that evaporated the instant he drew
close. “Anything! Get me anything! I don’t have to go to New York; I’ll go to
Dulles. I’ll go to Montreal! Chicago! Shoot, I’ll go to Paris or Berlin and see
if  they  have  flights.  Are  there  ships?  How  long  do  ships  take,  nowadays?
What  if  this  were  an  emergency?  I  mean  my  mother  on  her  deathbed  or
something? Are you saying there’s just no way out of this place?”

The people he dealt with were unfailingly courteous and full of chirpy good

humor—really,  if  not  for  the  strain  of  travel  he  believed  he  might  actually
have liked the English—but they couldn’t solve his problem. In the end he
had to stay on. He spent the rest of the week huddled in his room watching
TV, chewing a knuckle, subsisting on nonperishable groceries and lukewarm
soft drinks because he couldn’t face another restaurant.

So he was first in line, naturally, at the check-in counter on the day of his

departure. He had his pick of seats: window, nonsmoking. Next to him was a
very young couple completely absorbed in each other, so he didn’t need Miss
MacIntosh but sat staring out at the clouds all the long, dull afternoon.

Afternoon  was  never  his  favorite  time;  that  was  the  worst  of  these

homeward flights. It was afternoon for hours and hours, through drinks and

lunch and drinks again—all of which he waved away. It was afternoon when
they  showed  the  movie;  the  passengers  had  to  pull  their  shades  down.  An
orange light filled the plane, burdensome and thick.

Once when he’d been away on an unusually difficult trip—to Japan, where

you couldn’t even memorize the signs in order to find your way back to a
place—Sarah  had  met  his  plane  in  New  York.  It  was  their  fifteenth
anniversary  and  she  had  wanted  to  surprise  him.  She  called  Becky  at  the
travel agency to ask his flight number and then she left Ethan with her mother
and flew to Kennedy, bringing with her a picnic hamper of wine and cheeses
which they shared in the terminal while waiting for their plane home. Every
detail of that meal remained in Macon’s memory: the cheeses set out on a
marble slab, the wine in stemmed crystal glasses that had somehow survived
the trip. He could still taste the satiny Brie. He could still see Sarah’s small,
shapely hand resolutely slicing the bread.

But she didn’t meet him in New York today.

She didn’t even meet him in Baltimore.

He  collected  his  car  from  the  lot  and  drove  into  the  city  through  a

glowering  twilight  that  seemed  to  promise  something—a  thunder-storm  or
heat  lightning,  something  dramatic.  Could  she  be  waiting  at  home?  In  her
striped caftan that he was so fond of? With a cool summer supper laid out on
the patio table?

Careful not to take anything for granted, he stopped at a Seven-Eleven for

milk. He drove to the vet’s to pick up Edward. He arrived at the Meow-Bow
minutes before closing time; somehow, he’d managed to lose his way. There
was  no  one  at  the  counter.  He  had  to  ring  the  service  bell.  A  girl  with  a
ponytail poked her head through a door, letting in a jumble of animal sounds
that rose at all different pitches like an orchestra tuning up. “Yes?” she said.

“I’m here for my dog.”

She  came  forward  to  open  a  folder  that  lay  on  the  counter.  “Your  last

name?”

“Leary.”

“Oh,” she said. “Just a minute.”

Macon wondered what Edward had done wrong this time.

one. This evening she wore a V-necked black dress splashed with big pink
flowers,  its  shoulders  padded  and  its  skirt  too  skimpy;  and  preposterously
high-heeled sandals. “Well, hi there!” she said brightly. “How was your trip?”

“Oh, it was . . . where’s Edward? Isn’t he all right?”

“Sure, he’s all right. He was so good and sweet and friendly!”

“Well, fine,” Macon said.

“We just got on like a house afire. Seems he took a shine to me, I couldn’t

say why.”

“Wonderful,”  Macon  said.  He  cleared  his  throat.  “So  could  I  have  him

back, please?”

“Caroline will bring him.”

“Ah.”

There was a silence. The woman waited, facing him and wearing a perky

smile, with her fingers laced together on the counter. She had painted her nails
dark red, Macon saw, and put on a blackish lipstick that showed her mouth to
be an unusually complicated shape—angular, like certain kinds of apples.

“Um,” Macon said finally. “Maybe I could pay.”

“Oh, yes.”

She stopped smiling and peered down at the open folder. “That’ll be forty-

two dollars,” she said.

Macon  gave  her  a  credit  card.  She  had  trouble  working  the  embossing

machine; everything had to be done with the flats of her hands, to spare her
nails. She filled in the blanks in a jerky scrawl and then turned the bill in his
direction.  “Signature  and  phone,”  she  said.  She  leaned  over  the  counter  to
watch what he wrote. “Is that your home phone, or your business?”

“It’s both. Why? What difference does it make?” he asked.

fingered style of hers, and put the rest of the bill in a drawer. “I don’t know if
I mentioned before that it so happens I train dogs.”

“Is that right,” Macon said.

He looked toward the door where the first girl had disappeared. It always

made him nervous when they took too long bringing Edward. What were they
doing back there—getting rid of some evidence?

“My speciality is dogs that bite,” the woman said.

“Specialty.”

“Pardon?”

“Webster prefers ‘specialty.’ ”

She gave him a blank look.

“That must be a dangerous job,” Macon said politely.

“Oh, not for me! I’m not scared of a thing in this world.”

There was a scuffling sound at the door behind her. Edward burst through,

followed by the girl with the ponytail. Edward was giving sharp yelps and
flinging  himself  about  so  joyfully  that  when  Macon  bent  to  pat  him,  he
couldn’t really connect.

“Now, stop that,” the girl told Edward. She was trying to buckle his collar.

Meanwhile, the woman behind the counter was saying, “Biters, barkers, deaf
dogs, timid dogs, dogs that haven’t been treated right, dogs that have learned
bad habits, dogs that grew up in pet shops and don’t trust human beings . . . I
can handle all of those.”

“Well, good,” Macon said.

“Not that he would bite me, of course,” the woman said. “He just fell in

love with me, like I think I was telling you.”

“I’m glad to hear it,” Macon said.

“But I could train him in no time not to bite other people. You think it over

and call me. Muriel, remember? Muriel Pritchett. Let me give you my card.”

She  handed  him  a  salmon-pink  business  card  that  she  seemed  to  have

pulled out of nowhere. He had to fight his way around Edward to accept it. “I
studied with a man who used to train attack dogs,” she said. “This is not some
amateur you’re looking at.”

“Well, I’ll bear that in mind,” Macon said. “Thank you very much.”

“Or just call for no reason! Call and talk.”

“Talk?”

“Sure! Talk about Edward, his problems, talk about . . . anything! Pick up

the phone and just talk. Don’t you ever get the urge to do that?”

“Not really,” Macon said.

Then Edward gave a particularly piercing yelp, and the two of them rushed

home.

Well, of course she wasn’t there. He knew it the instant he stepped inside

the house, when he smelled that stale hot air and heard the muffled denseness
of a place with every window shut. Really he’d known it all along. He’d been
fooling himself. He’d been making up fairy tales.

The cat streaked past him and escaped out the door, yowling accusingly.

The dog hurtled into the dining room to roll about on the rug and get rid of the
scent of the kennel. But there was no rug—only bare, linty floor, and Edward
stopped short, looking foolish. Macon knew just how he felt.

He  put  away  the  milk  and  went  upstairs  to  unpack.  He  took  a  shower,

treading  the  day’s  dirty  clothes  underfoot,  and  prepared  for  bed.  When  he
turned off the light in the bathroom, the sight of his laundry dripping over the
tub reminded him of travel. Where was the real difference? Accidental Tourist
at Home, he thought, and he slid wearily into his body bag.

four

When the phone rang, Macon dreamed it was Ethan. He dreamed Ethan

was calling from camp, wondering why they’d never come to get him. “But
we thought you were dead,” Macon said, and Ethan said—in that clear voice
of  his  that  cracked  on  the  high  notes—“Why  would  you  think  that?” The
phone rang again and Macon woke up. There was a thud of disappointment
somewhere inside his rib cage. He understood why people said hearts “sank.”

In slow motion, he reached for the receiver. “Yes,” he said.

“Macon! Welcome back!”

It was Julian Edge, Macon’s boss, his usual loud and sprightly self even

this early in the morning. “Oh,” Macon said.

“How was the trip?”

“It was okay.”

“You just get in last night?”

“Yes.”

“Find any super new places?”

“Well, ‘super’ would be putting it a bit strongly.”

“So now I guess you start writing it up.”

Macon said nothing.

“Just when do you figure to bring me a manuscript?” Julian asked.

“I don’t know,” Macon said.

“Soon, do you figure?”

“I don’t know.”

There was a pause.

“I guess I woke you,” Julian said.

“Yes.”

“Macon  Leary  in  bed,”  Julian  said.  He  made  it  sound  like  the  title  of

something.  Julian  was  younger  than  Macon  and  brasher,  breezier,  not  a
serious man. He seemed to enjoy pretending that Macon was some kind of
character. “So anyway, can I expect it by the end of the month?”

“No,” Macon said.

“Why not?”

“I’m not organized.”

“Not organized! What’s to organize? All you have to do is retype your old

one, basically.”

“There’s a lot more to it than that,” Macon said.

“Look. Fellow. Here it is—” Julian’s voice grew fainter. He’d be drawing

back to frown at his flashy gold calendar watch with the perforated leather
racing band. “Here it is the third of August. I want this thing on the stands by
October. That means I’d need your manuscript by August thirty-first.”

“I can’t do it,” Macon said.

In fact, it amazed him he’d found the strength to carry on this conversation.

“August thirty-first, Macon. That’s four full weeks away.”

“It’s not enough,” Macon said.

“Not enough,” Julian said. “Well. All right, then: mid-September. It’s going

to  knock  a  good  many  things  out  of  whack,  but  I’ll  give  you  till  mid-
September. How’s that?”

“I don’t know,” Macon said.

The  dullness  of  his  voice  interested  him.  He  felt  strangely  distant  from

himself. Julian might have sensed this, for after another pause he said, “Hey.
Pal. Are you okay?”

“I’m fine,” Macon told him.

“I know you’ve been through a lot, pal—”

“I’m  fine!  Just  fine!  What  could  be  wrong?  All  I  need  is  time  to  get

organized. I’ll have the manuscript in by September fifteenth. Possibly earlier.
Yes, very possibly earlier. Maybe the end of August. All right?”

Then he hung up.

But his study was so dim and close, and it gave off the salty, inky smell of

mental fidgeting. He walked in and felt overwhelmed by his task, as if finally
chaos had triumphed. He turned around and walked out again.

Maybe  he  couldn’t  get  his  guidebook  organized,  but  organizing  the

household was another matter entirely. There was something fulfilling about
that, something consoling—or more than consoling; it gave him the sense of
warding off a danger. Over the next week or so, he traveled through the rooms
setting  up  new  systems.  He  radically  rearranged  all  the  kitchen  cupboards,
tossing out the little bits of things in sticky, dusty bottles that Sarah hadn’t
opened  in  years.  He  plugged  the  vacuum  cleaner  into  a  hundred-foot
extension cord originally meant for lawn mowers. He went out to the yard and
weeded,  trimmed,  pruned,  clipped—stripping  down,  he  pictured  it.  Up  till
now  Sarah  had  done  the  gardening,  and  certain  features  of  it  came  as  a
surprise to him. One variety of weed shot off seeds explosively the instant he
touched it, a magnificent last-ditch stand, while others gave way so easily—
too easily, breaking at the topmost joint so their roots remained in the ground.
Such tenacity! Such genius for survival! Why couldn’t human beings do as
well?

He stretched a clothesline across the basement so he wouldn’t have to use

the dryer. Dryers were a terrible waste of energy. Then he disconnected the
dryer’s  wide  flexible  exhaust  tube,  and  he  taught  the  cat  to  go  in  and  out
through  the  empty  windowpane  where  the  tube  had  exited.  This  meant  no
more litterbox. Several times a day the cat leapt soundlessly to the laundry
sink,  stood  up  long  and  sinewy  on  her  hind  legs,  and  sprang  through  the
window.

It  was  a  pity  Edward  couldn’t  do  the  same.  Macon  hated  walking  him;

Edward  had  never  been  trained  to  heel  and  kept  winding  his  leash  around
Macon’s legs. Oh, dogs were so much trouble. Dogs ate mammoth amounts of
food,  too;  Edward’s  kibble  had  to  be  lugged  home  from  the  supermarket,
dragged  out  of  the  car  trunk  and  up  the  steep  front  steps  and  through  the
house to the pantry. But for that, at least, Macon finally thought of a solution.
At the foot of the old coal chute in the basement he set a plastic trash can,
with a square cut out of the bottom. Then he poured the remainder of a sack
of kibble into the trash can, which magically became a continuous feeder like
the cat’s. Next time he bought dog food, he could just drive around to the side
of the house and send it rattling down the coal chute.

The only hitch was, Edward turned out to be scared of the basement. Every

morning he went to the pantry where his breakfast used to be served, and he
sat on his fat little haunches and whimpered. Macon had to carry him bodily
down the basement stairs, staggering slightly while Edward scrabbled in his
arms. Since the whole idea had been to spare Macon’s trick back, he felt he’d
defeated his purpose. Still, he kept trying.

Also  with  his  back  in  mind,  he  tied  the  clothes  basket  to  Ethan’s  old

skateboard and he dropped a drawstring bag down the laundry chute at the
end of a rope. This meant he never had to carry the laundry either up or down
the  stairs,  or  even  across  the  basement.  Sometimes,  though—laboriously
scooting the wheeled basket from the clothesline to the laundry chute, stuffing
clean sheets into the bag, running upstairs to haul them in by the long, stiff
rope— Macon felt a twinge of embarrassment. Was it possible that this might
be sort of silly?

Well, everything was silly, when you got right down to it.

The  neighborhood  must  have  learned  by  now  that  Sarah  had  left  him.

People started telephoning on ordinary weeknights and inviting him to take
“potluck”  with  them.  Macon  thought  at  first  they  meant  one  of  those
arrangements  where  everybody  brings  a  different  pot  of  something  and  if
you’re lucky you end up with a balanced meal. He arrived at Bob and Sue
Carney’s  with  a  bowl  of  macaroni  and  cheese.  Since  Sue  was  serving
spaghetti, he didn’t feel he’d been all that lucky. She set his macaroni at one
end of the table  and  no  one  ate  it  but  Delilah,  the  three-year-old.  She  had
several helpings, though.

Macon hadn’t expected to find the children at the table. He saw he was

somebody different now, some kind of bachelor uncle who was assumed to
need  a  glimpse  of  family  life  from  time  to  time.  But  the  fact  was,  he  had
never  much  liked  other  people’s  children.  And  gatherings  of  any  sort
depressed  him.  Physical  contact  with  people  not  related  to  him—an  arm
around  his  shoulder,  a  hand  on  his  sleeve—made  him  draw  inward  like  a
snail. “You know, Macon,” Sue Carney said, leaning across the table to pat his
wrist, “whenever you get the urge, you’re welcome to drop in on us. Don’t
wait for an invitation.”

“That’s nice of you, Sue,” he said. He wondered why it was that outsiders’

skin  felt  so  unreal—almost  waxy,  as  if  there  were  an  invisible  extra  layer
between him and them. As soon as possible, he moved his wrist.

“If  you  could  live  any  way  you  wanted,”  Sarah  had  once  told  him,  “I

suppose you’d end up on a desert island with no other human beings.”

“Why! That’s not true at all,” he’d said. “I’d have you, and Ethan, and my

sister and brothers . . .”

“But  no  people.  I  mean,  people  there  just  by  chance,  people  you didn’t

know.”

“Well, no, I guess not,” he’d said. “Would you?”

But of course she would—back then. Back before Ethan died. She’d always

been a social person. When there was nothing else to do she’d stroll happily
through a shopping mall—Macon’s notion of hell, with all those strangers’
shoulders brushing his. Sarah thought crowds were exciting. She liked to meet
new people. She was fond of parties, even cocktail parties. You’d have to be
crazy to like cocktail parties, Macon thought—those scenes of confusion she
used to drag him to, where he was made to feel guilty if he managed by some
fluke to get involved in a conversation of any depth. “Circulate. Circulate,”
Sarah would hiss, passing behind him with her drink.

That had changed during this past year. Sarah didn’t like crowds anymore.

She never went near a mall, hadn’t made him go to any parties. They attended
only quiet little dinners and she herself had not given a dinner since Ethan
died. He’d asked her once, “Shouldn’t we have the Smiths and Millards over?
They’ve had us so often.”

Sarah said, “Yes. You’re right. Pretty soon.” And then did nothing about it.

of those mixer things, combining their two schools. Even at that age Macon
had disliked parties, but he was secretly longing to fall in love and so he had
braved  this  mixer  but  then  stood  off  in  a  corner  looking  unconcerned,  he
hoped, and sipping his ginger ale. It was 1958. The rest of the world was in
button-down shirts, but Macon wore a black turtleneck sweater, black slacks,
and sandals. (He was passing through his poet stage.) And Sarah, a bubbly
girl with a tumble of copper-brown curls and a round face, large blue eyes, a
plump lower lip—she wore something pink, he remembered, that made her
skin look radiant. She was ringed by admiring boys. She was short and tidily
made,  and  there  was  something  plucky  about  the  way  her  little  tan  calves
were so firmly braced, as if she were determined that this looming flock of
basketball stars and football stars would not bowl her over. Macon gave up on
her at once. No, not even that—he didn’t even consider her, not for a single
second, but gazed beyond her to other, more attainable girls. So it had to be
Sarah who made the first move. She came over to him and asked what he was
acting so stuck-up about. “Stuck-up!” he said. “I’m not stuck-up.”

“You sure do look it.”

“No, I’m just . . . bored,” he told her.

“Well, so do you want to dance, or not?”

They danced. He was so unprepared that it passed in a blur. He enjoyed it

only later, back home, where he could think it over in a calmer state of mind.
And  thinking  it  over,  he  saw  that  if  he  hadn’t  looked  stuck-up  she  never
would have noticed him. He was the only boy who had not openly pursued
her. He would be wise not to pursue her in the future; not to seem too eager,
not to show his feelings. With Sarah you had to keep your dignity, he sensed.

Lord knows, though, keeping his dignity wasn’t easy. Macon lived with his

grandparents, and they believed that no one under eighteen ought to have a
driver’s  license.  (Never  mind  if  the  state  of  Maryland  felt  otherwise.)  So
Grandfather Leary drove Macon and Sarah on their dates. His car was a long
black Buick with a velvety gray backseat on which Macon sat all by himself,
for  his  grandfather  considered  it  unseemly  for  the  two  of  them  to  sit  there
together. “I am not your hired chauffeur,” he said, “and besides, the backseat
has connotations.” (Much of Macon’s youth was ruled by connotations.) So
Macon sat alone in back and Sarah sat up front with Grandfather Leary. Her
cloud of hair, seen against the glare of oncoming headlights, reminded Macon

of a burning bush. He would lean forward, clear his throat, and ask, “Um, did
you finish your term paper?”

Sarah would say, “Pardon?”

“Term  paper,”  Grandfather  Leary  would  tell  her.  “Boy  wants  to  know if

you finished it.”

“Oh. Yes, I finished it.”

“She finished it,” Grandfather Leary relayed to Macon.

“I do have ears, Grandfather.”

“You  want  to  get  out  and  walk?  Because  I  don’t  have  to  stand  for any

mouthing off. I could be home with my loved ones, not motoring around in
the dark.”

“Sorry, Grandfather.”

Macon’s only hope was silence. He sat back, still and aloof, knowing that

when Sarah looked she’d see nothing but a gleam of blond hair and a blank
face—the  rest  darkness,  his  black  turtleneck  blending  into  the  shadows.  It
worked. “What do you think about all the time?” she asked in his ear as they
two-stepped around her school gym. He only quirked a corner of his mouth,
as if amused, and didn’t answer.

Things  weren’t  much  different  when  he  got  his  license.  Things  weren’t

much different when he went away to college, though he did give up his black
turtlenecks and turn into a Princeton man, crisply, casually attired in white
shirts and khakis. Separated from Sarah, he felt a constant hollowness, but in
his letters he talked only about his studies. Sarah, home at Goucher, wrote
back, Don’t you miss me a little? I can’t go anywhere we’ve been for fear I’ll
see you looking so mysterious across the room. She signed her letters I love
you and he signed his Fondly . At night he dreamed she lay next to him, her
curls making a whispery sound against his pillow, although all they’d done in
real life was a lengthy amount of kissing. He wasn’t sure, to tell the truth, that
he could manage much more without . . . how did they put it in those days?
Losing his cool. Sometimes, he was almost angry with Sarah. He felt he’d
been backed  into  a  false  position.  He  was  forced  to  present  this  impassive
front if he wanted her to love him. Oh, so much was expected of men!

She  wrote  she  wasn’t  dating  other  people.  Neither  was  Macon,  but  of

course  he  didn’t  say  so.  He  came  home  in  the  summer  and  worked  at  his
grandfather’s  factory;  Sarah  worked  on  a  tan  at  the  neighborhood  pool.
Halfway through that summer, she said she wondered why he’d never asked
to sleep with her. Macon thought about that and then said, levelly, that in fact
he’d like to ask her now. They went to her parents’ house; her parents were
vacationing in  Rehoboth.  They  climbed  the  stairs  to  her  little  bedroom,  all
white ruffles and hot sunlight baking the smell of fresh paint. “Did you bring
a  whatchamacallit?”  Sarah  asked,  and  Macon,  unwilling  to  admit  that  he
hardly  knew  what  one  looked  like,  barked,  “No,  I  didn’t  bring  a
whatchamacallit,  who  do  you  think  I  am?”—a  senseless  question,  if  you
stopped to examine it, but Sarah took it to mean that he was shocked by her,
that he thought her too forward, and she said, “Well, excuse me for living!”
and ran down the stairs and out of the house. It took him half an hour to find
her, and longer than that to make her stop crying. Really, he said, he’d only
been thinking of her welfare: In his experience, whatchamacallits weren’t all
that safe. He tried to sound knowledgeable and immune to passions of the
moment.  He  suggested  she  visit  a  doctor  he  knew—it  happened  to  be  the
doctor  who  treated  his  grandmother’s  Female  Complaint.  Sarah  dried  her
tears and borrowed Macon’s pen to write the doctor’s name on the back of a
chewing  gum  wrapper.  But  wouldn’t  the  doctor  refuse  her?  she  asked.
Wouldn’t he say she ought to be at least engaged? Well, all right, Macon said,
they would get engaged. Sarah said that would be lovely.

Their engagement lasted three years, all through college. Grandfather Leary

felt the wedding should be delayed even further, till Macon was firmly settled
in  his  place  of  employment;  but  since  his  place  of  employment  would  be
Leary  Metals,  which  manufactured  cork-lined  caps  for  soft  drink  bottles,
Macon couldn’t see himself concentrating on that even briefly. Besides, the
rush to and from Sarah’s bedroom on her mother’s Red Cross days had begun
to tell on them both.

So they married the spring they graduated from college, and Macon went to

work  at  the  factory  while  Sarah  taught  English  at  a  private  school.  It  was
seven years before Ethan was born. By that time, Sarah was no longer calling
Macon “mysterious.” When he was quiet now it seemed to annoy her. Macon
sensed this, but there was nothing he could do about it. In some odd way, he
was locked  inside  the  standoffish  self  he’d  assumed  when  he  and  she  first
met. He was frozen there. It was like that old warning of his grandmother’s:
Don’t cross your eyes, they might get stuck that way. No matter how he tried

to  change  his  manner,  Sarah  continued  to  deal  with  him  as  if  he  were
someone unnaturally cool-headed, someone more even in temperament than
she but perhaps not quite as feeling.

He had once come upon a questionnaire that she’d filled out in a ladies’

magazine—one of those “How Happy Is Your Marriage?” things—and where
it  said,  I  believe  I  love  my  spouse  more  than  he/she  loves  me,  Sarah  had
checked True. The unsettling part was that after Macon gave his automatic
little snort of denial, he had wondered if it might be true after all. Somehow,
his role had sunk all the way through to the heart. Even internally, by now, he
was a fairly chilly man, and if you didn’t count his son (who was easy, easy; a
child is no test at all), there was not one person in his life whom he really
agonized over.

When he thought about this now, it was a relief to remind himself that he

did  miss  Sarah,  after  all.  But  then  his  relief  seemed  unfeeling  too,  and  he
groaned and shook his head and tugged his hair in great handfuls.

Some woman phoned and said, “Macon?” He could tell at once it wasn’t

Sarah. Sarah’s voice was light and breathy; this one was rough, tough, wiry.
“It’s Muriel,” she said.

“Muriel,” he said.

“Muriel Pritchett.”

“Ah, yes,” he said, but he still had no clue who she was.

“From the vet’s?” she asked. “Who got on so good with your dog?”

“Oh, the vet’s!”

He saw her, if dimly. He saw her saying her own name, the long u sound

and the p drawing up her dark red mouth.

“I was just wondering how Edward was.”

Macon glanced over at Edward. The two of them were in the study, where

Macon had managed to type half a page. Edward lay flat on his stomach with
his legs straight out behind him—short, pudgy legs like the drumsticks of a
dressed Long Island duckling. “He looks all right to me,” Macon said.

“I mean, is he biting?”

“Well, not lately, but he’s developed this new symptom. He gets angry if I

leave the house. He starts barking and showing his teeth.”

“I still think he ought to be trained.”

“Oh, you know, he’s four and a half and I suppose—”

“That’s not too old! I could do it in no time. Tell you what, maybe I could

just come around and discuss it. You and me could have a drink or something
and talk about what his problems are.”

“Well, I really don’t think—”

“Or you could come to my place. I’d fix you supper.”

Macon  wondered  how  it  would  help  Edward  to  be  dragged  to  supper at

some stranger’s house.

“Macon? What do you say?” she asked.

“Oh, why, um . . . I think for now I’ll just try to manage on my own.”

“Well, I can understand that,” she said. “Believe me. I’ve been through that

stage. So what I’ll do is, I’ll wait for you to get in touch. You do still have my
card, don’t you?”

Macon said he did, although he had no idea where it had got to.

“I don’t want to be pushy!” she said.

“No,  well  .  .  .”  Macon  said.  Then  he  hung  up  and  went  back  to  his

guidebook.

He was still on the introduction, and it was already the end of August. How

would he meet his deadline? The back of the desk chair hit his spine in just
the wrong place. The s key kept sticking. The typewriter tapped out audible
words.  “Inimitable,”  it  said.  His  typing  sounded  just  like  Sarah  saying
“inimitable.” “You in your inimitable way . . .” she told him. He gave a quick
shake of his head. Generally food in England is not as jarring as in other
foreign countries. Nice cooked vegetables, things in white sauce, pudding for

dessert . . . I don’t know why some travelers complain about Englishfood.

In September, he decided to alter his system of dressing. If he wore sweat

suits at home—the zipper-free kind, nothing to scratch or bind him—he could
go  from  one  shower  to  the  next  without  changing  clothes.  The  sweat  suit
would serve as both pajamas and day wear.

bed  he  enjoyed  the  feel  of  it,  and  he  liked  not  having  to  dress  the  next
morning. In fact, it occurred to him that he might as well wear the same outfit
two days in a row; skip his shower on alternate evenings. Talk about saving
energy! In the morning all he had to do was shave. He wondered if he ought
to grow a beard.

Around noon of the second day, though, he started feeling a little low. He

was sitting at his typewriter and something made him notice his posture—
stooped and sloppy. He blamed the sweat suit. He rose and went to the full-
length mirror in the hall. His reflection reminded him of a patient in a mental
hospital. Part of the trouble, perhaps, was his shoes—regular black tie shoes
intended for dressier clothes. Should he buy sneakers? But he would hate to
be mistaken for a jogger. He noticed that without a belt around his waist, he
tended to let his stomach stick out. He stood up straighter. That evening when
it was time to wash the first sweat suit, he used extra-hot water to shrink out
some of the bagginess.

He felt much worse in the morning. It had been a warm night and he woke

up sticky and cross. He couldn’t face the thought of popcorn for breakfast. He
laundered  a  load  of  sheets  and  then,  in  the  midst  of  hanging  them,  found
himself standing motionless with his head bowed, both wrists dangling over
the clothesline as if he himself  had  been  pinned  there.  “Buck  up,”  he  said
aloud. His voice sounded creaky, out of practice.

This  was  his  day  for  grocery  shopping—Tuesday,  when  the  supermarket

was least crowded with other human beings. But somehow, he couldn’t bring
himself to get going. He dreaded all that business with the address books, the
three tabbed books he shopped with. (One held data from Consumer Reports
—the  top-rated  brand  of  bread,  for  instance,  listed  under  B.  In  another  he
noted prices, and in the third he filed his coupons.) He kept having to stop and
riffle  through  them,  muttering  prices  under  his  breath,  comparing  house
brands to cents-off name brands. Oh, everything seemed so complicated. Why
bother? Why eat at all, in fact?

Helen was completely out of cat food.

He  did  something  he’d  never  done  before.  He  telephoned  The  Market

Basket, a small, expensive grocery that delivered. And he didn’t order just
emergency rations. No, he called in the whole week’s list. “Shall we bring this
to the front or the back?” the clerk asked in her tinselly voice.

“The back,” Macon said. “No, wait. Bring the perishables to the back, but

put the dog food next to the coal chute.”

“Coal chute,” the clerk repeated, apparently writing it down.

“The coal chute at the side of the house. But not the cat food; that goes in

back with the perishables.”

“Well, wait now—”

“And the upstairs items at the front of the house.”

“What upstairs items?”

“Toothpaste, Ivory soap, dog biscuits . . .”

“I thought you said the dog biscuits went to the coal chute.”

“Not the dog biscuits, the dog food! It’s the food that goes to the coal chute,

dammit.”

“Now, look here,” the clerk said. “There’s no call to be rude.”

“Well, I’m sorry,” Macon told her, “but I just want the simplest thing, it

seems to me: one puny box of Milkbone biscuits up beside my bed. If I give
Edward  my  buttered  popcorn  it  upsets  his  stomach.  Otherwise  I  wouldn’t
mind; it’s not as if I’m hoarding it all for myself or something, but he has this
sensitivity to fats and I’m the only one in the house, it’s me who has to clean
up if he gets sick. I’m the only one to do it; I’m all alone; it’s just me; it seems
everybody’s  just  .  .  .  fled  from  me,  I  don’t  know,  I’ve  lost  them,  I’m  left
standing here saying, ‘Where’d they go? Where is everybody? Oh, God, what
did I do that was so bad?’ ”

His  voice  was  not  behaving  right  and  he  hung  up.  He  stood  over  the

telephone  rubbing  his  forehead.  Had  he  given  her  his  name?  Or  not.  He
couldn’t remember. Please, please, let him not have given her his name.

He was falling apart; that much was obvious. He would have to get a grip

on himself. First thing: out of this sweat suit. It was some kind of jinx. He
clapped  his  hands  together  briskly,  and  then  he  climbed  the  stairs.  In  the
bathroom,  he  yanked  off  the  sweat  suit  and  dropped  it  into  the  tub.
Yesterday’s  hung  from  the  shower  curtain  rod,  still  damp.  There  wasn’t  a
chance it would be dry by tonight. What a mistake! He felt like a fool. He’d
come  within  an  inch,  within  a  hairsbreadth  of  turning  into  one  of  those
pathetic  creatures  you  see  on  the  loose  from  time  to  time—unwashed,
unshaven,  shapeless,  talking  to  themselves,  padding  along  in  their
institutional garb.

Neatly dressed now in a white shirt and khakis, he gathered the damp sweat

suit and carried it down to the basement. It would make good winter pajamas,
at least. He put it in the dryer, wedged the exhaust tube in the window again,
and set the dials. Better to consume a little energy than to fall into despair
over a soggy sweat suit.

At the top of the basement stairs, Edward was complaining. He was hungry,

but not brave enough to descend the stairs on his own. When he caught sight
of Macon he lay flat, with his nose poking over the topmost step, and put on a
hopeful expression. “Coward,” Macon told him. He scooped Edward up in
both arms and turned to lumber back down. Edward’s teeth started chattering
—a ticketytick like rice in a cup. It occurred to Macon that Edward might
know something he didn’t. Was the basement haunted, or what? It had been
weeks now, and Edward was still so frightened that sometimes, set in front of
his food, he just stood there dismally and made a puddle without bothering to
lift his leg. “You’re being very silly, Edward,” Macon told him.

Just then, an eerie howl rose from . . . where? From the basement’s very air,

it  seemed.  It  continued  steadily;  it  grew.  Edward,  who  must  have  been
expecting this all along, kicked off instantly with his sturdy, clawed hind legs
against Macon’s diaphragm. Macon felt the wind knocked out of him. Edward
whomped into the wall of damp body bags on the clothesline, rebounded, and
landed in the center of Macon’s stomach. Macon set one foot blindly in the
wheeled basket and his legs went out from under him. He stepped down hard
into empty space.

He was lying on his back, on the clammy cement floor, with his left leg

doubled beneath him. The sound that had set all this in motion paused for one
split second and then resumed. It was clear now that it came from the dryer’s
exhaust tube. “Shoot,” Macon said to Edward, who lay panting on top of him.
“Wouldn’t you think that idiot cat would know the dryer was running?”

He could see how it must have happened. Attempting to enter from outside,

she’d been met by a whistling wind, but she had stubbornly continued into the
tube. He pictured her eyes pressed into slits, her ears flattened back by a lint-
filled gale. Wailing and protesting, she had nonetheless clung to her course.
What persistence!

Macon shook Edward off and rolled over on his stomach. Even so small a

movement  caused  him  agony.  He  felt  a  lump  of  nausea  beginning  in  his
throat, but he rolled once more, dragging his leg behind him. With his teeth
set, he reached for the door of the dryer and pulled it open. The sweat suit
slowly  stopped  revolving.  The  cat  stopped  howling.  Macon  watched  her
bumbling,  knobby  shape  inching  backward  through  the  tube.  Just  as  she
reached her exit, the entire tube fell out of the window and into the laundry
sink, but Helen didn’t fall with it. He hoped she was all right. He watched
until she scurried past the other window, looking just slightly rumpled. Then
he drew a breath and began the long, hard trip up the stairs for help.

five

“I’ve been sinful and unwise . . .”

She had a tremulous soprano that sounded like an old lady’s, although she

was younger than Macon. You could imagine such a voice in church, some
country kind of church where the women still wore flat straw hats.

I’m just a lucky pilgrim
On the road to Paradise.

Macon was lying on the daybed in his grandparents’ sun porch. His left leg,

encased  in  plaster  from  mid-thigh  to  instep,  was  not  painful  so  much  as
absent. There was a constant dull, cottony numbness that made him want to
pinch his own shin. Not that he could, of course. He was sealed away from
himself. The hardest blow felt like a knock on the wall from a neighboring
room.

Still,  he  felt  a  kind  of  contentment.  He  lay  listening  to  his  sister  fix

breakfast, idly scratching the cat who had made herself a nest in the blankets.
“I’ve had trials, I’ve had sorrows,” Rose trilled merrily, “I’ve had grief and
sacrifice  .  .  .”  Once  she  got  the  coffee  started,  she  would  come  help  him
across the living room to the downstairs bathroom. He still found it difficult
to navigate, especially on polished floors. Nowadays he marveled at all those
people on crutches whom he used to take for granted. He saw them as a flock
of stalky wading  birds,  dazzlingly  competent  with  their  sprightly  hops  and
debonair pivots. How did they do it?

His  own  crutches,  so  new  their  rubber  tips  were  not  yet  scuffed,  leaned

against the wall. His bathrobe hung over a chair. Beneath the window was a
folding card table with a wood-grained cardboard top and rickety legs. His
grandparents had been dead for years, but the table remained set up as if for
one of their eternal bridge games. Macon knew that on its underside was a
yellowed  label  reading  ATLAS  MFG.  CO.  with  a  steel  engraving  of  six
plump,  humorless  men  in  high-collared  suits  standing  upon  a  board  laid

across the very same table. FURNISHINGS OF DECEPTIVE DELICACY,
the  caption  said.  Macon  associated  the  phrase  with  his  grandmother:
deceptive delicacy. Lying on the sun porch floor as a boy, he had studied her
fragile legs, from which her anklebones jutted out like doorknobs. Her solid,
black, chunky-heeled shoes were planted squarely a foot apart, never tapping
or fidgeting.

He heard his brother Porter upstairs, whistling along with Rose’s song. He

knew it was Porter because Charles never whistled. There was the sound of a
shower running. His sister looked through the sun porch door, with Edward
peering around her and panting at Macon as if he were laughing.

“Macon? Are you awake?” Rose asked.

“I’ve been awake for hours,” he told her, for there was something vague

about her that caused her brothers to act put-upon and needy whenever she
chanced to focus on them. She was pretty in a sober, prim way, with beige
hair  folded  unobtrusively  at  the  back  of  her  neck  where  it  wouldn’t  be  a
bother. Her figure was a very young girl’s, but her clothes were spinsterly and
concealing.

She wrapped him in his bathrobe and helped him stand up. Now his leg

actively hurt. It seemed the pain was a matter of gravity. A throbbing ache
sank slowly down the length of the bone. With Rose supporting him on one
side and a crutch on the other, he hobbled out of the sun porch, through the
living  room  with  its  shabby,  curlicued  furniture.  The  dog  kept  getting
underfoot. “Maybe I could stop and rest a moment,” Macon said when they
passed the couch.

“It’s only a little farther.”

They entered the pantry. Rose opened the bathroom door and helped him

inside.  “Call  me  when  you’re  ready,”  she  said,  closing  the  door  after  him.
Macon sagged against the sink.

At breakfast, Porter was cheerily talkative while the others ate in silence.

Porter was the best-looking of all the Learys—more tightly knit than Macon,
his  hair  a  brighter  shade  of  blond.  He  gave  an  impression  of  vitality  and
direction that his brothers lacked. “Got a lot to do today,” he said between
mouthfuls. “That meeting with Herrin, interviews for Dave’s old job, Cates
flying in from Atlanta . . .”

still wore his pajamas. He was a soft, sweet-faced man who never seemed to
move; any time you looked at him he’d be watching you with his sorrowful
eyes that slanted downward at the outer corners.

Rose brought the coffeepot from the stove. “Last night, Edward woke me

twice asking to go out,” she said. “Do you think he has some sort of kidney
problem?”

“It’s the adjustment,” Macon said. “Adjustment to change. I wonder how

he knows not to wake me.”

Porter said, “Maybe we could rig up some sort of system. One of  those

little round pet doors or something.”

“Edward’s kind of portly for a pet door,” Macon said.

“Besides,” Rose said, “the yard’s not fenced. We can’t let him out on his

own if he’s not fenced in.”

“A litterbox, then,” Porter suggested.

“Litterbox! For a dog?”

“Why not? If it were big enough.”

Macon said, “Use a bathtub. The one in the basement. No one goes there

anymore.”

“But who would clean it?”

“Ah.”

They all looked down at Edward, who was lying at Rose’s feet. He rolled

his eyes at them.

“How come you have him, anyway?” Porter asked Macon.

“He was Ethan’s.”

“Oh. I see,” Porter said. He gave a little cough. “Animals!” he said brightly.

“Ever considered what they must think of us? I mean, here we come back

from  the  grocery  store  with  the  most  amazing  haul—chicken,  pork,  half  a
cow. We leave at nine and we’re back at ten, evidently having caught an entire
herd of beasts. They must think we’re the greatest hunters on earth!”

Macon leaned back in his chair with his coffee mug cupped in both hands.

The sun was warming the breakfast table, and the kitchen smelled of toast. He
almost  wondered  whether,  by  some  devious,  subconscious  means,  he  had
engineered this injury—every elaborate step leading up to it—just so he could
settle down safe among the people he’d started out with.

Charles and Porter left for the factory, and Rose went upstairs and ran the

vacuum  cleaner.  Macon,  who  was  supposed  to  be  typing  his  guidebook,
struggled back to the sun porch and collapsed. Since he’d come home he’d
been sleeping too much. The urge to sleep was like a great black cannonball
rolling around inside his skull, making his head heavy and droopy.

On  the  wall  at  the  end  of  the  room  hung  a  portrait  of  the  four  Leary

children: Charles, Porter, Macon, and Rose, clustered in an armchair. Their
grandfather had commissioned that portrait several years before they came to
live with him. They were still in California with their mother—a giddy young
war  widow.  From  time  to  time  she  sent  snapshots,  but  Grandfather  Leary
found those inadequate. By their very nature, he told her in his letters, photos
lied. They showed what a person looked like over a fraction of a second—not
over long, slow minutes, which was what you’d take to study someone in real
life. In that case, said Alicia, didn’t paintings lie also? They showed hours
instead of minutes. It wasn’t Grandfather Leary she said this to, but the artist,
an elderly Californian whose name Grandfather Leary had somehow got hold
of. If the artist had had a reply, Macon couldn’t remember what it was.

He  could  remember  sitting  for  the  portrait,  though,  and  now  when  he

looked at it he had a very clear picture of his mother standing just outside the
gilded frame in a pink kimono, watching the painting take shape while she
toweled  her  hair  dry.  She  had  fluffy,  short,  brittle  hair  whose  color  she
“helped along,” as she put it. Her face was a type no longer seen—it wasn’t
just  unfashionable,  it  had  vanished  altogether.  How  did  women  mold  their
basic forms to suit the times? Were there no more of those round chins, round
foreheads, and bruised, baroque little mouths so popular in the forties?

The artist, it was obvious, found her very attractive. He kept pausing in his

work to say he wished she were the subject. Alicia gave a breathless laugh
and shooed away his words with one hand. Probably later she had gone out

with him a few times. She was always taking up with new men, and they were
always the most exciting men in the world, to hear her tell it. If they were
artists,  why,  she  had  to  give  a  party  and  get  all  her  friends  to  buy  their
paintings.  If  they  flew  small  planes  on  weekends,  she  had  to  start  pilot’s
lessons.  If  they  were  political,  there  she  was  on  street  corners  thrusting
petitions on passersby. Her children were too young to worry about the men
themselves, if there was any reason to worry. No, it was her enthusiasm that
disturbed them. Her enthusiasm came in spurts, a violent zigzag of hobbies,
friends, boyfriends, causes. She always seemed about to fall over the brink of
something. She was always going too far. Her voice had an edge to it, as if at
any moment it might break. The faster she talked and the brighter her eyes
grew, the more fixedly her children stared at her, as if willing her to follow
their example of steadiness and dependability. “Oh, what is it with you?” she
would ask them. “Why are you such sticks?” And she would give up on them
and flounce off to meet her crowd. Rose, the baby, used to wait for her return
in the hall, sucking her thumb and stroking an old fur stole that Alicia never
wore anymore.

Sometimes  Alicia’s  enthusiasm  turned  to  her  children—an  unsettling

experience. She took them all to the circus and bought them cotton candy that
none of them enjoyed. (They liked to keep themselves tidy.) She yanked them
out  of  school  and  enrolled  them  briefly  in  an  experimental  learning
community  where  no  one  wore  clothes.  The  four  of  them,  chilled  and
miserable, sat hunched in a row in the common room with their hands pressed
flat  between  their  bare  knees.  She  dressed  as  a  witch  and  went  trick-or-
treating with them, the most mortifying Halloween of their lives, for she got
carried away as usual and cackled, croaked, scuttled up to strangers and shook
her ragged broom in their faces. She started making mother-daughter outfits
for  herself  and  Rose,  in  strawberry  pink  with  puffed  sleeves,  but  stopped
when  the  sewing  machine  pierced  her  finger  and  made  her  cry.  (She  was
always getting hurt. It may have been because she rushed so.) Then she turned
to something else, and something else, and something else. She believed in
change as if it were a religion. Feeling sad? Find a new man! Creditors after
you, rent due, children running fevers? Move to a new apartment! During one
year, they moved so often that every day after school, Macon had to stand
deliberating a while before setting out for home.

In 1950, she decided to marry an engineer who traveled around the world

building  bridges.  “Portugal.  Panama.  Brazil,”  she  told  the  children.  “We’ll
finally get to see our planet.” They gazed at her stonily. If they had met this

man before, they had no recollection of it. Alicia said, “Aren’t you excited?”
Later—it may have been after he took them all out to dinner—she said she
was sending them to live with their grandparents instead. “Baltimore’s more
suitable  for  children,  really,”  she  said.  Did  they  protest?  Macon  couldn’t
remember.  He  recalled  his  childhood  as  a  glassed-in  place  with  grown-ups
rushing past, talking at him, making changes, while he himself stayed mute.
At any rate, one hot night in June Alicia put them on a plane to Baltimore.
They were met by their grandparents, two thin, severe, distinguished people
in dark clothes. The children approved of them at once.

After that, they saw Alicia only rarely. She would come breezing into town

with  an  armload  of  flimsy  gifts  from  tropical  countries.  Her  print  dresses
struck the children as flashy; her makeup was too vivid, like a foreigner’s.
She  seemed  to  find  her  children  comical—their  navy-and-white  school
uniforms, their perfect posture. “My God! How stodgy you’ve grown!” she
would cry, evidently forgetting she’d thought them stodgy all along. She said
they took after their father. They sensed this wasn’t meant as a compliment.
(When they asked what their father had been like, she looked down at her
own chin and said, “Oh, Alicia, grow up.”) Later, when her sons married, she
seemed  to  see  even  more  resemblance,  for  at  one  time  or  another  she’d
apologized to all three daughters-in-law for what they must have to put up
with. Like some naughty, gleeful fairy, Macon imagined, she darted in and out
of  their  lives  leaving  a  trail  of  irresponsible  remarks,  apparently  never
considering they might be passed on. “I don’t see how you stay married to the
man,” she’d said to Sarah. She herself was now on her fourth husband, a rock-
garden architect with a white goatee.

It was true the children in the portrait seemed unrelated to her. They lacked

her blue-and-gold coloring; their hair had an ashy cast and their eyes were a
steely gray. They all had that distinct center groove from nose to upper lip.
And  never  in  a  million  years  would  Alicia  have  worn  an  expression  so
guarded and suspicious.

Uncomfortably  arranged-looking,  they  gazed  out  at  the  viewer.  The  two

older boys, plump Charles and trim Porter, perched on either arm of the chair
in white shirts with wide, flat, open collars. Rose and Macon sat on the seat in
matching  playsuits.  Rose  appeared  to  be  in  Macon’s  lap,  although  actually
she’d been settled between his knees, and Macon had the indrawn tenseness
of someone placed in a physically close situation he wasn’t accustomed to.
His hair, like the others’, slanted silkily across his forehead. His mouth was

thin, almost colorless, and firmed a bit, as if he’d decided to take a stand on
something. The set of that mouth echoed now in Macon’s mind. He glanced at
it,  glanced  away,  glanced  back.  It  was  Ethan’s  mouth.  Macon  had  spent
twelve years imagining Ethan as a sort of exchange student, a visitor from the
outside world,  and  here  it  turned  out  he’d  been  a  Leary  all  along.  What  a
peculiar thing to recognize at this late date.

He sat up sharply and reached for his trousers, which Rose had cut short

across the left thigh and hemmed with tiny, even stitches.

No one else in the world had the slightest idea where he was. Not Julian,

not Sarah, not anyone. Macon liked knowing that. He said as much to Rose.
“It’s nice to be so unconnected,” he told her. “I wish things could stay that
way a while.”

“Why can’t they?”

“Oh, well, you know, someone will call here, Sarah or someone—”

“Maybe we could just not answer the phone.”

“What, let it go on ringing?”

“Why not?”

“Not answer it any time?”

“Most who call me are neighbors,” Rose said. “They’ll pop over in person

if they don’t get an answer. And you know the boys: Neither one of them
likes dealing with telephones.”

“That’s true,” Macon said.

Julian  would  come  knocking  on  his  door,  planning  to  harangue  him  for

letting his deadline slip past. He’d have to give up. Then Sarah would come
for a soup ladle or something, and when he didn’t answer she would ask the
neighbors and they’d say he hadn’t shown his face in some time. She would
try to get in touch with his family and the telephone would ring and ring, and
then  she  would  start  to  worry.  What’s  happened?  she  would  wonder.  How
could I have left him on his own?

Lately, Macon had noticed he’d begun to view Sarah as a form of enemy.

He’d stopped missing her and started plotting her remorsefulness. It surprised
him to see how quickly he’d made the transition. Was this what two decades
of  marriage  amounted  to?  He  liked  to  imagine  her  self-reproaches.  He
composed and recomposed her apologies. He hadn’t had such thoughts since
he was a child, dreaming of how his mother would weep at his funeral.

In  the  daytime,  working  at  the  dining  room  table,  he  would  hear  the

telephone and he’d pause, fingers at rest on the typewriter keys. One ring, two
rings. Three rings. Rose would walk in with a jar of silver polish. She didn’t
even seem to hear. “What if that’s some kind of emergency?” he would ask.
Rose would say, “Hmm? Who would call us for an emergency?” and then she
would take the  silver  from  the  buffet  and  spread  it  at  the  other  end  of  the
table.

There had always been some family member requiring Rose’s care. Their

grandmother  had  been  bedridden  for  years  before  she  died,  and  then  their
grandfather got so senile, and first Charles and later Porter had failed in their
marriages and come back home. So she had enough right here to fill her time.
Or she made it enough; for  surely  it  couldn’t  be  necessary  to  polish  every
piece of silver every week. Shut in the house with her all day, Macon noticed
how  painstakingly  she  planned  the  menus;  how  often  she  reorganized  the
utensil drawer; how she ironed even her brothers’ socks, first separating them
from  the  clever  plastic  grips  she  used  to  keep  them  mated  in  the  washing
machine. For Macon’s lunch, she cooked a real meal and served it on regular
place mats. She set out cut-glass dishes of pickles and olives that had to be
returned to their bottles later on. She dolloped homemade mayonnaise into a
tiny bowl.

Macon wondered if it ever occurred to her that she lived an odd sort of life

—unemployed, unmarried, supported by her brothers. But what job would she
be suited for? he asked himself. Although he could picture her, come to think
of it, as the mainstay of some musty, antique law firm or accounting firm.
Nominally a secretary, she would actually run the whole business, arranging
everything just so on her employer’s desk every morning and allowing no one
below  her  or  above  her  to  overlook  a  single  detail.  Macon  could  use  a
secretary like that. Recalling the gum-chewing redhead in Julian’s disastrous
office, he sighed and wished the world had more Roses.

He zipped a page from his typewriter and set it face down on a stack of

others.  He  had  finished  with  his  introduction—general  instructions  like  A
subway is not an underground train and Don’t say restroom, say toilet—and

he’d finished the chapter called “Trying to Eat in England.” Rose had mailed
those off for him yesterday. That was his new stratagem: sending his book
piece by piece from this undisclosed location. “There’s no return address on
this,” Rose told him. “There’s not meant to be,” Macon said. Rose had nodded
solemnly. She was the only one in the family who viewed his guidebooks as
real writing. She kept a row of them in her bedroom bookcase, alphabetized
by country.

In midafternoon, Rose stopped work to watch her favorite soap opera. This

was something Macon didn’t understand. How could she waste her time on
such trash? She said it was because there was a wonderfully evil woman in it.
“There are enough evil people in real life,” Macon told her.

“Yes, but not wonderfully evil.”

“Well, that’s for sure.”

“This one, you see, is so obvious. You know exactly whom to mistrust.”

While she watched, she talked aloud to the characters. Macon could hear

her in the dining room. “It isn’t you he’s after, sweetie,” she said, and “Just
you wait. Ha!”—not at all her usual style of speech. A commercial broke in,
but  Rose  stayed  transfixed  where  she  was.  Macon,  meanwhile,  worked  on
“Trying to Sleep in England,” typing away in a dogged, uninspired rhythm.

When the doorbell rang, Rose didn’t respond. Edward went mad, barking

and scratching at the door and running back to Macon and racing again to the
door. “Rose?” Macon called. She said nothing. Finally he stood up, assembled
himself on his crutches, and went as quietly as possible to the hall.

Well, it wasn’t Sarah. A glance through the lace curtain told him that much.

He opened the door and peered out. “Yes?” he said.

It was Garner Bolt, a neighbor from home—a scrawny little gray man who

had made his fortune in cleaning supplies. When he saw Macon, every line in
his pert, pointed face turned upward. “There you are!” he said. It was hard to
hear him over Edward, who went on barking frantically.

“Why, Garner,” Macon said.

“We worried you had died.”

“You did?”

Macon grabbed at Edward’s collar, but missed.

“Saw  the  papers  piling  up  on  your  lawn,  mail  inside  your  screen  door,

didn’t know what to think.”

“Well, I meant to send my sister for those,” Macon said. “I broke my leg,

you see.”

“Now, how did you do that?”

“It’s a long story.”

He gave up blocking the door. “Come on in,” he told Garner.

Garner took off his cap, which had a Sherwin-Williams Paint sign across

the front. His jacket was part of some long-ago suit, a worn shiny brown, and
his overalls were faded to white at the knees. He stepped inside, skirting the
dog, and shut the door behind him. Edward’s barks turned to whimpers. “My
car is full of your mail,” Garner said. “Brenda said I ought to bring it to your
sister and ask if she knew of your whereabouts. Also I promised your friend.”

“What friend?”

“Lady in pedal pushers.”

“I don’t know any lady in pedal pushers,” Macon said. He hadn’t realized

pedal pushers still existed, even.

“Saw  her  standing  on  your  porch,  rattling  your  doorknob.  Calling  out,

‘Macon?  You  in  there?’  Skinny  little  lady  with  hair.  Looked  to  be  in  her
twenties or so.”

“Well, I can’t imagine who it was.”

“Squinching in and shading her eyes.”

“Who could it be?”

“Tripping down the porch steps in her great tall pointy high heels.”

“The dog lady,” Macon said. “Jesus.”

“Kind of young, ain’t she?”

“I don’t even know her!”

“Going round the back of the house to call out, ‘Macon? Macon?’ ”

“I barely met her!”

“It was her that told me about the windle.”

“Windle?”

“Windle  to  the  basement,  all  broke  out.  Fall  sets  in  and  it’ll  turn  your

furnace on. Waste all kinds of energy.”

“Oh. Well. Yes, I suppose it would,” Macon said.

“We thought you might’ve been burglarized or something.”

Macon led the way to the dining room. “See, what happened,” he said, “I

broke my leg and I came to live at my family’s till I could manage for myself
again.”

“We didn’t see no ambulance though or nothing.”

“Well, I called my sister.”

“Sister’s a doctor?”

“Just to come and take me to the emergency room.”

“When Brenda broke her hip on the missing step,” Garner said, “she called

the ambulance.”

“Well, I called my sister.”

“Brenda called the ambulance.”

They seemed to be stuck.

“I  guess  I  ought  to  notify  the  post  office  about  my  mail,”  Macon  said

finally. He lowered himself into his chair.

said, “I could just keep on bringing it.”

“No, I’ll have Rose notify them. Lord, all these bills must be coming due

and so forth—”

“I could bring it just as easy.”

“Thanks anyway.”

“Why don’t I bring it.”

“To tell the truth,” Macon said, “I’m not so sure I’ll be going back there.”

This  hadn’t  occurred  to  him  before.  He  placed  his  crutches  together

delicately,  like  a  pair  of  chopsticks,  and  laid  them  on  the  floor  beside  his
chair. “I might stay on here with my family,” he said.

“And give up that fine little house?”

“It’s kind of big for just one person.”

Garner frowned down at his cap. He put it on his head, changed his mind,

and  took  it  off  again.  “Look,”  he  said.  “Back  when  me  and  Brenda  were
newlyweds we were awful together. Just awful. Couldn’t neither one of us
stand the other, I’ll never know how we lasted.”

“We aren’t newlyweds, though,” Macon said. “We’ve been married twenty

years.”

“Brenda and me did not speak to each other for very nearly every bit of

nineteen  and  thirty-five,”  Garner  said.  “January  to  August,  nineteen  and
thirty-five. New Year’s Day till my summer vacation. Not a single blessed
word.”

Macon’s attention was caught. “What,” he said, “not even ‘Pass the salt’?

‘Open the window’?”

“Not even that.”

“Well, how did you manage your daily life?”

“Mostly, she stayed over to her sister’s.”

“Oh, then.”

“The morning my vacation began, I felt so miserable I like to died. Thought

to myself, ‘What am I doing, anyhow?’ Called long distance to Ocean City
and booked a room for two. In those days long distance was some big deal, let
me tell you. Took all these operators and so forth and it cost a mint. Then I
packed some clothes for me and some clothes for Brenda and went on over to
her sister’s house. Her sister says, ‘What do you want?’ She was the type that
likes to see dissension. I walk right past her. Find Brenda in the living room,
mending hose. Open my suitcase: ‘Look at here. Your sundress for dining in a
seafood  restaurant,’  I  tell  her.  ‘Two  pairs  of  shorts.  Two  blouses.  Your
swimsuit.’ She don’t even look at me. ‘Your bathrobe,’ I say. ‘Your nightgown
you wore on our honeymoon.’ Acts like I’m not even there. ‘Brenda,’ I tell
her. I say, ‘Brenda, I am nineteen years old and I’ll never be nineteen again.
I’ll  never  be  alive again.  I  mean  this  is  the  only  life  I  get  to  go  through,
Brenda, so far as I know, and I’ve spent this great large chunk of it sitting
alone in an empty apartment too proud to make up, too scared you’d say no,
but even if you did say no it can’t be worse than what I got now. I’m the
loneliest man in the world, Brenda, so please come to Ocean City with me.’
And Brenda, she lays down her mending and says, ‘Well, since you ask, but it
looks to me like you forgot my bathing cap.’ And off we went.”

He sat back triumphantly in his chair. “So,” he said.

“So,” Macon said.

“So you get my point.”

“What point?”

“You have to let her know you need her.”

“See, Garner, I think we’ve gone beyond little things like letting her know I

—”

“Don’t  take  this  personally,  Macon,  but  I  got  to  level  with  you:  There’s

times  when  you’ve  been  sort  of  frustrating.  I’m  not  talking  about  myself,
mind; I understand. It’s just some of the others in the neighborhood, they’ve
been put off a little. Take during your tragedy. I mean people like to offer help

at occasions like that— send flowers and visit at the viewing hour and bring
casseroles for after the service. Only you didn’t even have a service. Held a
cremation, Lord God, somewheres off in Virginia without a word to anyone
and come home directly. Peg Everett tells you she’s put you in her prayers and
Sarah says, ‘Oh, bless you, Peg,’ but what do you say? You ask Peg if her son
might care to take Ethan’s bike off your hands.”

Macon  groaned.  “Yes,”  he  said,  “I  never  know  how  to  behave  at  these

times.”

“Then you mow your lawn like nothing has happened.”

“The grass did keep on growing, Garner.”

“We was all dying to do it for you.”

“Well, thanks,” Macon said, “but I enjoyed the work.”

“See what I mean?”

Macon said, “Now, wait. Just to insert some logic into this discussion—”

“That’s exactly what I mean!”

“You started out talking about Sarah. You’ve switched to how I disappoint

the neighbors.”

“What’s the difference? You might not know this, Macon, but you come

across as a person that charges ahead on your own somewhat. Just look at the
way you walk! The way you, like, lunge, lope on down the street with your
head running clear in front of your body. If a fellow wants to stop you and, I
don’t know, offer his condolences, he’d be liable to get plowed down. Now, I
know you care, and you know you care, but how does it look to the others? I
ask you! No wonder she up and left.”

“Garner, I appreciate your thoughts on this,” Macon said, “but Sarah’s fully

aware that I care. I’m not as tongue-tied as you like to make out. And this
isn’t one of those open-shut, can-this-marriage-be-saved deals, either. I mean,
you’re just plain goddamned wrong, Garner.”

“Well,” Garner said. He looked down at his cap, and after a moment he

jammed it abruptly on his head. “I guess I’ll fetch your mail in, then,” he said.

“Right. Thanks.”

started barking all over again. There was an empty spell during which Macon
looked down at his cast and listened to the soap opera from the living room.
Meanwhile Edward whined at the door and paced back and forth, clicking his
toenails. Then Garner returned. “Mostly catalogs,” he said, flinging his load
on  the  table.  He  brought  with  him  the  smell  of  fresh  air  and  dry  leaves.
“Brenda said we might as well not bother with the newspapers; just throw
them out.”

“Oh, yes, of course,” Macon said.

He  stood  up  and  they  shook  hands.  Garner’s  fingers  were  crisp  and

intricately shaped, like crumpled paper. “Thanks for stopping by,” Macon told
him.

“Any time,” Garner said, looking elsewhere.

Macon  said,  “I  didn’t  mean,  you  know—I  hope  I  didn’t  sound  short-

tempered.”

“Naw,” Garner said. He lifted an arm and let it drop. “Shoot. Don’t think a

thing about it.” Then he turned to leave.

As soon as he did, Macon thought of a flood of other things he should have

mentioned. It wasn’t all his fault, he wanted to say. Sarah had a little to do
with it too. What Sarah needed was a rock, he wanted to say; someone who
wouldn’t crumble. Otherwise, why had she picked him to marry? But he held
his peace and watched Garner walk out. There was something pitiable about
the two sharp cords that ran down the back of Garner’s neck, cupping a little
ditch of mapped brown skin between them.

When  his  brothers  came  home  from  work,  the  house  took  on  a  relaxed,

relieved atmosphere. Rose drew the living room curtains and lit a few soft
lamps. Charles and Porter changed into sweaters. Macon started mixing his
special salad dressing. He believed that if you pulverized the spices first with
a marble mortar and pestle, it made all the difference. The others agreed that
no one else’s dressing tasted as good as Macon’s. “Since you’ve been gone,”
Charles told him, “we’ve had to buy that bottled stuff from the grocery store.”
He made it sound as if Macon had been gone a few weeks or so—as if his

entire marriage had been just a brief trip elsewhere.

baked potatoes. Baked potatoes had always been their favorite food. They had
learned to fix them as children, and even after they were big enough to cook a
balanced meal they used to exist solely on baked potatoes whenever Alicia
left  them  to  their  own  devices.  There  was  something  about  the  smell  of  a
roasting Idaho that was so cozy, and also, well, conservative, was the way
Macon  put  it  to  himself.  He  thought  back  on  years  and  years  of  winter
evenings: the kitchen windows black outside, the corners furry with gathering
darkness, the four of them seated at the chipped enamel table meticulously
filling  scooped-out  potato  skins  with  butter.  You  let  the  butter  melt  in  the
skins while you mashed and seasoned the floury insides; the skins were saved
till  last.  It  was  almost  a  ritual.  He  recalled  that  once,  during  one  of  their
mother’s longer absences, her friend Eliza had served them what she called
potato boats—restuffed, not a bit like the genuine article. The children, with
pinched,  fastidious  expressions,  had  emptied  the  stuffing  and  proceeded  as
usual with the skins, pretending to overlook her mistake. The skins should be
crisp.  They  should  not  be  salted.  The  pepper  should  be  freshly  ground.
Paprika was acceptable, but only if it was American. Hungarian paprika had
too distinctive a taste. Personally, Macon could do without paprika altogether.

While they ate, Porter discussed what to do with his children. Tomorrow

was  his  weekly  visitation  night,  when  he  would  drive  over  to  Washington,
where  his  children  lived  with  their  mother.  “The  thing  of  it  is,”  he  said,
“eating out in restaurants is so artificial. It doesn’t seem like real food. And
anyway, they all three have different tastes. They always argue over where to
go. Someone’s on a diet, someone’s turned vegetarian, someone can’t stand
food that crunches. And I end up shouting, ‘Oh, for God’s sake, we’re going
to Such-and-Such and that’s that!’ So we go and everybody sulks throughout
the meal.”

“Maybe you should just not visit,” Charles said reasonably. (He had never

had children of his own.)

“Well, of course I want to visit, Charles. I just wish we had some different

program. You know what would be ideal? If we could all do something with
tools  together.  I  mean  like  the  old  days  before  the  divorce,  when  Danny
helped me drain the hot water heater or Susan sat on a board I was sawing. If
I could just drop by their house, say, and June and her husband could go to a
movie or something, then the kids and I would clean the gutters, weather-strip

the windows, wrap the hot water pipes . . . Well, that husband of hers is no use
at all, you can bet he lets his hot water pipes sit around naked. I’d bring my
own tools, even. We’d have a fine time! Susan could fix us cocoa. Then at the
end of the evening I’d pack up my tools and off I’d go, leaving the house in
perfect repair. Why, June ought to jump at the chance.”

“Then why not suggest it,” Macon said.

“Nah. She’d never go for it. She’s so impractical. I said to her last week, I

said, ‘You know that front porch step is loose? Springing up from its nails
every  time  you  walk  on  it  wrong.’  She  said,  ‘Oh,  Lord, yes, it’s  been that
way,’ as if Providence had decreed it. As if nothing could be done about it.
They’ve got leaves in the gutter from way last winter but leaves are natural,
after all; why go against nature. She’s so impractical.”

Porter himself was the most practical man Macon had ever known. He was

the only Leary who understood money. His talent with money was what kept
the  family  firm  solvent—if  just  barely.  It  wasn’t  a  very  wealthy  business.
Grandfather Leary had founded it in the early part of the century as a tinware
factory, and turned  to  bottle  caps  in  1915.  The  Bottle  Cap  King,  he  called
himself, and  was  called  in  his  obituary,  but  in  fact  most  bottle  caps  were
manufactured by Crown Cork and always had been; Grandfather Leary ran a
distant  second  or  third.  His  only  son,  the  Bottle  Cap  Prince,  had  barely
assumed his place in the firm before quitting to volunteer for World War II—a
far more damaging enthusiasm, it turned out, than any of Alicia’s. After he
was killed the business limped along, never quite succeeding and never quite
failing, till Porter bounced in straight from college and took over the money
end. Money to Porter was something almost chemical—a volatile substance
that reacted in various interesting ways when combined with other substances.
He wasn’t what you’d call mercenary; he didn’t want the money for its own
sake but for its intriguing possibilities, and in fact when his wife divorced him
he handed over most of his property without a word of complaint.

It was Porter who ran the company, pumping in money and ideas. Charles,

more mechanical, dealt with the production end. Macon had done a little of
everything when he worked there, and had wasted away with boredom doing
it, for there wasn’t really enough to keep a third man busy. It was only for
symmetry’s  sake  that  Porter  kept  urging  him  to  return.  “Tell  you  what,
Macon,” he said now, “why not hitch a ride down with us tomorrow and look
over your old stomping ground?”

“No, thanks,” Macon told him.

“Plenty of room for your crutches in back.”

“Maybe some other time.”

They followed Rose around while she washed the dishes. She didn’t like

them  to  help  because  she  had  her  own  method,  she  said.  She  moved
soundlessly  through  the  old-fashioned  kitchen,  replacing  dishes  in  the  high
wooden  cabinets.  Charles  took  the  dog  out;  Macon  couldn’t  manage  his
crutches  in  the  spongy  backyard.  And  Porter  pulled  the  kitchen  shades,
meanwhile  lecturing  Rose  on  how  the  white  surfaces  reflected  the  warmth
back into the room now that the nights were cooler. Rose said, “Yes, Porter, I
know  all  that,”  and  lifted  the  salad  bowl  to  the  light  and  examined  it  a
moment before she put it away.

They watched the news, dutifully, and then they went out to the sun porch

and  sat  at  their  grandparents’  card  table.  They  played  something  called
Vaccination—a card game they’d invented as children, which had grown so
convoluted over the years that no one else had the patience to learn it. In fact,
more  than  one  outsider  had  accused  them  of  altering  the  rules  to  suit  the
circumstances. “Now, just a minute,” Sarah had said, back when she’d still
had hopes of figuring it out. “I thought you said aces were high.”

“They are.”

“So that means—”

“But not when they’re drawn from the deck.”

“Aha! Then why was the one that Rose drew counted high?”

“Well, she did draw it after a deuce, Sarah.”

“Aces drawn after a deuce are high?”

“No, aces drawn after a number that’s been drawn two times in a row just

before that.”

Sarah had folded her fan of cards and laid them face down— the last of the

wives to give up.

Macon  was  in  quarantine  and  had  to  donate  all  his  cards  to  Rose. Rose

moved her chair over next to his and played off his points while he sat back,
scratching  the  cat  behind  her  ears.  Opposite  him,  in  the  tiny  dark
windowpanes,  he  saw  their  reflections—  hollow-eyed  and  severely
cheekboned, more interesting versions of themselves.

The telephone in the living room gave a nipped squeak and then a full ring.

Nobody seemed to notice. Rose laid a king on Porter’s queen and Porter said,
“Stinker.”  The  telephone  rang  again  and  then  again.  In  the  middle  of  the
fourth ring, it fell silent. “Hypodermic,” Rose told Porter, and she topped the
king with an ace.

“You’re a real stinker, Rose.”

In  the  portrait  on  the  end  wall,  the  Leary  children  gazed  out  with  their

veiled  eyes.  It  occurred  to  Macon  that  they  were  sitting  in  much the same
positions here this evening: Charles and Porter on either side of him, Rose
perched  in  the  foreground.  Was  there  any  real  change?  He  felt  a  jolt  of
something very close to panic. Here he still  was!  The  same  as  ever!  What
have I gone and done? he wondered, and he swallowed thickly and looked at
his own empty hands.

six

Help! Help! Call off your dog!”

Macon  stopped  typing  and  lifted  his  head.  The  voice  came  from

somewhere  out  front,  rising  above  a  string  of  sharp,  excited  yelps.  But
Edward was taking a walk with Porter. This must be some other dog.

“Call him off, dammit!”

Macon rose, propping himself on his crutches, and made his  way  to  the

window. Sure enough, it was Edward. He seemed to have treed somebody in
the giant magnolia to the right of the walk. He was barking so hard that he
kept popping off the ground perfectly level, all four feet at once, like one of
those pull toys that bounce straight up in the air when you squeeze a rubber
bulb.

“Edward! Stop that!” Macon shouted.

Edward didn’t stop. He might not even have heard. Macon stubbed out to

the hall, opened the front door, and said, “Come here this instant!”

Edward barely skipped a beat.

It was a Saturday morning in early October, pale gray and cool. Macon felt

the coolness creeping up his cut-off pants leg as he crossed the porch. When
he dropped one crutch and took hold of the iron railing to descend the steps,
he found the metal beaded with moisture.

He hopped over to the magnolia, leaned down precariously, and grabbed

the  leash  that  Edward  was  trailing.  Without  much  effort,  he  reeled  it  in;
Edward was already losing interest. Macon peered into the inky depths of the
magnolia. “Who is that?” he asked.

“This is your employer, Macon.”

“Julian?”

branches. He had a line of dirt across the front of his slacks. His white-blond
hair, usually so neat it made him look like a shirt ad, struck out at several
angles. “Macon,” he said. “I really hate a man with an obnoxious dog. I don’t
hate just the dog. I hate the man who owns him.”

“Well, I’m sorry about this. I thought he was off on a walk.”

“You send him on walks by himself?”

“No, no . . .”

“A dog who takes solitary strolls,” Julian said. “Only Macon Leary would

have  one.”  He  brushed  off  the  sleeves  of  his  suede  blazer.  Then  he  said,
“What happened to your leg?”

“I broke it.”

“Well, I see that, but how?”

“It’s kind of hard to explain,” Macon told him.

They  started  toward  the  house,  with  Edward  trotting  docilely  alongside.

Julian supported Macon as they climbed the steps. He was an athletic-looking
man with a casual, sauntering style—a boater. You could tell he was a boater
by his nose, which was raw across the tip even this late in the year. No one so
startlingly  blond,  so  vividly  flushed  in  the  face,  should  expose  himself  to
sunburn, Macon  always  told  him.  But  that  was  Julian  for  you:  reckless.  A
dashing sailor, a speedy driver, a frequenter of singles bars, he was the kind of
man who would make a purchase without consulting Consumer Reports. He
never  seemed  to  have  a  moment’s  self-doubt  and  was  proceeding  into  the
house now as jauntily as if he’d been invited, first retrieving Macon’s other
crutch and then holding the door open and waving him ahead.

“How’d you find me, anyway?” Macon asked.

“Why, are you hiding?”

“No, of course not.”

Julian  surveyed  the  entrance  hall,  which  all  at  once  struck  Macon  as

slightly dowdy. The satin lampshade on the table had dozens of long vertical

rents; it seemed to be rotting off its frame.

“Your neighbor told me where you were,” Julian said finally.

“Oh, Garner.”

“I  stopped  by  your  house  when  I  couldn’t  reach  you  by  phone.  Do  you

know how late you’re running with this guidebook?”

“Well, you can see I’ve had an accident,” Macon said.

“Everybody’s  held  up,  waiting  for  the  manuscript.  I  keep  telling  them  I

expect it momentarily, but—”

“Any moment,” Macon said.

“Huh?”

“You expect it any moment.”

“Yes,  and  all  I’ve  seen  so  far  is  two  chapters  mailed  in  with  no

explanation.”

Julian led the way to the living room as he spoke. He selected the most

comfortable chair and sat down. “Where’s Sarah?” he asked.

“Who?”

“Your wife, Macon.”

“Oh. Um, she and I are . . .”

Macon should have practiced saying it out loud. The word “separated” was

too bald; it was something that happened to other people. He crossed to the
couch  and  made  a  great  business  of  settling  himself  and  arranging  his
crutches at his side. Then he said, “She’s got this apartment downtown.”

“You’ve split?”

Macon nodded.

“Jesus.”

to have something to do.

“Well, Jesus, Macon, what went wrong?” Julian asked.

“Nothing!” Macon told him. His voice was a little too loud. He lowered it.

“I mean, that’s not something I can answer,” he said.

“Oh. Excuse me.”

“No, I mean . . . there is no answer. It turns out these things can happen for

no particular reason.”

“Well, you’ve been under a strain, you two,” Julian said. “Shoot, with what

happened and all . . . She’ll be back, once she’s gotten over it. Or not gotten
over it of course but, you know . . .”

“Maybe so,” Macon said. He felt embarrassed for Julian, who kept jiggling

one Docksider. He said, “What did you think of those first two chapters?”

Julian  opened  his  mouth  to  answer,  but  he  was  interrupted  by  the  dog.

Edward had flown to the hall and was barking furiously. There was a clang
that  Macon  recognized  as  the  sound  of  the  front  door  swinging  open  and
hitting the radiator. “Hush, now,” he heard Rose tell Edward. She crossed the
hall and looked into the living room.

Julian got to his feet. Macon said, “Julian Edge, this is my sister Rose. And

this,” he said as Charles arrived behind her, “is my brother Charles.”

Neither  Rose  nor  Charles  could  shake  hands;  they  were  carrying  the

groceries. They stood in the center of the room, hugging brown paper bags,
while  Julian  went  into  what  Macon  thought  of  as  his  Macon  Leary  act.
“Macon Leary with a sister! And a brother, too. Who’d have guessed it? That
Macon Leary had a family just never entered my mind, somehow.”

Rose gave him a polite, puzzled smile. She wasn’t looking her best. She

wore a long black coat that drew all the color from her face. And Charles,
rumpled and out of breath, was having trouble with one of his bags. He kept
trying to get a better grip on it. “Here, let me help you,” Julian said. He took
the bag and then peered into it. Macon was afraid he’d go off on some tangent
about Macon Leary’s groceries, but he didn’t. He told Rose, “Yes, I do see a
family resemblance.”

label.”

“Address label?”

“I’m the one who mailed you Macon’s chapters.”

“Oh, yes.”

“I’m  supposed  to  send  you  some  more,  but  first  I  have  to  buy  nine-by-

twelve  envelopes.  All  we’ve  got  left  is  ten-by-thirteen.  It’s  terrible  when
things don’t fit precisely. They get all out of alignment.”

“Ah,” Julian said. He looked at her for a moment.

Macon said, “We wouldn’t want to keep you, Rose.”

“Oh! No,” she said. She smiled at Julian, hoisted her groceries higher, and

left the room. Charles retrieved his bag from Julian and slogged after her.

“The Macon Leary Nine-by-Twelve Envelope Crisis,” Julian said, sitting

back down.

Macon said, “Oh, Julian, drop it.”

“Sorry,” Julian said, sounding surprised.

There was a pause. Then Julian said, “Really I had no idea, Macon, I mean,

if you’d let me know what was going on in your life . . .”

He  was  jiggling  a  Docksider  again.  He  always  seemed  uneasy  when  he

couldn’t do his Macon Leary act. After Ethan died he’d avoided Macon for
weeks; he’d sent a tree-sized bouquet to the house but never again mentioned
Ethan’s name.

“Look,” he said now. “If you want another, I don’t know, another month—”

Macon said, “Oh, nonsense, what’s a missing wife or two, right? Ha, ha!

Here, let me get what I’ve typed and you can check it.”

“Well, if you say so,” Julian said.

“After this there’s only the conclusion,” Macon said. He was calling over

his shoulder as he made his way to the dining room, where his latest chapter
lay stacked on the buffet. “The conclusion’s nothing, a cinch. I’ll crib from
the old one, mostly.”

He returned with the manuscript and handed it to Julian. Then he sat on the

couch  again,  and  Julian  started  reading.  Meanwhile,  Macon  heard  Porter
come in the back way, where he was greeted by explosive barks from Edward.
“Monster,” Porter said. “Do you know how long I’ve been looking for you?”
The  phone  rang  over  and  over,  unanswered.  Julian  looked  at  Macon  and
raised his eyebrows but made no comment.

Macon and Julian had met some dozen years ago, when Macon was still at

the bottle-cap factory. He’d been casting about for other occupations at the
time. He’d begun to believe he might like to work on a newspaper. But he’d
had no training, not a single journalism course. So he started the only way he
could think of: He contributed a freelance article to a neighborhood weekly.
His subject was a crafts fair over in Washington. Getting there is difficult, he
wrote, because the freeway is so blank you start feeling all lost and sad. And
once you’ve arrived, it’s worse. The streets are not like ours and don’t even
run at right angles. He went on to evaluate some food he’d sampled at an
outdoor booth, but found it contained a spice he wasn’t used to, something
sort of cold and yellow I would almost describe as foreign, and settled instead
for a hot dog from a vendor across the street who wasn’t even part of the fair.
The  hot  dog  I  can  recommend,  he  wrote,  though  it  made  me  a  little
regretfulbecause  Sarah,  my  wife,  uses  the  same  kind  of  chili  sauce  and  I
thought of home the minute I smelled it. He also recommended the patchwork
quilts, one of which had a starburst pattern like the quilt in his grandmother’s
room. He suggested that his readers leave the fair no later than three thirty,
since  you’ll  be  driving  into  Baltimoreright  past  Lexington  Market  and  will
want to pick up your crabs before it closes .

His  article  was  published  beneath  a  headline  reading  CRAFTS  FAIR

DELIGHTS, INSTRUCTS. There was a subhead under that. Or, it read, I Feel
So Broke-Up, I Want to Go Home. Until he saw the subhead, Macon hadn’t
realized what tone he’d given his piece. Then he felt silly.

But Julian Edge thought it was perfect. Julian phoned him. “You the fellow

who wrote that hot dog thing in the Watchbird?”

“Well, yes.”

“Ha!”

“Well, I don’t see what’s so funny,” Macon said stiffly.

“Who said it was funny? It’s perfect. I’ve got a proposition for you.”

They met at the Old Bay Restaurant, where Macon’s grandparents used to

take the four children on their birthdays. “I can personally guarantee the crab
soup,” Macon said. “They haven’t done a thing to it since I was nine.” Julian
said, “Ha!” again and rocked back in his chair. He was wearing a polo shirt
and  white  duck  trousers,  and  his  nose  was  a  bright  shade  of  pink.  It  was
summer, or maybe spring. At any rate, his boat was in the water.

“Now, here’s my plan,” he said over the soup. “I own this little company

called the Businessman’s Press. Well, little: I say little. Actually we sell coast
to coast. Nothing fancy, but useful, you know? Appointment pads, expense
account booklets, compound interest charts, currency conversion wheels . . .
And now I want to  put  out  a  guidebook  for  commercial  travelers.  Just  the
U.S.,  to  begin  with;  maybe  other  countries  later.  We’d  call  it  something
catchy, I don’t know: Reluctant Tourist . . . And you’re the fellow to write it.”

“Me?”

“I knew the minute I read your hot dog piece.”

“But I hate to travel.”

“I kind of guessed that,” Julian said. “So do businessmen. I mean, these

folks are not running around the country for the hell of it,  Macon.  They’d
rather be home in their living rooms. So you’ll be helping them pretend that’s
where they are.”

Then he pulled a square of paper from his breast pocket and said, “What do

you think?”

It  was  a  steel  engraving  of  an  overstuffed  chair.  Attached  to  the  chair’s

back  were  giant,  feathered  wings  such  as  you  would  see  on  seraphim  in
antique Bibles. Macon blinked.

“Your logo,” Julian explained. “Get it?”

“Um . . .”

armchairs dream of staying put. I thought we’d use this on the cover.”

“Ah!” Macon said brightly. Then he said, “But would I actually have to

travel myself?”

“Well, yes.”

“Oh.”

“But just briefly. I’m not looking for anything encyclopedic, I’m looking

for the opposite of encyclopedic. And think of the pay.”

“It pays?”

“It pays a bundle.”

Well, not a bundle, exactly. Still, it did make a comfortable living. It sold

briskly  at  airport  newsstands,  train  stations,  and  office  supply  shops.  His
guide to France did even better. That was part of a major promotion by an
international  car-rental  agency—slipcased  with  The  Businessman’s  Foreign
Phrase Book, which gave the German, French, and Spanish for “We anticipate
an upswing in cross-border funds.” Macon, of course, was not the author of
the phrase book. His only foreign language was Latin.

Now Julian restacked the pages he’d been reading. “Fine,” he said. “I think

we can send this through as is. What’s left of the conclusion?”

“Not much.”

“After this I want to start on the U.S. again.”

“So soon?”

“It’s been three years, Macon.”

“Well, but . . .” Macon said. He gestured toward his leg. “You can see I’d

have trouble traveling.”

“When does your cast come off?”

“Not till the first of November at the earliest.”

“So? A few weeks!”

“But  it  really  seems  to  me  I  just  did  the  U.S.,”  Macon  said.  A  kind  of

fatigue fell over him. These endlessly recurring trips, Boston and Atlanta and
Chicago . . . He let his head drop back on the couch.

Julian said, “Things are changing every minute, Macon. Change! It’s what

keeps  us  in  the  black.  How  far  do  you  think  we’d  get  selling  out-of-date
guidebooks?”

Macon  thought  of  the  crumbling  old  Tips  for  the  Continent  in  his

grandfather’s  library.  Travelers  were  advised  to  invert  a  wineglass  on  their
hotel beds, testing the sheets for damp. Ladies should seal the corks of their
perfume bottles with melted candlewax before packing. Something about that
book  implied  that  tourists  were  all  in  it  together,  equally  anxious  and
defenseless. Macon might almost have enjoyed a trip in those days.

Julian  was  preparing  to  go  now.  He  stood  up,  and  with  some  difficulty

Macon did too. Then Edward, getting wind of a leavetaking, rushed into the
living room and started barking. “Sorry!” Macon shouted above the racket.
“Edward, stop it! I figure that’s his sheep-herding instinct,” he explained to
Julian. “He hates to see anyone straying from the flock.”

They  moved  toward  the  front  hall,  wading  through  a  blur  of  dancing,

yelping dog. When they reached the door, Edward blocked it. Luckily, he was
still trailing his leash, so Macon gave one crutch to Julian and bent to grasp it.
The instant Edward felt the tug, he turned and snarled at Macon. “Whoa!”
Julian said, for Edward when he snarled was truly ugly. His fangs seemed to
lengthen. He snapped at his leash with an audible click. Then he snapped at
Macon’s  hand.  Macon  felt  Edward’s  hot  breath  and  the  oddly  intimate
dampness of his teeth. His hand was not so much bitten as struck— slammed
into with a jolt such as you’d get from an electric fence. He stepped back and
dropped  the  leash.  His  other  crutch  clattered  to  the  floor.  The  front  hall
seemed to be full of crutches; there was some splintery, spiky feeling to the
air.

“Whoa, there!” Julian said. He spoke into a sudden silence. The dog sat

back now, panting and shamefaced. “Macon? Did he get you?” Julian asked.

Macon looked down at his hand. There were four red puncture marks in the

fleshy  part—two  in  front,  two  in  back—but  no  blood  at  all  and  very  little

pain. “I’m all right,” he said.

a dog like that,” he said. “I’d shoot him.”

“He was just trying to protect me,” Macon said.

“I’d call the S.P.C.A.”

“Why don’t you go now, Julian, while he’s calm.”

“Or the what’s-it, dogcatcher. Tell them you want him done away with.”

“Just go, Julian.”

Julian said, “Well, fine.” He opened the door and slid through it sideways,

glancing back at Edward. “That is not a well dog,” he said before he vanished.

Macon hobbled to the rear of the house and Edward followed, snuffling a

bit and staying close to the ground. In the kitchen, Rose stood on a stepstool
in  front  of  a  towering  glass-fronted  cupboard,  accepting  the  groceries  that
Charles and Porter handed up to her. “Now I need the n’s, anything starting
with n,” she was saying.

“How about these noodles?” Porter asked. “ N for noodles? P for pasta?”

“E for elbow macaroni. You might have passed those up earlier, Porter.”

“Rose?” Macon said. “It seems Edward’s given me a little sort of nip.”

She turned, and Charles and Porter stopped work to examine the hand he

held out. It was hurting him by now—a deep, stinging pain. “Oh, Macon!”
Rose cried. She came down off the stepstool. “How did it happen?”

“It was an accident, that’s all. But I think I need an antiseptic.”

“You need a tetanus shot, too,” Charles told him.

“You need to get rid of that dog,” Porter said.

They looked at Edward. He grinned up at them nervously.

“He didn’t mean any harm,” Macon said.

rid of him, I tell you.”

“See, I can’t,” Macon said.

“Why not?”

“Well, see . . .”

They waited.

“You know I don’t mind the cat,” Rose said. “But Edward is so disruptive,

Macon. Every day he gets more and more out of control.”

“Maybe you could give him to someone who wants a guard dog,” Charles

said.

“A  service  station,”  Rose  suggested.  She  took  a  roll  of  gauze  from  a

drawer.

“Oh, never,” Macon said. He sat where she pointed, in a chair at the kitchen

table. He propped his crutches in the corner. “Edward alone in some Exxon?
He’d be wretched.”

Rose  swabbed  Mercurochrome  on  his  hand.  It  looked  bruised;  each

puncture mark was puffing and turning blue.

“He’s used to sleeping with me,” Macon told her. “He’s never been alone in

his life.”

Besides, Edward wasn’t a bad dog at heart—only a little unruly. He was

sympathetic and he cared about Macon and plodded after him wherever he
went.  There  was  a  furrowed  W  on  his  forehead  that  gave  him  a  look  of
concern. His large, pointed, velvety ears seemed more expressive than other
dogs’ ears; when he was happy they stuck straight out at either side of his
head like airplane wings. His smell was unexpectedly pleasant—the sweetish
smell  a  favorite  sweater  takes  on  when  it’s  been  folded  away  in  a  drawer
unwashed.

And he’d been Ethan’s.

Once upon a time Ethan had brushed him, bathed him, wrestled on the floor

with him; and when Edward stopped to paw at one ear Ethan would ask, with
the  soberest  courtesy,  “Oh,  may  I  scratch  that  for  you?”  The  two  of  them
watched daily at the window for the afternoon paper, and the instant it arrived
Ethan  sent  Edward  bounding  out  to  fetch  it—hind  legs  meeting  front  legs,
heels kicking up joyfully. Edward would pause after he got the paper in his
mouth and look around him, as if hoping to be noticed, and then he’d swagger
back all bustling and self-important and pause again at the front hall mirror to
admire the figure he cut. “Conceited,” Ethan would say fondly. Ethan picked
up  a  tennis  ball  to  throw  and  Edward  grew  so  excited  that  he  wagged  his
whole  hind  end.  Ethan  took  Edward  outside  with  a  soccer  ball  and  when
Edward got carried away—tearing about and shouldering the ball into a hedge
and growling ferociously—Ethan’s laugh rang out so high and clear, such a
buoyant sound floating through the air on a summer evening.

“I just can’t,” Macon said.

There was a silence.

Rose wrapped gauze around his hand, so gently he hardly felt it. She tucked

the end under and reached for a roll of adhesive tape. Then she said, “Maybe
we could send him to obedience school.”

“Obedience school is for minor things—walking to heel and things,” Porter

told her. “What we have here is major.”

“It is not!” Macon said. “It’s really nothing at all. Why, the woman at the

Meow-Bow got on wonderfully with him.”

“Meow-Bow?”

“Where I boarded him when I went to England. She was just crazy about

him. She wanted me to let her train him.”

“So call her, why don’t you.”

“Maybe I will,” Macon said.

He wouldn’t, of course. The woman had struck him as bizarre. But there

was no sense going into that now.

On Sunday morning Edward tore the screen door, trying to get at an elderly

neighbor  who’d  stopped  by  to  borrow  a  wrench.  On  Sunday  afternoon  he

sprang at Porter to keep him from leaving on an errand. Porter had to creep
out the rear when Edward wasn’t watching. “This is undignified,” Porter told
Macon. “When are you going to call the Kit-Kat or whatever it is?”

Macon explained that on Sundays the Meow-Bow would surely be closed.

Monday morning, when Edward went for a walk with Rose, he lunged at a

passing jogger and yanked Rose off her feet. She came home with a scraped
knee. She said, “Have you called the Meow-Bow yet?”

“Not quite,” Macon said.

“Macon,” Rose said. Her voice was very quiet. “Tell me something.”

“What’s that, Rose?”

“Can you explain why you’re letting things go on this way?”

No, he couldn’t, and that was the truth. It was getting so he was baffling

even to himself. He felt infuriated by Edward’s misdeeds, but somehow he
viewed them as visitations of fate. There was nothing he could do about them.
When Edward approached him later with a mangled belt of Porter’s trailing
from his mouth, all Macon said was, “Oh, Edward . . .”

He  was  sitting  on  the  couch  at  the  time,  having  been  snagged  by  an

especially outrageous moment in Rose’s soap opera. Rose looked over at him.
Her expression was odd. It wasn’t disapproving; it was more like . . . He cast
about for the word. Resigned. That was it. She looked at him the way she
would look at, say, some hopeless wreck of a man wandering drugged on a
downtown street. After all, she seemed to be thinking, there was probably not
much that you could do for such a person.

“Meow-Bow Animal Hospital.”

“Is, ah, Muriel there, please?”

“Hold on a minute.”

He waited, braced against a cabinet. (He was using the pantry telephone.)

He heard two women discussing Fluffball Cohen’s rabies shot. Then Muriel
picked up the receiver. “Hello?”

“Yes, this is Macon Leary. I don’t know if you remember me or—”

“Oh, Macon! Hi there! How’s Edward doing?”

“Well, he’s getting worse.”

She tsk-tsked.

“He’s been attacking right and left. Snarling, biting, chewing things—”

“Did your neighbor tell you I came looking for you?”

“What? Yes, he did.”

“I was right on your street, running an errand. I make a little extra money

running errands. George, it’s called. Don’t you think that’s cute?”

“Excuse me?”

“George. It’s the name of my company. I stuck a flyer under your door. Let

George  do  it,  it  says,  and  then  it  lists  all  the  prices:  meeting  planes,
chauffeuring, courier service, shopping . . . Gift shopping’s most expensive
because for that I have to use my own taste. Didn’t you get my flyer? I really
stopped  by  just  to  visit,  though.  But  your  neighbor  said  you  hadn’t  been
around.”

“No, I broke my leg,” Macon said.

“Oh, that’s too bad.”

“And I couldn’t manage alone of course, so—”

“You should have called George.”

“George who?”

“George my company! The one I was just telling you about.”

“Oh, yes.”

“Then you wouldn’t have had to leave that nice house. I liked your house.

Is that where you lived when you were married, too?”

“Well, yes.”

“I’m surprised she agreed to give it up.”

“The point is,” Macon said, “I’m really at the end of my rope with Edward

here, and I was wondering if you might be able to help me.”

“Sure I can help!”

“Oh, that’s wonderful,” Macon said.

“I can do anything,” Muriel told him. “Search and alert, search and rescue,

bombs, narcotics—”

“Narcotics?”

“Guard training, attack training, poison-proofing, kennelosis—”

“Wait, I don’t even know what some of those things are,” Macon said.

“I can even teach split personality.”

“What’s split personality?”

“Where your dog is, like, nice to you but kills all others.”

“You know, I think I may be over my head here,” Macon said.

“No, no! Don’t say that!”

“But this is just the simplest problem. His only fault is, he wants to protect

me.”

“You can take protection too far,” Muriel told him.

Macon tried a little joke. “ ‘It’s a jungle out there,’ he’s saying. That’s what

he’s trying to say. ‘I know better than you do, Macon.’ ”

“Oh?” Muriel said. “You let him call you by your first name?”

“Well—”

“He needs to learn respect,” she said. “Five or six times a week I’ll come

out, for however long it takes. I’ll start with the basics; you always do that:
sitting,  heeling  .  .  .  My  charge  is  five  dollars  a  lesson.  You’re  getting  a
bargain. Most I charge ten.”

Macon tightened his hold on the receiver. “Then why not ten for me?” he

asked.

“Oh, no! You’re a friend.”

He  felt  confused.  He  gave  her  his  address  and  arranged  a  time  with the

nagging sense that something was slipping out of his control. “But look,” he
said, “about the fee, now—”

“See you tomorrow!” she said. She hung up.

At supper that night when he told the others, he thought they did a kind of

double  take.  Porter  said,  “You  actually  called?”  Macon  said,  “Yes,  why
not?”—acting very offhand—and so the others took their cue and dropped the
subject at once.

seven

When I was a little girl,” Muriel said, “I didn’t like dogs at all or any other

kinds of animals either. I thought they could read my mind. My folks gave me
a puppy for my birthday and he would, like, cock his head, you know how
they do? Cock his head and fix me with these bright round eyes and I said,
‘Ooh! Get him away from me! You know I can’t stand to be stared at.’ ”

She  had  a  voice  that  wandered  too  far  in  all  directions.  It  screeched

upward; then it dropped to a raspy growl. “They had to take him back. Had to
give him to a neighbor boy and buy me a whole different present, a beauty-
parlor permanent which is what I’d set my heart on all along.”

She and Macon were standing in the entrance hall. She still had her coat on

—a bulky-shouldered, three-quarter length, nubby black affair of a type last
seen in the 1940s. Edward sat in front of her as he’d been ordered. He had
met  her  at  the  door  with  his  usual  display,  leaping  and  snarling,  but  she’d
more or less walked right through him and pointed at his rump and told him to
sit. He’d gaped at her. She had reached over and poked his rear end down
with a long, sharp index finger.

“Now you kind of cluck your tongue,” she’d told Macon, demonstrating.

“They get to know a cluck means praise. And when I hold my hand out—see?
That means he has to stay.”

Edward stayed, but a yelp erupted from him every few seconds, reminding

Macon  of  the  periodic  bloops  from  a  percolator.  Muriel  hadn’t  seemed  to
hear. She’d started discussing her lesson plan and then for no apparent reason
had veered to her autobiography. But shouldn’t Edward be allowed to get up
now? How long did she expect him to sit there?

“I  guess  you’re  wondering  why  I’d  want  a  permanent  when  this  hair of

mine is so frizzy,” she said. “Old mop! But I’ll be honest, this is not natural.
My natural hair is real straight and lanky. Times I’ve just despaired of it. It
was  blond  when  I  was  a  baby,  can  you  believe  that?  Blond  as  a  fairy-tale
princess. People told my mother I’d look like Shirley Temple if she would

just curl my hair, and so she did, she rolled my hair on orange juice tins. I had
blue eyes, too, and  they  stayed  that  way  for  a  long  long  time,  a  whole  lot
longer than  most  babies’  do.  People  thought  I’d  look  that  way  forever  and
they talked about me going into the movies. Seriously! My mother arranged
for tap-dance school when I wasn’t much more than a toddler. No one ever
dreamed my hair would turn on me.”

Edward moaned. Muriel looked past Macon, into the glass of a picture that

hung behind him. She cupped a hand beneath the ends of her hair, as if testing
its weight. “Think what it must feel like,” she said, “waking up one morning
and finding you’ve gone dark. It near about killed my mother, I can tell you.
Ordinary dull old Muriel, muddy brown eyes and hair as black as dirt.”

Macon sensed he was supposed to offer some argument, but he was too

anxious about Edward. “Oh, well . . .” he said. Then he said, “Shouldn’t we
be letting him up now?”

“Up? Oh, the dog. In a minute,” she said. “So anyway. The reason it’s so

frizzy  is,  I  got  this  thing  called  a  body  perm.  You  ever  heard  of  those?
They’re supposed to just add body, but something went wrong. You think this
is bad. If I was to take a brush to it, my hair would spring straight out from
my head. I mean absolutely straight out. Kind of like a fright wig, isn’t that
what you call it? So I can’t even brush it. I get up in the morning and there I
am, ready to go. Lord, I hate to think of the tangles.”

“Maybe you could just comb it,” Macon suggested.

“Hard to drag a comb through it. All the little teeth would break off.”

“Maybe one of those thick-toothed combs that black people use.”

“I know what you mean but I’d feel silly buying one.”

“What for?” Macon asked. “They’re just hanging there in supermarkets. It

wouldn’t have to be a big deal. Buy milk and bread or something and an Afro
comb, no one will even think twice.”

“Well,  I  suppose  you’re  right,”  she  said,  but  now  that  she’d  got  him

involved it seemed she’d lost interest in the problem herself. She snapped her
fingers over Edward’s head. “Okay!” she said. Edward jumped up, barking.
“That was very good,” she told him.

In fact, it was so good that Macon felt a little cross. Things couldn’t be that

easy,  he  wanted  to  say.  Edward  had  improved  too  quickly,  the  way  a
toothache will improve the moment you step into a dentist’s waiting room.

Muriel slipped her purse off her shoulder and set it on the hall table. Out

came a long blue leash attached to a choke chain. “He’s supposed to wear this
all the time,” she said. “Every minute till he’s trained. That way you can yank
him back whenever he does something wrong. The leash is six dollars even,
and the chain is two ninety-five. With tax it comes to, let’s see, nine forty.
You can pay me at the end of the lesson.”

She  slipped  the  choke  chain  over  Edward’s  head.  Then  she  paused  to

examine a fingernail. “If I break another nail I’m going to scream,” she said.
She took a step back and pointed to Edward’s rump. After a brief hesitation,
he sat. Seated, he looked noble, Macon thought—chesty and solemn, nothing
like his usual self. But when Muriel snapped her fingers, he jumped up as
unruly as ever.

“Now you try,” Muriel told Macon.

Macon  accepted  the  leash  and  pointed  to  Edward’s  rump.  Edward  stood

fast. Macon frowned and pointed more sternly. He felt foolish. Edward knew,
if this woman didn’t, how little authority Macon had.

“Poke him down,” Muriel said.

This was going to be awkward. He propped a crutch against the radiator

and bent stiffly to jab Edward with one finger. Edward sat. Macon clucked.
Then he straightened and backed away, holding out his palm, but instead of
staying,  Edward  rose  and  followed  him.  Muriel  hissed  between  her  teeth.
Edward shrank down again. “He doesn’t take you seriously,” Muriel said.

“Well, I know that,” Macon snapped.

His broken leg was starting to ache.

“In  fact  I  didn’t  have  so  much  as  a  kitten  the  whole  entire  time  I  was

growing up,” Muriel said. Was she just going to leave Edward sitting there?
“Then a couple of years ago I saw this ad in the paper, Make extra money in
your off hours. Work as little or as much as you like. Place was a dog-training
firm that went around to people’s houses. Doggie, Do, it was called. Don’t

you just hate that name? Reminds me of dog-do. But anyhow, I answered the
ad. ‘To be honest I don’t like animals,’ I said, but Mr. Quarles, the owner, he
told me that was just as well. He told me it was people who got all mushy
about them that had the most trouble.”

“Well, that makes sense,” Macon said, glancing at Edward. He had heard

that dogs developed backaches if they were made to sit too long.

“I  was  just  about  his  best  pupil,  it  turns  out.  Seems  I  had  a  way  with

animals. So then I got a job at the Meow-Bow. Before that I worked at the
Rapid-Eze Copy Center and believe me, I was looking for a change. Who’s
the lady?”

“Lady?”

“The lady I just saw walking through the dining room.”

“That’s Rose.”

“Is she your ex-wife? Or what.”

“She’s my sister.”

“Oh, your sister!”

“This house belongs to her,” Macon said.

“I don’t live with anybody either,” Muriel told him.

Macon blinked. Hadn’t he just said he lived with his sister?

“Sometimes late at night when I get desperate for someone to talk to I call

the time signal,” Muriel said. “ ‘At the tone the time will be eleven . . . forty-
eight. And fifty seconds.’ ” Her voice took on a fruity fullness. “ ‘At the tone
the time will be eleven . . . forty-nine. Exactly.’ You can release him now.”

“Pardon?”

“Release your dog.”

Macon snapped his fingers and Edward jumped up, yapping.

“How about you?” Muriel asked. “What do you do for a living?”

Macon said, “I write tour guides.”

“Tour guides! Lucky.”

“What’s lucky about it?”

“Why, you must get to travel all kinds of places!”

“Oh, well, travel,” Macon said.

“I’d love to travel.”

“It’s just red tape, mostly,” Macon said.

“I’ve never even been on an airplane, you realize that?”

“It’s red tape in motion. Ticket lines, custom lines . . . Should Edward be

barking that way?”

Muriel gave Edward a slit-eyed look and he quieted.

“If I could go anywhere I’d go to Paris,” she said.

“Paris is terrible. Everybody’s impolite.”

“I’d walk along the Seine, like they say in the song. ‘You will find your

love in Paris,’ ” she sang scratchily, “ ‘if you walk along the—’ I just think it
sounds so romantic.”

“Well, it’s not,” Macon said.

“I bet you don’t know where to look, is all. Take me with you next time! I

could show you the good parts.”

Macon  cleared  his  throat.  “Actually,  I  have  a  very  limited  expense

account,” he told her. “I never even took my wife, or, um, my . . . wife.”

“I was only teasing,” she told him.

“Oh.”

“You think I meant it?”

“Oh, no.”

She grew suddenly brisk. “That will be fourteen forty, including the leash

and the choke chain.” Then while Macon was fumbling through his wallet she
said, “You have to practice what he’s learned, and no one else can practice for
you. I’ll come back tomorrow for the second lesson. Will eight in the morning
be too early? I’ve got to be at the Meow-Bow at nine.”

“Eight will be fine,” Macon told her. He counted out fourteen dollars and

all the change he had loose in his pocket—thirty-six cents.

“You can pay me the other four cents tomorrow,” she said.

Then she made Edward sit and she handed the leash to Macon. “Release

him when I’m gone,” she said.

Macon held out his palm and stared hard into Edward’s eyes, begging him

to  stay.  Edward  stayed,  but  he  moaned  when  he  saw  Muriel  leave.  When
Macon snapped his fingers, Edward jumped up and attacked the front door.

All  that  afternoon  and  evening,  Macon  and  Edward  practiced.  Edward

learned to plop his rump down at the slightest motion of a finger. He stayed
there, complaining and rolling his eyes, while Macon clucked approvingly. By
suppertime,  a  cluck  was  part  of  the  family language. Charles clucked over
Rose’s  pork  chops.  Porter  clucked  when  Macon  dealt  him  a  good  hand  of
cards.

“Imagine  a  flamenco  dancer  with  galloping  consumption,”  Rose  told

Charles and Porter. “That’s Edward’s trainer. She talks non-stop, I don’t know
when she comes up for air. When she talked about her lesson plan she kept
saying ‘simplistic’ for ‘simple.’ ”

“I thought you were going to stay out of sight,” Macon told Rose.

“Well? Did you ever see me?”

“Muriel did.”

“I  guess  so!  The  way  she  was  always  peering  around  your  back  and

snooping.”

There  were  constant  slamming  sounds  from  the  living  room,  because

Edward’s new leash kept catching on the rocking chair and dragging it behind
him. During the course of the evening he chewed a pencil to splinters, stole a
pork-chop bone from the garbage bin, and threw up on the sun porch rug; but
now that he could sit on command, everyone felt more hopeful.

“When I was in high school I made nothing but A’s,” Muriel said. “You’re

surprised at that, aren’t you. You think I’m kind of like, not  an  intellect.  I
know what you’re thinking! You’re surprised.”

“No, I’m not,” Macon said, although he was, actually.

“I made A’s because I caught on to the trick,” Muriel told him. “You think

it’s not a trick? There’s a trick to everything; that’s how you get through life.”

They were in front of the house—both of them in raincoats, for it was a

damp, drippy morning. Muriel wore truncated black suede boots with witchy
toes and needle heels. Her legs rose out of them like toothpicks. The leash
trailed from her fingers. Supposedly, she was teaching Edward to walk right.
Instead she went on talking about her schooldays.

“Some of my teachers told me I should go to college,” she said. “This one

in particular, well she wasn’t a teacher but a librarian. I worked in the library
for her, shelving books and things; she said, ‘Muriel, why don’t you go on to
Towson  State?’  But  I  don’t  know  .  .  .  and  now  I  tell  my  sister,  ‘You  be
thinking of college, hear? Don’t drop out like I dropped out.’ I’ve got this
little sister? Claire? Her hair never turned. She’s blond as an angel. Here’s
what’s funny, though: she couldn’t care less. Braids her hair back any old how
to keep it out of her eyes. Wears raggy jeans and forgets to shave her legs.
Doesn’t it always work that way? My folks believe she’s wonderful. She’s the
good one and I’m the bad one. It’s not her fault, though; I don’t blame Claire.
People just get fixed in these certain frames of other people’s opinions, don’t
you  find  that’s  true?  Claire  was  always  Mary  in  the  Nativity  Scene  at
Christmas. Boys in her grade school were always proposing, but there I was
in high school and no one proposed to me, I can tell you. Aren’t high school
boys just so frustrating? I mean they’d invite me out and all, like to drive-in
movies  and  things,  and  they’d  act  so  tense  and  secret,  sneaking  one  arm
around my shoulder inch by inch like they thought I wouldn’t notice and then
dropping a hand down, you know how they do, lower and lower while all the
time  staring  straight  ahead  at  the  movie  like  it  was  the  most  fascinating
spectacle they’d ever seen in their lives. You just had to feel sorry for them.
But then Monday morning there they were like nothing had taken place, real

boisterous and horsing around with their friends and nudging each other when
I walked past but not so much as saying hello to me. You think that didn’t hurt
my feelings? Not one boy in all that time treated me like a steady girlfriend.
They’d ask me out on Saturday night and expect me to be so nice to them, but
you think they ever ate lunch with me next Monday in the school cafeteria, or
walked me from class to class?”

She  glanced  down  at  Edward.  Abruptly,  she  slapped  her  hip;  her  black

vinyl raincoat made a buckling sound. “That’s the ‘heel’ command,” she told
Macon.  She  started  walking.  Edward  followed  uncertainly.  Macon  stayed
behind. It had been hard enough getting down the front porch steps.

“He’s  supposed  to  match  his  pace  to  anything,”  she  called  back.  “Slow,

fast, anything I do.” She speeded up. When Edward crossed in front of her,
she walked right into him. When he dawdled, she yanked his leash. She tip-
tapped briskly eastward, her coat a stiff, swaying triangle beneath the smaller
triangle of her hair blowing back. Macon waited, ankle-deep in wet leaves.

On the return trip, Edward kept close to Muriel’s left side. “I think he’s got

the hang of it,” she called. She arrived in front of Macon and offered him the
leash. “Now you.”

He attempted to slap his hip—which was difficult, on crutches. Then he set

off.  He  was  agonizingly  slow  and  Edward  kept  pulling  ahead.  “Yank  that
leash!” Muriel said, clicking along behind. “He knows what he’s supposed to
do. Contrary thing.”

Edward fell into step, finally, although he gazed off in a bored, lofty way.

“Don’t forget to cluck,” Muriel said. “Every little minute, you have to praise
him.” Her heels made a scraping sound behind them. “Once I worked with
this dog that had never in her life been housebroken. Two years old and not
one  bit  housebroken  and  the  owners  were  losing  their  minds.  First  I  can’t
figure it out; then it comes to me. That dog thought she wasn’t supposed to
piddle anyplace,  not  indoors  or  outdoors,  either  one.  See,  no  one  had  ever
praised her when she did it right. Did you ever hear of such a thing? I had to
catch her peeing outdoors which wasn’t easy, believe me, because she was all
the time ashamed and trying to hide it, and then I praised her to bits and after
a while she caught on.”

They reached the corner. “Now, when you stop, he has to sit,” she said.

“But how will I practice?” Macon asked.

“What do you mean?”

“I’m on these crutches.”

“So? It’s good exercise for your leg,” she said. She didn’t ask how the leg

had been broken. Come to think of it, there was something impervious about
her, in spite of all her interest in his private life. She said, “Practice lots, ten
minutes a session.”

“Ten minutes!”

“Now let’s start back.”

She led the way, her angular, sashaying walk broken by the jolt of her sharp

heels. Macon and Edward followed. When they reached the house, she asked
what time it was. “Eight fifty,” Macon said severely. He mistrusted women
who wore no watches.

“I have to get going. That will be five dollars, please, and the four cents

you owe me from yesterday.”

He  gave  her  the  money  and  she  stuffed  it  in  her  raincoat  pocket.  “Next

time, I’ll stay longer and talk,” she said. “That’s a promise.” She trilled her
fingers at him, and then she clicked off toward a car that was parked down the
street—an aged, gray, boat-like sedan polished to a high shine. When she slid
in and slammed the door behind her, there was a sound like falling beer cans.
The engine twanged and rattled before it took hold. Macon shook his head,
and he and Edward returned to the house.

Between Wednesday and Thursday, Macon spent what seemed a lifetime

struggling  up  and  down  Dempsey  Road  beside  Edward.  His  armpits
developed a permanent ache. There was a vertical seam of pain in his thigh.
This  made  no  sense;  it  should  have  been  in  the  shin.  He  wondered  if
something  had  gone  wrong—if  the  break  had  been  set  improperly,  for
instance, so that some unusual strain was being placed upon the thighbone.
Maybe he’d have to go back to the hospital and get his leg rebroken, probably
under general anesthesia with all its horrifying complications; and then he’d
spend months in traction and perhaps walk the rest of his life with a limp. He
imagined himself tilting across intersections with a grotesque, lopsided gait.

Sarah, driving past, would screech to a halt. “Macon?” She would roll down
her window. “Macon, what happened?”

He would raise one arm and let it flop and totter away from her.

Or tell her, “I’m surprised you care enough to inquire.”

No, just totter away.

Most  likely  these  little  spells  of  self-pity  (an  emotion  he  despised

ordinarily) were caused by sheer physical exhaustion. How had he got himself
into  this?  Slapping  his  haunch  was  the  first  problem;  then  summoning  his
balance to jerk the leash when Edward fell out of step, and staying constantly
alert for any squirrel or pedestrian. “Sss!” he kept saying, and “Cluck-cluck!”
and “Sss!” again. He supposed passersby must think he was crazy. Edward
loped  beside  him,  occasionally  yawning,  looking  everywhere  for  bikers.
Bikers were his special delight. Whenever he saw one, the hair between his
shoulders stood on end and he lunged forward. Macon felt like a man on a
tightrope that was suddenly set swinging.

At  this  uneven,  lurching  pace,  he  saw  much  more  than  he  would  have

otherwise. He had a lengthy view of every bush and desiccated flower bed.
He memorized eruptions in the sidewalk that might trip him. It was an old
people’s street, and not in the best of repair. The neighbors spent their days
telephoning back and forth among themselves, checking to see that no one
had suffered a stroke alone on the stairs or a heart attack in the bathroom, a
broken hip, blocked windpipe, dizzy spell over the stove with every burner
alight. Some would set out for a walk and find themselves hours later in the
middle of the street, wondering where they’d been headed. Some would start
fixing a bite to eat at noon, a soft-boiled egg or a cup of tea, and by sundown
would still be puttering in their kitchen, fumbling for the salt and forgetting
how  the  toaster  worked.  Macon  knew  all  this  through  his  sister,  who  was
called upon by neighbors in distress. “Rose, dear! Rose, dear!” they would
quaver, and they’d stumble into her yard waving an overdue bill, an alarming
letter, a bottle of pills with a childproof top.

In the evening, taking Edward for his last walk, Macon glanced in windows

and saw people slumped in flowered armchairs, lit blue and shivery by their
TV sets. The Orioles were winning the second game of the World Series, but
these  people  seemed  to  be  staring  at  their  own  thoughts  instead.  Macon
imagined  they  were  somehow  dragging  him  down,  causing  him  to  walk

heavily, to slouch, to grow short of breath. Even the dog seemed plodding and
discouraged.

And when he returned to the house, the others were suffering one of their

fits of indecisiveness. Was it better to lower the thermostat at night, or not?
Wouldn’t the furnace have to work harder if it were lowered? Hadn’t Porter
read  that  someplace?  They  debated  back  and  forth,  settling  it  and  then
beginning again. Why! Macon thought. They were not so very different from
their neighbors. They were growing old themselves. He’d been putting in his
own two bits (by all means, lower the thermostat), but now his voice trailed
off, and he said no more.

That  night,  he  dreamed  he  was  parked  near  Lake  Roland  in  his

grandfather’s ’57 Buick. He was sitting in the dark and some girl was sitting
next to him. He didn’t know her, but the bitter smell of her perfume seemed
familiar, and the rustle of her skirt when she moved closer. He turned and
looked at her. It was Muriel. He drew a breath to ask what she was doing here,
but she put a finger to his lips and stopped him. She moved closer still. She
took his keys from him and set them on the dashboard. Gazing steadily into
his face, she unbuckled his belt and slipped a cool, knowing hand down inside
his trousers.

He woke astonished and embarrassed, and sat bolt upright in his bed.

“Everybody always asks me, ‘What is your dog like?’ ” Muriel said. “ ‘I

bet  he’s  a  model  of  good  behavior,’  they  tell  me.  But  you  want  to  hear
something funny? I don’t own a dog. In fact, the one time I had one around,
he ran off. That was Norman’s dog, Spook. My ex-husband’s. First night we
were married, Spook ran off to Norman’s mom’s. I think he hated me.”

“Oh, surely not,” Macon said.

“He hated me. I could tell.”

They were outdoors again, preparing to put Edward through his paces. By

now, Macon had adjusted to the rhythm of these lessons. He waited, gripping
Edward’s  leash.  Muriel  said,  “It  was  just  like  one  of  those  Walt  Disney
movies.  You  know:  where  the  dog  walks  all  the  way  to  the  Yukon  or
something.  Except  Spook  only  walked  to  Timonium.  Me  and  Norman  had
him downtown in our apartment, and Spook took off and traveled the whole
however many miles it was back to Norman’s mom’s house in Timonium. His

mom calls up: ‘When did you drop Spook off?’ ‘What’re you talking about?’
Norman asks her.”

She  changed  her  voice  to  match  each  character.  Macon  heard  the  thin

whine of Norman’s mother, the stammering boyishness of Norman himself.
He  remembered  last  night’s  dream  and  felt  embarrassed  all  over  again.  He
looked  at  her  directly,  hoping  for  flaws,  and  found  them  in  abundance—a
long, narrow nose, and sallow skin, and two freckled knobs of collarbone that
promised an unluxurious body.

“Seems his mom woke up in the morning,” she was saying, “and there was

Spook,  sitting  on  the  doorstep.  But  that  was  the  first  we  realized  he  was
missing. Norman goes, ‘I don’t know what got into  him.  He  never  ran  off
before.’ And gives me this doubtful kind of look. I could tell he wondered if it
might be my fault. Maybe he thought it was an omen or something. We were
awful  young  to  get  married.  I  can  see  that  now.  I  was  seventeen.  He  was
eighteen—an  only  child.  His  mother’s  pet.  Widowed  mother.  He  had  this
fresh pink face like a girl’s and the shortest hair of any boy in my school and
he buttoned his shirt collars all the way to the neck. Moved in from Parkville
the  end  of  junior  year.  Caught  sight  of  me  in  my  strapless  sundress  and
goggled at me all through every class; other boys teased him but he didn’t pay
any mind. He was just so . . . innocent, you know? He made me feel like I had
powers. There he was  following  me  around  the  halls  with  his  arms  full  of
books and I’d say, ‘Norman? You want to eat lunch with me?’ and he’d blush
and say, ‘Oh, why, uh, you serious?’ He didn’t even know how to drive, but I
told him if he got his license I’d go out with him. ‘We could ride to someplace
quiet and talk and be alone,’ I’d say, ‘you know what I mean?’ Oh, I was bad.
I don’t know what was wrong with me, back then. He got his license in no
time  flat  and  came  for  me  in  his  mother’s  Chevy,  which  incidentally  she
happened to have purchased from my father, who was a salesman for Ruggles
Chevrolet. We found that out at the wedding. Got married the fall of senior
year, he was just dying to marry me so what could I say? and at the wedding
my daddy goes to Norman’s mom, ‘Why, I believe I sold you a car not long
ago,’ but she was too busy crying to take much notice. That woman carried on
like marriage was a fate worse than death. Then when Spook runs off to her
house she tells us, ‘I suppose I’d best keep him, it’s clear as day he don’t like
it there with you-all.’ With me, is what she meant. She held it against me I
took her son away. She claimed I ruined his chances; she wanted him to get
his diploma. But I never kept him from getting his diploma. He was the one
who said he might as well drop out; said why bother staying in school when

he could make a fine living on floors.”

“On what?” Macon asked.

“Floors. Sanding floors. His uncle was Pritchett Refinishing. Norman went

into the business as soon as we got married and his mom was always talking
about the waste. She said he could have been an accountant or something, but
I  don’t  know  who  she  thought  she  was  kidding.  He  never  mentioned
accounting to me.”

She pulled a dog hair off her coat sleeve, examined it, and flicked it away.

“So let’s see him,” she said.

“Pardon?”

“Let’s see him heel.”

Macon  slapped  his  hip  and  started  off,  with  Edward  lagging  just  a  bit

behind. When Macon stopped, Edward stopped too and sat down. Macon was
pleasantly surprised, but Muriel said, “He’s not sitting.”

“What? What do you call it, then?”

“He’s keeping his rear end about two inches off the ground. Trying to see

what he can get away with.”

“Oh, Edward,” Macon said sadly.

He pivoted and returned. “Well, you’ll have to work on that,” Muriel said.

“But meantime, we’ll go on to the down-stay. Let’s try it in the house.”

Macon worried they’d meet up with Rose, but she was nowhere to be seen.

The  front  hall  smelled  of  radiator  dust.  The  clock  in  the  living  room  was
striking the half hour.

“This is where we start on Edward’s real problem,” Muriel said. “Getting

him to lie down and stay, so he won’t all the time be jumping at the door.”

She showed him the command: two taps of the foot. Her boot made a crisp

sound. When Edward didn’t respond, she bent and pulled his forepaws out
from under him. Then she let him up and went through it again, several times
over. Edward made no progress.  When  she  tapped  her  foot,  he  panted  and

looked elsewhere. “Stubborn,” Muriel told him. “You’re just as stubborn as
they come.” She said to Macon, “A lot of dogs will act like this. They hate to
lie down; I don’t know why. Now you.”

Macon tapped his foot. Edward seemed fascinated by something off to his

left.

“Grab his paws,” Muriel said.

“On crutches?”

“Sure.”

Macon sighed and propped his crutches in the corner. He lowered himself

to the floor with his cat in front of him, took Edward’s paws and forced him
down. Edward rumbled threateningly, but in the end he submitted. To get up
again, Macon had to hold onto the lamp table. “This is really very difficult,”
he said, but Muriel said, “Listen, I’ve taught a man with no legs at all.”

“You  have?”  Macon  said.  He  pictured  a  legless  man  dragging  along  the

sidewalk with some vicious breed of dog, Muriel standing by unconcerned
and  checking  her  manicure.  “I  don’t  suppose  you  ever  broke  a  leg,”  he
accused her. “Getting around is harder than it looks.”

“I broke an arm once,” Muriel said.

“An arm is no comparison.”

“I did it training dogs, in fact. Got knocked off a porch by a Doberman

pinscher.”

“A Doberman!”

“Came  to  to  find  him  standing  over  me,  showing  all  his  teeth.  Well,  I

thought of what they said at Doggie, Do: Only one of you can be boss. So I
tell him, ‘Absolutely not.’ Those were the first words that came to me—what
my  mother  used  to  say  when  she  wasn’t  going  to  let  me  get  away  with
something. ‘Absolutely not,’ I tell him and my right arm is broken so I hold
out my left, hold out my palm and stare into his eyes—they can’t stand for
you to meet their eyes—and get to my feet real slow. And durned if that dog
doesn’t settle right back on his haunches.”

“Good Lord,” Macon said.

“I’ve had a cocker spaniel fly directly at my throat. Meanest thing you ever

saw. Had a German shepherd take my ankle in his teeth. Then he let it go.”

She  lifted  a  foot  and  rotated  it.  Her  ankle  was  about  the  thickness  of  a

pencil.

“Have you ever met with a failure?” Macon asked her. “Some dog you just

gave up on?”

“Not a one,” she said. “And Edward’s not about to be the first.”

But Edward seemed to think otherwise. Muriel worked with him another

half hour, and although he would stay once he was down, he flatly refused to
lie down on his own. Each time, he had to be forced. “Never mind,” Muriel
said.  “This  is  the  way  most  of  them  do.  I  bet  tomorrow  he’ll  be  just  as
stubborn, so I’m going to skip a day. You keep practicing, and I’ll be back this
same time Saturday.”

Then she told Edward to stay, and she accepted her money and slipped out

the  door.  Observing  Edward’s  erect,  resisting  posture,  Macon  felt
discouraged. Why hire a trainer at all, if she left him to do the training? “Oh, I
don’t  know,  I  don’t  know,”  he  said.  Edward  gave  a  sigh  and  walked  off,
although he hadn’t been released.

All  that  afternoon  and  evening,  Edward  refused  to  lie  down.  Macon

wheedled, threatened, cajoled; Edward muttered ominously and stood firm.
Rose and the boys edged around the two of them, politely averting their eyes
as if they’d stumbled on some private quarrel.

Then the next morning, Edward charged the mailman. Macon managed to

grab the leash, but it raised some doubts in his mind. What did all this sitting
and heeling have to do with Edward’s real problem? “I should just ship you
off to the pound,” he told Edward. He tapped his foot twice. Edward did not
lie down.

In the afternoon, Macon called the Meow-Bow. “May I speak to Muriel,

please?” he asked. He couldn’t think of her last name.

“Muriel’s not working today,” a girl told him.

“Oh, I see.”

“Her little boy is sick.”

He  hadn’t  known  she  had  a  little  boy.  He  felt  some  inner  click  of

adjustment; she was a slightly different person from the one he’d imagined.
“Well,” he said, “this is Macon Leary. I guess I’ll talk to her tomorrow.”

“Oh, Mr. Leary. You want to call her at home?”

“No, that’s all right.”

“I can give you her number if you want to call her at home.”

“I’ll just talk to her tomorrow. Thank you.”

Rose  had  an  errand  downtown,  so  she  agreed  to  drop  him  off  at  the

Businessman’s  Press.  He  wanted  to  deliver  the  rest  of  his  guidebook.
Stretched  across  the  backseat  with  his  crutches,  he  gazed  at  the  passing
scenery: antique office buildings, tasteful restaurants, health food stores and
florists’ shops, all peculiarly hard-edged and vivid in the light of a brilliant
October afternoon. Rose perched behind the wheel and drove at a steady, slow
pace that was almost hypnotic. She wore a little round basin-shaped hat with
ribbons down the back. It made her look prim and Sunday schoolish.

One of the qualities that all four Leary children shared was a total inability

to  find  their  way  around.  It  was  a  kind  of  dyslexia,  Macon  believed—a
geographic dyslexia. None of them ever stepped outside without obsessively
noting all available landmarks, clinging to a fixed and desperate mental map
of  the  neighborhood.  Back  home,  Macon  had  kept  a  stack  of  index  cards
giving  detailed  directions  to  the  houses  of  his  friends—even  friends  he’d
known for decades. And it used to be that whenever Ethan met a new boy,
Macon’s  first  anxious  question  was,  “Where  exactly  does  he  live,  do  you
know?” Ethan had had a tendency to form inconvenient alliances. He couldn’t
just hang out with the boy next door; oh, no, it had to be someone who lived
way beyond the Beltway. What did Ethan care? He had no trouble navigating.
This was because he’d lived all his life in one house, was Macon’s theory;
while a person who’d been moved around a great deal never acquired a fixed
point  of  reference  but  wandered  forever  in  a  fog—adrift  upon  the  planet,
helpless, praying that just by luck he might stumble across his destination.

—a  shop  that  sold  a  special  furniture  oil—and  Macon  had  visited  Julian’s
office a hundred times; but even so, they drove in circles till Macon noticed a
familiar steeple. “Stop! Turn left,” he said. Rose pulled up where he directed.
Macon struggled out. “Will you be all right?” he asked Rose. “Do you think
you can find your way back to pick me up?”

“I hope so.”

“Look for the steeple, remember.”

She nodded and drove away.

Macon swung up three granite steps to the brick mansion that housed the

Businessman’s Press. The door was made of polished, golden wood. The floor
inside was tiled with tiny black and white hexagons, just uneven enough to
give purchase to Macon’s crutches.

This wasn’t an ordinary office. The secretary typed in a back room while

Julian, who couldn’t stand being alone, sat out front. He was talking on a red
telephone,  lounging  behind  a  desk  that  was  laden  with  a  clutter  of
advertisements, pamphlets, unpaid bills, unanswered  letters,  empty  Chinese
carryout  cartons,  and  Perrier  bottles.  The  walls  were  covered  with  sailing
charts.  The  bookshelves  held  few  books  but  a  great  many  antique  brass
mariners’ instruments that probably didn’t even work anymore. Anybody with
eyes could see that Julian’s heart was not in the Businessman’s Press but out
on  the  Chesapeake  Bay  someplace.  This  was  to  Macon’s  advantage,  he
figured. Surely no one else would have continued backing his series, with its
staggering expenses and its constant need for updating.

“Rita’s bringing croissants,” Julian said into the phone. “Joe is making his

quiche.” Then he caught sight of Macon. “Macon!” he said. “Stefanie, I’ll get
back to you.” He hung up. “How’s the leg? Here, have a seat.”

He dumped a stack of yachting magazines off a chair. Macon sat down and

handed over his folder. “Here’s the rest of the material on England,” he said.

“Well, finally!”

“This edition as I see it is going to run about ten or twelve pages longer

than the last one,” Macon said. “It’s adding the business women that does it—

listing  which  hotels  offer  elevator  escorts,  which  ones  serve  drinks  in  the
lobbies . . . I think I ought to be paid more.”

“I’ll talk it over with Marvin,” Julian said, flipping through the manuscript.

Macon  sighed.  Julian  spent  money  like  water  but  Marvin  was  more

cautious.

“So now you’re on the U.S. again,” Julian said.

“Well, if you say so.”

“I hope it’s not going to take you long.”

“I can only go so fast,” Macon said. “The U.S. has more cities.”

“Yes, I realize that. In fact I might print this edition in sections: northeast,

mid-Atlantic, and so forth; I don’t know . . .” But then he changed the subject.
(He had a rather skittery mind.) “Did I tell you my new idea? Doctor friend of
mine is looking into it: AccidentalTourist in Poor Health. A list of American-
trained  doctors  and  dentists  in  every  foreign  capital,  plus  maybe  some
suggestions for basic medical supplies: aspirin, Merck Manual—”

“Oh, not a Merck Manual away from home!” Macon said. “Every hangnail

could be cancer, when you’re reading a Merck Manual.”

“Well, I’ll make a note of that,” Julian said (without so much as lifting a

pencil). “Aren’t you going to ask me to autograph your cast? It’s so white.”

“I like it white,” Macon said. “I polish it with shoe polish.”

“I didn’t realize you could do that.”

“I use the liquid kind. It’s the brand with a nurse’s face on the label, if you

ever need to know.”

“Accidental Tourist on Crutches,” Julian said, and he rocked back happily

in his chair.

Macon could tell he was about to start his Macon Leary act. He got hastily

to his feet and said, “Well, I guess I’ll be going.”

“So soon? Why don’t we have a drink?”

with her errand.”

“Ah,” Julian said. “What kind of errand?”

Macon looked at him suspiciously.

“Well? Dry cleaner’s? Shoe repair?”

“Just an ordinary errand, Julian. Nothing special.”

“Hardware store? Pharmacy?”

“No.”

“So what is it?”

“Uh . . . she had to buy Furniture Food.”

Julian’s chair rocked so far back, Macon thought he was going to tip over.

He wished he would, in fact. “Macon, do me a favor,” Julian said. “Couldn’t
you just once invite me to a family dinner?”

“We’re really not much for socializing,” Macon told him.

“It wouldn’t have to be fancy. Just whatever you eat normally. What do you

eat normally? Or I’ll bring the meal myself. You could lock the dog up . . .
what’s his name again?”

“Edward.”

“Edward. Ha! And I’ll come spend the evening.”

“Oh, well,” Macon said vaguely. He arranged himself on his crutches.

“Why don’t I step outside and wait with you.”

“I’d really rather you didn’t,” Macon said.

He couldn’t bear for Julian to see his sister’s little basin hat.

should  be  coming  from.  He  supposed  she  was  lost  again.  The  cold  was
already creeping through the stretched-out sock he wore over his cast.

The trouble was, he decided, Julian had never had anything happen to him.

His  ruddy,  cheerful  face  was  unscarred  by  anything  but  sunburn;  his  only
interest  was  a  ridiculously  inefficient  form  of  transportation.  His  brief
marriage  had  ended  amicably.  He  had  no  children.  Macon  didn’t  want  to
sound  prejudiced,  but  he  couldn’t  help  feeling  that  people  who  had  no
children had never truly grown up. They weren’t entirely . . . real, he felt.

Unexpectedly, he pictured Muriel after the Doberman had knocked her off

the porch. Her arm hung lifeless; he knew the leaden look a broken limb takes
on.  But  Muriel  ignored  it;  she  didn’t  even  glance  at  it.  Smudged  and
disheveled and  battered, she  held  her  other  hand  up.  “Absolutely  not,”  she
said.

She arrived the next morning with a gauzy bouffant scarf swelling over her

hair, her hands thrust deep in her coat pockets. Edward danced around her.
She pointed to his rump. He sat, and she bent to pick up his leash.

“How’s your little boy?” Macon asked her.

She looked over at him. “What?” she said.

“Wasn’t he sick?”

“Who told you that?”

“Someone at the vet’s, when I phoned.”

She went on looking at him.

“What was it? The flu?” he asked.

“Oh, yes, probably,” she said after a moment. “Some little stomach thing.”

“It’s that time of year, I guess.”

“How come you phoned?” she asked him.

“I wanted to know why Edward wouldn’t lie down.”

and considered him.

“I tap my foot but he never obeys me,” Macon said. “Something’s wrong.”

“I told you he’d be stubborn about it.”

“Yes, but I’ve been practicing two days now and he’s not making any—”

“What do you expect? You think I’m magical or something? Why blame

me?”

“Oh, I’m not blaming—”

“You most certainly are. You tell me something’s wrong, you call me on

the phone—”

“I just wanted to—”

“You think it’s weird I didn’t mention Alexander, don’t you?”

“Alexander?”

“You think I’m some kind of unnatural mother.”

“What? No, wait a minute—”

“You’re not going to give me another thought, are you, now you know I’ve

got a kid. You’re like, ‘Oh, forget it, no point getting involved in that,’ and
then  you  wonder  why  I  didn’t  tell  you  about  him  right  off.  Well,  isn’t  it
obvious? Don’t you see what happens when I do?”

Macon wasn’t quite following her logic, perhaps because he was distracted

by Edward. The shriller Muriel’s voice grew, the stiffer Edward’s hair stood
up on the back of his neck. A bad sign. A very bad sign. Edward’s lip was
slowly curling. Gradually, at first almost soundlessly, he began a low growl.

Muriel glanced at him and stopped speaking. She didn’t seem alarmed. She

merely tapped her foot twice. But Edward not only failed to lie down; he rose
from his sitting position. Now he had a distinct, electrified hump between his
shoulders. He seemed to have altered his basic shape. His ears were flattened
against his skull.

“Down,” Muriel said levelly.

With a bellow, Edward sprang straight at her face. Every tooth was bare

and gleaming. His lips were drawn back in a horrible grimace and flecks of
white foam flew from his mouth. Muriel instantly raised the leash. She jerked
it  upward  with  both  fists  and  lifted  Edward  completely  off  the  floor.  He
stopped barking. He started making gargling sounds.

“He’s choking,” Macon said.

Edward’s throat gave an odd sort of click.

“Stop it. It’s enough! You’re choking him!”

Still, she let him hang. Now Edward’s eyes rolled back in their sockets.

Macon grabbed at Muriel’s shoulder but found himself with a handful of coat,
bobbled  and  irregular  like  something  alive.  He  shook  it,  anyhow.  Muriel
lowered Edward to the floor. He landed in a boneless heap, his legs crumpling
beneath  him  and  his  head  flopping  over.  Macon  crouched  at  his  side.
“Edward? Edward? Oh, God, he’s dead!”

Edward raised his head and feebly licked his lips.

“See that? When they lick their lips it’s a sign they’re giving in,” Muriel

said cheerfully. “Doggie, Do taught me that.”

Macon stood up. He was shaking.

“When they lick their lips it’s good but when they put a foot on top of your

foot it’s bad,” Muriel said. “Sounds like a secret language, just about, doesn’t
it?”

“Don’t you ever, ever do that again,” Macon told her.

“Huh?”

“In fact, don’t even bother coming again.”

There was a startled silence.

“Well, fine,” Muriel said, tightening her scarf. “If that’s the way you feel,

just fine and dandy.” She stepped neatly around Edward and opened the front

door. “You want a dog you can’t handle? Fine with me.”

“I’d rather a barking dog than a damaged, timid dog,” Macon said.

Gets  you  into  lawsuits?  You  want  a  dog  that  hates  the  whole  world?  Evil,
nasty, angry dog? That kills the whole world?”

She slipped out the screen door and closed it behind her. Then she looked

through the screen directly into Macon’s eyes. “Why, yes, I guess you do,”
she said.

From the hall floor, Edward gave a moan and watched her walk away.

eight

Now  the  days  were  shorter  and  colder,  and  the  trees  emptied  oceans  of

leaves on the lawn but remained, somehow, as full as ever, so you’d finish
raking and look upward to see a great wash of orange and yellow just waiting
to cover the grass again the minute your back was turned. Charles and Porter
drove over to Macon’s house and raked there as well, and lit the pilot light in
the furnace and repaired the basement window. They reported that everything
seemed fine. Macon heard the news without much interest. Next week he’d be
out of his cast, but no one asked when he was moving back home.

Each  morning  he  and  Edward  practiced  heeling.  They  would  trudge the

length of the block, with Edward matching Macon’s gait so perfectly that he
looked crippled himself. When they met passersby now he muttered but he
didn’t  attack.  “See  there?”  Macon  wanted  to  tell  someone.  Bikers  were
another issue, but Macon had confidence they would solve that problem too,
eventually.

He would make Edward sit and then he’d draw back, holding out a palm.

Edward  waited.  Oh,  he  wasn’t  such  a  bad  dog!  Macon  wished  he  could
change the gestures of command—the palm, the pointed finger, all vestiges of
that heartless trainer—but he supposed  it  was  too  late.  He  tapped  his  foot.
Edward  growled.  “Dear  one,”  Macon  said,  dropping  heavily  beside  him.
“Won’t  you  please  consider  lying  down?”  Edward  looked  away.  Macon
stroked the soft wide space between his ears. “Ah, well, maybe tomorrow,” he
said.

His  family  was  not  so  hopeful.  “What  about  when  you  start  traveling

again?” Rose said. “You’re not leaving him with me. I wouldn’t know how to
handle him.”

Macon told her they would get to that when they got to it.

It was hard for him to imagine resuming his travels. Sometimes he wished

he could stay in his cast forever. In fact, he wished it covered him from head
to  foot.  People  would  thump  faintly  on  his  chest.  They’d  peer  through  his

eyeholes. “Macon? You in there?” Maybe he was, maybe he wasn’t. No one
would ever know.

One  evening  just  after  supper,  Julian  stopped  by  with  a  stack  of  papers.

Macon had to slam Edward into the pantry before he opened the door. “Here
you  are!”  Julian  said,  strolling  past  him.  He  wore  corduroys  and  looked
rugged and healthy. “I’ve been phoning you for three days straight. That dog
sounds awfully close by, don’t you think?”

“He’s in the pantry,” Macon said.

“Well, I’ve brought some materials, Macon—mostly on New York. We’ve

got a lot of suggestions for New York.”

Macon groaned. Julian set his papers on the couch and looked around him.

“Where are the others?” he asked.

“Oh, here and there,” Macon said vaguely, but just then Rose appeared, and

Charles was close behind.

“I hope I’m not interfering with supper,” Julian told them.

“No, no,” Rose said.

“We’ve finished,” Macon said triumphantly.

Julian’s face fell. “Really?” he said. “What time do you eat, anyhow?”

Macon didn’t answer that. (They ate at five-thirty. Julian would laugh.)

Rose  said,  “But  we  haven’t  had  our  coffee.  Wouldn’t  you  like  some

coffee?”

“I’d love some.”

“It seems a little silly,” Macon said, “if you haven’t eaten.”

“Well, yes,” Julian said, “I suppose it does, Macon, to someone like you.

But  for  me,  home-brewed  coffee  is  a  real  treat.  All  the  people  in  my
apartment building eat out, and there’s nothing in any of the kitchens but a
couple cans of peanuts and some diet soda.”

“What kind of place is that?” Rose asked.

“It’s the Calvert Arms—a singles building. Everybody’s single.”

“Oh! What an interesting idea.”

“Well,  not  really,”  Julian  said  gloomily.  “Not  after  a  while.  I  started out

enjoying it but now I think it’s getting me down. Sometimes I wish for the
good old-fashioned way of doing things, with children and families and old
people like normal buildings have.”

“Well, of course you do,” Rose told him. “I’m going to get you some nice

hot coffee.”

She left, and the others sat down. “So. Are you three all there is?” Julian

asked.

Macon refused to answer, but Charles said, “Oh, no, there’s Porter too.”

“Porter? Where is Porter?”

“Um, we’re not too sure.”

“Missing?”

“He went to a hardware store and we think he got lost.”

“A little while before supper.”

“Supper. You mean today.”

“He’s  just  running  an  errand,”  Macon  said.  “Not  lost  in  any  permanent

sense.”

“Where was the store?”

“Someplace on Howard Street,” Charles said. “Rose needed hinges.”

“He got lost on Howard Street.”

Macon stood up. “I’ll go help Rose,” he said.

Rose was setting their grandmother’s clear glass coffee mugs on a silver

tray. “I hope he doesn’t take sugar,” she said. “The sugar-bowl is empty and
Edward’s in the pantry where I keep the bag.”

“I wouldn’t worry about it.”

“Maybe you could go to the pantry and get it for me.”

“Oh, just give him his coffee straight and tell him to take it or leave it.”

“Why, Macon! This is your employer!”

“He’s only here because he hopes we’ll do something eccentric,” Macon

told  her.  “He  has  this  one-sided  notion  of  us.  I  just  pray  none  of  us  says
anything unconventional around him, are you listening?”

“What would we say?” Rose asked. “We’re the most conventional people I

know.”

This was perfectly true, and yet in some odd way it wasn’t. Macon couldn’t

explain it. He sighed and followed her out of the kitchen.

In  the  living  room,  Charles  was  doggedly  debating  whether  they should

answer the phone in case it rang, in case it might be Porter, in case he needed
them to consult a map. “Chances are, though, he wouldn’t bother calling,” he
decided, “because he knows we wouldn’t answer. Or he thinks we wouldn’t
answer. Or I don’t know, maybe he figures we would answer even so, because
we’re worried.”

“Do you always give this much thought to your phone calls?” Julian asked.

Macon said, “Have some coffee, Julian. Try it black.”

“Why,  thank  you,”  Julian  said.  He  accepted  a  mug  and  studied  the

inscription that arched across it. “CENTURY OF PROGRESS 1933,” he read
off. He grinned and raised the mug in a toast. “To progress,” he said.

“Progress,” Rose and Charles echoed. Macon scowled.

Julian said, “What do you do for a living, Charles?”

“I make bottle caps.”

“Bottle caps! Is that a fact!”

“Oh, well, it’s no big thing,” Charles said. “I mean it’s not half as exciting

as it sounds, really.”

“And Rose? Do you work?”

“Yes,  I  do,”  Rose  said,  in  the  brave,  forthright  style  of  someone  being

interviewed. “I work at home; I keep house for the boys. Also I take care of a
lot  of  the  neighbors.  They’re  mostly  old  and  they  need  me  to  read  their
prescriptions and repair their plumbing and such.”

“You repair their plumbing?” Julian asked.

The telephone rang. The others stiffened.

“What do you think?” Rose asked Macon.

“Um . . .”

“But he knows we wouldn’t answer,” Charles told them.

“Yes, he’d surely call a neighbor instead.”

“On the other hand . . .” Charles said.

“On the other hand,” Macon said.

It was Julian’s face that decided him—Julian’s pleased, perked expression.

Macon reached over to the end table and picked up the receiver. “Leary,” he
said.

“Macon?”

It was Sarah.

Macon shot a glance at the others and turned his back to them. “Yes,” he

said.

“Well, finally,” she said. Her voice seemed oddly flat and concrete. All at

once  he  saw  her  clearly:  She  wore  one  of  his  cast-off  shirts  and  she  sat
hugging her bare knees. “I’ve been trying to get in touch with you at home,”
she  said.  “Then  it  occurred  to  me  you  might  be  having  supper  with  your

family.”

“Is something wrong?” he asked.

He was nearly whispering. Maybe Rose understood, from that, who it was,

for she suddenly began an animated conversation with the others. Sarah said,
“What? I can’t hear you.”

“Is everything all right?”

“Who’s that talking?”

“Julian’s here.”

“Oh, Julian! Give him my love. How’s Sukie?”

“Sukie?”

“His boat, Macon.”

“It’s fine,” he said. Or should he have said “she”? For all he knew, Sukie

was at the bottom of the Chesapeake.

“I called because I thought we should talk,” Sarah said. “I was hoping we

could meet for supper some night.”

“Oh. Well. Yes, we could do that,” Macon said.

“Would tomorrow be all right?”

“Certainly.”

“What restaurant?”

“Well, why not the Old Bay,” Macon said.

“The  Old  Bay.  Of  course,”  Sarah  said.  She  either  sighed  or  laughed, he

wasn’t sure which.

“It’s  only  because  you  could  walk  there,”  he  told  her.  “That’s  the  only

reason I suggested it.”

“Yes, well, let’s see. You like to eat early; shall we say six o’clock?”

“Six will be fine,” he said.

language. She pretended not to notice he had rejoined them. It was shocking,
she  was  saying,  how  sloppy  everyday  speech  had  become.  How  the  world
seemed bound and determined to say “the hoi polloi,” a clear redundancy in
view of the fact that “hoi” was an article. How “chauvinist” had come to be a
shorthand  term  for  “male  chauvinist,”  its  original  meaning  sadly  lost  to
common  knowledge.  It  was  incredible,  Charles  chimed  in,  that  a  female
movie  star  traveled  “incognito”  when  any  fool  should  know  she  was
“incognita” instead. Julian appeared to share their indignation. It was more
incredible  still,  he  said,  how  everyone  slung  around  the  word  “incredible”
when  really  there  was  very  little  on  earth  that  truly  defied  credibility.
“Credence,”  Macon  corrected  him,  but  Rose  rushed  in  as  if  Macon  hadn’t
spoken. “Oh, I know just what you mean,” she told Julian. “Words are getting
devalued, isn’t that right?” She tugged handfuls of her gray tube skirt over her
knees in a childlike gesture. You would think she had never been warned that
outsiders were not to be trusted.

To enter the Old Bay Restaurant, Macon had to climb a set of steps. Before

he broke his leg he hadn’t even noticed those steps existed—let alone that
they  were  made  of  smooth,  unblemished  marble,  so  that  his  crutches  kept
threatening to slide out from under him. Then he had to fight the heavy front
door, hurrying a bit because Rose had taken a wrong turn driving him down
and it was already five after six.

The foyer was dark as night. The dining room beyond was only slightly

brighter,  lit  by  netted  candles  on  the  tables.  Macon  peered  into the gloom.
“I’m meeting someone,” he told the hostess. “Is she here yet?”

“Not as I know of, hon.”

She  led  him  past  a  tankful  of  sluggish  lobsters,  past  two  old  ladies  in

churchy hats sipping pale pink drinks, past a whole field of empty tables. It
was too early for anyone else to be eating; all the other customers were still in
the bar. The tables stood very close together, their linens brushing the floor,
and Macon had visions of catching a crutch on a tablecloth and dragging the
whole thing after him, candle included. The maroon floral carpet would burst
into flames. His grandfather’s favorite restaurant—his greatgrandfather’s too,
quite  possibly—would  be  reduced  to  a  heap  of  charred  metal  crab  pots.
“Miss!  Slow  down!”  he  called,  but  the  hostess  strode  on,  muscular  and

athletic  in  her  off-the-shoulder  square-dance  dress  and  sturdy  white  crepe-
soled shoes.

She put him in a corner, which was lucky because it gave him a place to

lean his crutches. But just as he was matching them up and preparing to set
them aside, she said, “I’ll take those for you, darlin’.”

“Oh, they’ll be fine here.”

“I need to check them up front, sweetheart. It’s a rule.”

“You have a rule about crutches?”

“They might trip the other customers, honeybunch.”

This  was  unlikely,  since  the  two  other  customers  were  clear  across  the

room, but Macon handed his crutches over. Come to think of it, he might be
better off without them. Then Sarah wouldn’t get the impression (at least at
first glance) that he’d fallen apart in her absence.

As  soon  as  he  was  alone  he  tugged  each  shirt  cuff  till  a  quarter-inch  of

white  showed.  He  was  wearing  his  gray  tweed  suit  coat  with  gray  flannel
trousers—an old pair of trousers, so it hadn’t mattered if he cut one leg off.
Charles had fetched them from home and Rose had hemmed them, and she’d
also trimmed his hair. Porter had lent him his best striped tie. They had all
been so discreetly helpful that Macon had felt sad, for some reason.

The hostess reappeared in the doorway, followed by Sarah. Macon had an

instant of stunned recognition; it was something like accidentally glimpsing
his own reflection in a mirror. Her halo of curls, the way her coat fell around
her in soft folds, her firm, springy walk in trim pumps with wineglass heels—
how had he forgotten all that?

He  half  stood.  Would  she  kiss  him?  Or  just,  God  forbid,  coolly  shake

hands.  But  no,  she  did  neither;  she  did  something  much  worse.  She  came
around the table and pressed her cheek to his briefly, as if they were mere
acquaintances meeting at a cocktail party.

“Hello, Macon,” she said.

He  waved  her  speechlessly  into  the  chair  across  from  his.  He  sat  again,

with some effort.

“What happened to your leg?” she asked.

“I had a kind of . . . fall.”

“Is it broken?”

He nodded.

“And what did you do to your hand?”

He  held  it  up  to  examine.  “Well,  it’s  a  sort  of  dog  bite.  But  it’s  nearly

healed by now.”

“I meant the other one.”

The other one had a band of gauze around the knuckles. “Oh, that,” he said.

“It’s just a scrape. I’ve been helping Rose build a cat door.”

She studied him.

“But  I’m  all  right!”  he  told  her.  “In  fact  the  cast  is  almost  comfortable.

Almost familiar! I’m wondering if I broke a leg once before in some previous
incarnation.”

Their waitress asked, “Can I bring you something from the bar?”

She was standing over them, pad and pencil poised. Sarah started flipping

hastily through the menu, so Macon said, “A dry sherry, please.” Then he and
the waitress turned back to Sarah. “Oh, my,” Sarah said. “Let me see. Well,
how about a Rob Roy. Yes, a Rob Roy would be nice, with extra cherries.”

That  was  something  else  he’d  forgotten—how  she  loved  to  order

complicated drinks in restaurants. He felt the corners of his mouth twitching
upward.

“So,”  Sarah  said  when  the  waitress  had  gone.  “Why  would  Rose  be

building a cat door? I thought they didn’t have any pets.”

“No, this is for our cat. Helen. Helen and I have been staying there.”

“What for?”

“Well, because of my leg.”

Sarah said nothing.

“I mean, can you see me managing those steps at home?” Macon asked her.

“Taking Edward for walks? Lugging the trash cans out?”

But she was busy shucking off her coat. Beneath it she wore a gathered

wool dress in an indeterminate color. (The candlelight turned everything to
shades  of  sepia,  like  an  old-fashioned  photograph.)  Macon  had  time  to
wonder if he’d given her the wrong idea. It sounded, perhaps, as if he were
complaining—as if he were reproaching her for leaving him alone.

“But really,” he said, “I’ve been getting along wonderfully.”

“Good,” Sarah said, and she smiled at him and went back to her menu.

Their drinks were set before them on little cardboard disks embossed with

crabs. The waitress said, “Ready to order, dearies?”

“Well,” Sarah said, “I think I’ll have the hot antipasto and the beef Pierre.”

The waitress, looking startled, peered over Sarah’s shoulder at the menu.

(Sarah  had  never  seemed  to  realize  what  the  Old  Bay  Restaurant  was  all
about.) “Here,” Sarah said, pointing, “and here.”

“If you say so,” the waitress said, writing it down.

“I’ll  just  have  the,  you  know,”  Macon  said.  “Crab  soup,  shrimp  salad

platter . . .” He handed back his menu. “Sarah, do you want wine?”

“No, thank you.”

When they were alone again, she said, “How long have you been at your

family’s?”

“Since September,” Macon said.

“September! Your leg’s been broken all that time?”

He nodded and took a sip of his drink. “Tomorrow I get the cast off,” he

said.

“And is Edward over there too?”

He nodded again.

“Was it Edward who bit your hand?”

“Well, yes.”

He wondered if she’d act like the others, urge him to call the S.P.C.A.; but

instead she meditatively plucked a cherry off the plastic sword from her drink.
“I guess he’s been upset,” she said.

“Yes, he has, in fact,” Macon said. “He’s not himself at all.”

“Poor Edward.”

“He’s getting kind of out of control, to tell the truth.”

“He always did have a sensitivity to change,” Sarah said.

Macon  took  heart.  “Actually,  he’s  been  attacking  right  and  left,”  he told

her. “I had to hire a special trainer. But she was too harsh; let’s face it, she
was brutal. She nearly strangled him when he tried to bite her.”

“Ridiculous,”  Sarah  said.  “He  was  only  frightened.  When  Edward’s

frightened he attacks; that’s just the way he is. There’s no point scaring him
more.”

Macon felt a sudden rush of love.

Oh, he’d raged at her and hated her and entirely forgotten her, at different

times. He’d had moments when he imagined he’d never cared for her to begin
with; only went after her because everybody else had. But the fact was, she
was his best friend. The two of them had been through things that no one else
in the world knew of. She was embedded in his life. It was much too late to
root her out.

“What  he  wants,”  she  was  saying,  “is  a  sense  of  routine.  That’s  all  he

needs: reassurance.”

“Sarah,” he said, “it’s been awful living apart.”

She looked at him. Some trick of light made her eyes appear a darker blue,

almost black.

“Hasn’t it?” he said.

She lowered her glass. She said, “I asked you here for a reason, Macon.”

He could tell it was something he didn’t want to hear.

She said, “We need to spell out the details of our separation.” “We’ve been

separated; what’s to spell out?” he asked.

“I meant in a legal way.”

“Legal. I see.”

“Now, according to the state of Maryland—”

“I think you ought to come home.”

Their  first  course  arrived,  placed  before  them  by  a  hand  that,  as  far  as

Macon was concerned, was not attached to a body. Condiment bottles were
shifted needlessly; a metal stand full of sugar packets was moved a half-inch
over. “Anything else?” the waitress asked.

“No!” Macon said. “Thank you.”

She left.

He said, “Sarah?”

“It’s not possible,” she told him.

She was sliding a single pearl up and down the chain at her throat. He had

given her that pearl when they were courting. Was there any significance in
her wearing it this evening? Or maybe she cared so little now, it hadn’t even
occurred to her to leave it off. Yes, that was more likely.

“Listen,” he said. “Don’t say no before you hear me out. Have you ever

considered we might have another baby?”

He  had  shocked  her,  he  saw;  she  drew  in  a  breath.  (He  had  shocked

himself.)

“Why not?‘ he asked her. “We’re not too old.”

“Oh, Macon.”

“This  time,  it  would  be  easy,”  he  said.  “It  wouldn’t  take  us  seven years

again; I bet you’d get pregnant in no time!” He leaned toward her, straining to
make her see it: Sarah blossoming in that luscious pink maternity smock she
used to wear. But oddly enough, what flashed across his mind instead was the
memory of those first seven years—their disappointment each month. It had
seemed to Macon back then (though of course it was pure superstition) that
their failures were a sign of something deeper, some essential incompatibility.
They had missed connections in the most basic and literal sense. When she
finally got pregnant, he had felt not only relieved but guilty, as if they had
succeeded in putting something over on someone.

He pushed these thoughts back down. “I realize,” he said, “that it wouldn’t

be Ethan. I realize we can’t replace him. But—”

“No,” Sarah said.

Her  eyes  were  very  steady.  He  knew  that  look.  She’d  never  change  her

mind.

Macon  started  on  his  soup.  It  was  the  best  crab  soup  in  Baltimore,  but

unfortunately the spices had a tendency to make his nose run. He hoped Sarah
wouldn’t think he was crying.

“I’m sorry,” she said more gently. “But it would never work.”

He said, “All right, forget that. It was crazy, right? Crazy notion. By the

time that baby was twenty we’d be . . . Aren’t you going to eat?”

She glanced down at her plate. Then she picked up a fork.

“Suppose I did this,” Macon said. “Suppose I packed a suitcase with your

clothes and knocked on your door and said, ‘Come on, we’re going to Ocean
City. We’ve wasted long enough.’ ”

She stared, an artichoke heart raised halfway to her mouth.

“Ocean City?” she said. “You hate Ocean City!”

“Yes, but I meant—”

“You always said it was way too crowded.”

“Yes, but—”

apartment.”

“It was only a manner of speaking,” Macon said.

“Really, Macon,” she told him. “You don’t even communicate when you

communicate.”

“Oh, communicate,” he said. (His least favorite word.) “All I’m saying is, I

think we ought to start over.”

“I am starting over,” she said. She returned the artichoke heart to her plate.

“I’m doing everything I can to start over,” she said, “but that doesn’t mean I
want to live the same life twice. I’m trying to branch off in new directions.
I’m taking some courses. I’m even dating, a little.”

“Dating?”

“I’ve been going out with this physician.”

There was a pause.

Macon said, “Why not just call him a doctor.”

Sarah briefly closed her eyes.

“Look,” she said. “I know this is hard for you. It’s hard for both of us. But

we really didn’t have much left, don’t you see? Look who you turned to when
you broke your leg: your sister Rose! You didn’t even let me know, and you
do have my telephone number.”

“If I’d turned to you instead,” he said, “would you have come?”

“Well . . . but at least you could have asked. But no, you called on your

family. You’re closer to them than you ever were to me.”

“That’s not true,” Macon said. “Or rather, it’s true but it’s not the point. I

mean, in one sense, of course we’re closer; we’re blood relations.”

“Plotting your little household projects, Rose with her crescent wrench and
her  soldering  gun.  Cruising  hardware  stores  like  other  people  cruise
boutiques.”

“As other people cruise boutiques,” Macon said. And then regretted it.

“Picking apart people’s English,” Sarah said. “Hauling forth the dictionary

at every opportunity. Quibbling over method. The kind of family that always
fastens their seatbelts.”

“For God’s sake, Sarah, what’s wrong with fastening your seatbelt?”

“They  always  go  to  one  restaurant,  the  one  their  grandparents  went  to

before them, and even there they have to rearrange the silver and set things up
so they’re sitting around the table the same way they sit at home. They dither
and deliberate, can’t so much as close a curtain without this group discussion
back and forth, to and fro, all the pros and cons. ‘Well, if we leave it open it
will be so hot but if we close it things will get musty . . .’ They have to have
their  six  glasses  of  water  every  day.  Their  precious  baked  potatoes  every
night. They don’t believe in ballpoint pens or electric typewriters or automatic
transmissions. They don’t believe in hello and good-bye.”

“Hello? Good-bye?” Macon said.

“Just watch yourself some time! People walk in and you just, oh, register it

with your eyes; people leave and you just look away quickly. You don’t admit
to comings and goings. And the best house in the world might come on the
market, but you can’t buy it because you’ve ordered these address labels for
the old house, a thousand five hundred gummed labels, and you have to use
them up before you move.”

“That wasn’t me, it was Charles,” Macon said.

“Yes, but it could have been you. And his wife divorced him for it, and I

don’t blame her.”

“And now you’re about to do the same damn thing,” Macon said. “Ruin

twenty years of marriage over whether I fasten my seatbelt.”

“They were ruined long ago, believe me,” Sarah said.

Macon laid down his spoon. He forced himself to take a deep breath.

“Sarah,” he said. “We’re getting away from the point.”

After a silence, Sarah said, “Yes, I guess we are.”

“It’s what happened to Ethan that ruined us,” Macon told her.

She set an elbow on the table and covered her eyes.

“But it wouldn’t have to,” he said. “Why, some people, a thing like this

brings them closer together. How come we’re letting it part us?”

The waitress said, “Is everything all right?”

Sarah sat up straighter and started rummaging through her purse.

“Yes, certainly,” Macon said.

The waitress was carrying a tray with their main dishes. She cast a doubtful

look at Sarah’s antipasto. “Isn’t she going to eat that, or what?” she asked
Macon.

“No, I guess, um, maybe not.”

“Didn’t she like it?”

“She liked it fine. Take it away.”

The  waitress  bustled  around  the  table  in  an  offended  silence.  Sarah  put

aside her purse. She looked down at her meal, which was something brown
and gluey.

“You’re  welcome  to  half  my  shrimp  salad,”  Macon  told  her  when  the

waitress had gone.

She shook her head. Her eyes were deep with tears, but they hadn’t spilled

over.

“Macon,” she said, “ever since Ethan died I’ve had to admit that people are

basically bad. Evil, Macon. So evil they would take a twelve-year-old boy and
shoot him through the skull for no reason. I read a paper now and I despair;
I’ve  given  up  watching  the  news  on  TV.  There’s  so  much  wickedness,

children setting other  children  on  fire  and  grown  men  throwing  babies  out
second-story windows, rape and torture and terrorism, old people beaten and
robbed,  men  in  our  very  own  government  willing  to  blow  up  the  world,
indifference and greed and instant anger on every street corner. I look at my
students and they’re so ordinary, but they’re exactly like the boy who killed
Ethan. If it hadn’t said beneath that boy’s picture what he’d been arrested for,
wouldn’t you think he was just anyone? Someone who’d made the basketball
team or won a college scholarship? You can’t believe in a soul. Last spring,
Macon, I didn’t tell you this, I was cutting back our hedge and I saw the bird
feeder had been stolen out of the crape myrtle tree. Someone will even steal
food  from  little  birds!  And  I  just,  I  don’t  know,  went  kind  of  crazy  and
attacked the crape myrtle. Cut it all up, ripped off the branches, slashed it with
my pruning shears . . .”

Tears  were  running  down  her  face  now.  She  leaned  across  the  table and

said, “There are times when I haven’t been sure I could— I don’t want to
sound melodramatic but—Macon, I haven’t been sure I could live in this kind
of a world anymore.”

Macon felt he had to be terribly careful. He had to choose exactly the right

words. He cleared his throat and said, “Yes, um, I see what you mean but . . .”
He cleared his throat again. “It’s true,” he said, “what you say about human
beings. I’m not trying to argue. But tell me this, Sarah: Why would that cause
you to leave me?”

She crumpled up her napkin and dabbed at her nose. She said, “Because I

knew you wouldn’t try to argue. You’ve believed all along they were evil.”

“Well, so—”

“This  whole  last  year  I  felt  myself  retreating.  Withdrawing.  I  could feel

myself shrinking. I stayed away from crowds, I didn’t go to parties, I didn’t
ask our friends in. When you and I went to the beach in the summer I lay on
my blanket with all those people around me, their squawking radios and their
gossip and their quarrels, and I thought, ‘Ugh, they’re so depressing. They’re
so unlikable. So vile, really.’ I felt myself shrinking away from them. Just like
you do, Macon—just as you do; sorry. Just as you have always done. I felt I
was turning into a Leary.”

Macon  tried  for  a  lighter  tone.  He  said,  “Well,  there  are  worse  disasters

than that, I guess.”

She didn’t smile. She said, “I can’t afford it.”

“Afford?”

in  my  shell.  So  I’ve  taken  action.  I’ve  cut  myself  loose.  I  live  in  this
apartment you’d hate, all clutter. I’ve made a whole bunch of new friends, and
you wouldn’t like them much either, I guess. I’m studying with a sculptor. I
always did want to be an artist, only teaching seemed more sensible. That’s
how you would think: sensible. You’re so quick to be sensible, Macon, that
you’ve given up on just about everything.”

“What have I given up on?”

She refolded the napkin and blotted her eyes. An appealing blur of mascara

shadowed the skin beneath them. She said, “Remember Betty Grand?”

“No.”

“Betty Grand, she went to my school. You used to like her before you met

me.”

“I never liked anyone on earth before I met you,” Macon said.

“You liked Betty Grand, Macon. You told me so when we first went out.

You asked me if I knew her. You said you used to think she was pretty and
you’d invited her to a ball game but she turned you down. You told me you’d
changed your mind about her being pretty. Her gums showed any time she
smiled, you said.”

Macon still didn’t remember, but he said, “Well? So?”

“Everything that might touch you or upset you or disrupt you, you’ve given

up without a murmur and done without, said you never wanted it anyhow.”

“I suppose I would have done better if I’d gone on pining for Betty Grand

all my life.”

“Well, you would have shown some feeling, at least.”

“I do show feeling, Sarah. I’m sitting here with you, am I not? You don’t

see me giving up on you.”

every single Wacky Pack sticker off his bedroom door. You emptied his closet
and  his  bureau  as  if  you  couldn’t  be  rid  of  him  soon  enough.  You  kept
offering people his junk in the basement, stilts and sleds and skateboards, and
you couldn’t understand why they didn’t accept them. ‘I hate to see stuff there
useless,’ you said. Macon, I know you loved him but I can’t help thinking you
didn’t love him as much as I did, you’re not so torn apart by his going. I know
you  mourned  him  but  there’s  something  so  what-do-you-call,  so  muffled
about the way you experience things, I mean love or grief or anything; it’s
like you’re trying to slip through life unchanged. Don’t you see why I had to
get out?”

“Sarah, I’m not muffled. I . . . endure. I’m trying to endure. I’m standing

fast, I’m holding steady.”

“If you really think that,” Sarah said, “then you’re fooling yourself. You’re

not holding steady; you’re ossified. You’re encased. You’re like something in
a capsule. You’re a dried-up kernel of a man that nothing real penetrates. Oh,
Macon, it’s not by chance you write those silly books telling people how to
take trips without a jolt. That traveling armchair isn’t just your logo; it’s you.”

“No, it’s not,” Macon said. “It’s not!”

Sarah pulled her coat on, making a sloppy job of it. One corner of her collar

was tucked inside. “So anyway,” she said. “This is what I wanted to tell you:
I’m having John Albright send you a letter.”

“Who’s John Albright?”

“He’s an attorney.”

“Oh,” Macon said.

It was at least a full minute before he thought to say, “I guess you must

mean a lawyer.”

Sarah collected her purse, stood up, and walked out.

Macon made his way conscientiously through his shrimp salad. He ate his

cole  slaw  for  the  vitamin  C.  Then  he  finished  every  last  one of his potato
chips,  although  he  knew  his  tongue  would  feel  shriveled  the  following
morning.

the street after a ball. Macon had been too far away to stop him. All he could
do was shout, “No!” and then watch, frozen with horror, as a pickup truck
came barreling around the curve. In that instant, he released his claim. In one
split  second  he  adjusted  to  a  future  that  held  no  Ethan—an  immeasurably
bleaker place but also, by way of compensation, plainer and simpler, free of
the problems a small child trails along with him, the endless demands and the
mess and the contests for his mother’s attention. Then the truck stopped short
and Ethan retrieved his ball, and Macon’s knees went weak with relief. But he
remembered  forever  after  how  quickly  he  had  adjusted.  He  wondered,
sometimes,  if  that  first  adjustment  had  somehow  stuck,  making  what
happened to Ethan later less of a shock than it might have been. But if people
didn’t adjust, how could they bear to go on?

He  called  for  his  bill  and  paid  it.  “Was  there  something  wrong?”  the

waitress asked. “Did your friend not like her meal? She could always have
sent it back, hon. We always let you send it back.”

“I know that,” Macon said.

“Maybe it was too spicy for her.”

“It was fine,” he said. “Could I have my crutches, please?”

She went off to get them, shaking her head.

He would have to locate a taxi. He’d made no arrangements for Rose to

pick him up. Secretly, he’d been hoping to go home with Sarah. Now that
hope seemed pathetic. He looked around the dining room and saw that most
of the tables were filled, and that every person had someone else to eat with.
Only Macon sat alone. He kept very erect and dignified but inside, he knew,
he was crumbling. And when the waitress brought him his crutches and he
stood to leave, it seemed appropriate that he had to walk nearly doubled, his
chin  sunk  low  on  his  chest  and  his  elbows  jutting  out  awkwardly  like  the
wings of a baby bird. People stared at him as he passed. Some snickered. Was
his foolishness so obvious? He passed the two churchy old ladies and one of
them tugged at his sleeve. “Sir? Sir?”

He came to a stop.

“I suspect they may have given you my crutches,” she said.

diminutive—hardly  more  than  child-sized.  Any  other  time  he  would  have
grasped the situation right off, but today it had somehow escaped him. Any
other time he would have swung into action—called for the manager, pointed
out the restaurant’s lack of concern for the handicapped. Today he only stood
hanging his head, waiting for someone to help him.

nine

Back when Grandfather Leary’s mind first began to wander, no one had

guessed what was happening. He was such an upright, firm old man. He was
all sharp edges. Definite. “Listen,” he told Macon, “by June the twelfth I’ll
need my passport from the safe deposit box. I’m setting sail for Lassaque.”

“Lassaque, Grandfather?”

“If I like it I may just stay there.”

“But where is Lassaque?”

“It’s an island off the coast of Bolivia.”

“Ah,” Macon said. And then, “Well, wait a minute . . .”

“It interests me because the Lassaquans have no written language. In fact if

you bring any reading matter they confiscate it. They say it’s black magic.”

“But I don’t think Bolivia has a coast,” Macon said.

“They don’t even allow, say, a checkbook with your name on it. Before you

go ashore you have to soak the label off your deodorant. You have to get your
money changed into little colored wafers.”

“Grandfather, is this a joke?”

“A joke! Look it up if you don’t believe me.” Grandfather Leary checked

his steel pocket watch, then wound it with an assured, back-and-forth motion.
“An intriguing effect of their illiteracy,” he said, “is their reverence for the
elderly. This is because the Lassaquans’ knowledge doesn’t come from books
but from living; so they hang on every word from those who have lived the
longest.”

“I see,” Macon said, for now he thought he did see. “ We hang on your

words, too,” he said.

“That  may  be  so,”  his  grandfather  told  him,  “but  I  still  intend  to  see

Lassaque before it’s corrupted.”

Macon  was  silent  a  moment.  Then  he  went  over  to  the  bookcase  and

selected a volume from his grandfather’s set of faded brown encyclopedias.
“Give it here,” his grandfather said, holding out both hands. He took the book
greedily and started riffling through the pages. A smell of mold floated up.
“Laski,”  he  muttered,  “Lassalle,  Lassaw  .  .  .”  He  lowered  the  book  and
frowned. “I don’t . . .” he said. He returned to the book. “Lassalle, Lassaw . .
.”

He looked confused, almost frightened. His face all at once collapsed—a

phenomenon  that  had  startled  Macon  on  several  occasions  lately.  “I  don’t
understand,” he whispered to Macon. “I don’t understand.”

“Well,” Macon said, “maybe it was a dream. Maybe it was one of those

dreams that seem real.”

“Macon, this was no dream. I know the place. I’ve bought my ticket. I’m

sailing June the twelfth.”

Macon felt a strange coldness creeping down his back.

Then  his  grandfather  became  an  inventor—spoke  of  various  projects  he

was tinkering with, he said, in his basement. He would sit in his red leather
armchair, his suit and white shirt immaculate, his black dress shoes polished
to a glare, his carefully kept hands folded in his lap, and he would announce
that he’d just finished welding together a motorcycle that would pull a plow.
He  would  earnestly  discuss  crankshafts  and  cotter  pins,  while  Macon—
though  terribly  distressed—had  to  fight  down  a  bubble  of  laughter  at  the
thought of some leather-booted Hell’s Angel grinding away at a wheatfield.
“If I could just get the kinks ironed out,” his grandfather said, “I’d have my
fortune made. We’ll all be rich.” For he seemed to believe he was poor again,
struggling to earn his way in the world. His motorized radio that followed you
from room to room, his floating telephone, his car that came when you called
it— wouldn’t there be some application for those? Wouldn’t the right person
pay an arm and a leg?

Having  sat  out  on  the  porch  for  one  entire  June  morning,  studiously

pinching the creases of his trousers, he announced that he had perfected a new
type of hybrid: flowers that closed in the presence of tears. “Florists will be

mobbing  me,”  he  said.  “Think  of  the  dramatic  effect  at  funerals!”  He  was
working next on a cross between basil and tomatoes. He said the spaghetti-
sauce companies would make him a wealthy man.

By then, all three of his grandsons had left home and his wife had died; so

Rose alone took care of him. Her brothers began to worry about her. They
took to dropping by more and more often. Then Rose said, “You don’t have to
do this, you know.”

They said, “What? Do what? What are you talking about?” And other such

things.

“If you’re coming so often on account of Grandfather, it’s not necessary.

I’m managing fine, and so is he. He’s very happy.”

“Happy!”

“I honestly believe,” Rose said, “that he’s having the richest and most . . .

colorful, really, time of his life. I’ll bet even when he was young, he never
enjoyed himself this much.”

They  saw  what  she  meant.  Macon  felt  almost  envious,  once  he  thought

about it. And later, when that period was over, he was sorry it had been so
short. For their grandfather soon passed to pointless, disconnected mumbles,
and then to a staring silence, and at last he died.

Early Wednesday morning, Macon dreamed Grandfather Leary woke him

and asked where the center punch was. “What are you talking about?” Macon
said. “I never had your center punch.”

“Oh, Macon,” his grandfather said sadly, “can’t you tell that I’m not saying

what I mean?”

“What do you mean, then?”

“You’ve lost the center of your life, Macon.”

“Yes, I know that,” Macon said, and it seemed that Ethan stood just slightly

to the left, his bright head nearly level with the old man’s.

But  his  grandfather  said,  “No,  no,”  and  made  an  impatient,  shaking-off

gesture and went over to the bureau. (In this dream, Macon was not in the sun

porch but upstairs in his boyhood bedroom, with the bureau whose cut-glass
knobs Rose had stolen long ago to use as dishes for her dolls.) “It’s Sarah I
mean,” his grandfather said, picking up a hairbrush. “Where is Sarah?”

“She’s left me, Grandfather.”

“Why, Sarah’s the best of all of us!” his grandfather said. “You want to sit

in this old house and rot, boy? It’s time we started digging out! How long are
we going to stay fixed here?”

Macon opened his eyes. It wasn’t morning yet. The sun porch was fuzzy as

blotting paper.

There was still a sense of his grandfather in the air. His little shaking-off

gesture was one that Macon had forgotten entirely; it had reappeared on its
own. But Grandfather Leary would never have said in real life what he’d said
in the dream. He had liked Sarah well enough, but he seemed to view wives
as  extraneous,  and  he’d  attended  each  of  his  grandsons’  weddings  with  a
resigned and tolerant expression. He wouldn’t have thought of any woman as
a  “center.”  Except,  perhaps  Macon  thought  suddenly,  his  own  wife,
Grandmother  Leary.  After  whose  death—why,  yes,  immediately  after—his
mind had first begun to wander.

Macon  lay  awake  till  dawn.  It  was  a  relief  to  hear  the  first  stir-rings

overhead. Then he got up and shaved and dressed and sent Edward out for the
paper. By the time Rose came downstairs, he had started the coffee perking.
This seemed to make her anxious. “Did  you  use  the  morning  beans  or  the
evening beans?” she asked.

“The morning beans,” he assured her. “Everything’s under control.”

She moved around the kitchen raising shades, setting the table, opening a

carton of eggs. “So today’s the day you get your cast off,” she said.

“Looks that way.”

“And this afternoon’s your New York trip.”

“Oh, well . . .” he said vaguely, and then he asked if she wanted a bacon

coupon he’d spotted in the paper.

She persisted: “Isn’t it this afternoon you’re going?”

“Well, yes.”

made any arrangements for Edward. The old place wouldn’t accept him, the
new place had that Muriel woman . . . and in Macon’s opinion, Edward was
best off at home with the family. Rose, no doubt, would disagree. He held his
breath,  but  Rose  started  humming  “Clementine”  and  breaking  eggs  into  a
skillet.

At nine o’clock, in an office down on St. Paul Street, the doctor removed

Macon’s  cast  with  a  tiny,  purring  electric  saw.  Macon’s  leg emerged dead-
white and wrinkled and ugly. When he stood up, his ankle wobbled. He still
had a limp. Also, he’d forgotten to bring different trousers and he was forced
to parade back through the other patients in his one-legged summer khakis,
exposing his repulsive-looking shin. He wondered if he’d ever return to his
old, unbroken self.

Driving him home, Rose finally thought to ask where he planned to board

Edward. “Why, I’m leaving him with you,” Macon said, acting surprised.

“With me? Oh, Macon, you know how out of hand he gets.”

“What could happen in such a short time? I’ll be home by tomorrow night.

If  worst  comes  to  worst  you  could  lock  him  in  the  pantry;  toss  him  some
kibble now and then till I get back.”

“I don’t like this at all,” Rose said.

“It’s visitors that set him off. It’s not as if you’re expecting any visitors.”

“Oh, no,” she said, and then she let the subject drop, thank heaven. He’d

been fearing more of a battle.

He took a shower, and he dressed in his traveling suit. Then he had an early

lunch. Just before noon Rose drove him down to the railroad station, since he
didn’t  yet  trust  his  clutch  foot.  When  he  stepped  from  the  car,  his  leg
threatened to buckle. “Wait!” he said to Rose, who was handing his bag out
after him. “Do you suppose I’m up to this?”

“I’m  sure  you  are,”  she  said,  without  giving  it  anywhere  near  enough

thought. She pulled the passenger door shut, waved at him, and drove off.

In  the  period  since  Macon’s  last  train  trip,  something  wonderful  had

happened to the railroad station. A skylight in shades of watery blue arched
gently overhead. Pale globe lamps hung from brass hooks. The carpenters’
partitions  that  had  divided  the  waiting  room  for  so  long  had  disappeared,
revealing polished wooden benches.  Macon  stood  bewildered  at  the  brand-
new,  gleaming  ticket  window.  Maybe,  he  thought,  travel  was  not  so  bad.
Maybe he’d got it all wrong. He felt a little sprig of hopefulness beginning.

But immediately afterward, limping toward his gate, he was overcome by

the lost feeling that always plagued him on these trips. He envisioned himself
as  a  stark  Figure  1  in  a  throng  of  2’s  and  3’s.  Look  at  that  group  at  the
Information counter, those confident young people with their knapsacks and
sleeping bags. Look at the family occupying one entire bench, their four little
daughters so dressed up, so stiff in new plaid coats and ribboned hats, you just
knew they’d be met by grandparents at the other end of the line. Even those
sitting alone—the old woman with the corsage, the blonde with her expensive
leather luggage—gave the impression of belonging to someone.

He sat down on a bench. A southbound train was announced and half the

crowd went off to catch it, followed by the inevitable breathless, disheveled
woman galloping through some time later with far too many bags and parcels.
Arriving  passengers  began  to  straggle  up  the  stairs.  They  wore  the  dazed
expressions of people who had been elsewhere till just this instant. A woman
was greeted by a man holding a baby; he kissed her and passed her the baby
at once, as if it were a package he’d been finding unusually heavy. A young
girl in jeans, reaching the top of the stairs, caught sight of another girl in jeans
and threw her arms around her and started crying. Macon watched, pretending
not to, inventing explanations. (She was home for their mother’s funeral? Her
elopement hadn’t worked out?)

Now his own train was called, so he picked up his bag and limped behind

the family with all the daughters. At the bottom of the stairs a gust of cold,
fresh air hit him. Wind always seemed to be howling down these platforms,
no matter what the weather elsewhere. The smallest of the daughters had to
have her coat buttoned. The train came into view, slowly assembling itself
around a pinpoint of yellow light.

Most of the cars were full, it turned out. Macon gave up trying to find a

completely  empty  seat  and  settled  next  to  a  plump  young  man  with  a
briefcase. Just to be on the safe side, he unpacked Miss MacIntosh .

The  train  lurched  forward  and  then  changed  its  mind  and  then  lurched

forward again and took off. Macon imagined he could feel little scabs of rust
on the tracks; it wasn’t a very smooth ride. He watched the sights of home
rush toward him and disappear—a tumble of row houses, faded vacant lots,
laundry hanging rigid in the cold.

“Gum?” his seatmate asked.

Macon said, “No, thanks,” and quickly opened his book.

When they’d been traveling an hour or so, he felt his lids grow heavy. He

let his head fall back. He thought he was only resting his eyes, but he must
have gone to sleep. The next thing he knew, the conductor was announcing
Philadelphia. Macon jerked and sat up straight and caught his book just before
it slid off his lap.

His seatmate was doing some kind of paperwork, using his briefcase as a

desk. A businessman, obviously—one of the people Macon wrote his guides
for.  Funny,  Macon  never  pictured  his  readers.  What  did  businessmen  do,
exactly? This one was jotting notes on index cards, referring now and then to
a booklet full of graphs. One graph showed little black trucks marching across
the page—four trucks, seven trucks, three and a half trucks. Macon thought
the half-truck looked deformed and pitiable.

Just before they arrived, he used the restroom at the rear of the car—not

ideal, but more homey than anything he’d find in New York. He went back to
his seat and packed Miss MacIntosh. “Going to be cold there,” his seatmate
told him.

“I imagine so,” Macon said.

“Weather report says cold and windy.”

Macon didn’t answer.

He believed in traveling without an overcoat—just one more thing to carry

—but he wore a thermal undershirt and long johns. Cold was the least of his
worries.

In New York the passengers scattered instantly. Macon thought of a seed

pod bursting open. He refused to be rushed and made his way methodically
through  the  crowd,  up  a  set  of  clanking,  dark  stairs,  and  through  another

crowd  that  seemed  more  extreme  than  the  one  he  had  left  down  below.
Goodness, where did these women get their clothes? One wore a bushy fur
tepee and leopardskin boots. One wore an olive-drab coverall exactly like an
auto mechanic’s except that it was made of leather. Macon took a firmer grip
on his bag and pushed through the door to the street, where car horns blasted
insistently  and  the  air  smelled  gray  and  sharp,  like  the  interior  of  a  dead
chimney. In his opinion, New York was a foreign city. He was forever taken
aback by its pervasive atmosphere of purposefulness—the tight focus of its
drivers,  the  brisk  intensity  of  its  pedestrians  drilling  their  way  through  all
obstacles without a glance to either side.

He hailed a cab, slid across the worn, slippery seat, and gave the address of

his hotel. The driver started talking at once about his daughter. “I mean she’s
thirteen years old,” he said, nosing out into traffic, “and got three sets of holes
in her ears and an earring in each hole, and now she wants to get another set
punched up toward  the  top.  Thirteen  years  old!”  He  either  had  or  had  not
heard the address. At any rate, he was driving along. “I wasn’t even in favor
of  the  first  set  of  holes,”  he  said.  “I  told  her,  ‘What;  you  don’t  read  Ann
Landers?’ Ann Landers says piercing your ears is mutilating your body. Was it
Ann  Landers?  I  think  it  was  Ann  Landers.  You  might  as  well  wear  a  ring
through your nose like the Africans, right? I told my daughter that. She says,
‘So? What’s wrong with a ring through my nose? Maybe that’s what I’ll get
next.’ I wouldn’t put it past her, either. I would not put it past her. Now this
fourth set goes through cartilage and most of these ear-piercing places won’t
do that; so you see how crazy it is. Cartilage is a whole different ball game.
It’s not your earlobe, all spongy.”

Macon had the feeling he wasn’t fully visible. He was listening to a man

who was talking to himself, who may have been talking before he got in and
might possibly go on talking after he got out. Or was he present in this cab at
all? Such thoughts often attacked while he was traveling. In desperation, he
said, “Um—”

The  driver  stopped  speaking,  surprisingly  enough.  The  back  of  his neck

took on an alert look. Macon had to continue. He said, “Tell her something
scary.”

“Like what?”

“Like . . . tell her you know a girl whose ears dropped off.”

“She’d never go for that.”

“Make it scientific. Say if you puncture cartilage, it will wither right away.”

“Hmm,” the driver said. He honked his horn at a produce truck.

“  ‘Imagine  how  you’d  feel,’  tell  her,  ‘having  to  wear  the  same  hairstyle

forever. Covering up your withered ears.’ ”

“Think she’d believe me?”

“Why not?” Macon asked. And then, after a pause, “In fact, it may be true.

Do you suppose I could have read it someplace?”

“Well, now, maybe you did,” the driver said. “There’s this sort of familiar

ring to it.”

“I  might  even  have  seen  a  photograph,”  Macon  said.  “Somebody’s  ears,

shriveled. All shrunken.”

“Wrinkly, like,” the driver agreed.

Macon said, “Like two dried apricots.”

“Christ! I’ll tell her.”

The taxi stopped in front of Macon’s hotel. Macon paid the fare and said, as

he slid out, “I hope it works.”

“Sure it will,” the driver said, “till next time. Till she wants a nose ring or

something.”

“Noses are cartilage too, remember! Noses can wither too!”

The driver waved and pulled into traffic again.

After Macon had claimed his room, he took a subway to the Buford Hotel.

An  electronics  salesman  had  written  to  suggest  it;  the  Buford rented small
apartments,  by  the  day  or  the  week,  to  businessmen.  The  manager,  a  Mr.
Aggers, turned out to be a short, round man who walked with a limp exactly
like Macon’s. Macon thought they must look very odd together, crossing the
lobby to the elevators. “Most of our apartments are owned by corporations,”

Mr. Aggers said.  He  pressed  the  “Up”  button.  “Companies  who  send  their
men to the city regularly will often find it cheaper to buy their own places.
Then those weeks the apartments are empty, they look to me to find other
tenants, help defray the costs.”

Macon  made  a  note  of  this  in  the  margin  of  his  guidebook.  Using  an

infinitesimal script, he also noted the decor of the lobby, which reminded him
of some old-fashioned men’s club. On the massive, claw-footed table between
the  two  elevators  stood  a  yard-high  naked  lady  in  brass,  trailing  brass
draperies and standing on brass clouds, holding aloft a small, dusty light bulb
with a frayed electric cord dangling from it. The elevator, when it arrived, had
dim floral carpeting and paneled walls.

“May  I  ask,”  Mr.  Aggers  said,  “whether  you  personally  write  the

Accidental Tourist series?”

“Yes, I do,” Macon told him.

“Well!” Mr. Aggers said. “This is a real honor, then. We keep your books in

the lobby for our guests. But I don’t know, I somehow pictured you looking a
little different.”

“How did you think I would look?” Macon asked.

“Well,  maybe  not  quite  so  tall.  Maybe  a  bit,  well,  heavier.  More  .  .  .

upholstered.”

“I see,” Macon said.

The elevator had stopped by now but it took its time sliding open. Then Mr.

Aggers led Macon down a hall. A woman with a laundry cart stood aside to
let them pass. “Here we are,” Mr. Aggers said. He unlocked a door and turned
on a light.

Macon walked into an apartment that could have come straight from the

1950s. There was a square sofa with metallic threads in its fabric, a chrome-
trimmed dinette set, and in the bedroom a double bed whose headboard was
quilted in cream-colored vinyl. He tested the mattress. He took off his shoes,
lay down, and thought a while. Mr. Aggers stood above him with his fingers
laced. “Hmm,” Macon said. He sat up and put his shoes back on. Then he
went  into  the  bathroom,  where  the  toilet  bore  a  white  strip  reading

SANITIZED. “I’ve never understood these things,” he said. “Why should it
reassure me to know they’ve glued a paper band across my toilet seat?” Mr.
Aggers made a helpless gesture with both hands. Macon drew aside a shower
curtain printed with pink and blue fish, and he inspected the tub. It looked
clean enough, although there was a rust stain leading down from the faucet.

In the kitchenette he found a single saucepan, two faded plastic plates and

mugs, and an entire shelf of highball glasses. “Usually our guests don’t cook
much,”  Mr.  Aggers  explained,  “but  they  might  have  their  associates  in  for
drinks.”  Macon  nodded.  He  was  faced  with  a  familiar  problem,  here:  the
narrow  line  between  “comfortable”  and  “tacky.”  In  fact,  sometimes
comfortable was tacky. He opened the refrigerator, a little undercounter affair.
The ice trays in the freezing compartment were exactly the same kind of trays
— scummy aqua plastic, heavily scratched—that Rose had back in Baltimore.

“You have to admit it’s well stocked,” Mr. Aggers said. “See? An apron in

the kitchen drawer. My wife’s idea. Protects their suits.”

“Yes, very nice,” Macon said.

“It’s just like home away from home; that’s how I like to think of it.”

“Oh, well, home,” Macon said. “Nothing’s home , really.”

“Why? What’s missing?” Mr. Aggers asked. He had very pale, fine-grained

skin that took on a shine when he was anxious. “What more would you like to
see added?”

“To tell the truth,” Macon said, “I’ve always thought a hotel ought to offer

optional small animals.”

“Animals?”

“I mean a cat to sleep on your bed at night, or a dog of some kind to act

pleased  when  you  come  in.  You  ever  notice  how  a  hotel  room  feels  so
lifeless?”

“Yes,  but—well,  I  don’t  see  how  I  could—there  are  surely  health

regulations  or  something  .  .  .  complications,  paperwork,  feeding  all  those
different . . . and allergies, of course, many guests have—”

“Oh,  I  understand,  I  understand,”  Macon  said.  In  the  margin  of  his

guidebook he was noting the number of wastebaskets: four. Excellent. “No,”
he said, “it doesn’t seem that people ever take me up on that.”

“Will you recommend us anyway?”

“Certainly,” Macon said, and he closed his guidebook and asked for a list

of the rates.

The rest of the afternoon he spent in hotels that he’d covered before. He

visited managers in their offices, took brief guided tours to see that nothing
had slid into ruin, and listened to talk of rising costs and remodeling plans and
new,  improved  conference  settings.  Then  he  returned  to  his  room  and
switched on the evening news. The world was doing poorly; but watching this
unfamiliar  TV  set,  propping  his  aching  leg  and  braced  in  this  chair  that
seemed designed for someone else’s body, Macon had the feeling that none of
the wars and famines he saw were real. They were more like, oh, staged. He
turned off the set and went downstairs to hail a cab.

At Julian’s suggestion, he was dining on the very top of an impossibly tall

building. (Julian had a fondness for restaurants with gimmicks, Macon had
noticed.  He  wasn’t  happy  unless  a  place  revolved,  or  floated,  or  could  be
reached only by catwalk.) “Imagine,” Julian had said, “the effect on your out-
of-town client. Yes, he’d have to be from out of town; I don’t suppose a native
New Yorker . . .” Macon had snorted. Now the cabdriver snorted, too. “Cup of
coffee there will cost you five bucks,” he told Macon.

“It figures.”

“You’re better off at one of those little Frenchy places.”

“That’s for tomorrow. In-town clients.”

The  taxi  coasted  down  streets  that  grew  darker  and  more  silent,  leading

away from the crowds. Macon peered out of his window. He saw a lone man
huddled in a doorway, wrapped in a long coat. Wisps of steam drifted up from
manhole covers. All the shops were locked behind iron grilles.

At the end of the darkest street of all, the taxi stopped. The driver gave

another snort, and Macon paid his fare and stepped out. He wasn’t prepared
for the wind, which rushed up against him like a great flat sheet of something.
He hurried across the sidewalk, or was propelled, while his trousers twisted

and flapped about his legs. Just before entering the building, he thought to
look  up.  He  looked  up  and  up  and  up,  and  finally  he  saw  a  faint  white
pinnacle dwindling into a deep, black, starless sky eerily far away. He thought
of once  long  ago  when  Ethan,  visiting  the  zoo  as  a  toddler,  had  paused in
front  of  an  elephant  and  raised  his  face  in  astonishment  and  fallen  over
backwards.

Inside,  everything  was  streaky  pink  marble  and  acres  of  texture-less

carpeting. An elevator the size of a room stood open, half filled with people,
and Macon stepped in and took his place between two women in silks and
diamonds.  Their  perfume  was  almost  visible.  He  imagined  he  could  see  it
rippling the air.

Have chewing gum handy, he wrote in his guidebook as the elevator shot

upward. His ears were popping. There was a dense, un-resonant stillness that
made the women’s voices sound tinny. He tucked his guidebook in his pocket
and glanced at the numbers flashing overhead. They progressed by tens: forty,
fifty, sixty . . . One of the men said they’d have to bring Harold sometime—
remember  Harold  when  he  got  so  scared  on  the  ski  lift?—and  everyone
laughed.

The elevator gave a sort of lilt and the door slid open without a sound. A

girl  in  a  white  trouser  suit  directed  them  down  a  corridor,  into  a  spacious
darkness  flickering  with  candles.  Great  black  windows  encircled  the  room
from floor to ceiling, but Macon was taken to a table without a view. Lone
diners, he supposed, were an embarrassment here. He might be the first they’d
ever had. The array of silver at his single place could easily serve a family of
four.

His waiter, far better dressed than Macon, handed him a menu and asked

what he wanted to drink. “Dry sherry, please,” Macon said. The minute the
waiter  left,  Macon  folded  his  menu  in  two  and  sat  on  it.  Then  he  looked
around  at  his  neighbors.  Everyone  seemed  to  be  celebrating  something.  A
man and a pregnant woman held hands and smiled across the moony glow of
their candle. A boisterous group to his left toasted the same man over and
over.

The  waiter  returned,  balancing  a  sherry  neatly  on  a  tray.  “Very  good,”

Macon said. “And now perhaps a menu.”

“Menu? Didn’t I give you one?”

“There could have been an oversight,” he said, not exactly lying.

sipped  his  sherry  and  considered  the  prices.  Astronomical.  He  decided,  as
usual, to eat what he thought his readers might eat—not the quenelles or the
sweetbreads but the steak, medium rare. After he’d given his order, he rose
and slid his chair in and took his sherry over to a window.

All of a sudden he thought he had died.

He saw the city spread below like a glittering golden ocean, the streets tiny

ribbons of light, the planet curving away at the edges, the sky a purple hollow
extending to infinity. It wasn’t the height; it was the distance. It was his vast,
lonely distance from everyone who mattered. Ethan, with his bouncy walk—
how would he ever know that his father had come to be trapped in this spire
in  the  heavens?  How  would  Sarah  know,  lazily  tanning  herself  in  the
sunshine? For he did believe the sun could be shining wherever she was at
this moment;  she  was  so  removed  from  him.  He  thought  of  his  sister  and
brothers going about their business, playing their evening card game, unaware
of how far behind he’d left them. He was too far gone to return. He would
never, ever get back. He had somehow traveled to a point completely isolated
from everyone else in the universe, and nothing was real but his own angular
hand clenched around the sherry glass.

He dropped the glass, causing a meaningless little flurry of voices, and he

spun around and ran lopsidedly across the room and out the door. But there
was that endless corridor, and he couldn’t manage the trip. He took a right
turn instead. He passed a telephone alcove and stumbled into a restroom—
yes, a men’s room, luckily. More marble, mirrors, white enamel. He thought
he was going to throw up, but when he entered one of the cubicles the sick
feeling left his stomach and floated to his head. He noticed how light his brain
felt.  He  stood  above  the  hotel  pressing  his  temples.  It  occurred  to  him  to
wonder how many feet of pipe a toilet at this altitude required.

He heard someone else come in, coughing. A cubicle door slammed shut.

He opened his own door a crack and looked out. The impersonal lushness of
the room made him think of sciencefiction movies.

Well, this difficulty probably happened here often, didn’t it? Or maybe not

this difficulty exactly but others like it—people with a fear of heights, say,
going into a panic, having to call upon . . . whom? The waiter? The girl who

met the elevator?

He  ventured  cautiously  out  of  the  cubicle,  then  out  of  the  restroom

altogether, and he nearly bumped into a woman in the telephone alcove. She
wore yards and yards of pale chiffon. She was just hanging up the phone, and
she gathered her skirts around her and moved languidly, gracefully toward the
dining room. Excuse me, ma’am, I wonder if you would be so kind as to, um . .
. But the only request that came to mind rose up from his earliest childhood:
Carry me!

The woman’s little sequined evening purse was the last of her to go, trailed

behind  her  in  one  white  hand  as  she  disappeared  into  the  darkness  of  the
restaurant.

He stepped over to the telephone and lifted the receiver. It was cool to the

touch; she hadn’t talked long. He fumbled through his pockets, found coins
and dropped them in. But there was no one he could contact. He didn’t know
a soul in all New York. Instead he called home, miraculously summoning up
his credit card number. He worried his family would let the phone ring—it
was a habit, by now—but Charles answered. “Leary.”

“Charles?”

“Macon!” Charles said, unusually animated.

“Charles, I’m up on top of this building and a sort of . . . silly thing has

happened. Listen: You’ve got to get me out of here.”

“You out! What are you talking about? You’ve got to get me out!”

“Pardon?”

“I’m shut in the pantry; your dog has me cornered.”

“Oh. Well, I’m sorry, but . . . Charles, it’s like some kind of illness. I don’t

think I can manage the elevator and I doubt I could manage a stairway either
and—”

“Macon, do you hear that barking? That’s Edward. Edward has me treed, I

tell you, and you have to come home this instant.”

“But  I’m  in  New  York!  I’m  up  on  top  of  this  building  and  I  can’t  get

down!”

he attacks it, he must have clawed halfway through it by now.”

Macon made himself take a deep breath. He said, “Charles, could I speak to

Rose?”

“She’s out.”

“Oh.”

“How do you think I got into this?” Charles asked. “Julian came to take her

to dinner and—”

“Julian?”

“Isn’t that his name?”

“Julian my boss?”

“Yes, and Edward went into one of his fits; so Rose said, ‘Quick, shut him

in the pantry.’ So I grabbed his leash and he turned on me and nearly took my
hand off. So I shut myself in the pantry instead and Rose must have left by
then so—”

“Isn’t Porter there?”

“It’s his visitation night.”

Macon imagined how safe the pantry must feel, with Rose’s jams lined up

in alphabetical order and the black dial telephone so ancient that the number
on its face was still the old Tuxedo exchange. What he wouldn’t give to be
there!

Now he had a new symptom. His chest had developed a flutter that bore no

resemblance to a normal heartbeat.

“If you don’t get me out of this I’m going to call for the police to come

shoot him,” Charles said.

“No! Don’t do that!”

“I can’t just sit here waiting for him to break through.”

Believe me, Charles. Please. I’m up on top of this building and—”

“Maybe you don’t know that I’m prone to claustrophobia,” Charles said.

One possibility, Macon decided, was to tell the restaurant people he was

having a coronary. A coronary was so respectable. They would send for an
ambulance  and  he  would  be,  yes,  carried—just  what  he  needed.  Or  he
wouldn’t have to be carried but only touched, a mere human touch upon his
arm, a hand on his shoulder, something to put him back in connection with the
rest of the world. He hadn’t felt another person’s touch in so long.

“I’ll tell them about the key in the mailbox so they won’t have to break

down the door,” Charles said.

“What? Who?”

“The police, and I’ll tell them to—Macon, I’m sorry but you knew that dog

would have to be done away with sooner or later.”

“Don’t do it!” Macon shouted.

A man emerging from the restroom glanced in his direction.

Macon lowered his voice and said, “He was Ethan’s.”

“Does that mean he’s allowed to tear my throat out?”

“Listen. Let’s not be hasty. Let’s think this through. Now, I’m going to . . .

I’m going to telephone Sarah. I’m going to ask her to come over and take
charge of Edward. Are you listening, Charles?”

“But what if he attacks her too?” Charles asked.

“He  won’t,  believe  me.  Now,  don’t  do  anything  till  she  comes,  you

understand? Don’t do anything hasty.”

“Well . . .” Charles said doubtfully.

Macon hung up and took his wallet from his pocket. He rummaged through

the business cards and torn-off snippets of paper, some of them yellow with
age, that he kept in the secret compartment. When he found Sarah’s number
he punched it in with a trembling finger and held his breath. Sarah, he would
say, I’m up on top of this building and—

She didn’t answer.

That  possibility  hadn’t  occurred  to  him.  He  listened  to  her  phone  ring.

What now? What on earth now?

Finally he hung up. He sifted despairingly through the other numbers in his

wallet—dentist, pharmacist, animal trainer . . .

Animal trainer?

He thought at first of someone from a circus—a brawny man in satin tights.

Then  he  saw  the  name:  Muriel  Pritchett.  The  card  was  handwritten,  even
hand-cut, crookedly snipped from a larger piece of paper.

He  called  her.  She  answered  at  once.  “Hel-lo,”  roughly,  like  a  weary

barmaid.

“Muriel? It’s Macon Leary,” he told her.

“Oh! How you doing?”

“I’m  fine.  Or,  rather  .  .  .  See,  the  trouble  is,  Edward’s  got  my  brother

cornered in the pantry, overreacting. Charles I mean, he always overreacts,
and here I am on top of this building in New York and I’m having this kind
of, um, disturbance, you know? I was looking down at the city and it was
miles away, miles. I can’t describe to you how—”

“Let’s make sure I’ve got this right,” Muriel said. “Edward’s in your pantry

—”

Macon collected himself. He said, “Edward’s outside the pantry, barking.

My brother’s inside. He says he’s going to call the police and tell them to
come shoot Edward.”

“Well, what a dumb fool idea.”

“Yes!” Macon said. “So I thought if you could go over and get the key from

the mailbox, it’s lying on the bottom of the mailbox—”

“I’ll go right away.”

“Oh, wonderful.”

“So good-bye for now, Macon.”

“Well, but also—” he said.

She waited.

“See, I’m up on top of this building,” he said, “and I don’t know what it is

but something has scared the hell out of me.”

“Oh, Lord, I’d be scared too after I went and saw Towering Inferno.”

“No, no, it’s nothing like that, fire or heights—”

“Did you see Towering Inferno? Boy, after that you couldn’t get me past

jumping level in any building. I think people who go up in skyscrapers are
just plain brave. I mean if you think about it, Macon, you have to be brave to
be standing where you are right now.”

“Oh, well, not so brave as all that,” Macon said.

“No, I’m serious.”

“You’re making too much out of it. It’s nothing, really.”

“You just say that because you don’t realize what you went through before

you stepped into the elevator. See, underneath you said, ‘Okay, I’ll trust it.’
That’s what everyone does; I bet it’s what they do on airplanes, too. ‘This is
dangerous as all get-out but what the hay,’ they say, ‘let’s fling ourselves out
on thin air and trust it.’ Why, you ought to be walking around that building so
amazed and proud of yourself!”

Macon gave a small, dry laugh and gripped the receiver more tightly.

“Now here’s what I’m going to do,” she said. “I’m going to go get Edward

and take him to the Meow-Bow. It doesn’t sound to me like your brother is
much use with him. Then when you get back from your trip, we need to talk

about his training. I mean, things just can’t go on this way, Macon.”

“No, they can’t. You’re right. They can’t,” Macon said.

“I mean this is ridiculous.”

“You’re absolutely right.”

“See you, then. Bye.”

“Well, wait!” he said.

But she was gone.

After he hung up, he turned and saw the latest arrivals just heading toward

him from the elevator. First came three men, and then three women in long
gowns. Behind them was a couple who couldn’t be past their teens. The boy’s
wrist bones stuck out of the sleeves of his suit. The girl’s dress was clumsy
and touching, her small chin obscured by a monstrous orchid.

Halfway down the corridor, the boy and girl stopped to gaze around them.

They looked at the ceiling, and then at the floor. Then they looked at each
other. The boy said, “Hoo!” and grabbed both the girl’s hands, and they stood
there a moment, laughing, before they went into the restaurant.

Macon followed them. He felt soothed and tired and terribly hungry. It was

good to find the waiter just setting his food in place when he sank back into
his seat.

ten

I’ll be honest,” Muriel said, “My baby was not exactly planned for. I mean

we weren’t exactly even married yet, if you want to know the truth. If you
want to know the truth the baby was the reason we got married in the first
place, but I did tell Norman he didn’t have to go through with it if he didn’t
want to. It’s not like I pushed him into it or anything.”

She looked past Macon at Edward, who lay prone on the front hall rug.

He’d had to be forced into position, but at least he was staying put.

“Notice I let him move around some, as long as he stays down,” she said.

“Now I’m going to turn my back, and you watch how he does.”

She  wandered  into  the  living  room.  She  lifted  a  vase  from  a  table  and

examined  its  underside.  “So  anyhow,”  she  said,  “we  went  ahead  and  got
married, with everybody acting like it was the world’s biggest tragedy. My
folks really never got over it. My mom said, ‘Well, I always knew this was
going  to  happen.  Back  when  you  were  hanging  out  with  Dana  Scully  and
them, one or another of them no-count boys always honking out front for you,
didn’t I tell you this was going to happen?’ We had a little bitty wedding at
my folks’ church, and we didn’t take a honeymoon trip but went straight to
our  apartment  and  next  day  Norman  started  work  at  his  uncle’s.  He  just
settled right into being married—shopping with me for groceries and picking
out curtains and such. Oh, you know, sometimes I get to thinking what kids
we were. It was almost like playing house! It was pretend! The candles I lit at
suppertime, flowers on the table, Norman calling me ‘hon’ and bringing his
plate to the sink for me to wash. And then all at once it turned serious. Here
I’ve got this little boy now, this great big seven-year-old boy with his clompy
leather shoes, and it wasn’t playing house after all. It was for real, all along,
and we just didn’t know it.”

She  sat  on  the  couch  and  raised  one  foot  in  front  of  her.  She  turned  it

admiringly this way and that. Her stockings bagged at the ankle.

“What is Edward up to?” she asked.

Macon said, “He’s still lying down.”

“Pretty soon he’ll do that for three hours straight.”

“Three hours?”

“Easy.”

“Isn’t that sort of cruel?”

“I thought you promised not to talk like that,” she told him.

“Right. Sorry,” Macon said.

“Maybe tomorrow he’ll lie down on his own.”

“You think so?”

“If you practice. If you don’t give in. If you don’t go all soft-hearted.”

Then she stood up and came over to Macon. She patted his arm. “But never

mind,” she told him, “I think soft-hearted men are sweet.”

Macon backed away. He just missed stepping on Edward.

It was getting close to Thanksgiving, and the Learys were debating as usual

about Thanksgiving dinner. The fact was, none of them cared for turkey. Still,
Rose said, it didn’t seem right to serve anything else. It would just feel wrong.
Her  brothers  pointed  out  that  she’d  have  to  wake  up  at  five  a.m.  to  put  a
turkey in the oven. But it was she who’d be doing it, Rose said. It wouldn’t be
troubling them any.

Then it began to seem she had had an ulterior motive, for as soon as they

settled on turkey she announced that she might just invite Julian Edge. Poor
Julian,  she  said,  had  no  close  family  nearby,  and  he  and  his  neighbors
gathered  forlornly  at  holidays,  each  bringing  his  or  her  specialty.
Thanksgiving dinner last year had been a vegetarian pasta casserole and goat
cheese on grape leaves and kiwi tarts. The least she could do was offer him a
normal family dinner.

“What!” Macon said, acting surprised and disapproving, but unfortunately,

it wasn’t that much of a surprise. Oh, Julian was up to something, all right.

But what could it be? Whenever Rose came down the stairs in her best dress
and two spots of rouge, whenever she asked Macon to shut Edward in the
pantry because Julian would be stopping by to take her this place or that—
well, Macon had a very strong urge to let Edward accidentally break loose.
He made a point of meeting Julian at the door, eyeing him for a long, silent
moment before calling Rose. But Julian behaved; no glint of irony betrayed
him. He was respectful with Rose, almost shy, and hovered clumsily when he
ushered her out the door. Or was that the irony? His Rose Leary act. Macon
didn’t like the looks of this.

Then it turned out that Porter’s children would be coming for Thanksgiving

too. They usually came at Christmas instead, but wanted to trade off this year
due to some complication with their grandparents on their stepfather’s side.
So really, Rose said, wasn’t it good they were having turkey? Children were
such  traditionalists.  She  set  to  work  baking  pumpkin  pies.  “We  gather
together,” she sang, “to ask the Lord’s blessing . . .” Macon looked up from
the sheaf of stolen menus he was spreading across the kitchen table. There
was a note of gaiety in her voice that made him uneasy. He wondered if she
had  any  mistaken  ideas  about  Julian—if,  for  instance,  she  hoped  for  some
kind of romance. But Rose was so plain and sensible in her long white apron.
She reminded him of Emily Dickinson; hadn’t Emily Dickinson also baked
for her nieces and nephews? Surely there was no need for concern.

“My son’s name is Alexander,” Muriel said. “Did I tell you that? I named

him Alexander because I thought it sounded high-class. He was never an easy
baby. For starters something went wrong while I was carrying him and they
had to do a Caesarean and take him out early and I got all these complications
and can’t ever have any more children. And then Alexander was so teeny he
didn’t even look like a human, more like a big-headed newborn kitten, and he
had to stay in an incubator forever, just about, and nearly died. Norman said,
‘When’s it going to look like other babies?’ He always called Alexander ‘it.’ I
adjusted better; I mean pretty soon it seemed to me that that was what a baby
ought  to  look  like,  and  I  hung  around  the  hospital  nursery  but  Norman
wouldn’t go near him, he said it made him too nervous.”

Edward whimpered. He was just barely lying down—his haunches braced,

his claws digging into the carpet. But Muriel gave no sign she had noticed.

“Maybe  you  and  Alexander  should  get  together  some  time,”  she  told

Macon.

“Oh, I, ah . . .” Macon said.

“He doesn’t have enough men in his life.”

“Well, but—”

“He’s supposed to see men a lot; it’s supposed to show him how to act.

Maybe the three of us could go to a movie. Don’t you ever go to movies?”

“No, I don’t,” Macon said truthfully. “I haven’t been to a movie in months.

I really don’t care for movies. They make everything seem so close up.”

“Or just out to a McDonald’s, maybe.”

“I don’t think so,” Macon said.

Porter’s children arrived the evening before Thanksgiving, traveling by car

because  Danny,  the  oldest,  had  just  got  his  driver’s  license.  That  worried
Porter considerably. He paced the floor from the first moment they could be
expected. “I don’t know where June’s brain is,” he said. “Letting a sixteen-
year-old  boy  drive  all  the  way  from  Washington  the  first  week  he  has  his
license!  With  his  two  little  sisters  in  the  car!  I  don’t  know  how  her  mind
works.”

To  make  it  worse,  the  children  were  almost  an  hour  late.  When  Porter

finally saw their headlights, he rushed out the door and down the steps well
ahead of the others. “What kept you?” he cried.

Danny  unfurled  himself  from  the  car  with  exaggerated  nonchalance,

yawning  and  stretching,  and  shook  Porter’s  hand  as  a  kind  of afterthought
while turning to study his tires. He was as tall as Porter now but very thin,
with  his  mother’s  dark  coloring.  Behind  him  came  Susan,  fourteen—just  a
few  months  older  than  Ethan  would  have  been.  It  was  lucky  she  was  so
different from Ethan, with her cap of black curls and her rosy cheeks. This
evening she wore jeans and hiking boots and one of those thick down jackets
that made young people look so bulky and graceless. Then last came Liberty.
What a name, Macon always thought. It was an invention of her mother’s—a
flighty woman who had run away from Porter with a hippie stereo salesman
eight and a half years ago and discovered immediately afterward that she was
two months pregnant. Ironically, Liberty was the one who looked most like
Porter. She had fair, straight hair and a chiseled face and she was dressed in a

little tailored coat. “Danny got lost,” she said severely. “What a dummy.” She
kissed Porter and her aunt and uncles, but Susan wandered past them in a way
that let everyone know she had outgrown all that.

“Oh,  isn’t  this  nice?”  Rose  said.  “Aren’t  we  going  to  have  a  wonderful

Thanksgiving?” She stood on the sidewalk wrapping her hand in her apron,
perhaps to stop herself from reaching out to Danny as he slouched toward the
house. It was dusk, and Macon, happening to glance around, saw the grown-
ups as pale gray wraiths—four middle-aged unmarried relatives yearning after
the young folks.

For supper they had carry-out pizza, intended to please the children, but

Macon kept smelling turkey. He thought at first it was his imagination. Then
he noticed Danny sniffing the air. “Turkey? Already?” Danny asked his aunt.

“I’m trying this new method,” she said. “It’s supposed to save energy. You

set your oven extremely low and cook your meat all night.”

“Weird.”

After supper they watched TV—the children had never seemed to warm to

cards—and  then  they  went  to  bed.  But  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  Macon
woke with a start and gave serious thought to that turkey. She was cooking it
till tomorrow? At an extremely low temperature? What temperature was that,
exactly?

He was sleeping in his old room, now that his leg had mended. Eventually

he nudged the cat off his chest and got up. He made his way downstairs in the
dark, and he crossed the icy kitchen linoleum and turned on the little light
above the stove. One hundred and forty degrees, the oven dial read. “Certain
death,”  he  told  Edward,  who  had  tagged  along  behind  him.  Then  Charles
walked in, wearing large, floppy pajamas. He peered at the dial and sighed.
“Not only that,” he said, “but this is a stuffed turkey.”

“Wonderful.”

“Two quarts of stuffing. I heard her say so.”

“Two quarts of teeming, swarming bacteria.”

“Unless there’s something to this method we don’t understand.”

“We’ll ask her in the morning,” Macon said, and they went back to bed.

In the morning, Macon came down to find Rose serving pancakes to the

children. He said, “Rose, what exactly is it you’re doing to this turkey?”

“I told you: slow heat. Jam, Danny, or syrup?”

“Is that it?” Macon asked.

“You’re  dripping,”  Rose  said  to  Liberty.  “What,  Macon?  See,  I  read  an

article about slow-cooked beef and I thought, well, if it works with beef it
must work with turkey too so I—”

“It might work with beef but it will murder us with turkey,” Macon told

her.

“But at the end I’m going to raise the temperature!”

“You’d have to raise it mighty high. You’d have to autoclave the thing.”

“You’d have to expose it to a nuclear flash,” Danny said cheerfully.

Rose  said,  “Well,  you’re  both  just  plain  wrong.  Who’s  the  cook  here,

anyhow? I say it’s going to be delicious.”

Maybe it was, but it certainly didn’t look it. By dinnertime the breast had

caved  in  and  the  skin  was  all  dry  and  dull.  Rose  entered  the  dining  room
holding  the  turkey  high  as  if  in  triumph,  but  the  only  people  who  looked
impressed were those who didn’t know its history—Julian and Mrs. Barrett,
one of Rose’s old people. Julian said, “Ah!” and Mrs. Barrett beamed. “I just
wish  my  neighbors  could  see  this,”  Julian  said.  He  wore  a  brass-buttoned
navy blazer, and he seemed to have polished his face.

“Well, there may be a little problem here,” Macon said.

Rose set the turkey down and glared at him.

“Of course, the rest of the meal is excellent,” he said. “Why, we could fill

up on the vegetables alone! In fact I think I’ll do that. But the turkey . . .”

“It’s pure poison,” Danny finished for him.

Julian said, “Come again?” but Mrs. Barrett just smiled harder.

Macon explained.

“It was not!” Rose said. “It’s perfectly good.”

“Maybe you’d rather just stick to the side dishes,” Macon told Mrs. Barrett.

He was worried she might be deaf.

But she must have heard, for she said, “Why, perhaps I will,” never losing

her smile. “I don’t have much of an appetite anyhow,” she said.

“And I’m a vegetarian,” Susan said.

“So am I,” Danny said suddenly.

“Oh, Macon, how could you do this?” Rose asked. “My lovely turkey! All

that work!”

“I think it looks delicious,” Julian said.

“Yes,” Porter told him, “but you don’t know about the other times.”

“Other times?”

“Those were just bad luck,” Rose said.

“Why, of course!” Porter said. “Or economy. You don’t like to throw things

away; I can understand that! Pork that’s been sitting too long or chicken salad
left out all night . . .”

Rose sat down. Tears were glazing her eyes. “Oh,” she said, “you’re all so

mean! You don’t fool me for an instant; I know why you’re doing this. You
want to make me look bad in front of Julian.”

“Julian?”

Julian seemed distressed. He took a handkerchief from his breast pocket

but then went on holding it.

“You want to drive him off! You three wasted your chances and now you

want me to waste mine, but I won’t do it. I can see what’s what. Just listen to

any song on the radio; look at any soap opera. Love is what it’s all about. On
soap operas everything revolves around love. A new person comes to town
and right away the question is, who’s he going to love? Who’s going to love
him back? Who’ll lose her mind with jealousy? Who’s going to ruin her life?
And you want to make me miss it!”

“Well, goodness,” Macon said, trying to sort this out.

“You know perfectly well there’s nothing wrong with that turkey. You just

don’t  want  me  to  stop  cooking  for  you  and  taking  care  of  this  house,  you
don’t want Julian to fall in love with me.”

“Do what?”

But she scraped her chair back and ran from the room. Julian sat there with

his mouth open.

“Don’t you dare laugh,” Macon told him.

Julian just went on gaping.

“Don’t even consider it.”

Julian swallowed. He said, “Do you think I ought to go after her?”

“No,” Macon said.

“But she seems so—”

“She’s fine! She’s perfectly fine.”

“Oh.”

“Now, who wants a baked potato?”

There was a kind of murmur around the table; everyone looked unhappy.

“That poor, dear girl,” Mrs. Barrett said. “I feel just awful.”

“Me too,” Susan said.

“Julian?” Macon asked, clanging a spoon. “Potato?”

“I’ll take the turkey,” Julian said firmly.

At that moment, Macon almost liked the man.

“It was having the baby that broke our marriage up,” Muriel said. “When

you think about it, that’s funny. First we got married on account of the baby
and then we got divorced on account of the baby, and in between, the baby
was what we argued about. Norman couldn’t understand why I was all the
time at the hospital visiting Alexander. ‘It doesn’t know you’re there, so why
go?’ he said. I’d  go  early  in  the  morning  and  just  hang  around,  the  nurses
were as nice as could be about it, and I’d stay till night. Norman said, ‘Muriel,
won’t  we  ever  get  our  ordinary  life  back?’  Well,  you  can  see  his  point,  I
guess. It’s like I only had room in my mind for Alexander. And he was in the
hospital  for  months,  for  really  months;  there  was  everything  in  this  world
wrong with him. You should have seen our medical bills. We only had partial
insurance and there were these bills running up, thousands and thousands of
dollars.  Finally  I  took  a  job  at  the  hospital.  I  asked  if  I  could  work  in  the
nursery but they said no, so I got a kind of, more like a maid’s job, cleaning
patients’ rooms and so forth. Emptying trash cans, wet-mopping floors . . .”

She and Macon were walking along Dempsey Road with Edward, hoping

to  run  into  a  biker.  Muriel  held  the  leash.  If  a  biker  came,  she  said,  and
Edward lunged or gave so much as the smallest yip, she was going to yank
him  so  hard  he  wouldn’t  know  what  hit  him.  She  warned  Macon  of  that
before they started out. She said he’d better not object because this was for
Edward’s own good. Macon hoped he’d be able to remember that when the
time came.

It was the Friday after Thanksgiving and there’d been a light snow earlier,

but  the  air  didn’t  have  a  real  bite  to  it  yet  and  the  sidewalks  were  merely
damp. The sky seemed to begin about two feet above their heads.

“This one patient, Mrs. Brimm, she took a liking to me,” Muriel said. “She

said I was the only person who ever bothered talking to her. I’d come in and
tell her about Alexander. I’d tell her what the doctors said, how they didn’t
give  him  much  of  a  chance  and  some  had  even  wondered  if  we  wanted  a
chance, what with all that might be wrong with him. I’d tell her about me and
Norman and the way he was acting, and she said it sounded exactly like a
story in a magazine. When they let her go home she wanted me to come with
her, take a job looking out for her, but I couldn’t on account of Alexander.”

A  biker  appeared  at  the  end  of  the  street,  a  girl  with  a  Baskin-Robbins

uniform bunching below her jacket. Edward perked his ears  up.  “Now,  act

like  we  expect  no  trouble,”  Muriel  told  Macon.  “Just  go  along,  go  along,
don’t even look in Edward’s direction.”

The girl skimmed toward them—a little slip of a person with a tiny, serious

face. When she passed, she gave off a definite smell of chocolate ice cream.
Edward sniffed the breeze but marched on.

“Oh, Edward, that was wonderful!” Macon told him.

Muriel just clucked. She seemed to take his good behavior for granted.

“So anyhow,” she said. “They finally did let Alexander come home. But he

was still no bigger than a minute. All wrinkles like a little old man. Cried like
a kitten would cry. Struggled for every breath. And Norman was no help. I
think he was jealous. He got this kind of stubborn look whenever I had to do
something,  go  warm  a  bottle  or  something.  He’d  say,  ‘Where  you  off  to?
Don’t you want to watch the end of this program?’ I’d be hanging over the
crib  watching  Alexander  fight  for  air,  and  Norman  would  call,  ‘Muriel?
Commercial’s just about over!’ Then next thing I knew, there was his mother
standing on my doorstep saying it wasn’t his baby anyhow.”

“What? Well, of all things!” Macon said.

“Can  you  believe  it?  Standing  on  my  doorstep  looking  so  pleased  with

herself. ‘Not his baby!’ I said. ‘Whose then?’ ‘Well, that I couldn’t say,’ she
said, ‘and I doubt if you could either. But I can tell you this much: If you
don’t give my son a divorce and release all financial claims on him, I will
personally produce Dana Scully and his friends in a court of law and they will
swear you’re a known tramp and that baby could be any one of theirs. Clearly
it’s not Norman’s; Norman was a darling baby.’ Well. I waited till Norman got
home from work and I said, ‘Do you know what your mother told me?’ Then
I saw by his face that he did. I saw she must have been talking behind my
back for who knows how long, putting these suspicions in his head. I said,
‘Norman?’ He just stuttered around. I said ‘Norman, she’s lying, it’s not true,
I wasn’t going with those boys when I met you! That’s all in the past!’ He
said, ‘I don’t know what to think.’ I said, ‘Please!’ He said, ‘I don’t know.’ He
went out to the kitchen and started fixing this screen I’d been nagging him
about,  window  screen  halfway  out  of  its  frame  even  though  supper  was
already on the table. I’d made him this special supper. I followed after him. I
said, ‘Norman. Dana and them are from way, way back. That baby couldn’t
be theirs.’ He pushed up on one side of the screen and it wouldn’t go, and he

pushed up on the other side and it cut his hand, and all at once he started
crying and wrenched the whole thing out of the window and threw it as far as
he could. And next day his mother came to help him pack his clothes and he
left me.”

“Good  Lord,”  Macon  said.  He  felt  shocked,  as  if  he’d  known  Norman

personally.

“So I thought about what to do. I knew I couldn’t go back to my folks.

Finally I phoned Mrs. Brimm and asked if she still wanted me to come take
care of her, and she said yes, she did; the woman she had wasn’t any use at
all. So I said I would do it for room and board if I could bring the baby and
she said yes, that would be fine. She had this little row house downtown and
there was an extra bedroom where me and Alexander could sleep. And that’s
how I managed to keep us going.”

They were several blocks from home now, but she didn’t suggest turning

back. She held the leash loosely and Edward strutted next to her, matching her
pace. “I was lucky, wasn’t I,” she said. “If it wasn’t for Mrs. Brimm I don’t
know what I’d have done. And it’s not like it was all that much work. Just
keeping the house straight, fixing her a bite to eat, helping her around. She
was crippled up with arthritis but just as spunky! It’s not like I really had to
nurse her.”

She  slowed  and  then  came  to  a  stop.  Edward,  with  a  martyred  sigh, sat

down at her left heel. “When you think about it, it’s funny,” she said. “All that
time Alexander was in the hospital seemed so awful, seemed it would go on
forever,  but  now  when  I  look  back,  I  almost  miss  it.  I  mean  there  was
something  cozy  about  it,  now  that  I  recall.  I  think  about  those  nurses
gossiping at the nurses’ station and those rows of little babies sleeping. It was
winter and sometimes I’d stand at a window and look out and I’d feel happy
to  be  warm  and  safe.  I’d  look  down  at  the  emergency  room  entrance  and
watch  the  ambulances  coming  in.  You  ever  wonder  what  a  Martian  might
think if he happened to land near an emergency room? He’d see an ambulance
whizzing  in  and  everybody  running  out  to  meet  it,  tearing  the  doors  open,
grabbing up the stretcher, scurrying along with it. ‘Why,’ he’d say, ‘what a
helpful planet, what kind and helpful creatures.’ He’d never guess we’re not
always  that  way;  that  we  had  to,  oh,  put  aside  our  natural  selves  to  do  it.
‘What a helpful race of beings,’ a Martian would say. Don’t you think so?”

She  looked  up  at  Macon  then.  Macon  experienced  a  sudden  twist in his

chest. He felt there was something he needed to do, some kind of connection
he  wanted  to  make,  and  when  she  raised  her  face  he  bent  and  kissed  her
chapped, harsh lips even though that wasn’t the connection he’d intended. Her
fist  with  the  leash  in  it  was  caught  between  them  like  a  stone.  There  was
something insistent about her—pressing. Macon drew back. “Well . . .” he
said.

She went on looking up at him.

“Sorry,” he said.

Then they turned around and walked Edward home.

Danny spent the holiday practicing his parallel parking, tirelessly wheeling

his  mother’s  car  back  and  forth  in  front  of  the  house.  And  Liberty  baked
cookies with Rose. But Susan had nothing to do, Rose said, and since Macon
was planning a trip to Philadelphia, wouldn’t he consider taking her along?
“It’s only hotels and restaurants,” Macon said. “And I’m cramming it into one
day, leaving at crack of dawn and coming back late at night—”

“She’ll be company for you,” Rose told him.

However, Susan went to sleep when the train was hardly out of Baltimore,

and  she  stayed  asleep  for  the  entire  ride,  sunk  into  her  jacket  like  a  little
puffed-up  bird  roosting  on  a  branch.  Macon  sat  next  to  her  with  a  rock
magazine he’d found rolled up in one of her pockets. He saw that the Police
were  experiencing  personality  conflicts,  that  David  Bowie  worried  about
mental  illness,  that  Billy  Idol’s  black  shirt  appeared  to  have  been  ripped
halfway off his body. Evidently these people led very difficult lives; he had no
idea  who  they  were.  He  rolled  the  magazine  up  again  and  replaced  it  in
Susan’s pocket.

If  Ethan  were  alive,  would  he  be  sitting  where  Susan  was?  He  hadn’t

traveled  with  Macon  as  a  rule.  The  overseas  trips  were  too  expensive, the
domestic trips too dull. Once he’d gone with Macon to New York, and he’d
developed stomach pains that resembled appendicitis. Macon could still recall
his frantic search for a doctor, his own stomach clenching in sympathy, and
his relief when they were  told  it  was  nothing  but  too  many  breakfasts.  He
hadn’t taken Ethan  anywhere  else  after  that.  Only  to  Bethany  Beach  every
summer, and that was not so much a trip as a kind of relocation of home base,
with Sarah sunbathing and Ethan joining other Baltimore boys, also relocated,

and  Macon  happily  tightening  all  the  doorknobs  in  their  rented  cottage  or
unsticking  the  windows  or—  one  blissful  year—solving  a  knotty  problem
he’d discovered in the plumbing.

In  Philadelphia,  Susan  came  grumpily  awake  and  staggered  off  the train

ahead of him. She complained about the railroad station. “It’s way too big,”
she  said.  “The  loudspeakers  echo  so  you  can’t  hear  what  they’re  saying.
Baltimore’s station is better.”

“Yes, you’re absolutely right,” Macon said.

They  went  for  breakfast  to  a  café  he  knew  well,  which  unfortunately

seemed  to  have  fallen  upon  hard  times.  Little  chips  of  ceiling  plaster  kept
dropping into his coffee. He crossed the name out of his guidebook. Next they
went to a place that a reader had suggested, and Susan had walnut waffles.
She said they were excellent. “Are you going to quote me on this?” she asked.
“Will you put my name in your book and say I recommended the waffles?”

“It’s not that kind of a book,” he told her.

“Call  me  your  companion.  That’s  what  restaurant  critics  do.  ‘My

companion, Susan Leary, pronounced the waffles remarkable.’ ”

Macon laughed and signaled for their bill.

After their fourth breakfast, they started on hotels. Susan found these less

enjoyable, though Macon kept trying to involve her. He told a manager, “My
companion  here  is  the  expert  on  bathrooms.”  But  Susan  just  opened  a
medicine cabinet, yawned, and said, “All they have is Camay.”

“What’s wrong with that?”

“When Mama came back from her honeymoon she brought us perfumed

designer  soap  from  her  hotel.  One  bar  for  me  and  one  for  Danny,  in  little
plastic boxes and drainage racks.”

“I  think  Camay  is  fine,”  Macon  told  the  manager,  who  was  looking

worried.

Late in the afternoon Susan started feeling peckish again; so they had two

more  breakfasts.  Then  they  went  to  Independence  Hall.  (Macon  felt  they
should do something educational.) “You can tell your civics teacher,” he said.

She rolled her eyes and said, “Social studies.”

“Whatever.”

The  weather  was  cold,  and  the  interior  of  the  hall  was  chilly  and bleak.

Macon noticed Susan gaping vacantly at the guide, who wasn’t making his
spiel  very  exciting;  so  he  leaned  over  and  whispered,  “Imagine.  George
Washington sat in that very chair.”

“I’m not really into George Washington, Uncle Macon.”

“Human beings can only go ‘into’ houses, cars, and coffins, Susan.”

“Huh?”

“Never mind.”

They  followed  the  crowd  upstairs,  through  other  rooms,  but  Susan  had

plainly  exhausted  her  supply  of  good  humor.  “If  it  weren’t  for  what  was
decided  in  this  building,”  Macon  told  her,  “you  and  I  might  very  well  be
living under a dictatorship.”

“We are anyhow,” she said.

“Pardon?”

“You really think that you and me have any power?”

“You and I, honey.”

“It’s just free speech, that’s all we’ve got. We can say whatever we like,

then the government goes on and does exactly what it pleases. You call that
democracy?  It’s  like  we’re  on  a  ship,  headed  someplace  terrible,  and
somebody else is steering and the passengers can’t jump off.”

“Why don’t we go get some supper,” Macon said. He was feeling a little

depressed.

He took her to an old-fashioned inn a few streets over. It wasn’t even dark

yet, and they were the first customers. A woman in a Colonial gown told them
they’d have to wait a few minutes. She led them into a small, snug room with
a fireplace, and a waitress offered them their choice of buttered rum or hot

spiked cider. “I’ll have buttered rum,” Susan said, shucking off her jacket.

Macon said, “Uh, Susan.”

She glared at him.

“Oh, well, make that two,” he told the waitress. He supposed a little toddy

couldn’t do much harm.

But it must have been an exceptionally strong toddy—either that, or Susan

had an exceptionally weak head for alcohol. At any rate, after two small sips
she leaned toward him in an unbalanced way. “This is sort of fun!” she said.
“You know, Uncle Macon, I like you much better than I thought I did.”

“Why, thank you.”

“I used to think you were kind of finicky. Ethan used to make us laugh,

pointing to your artichoke plate.”

“My artichoke plate.”

She pressed her fingertips to her mouth. “I’m sorry,” she said.

“For what?”

“I didn’t mean to talk about him.”

“You can talk about him.”

“I don’t want to,” she said.

She gazed off across the room. Macon, following her eyes, found only a

harpsichord. He looked back at her and saw her chin trembling.

It had never occurred to him that Ethan’s cousins missed him too.

After a minute, Susan picked her mug up and took several large swallows.

She wiped her nose with the back of her hand. “Hot,” she explained. It was
true she seemed to have recovered herself.

Macon said, “What was funny about my artichoke plate?”

“Oh, nothing.”

“I won’t be hurt. Was it funny?”

circle when you’d finished.”

“I see.”

“He was laughing with you, not at you,” Susan said, peering anxiously into

his face.

“Well, since I wasn’t laughing myself, that statement seems inaccurate. But

if you mean he wasn’t laughing unkindly, I believe you.”

She sighed and drank some more of her rum.

“Nobody talks about him,” Macon said. “None of you mentions his name.”

“We do when you’re not around,” Susan said.

“You do?”

“We  talk  about  what  he’d  think,  you  know.  Like  when  Danny  got  his

license, or when I had a date for the Halloween Ball. I mean we used to make
so  much  fun  of  the  grown-ups.  And  Ethan  was  the  funniest  one;  he  could
always get us to laugh. Then here we are, growing up ourselves. We wonder
what Ethan would think of us, if he could come back and see us. We wonder
if he’d laugh at us. Or if he’d feel . . . left out. Like we moved on and left him
behind.”

The woman in the Colonial gown came to show them to their table. Macon

brought his drink; Susan had already finished hers. She was a bit unsteady on
her feet. When their waitress asked them if they’d like a wine list, Susan gave
Macon  a  bright-eyed  look  but  Macon  said,  “No,”  very  firmly.  “I  think  we
ought to start with soup,” he said. He had some idea soup was sobering.

But Susan talked in a reckless, headlong way all through the soup course,

and  the  main  course,  and  the  two  desserts  she  hadn’t  been  able  to  decide
between, and the strong black coffee that he pressed upon her afterward. She
talked  about  a  boy  she  liked  who  either  liked  her  back  or  else  preferred
someone named Sissy Pace. She talked about the Halloween Ball where this
really juvenile eighth-grader had thrown up all over the stereo. She said that
when  Danny  was  eighteen,  the  three  of  them  were  moving  to  their  own

apartment because now that their mother was expecting (which Macon hadn’t
known), she wouldn’t even realize they were gone. “That’s not true,” Macon
told  her.  “Your  mother  would  feel  terrible  if  you  left.”  Susan  propped  her
cheek on her fist in a sort of slipshod manner and said that she wasn’t born
yesterday.  Her  hair  had  grown  wilder  through  the  evening,  giving  her  an
electrified appearance. Macon found it difficult to stuff her into her jacket,
and he had to hold her up more or less by the back of her collar while they
were waiting for a taxi.

In the railroad station she got a confused, squinty look, and once they were

on the train she fell asleep with her head against the window. In Baltimore,
when he woke her, she said, “You don’t think he’s mad at us, do you, Uncle
Macon?”

“Who’s that?”

“You think he’s mad we’re starting to forget him?”

“Oh, no, honey. I’m sure he’s not.”

She slept in the car all the way from the station, and he drove very gently

so as not to wake her. When they got home, Rose said it looked as if he’d
worn the poor child right down to a frazzle.

“You want your dog to mind you in every situation,” Muriel said. “Even

out in public. You want to leave him outside a public place and come back to
find him waiting. That’s what we’ll work on this morning. We’ll start with
him waiting right on your own front porch. Then next lesson we’ll go on to
shops and things.”

She picked up the leash and they stepped out the door. It was raining, but

the porch roof kept them dry. Macon said, “Hold on a minute, I want to show
you something.”

“What’s that?”

He  tapped  his  foot  twice.  Edward  looked  uncomfortable;  he  gazed  off

toward the street and gave a sort of cough. Then slowly, slowly, one forepaw
crumpled. Then the other. He lowered himself by degrees until he was lying
down.

“Well! Good dog!” Muriel said. She clucked her tongue.

Edward flattened his ears back for a pat.

“I worked on him most of yesterday,” Macon said. “It was Sunday and I

had nothing to do. And then my brother’s kids were getting ready to leave and
Edward was growling the way he usually does; so I tapped my foot and down
he went.”

“I’m proud of both of you.”

She told Edward, “Stay,” holding out a hand. She backed into the house

again. “Now, Macon, you come in too.”

They closed the front door. Muriel tweaked the lace curtain and peered out.

“Well, he’s staying so far,” she announced.

She  turned  her  back  to  the  door.  She  checked  her  fingernails  and  said,

“Tsk!” Tiny beads of rain trickled down her raincoat, and her hair—reacting
to  the  damp—stood  out  in  corkscrews.  “Someday  I’m  going  to  get  me  a
professional manicure,” she said.

Macon tried to see around her; he wasn’t sure that Edward would stay put.

“Have you ever been to a manicurist?” she asked.

“Me? Goodness, no.”

“Well, some men go.”

“Not me.”

“I’d like just once to get everything done professional. Nails, skin . . . My

girlfriend goes to this place where they vacuum your skin. They just vacuum
all your pores, she says. I’d like to go there sometime. And I’d like to have
my colors done. What colors look good on me? What don’t? What brings out
the best in me?”

She looked up at him. All at once, Macon got the feeling she had not been

talking about colors at all but something else. It seemed she used words as a
sort  of  background  music.  He  took  a  step  away  from  her.  She  said,  “You
didn’t have to apologize, the other day.”

“Apologize?”

Although he knew exactly what she was referring to.

She seemed to guess that. She didn’t explain herself.

even legally divorced yet.”

“So?”

“I’m just, what do you call. Separated.”

“Well? So?”

He wanted to say, Muriel, forgive me, but since my son died, sex has . . .

turned. (As milk turns; that was how he thought of it. As milk will alter its
basic nature and turn sour.) I really don’t think of it anymore. I honestly don’t. I
can’t imagine anymore what all that fuss was about. Now it seems pathetic.

But what he said was, “I’m worried the mailman’s going to come.”  She

looked at him for a moment longer, and then she opened the door for Edward.

Rose  was  knitting  Julian  a  pullover  sweater  for  Christmas.  “Already?”

Macon asked. “We’ve barely got past Thanksgiving.”

“Yes, but this is a really hard pattern and I want to do it right.”

Macon watched her needles flashing. “Actually,” he said, “have you ever

noticed that Julian wears cardigans?”

“Yes, I guess he does,” she said.

But she went on knitting her pullover.

It  was  a  heathery  gray  wool,  what  he  believed  they  called  Ragg  wool.

Macon and both his brothers had sweaters that color. But Julian wore crayon
colors  or  navy  blue.  Julian  dressed  like  a  golfer.  “He  tends  toward  the  V-
necked look,” Macon said to Rose.

“That doesn’t mean he wouldn’t wear a crew neck if he had one.”

“Look,” Macon said. “I guess what I’m getting at—”

Rose’s needles clicked serenely.

And besides, he’s younger.”

“Two years,” she said.

“But  he’s  got  a  younger,  I  don’t  know,  style  of  living.  Singles  and

apartments and so on.”

“He says he’s tired of all that.”

“Oh, Lord.”

“He says he likes homeyness. He appreciates my cooking. He can’t believe

I’m knitting him a sweater.”

“No, I guess not,” Macon said grimly.

“Don’t try to spoil this, Macon.”

“Sweetheart, I only want to protect you. It’s wrong, you know, what you

said at Thanksgiving. Love is not what it’s all about. There are other things to
consider besides, all kinds of other issues.”

“He ate my turkey and did not get sick. Two big helpings,” Rose said.

Macon groaned and tore at a handful of his hair.

“First we try him on a real quiet street,” Muriel said. “Someplace public,

but not too busy. Some out-of-the-way little store or something.”

She was driving her long gray boat of a car. Macon sat in front beside her,

and Edward sat in back, his ears out horizontal with joy. Edward was always
happy to be invited for a car ride, though very soon he’d turn cranky. (“How
much longer?” you could almost hear him whine.) It was lucky they weren’t
going far.

“I got this car on account of its big old trunk,” Muriel said. She slung it

dashingly around a corner. “I needed it for my errand business. Guess how
much it cost?”

“Um . . .”

this boy down the street from where I live. I said, ‘Here’s the deal. You fix my
car up, I let you have the use of it three nights a week and all day Sunday.’
Wasn’t that a good idea?”

“Very inventive,” Macon said.

“I’ve had to be inventive. It’s been scrape and scrounge, nail and knuckle,

ever since Norman left me,” she said. She had pulled into a space in front of a
little shopping center, but she made no move to get out of the car. “I’ve lain
awake, oh, many a night, thinking up ways to earn money. It was bad enough
when room and board came free, but after Mrs. Brimm died it was worse; her
house  passed  on  to  her  son  and  I  had  to  pay  him  rent.  Her  son’s  an  old
skinflint. Always wanting to jack up the price. I said, ‘How’s about this? You
leave the rent where it is and I won’t trouble you with maintenance. I’ll tend
to it all myself,’ I said. ‘Think of the headaches you’ll save.’ So he agreed and
now you should see what I have to deal with, things go wrong and I can’t fix
them  and  so  we  just  live  with  them.  Leaky  roof,  stopped-up  sink,  faucet
dripping hot water so my gas bill’s out of this world, but at least I’ve kept the
rent down. And I’ve got about fifty jobs, if you count them all up. You could
say I’m lucky; I’m good at spotting a chance. Like those lessons at Doggie,
Do, or another time a course in massage at the Y. The massage turned out to
be a dud, seems you have to have a license and all like that, but I will say
Doggie, Do paid off. And also I’m trying to start this research service; that’s
on account of all I picked up helping the school librarian. Wrote out these
little  pink  cards  I  passed  around  at  Towson  State:  We-Search  Research.
Xeroxed these flyers and mailed them to every Maryland name in the Writer’s
Directory. Men and Women of Letters!I said. Do you want a long slow illness
that will effectively kill off a character without unsightly disfigurement? So far
no  one’s  answered  but  I’m  still  hoping.  Twice  now  I’ve  paid  for  an  entire
Ocean City vacation just by going up and down the beach offering folks these
box lunches me and Alexander fixed in our motel room every morning. We
lug  them  in  Alexander’s  red  wagon;  I  call  out,  ‘Cold  drinks!  Sandwiches!
Step right up!’ And this is not even counting the regular jobs, like the Meow-
Bow or before that the Rapid-Eze. Tiresome old Rapid-Eze; they did let me
bring Alexander but it was nothing but copying documents and tedious things
like that, canceled checks and invoices, little chits of things. I’ve never been
so disinterested.”

Macon stirred and said, “Don’t you mean uninterested?”

articles  on  how  to  shop  for  a  mortgage.  Knitting  instructions,  crochet
instructions, all rolling out of the machine real slow and stately like they’re
such a big deal. Finally I quit. When I got my training at Doggie, Do I said, ‘I
quit. I’ve had it!’ Why don’t we try the grocery.”

Macon felt confused for a second. Then he said, “Oh. All right.”

“You go into the grocery, put Edward on a down-stay outside. I’ll wait here

in the car and see if he behaves.”

“All right.”

He climbed from the car and opened the back door for Edward. He led him

over to the grocery. He tapped his foot twice. Edward looked distressed, but
he  lay  down.  Was  this  humane,  when  the  sidewalk  was  still  so  wet?
Reluctantly, Macon stepped into the store. It had the old-fashioned smell of
brown  paper  bags.  When  he  looked  back  out,  Edward’s  expression  was
heartbreaking.  He  wore  a  puzzled,  anxious  smile  and  he  was  watching  the
door intently.

Macon cruised an aisle full of fruits and vegetables. He picked up an apple

and considered it and set it down again. Then he went back outside. Edward
was still in place. Muriel had emerged from her car and was leaning against
the  fender,  making  faces  into  a  brown  plastic  compact.  “Give  him  lots  of
praise!”  she  called,  snapping  the  compact  shut.  Macon  clucked  and  patted
Edward’s head.

They went next door to the drugstore. “This time we’ll both go in,” Muriel

said.

“Is that safe?”

“We’ll have to try it sooner or later.”

They  strolled  the  length  of  the  hair  care  aisle,  all  the  way  back  to

cosmetics, where Muriel stopped to try on a lipstick. Macon imagined Edward
yawning  and  getting  up  and  leaving.  Muriel  said,  “Too  pink.”  She  took  a
tissue from her purse and rubbed the pink off. Her own lipstick stayed on, as
if it were not merely a 1940s color but a 1940s formula—the glossless, cakey
substance that used to cling to pillowcases, napkins, and the rims of coffee

cups. She said, “What are you doing for dinner tomorrow night?”

“For—?”

“Come and eat at my house.”

He blinked.

“Come on. We’ll have fun.”

“Um . . .”

“Just  for  dinner,  you  and  me  and  Alexander.  Say  six  o’clock.  Number

Sixteen Singleton Street. Know where that is?”

“Oh, well, I don’t believe I’m free then,” Macon said.

“Think it over a while,” she told him.

They went outside. Edward was still there but he was standing up, bristling

in  the  direction  of  a  Chesapeake  Bay  retriever  almost  a  full  block  away.
“Shoot,” Muriel said. “Just when I thought we were getting someplace.” She
made  him  lie  down  again.  Then  she  released  him  and  the  three  of  them
walked on. Macon was wondering how soon he could decently say that he
had  thought  it  over  and  now  remembered  he  definitely  had  an  invitation
elsewhere. They rounded a corner. “Oh, look, a thrift shop!” Muriel said. “My
biggest weakness.” She tapped her foot at Edward. “This time, I’ll go in,” she
said. “I want to see what they have. You step back a bit and watch he doesn’t
stand up like before.”

She went inside the thrift shop while Macon waited, skulking around the

parking meters. Edward knew he was there, though. He kept turning his head
and giving Macon beseeching looks.

Macon saw Muriel at the front of the shop, picking up and setting down

little gilded cups without saucers, chipped green glass florists’ vases, ugly tin
brooches as big as ashtrays. Then he saw her dimly in the  back where the
clothes were. She drifted into sight and out again like a fish in dark water. She
appeared all at once in the doorway, holding up a hat. “Macon? What do you
think?”  she  called.  It  was  a  dusty  beige  turban  with  a  jewel  pinned  to  its
center, a great false topaz like an eye.

“Very interesting,” Macon said. He was starting to feel the cold.

Muriel vanished again, and Edward sighed and settled his chin on his paws.

A teenaged girl walked past—a gypsy kind of girl with layers of flouncy

skirts  and  a  purple  satin  knapsack  plastered  all  over  with  Grateful  Dead
emblems. Edward tensed. He watched every step she took; he rearranged his
position  to  watch  after  her  as  she  left.  But  he  said  nothing,  and  Macon—
tensed himself—felt relieved but also a little let down. He’d been prepared to
leap  into  action.  All  at  once  the  silence  seemed  unusually  deep;  no  other
people passed. He experienced one of those hallucinations of sound that he
sometimes got on planes or trains. He heard Muriel’s voice, gritty and thin,
rattling along. “At the tone the time will be . . .” she said, and then she sang,
“You  will  find  your  love  in  .  .  .”  and  then  she  shouted,  “Cold  drinks!
Sandwiches!  Step  right  up!”  It  seemed  she  had  webbed  his  mind  with  her
stories,  wound  him  in  slender  steely  threads  from  her  life—her  Shirley
Temple  childhood,  unsavory  girlhood,  Norman  flinging  the  screen  out  the
window,  Alexander  mewing  like  a  newborn  kitten,  Muriel  wheeling  on
Doberman  pinschers  and  scattering  her  salmon-pink  business  cards  and
galloping down the beach, all spiky limbs and flying hair, hauling a little red
wagon full of lunches.

Then she stepped out of the thrift shop. “It was way too expensive,” she

told Macon. “Good dog,” she said, and she snapped her fingers to let Edward
up. “Now one more test.” She was heading back toward her car. “We want to
try both of us going in again. We’ll do it down at the doctor’s.”

“What doctor’s?”

“Dr. Snell’s. I’ve got to pick up Alexander; I want to return him to school

after I drop you off.”

“Will that take long?”

“Oh, no.”

They drove south, with the engine knocking in a way that Macon hadn’t

noticed  the  first  time.  In  front  of  a  building  on  Cold  Spring  Lane,  Muriel
parked and got out. Macon and Edward followed her. “Now, I don’t know if
he’s  ready  or  not,”  she  said.  “But  all  the  better  if  he’s  not;  gives  Edward
practice.”

“I thought you said this wouldn’t take long.”

She didn’t seem to hear him.

receptionist was a gray-haired woman with sequined glasses dangling from a
chain of fake scarabs. Muriel asked her, “Is Alexander through yet?”

“Any minute, hon.”

Muriel found a magazine and sat down but Macon remained standing. He

raised one of the slats of the venetian blind to check on Edward. A man in a
nearby chair glanced over at him suspiciously. Macon felt like someone from
a gangster movie—one of those shady characters who twitches back a curtain
to make sure the coast is clear. He dropped the blind. Muriel was reading an
article called “Put on the New Sultry, Shadowed Eyes!” There were pictures
of different models looking malevolent.

“How old did you say Alexander was?” Macon asked.

She glanced up. Her own eyes, untouched by cosmetics, were disquietingly

naked compared to those in the magazine.

“He’s seven,” she said.

Seven.

Seven was when Ethan had learned to ride a bicycle.

Macon was visited by one of those memories that dent the skin, that strain

the  muscles.  He  felt  the  seat  of  Ethan’s  bike  pressing  into  his  hand—the
curled-under edge at the rear that you hold onto when you’re trying to keep a
bicycle upright. He felt the sidewalk slapping against his soles as he ran. He
felt himself let go, slow to a walk, stop with his hands on his hips to call out,
“You’ve  got  her  now!  You’ve  got  her!”  And  Ethan  rode  away  from  him,
strong  and  proud  and  straight-backed,  his  hair  picking  up  the  light  till  he
passed beneath an oak tree.

Macon  sat  down  next  to  Muriel.  She  looked  over  and  said,  “Have  you

thought?”

“Hmm?”

“Have you given any thought to coming to dinner?”

“Oh,”  he  said.  And  then  he  said,  “Well,  I  could  come.  If  it’s  only  for

dinner.”

“What else would it be for?” she asked. She smiled at him and tossed her

hair back.

The receptionist said, “Here he is.”

She  was  talking  about  a  small,  white,  sickly  boy  with  a  shaved-looking

skull. He didn’t appear to have quite enough skin for his face; his skin was
stretched, his mouth was stretched to an unattractive width, and every bone
and blade of cartilage made its presence known. His eyes were light blue and
lashless, bulging slightly, rimmed with pink, magnified behind large, watery
spectacles whose clear frames had an unfortunate pinkish cast themselves. He
wore a carefully coordinated shirt-and-slacks set such as only a mother would
choose.

“How’d it go?” Muriel asked him.

“Okay.”

“Sweetie, this is Macon. Can you say hi? I’ve been training his dog.”

Macon  stood  up  and  held  out  his  hand.  After  a  moment,  Alexander

responded. His fingers felt like a collection of wilted stringbeans. He took his
hand  away  again  and  told  his  mother,  “You  have  to  make  another
appointment.”

“Sure thing.”

She went over to the receptionist, leaving Macon and Alexander standing

there.  Macon  felt  there  was  nothing  on  earth  he  could  talk about  with this
child. He brushed a leaf off his sleeve. He pulled his cuffs down. He said,
“You’re pretty young to be at the doctor’s without your mother.”

Alexander didn’t answer, but Muriel—waiting for the receptionist to flip

through her calendar—turned and answered for him. “He’s  used to it,” she
said, “because he’s had to go so often. He’s got these allergies.”

“I see,” Macon said.

Yes, he was just the type for allergies.

“He’s allergic to shellfish, milk, fruits of all kinds, wheat, eggs, and most

vegetables,”  Muriel  said.  She  accepted  a  card  from  the  receptionist  and
dropped it into her purse. She said as they were walking out, “He’s allergic to
dust  and  pollen  and  paint,  and  there’s  some  belief  he’s  allergic  to  air.
Whenever he’s outside a long  time  he  gets  these  bumps  on  any  uncovered
parts of his body.”

She  clucked  at  Edward  and  snapped  her  fingers.  Edward  jumped  up,

barking. “Don’t pat him,” she told Alexander. “You don’t know what dog fur
will do to you.”

They got into her car. Macon sat in back so Alexander could take the front

seat, as far from Edward as possible. They had to drive with all the windows
down so Alexander wouldn’t start wheezing. Over the rush of wind, Muriel
called, “He’s subject to asthma, eczema, and nosebleeds. He has to get these
shots all the time. If a bee ever stings him and he hasn’t had his shots he could
be dead in half an hour.”

Alexander turned his head slowly and gazed at Macon. His expression was

prim and censorious.

When they drew up in front of the house, Muriel said, “Well, let’s see now.

I’m on full time at the Meow-Bow tomorrow . . .” She ran a hand through her
hair, which was scratchy, rough, disorganized. “So I guess I won’t see you till
dinner,” she said.

Macon couldn’t think of any way to tell her this, but the fact was he would

never be able to make that dinner. He missed his wife. He missed  his son.
They  were  the  only  people  who  seemed  real  to  him.  There  was  no  point
looking for substitutes.

eleven

Muriel  Pritchett  was  how  she  was  listed.  Brave  and  cocky:  no  timorous

initials for Muriel. Macon circled the number. He figured now was the time to
call. It was nine in the evening. Alexander would have gone to bed. He lifted
the receiver.

But what would he say?

Best  to  be  straightforward,  of  course,  much  less  hurtful;  hadn’t

Grandmother Leary always told them so? Muriel, last year my son died and I
don’t seem to . . . Muriel, this has nothing to do with you personally but really
I have no . . .

Muriel, I can’t. I just can’t.

It  seemed  his  voice  had  rusted  over.  He  held  the  receiver  to  his  ear but

great, sharp clots of rust were sticking in his throat.

He had never actually said out loud that Ethan was dead. He hadn’t needed

to; it was in the papers (page three, page five), and then friends had told other
friends, and Sarah got on the phone . . . So somehow, he had never spoken the
words.  How  would  he  do  it  now?  Or  maybe  he  could  make  Muriel  do  it.
Finish the sentence, please: I did have a son but he—. “He what?” she would
ask. “He went to live with your wife? He ran away? He died?” Macon would
nod.  “But  how  did  he  die?  Was  it  cancer?  Was  it  a  car  wreck?  Was  it  a
nineteen-year-old with a pistol in a Burger Bonanza restaurant?”

He hung up.

He went to ask Rose for notepaper and she gave him some from her desk.

He took it to the dining room table, sat down, and uncapped his fountain pen.
Dear Muriel, he wrote. And stared at the page a while.

Funny sort of name.

Who would think of calling a little newborn baby Muriel?

complicated  gold  nib  that  he  liked  the  looks  of.  He  examined  Rose’s
stationery. Cream colored. Deckle edged. Deckle! What an odd word.

Well.

Dear Muriel.

I am very sorry, he wrote, but I won’t be able to have dinner with you after

all. Something has come up. He signed it, Regretfully, Macon.

Grandmother Leary would not have approved.

He sealed the envelope and tucked it in his shirt pocket. Then he went to

the kitchen where Rose kept a giant city map thumb-tacked to the wall.

Driving through the labyrinth of littered, cracked, dark streets in the south

of the city, Macon wondered how Muriel could feel safe living here. There
were too many murky alleys and stairwells full of rubbish and doorways lined
with tattered shreds of posters. The gridded shops with their ineptly lettered
signs offered services that had a sleazy ring to them: CHECKS CASHED NO
QUESTIONS,  TINY  BUBBA’S  INCOME  TAX,  SAME  DAY  AUTO
RECOLORING. Even this late on a cold November night, clusters of people
lurked  in  the  shadows—  young  men  drinking  out  of  brown  paper  bags,
middle-aged women arguing under a movie marquee that read CLOSED.

He  turned  onto  Singleton  and  found  a  block  of  row  houses  that  gave a

sense of having been skimped on. The roofs were flat, the windows flush and
lacking depth. There was nothing to spare, no excess material for overhangs
or decorative moldings, no generosity. Most were covered in formstone, but
the  bricks  of  Number  16  had  been  painted  a  rubbery  maroon.  An  orange
bugproof bulb glowed dimly above the front stoop.

He got out of the car and climbed the steps. He opened the screen door,

which  was  made  of  pitted  aluminum.  It  clattered  in  a  cheap  way  and  the
hinges  shrieked.  He  winced.  He  took  the  letter  from  his  pocket  and  bent
down.

“I’ve got a double-barreled shotgun,” Muriel said from inside the house,

“and I’m aiming it exactly where your head is.”

He  straightened  sharply.  His  heart  started  pounding.  (Her  voice  sounded

level and accurate—like her shotgun, he imagined.) He said, “It’s Macon.”

“Macon?”

The latch clicked and the inner door opened several inches. He saw a sliver

of  Muriel  in  a  dark-colored  robe.  She  said,  “Macon!  What  are  you  doing
here?”

He gave her the letter.

She  took  it  and  opened  it,  using  both  hands.  (There  wasn’t  a  trace  of  a

shotgun.) She read it and looked up at him.

He saw he had done it all wrong.

“Last year,” he said, “I lost . . . I experienced a . . . loss, yes, I lost my . . .”

She went on looking into his face.

“I lost my son,” Macon said. “He was just . . . he went to a hamburger joint

and then . . . someone came, a holdup man, and shot him. I can’t go to dinner
with people! I can’t talk to their little boys! You have to stop asking me. I
don’t mean to hurt your feelings but I’m just not up to this, do you hear?”

She took one of his wrists very gently and she drew him into the house, still

not  fully  opening  the  door,  so  that  he  had  a  sense  of  slipping  through
something, of narrowly evading something. She closed the door behind him.
She put her arms around him and hugged him.

“Every day I tell myself it’s time to be getting over this,” he said into the

space above her head. “I know that people expect it of me. They used to offer
their sympathy but now they don’t; they don’t even mention his name. They
think it’s time my life moved on. But if anything, I’m getting worse. The first
year was like a bad dream— I was clear to his bedroom door in the morning
before I remembered he wasn’t there to be wakened. But this second year is
real. I’ve stopped going to his door. I’ve sometimes let a whole day pass by
without thinking about him. That absence is more terrible than the first, in a
way. And you’d suppose I would turn to Sarah but no, we only do each other
harm.  I  believe  that  Sarah  thinks  I  could  have  prevented  what  happened,
somehow—she’s so used to my arranging her life. I wonder if all this has only
brought  out  the  truth  about  us—how  far  apart  we  are.  I’m  afraid  we  got
married because we were far apart. And now I’m far from everyone; I don’t

have  any  friends  anymore  and  everyone  looks  trivial  and  foolish  and  not
related to me.”

She drew him through a living room where shadows loomed above a single

beaded lamp, and a magazine lay face down on a lumpy couch. She led him
up a stairway and across a hall and into a bedroom with an iron bedstead and
a varnished orange bureau.

“No,” he said, “wait. This is not what I want.”

“Just sleep,” she told him. “Lie down and sleep.”

That seemed reasonable.

She removed his duffel coat and hung it on a hook in a closet curtained

with a length of flowered sheeting. She knelt and untied his shoes. He stepped
out of them obediently. She rose to unbutton his shirt and he stood passive
with  his  hands  at  his  sides.  She  hung  his  trousers  over  a  chair  back.  He
dropped  onto  the  bed  in  his  underwear  and  she  covered  him  with  a  thin,
withered quilt that smelled of bacon grease.

Next he heard her moving through the rest of the house, snapping off lights,

running  water,  murmuring  something  in  another  room.  She  returned  to  the
bedroom and stood in front of the bureau. Earrings clinked into a dish. Her
robe was old, shattered silk, the color of sherry. It tied at the waist with a
twisted cord and the elbows were clumsily darned. She switched off the lamp.
Then she came over to the bed and lifted the quilt and slid under it. He wasn’t
surprised when she pressed against him. “I just want to sleep,” he told her.
But there were those folds of silk. He felt how cool and fluid the silk was. He
put a hand on her hip and felt the two layers of her, cool over warm. He said,
“Will you take this off?”

She  shook  her  head.  “I’m  bashful,”  she  whispered,  but  immediately

afterward,  as  if  to  deny  that,  she  put  her  mouth  on  his  mouth  and  wound
herself around him.

In the night he heard a child cough, and he swam up protestingly through

layers of dreams to answer. But he was in a room with one tall blue window,
and the child was not Ethan. He turned over and found Muriel. She sighed in
her sleep and lifted his hand and placed it upon her stomach. The robe had
fallen open; he felt smooth skin, and then a corrugated ridge of flesh jutting

across her abdomen. The Caesarean, he thought. And it seemed to him, as he
sank back into his dreams, that she had as good as spoken aloud. About your
son, she seemed to be saying: Just put your hand here. I’m scarred, too. We’re
all scarred. You are not the only one.

twelve

here all afternoon, and then you say you won’t. How can I plan when you’re
so disorganized?”

She was folding linen napkins and stacking them on the table, preparing her

annual  tea  for  the  old  people.  Macon  said,  “Sorry,  Rose,  I  didn’t  think  it
would matter that much.”

“Last night you said you’d want supper and then you weren’t here to eat it.

Three separate mornings these past two weeks I go to call you for breakfast
and I find you haven’t slept in your bed. Don’t you think I worry? Anything
might have happened.”

“Well, I said I was sorry.”

Rose smoothed the stack of napkins.

“Time creeps up on me,” he told her. “You know how it is. I mean I don’t

intend to go out at all, to begin with, but then I think, ‘Oh, maybe for a little
while,’ and next thing I know it’s so late, much too late to be driving, and I
think to myself, ‘Well . . .’ ”

Rose turned away quickly and went over to the buffet. She started counting

spoons. “I’m not asking about your private life,” she said.

“I thought in a sense you were.”

“I just need to know how much food to cook, that’s all.”

“I wouldn’t blame you for being curious,” he said.

“I just need to know how many breakfasts to fix.”

“You think I don’t notice you three? Whenever she’s here giving Edward

his lesson, everyone starts coming out of the woodwork. Edging through the

living  room—‘Just  looking  for  the  pliers!  Don’t  mind  me!’  Sweeping  the
entire front porch the minute we take Edward out for a walk.”

“Could I help it if the porch was dirty?”

“Well, I’ll tell you what,” he said. “Tomorrow night I’ll definitely be here

for supper. That’s a promise. You can count on it.”

“I’m not asking you to stay if you don’t want to,” she told him.

“Of course I want to! It’s just this evening I’ll be out,” he said, “but not

late, I’m sure of that. Why, I bet I’ll be home before ten!”

Although even as he spoke, he heard how false and shallow he sounded,

and he saw how Rose lowered her eyes.

He  bought  a  large  combination  pizza  and  drove  downtown  with  it.  The

smell  made  him  so  hungry  that  he  kept  snitching  bits  off  the  top  at  every
stoplight—coins  of  pepperoni,  crescents  of  mushroom.  His  fingers  got  all
sticky and he couldn’t find his handkerchief. Pretty soon the steering wheel
was sticky too. Humming to himself, he drove past tire stores, liquor stores,
discount shoe stores, the Hot-Tonight Novelty Company. He took a shortcut
through  an  alley  and  jounced  between  a  double  row  of  backyards—tiny
rectangles crammed with swing sets and rusted auto parts and stunted, frozen
bushes. He turned onto Singleton and drew up behind a pickup truck full of
moldy rolls of carpet.

The next-door neighbor’s twin daughters were perched on their front stoop

—flashy sixteen-year-olds in jeans as tight as sausage casings. It was too cold
to sit outside, but that never stopped them. “Hey there, Macon,” they sing-
songed.

“How are you, girls.”

“You going to see Muriel?”

“I thought I might.”

He  climbed  Muriel’s  steps,  holding  the  pizza  level,  and  knocked  on  the

door. Debbie and Dorrie continued to watch him. He flashed them a broad
smile. They sometimes baby-sat with Alexander; he had to be nice to them.
Half the neighborhood sat with Alexander, it seemed. He still felt confused by

Muriel’s network of arrangements.

It was Alexander who opened the door. “Pizza man!” Macon told him.

wandered back to the couch, adjusting his glasses on his nose. Evidently he
was watching TV.

“Extra-large combination, no anchovies,” Macon said.

“I’m allergic to pizza.”

“What part of it?”

“Huh?”

“What part are you allergic to? The pepperoni? Sausage? Mushrooms? We

could take those off.”

“All of it,” Alexander said.

“You can’t be allergic to all of it.”

“Well, I am.”

Macon went on into the kitchen. Muriel stood with her back to him, talking

on  the  phone  with  her  mother.  He  could  tell  it  was  her  mother because of
Muriel’s high, sad, querulous tone. “Aren’t you going to ask how Alexander
is? Don’t you want to know about his rash? I ask after your health, why don’t
you ask about ours?”

He stepped up behind her soundlessly. “You didn’t even ask what happened

with his eye doctor,” she said, “and here I was so worried about it. I swear
sometimes  you’d  think  he  wasn’t  your  grandson!  That  time  I  sprained  my
ankle falling off my shoes and called to see if you’d look after him, what did
you say? Said, ‘Now let me get this straight. You want me to come all the way
down to your house.’ You’d think Alexander was nothing to do with you!”

Macon presented himself in front of her, holding out the pizza. “Ta-da!” he

whispered.  She  looked  up  at  him  and  gave  that  perky  smile  of  hers—an
ornate, Victorian V.

“Ma,” she said, “I’m going now! Macon’s here!”

It  had  been  a  long,  long  time  since  anyone  made  such  an  event  of  his

arrival.

He went to Julian’s office on a Monday afternoon and handed over what

he’d done on the U.S. guidebook. “That wraps up the Northeast,” he said. “I
guess next I’ll start on the South.”

“Well,  good,”  Julian  told  him.  He  was  bent  over  behind  his  desk,

rummaging  through  a  drawer.  “Excellent.  Like  to  show  you  something,
Macon. Now, where in hell—ah.”

He straightened, with his face flushed. He gave Macon a tiny blue velvet

box. “Your sister’s Christmas present,” he said.

Macon raised the lid. Inside, on a bed of white satin, was a diamond ring.

He looked at Julian.

“What is it?” he asked.

“What is it?”

“I mean, is this a . . . what you would call, dinner ring? Or is it meant to be,

rather . . .”

“It’s an engagement ring, Macon.”

“Engagement?”

“I want to marry her.”

“You want to marry Rose?”

“What’s so odd about that?”

“Well, I—” Macon said.

“If she’ll agree to it, that is.”

“What, you haven’t asked her yet?”

“I’ll  ask  her  at  Christmas,  when  I  give  her  the  ring.  I  want  to  do  this

properly. Old-fashioned. Do you think she’ll have me?”

would, but he’d be damned if he’d tell Julian that.

“She’s got to,” Julian said. “I am thirty-six years old, Macon, but I tell you,

I feel like a schoolboy about that woman. She’s everything those girls in my
apartment building are not. She’s so . . . true. Want to know something? I’ve
never even slept with her.”

“Well, I don’t care to hear about that,” Macon said hastily.

“I want us to have a real wedding night,” Julian told him. “I want to do

everything right. I want to join a real family. God, Macon, isn’t it amazing
how  two  separate  lives  can  link  up  together?  I  mean  two  differentnesses?
What do you think of the ring?”

Macon said, “It’s okay.” He looked down at it. Then he said, “It’s very nice,

Julian,” and he closed the box gently and handed it back.

“Now, this is not your ordinary airplane,” Macon told Muriel. “I wouldn’t

want you to get the wrong idea. This is what they call a commuter plane. It’s
something a businessman would take, say, to hop to the nearest city for a day
and make a few sales and hop back again.”

The  plane  he  was  referring  to—a  little  fifteen-seater  that  resembled  a

mosquito or a gnat—stood just outside the door of the commuter’s waiting
room.  A  girl  in  a  parka  was  loading  it  with  baggage.  A boy was checking
something on the wings. This appeared to be an airline run by teenagers. Even
the pilot was a teenager, it seemed to Macon. He entered the waiting room,
carrying  a  clipboard.  He  read  off  a  list  of  names.  “Marshall?  Noble?
Albright?” One by one the passengers stepped forward—just eight or ten of
them.  To  each  the  pilot  said,  “Hey,  how  you  doing.”  He  let  his  eyes  rest
longest  on  Muriel.  Either  he  found  her  the  most  attractive  or  else  he  was
struck  by  her  outfit.  She  wore  her  highest  heels,  black  stockings  spattered
with black net roses, and a flippy little fuchsia dress under a short fat coat that
she referred to as her “fun fur.” Her hair was caught all to one side in a great
bloom  of  frizz,  and  there  was  a  silvery  dust  of  some  kind  on  her  eyelids.
Macon knew she’d overdone it, but at the same time he liked her considering
this such an occasion.

stretch  of  concrete,  and  up  two  rickety  steps  into  the  plane.  Macon  had  to
bend almost double as he walked down the aisle. They threaded between two
rows  of  single  seats,  each  seat  as  spindly  as  a  folding  chair.  They  found
spaces  across  from  each  other  and  settled  in.  Other  passengers  struggled
through,  puffing  and  bumping  into  things.  Last  came  the  copilot,  who  had
round, soft, baby cheeks and carried a can of Diet Pepsi. He slammed the door
shut behind him and went up front to the controls. Not so much as a curtain
hid  the  cockpit.  Macon  could  lean  out  into  the  aisle  and  see  the  banks  of
knobs and gauges, the pilot positioning his headset, the copilot taking a final
swig and setting his empty can on the floor.

“Now, on a bigger plane,” Macon called to Muriel as the engines roared up,

“you’d hardly feel the takeoff. But here you’d better brace yourself.”

Muriel  nodded,  wide-eyed,  gripping  the  seat  ahead  of  her.  “What’s  that

light that’s blinking in front of the pilot?” she asked.

“I don’t know.”

“What’s that little needle that keeps sweeping round and round?”

“I don’t know.”

He felt he’d disappointed her. “I’m used to jets, not these toys,” he told her.

She nodded again, accepting that. It occurred to Macon that he was really a
very worldly and well-traveled man.

The plane started taxiing. Every pebble on the runway jolted it; every jolt

sent  a  series  of  creaks  through  the  framework.  They  gathered  speed.  The
crew, suddenly grave and professional, made complicated adjustments to their
instruments. The wheels left the ground. “Oh!” Muriel said, and she turned to
Macon with her face all lit up.

“We’re off,” he told her.

“I’m flying!”

They rose—with some effort, Macon felt—over the fields surrounding the

airport, over a stand of trees and a grid of houses. Above-ground swimming
pools  dotted  backyards  here  and  there  like  pale  blue  thumbtacks.  Muriel
pressed so close to her window that she left a circle of mist on the glass. “Oh,

look!” she said to Macon, and then she said something else that he couldn’t
hear. The engines on this plane were loud and harsh, and the Pepsi can was
rolling around with a clattering sound, and also the pilot was bellowing to the
copilot, saying something about his refrigerator. “So I wake up in the middle
of the night,” he was shouting, “damn thing’s thudding and thumping—”

Muriel said, “Wouldn’t Alexander enjoy this!”

Macon hadn’t seen Alexander enjoying anything yet, but he said dutifully,

“We’ll have to bring him sometime.”

“We’ll have to take just lots of trips! France and Spain and Switzerland . .

.”

“Well,” Macon said, “there’s the little matter of money.”

“Just America, then. California, Florida . . .”

California  and  Florida  took  money  too,  Macon  should  have  said  (and

Florida wasn’t even given space in his guidebook), but for the moment, he
was borne along by her vision of things. “Look!” she said, and she pointed to
something. Macon leaned across the aisle to see what she meant. The airplane
flew so low that it might have been following road signs; he had an intimate
view of farmlands, woodlands, roofs of houses. It came to him very suddenly
that every little roof concealed actual lives. Well, of course he’d known that,
but all at once it took his breath away. He saw how real those lives were to the
people who lived them—how intense and private and absorbing. He stared
past Muriel with his mouth open. Whatever she had wanted him to look at
must be long past by now, but still he went on gazing out her window.

Porter and the others were talking money. Or Porter was talking money and

the others were half listening. Porter was planning ahead for income taxes. He
was interested in something called a chicken straddle. “The way it works,” he
said, “you invest in baby chicks right now, before the end of the year. Deduct
the cost of feed and such. Then sell the grown hens in January and collect the
profit.”

Rose wrinkled her forehead. She said, “But chickens are so prone to colds.

Or would you call it distemper. And December and January aren’t usually all
that warm here.”

mean these are not chickens you actually see; they’re a way to manage our
taxes.”

“Well,  I  don’t  know,”  Charles  said.  “I  hate  to  get  involved  in  things

someone  else  would  be  handling.  It’s  someone  else’s  word  those chickens
even exist.”

“You people have no imagination,” Porter said.

The four of them stood around the card table in the sun porch, helping Rose

with  her  Christmas  present  for  Liberty.  She  had  constructed  an  addition  to
Liberty’s dollhouse—a garage with a guest apartment above it. The garage
was  convincingly  untidy.  Miniature  wood  chips  littered  the  floor  around  a
stack of twig-sized fire logs, and a coil of green wire made a perfect garden
hose. Now they were working on the upstairs. Rose was stuffing an armchair
cushion no bigger than an aspirin. Charles was cutting a sheet of wallpaper
from a sample book. Porter was drilling holes for the curtain rods. There was
hardly elbow room; so Macon, who had just come in with Edward, stood back
and merely watched.

“Besides,” Charles said, “chickens are really not, I don’t know, very classy

animals. I would hate to go round saying I’m a chicken magnate.”

“You don’t even have to mention the fact,” Porter said.

“Beef magnate, now; that I wouldn’t mind. Beef has more of a ring to it.”

“They’re not offering a straddle for beef, Charles.”

Macon  picked  up  some  color  photos  that  sat  beside  the  wallpaper  book.

The  top  photo  showed  a  window  in  a  room  he  didn’t  recognize—a white-
framed window with louvered shutters closed across its lower half. The next
was a group portrait. Four people— blurry, out of focus—stood in a line in
front  of  the  couch.  The  woman  wore  an  apron,  the  men  wore  black  suits.
There was something artificial about their posture. They were lined up too
precisely; none of them touched the others. “Who are these people?” Macon
asked.

Rose glanced over. “That’s the family from Liberty’s dollhouse,” she said.

“Oh.”

“Her mother sent me those pictures.”

“It’s a family with nothing but grown-ups?” he asked.

Liberty switches him back and forth.”

Macon laid the photos aside without looking at the rest of them. He knelt to

pat  Edward.  “A  cattle  straddle,”  Charles  was  saying  thoughtfully.  Macon
suddenly wished he were at Muriel’s. He wrapped his arms around Edward
and imagined he smelled her sharp perfume deep in Edward’s fur.

Oh, above all else he was an orderly man. He was happiest with a regular

scheme of things. He tended to eat the same meals over and over and to wear
the same clothes; to drop off his cleaning on a certain set day and to pay all
his bills on another. The teller who helped him on his first trip to a bank was
the teller he went to forever after, even if she proved not to be efficient, even
if the next teller’s line was shorter. There was no room in his life for anyone
as  unpredictable  as  Muriel.  Or  as  extreme.  Or  as  .  .  .  well,  unlikable,
sometimes.

Her youthfulness was not appealing but unsettling. She barely remembered

Vietnam  and  had  no  idea  where  she’d  been  when  Kennedy  was  shot.  She
made him anxious about his own age, which had not previously troubled him.
He realized how stiffly he walked after he had been sitting in one position too
long; how he favored his back, always expecting it to go out on him again;
how once was plenty whenever they made love.

And she talked so much—almost ceaselessly; while Macon was the kind of

man to whom silence was better than music. (“Listen! They’re playing my
song,” he used to say when Sarah switched the radio off.) She talked about
blushers, straighteners, cellulite, hemlines, winter skin. She was interested in
the  appearance  of  things,  only  the  appearance:  in  lipstick  shades  and  nail
wrapping  and  facial  masques  and  split  ends.  Once,  on  one  of  her  more
attractive  days,  he  told  her  she  was  looking  very  nice,  and  she  grew  so
flustered that she stumbled over a curb. She asked if that was because she had
tied her hair back; and was it the hair itself or the ribbon; or rather the color of
the ribbon, which she’d feared might be just a little too bright and set off the
tone of her complexion wrong. And didn’t he think her hair was hopeless,
kerblamming out the way it did in the slightest bit of humidity? Till he was
sorry he had ever brought it up. Well, not sorry, exactly, but tired. Exhausted.

Certain images of her at certain random, insignificant moments would flash
before him: Muriel at her kitchen table, ankles twined around her chair rungs,
filling out a contest form for an all-expense-paid tour of Hollywood. Muriel
telling  her  mirror,  “I  look  like  the  wrath  of  God”—a  kind  of  ritual  of
leavetaking. Muriel doing the dishes in her big pink rubber gloves with the
crimson fingernails, raising a soapy plate and trailing it airily over to the rinse
water and belting out one of her favorite songs—“War is Hell on the Home
Front Too” or “I Wonder if God Likes Country Music.” (Certainly she liked
country music—long, complaining ballads about the rocky road of life, the
cold gray walls of prison, the sleazy, greasy heart of a two-faced man.) And
Muriel at the hospital window, as he’d never actually seen her, holding a mop
and gazing down at the injured coming in.

Then he knew that what mattered was the pattern of her life; that although

he  did  not  love  her  he  loved  the  surprise  of  her,  and  also  the  surprise  of
himself  when  he  was  with  her.  In  the  foreign  country  that  was  Singleton
Street  he  was  an  entirely  different  person.  This  person  had  never  been
suspected  of  narrowness,  never  been  accused  of  chilliness;  in  fact,  was
mocked for his soft heart. And was anything but orderly.

“Why don’t you come to my folks’ house for Christmas dinner?” she asked

him.

Macon was in her kitchen at the time. He was crouched beneath the sink,

turning off a valve. For a moment he didn’t answer; then he emerged and said,
“Your folks?”

“For Christmas dinner.”

“Oh, well, I don’t know,” he said.

“Come on, Macon, please say yes! I want you to meet them. Ma thinks I’m

making you up. ‘You made him up,’ she says. You know how she is.”

Yes, Macon did know, at least from second hand, and he could just imagine

what that dinner would be like. Booby-trapped. Full of hidden digs and hurt
feelings. The fact was, he just didn’t want to get involved.

So  instead  of  answering,  he  turned  his  attention  to  Alexander.  He  was

trying to teach Alexander how to fix a faucet. “Now,” he said, “you see I shut

the valve off. What did I do that for?”

Alexander had been hauled away from the TV like a sack of stones, plunked
on a kitchen chair, and instructed to watch closely. “Oh,” Muriel said, “I’m
not sure about this. He’s not so very strong.”

“You don’t have to be Tarzan to fix a kitchen faucet, Muriel.”

“Well, no, but I don’t know . . .”

Sometimes Macon wondered if Alexander’s ailments were all in Muriel’s

head.

“Why did I shut off the valve, Alexander?” he asked.

Alexander said, “Why.”

“You tell me.”

“You tell me.”

“No, you,” Macon said firmly.

There was a bad moment or two in which it seemed that Alexander might

keep up that stare of his forever. He sat C-shaped in his chair, chin on one
hand, eyes expressionless. The shins emerging from his trousers were thin as
Tinkertoys, and his brown school shoes seemed very large and heavy. Finally
he said, “So the water won’t whoosh all over.”

“Right.”

Macon was careful not to make too much of his victory.

“Now, this leak is not from the spout, but from the handle,” he said. “So

you want to take the handle apart and replace the packing. First you unscrew
the top screw. Let’s see you do it.”

“Me?”

Macon nodded and offered him the screwdriver.

“I don’t want to,” Alexander said.

“Let him just watch,” Muriel suggested.

I’m going to ask him to manage that without me.”

Alexander took the screwdriver, in one of those small, stingy gestures of

his that occupied a minimum of space. He inched off the chair and came over
to the sink. Macon pulled another chair up close and Alexander climbed onto
it. Then there was the problem of fitting the screwdriver into the slot of the
screw. It took him forever. He had tiny fingers, each tipped with a little pink
pad above painfully bitten nails. He concentrated, his glasses slipping down
on  his  nose.  Always  a  mouth-breather,  he  was  biting  his  tongue  now  and
panting slightly.

“Wonderful,” Macon said when the screwdriver finally connected.

At each infinitesimal turn, though, it slipped and had to be repositioned.

Macon’s  stomach  muscles  felt  tight.  Muriel,  for  once,  was  silent,  and  her
silence was strained and anxious.

Then,  “Ah!”  Macon  said.  The  screw  had  loosened  enough  so  that

Alexander could twist it by hand. He managed that part fairly easily. He even
removed the faucet without being told. “Very good,” Macon said. “I believe
you may have natural talents.”

Muriel relaxed. Leaning back against the counter, she said, “My folks have

their Christmas dinner in the daytime. I mean it’s not at noon but it’s not at
night either, it’s more like midafternoon, or this year it’s really late afternoon
because I’ve got the morning shift at the Meow-Bow and—”

“Look at this,” Macon told Alexander. “See that gunk? That’s old, rotted

packing. So take it away. Right. Now here’s the new packing. You wind it
around, wind even a little more than you need. Let’s see you wind it around.”

Alexander  wrapped  the  thread.  His  fingers  turned  white  with  the  effort.

Muriel said, “Usually we have a goose. My daddy brings a goose from the
Eastern Shore. Or don’t you care for goose. Would you rather just a turkey? A
duck? What are you used to eating, Macon?”

Macon said, “Oh, well . . .” and was saved by Alexander. Alexander turned,

having reassembled the faucet without any help, and said, “Now what?”

“Now make sure the screw is well in.”

you’d rather a good hunk of beef. I know some men are like that. They think
poultry is kind of pansy. Is that how you think too? You can tell me! I won’t
mind! My folks won’t mind!”

“Oh, um, Muriel . . .”

“Now what,” Alexander ordered.

“Why, now we turn the water back on and see what kind of job you’ve

done.”

Macon crouched beneath the sink and showed him where the valve was.

Alexander reached past him and twisted it, grunting. Wasn’t it odd, Macon
thought, how little boys all had that same slightly green smell, like a cedar
closet.  He  rose  and  turned  on  the  faucet.  No  leak.  “Look  at  that!”  he  told
Alexander. “You’ve solved the problem.”

Alexander fought to hold a grin back.

“Will you know how to do it the next time?”

He nodded.

“Now when you’re grown,” Macon said, “you can fix the faucets for your

wife.”

Alexander’s face squinched up with amusement at the thought.

“ ‘Step back, dearie,’ you can say. ‘Just let me see to this.’ ”

Alexander said, “Tssh!”—his face like a little drawstring purse.

“ ‘Let a real man take care of this,’ you can tell her.”

“Tssh! Tssh!”

“Macon? Are you coming to my folks’, or aren’t you?” Muriel asked.

It seemed unreasonable to say he wasn’t. Somehow or other, he had got

himself involved already.

thirteen

Acres. Muriel had to show Macon the way. It was the coldest Christmas Day
either  of  them  could  remember,  but  they  drove  with  the  windows  slightly
open so that Alexander, riding in back, would not be bothered by the dog hair.
The radio was tuned to Muriel’s favorite station. Connie Francis was singing
“Baby’s First Christmas.”

“You warm enough?” Muriel asked Alexander. “You doing okay?”

Alexander must have nodded.

“You feel like you’re wheezing at all?”

“Nope.”

“No, ma’am,” she corrected him.

Sarah  used  to  do  that,  too,  Macon  remembered—give  their  son  a  crash

course in manners anytime they set out to visit her mother.

Muriel  said,  “Once  I  was  riding  Alexander  uptown  on  some  errands  for

George?  My  company?  And  I  had  these  two  cats  in  the  car  just  the  day
before?  And  I  didn’t  think  a  thing  about  it,  clean  forgot  to  vacuum  like  I
usually do, and all at once I turn around and Alexander’s stretched across the
seat, flat out.”

“I wasn’t flat out,” Alexander said.

“You were just as good as.”

“I was only laying down so I wouldn’t need so much air.”

“See there?” Muriel said to Macon.

They  were  traveling  up  York  Road  now,  past  body  shops  and  fast  food

outlets all closed and bleak. Macon had never seen this road so empty. He
overtook a van and then a taxicab; nothing else. Swags of Christmas greens
hung stiffly above a used car lot.

“He can get shots, though,” Muriel said.

“Shots?”

“He can get shots to keep him from wheezing.”

“Then why doesn’t he?”

“Well, if Edward was to move in I guess that’s what we’d do.”

“Edward?”

“I mean if, you know. If you moved in on a permanent basis and Edward

came too.”

“Oh,” Macon said.

Brenda Lee was singing “I’m Gonna Lasso Santa Claus.” Muriel hummed

along, tipping her head perkily left and right to keep time.

“Would you ever think of doing that?” she asked him finally.

“Doing what?” he said, pretending not to know.

“Would you ever think of moving in with us?”

“Oh, um . . .”

“Or we could move in with you,” she said. “Either way you preferred.”

“With me? But my sister and my—”

“I’m talking about your house.”

“Oh. My house.”

His house swam up before him—small and dim and abandoned, hunkered

beneath  the  oak  trees  like  a  woodchopper’s  cottage  in  a  fairy  tale.  Muriel
glanced at his face and then said, quickly, “I could understand if you didn’t

want to go back there.”

“It’s  not  that,”  he  said.  He  cleared  his  throat.  He  said,  “It’s  just  that  I

haven’t given it much thought.”

“Oh, I understand!”

“Not yet, at least.”

“You don’t have to explain!”

She pointed out where to turn, and they started down a winding road. The

eating  places  grew  sparser  and  shabbier.  There  were  scratchy  little  trees,
frozen fields, a whole village of different-sized mailboxes bristling at the end
of a driveway.

Every time the car jounced, something rattled on the backseat. That was

Macon’s  Christmas  present  to  Alexander—a  kit  full  of  tools  that  were
undersized but real, with solid wooden handles. Macon had hunted those tools
down  one  by  one.  He  had  rearranged  them  in  their  compartments  a  dozen
times at least, like a miser counting his money.

They passed a segment of rickrack fence that was dissolving back into the

ground. Muriel said, “What is your family doing today?”

“Oh, nothing much.”

“Having a big Christmas dinner?”

“No,  Rose  has  gone  to  Julian’s.  Charles  and  Porter  are,  I  don’t  know,  I

think they said something about caulking the second-floor bathtub.”

“Oh, the poor things! They should have come with us to my folks’.”

Macon smiled, picturing that.

He turned where she directed, into a meadow dotted with houses. All were

built  to  the  same  general  plan—brick  with  half-stories  of  aluminum siding
above. The streets were named for trees that weren’t there, Birch Lane and
Elm Court and Apple Blossom Way. Muriel had him make a right onto Apple
Blossom Way. He pulled up behind a station wagon. A girl burst out of the
house—a chunky, pretty teenager in blue jeans and a long yellow ponytail.

“Claire!” Alexander shouted, bouncing in his seat.

“That’s my sister,” Muriel told Macon.

“Ah.”

“Do you think she’s good-looking?”

“Yes, she’s very good-looking.”

Claire had the car door open by now and was hoisting Alexander into her

arms.  “How’s  my  fellow?”  she  was  asking.  “What  did  Santa  Claus  bring
you?” She was so unlike Muriel that you’d never guess they were sisters. Her
face  was  almost  square,  and  her  skin  was  golden,  and  by  present-day
standards she was probably ten pounds overweight. After she’d set Alexander
down, she stuffed her hands awkwardly into the back pockets of her jeans.
“So anyhow,” she told Macon and Muriel. “Merry Christmas, and all that.”

“Look,” Muriel said, flashing a wristwatch. “See what Macon gave me.”

“What’d you give him?”

“A key tag from a thrift shop. Antique.”

“Oh.”

With her house key attached, Muriel had neglected to say.

Macon unloaded things from the trunk—Muriel’s presents for her family,

along  with  his  hostess  gift—and  Alexander  took  his  toolbox  from  the
backseat. They followed Claire across the yard. Muriel was anxiously feeling
her hair as she walked. “You ought to see what Daddy gave Ma,” Claire told
her. “Gave her a microwave oven. Ma says she’s scared to death of it. ‘I just
know I’ll get radiation,’ she says. We’re worried she won’t use it.”

The door was held open for them by a small, skinny, gray woman in an

aqua pantsuit. “Ma, this is Macon,” Muriel said. “Macon, this is my mother.”

Mrs. Dugan studied him, pursing her lips. Lines radiated from the corners

of her mouth like cat whiskers. “Pleased to meet you,” she said finally.

“Merry Christmas, Mrs. Dugan,” Macon said. He handed her his gift—a

bottle of cranberry liqueur with a ribbon tied around it. She studied that, too.

aren’t you going to say hello to your grandson?”

Mrs.  Dugan  glanced  briefly  at  Alexander.  He  must  not  have  expected

anything  more;  he  was  already  wandering  over  to  the  Christmas  tree.
Unrelated objects sat beneath it—a smoke detector, an electric drill, a makeup
mirror encircled with light bulbs. Macon laid Muriel’s packages next to them,
and then he removed his coat and draped it across the arm of a white satin
couch. Fully a third of the couch was occupied by the microwave oven, still
jauntily decorated with a large red bow. “Look at my new microwave,” Mrs.
Dugan said. “If that’s not just the weirdest durn thing I ever laid eyes on.” She
cleared a crumple of gift wrap off an armchair and waved Macon into it.

“Something certainly smells good,” he said.

“Goose,” she told him. “Boyd went and shot me a goose.”

She  sat  down  next  to  the  oven.  Claire  was  on  the  floor  with  Alexander,

helping him open a package. Muriel, still in her coat, scanned a row of books
on a shelf. “Ma—” she said. “No, never mind, I found it.” She came over to
Macon with a photo album, the modern kind with clear plastic pages. “Look
here,” she said, perching on the arm of his chair. “Pictures of me when I was
little.”

“Why not take off your coat and stay a while,” Mrs. Dugan told her.

“Me at six months. Me in my stroller. Me and my first birthday cake.”

They  were  color  photos,  shiny,  the  reds  a  little  too  blue.  (Macon’s  own

baby  pictures  were  black-and-white,  which  was  all  that  was  generally
available  back  then.)  Each  showed  her  to  be  a  chubby,  giggling  blonde,
usually with her hair fixed in some coquettish style— tied in a sprig at the top
of her head, or in double ponytails so highly placed they looked like puppy
ears. At first the stages of her life passed slowly—it took her three full pages
to learn to walk—but then they speeded up. “Me at two. Me at five. Me when
I was seven and a half.” The chubby blonde turned thin and dark and sober
and then vanished altogether, replaced by the infant Claire. Muriel said, “Oh,
well,” and snapped the album shut just midway through. “Wait,” Macon told
her. He had an urge to see her at her worst, at her most outlandish, hanging

out with motorcycle gangs. But when he took the album away from her and
flipped to the very last pages, they were blank.

Mr. Dugan wandered in—a fair, freckled man in a plaid flannel shirt—and

gave Macon a callused hand to shake and then wandered out again, mumbling
something  about  the  basement.  “He’s  fretting  over  the  pipes,”  Mrs.  Dugan
explained.  “Last  night  it  got  down  below  zero,  did  you  know  that?  He’s
worried the pipes’ll freeze.”

“Oh, could I help?” Macon asked, perking up.

“Now, you just sit right where you are, Mr. Leary.”

“Macon,” he said.

“Macon. And you can call me Mother Dugan.”

“Um . . .”

“Muriel tells me you’re separated, Macon.”

“Well, yes, I am.”

“Do you think it’s going to take?”

“Pardon?”

“I mean you’re not just leading this child around Robin Hood’s barn now,

are you?”

“Ma, quit that,” Muriel said.

“Well, I wouldn’t have to ask, Muriel, if you had ever showed the least bit

of common sense on your own. I mean face it, you don’t have such a great
track record.”

“She’s just worried for me,” Muriel told Macon.

“Well, of course,” he said.

“This girl was not but thirteen years old,” Mrs. Dugan said, “when all at

once it seemed boys of the very slipperiest character just came crawling out of
the woodwork. I haven’t had a good night’s sleep since.”

ago.”

“Seemed every time we turned around, off she’d gone to the Surf’n’Turf or

the Torch Club or the Hi-Times Lounge on Highway Forty.”

“Ma, will you please open up you and Daddy’s Christmas present?”

“Oh, did you bring us a present?”

Muriel rose to fetch it from under the tree, where Claire sat with Alexander.

She was helping him set up some little cardboard figures. “This one goes on
the green. This one goes on the blue,” she said. Alexander jittered next to her,
impatient to take over.

“Claire  was  the  one  who  picked  that  game  for  him,”  Mrs.  Dugan  said,

accepting  the  package  Muriel  handed  her.  “I  thought  it  was  too  advanced,
myself.”

“It  is  not,”  Muriel  said  (although  she  hadn’t  even  glanced  at  it).  She

returned to Macon’s chair. “Alexander’s just as smart as a tack. He’ll catch on
in no time.”

“Nobody said he wasn’t smart, Muriel. You don’t have to take offense at

every little thing a person says.”

“Will you just open your present?”

But Mrs. Dugan proceeded at her own pace. She took off the ribbon and

laid it in a box on the coffee table. “Your daddy has a bit of cash for your
Christmas,” she told Muriel. “Remind him before you go.” She examined the
wrapping.  “Will  you  look  at  that!  Teeny  little  Rudolph  the  Red-nosed
Reindeers all over it. Real aluminum foil for their noses. I don’t know why
you couldn’t just use tissue like I do.”

“I wanted it to be special,” Muriel told her.

Mrs. Dugan took off the paper, folded it, and laid it aside. Her gift was

something  in  a  gilded  frame.  “Well,  isn’t  that  nice,”  she  said  finally.  She
turned it toward Macon. It was a picture of Muriel and Alexander—a studio
portrait in dreamy pastels, the lighting so even that it seemed to be coming
from no particular place at all. Muriel was seated and Alexander stood beside

her, one hand resting delicately upon her shoulder. Neither of them smiled.
They looked wary and uncertain, and very much alone.

Macon said, “It’s beautiful.”

Mrs. Dugan only grunted and leaned forward to lay the photo beside the

box of ribbons.

Dinner was an industrious affair, with everyone working away at the food

—goose,  cranberry  relish,  two  kinds  of  potatoes,  and  three  kinds  of
vegetables. Mr. Dugan remained spookily quiet, although Macon offered him
several  openers  about  the  basement  plumbing.  Muriel  devoted  herself  to
Alexander. “There’s bread in that stuffing, Alexander. Put it back this instant.
You want your allergy to start up? I wouldn’t trust that relish, either.”

“Oh, for Lord’s sake, let him be,” Mrs. Dugan said.

“You  wouldn’t  say  that  if  it  was  you  he  kept  awake  at  night  with  itchy

rashes.”

“Half the time I believe you bring on those rashes yourself with all your

talk,” Mrs. Dugan said.

“That just shows how much you know about it.”

Macon had a sudden feeling of dislocation. What would Sarah say if she

could see him here? He imagined her amused, ironic expression. Rose and his
brothers would just look baffled. Julian would say, “Ha! Accidental Tourist in
Timonium.”

Mrs.  Dugan  brought  out  three  different  pies,  and  Claire  scurried  around

with the coffeepot. Over her jeans now she wore an embroidered dirndl skirt
—her gift from Muriel, purchased last week at Value Village. Her layers of
clothing reminded Macon of some native costume. “What about the liqueur?”
she asked her mother. “Shall I set out Macon’s liqueur?”

“Maybe he wants you to call him Mr. Leary, hon.”

“No, please, Macon’s fine,” he said.

He supposed there’d been a lot of discussion about his age. Oh, no doubt

about it: He was too old, he was too tall, he was too dressed up in his suit and

tie.

Macon himself found it similar to the fluoride mixture his dentist coated his
teeth with; he’d envisioned something different. Mr. Dugan said, “Well, these
sweet-tasting,  pretty-colored  drinks  are  all  very  well  for  the  ladies,  but
personally I favor a little sipping whiskey, don’t you, Macon?” and he rose
and  brought  back  a  fifth  of  Jack  Daniel’s  and  two  shot  glasses.  The  mere
weight of the bottle in his hand seemed to loosen his tongue. “So!” he said,
sitting down. “What you driving these days, Macon?”

“Driving? Oh, um, a Toyota.”

Mr.  Dugan  frowned.  Claire  giggled.  “Daddy  hates  and  despises  foreign

cars,” she told Macon.

“What is it, you don’t believe in buying American?” Mr. Dugan asked him.

“Well, as a matter of fact—”

As a matter of fact his wife drove a Ford, he’d been going to say, but he

changed his mind. He took the glass that Mr. Dugan held out to him. “I did
once have a Rambler,” he said.

“You  want  to  try  a  Chevy,  Macon.  Want  to  come  to  the  show-room

sometime  and  let  me  show  you  a  Chevy.  What’s  your  preference?  Family-
size? Compact?”

“Well, compact, I guess, but—”

“I’ll tell you one thing: There is no way on earth you’re going to get me to

sell you a subcompact. No sir, you can beg and you can whine, you can get
down on bended knee, I won’t sell you one of those deathtraps folks are so set
on  buying  nowadays.  I  tell  my  customers,  I  say,  ‘You  think  I  got  no
principles? You’re looking here before you at a man of principle,’ I tell them,
and I say, ‘You want a subcompact you better go to Ed Mackenzie there. He’ll
sell  you  one  without  a  thought.  What  does  he  care?  But  I’m  a  man  of
principle.’ Why Muriel here near about lost her life in one of them things.”

“Oh, Daddy, I did not,” Muriel said.

“Came a lot closer than I’d like to get.”

“I walked away without a scratch.”

“Car looked like a little stove-in sardine can.”

“Worst thing I got was a run in my stocking.”

“Muriel was taking a lift from Dr. Kane at the Meow-Bow,” Mr. Dugan

told Macon, “one day when her car was out of whack, and some durn fool
woman driver swung directly into their path. See, she was hanging a left when
—”

“Let me tell it,” Mrs. Dugan said. She leaned toward Macon, gripping the

wineglass that held her liqueur. “I was just coming in from the grocery store,
carrying these few odds and ends I needed for Claire’s school lunches. That
child eats more than some grown men I know. Phone rings. I drop everything
and  go  to  answer.  Man  says,  ‘Mrs.  Dugan?’  I  say,  ‘Yes.’  Man  says,  ‘Mrs.
Dugan, this is the Baltimore City Police and I’m calling about your daughter
Muriel.’ I think, ‘Oh, my God.’ Right away my heart starts up and I have to
find someplace to sit. Still have my coat on, rain scarf tied around my head so
I couldn’t even hear all that good but I never thought to take it off, that’s how
flustered I was. It was one of those hard rainy days like someone is purposely
heaving buckets of water at you. I think, ‘Oh, my God, now what has Muriel
gone and—’ ”

“Lillian, you are getting way off the subject here,” Mr. Dugan said.

“How can you say that? I’m telling him about Muriel’s accident.”

“He don’t want to hear every little oh-my-God, he wants to know why he

can’t have a subcompact. Lady hangs a left smack in front of Dr. Kane’s little
car,” Mr. Dugan told Macon, “and he has no choice but to ram her. He had the
right of way. Want to know what happened? His little car is totaled. Little
bitty Pinto. Lady’s big old Chrysler barely dents its fender. Now tell me you
still want a subcompact.”

“But I didn’t—”

“And the other thing is that Dr. Kane never, ever offered her another ride

home, even after he got a new car,” Mrs. Dugan said.

“Well, I don’t exactly live in his neighborhood, Ma.”

good-looking, Muriel says. First day on the job she says, ‘Guess what, Ma.’
Calls me on the phone. ‘Guess what, my boss is single and he’s real good-
looking, a professional man, the other girls tell me he isn’t even engaged.’
Then he offers her that one lift home and they go and have an accident and he
never offers again. Even when she lets him know she don’t have her car some
days, he never offers again.”

“He does live clear up in Towson,” Muriel said.

“I believe he thinks you’re bad luck.”

“He lives up in Towson and I live down on Singleton Street! What do you

expect?”

“Next he got a Mercedes sports car,” Claire put in.

“Well, sports cars,” Mr. Dugan said. “We don’t even talk about those.”

Alexander said, “Can I be excused now?”

“I really had high hopes for Dr. Kane,” Mrs. Dugan said sadly.

“Oh, quit it, Ma.”

“You did, too! You said you did!”

“Why don’t you just hush up and drink your drink.”

Mrs. Dugan shook her head, but she took another sip of liqueur.

They left in the early evening, when the last light had faded and the air

seemed  crystallized  with  cold.  Claire  stood  in  the  doorway  singing  out,
“Come  back  soon!  Thanks  for  the  skirt!  Merry  Christmas!”  Mrs.  Dugan
shivered next to her, a sweater draped over her shoulders. Mr. Dugan merely
lifted an arm and disappeared— presumably to check on the basement again.

Traffic was heavier now. Headlights glowed like little white smudges. The

radio—having  given  up  on  Christmas  for  another  year—played “I Cut My
Fingers  on  the  Pieces  of  Your  Broken  Heart,”  and  the  toolbox  rattled
companionably in the backseat.

“Macon? Are you mad?” Muriel asked.

“Mad?”

“Are you mad at me?”

“Why, no.”

She glanced back at Alexander and said no more.

It was night when they reached Singleton Street. The Butler twins, bundled

into  identical  lavender  jackets,  stood  talking  with  two  boys  on  the  curb.
Macon parked and opened the back door for Alexander, who had fallen asleep
with his chin on his chest. He gathered him up and carried him into the house.
In  the  living  room,  Muriel  set  down  her  own  burdens—the  toolbox,
Alexander’s new  game,  and  a  pie  Mrs.  Dugan  had  pressed  on  them—and
followed Macon up the stairs. Macon walked sideways to keep Alexander’s
feet from banging into the wall. They went into the smaller of the bedrooms
and  he  laid  Alexander  on  the  bed.  “I  know  what  you  must  be  thinking,”
Muriel said. She took Alexander’s shoes off. “You’re thinking, ‘Oh, now I
see, this Muriel was just on the lookout for anybody in trousers.’ Aren’t you.”

Macon didn’t answer. (He worried they’d wake Alexander.)

“I know what you’re thinking!”

She  tucked  Alexander  in.  Turned  off  the  light.  They  started  back

downstairs.  “But  that’s  not  the  way  it  was;  I  swear  it,”  she  said.  “Oh,  of
course since he was single the possibility did cross my mind. Who would I be
kidding if I said it didn’t? I’m all alone, raising a kid. Scrounging for money.
Of course it crossed my mind!”

“Well, of course,” Macon said mildly.

“But it wasn’t like she made it sound,” Muriel told him.

She clattered after him across the living room. When he sat on the couch

she sat next to him, still in her coat. “Are you going to stay?” she asked.

“If you’re not too sleepy.”

Instead of answering, she tipped her head back against the couch. “I meant

are you giving up on me. I meant did you want to stop seeing me.”

“Why would I want to stop seeing you?”

“After how bad she made me look.”

“You didn’t look bad.”

“Oh, no?”

When she was tired, her skin seemed to tighten over her bones. She pressed

her fingertips to her eyelids.

“Last Christmas,” Macon said, “was the first one we had without Ethan. It

was very hard to get through.”

He often found himself talking with her about Ethan. It felt good to say his

name out loud.

“We didn’t know how to have a childless Christmas anymore,” he said. “I

thought, ‘Well, after all, we managed before we had him, didn’t we?’ But in
fact I couldn’t remember how. It seemed to me we’d always had him; it’s so
unthinkable once you’ve got children that they ever didn’t exist. I’ve noticed:
I look back to when I was a boy, and it seems to me that Ethan was somehow
there even then; just not yet visible, or something. So anyway. I decided what
I  should  do  was  get  Sarah  a  whole  flood  of  presents,  and  I  went  out  to
Hutzler’s  the  day  before  Christmas  and  bought  all  this  junk—closet
organizers and such. And Sarah: She went to the other extreme. She didn’t
buy anything. So there we were, each of us feeling we’d done it all wrong,
acted inappropriately, but also that the other had done wrong; I don’t know. It
was a terrible Christmas.”

He smoothed Muriel’s hair off her forehead. “This one was better,” he said.

She opened her eyes and studied him a moment. Then she slipped her hand

in her pocket, came up with something and held it toward him—palming it,
like a secret. “For you,” she said.

“For me?”

“I’d like you to have it.”

It  was  a  snapshot  stolen  from  her  family  album:  Muriel  as  a  toddler,

clambering out of a wading pool.

She meant, he supposed, to give him the best of her. And so she had. But

the  best  of  her  was  not  that  child’s  Shirley  Temple  hairdo.  It  was  her
fierceness—her  spiky,  pugnacious  fierceness  as  she  fought her way toward
the camera with her chin set awry and her eyes bright slits of determination.
He thanked her. He said he would keep it forever.

fourteen

all his time at her house, to contribute toward her rent and her groceries. He
kept his shaving things in her bathroom and squeezed his clothes among the
dresses in her closet. But there wasn’t one particular point at which he made
the  shift.  No,  this  was  a  matter  of  day  by  day.  First  there  was  that  long
Christmas  vacation  when  Alexander  was  home  alone;  so  why  shouldn’t
Macon stay on with him once he’d spent the night there? And why not fetch
his typewriter and work at the kitchen table? And then why not remain for
supper, and after that for bed?

Though if you needed to put a date on it, you might say he truly moved in

the afternoon he moved Edward in. He’d just got back from a business trip—
an exhausting blitz of five southern cities, not one of which was any warmer
than Baltimore—and he stopped by Rose’s house to check the animals. The
cat  was  fine,  Rose  said.  (She  had  to  speak  above  Edward’s  yelps;  he  was
frantic  with  joy  and  relief.)  The  cat  had  probably  not  noticed  Macon  was
missing. But Edward, well . . . “He spends a lot of time sitting in the hall,” she
said, “staring at the door. He keeps his head cocked and he waits for you to
come back.”

That did it. He brought Edward with him when he returned to Singleton

Street.

“What do you think?” he asked Muriel. “Could we keep him just a day or

two? See if Alexander can take it, without any shots?”

“I can take it!” Alexander said. “It’s cats that get to me; not dogs.”

Muriel looked doubtful, but she said they could give it a try.

Meanwhile, Edward darted madly all over the house snuffling into corners

and under furniture. Then he sat in front of Muriel and grinned up at her. He
reminded Macon of a schoolboy with a crush on his teacher; all his fantasies
were realized, here he was at last.

For  the  first  few  hours  they  tried  to  keep  him  in  a  separate  part  of the

house, which of course was hopeless. He had to follow Macon wherever he
went, and also he developed an immediate interest in Alexander. Lacking a
ball,  he  kept  dropping  small  objects  at  Alexander’s  feet  and  then  stepping
back  to  look  expectantly  into  his  face.  “He  wants  to  play  fetch,”  Macon
explained. Alexander picked up a matchbook and tossed it, angling his arm
behind him in a prissy way. While Edward went tearing after it, Macon made
a mental note to buy a ball first thing in the morning and teach Alexander how
to throw.

Alexander  watched  TV  and  Edward  snoozed  on  the  couch  beside  him,

curled like a little blond cashew nut with a squinty, blissful expression on his
face. Alexander hugged him and buried his face in Edward’s ruff. “Watch it,”
Macon told him. He had no idea what to do if Alexander started wheezing.
But Alexander didn’t wheeze. By bedtime he just had a stuffy nose, and he
usually had that anyhow.

Macon  liked  to  believe  that  Alexander  didn’t  know  he  and  Muriel  slept

together.  “Well,  that’s  just  plain  ridiculous,”  Muriel  said.  “Where  does  he
imagine you spend the night—on the living room couch?”

“Maybe,”  he  said.  “I’m  sure  he  has  some  explanation.  Or  maybe  he

doesn’t. All I’m saying is, we shouldn’t hit him in the face with it. Let him
think what he wants to think.”

So  every  morning,  Macon  rose  and  dressed  before  Alexander  woke.  He

started fixing breakfast and then roused him. “Seven o’clock! Time to get up!
Go  call  your  mother,  will  you?”  In  the  past,  he  learned,  Muriel  had  often
stayed in bed while Alexander woke up on his own and got ready for school.
Sometimes he left the house while she was still asleep. Macon thought that
was shocking. Now he made a full breakfast, and he insisted that Muriel sit at
the table with them. Muriel claimed breakfast made her sick to her stomach.
Alexander said it made him sick, too, but Macon said that was just too bad.
“Ninety-eight  percent  of  all  A  students  eat  eggs  in  the  morning,”  he  said
(making it up as he went along). “Ninety-nine percent drink milk.” He untied
his apron and sat down. “Are you listening, Alexander?”

“I’ll throw up if I drink milk.”

“That’s all in your head.”

“Tell him, Mama!”

long  silk  robe,  resting  her  chin  on  one  hand.  “It’s  something  to  do  with
enzymes,” she said. She yawned. Her hair, growing out of its permanent at
last, hung down her back in even ripples like the crimps on a bobby pin.

Alexander  walked  to  school  with  Buddy  and  Sissy  Ebbetts,  two  tough-

looking older children from across the street. Muriel either went back to bed
or dressed and left for one or another of her jobs, depending on what day it
was. Then Macon did the breakfast dishes and took Edward out. They didn’t
go  far;  it  was  much  too  cold.  The  few  people  they  encountered  walked
rapidly, with jerky steps, like characters in a silent film. They knew Macon by
sight now and would allow their eyes to flick over his face as they passed—a
gesture like a nod—but they didn’t speak. Edward ignored them. Other dogs
could come up and sniff him and he wouldn’t even break stride. Mr. Marcusi,
unloading crates outside Marcusi’s Grocery, would pause to say, “Well, hey
there, stubby. Hey there, tub of lard.” Edward, smugly oblivious, marched on.
“Weirdest animal I ever saw,” Mr. Marcusi called after Macon. “Looks like
something that was badly drawn.” Macon always laughed.

He was beginning to feel easier here. Singleton Street still unnerved him

with its poverty and its ugliness, but it no longer seemed so dangerous. He
saw  that  the  hoodlums  in  front  of  the  Cheery  Moments  Carry-Out  were
pathetically  young  and  shabby—  their  lips  chapped,  their  sparse  whiskers
ineptly shaved, an uncertain, unformed look around their eyes. He saw that
once  the  men  had  gone  off  to  work,  the  women  emerged  full  of  good
intentions and  swept  their  front  walks,  picked  up  the  beer  cans  and  potato
chip bags, even rolled back their coat sleeves and scrubbed their stoops on the
coldest  days  of  the  year.  Children  raced  past  like  so  many scraps of paper
blowing in the wind—mittens mismatched, noses running—and some woman
would brace herself on her broom to call, “You there! I see you! Don’t think I
don’t know you’re skipping school!” For this street was always backsliding,
Macon  saw,  always  falling  behind,  but  was  caught  just  in  time  by  these
women with their carrying voices and their pushy jaws.

Returning to Muriel’s house, he would warm himself with a cup of coffee.

He would set his typewriter on the kitchen table and sit down with his notes
and  brochures.  The  window  next  to  the  table  had  large,  cloudy  panes  that
rattled whenever the wind blew. Something about the rattling sound reminded
him of train travel. The airport in Atlanta must have ten miles of corridors, he

typed,  and  then  a  gust  shook  the  panes  and  he  had  an  eerie  sensation  of
movement, as if the cracked linoleum floor were skating out from under him.

He  would  telephone  hotels,  motels,  Departments  of  Commerce,  and  his

travel agent, arranging future trips. He would note these arrangements in the
datebook  that  Julian  gave  him  every  Christmas—a  Businessman’s  Press
product, spiral-bound. In the back were various handy reference charts that he
liked to thumb through. The birthstone for January was a garnet; for February,
an amethyst. One square mile equaled 2.59 square kilometers. The proper gift
for a first anniversary was paper. He would ponder these facts dreamily. It
seemed  to  him  that  the  world  was  full  of  equations;  that  there  must  be  an
answer for everything, if only you knew how to set forth the questions.

Then it was lunchtime, and he would put away his work and make himself

a sandwich or heat a can of soup, let Edward have a quick run in the tiny
backyard. After that he liked to putter around the house a bit. There was so
much that needed fixing! And all of it somebody else’s, not his concern, so he
could approach it lightheartedly. He whistled while he probed the depth of a
crack.  He  hummed  as  he  toured  the  basement,  shaking  his  head  at  the
disarray.  Upstairs  he  found  a  three-legged  bureau  leaning  on  a  can  of
tomatoes, and he told Edward, “Scandalous!” in a tone of satisfaction.

It occurred to him—as he oiled a hinge, as he tightened a doorknob—that

the house reflected amazingly little of Muriel. She must have lived here six or
seven  years  by  now,  but  still  the  place  had  an  air  of  transience.  Her
belongings seemed hastily placed, superimposed, not really much to do with
her. This was a disappointment, for Macon was conscious while he worked of
his intense curiosity about her inner workings. Sanding a drawer, he cast a
guilty eye upon its contents but found only fringed shawls and yellowed net
gloves from the forties—clues to other people’s lives, not hers.

But what was it he wanted to know? She was an open book, would tell him

anything—more than he felt comfortable with. Nor did she attempt to hide her
true nature, which was certainly far from perfect. It emerged that she had a
nasty temper, a shrewish tongue, and a tendency to fall into spells of self-
disgust from which no one could rouse her for hours. She was inconsistent
with Alexander to the point of pure craziness—one minute overprotective, the
next  minute  callous  and  offhand.  She  was  obviously  intelligent,  but  she
counteracted that with the most global case of superstition Macon had ever
witnessed.  Hardly  a  day  passed  when  she  didn’t  tell  him  some  dream  in
exhaustive detail and then sift through it for omens. (A dream of white ships

on a purple sea came true the very next morning, she claimed, when a door-
to-door salesman showed up in a purple sweater patterned with little white
boats. “The very same purple! Same shape of ship!” Macon only wondered
what kind of salesman would wear such clothing.) She believed in horoscopes
and  tarot  cards  and  Ouija  boards.  Her  magic  number  was  seventeen.  In  a
previous incarnation she’d been a fashion designer, and she swore she could
recall at least one of her deaths. (“We think she’s passed on,” they told the
doctor as he entered, and the doctor unwound his muffler.) She was religious
in a blurry, nondenominational way and had no doubt whatsoever that God
was looking after her personally—ironic, it seemed to Macon, in view of how
she’d had to fight for every little thing she wanted.

He knew all this and yet, finding a folded sheet of paper on the counter, he

opened it and devoured her lurching scrawl as if she were a stranger. Pretzels.
Pantyhose. Dentist, he read. Pick up Mrs. Arnold’s laundry.

No, not that. Not that.

Then it was three o’clock and Alexander was home from school,  letting

himself in with a key that he wore on a shoelace around his neck. “Macon?”
he’d  call  tentatively.  “Is  that  you  out  there?”  He  was  scared  of  burglars.
Macon said, “It’s me.” Edward leapt up and went running for his ball. “How
was your day?” Macon always asked.

“Oh, okay.”

But Macon had the feeling that school never went very well for Alexander.

He came out of it with his face more pinched than ever, his glasses thick with
fingerprints. He reminded Macon of a home-work paper that had been erased
and rewritten too many times. His clothes, on the other hand, were as neat as
when he’d left in the morning. Oh, those clothes! Spotless polo shirts with a
restrained brown pinstripe, matching brown trousers gathered bulkily around
his waist with a heavy leather belt. Shiny brown shoes. Blinding white socks.
Didn’t he ever play? Didn’t kids have recess anymore?

Macon gave him a snack: milk and cookies. (Alexander drank milk in the

afternoons without complaint.) Then he helped him with his schoolwork. It
was the simplest sort—arithmetic sums and reading questions. “Why did Joe
need the dime? Where was Joe’s daddy?”

“Umm . . .” Alexander said. Blue veins pulsed in his temples.

walk  was  constricted.  Even  his  smile  never  dared  to  venture  beyond  two
invisible boundaries in the center of his face. Not that he was smiling now. He
was wrinkling his forehead, raising his eyes fearfully to Macon.

“Take your time,” Macon told him. “There’s no hurry.”

“But I can’t! I don’t know! I don’t know!”

“You remember Joe,” Macon said patiently.

“I don’t think I do!”

Sometimes Macon stuck with it, sometimes he simply dropped it. After all,

Alexander  had  managed  without  him  up  till  now,  hadn’t  he?  There  was  a
peculiar kind of luxury here: Alexander was not his own child. Macon felt
linked to him in all sorts of complicated ways, but not in that inseparable,
inevitable way that he’d been linked to Ethan. He could still draw back from
Alexander; he could still give up on him. “Oh, well,” he could say, “talk it
over with your teacher tomorrow.” And then his thoughts could wander off
again.

The difference was, he realized, that he was not held responsible here. It

was a great relief to know that.

When Muriel came home she brought fresh air and bustle and excitement.

“Is  it  ever  cold!  Is  it  ever  windy!  Radio  says  three  below  zero  tonight.
Edward, down, this minute. Who wants lemon pie for dessert? Here’s what
happened: I had to go shopping for Mrs. Quick. First I had to buy linens for
her daughter who’s getting married, then I had to take them back because they
were all the wrong color, her daughter didn’t want pastel but white and told
her mother plain as day, she said . . . and then I had to pick up pastries for the
bridesmaids’ party and when Mrs. Quick sees the lemon pie she says, ‘Oh, no,
not lemon! Not that tacky lemon that always tastes like Kool-Aid!’ I’m like,
‘Mrs. Quick, you don’t have any business telling me what is tacky. This is a
fresh-baked, lemon meringue pie without a trace of artificial . . .’ So anyway,
to make a long story short, she said to take it home to my little boy. ‘Well, for
your information I’m certain he can’t eat it,’ I say. ‘Chances are he’s allergic.’
But I took it.”

She ranged around the kitchen putting together a supper— BLT’s, usually,

and vegetables from a can. Sometimes things were not where she expected
(Macon’s doing—he couldn’t resist reorganizing), but she adapted cheerfully.
While the bacon sputtered in the skillet she usually phoned her mother and
went over all she’d just told Macon and Alexander. “But the daughter wanted
white and . . . ‘oh, not that tacky lemon pie!’ she says . . .”

If  Mrs.  Dugan  couldn’t  come  to  the  phone  (which  was  often  the  case),

Muriel talked to Claire instead. Evidently Claire was having troubles at home.
“Tell them!” Muriel counseled her. “Just tell them! Tell them you won’t stand
for it.” Cradling the receiver against her shoulder, she opened a drawer and
took out knives and forks. “Why should they have to know every little thing
you do? It doesn’t matter that you’re not up to anything, Claire. Tell them,
‘I’m seventeen years old and it’s none of your affair anymore if I’m up to
anything or not. I’m just about a grown woman,’ tell them.”

But later, if Mrs. Dugan finally came to the phone, Muriel herself sounded

like a child. “Ma? What kept you? You can’t say a couple of words to your
daughter  just  because  your  favorite  song  is  playing  on  the  radio?  ‘Lara’s
Theme’ is more important than flesh and blood?”

Even  after  Muriel  hung  up,  she  seldom  really  focused  on  dinner.  Her

girlfriend  might  drop  by  and  stay  to  watch  them  eat—a  fat  young woman
named Bernice who worked for the Gas and Electric Company. Or neighbors
would knock on the kitchen door and walk right in. “Muriel, do you happen to
have  a  coupon  for  support  hose?  Young  and  slim  as  you are,  I  know  you
wouldn’t need it yourself.” “Muriel, Saturday morning I got to go to the clinic
for my teeth, any chance of you giving me a lift?” Muriel was an oddity on
this  street—a  woman  with  a  car  of  her  own—and  they  knew  by  heart her
elaborate  arrangement  with  the  boy  who  did  her  repairs.  Sundays,  when
Dominick had the car all day, nobody troubled her; but as soon as Monday
rolled around they’d be lining up with their requests. “Doctor wants me to
come in and show him my . . .” “I promised I’d take my kids to the . . .”

If Muriel couldn’t do it, they never thought to ask Macon instead. Macon

was still an outsider; they shot him quick glances but pretended not to notice
he was listening. Even Bernice was bashful with him, and she avoided using
his name.

By  the  time  the  lottery  number  was  announced  on  TV,  everyone  would

have left. That was what mattered here, Macon had discovered: the television
schedule. The news could be missed but the lottery drawing could not; nor

could  “Evening  Magazine”  or  any  of  the  action  shows  that  followed.
Alexander watched these shows but Muriel didn’t, although she claimed to.
She sat on the couch in front of the set and talked, or painted her nails, or read
some article or other. “Look here! ‘How to Increase Your Bustline.’ ”

“You don’t want to increase your bustline,” Macon told her.

“ ‘Thicker, More Luxurious Eyelashes in Just Sixty Days.’ ”

“You don’t want thicker eyelashes.”

He felt content with everything exactly the way it was. He seemed to be

suspended, his life on hold.

And later, taking Edward for his final outing, he liked the feeling of the

neighborhood at night. This far downtown the sky was too pale for stars; it
was pearly and opaque. The buildings were muffled dark shapes. Faint sounds
threaded  out  of  them—music,  rifle  shots,  the  whinnying  of  horses.  Macon
looked  up  at  Alexander’s  window  and  saw  Muriel  unfolding  a  blanket,  as
delicate and distinct as a silhouette cut from black paper.

One Wednesday there was a heavy snowstorm, starting in the morning and

continuing through the day. Snow fell in clumps like white woolen mittens. It
wiped out the dirty tatters of snow from earlier storms; it softened the street’s
harsh angles and hid the trash cans under cottony domes. Even the women
who  swept  their  stoops  hourly  could  not  keep  pace  with  it,  and  toward
evening they gave up and went inside. All night the city glowed lilac. It was
absolutely silent.

The next morning, Macon woke late. Muriel’s side of the bed was empty,

but her radio was still playing. A tired-sounding announcer was reading out
cancellations. Schools were closed, factories were closed, Meals on Wheels
was  not  running.  Macon  was  impressed  by  the  number  of  activities  that
people had been planning for just this one day—the luncheons and lectures
and protest meetings. What energy, what spirit! He felt almost proud, though
he hadn’t been going to attend any of these affairs himself.

Then  he  realized  he  was  hearing  voices  downstairs.  Alexander  must  be

awake, and here he was trapped in Muriel’s bedroom.

He dressed stealthily, making sure the coast was clear before crossing the

hall to the bathroom. He tried not to creak the floorboards as he descended the
stairs. The living room was unnaturally bright, reflecting the snow outside.
The couch was opened, a mass of sheets and blankets; Claire had slept over
the  last  few  nights.  Macon  followed  the  voices  into  the  kitchen.  He  found
Alexander eating pancakes, Claire at the stove making more, Muriel curled in
her  usual  morning  gloom  above  her  coffee  cup.  Just  inside  the  back  door
Bernice  stood  dripping  snow,  swathed  in  various  enormous  plaids.  “So
anyhow,” Claire was telling Bernice, “Ma says, ‘Claire, who was that boy you
drove up with?’ I said, ‘That was no boy, that was Josie Tapp with her new
punk haircut,’ and Ma says, ‘Expect me to believe a cock-and-bull story like
that!’ So I say, ‘I’ve had enough of this! Grillings! Curfews! Suspicions!’ And
I leave and catch a bus down here.”

“They’re just worried you’ll turn out like Muriel did,” Bernice told her.

“But Josie Tapp! I mean God Almighty!”

There was a general shifting motion in Macon’s direction. Claire said, “Hey

there, Macon. Want some pancakes?”

“Just a glass of milk, thanks.”

“They’re nice and hot.”

“Macon thinks sugar on an empty stomach causes ulcers,” Muriel said. She

wrapped both hands around her cup.

Bernice said, “Well, I’m not saying no,” and she crossed the kitchen to pull

out a chair. Her boots left pads of snow with each step. Edward toddled after
her, licking them up. “You and me ought to build a snowman,” Bernice told
Alexander. “Snow must be four feet deep out there.”

“Have the streets been cleared?” Macon asked.

“Are you kidding?”

“They couldn’t even get through with the newspaper,” Alexander told him.

“Edward’s about to lose his mind wondering where it’s got to.”

“And there’s cars abandoned all over the city. Radio says nobody’s going

anywhere at all.”

door  and  started  barking.  A  figure  loomed  outside.  “Who’s  that?”  Bernice
asked.

Muriel tapped her foot at Edward. He lay down but kept on barking, and

Macon  opened  the  door.  He  found  himself  face  to  face  with  his  brother
Charles—unusually rugged-looking in a visored cap with earflaps. “Charles?”
Macon said. “What are you doing here?”

Charles  stepped  in,  bringing  with  him  the  fresh,  expectant  smell  of new

snow.  Edward’s  yelps  changed  to  welcoming  whines.  “I  came  to  pick  you
up,” Charles said. “Couldn’t reach you on the phone.”

“Pick me up for what?”

“Your neighbor Garner Bolt called and said pipes or something have burst

in your house, water all over everything. I’ve been trying to get you since
early morning but your line was always busy.”

“That was me,” Claire said, setting down a platter of pancakes. “I took the

receiver off the hook so my folks wouldn’t call me up and nag me.”

“This  is  Muriel’s  sister,  Claire,”  Macon  said,  “and  that’s  Alexander  and

that’s Bernice Tilghman. My brother Charles.”

Charles looked confused.

Come to think of it, this wasn’t an easy group to sort out. Claire was her

usual  mingled  self—rosebud  bathrobe  over  faded  jeans,  fringed  moccasin
boots  that  laced  to  her  knees.  Bernice  could  have  been  a  lumberjack.
Alexander was neat and polished, while Muriel in her slinky silk robe was
barely decent. Also, the kitchen was so small that there seemed to be more
people  than  there  actually  were.  And  Claire  was  waving  her  spatula,
spangling  the  air  with  drops  of  grease.  “Pancakes?”  she  asked  Charles.
“Orange juice? Coffee?”

“No, thank you,” Charles said. “I really have to be—”

“I  bet  you  want  milk,”  Muriel  said.  She  got  to  her  feet,  fortunately

remembering to clutch her robe together. “I bet you don’t want sugar on an
empty stomach.”

“No, really I—”

“How’d you get here, anyways?”

“I drove.”

“I thought the streets were blocked.”

“They weren’t so bad,” Charles said, accepting a glass of milk. “Finding

the place was the hard part.” He told Macon, “I looked it up on the map but
evidently I was mizzled.”

“Mizzled?” Muriel asked.

“He  was  misled,”  Macon  explained.  “What  did  Garner  say,  exactly,

Charles?”

“He  said  he  saw  water  running  down  the  inside  of  your  living  room

window. He looked in and saw the ceiling dripping. Could have been that way
for weeks, he said; you know that cold spell we had over Christmas.”

“Doesn’t sound good,” Macon said.

He went to the closet for his coat. When he came back, Muriel was saying,

“Now that you don’t have an empty stomach, Charles, won’t you try some of
Claire’s pancakes?”

“I’ve had a half a dozen,” Bernice told him. “They don’t call me Big-Ass

Bernice for nothing.”

Charles said, “Uh, well—” and gave Macon a helpless look.

“We have to be going,” Macon told the others. “Charles, are you parked in

back?”

“No, in front. Then I went around back because I couldn’t get the doorbell

to work.”

There was a reserved, disapproving note in Charles’s voice when he said

this, but Macon just said airily, “Oh, yes! Place is a wreck.” He led the way
toward the front of the house. He felt like someone demonstrating how well

he got on with the natives.

so deeply buried that both men more or less fell the length of them, trusting
that they would be cushioned. The sunlight sparked and flashed. They waded
toward  the  street,  Macon’s  shoes  quickly  filling  with  snow—a  refreshing
sharpness that almost instantly turned painful.

“I guess we’d better take both cars,” he told Charles.

“How come?”

“Well, you don’t want to have to drive all the way back down here.”

“But if we take just one, then one of us can drive and one can push if we

get stuck.”

“Let’s take mine, then.”

“But mine’s already cleared and dug out.”

“But  with  mine  I  could  drop  you  off  home  and  save  you  the  trip  back

down.”

“But that leaves my car stranded on Singleton Street.”

“We could get it to you after they plow.”

“And my car has its engine warmed!” Charles said.

Was this how they had sounded, all these years? Macon gave a short laugh,

but Charles waited intently for his answer. “Fine, we’ll take yours,” Macon
told him. They climbed into Charles’s VW.

It was true there were a lot of abandoned cars. They sat in no particular

pattern,  featureless  white  mounds  turned  this  way  and  that,  so  the  street
resembled a river of drifting boats. Charles dodged expertly between them.
He kept a slow, steady speed and talked about Rose’s wedding. “We told her
April  was  too  iffy.  Better  wait,  we  told  her,  if  she’s  so  set  on  an  outdoor
service. But Rose said no, she’ll take her chances. She’s sure the weather will
be perfect.”

encountered,  suddenly  slurred  to  one  side.  Charles  passed  it  smoothly  in  a
long, shallow arc. Macon said, “Where will they live, anyhow?”

“Why, at Julian’s, I suppose.”

“In a singles building?”

“No, he’s got another place now, an apartment near the Belvedere.”

“I see,” Macon said. But he had trouble picturing Rose in an apartment—or

anywhere, for that matter, if it wasn’t her grandparents’ house with its egg-
and-dart moldings and heavily draped windows.

All  through  the  city  people  were  digging  out—tunneling  toward  their

parked cars, scraping off their windshields, shoveling sidewalks. There was
something holidaylike about them; they waved to each other and called back
and forth. One man, having cleared  not  only  his  walk  but  a  section  of  the
street  as  well,  was  doing  a  little  soft-shoe  dance  on  the  wet  concrete,  and
when Charles and Macon drove through he stopped to shout, “What are you,
crazy? Traveling around in this?”

“I must say you’re remarkably calm in view of the situation,” Charles told

Macon.

“What situation?”

“Your  house,  I  mean.  Water  pouring  through  the  ceiling  for  who  knows

how long.”

“Oh, that,” Macon said. Yes, at one time he’d have been very upset about

that.

By  now  they  were  high  on  North  Charles  Street,  which  the  plows  had

already cleared. Macon was struck by the spaciousness here—the buildings
set far apart, wide lawns sloping between them. He had never noticed that
before. He sat forward to gaze at the side streets. They were still completely
white.  And  just  a  few  blocks  over,  when  Charles  turned  into  Macon’s
neighborhood, they saw a young girl on skis.

His house looked the same as ever, though slightly dingy in comparison

with the snow. They sat in the car a moment studying it, and then Macon said,

“Well,  here  goes,  I  guess,”  and  they  climbed  out.  They  could  see  where
Garner Bolt had waded through the yard; they saw the scalloping of footprints
where he’d  stepped  closer  to  peer  in  a  window.  But  the  sidewalk  bore  no
tracks at all, and Macon found it difficult in his smooth-soled shoes.

The instant he unlocked the door, they heard the water. The living room

was  filled  with  a  cool,  steady,  dripping  sound,  like  a  greenhouse  after  the
plants have been sprayed. Charles, who was the first to enter, said, “Oh, my
God.” Macon stopped dead in the hallway behind him.

Apparently  an  upstairs  pipe  (in  that  cold  little  bathroom  off  Ethan’s  old

room, Macon would bet) had frozen and burst, heaven only knew how long
ago, and the water had run and run until it saturated the ceiling and started
coming  through  the  plaster.  All  over  the  room  it  was  raining.  Chunks  of
plaster  had  fallen  on  the  furniture,  turning  it  white  and  splotchy.  The
floorboards  were  mottled.  The  rug,  when  Macon  stepped  on  it,  squelched
beneath his feet. He marveled at the thoroughness of the destruction; not a
detail had been overlooked. Every ashtray was full of wet flakes and every
magazine was sodden. There was a gray smell rising from the upholstery.

“What are you going to do?” Charles breathed.

Macon pulled himself together. “Why, turn off the water main, of course,”

he said.

“But your living room!”

Macon didn’t answer. His living room was . . . appropriate, was what he

wanted to say. Even more appropriate if it had been washed away entirely.
(He imagined the house under twelve feet of water, uncannily clear, like a
castle at the bottom of a goldfish bowl.)

He went down to the basement and shut off the valve, and then he checked

the laundry sink. It was dry. Ordinarily he let the tap run all winter long, a
slender stream to keep the pipes from freezing, but this year he hadn’t thought
of  it  and  neither  had  his  brothers,  evidently,  when  they  came  to  light  the
furnace.

“Oh, this is terrible, just terrible,” Charles was saying when Macon came

back  upstairs.  But  he  was  in  the  kitchen  now,  where  there  wasn’t  any
problem. He was opening and shutting cabinet doors. “Terrible. Terrible.”

my boots and we can leave.”

“Leave?”

He  thought  his  boots  must  be  in  his  closet.  He  went  upstairs  to  the

bedroom. Everything here was so dreary—the naked mattress with its body
bag, the dusty mirror, the brittle yellow newspaper folded on the nightstand.
He bent to root through the objects on the closet floor. There were his boots,
all right, along with some wire hangers and a little booklet of some sort. A
Gardener’s  Diary,  1976.  He  flipped  through  it.  First  lawn-mowing  of  the
spring,  Sarah  had  written  in  her  compact  script.  Forsythia  still  in  bloom.
Macon closed the diary and smoothed the cover and laid it aside.

Boots in hand, he went back downstairs. Charles had returned to the living

room;  he  was  wringing  out  cushions.  “Never  mind  those,”  Macon  said.
“They’ll just get wet again.”

“Will your insurance cover this?”

“I suppose so.”

“What would they call it? Flood damage? Weather damage?”

“I don’t know. Let’s get going.”

“You should phone our contractor, Macon. Remember the man who took

care of our porch?”

“Nobody lives here anyhow,” Macon said.

Charles  straightened,  still  holding  a  cushion.  “What’s  that  supposed  to

mean?” he asked.

“Mean?”

“Are you saying you’ll just let this stay?”

“Probably,” Macon told him.

“All soaked and ruined? Nothing done?”

“Oh, well,” Macon said, waving a hand. “Come along, Charles.”

the curtains are dripping. Sarah will feel just terrible.”

“I doubt she’ll give it a thought,” Macon said.

He paused on the porch to pull his boots on. They were old and stiff, the

kind with metal clasps. He tucked his wet trouser cuffs inside them and then
led the way to the street.

Once they were settled in the car, Charles didn’t start the engine but sat

there, key in hand, and looked soberly at Macon. “I think it’s time we had a
talk,” he said.

“What about?”

“I’d like to know what you think you’re up to with this Muriel person.”

“Is that what you call her? ‘This Muriel person’?”

“No  one  else  will  tell  you,”  Charles  said.  “They  say  it’s  none  of  their

business. But I can’t just stand by and watch, Macon. I have to say what I
think.  How  old  are  you—forty-two?  Forty-three  now?  And  she  is  .  .  .  but
more than that, she’s not your type of woman.”

“You don’t even know her!”

“I know her type.”

“I have to be getting home now, Charles.”

Charles looked down at his key. Then he started the car and pulled into the

street, but he didn’t drop the subject. “She’s some kind of symptom, Macon!
You’re  not  yourself  these  days  and  this  Muriel  person’s  a  symptom.
Everybody says so.”

“I’m more myself than I’ve been my whole life long,” Macon told him.

“What kind of remark is that? It doesn’t even make sense!”

“And who is ‘everybody,’ anyway?”

“Why, Porter, Rose, me . . .”

“All such experts.”

“We’re just worried for you, Macon.”

“Could we switch to some other topic?”

“I had to tell you what I thought,” Charles said.

“Well, fine. You’ve told me.”

But Charles didn’t look satisfied.

The  car  wallowed  back  through  the  slush,  with  ribbons  of  bright  water

trickling down the windshield from the roof. Then out on the main road, it
picked up speed. “Hate to think what all that salt is doing to your underbody,”
Macon said.

Charles  said,  “I  never  told  you  this  before,  but  it’s  my  opinion  sex  is

overrated.”

Macon looked at him.

“Oh, when I was in my teens I was as interested as anyone,” Charles said.

“I mean it occupied my thoughts for every waking moment and all that. But
that was just the idea of sex, you know? Somehow, the real thing was less . . .
I don’t mean I’m opposed to it, but it’s just not all I expected. For one thing,
it’s rather messy. And then the weather is such a problem.”

“Weather,” Macon said.

“When it’s cold you hate to take your clothes off. When it’s hot you’re both

so sticky. And in Baltimore, it does always seem to be either too cold or too
hot.”

“Maybe you ought to consider a change of climate,” Macon said. He was

beginning to enjoy himself. “Do you suppose anyone’s done a survey? City
by  city?  Maybe  the  Businessman’s  Press  could  put  out  some  sort  of
pamphlet.”

“And besides it often leads to children,” Charles said. “I never really cared

much for children. They strike me as disruptive.”

can’t have any more.”

Charles gave a little cough. “That’s good to hear,” he said, “but it’s not why

I brought it up. I believe what I was trying to say is, I just don’t think sex is
important enough to ruin your life for.”

“So? Who’s ruining his life?”

“Macon, face it. She’s not worth it.”

“How can you possibly know that?”

“Can you tell me one unique thing about her?” Charles asked. “I mean one

really special quality, Macon, not something sloppy like ‘She appreciates me’
or ‘She listens . . .’ ”

She looks out hospital windows and imagines how the Martians would see

us, Macon wanted to say. But Charles wouldn’t understand that, so instead he
said, “I’m not such a bargain myself, in case you haven’t noticed. I’m kind of,
you  could  say,  damaged  merchandise.  Somebody  ought  to  warn  her  away
from me, when you get right down to it.”

“That’s not true. That’s not true at all. As a matter of fact, I imagine her

people are congratulating her on her catch.”

“Her catch!”

“Someone to support her. Anyone,” Charles said. “She’d be lucky to find

anyone.  Why,  she  doesn’t  even  speak  proper  English!  She  lives  in  that
slummy house, she dresses like some kind of bag lady, she’s got that little boy
who appears to have hookworm or something—”

“Charles, just shut the hell up,” Macon said.

Charles closed his mouth.

They had reached Muriel’s neighborhood by now. They were driving past

the stationery factory with its tangled wire fence like old bedsprings. Charles
took a wrong turn. “Let’s see, now,” he said, “where do I . . .”

Macon didn’t offer to help.

.”

They  were  two  short  blocks  from  Singleton  Street,  but  Macon  hoped

Charles would drive in circles forever. “Lots of luck,” he said, and he opened
the door and hopped out.

“Macon?”

Macon waved and ducked down an alley.

Freedom!  Sunlight  glinting  off  blinding  white  drifts,  and  children  riding

sleds  and  TV  trays.  Cleared  parking  spaces  guarded  with  lawn  chairs.
Throngs of hopeful boys with shovels. And then Muriel’s house with its walk
still  deep  in  snow,  its  small  rooms  smelling  of  pancakes,  its  cozy  mix  of
women  lounging  about  in  the  kitchen.  They  were  drinking  cocoa  now.
Bernice was braiding Claire’s hair. Alexander was painting a picture. Muriel
kissed Macon hello and squealed at his cold cheeks. “Come in and get warm!
Have some cocoa! Look at Alexander’s picture,” she said. “Don’t you love it?
Isn’t he something? He’s a regular da Vinci.”

“Leonardo,” Macon said.

“What?”

“Not  da  Vinci.  For  God’s  sake.  It’s  Leonardo,”  he  told  her.  Then  he

stamped upstairs to change out of his clammy trousers.

fifteen

I’m sorry I’m so fat,” Macon’s seatmate said.

Macon said, “Oh, er, ah—”

“I know I’m using more than my share of space,” the man told him. “Do

you think I’m not aware of that? Every trip I take, I have to ask the stewardess
for a seatbelt extender. I have to balance my lunch on my knees because the
tray can’t unfold in front of me. Really I ought to purchase two seats but I’m
not a wealthy man. I ought to purchase two tickets and not spread all over my
fellow passengers.”

“Oh, you’re not spreading all over me,” Macon said.

This  was  because  he  was  very  nearly  sitting  in  the  aisle,  with  his knees

jutting out to the side so that every passing stewardess ruffled the pages of
Miss MacIntosh.  But  he  couldn’t  help  feeling  touched  by  the  man’s  great,
shiny,  despairing  face,  which  was  as  round  as  a  baby’s.  “Name’s  Lucas
Loomis,” the man said, holding out a hand. When Macon shook it, he was
reminded of risen bread dough.

“Macon Leary,” Macon told him.

“The stupid thing is,” Lucas Loomis said, “I travel for a living.”

“Do you.”

“I demonstrate software to computer stores. I’m sitting in an airplane seat

six days out of seven sometimes.”

“Well, none of us finds them all that roomy,” Macon said.

“What do you do, Mr. Leary?”

“I write guidebooks,” Macon said.

“Is that so? What kind?”

“Oh, guides for businessmen. People just like you, I guess.”

“Accidental Tourist,” Mr. Loomis said instantly.

“Why, yes.”

“Really? Am I right? Well, what do you know,” Mr. Loomis said. “Look at

this.” He took hold of his own lapels, which sat so far in front of him that his
arms seemed too short to reach them. “Gray suit,” he told Macon. “Just what
you recommend. Appropriate for all occasions.” He pointed to the bag at his
feet. “See my luggage? Carry-on. Change of underwear, clean shirt, packet of
detergent powder.”

“Well, good,” Macon said. This had never happened to him before.

“You’re  my  hero!”  Mr.  Loomis  told  him.  “You’ve  improved  my  trips a

hundred percent. You’re the one who told me about those springy items that
turn into clotheslines.”

“Oh, well, you could have run across those in any drugstore,” Macon said.

“I’ve stopped relying on hotel laundries; I hardly need to venture into the

streets anymore. I tell my wife, I say, you just ask her, I tell her often, I say,
‘Going with the Accidental Tourist is like going in a capsule, a cocoon. Don’t
forget to pack my Accidental Tourist !’ I tell her.”

“Well, this is very nice to hear,” Macon said.

“Times I’ve flown clear to Oregon and hardly knew I’d left Baltimore.”

“Excellent.”

There was a pause.

“Although,” Macon said, “lately I’ve been wondering.”

Mr.  Loomis  had  to  turn  his  entire  body  to  look  at  him,  like  someone

encased in a hooded parka.

“I mean,” Macon said, “I’ve been out along the West Coast. Updating my

U.S. edition. And of course I’ve covered the West Coast before, Los Angeles
and all that; Lord, yes, I knew the place as a child; but this was the first I’d
seen of San Francisco. My publisher wanted me to add it in. Have you been to
San Francisco?”

“That’s where we just now got on the plane,” Mr. Loomis reminded him.

“San Francisco is certainly, um, beautiful,” Macon said.

Mr. Loomis thought that over.

“Well, so is Baltimore too, of course,” Macon said hastily. “Oh, no place on

earth like Baltimore! But San Francisco, well, I mean it struck me as, I don’t
know . . .”

“I was born and raised in Baltimore, myself,” Mr. Loomis said. “Wouldn’t

live anywhere else for the world.”

“No, of course not,” Macon said. “I just meant—”

“Couldn’t pay me to leave it.”

“No, me either.”

“You a Baltimore man?”

“Yes, certainly.”

“No place like it.”

“Certainly isn’t,” Macon said.

But a picture came to his mind of San Francisco floating on mist like the

Emerald City, viewed from one of those streets so high and steep that you
really could hang your head over and hear the wind blow.

He’d left Baltimore on a sleety day with ice coating the airport runways,

and he hadn’t been gone all that long; but when he returned it was spring. The
sun was shining and the trees were tipped with green. It was still fairly cool
but  he  drove  with  his  windows  down.  The  breeze  smelled  exactly  like
Vouvray—flowery with a hint of mothballs underneath.

in front of basement windows. Rugs and bedspreads flapped in backyards. A
whole  cache  of  babies  had  surfaced.  They  cruised  imperiously  in  their
strollers, propelled by their mothers or by pairs of grandmothers. Old people
sat out on the sidewalk in beach chairs and wheelchairs, and groups of men
stood  about  on  corners,  their  hands  in  their  pockets  and  their  posture
elaborately  casual—the  unemployed,  Macon  imagined,  emerging  from  the
darkened living rooms where they’d spent the winter watching T V. He caught
snatches of their conversation:

“What’s going down, man?”

“Nothing much.”

“What you been up to?”

“Not a whole lot.”

He  parked  in  front  of  Muriel’s  house,  where  Dominick  Saddler  was

working on Muriel’s car. The hood was open and Dominick was deep in its
innards;  all  Macon  saw  was  his  jeans  and  his  gigantic,  ragged  sneakers,  a
band  of  bare  flesh  showing  above  his  cowhide  belt.  On  either  side  of  him
stood the Butler twins, talking away a mile a minute. “So she says to us we’re
grounded—”

“Can’t go out with no one till Friday—”

“Takes away our fake i.d.’s—”

“Won’t let us answer the phone—”

“We march upstairs and slam our bedroom door, like, just a little slam to let

her know what we think of her—”

“And up she comes with a screwdriver and takes our door off its hinges!”

“Hmm,” Dominick said.

Macon rested his bag on the hood and peered down into the engine. “Car

acting up again?” he asked.

The Butler twins said, “Hey there, Macon,” and Dominick straightened and

wiped his forehead with the back of his hand. He was a dark, good-looking
boy whose bulging muscles made Macon feel inadequate. “Damn thing keeps
stalling out,” he said.

“How’d Muriel get to work?”

“Had to take the bus.”

Macon was hoping to hear she’d stayed home.

He  climbed  the  steps  and  unlocked  the  front  door.  Just  inside,  Edward

greeted  him,  squeaking  and  doing  back  flips  and  trying  to  hold  still  long
enough to be petted. Macon walked through the rest of the house. Clearly,
everyone had left in a hurry. The sofa was opened out. (Claire must have had
another fight with her folks.) The kitchen table was littered with dishes and no
one had put the cream away. Macon did that. Then he took his bag upstairs.
Muriel’s bed was unmade and her robe was slung across a chair. There was a
snarl of hair in the pin tray on her bureau. He picked it up between thumb and
index finger and dropped it into the wastebasket. It occurred to him (not for
the  first  time)  that  the  world  was  divided  sharply  down  the  middle:  Some
lived careful lives and some lived careless lives, and everything that happened
could be explained by the difference between them. But he could not have
said, not in a million years, why he was so moved by the sight of Muriel’s
thin quilt trailing across the floor where she must have dragged it when she
rose in the morning.

It  wasn’t  quite  time  for  Alexander  to  come  home  from  school,  so  he

thought he would walk the dog. He put Edward on his leash and let himself
out the front door. When he passed the Butler twins again they said, “Hey,
there, Macon,” singsong as ever, while Dominick cursed and reached for a
wrench.

The men standing on the corner were discussing a rumor of jobs in Texas.

Someone’s brother-in-law had found work there. Macon passed with his head
lowered, feeling uncomfortably privileged. He skirted a welcome mat that had
been  scrubbed  and  set  out  to  dry  on  the  pavement.  The  women  here  took
spring cleaning seriously, he saw. They shook their dust mops out of upstairs
windows; they sat on their sills to polish the panes with crumpled sheets of
newspapers. They staggered between houses with borrowed vacuum cleaners,
rug  machines,  and  gallon  jugs  of  upholstery  shampoo.  Macon  rounded  the
block  and  started  home,  having  paused  to  let  Edward  pee  against  a  maple

sapling.

Just  as  he  was  approaching  Singleton  Street,  whom  should  he  see  but

Alexander scurrying up ahead. There was no mistaking that stiff little figure
with the clumsy backpack. “Wait!” Alexander was crying. “Wait for me!” The
Ebbetts  children,  some  distance  away,  turned  and  called  something  back.
Macon couldn’t hear what they said but he knew the tone, all right—that high,
mocking chant. “Nyah-nyah-nyah-NYAH-nyah!” Alexander started running,
stumbling  over  his  own  shoes.  Behind  him  came  another  group,  two  older
boys and a girl with red hair, and they began jeering too. Alexander wheeled
and looked at them. His face was somehow smaller than usual. “Go,” Macon
told Edward, and he dropped the leash. Edward didn’t need any urging. His
ears had perked at the sound of Alexander’s voice, and now he hurtled after
him. The three older children scattered as he flew through them, barking. He
drew up short in front of Alexander, and Alexander knelt to hug his neck.

When Macon arrived, he said, “Are you all right?”

Alexander nodded and got to his feet.

“What was that all about?” Macon asked him.

Alexander said, “Nothing.”

But when they started walking again, he slipped his hand into Macon’s.

Those cool little fingers were so distinct, so particular, so full of character.

Macon tightened his grip and felt a pleasant kind of sorrow sweeping through
him. Oh, his life had regained all its old perils. He was forced to worry once
again about nuclear war and the future of the planet. He often had the same
secret, guilty thought that had come to him after Ethan was born: From this
time on I can never be completely happy.

Not that he was before, of course.

Macon’s U.S. edition was going to be five separate pamphlets now, divided

geographically,  slipcased  together  so  you  had  to  buy  all  five  even  if  you
needed only one. Macon thought this was immoral. He said so when Julian
stopped by for the West Coast material. “What’s immoral about it?” Julian
asked. He wasn’t really paying attention; Macon could see that. He was filing
mental  notes  on  Muriel’s  household,  no  doubt  the  real  purpose  of  this

unannounced,  unnecessary  visit.  Even  though  he’d  already  collected  his
material, he was wandering around the living room in an abstracted way, first
examining a framed school photo of Alexander and then a beaded moccasin
that Claire had left on the couch. It was Saturday and the others were in the
kitchen, but Macon had no intention of letting Julian meet them.

“It’s always immoral to force a person to buy something he doesn’t want,”

Macon said. “If he only wants the Midwest, he shouldn’t have to buy New
England too, for heaven’s sake.”

Julian said, “Is that your friend I hear out there? Is it Muriel?”

“Yes, I suppose it is,” Macon said.

“Aren’t you going to introduce us?”

“She’s busy.”

“I’d really like to meet her.”

“Why? Hasn’t Rose given you a full report?”

“Macon,” Julian said, “I’m soon going to be a relative of yours.”

“Ah, God.”

“It’s only natural I’m interested in knowing her.”

Macon said nothing.

“Besides,” Julian told him, “I want to invite her to the wedding.”

“You do?”

“So can I talk to her?”

“Oh. Well. I guess so.”

Macon  led  the  way  to  the  kitchen.  He  felt  he’d  made  a  mistake—  that

having acted so thorny, he’d caused this meeting to seem more important than
it was. But Julian, as it happened, was breezy and offhand. “Hello, ladies,” he
said.

They  looked  up—Muriel,  Claire,  and  Bernice,  seated  around  a  sheaf  of

notebook  paper.  Macon  reeled  their  names  off  rapidly  but  got  stuck  on
Julian’s. “Julian, ah, Edge, my . . .”

“Future brother-in-law,” Julian said.

“My boss.”

“I’ve come to invite you to the wedding, Muriel. Also your little boy, if—

where’s your little boy?”

“He’s  out  walking  the  dog,”  Muriel  said.  “But  he’s  not  too  good  in

churches.”

“This’ll be a garden wedding.”

“Well, maybe, then, I don’t know . . .”

Muriel was wearing what she called her “paratrooper look”— a coverall

from  Sunny’s  Surplus—and  her  hair  was  concealed  beneath  a  wildly
patterned  silk  turban.  A  ballpoint  pen  mark  slashed  across  one  cheekbone.
“We’re entering this contest,” she told Julian. “Write a country-music song
and win a trip for two to Nashville. We’re working on it all together. We’re
going to call it ‘Happier Days.’ ”

“Hasn’t that already been written?”

“Oh,  I  hope  not.  You  know  how  they  always  have  these  photographs  of

couples in magazines? ‘Mick Jagger and Bianca in happier days.’ ‘Richard
Burton and Liz Taylor, in—’ ”

“Yes, I get it.”

“So this man is talking about his ex-wife. ‘I knew her in another time and

place . . .’ ”

She  sang  it  right  out,  in  her  thin  scratchy  voice  that  gave  a  sense  of

distance, like a used-up phonograph record:

When we kissed in the rain,
When we shared every pain,
When we both enjoyed happier days.

“Very catchy,” Julian said, “but I don’t know about ‘shared every pain.’ ”

“What’s wrong with it?”

“I mean, in happier days they had pain?”

“He’s right,” Bernice told Muriel.

“Rain, brain, drain,” Julian reflected. “ ‘When our lives were more sane,’

‘When we used to raise Cain . . .’ ”

“Let it be, why don’t you,” Macon told him.

“ ‘When I hadn’t met Jane,’ ‘When she didn’t know Wayne . . .’ ”

“Wait!” Bernice said, scribbling furiously.

“I may have tapped some hidden talent here,” Julian told Macon.

“I’ll see you to the door,” Macon said.

“ ‘When our love had no stain,’ ‘When she wasn’t insane . . .’ ” Julian said,

trailing Macon through the living room. “Don’t forget the wedding!” he called
back. He told Macon, “If she wins, you could cover Nashville free for your
next U.S. edition.”

“I think she’s planning on taking Bernice,” Macon told him.

“ ‘When we guzzled champagne . . .’ ” Julian mused.

“I’ll be in touch,” Macon said, “as soon as I start on the Canada guide.”

“Canada! Aren’t you coming to the wedding?”

“Well, that too, of course,” Macon said, opening the door.

“Wait  a  minute,  Macon.  What’s  your  hurry?  Wait,  I  want  to  show  you

something.”

Julian set down the West Coast material to search his pockets. He pulled

out a shiny, colored advertisement. “Hawaii,” he said.

“Well, I certainly see no point in covering—”

“Not for you; for me! For our honeymoon. I’m taking Rose.”

“Oh, I see.”

“Look,” Julian said. He unfolded the ad. It turned out to be a map—one of

those useless maps that Macon detested, with out-sized, whimsical drawings
of pineapples, palm trees, and hula dancers crowding the apple-green islands.
“I got this from The Travel People Incorporated. Have you heard of them?
Are  they  reliable?  They  suggested  a  hotel  over  here  on  .  .  .”  He  drew  a
forefinger across the page, hunting down the hotel.

“I know nothing at all about Hawaii,” Macon said.

“Somewhere here . . .” Julian said. Then he gave up, perhaps just at that

moment hearing what Macon had told him, and refolded the map. “She may
be exactly what you need,” he said.

“Pardon?”

“This Muriel person.”

“Why does everyone call her—”

“She’s  not  so  bad!  I  don’t  think  your  family  understands  how  you’re

feeling.”

“No, they don’t. They really don’t,” Macon said. He was surprised that it

was Julian, of all people, who saw that.

Although Julian’s parting words were, “ ‘When we stuffed on chow mein . .

.’ ”

Macon shut the door firmly behind him.

He decided to buy Alexander some different clothes. “How would you like

some blue jeans?” he asked. “How would you like some work shirts? How
would you like a cowboy belt with ‘Budweiser Beer’ on the buckle?”

“You serious?”

“Would you wear that kind of thing?”

“Yes! I would! I promise!”

“Then let’s go shopping.”

“Is Mama coming?”

“We’ll surprise her.”

Alexander  put  on  his  spring  jacket—a  navy  polyester  blazer  that  Muriel

had just paid a small fortune for. Macon didn’t know if she would approve of
jeans,  which  was  why  he’d  waited  till  she  was  off  buying  curtains  for  a
woman in Guilford.

The  store  he  drove  to  was  a  Western-wear  place  where  he  used  to  take

Ethan.  It  hadn’t  changed  a  bit.  Its  wooden  floorboards  creaked,  its  aisles
smelled  of  leather  and  new  denim.  He  steered  Alexander  to  the  boys’
department, where he spun a rack of shirts. How many times had he done this
before?  It  wasn’t  even  painful.  Only  disorienting,  in  a  way,  to  see  that
everything  continued  no  matter  what.  The  student  jeans  were  still  stacked
according to waist and inseam. The horsey tie pins were still arrayed behind
glass. Ethan was dead and gone but Macon was still holding up shirts and
asking, “This one? This one? This one?”

“What I’d really like is T-shirts,” Alexander said.

“T-shirts. Ah.”

“The  kind  with  a  sort  of  stretched-out  neck.  And  jeans  with  raggedy

bottoms.”

“Well, that you have to do for yourself,” Macon said. “You have to break

them in.”

“I don’t want to look new.”

“Tell you what. Everything we buy, we’ll wash about twenty times before

you wear it.”

“But nothing prewashed,” Alexander said.

“No, no.”

“Only nerds wear prewashed.”

“Right.”

Alexander  chose  several  T-shirts,  purposely  too  big,  along  with  an

assortment of jeans because he wasn’t sure of his size. Then he went off to try
everything on. “Shall I come with you?” Macon asked.

“I can do it myself.”

“Oh. All right.”

That was familiar, too.

Alexander disappeared into one of the stalls and Macon went on a tour of

the  men’s  department.  He  tried  on  a  leather  cowboy  hat  but  took  it  off
immediately. Then he went back to the stall. “Alexander?”

“Huh?”

“How’s it going?”

“Okay.”

In the space below the door, Macon saw Alexander’s shoes and his trouser

cuffs. Evidently he hadn’t got around to putting on the jeans yet.

Someone said, “Macon?”

He  turned  and  found  a  woman  in  a  trim  blond  pageboy,  her  wrap  skirt

printed with little blue whales. “Yes,” he said.

“Laurel Canfield. Scott’s mother, remember?”

“Of course,” Macon said, shaking her hand. Now he caught sight of Scott,

who had been in Ethan’s class at school—an unexpectedly tall, gawky boy
lurking at his mother’s elbow with an armload of athletic socks. “Why, Scott.
Nice to see you,” Macon said.

Scott flushed and said nothing. Laurel Canfield said, “It’s nice to see you.

Are you doing your spring shopping?”

“Oh, well, ah—”

around his ankles. “I’m helping the son of a friend,” he explained.

“We’ve just been buying out the sock department.”

“Yes, I see you have.”

“Seems every other week I find Scott’s run through his socks again; you

know how they are at this age—”

She stopped herself. She looked horrified. She said, “Or, rather . . .”

“Yes, certainly!” Macon said. “Amazing, isn’t it?” He felt so embarrassed

for her that he was pleased, at first, to see another familiar face behind her.
Then  he  realized  whose  it  was.  There  stood  his  mother-in-law.  “Why!”  he
said. Was she still Mother Sidey? Mrs. Sidey? Who, for God’s sake?

Luckily, it turned out that Laurel Canfield knew her too. “Paula Sidey,” she

said. “I haven’t seen you since last year’s Hunt Cup.”

“Yes, I’ve been away,” Mrs. Sidey told her, and then she dropped her lids

somewhat, as if drawing a curtain, before saying, “Macon.”

“How are you?” Macon said.

She was flawlessly groomed, industriously tended—a blue-haired woman

in tailored slacks and a turtleneck. He used to worry that Sarah would age the
same  way,  develop  the  same  brittle  carapace,  but  now  he  found  himself
admiring Mrs. Sidey’s resolve. “You’re looking well,” he told her.

“Thank you,” she said, touching her hairdo. “I suppose you’re here for your

spring wardrobe.”

“Oh,  Macon’s  helping  a  friend!”  Laurel  Canfield  caroled.  She  was  so

chirpy, all of a sudden, that Macon suspected she’d just now recalled Mrs.
Sidey’s relationship to him. She looked toward Alexander’s stall. Alexander
was in his socks now. One sock rose and vanished, stepping into a flood of
blue denim. “Isn’t shopping for boys so difficult?” she said.

“I  wouldn’t  know,”  Mrs.  Sidey  said.  “I  never  had  one.  I’m  here  for the

denim skirts.”

“Oh, the skirts, well, I notice they’re offering a—”

“What friend are you helping to buy for?” Mrs. Sidey asked Macon.

Macon  didn’t  know  what  to  tell  her.  He  looked  toward  the  stall.  If only

Alexander would just stay hidden forever, he thought. How to  explain  this
scrawny little waif, this poor excuse of a child who could never hold a candle
to the real child?

Contrary as always, Alexander chose that moment to step forth.

He wore an oversized T-shirt that slipped a bit off one shoulder, as if he’d

just emerged from some rough-and-tumble game. His jeans were comfortably
baggy. His face, Macon saw, had somehow filled out in the past few weeks
without anybody’s noticing; and his hair—which Macon had started cutting at
home—had lost that shaved prickliness and grown thick and floppy.

“I look wonderful!” Alexander said.

Macon turned to the women and said, “Actually, I find shopping for boys is

a pleasure.”

sixteen

There is no sound more peaceful than rain on the roof, if you’re safe asleep

in someone else’s house. Macon heard the soft pattering; he heard Muriel get
up  to  close  a  window.  She  crossed  his  vision  like  the  gleam  of  headlights
crossing  a  ceiling,  white  and  slim  and  watery  in  a  large  plain  slip  from
Goodwill Industries. She shut the window and the stillness dropped over him
and he went back to sleep.

But in the morning his first thought was, Oh, no! Rain! On Rose’s wedding

day!

He got up, careful not to wake Muriel, and looked out. The sky was bright

but  flat,  the  color  of  oyster  shells—not  a  good  sign.  The  scrawny  little
dogwood  in  back  was  dripping  from  every  twig  and  bud.  Next  door,  Mr.
Butler’s ancient heap of scrap lumber had grown several shades darker.

Macon went downstairs, tiptoeing through the living room where Claire lay

snoring in a tangle of blankets. He fixed a pot of coffee and then called Rose
on the kitchen phone. She answered instantly, wide awake. “Are you moving
the wedding indoors?” he asked her.

“We’ve got too many guests to move it indoors.

“Why? How many are coming?”

“Everyone we’ve ever known.”

“Good grief, Rose.”

“Never mind, it will clear.”

“But the grass is all wet!”

“Wear galoshes,” she told him. She hung up.

Since she’d met Julian she’d grown so airy, Macon thought. So flippant.

Lacking in depth.

She was right about the weather, though. By afternoon there was a weak,

pale sun. Muriel decided to wear the short-sleeved dress she’d planned on, but
maybe with a shawl tossed over her shoulders. She wanted Alexander to put
on a suit—he did have one, complete with waistcoat. He protested, though,
and so did Macon. “Jeans and a good white shirt. That’s plenty,” Macon told
her.

“Well, if you’re sure.”

Lately, she’d been deferring to him about Alexander. She had finally given

in on the question of sneakers and she’d stopped policing his diet. Contrary to
her predictions, Alexander’s arches did not fall flat and he was not overtaken
by raging eczema. At worst, he suffered a mild skin rash now and then.

The wedding was set for three o’clock. Around two thirty they started out,

proceeding  self-consciously  toward  Macon’s  car.  It  was  a  Saturday  and  no
one else in the neighborhood was so dressed up. Mr. Butler was standing on a
ladder with a hammer and a sack of nails. Rafe Daggett was taking his van
apart. The Indian woman was hosing down a glowing threadbare carpet that
she’d spread across the sidewalk, and then she turned off the water and lifted
the hem of her sari and stamped around so the carpet radiated little bursts of
droplets. Every passing car, it seemed, labored under a top-heavy burden of
mattresses  and  patio  furniture,  reminding  Macon  of  those  ants  who  scuttle
back to their nests with loads four times their own size.

“I think I’m supposed to be the best man,” Macon told Muriel after he’d

started driving.

“You didn’t mention that!”

“And Charles is giving her away.”

“It’s a real wedding, then,” Muriel said. “Not just two people standing up

together.”

“That’s what Rose said she wanted.”

“I wouldn’t do it like that at all,” Muriel said. She glanced toward the rear

and said, “Alexander, quit kicking my seat. You’re about to drive me crazy.
No,” she said, facing forward, “if I was to marry, know what I’d do? Never

tell  a  soul.  Act  like  I’d  been  married  for  years.  Slip  off  somewheres  to  a
justice of the peace and come back like nothing had happened and make out
like I’d been married all along.”

“This is Rose’s first time, though,” Macon told her.

“Yes, but even so, people can say, ‘It sure took you long enough.’ I can hear

my  mother  now;  that’s  what  she’d  say  for  certain.  ‘Sure  took  you  long
enough. I thought you’d never get around to it,’ is what she’d say. If I was
ever to marry.”

Macon braked for a traffic light.

“If I was ever to decide to marry,” Muriel said.

He glanced over at her and was struck by how pretty she looked, with the

color high in her cheeks and the splashy shawl flung around her shoulders.
Her spike-heeled shoes had narrow, shiny ankle straps. He never could figure
out why ankle straps were so seductive.

The first person they saw when they arrived was Macon’s mother. For some

reason  it  hadn’t  occurred  to  Macon  that  Alicia  would  be  invited  to  her
daughter’s wedding, and when she opened the front door it took him a second
to place her. She was looking so different, for one thing. She had dyed her
hair a dark tomato red. She wore a long white caftan trimmed with vibrant
bands of satin, and when she reached up to hug him a whole culvert of metal
bangles clattered and slid down her left arm. “Macon, dear!” she said. She
smelled of bruised gardenias. “And who may this be?” she asked, peering past
him.

“Oh, um, I’d like you to meet Muriel Pritchett. And Alexander, her son.”

“Really?”

A  politely  inquisitive  look  remained  on  her  face.  Evidently  no  one  had

filled her in. (Or else she hadn’t bothered to listen.) “Well, since I seem to be
the maître d’,” she said, “I’ll show you out back where the bride and groom
are.”

“Rose is not in hiding?”

“No,  she  says  she  doesn’t  see  the  logic  in  missing  her  own  wedding,”

Alicia  said,  leading  them  toward  the  rear  of  the  house.  “Muriel,  have  you
known Macon long?”

“Oh, kind of.”

“He’s very stuffy,” Alicia said confidingly. “All my children are. They get

it from the Leary side.”

“I think he’s nice,” Muriel said.

“Oh, nice,  yes.  All  very  well  and  good,”  Alicia  said,  throwing  Macon a

look he couldn’t read. She had linked arms with Muriel; she was always so
physical. The trim on her caftan nearly matched Muriel’s shawl. Macon had a
sudden appalling thought: Maybe in his middle age he was starting to choose
his  mother’s  style  of  person,  as  if  concluding  that  Alicia—silly,  vain,
annoying woman— might have the right answers after all. But no. He put the
thought away from him. And Muriel slipped free of Alicia’s arm. “Alexander?
Coming?” she asked.

They stepped through the double doors of the sun porch. The backyard was

full of pastels—Rose’s old ladies in pale dresses, daffodils set everywhere in
buckets, forsythia in full bloom along the alley. Dr. Grauer, Rose’s minister,
stepped forward and shook Macon’s hand. “Aha! The best man,” he said, and
behind him came Julian in black—not his color. His nose was peeling. It must
be boating season again. He put a gold ring in Macon’s palm and said, “Like
for you to have this.” For a moment Macon imagined he was really meant to
have it. Then he said, “Oh, yes, the ring,” and dropped it in his pocket.

“I can’t believe I’m finally getting a son-in-law,” Alicia told Julian. “All

I’ve ever had is daughter-in-laws.”

“Daughters,” Macon said automatically.

“No, daughter-in-laws.”

“Daughters-in-law, Mother.”

“And didn’t manage to keep them long, either,” Alicia said.

When Macon was small, he used to worry that his mother was teaching him

the wrong names for things. “They call this corduroy,” she’d said, buttoning
his new coat, and he had thought, But do they really? Funny word, in fact,

corduroy. Very suspicious. How could he be sure that other people weren’t
speaking  a  whole  different  language  out  there?  He’d  examined  his  mother
distrustfully— her foolish fluff of curls and her flickery, unsteady eyes.

Now here came Porter’s children, the three of them sticking close together;

and behind them June, their mother. Wasn’t it unusual to invite your brother’s
ex-wife  to  your  wedding?  Particularly  when  she  was  big  as  a  barn  with
another  man’s  baby.  But  she  seemed  to  be  enjoying  herself.  She  pecked
Macon on the cheek and cocked her head appraisingly at Muriel. “Kids, this is
Alexander,” Macon said. He was hoping against hope that they’d all just fall
in together somehow and be friends, which of course didn’t happen. Porter’s
children eyed Alexander sullenly and said nothing. Alexander knotted his fists
in  his  pockets.  June  told  Julian,  “Your  bride  is  looking  just  radiant,”  and
Julian said, “Yes, isn’t she,” but when Macon located Rose he thought she
looked tense and frayed, as most brides do if people would only admit it. She
wore a white dress, mid-calf length but very simple, and a little puff of lace or
net or something on her head. She was talking to their hardware man. And
yes, there was the girl who cashed their checks at the Mercantile Bank, and
over next to Charles was the family dentist. Macon thought of Mary Poppins
—those  late-night  adventures  he  used  to  read  to  Ethan,  where  all  the
tradespeople showed up behaving nothing like their daytime selves.

“I’m not sure if there’s been any research on this,” Charles was telling the

dentist,  “but  have  you  ever  tried  polishing  your  teeth  with  a  T-shirt  after
flossing?”

“Er . . .”

“A plain cotton T-shirt. One hundred percent cotton. I think you’re going to

be impressed when I have my next checkup. See, my theory is—”

Muriel and June were discussing Caesareans. Julian was asking Alicia if

she’d  ever  sailed  the  Intracoastal  Waterway.  Mrs.  Barrett  was  telling  the
mailman that Leary Metals used to make the handsomest stamped tin ceilings
in Baltimore.

And Sarah was talking to Macon about the weather.

“Yes,  I  worried  when  it  rained  last  night,”  Macon  said.  Or  he  said

something; something or other . . .

and her round, sweet face, and the dusting of powder on the down along her
jawline.

“How have you been, Macon?” she asked him.

“I’ve been all right.”

“Are you pleased about the wedding?”

“Well,” he said, “I am if Rose is, I guess. Though I can’t help feeling . . .

well, Julian. You know.”

“Yes, I know. But there’s more to him than you think. He might be a very

good choice.”

When  she  stood  in  this  kind  of  sunlight  her  eyes  were  so  clear  that  it

seemed  you  could  see  to  the  backs  of  them.  He  knew  that  from  long  ago.
They might have been his own eyes; they were so familiar. He said, “How
have you been?”

“I’ve been fine.”

“Well. Good.”

“I know that you’re living with someone,” she told him in a steady voice.

“Ah, yes, actually I . . . yes, I am.”

She knew who it was, too, because she looked past him then at Muriel and

Alexander. But all she said was, “Rose told me when she invited me.”

He said, “How about you?”

“Me?”

“Are you living with anyone?”

“Not really.”

Rose  came  over  and  touched  their  arms,  which  was  unlike  her.  “We’re

ready now,” she said. She told Macon, “Sarah’s my matron of honor, did I
happen to mention that?”

“No, you didn’t,” Macon said.

and Dr. Grauer were waiting. There was some kind of makeshift altar there—
some little table or something covered with a cloth; Macon didn’t pay much
attention. He stood beside the minister and fingered the ring in his pocket.
Sarah stood across from him, looking gravely into his face.

It all felt so natural.

seventeen

Muriel  said,  “I  never  told  you  this,  but  a  while  before  I  met  you  I  was

dating somebody else.”

“Oh? Who was that?” Macon asked.

“He  was  a  customer  at  the  Rapid-Eze  Copy  Center.  He  brought  me  his

divorce papers to copy and we started having this conversation and ended up
going out together. His divorce was awful. Really messy. His wife had been
two-timing him. He said he didn’t think he could ever trust a woman again. It
was months before he would spend the night, even; he didn’t like going to
sleep when a woman was in the same room. But bit by bit I changed all that.
He relaxed. He got to be a whole different man. Moved in with me and took
over the bills, paid off all I still owed. Alexander’s doctor. We started talking
about getting married. Then he met an airline stewardess and eloped with her
within the week.”

“I see,” Macon said.

“It was like I had, you know, cured him, just so he could elope with another

woman.”

“Well,” he said.

“You wouldn’t do anything like that, would you, Macon?”

“Who, me?”

“Would you elope with someone else? Would you see someone else behind

my back?”

“Oh, Muriel, of course not,” he told her.

“Would you leave me and go home to your wife?”

“What are you talking about?”

“Would you?”

“Don’t be silly,” he said.

She cocked her head and considered him. Her eyes were alert and bright

and knowing, like the eyes of some small animal.

It was a rainy Tuesday morning and Edward, who was squeamish about

rain, insisted he didn’t need to go out, but Macon took him anyway. While he
was  waiting  in  the  backyard  beneath  his  umbrella,  he  saw  a  young  couple
walking  down  the  alley.  They  caught  his  attention  because  they  walked  so
slowly, as if they didn’t realize they were getting wet. The boy was tall and
frail, in ragged jeans and a soft white shirt. The girl wore a flat straw hat with
ribbons down the back and a longish limp cotton dress. They swung hands,
looking only at each other. They came upon a tricycle and they separated to
walk  around  it;  only  instead  of  simply  walking  the  girl  did  a  little  sort  of
dance step, spinning her skirt out, and the boy spun too and laughed and took
her hand again.

Edward finally, finally peed, and Macon followed him back into the house.

He set his umbrella in the kitchen sink and squatted to dry Edward off with an
old beach towel. He rubbed briskly at first, and then more slowly. Then he
stopped but remained on the floor, the towel bunched in his hands, the tin-can
smell of wet dog rising all around him.

When he’d asked Sarah whether she was living with anyone, and Sarah had

said, “Not really,” what exactly had she meant by that?

The rain stopped and they put Edward on his leash and went out shopping.

Muriel needed bedroom slippers with feathers on them. “Red. High-heeled.
Pointy-toed,” she said.

“Goodness. Whatever for?” Macon asked her.

“I want to clop around the house in them on Sunday mornings. Can’t you

just see it? I wish I smoked cigarettes. I wish Alexander wasn’t allergic to
smoke.”

Yes, he could see it, as a matter of fact. “In your black-and-gold kimono,”

he said.

“Exactly.”

“But I don’t believe they sell those feathered slippers anymore.”

“In thrift shops they do.”

“Oh. Right.”

Lately, Macon had begun to like thrift shops himself. In the usual sea of

plastic he had found, so far, a folding boxwood carpenter’s rule, an ingenious
wheeled  cookie  cutter  that  left  no  waste  space  between  cookies,  and  a
miniature brass level for Alexander’s toolbox.

The  air  outside  was  warm  and  watery.  Mrs.  Butler  was  propping  up the

squashed geraniums that flopped in the white-washed tire in her yard. Mrs.
Patel—out  of  her  luminous  sari  for  once,  clumsy  and  unromantic  in  tight,
bulgy Calvin Klein jeans—was sweeping the puddles off her front steps. And
Mrs. Saddler stood in front of the hardware store waiting for it to open. “I
don’t guess you’d have seen Dominick,” she said to Muriel.

“Not lately.”

“Last  night  he  never  came  home,”  Mrs.  Saddler  said.  “That  boy  just

worries the daylights out of me. He’s not what you would call bad,” she told
Macon, “but he’s worrisome, know what I mean? When he’s at home he’s so
much at home, those big noisy boots all over the place, but then when he’s
away  he’s  so  much  away.  You  wouldn’t  believe  how  the  house  feels;  just
empty. Just echoing.”

“He’ll be back,” Muriel said. “Tonight’s his turn to have the car.”

“Oh, and when he’s out with the car it’s worst of all,” Mrs. Saddler said.

“Then every siren I hear, I wonder if it’s Dommie. I know how he screeches
round corners! I know those fast girls he goes out with!”

They  left  her  still  standing  there,  distractedly  fingering  her  coin  purse,

although the hardware-store owner had unlocked his door by now and was
cranking down his awnings.

Outside a shop called Re-Runs, they ordered Edward to stay. He obeyed,

looking put upon, while they went in. Muriel sifted through stacks of curled,
brittle  shoes  that  had  hardened  into  the  shapes  of  other  people’s  feet.  She
shucked off her own shoes and stepped into a pair of silver evening sandals.
“What do you think?” she asked Macon.

“I thought you were looking for slippers.”

“But what do you think of these?”

“I can live without them,” he said.

He was feeling bored because Re-Runs carried nothing but clothes.

Muriel  abandoned  the  shoes  and  they  went  next  door  to  Garage  Sale

Incorporated. Macon tried to invent a need for a rusty metal Rolodex file he
found in a heap of tire chains. Could he use it for his guidebooks in some
way? And make it tax-deductible. Muriel picked up a tan vinyl suitcase with
rounded edges; it reminded Macon of a partly sucked caramel. “Should I get
this?” she asked.

“I thought you wanted slippers.”

“But for travel.”

“Since when do you travel?”

“I know where you’re going next,” she said. She came closer to him, both

hands clutching the suitcase handle. She looked like a very young girl at a bus
stop, say, or out hitching a ride on the highway. “I wanted to ask if I could
come with you.”

“To Canada.”

“I mean the next place after that. France.”

He set down the Rolodex. (Mention of France always depressed him.)

“Julian said!” she reminded him. “He said it’s getting to be time to go to

France again.”

“You know I can’t afford to bring you.”

Muriel replaced the suitcase and they left the shop. “But just this once,” she

said, hurrying along beside him. “It wouldn’t cost much!”

Macon  retrieved  Edward’s  leash  and  motioned  him  up.  “It  would  cost  a

mint,” he said, “not to mention that you’d have to miss work.”

“No, I wouldn’t. I’ve quit.”

He looked over at her. “Quit?”

“Well, at the Meow-Bow. Then things like George and the dog training I’ll

just rearrange; if I was to travel I could just—”

“You quit the Meow-Bow?”

“So what?”

He couldn’t explain the sudden weight that fell on him.

“It’s not like it really paid much,” Muriel said. “And you do buy most of

the groceries now and help me with the rent and all; it’s not like I needed the
money.  Besides,  it  took  so  much  time!  Time  I  could  spend  with  you  and
Alexander! Why, I was coming home nights literally dead with exhaustion,
Macon.”

They  passed  Methylene’s  Beauty  Salon,  an  insurance  agency,  a  paint-

stripping  shop.  Edward  gave  an  interested  glance  at  a  large,  jowly  tomcat
basking on the hood of a pickup.

“Figuratively,” Macon said.

“Huh?”

“You  were  figuratively  dead  with  exhaustion.  Jesus,  Muriel,  you’re  so

imprecise. You’re so sloppy. And how could you quit your job like that? How
could you just assume like that? You never even warned me!”

“Oh, don’t make such a big deal about it,” Muriel said.

They arrived at her favorite shop—a nameless little hole in the wall with a

tumble  of  dusty  hats  in  the  window.  Muriel  started  through  the  door  but
Macon stayed where he was. “Aren’t you coming in?” she asked him.

“I’ll wait here.”

“But it’s the place with all the gadgets!”

He said nothing. She sighed and disappeared.

Seeing her go was like shucking off a great, dragging burden.

sun-bleached  election  poster  as  if  it  held  some  fascinating  coded  message.
Two black women passed him, pulling wire carts full of laundry. “It was just
as warm as this selfsame day I’m speaking to you but she wore a very very
fur coat . . .”

“May-con.”

He turned toward the door of the shop.

“Oh, Maay-con!”

He saw a mitten, one of those children’s mittens designed to look like a

puppet.  The  palm  was  a  red  felt  mouth  that  widened  to  squeak,  “Macon,
please don’t be angry with Muriel.”

Macon groaned.

“Come into this nice store with her,” the puppet urged.

“Muriel, I think Edward’s getting restless now.”

“There’s lots of things to buy here! Pliers and wrenches and T-squares . . .

There’s a silent hammer.”

“What?”

“A hammer that doesn’t make a sound. You can pound in nails in the dead

of night.”

“Listen—” Macon said.

“There’s a magnifying glass all cracked and broken, and when you look at

broken things through the lens you’d swear they’d turned whole again.”

“Really, Muriel.”

“I’m not Muriel! I’m Mitchell Mitten! Macon, don’t you know Muriel can

always  take  care  of  herself?”  the  puppet  asked  him.  “Don’t  you  know  she
could  find  another  job  tomorrow,  if  she  wanted?  So  come  inside!  Come

along! There’s a pocket-knife here with its own whetstone blade.”

“Oh, for Lord’s sake,” Macon said.

But he gave a grudging little laugh.

And went on inside.

Over the next few days she kept bringing up France again and again. She

sent  him  an  anonymous  letter  pasted  together  from  magazine  print:  Don’t
FoRget tO BUY plANe Ticket for MuRiel. (And the telltale magazine—with
little blocks clipped out of its pages—still lay on the kitchen table.) She asked
him  to  get  her  her  keys  from  her  purse  and  when  he  opened  her  purse  he
found photographs, two slick colored squares on thin paper showing Muriel’s
eyes at half mast. Passport photos, plainly. She must have meant for him to
see them; she was watching him so intently. But all he did was drop her keys
in her palm without comment.

He had to admire her. Had he ever known such a fighter? He went grocery

shopping with her unusually late one evening, and just as they were crossing a
shadowed area a boy stepped forth from a doorway. “Give over all what you
have in your purse,” he told Muriel. Macon was caught off guard; the boy was
hardly more than a child. He froze, hugging the sack of groceries. But Muriel
said, “The hell I will!” and swung her purse around by its strap and clipped
the boy in the jaw. He lifted a hand to his face. “You get on home this instant
or  you’ll  be  sorry  you  were  ever  born,”  Muriel  told  him.  He  slunk  away,
looking back at her with a puzzled expression.

When Macon had caught his breath again, he told Muriel she was a fool.

“He might have had a gun, for all you knew,” he said. “Anything might have
happened! Kids show less mercy than grownups; you can see that any day in
the papers.”

“Well, it turned out fine, didn’t it?” Muriel asked. “What are you so mad

at?”

He  wasn’t  sure.  He  supposed  he  might  be  mad  at  himself.  He had done

nothing to protect her, nothing strong or chivalrous. He hadn’t thought as fast
as she had or thought at all, in fact. While Muriel . . . why, Muriel hadn’t even
seemed  surprised.  She  might  have  strolled  down  that  street  expecting  a
neighbor here, a stray dog there, a holdup just beyond—all equally part of

life. He felt awed by her, and diminished. Muriel just walked on, humming
“Great Speckled Bird” as if nothing particular had happened.

“I don’t think Alexander’s getting a proper education,” he said to her one

evening.

“Oh, he’s okay.”

“I asked him to figure what change they’d give back when we bought the

milk today, and he didn’t have the faintest idea. He didn’t even know he’d
have to subtract.”

“Well, he’s only in second grade,” Muriel said.

“I think he ought to switch to a private school.”

“Private schools cost money.”

“So? I’ll pay.”

She  stopped  flipping  the  bacon  and  looked  over  at  him.  “What  are  you

saying?” she asked.

“Pardon?”

“What are you saying, Macon? Are you saying you’re committed?”

Macon cleared his throat. He said, “Committed.”

“Alexander’s got ten more years of school ahead of him. Are you saying

you’ll be around for all ten years?”

“Um . . .”

“I can’t just put him in a school and take him out again with every passing

whim of yours.”

He was silent.

“Just  tell  me  this  much,”  she  said.  “Do  you  picture  us  getting  married

sometime? I mean when your divorce comes through?”

He said, “Oh, well, marriage, Muriel . . .”

“You don’t, do you. You don’t know what you want. One minute you like

me and the next you don’t. One minute you’re ashamed to be seen with me
and the next you think I’m the best thing that ever happened to you.”

He stared at her. He had never guessed that she read him so clearly.

“You think you can just drift along like this, day by day, no plans,” she

said. “Maybe tomorrow you’ll be here, maybe you won’t. Maybe you’ll just
go  on  back  to  Sarah.  Oh  yes!  I  saw  you  at  Rose’s  wedding.  Don’t  think  I
didn’t see how you and Sarah looked at each other.”

Macon said, “All I’m saying is—”

“All I’m saying,” Muriel told him, “is take care what you promise my son.

Don’t go making him promises you don’t intend to keep.”

“But I just want him to learn to subtract!” he said.

She  didn’t  answer,  and  so  the  last  word  rang  in  the  air  for  moments

afterward.  Subtract.  A  flat,  sharp,  empty  sound  that  dampened  Macon’s
spirits.

At  supper  she  was  too  quiet;  even  Alexander  was  quiet,  and  excused

himself the minute he’d finished his BLT. Macon, though, hung around the
kitchen.  Muriel  was  running  a  sinkful  of  water.  He  said,  “Shall  I  dry?”
Without any sort of warning, she whirled and flung a wet sponge in his face.
Macon said, “Muriel?”

“Just get out!” she shouted, tears spiking her lashes, and she turned away

again  and  plunged  her  hands  into  water  so  hot  that  it  steamed.  Macon
retreated. He went into the living room where Alexander was watching TV,
and Alexander moved over on the couch to give him space. He didn’t say
anything, but Macon could tell he’d heard from the way he tensed at each
clatter  in  the  kitchen.  After  a  while  the  clatters  died  down.  Macon  and
Alexander  looked  at  each  other.  There  was  a  silence;  a  single  murmuring
voice. Macon  rose  and  returned  to  the  kitchen,  walking  more  quietly  than
usual and keeping a weather eye out, the way a cat creeps back after it’s been
dumped from someone’s lap.

Muriel was talking on the phone with her mother. Her voice was gay and

chirpy but just a shade thicker than usual, as if she were recovering from a

cold. “So anyhow,” she said, “I asked what kind of trouble her dog is giving
her  and  the  lady’s  like,  ‘Oh,  no  trouble,’  so  I  ask  her,  ‘Well,  what’s  his
problem, then?’ and the lady’s like, ‘No real problem.’ I say, ‘Ma’am. You
must have called me here for some reason.’ She says, ‘Oh. Well. That.’ She
says,  ‘Actually,’  she  says,  ‘I  was  wondering  about  when  he  makes.’  I  say,
‘Makes?’ She says, ‘Yes, when he makes number one. He makes like little girl
dogs do, he doesn’t lift his leg.’ I say to her, ‘Now let me see if I’ve got this
straight. You have called me here to teach your dog to lift his leg when he
tinkles.’ ”

Her  free  hand  kept  flying  out  while  she  talked,  as  if  she  imagined  her

mother could see her. Macon came up behind her and put his arms around her,
and  she  leaned  back  against  him.  “Oh,  there’s  never  a  dull  moment,  I  tell
you,” she said into the phone.

That night he dreamed he was traveling in a foreign country, only it seemed

to be a medley of all the countries he’d ever been to and even some he hadn’t.
The sterile vast spaces of Charles de Gaulle airport chittered with those tiny
birds he’d seen inside the terminal at Brussels; and when he stepped outdoors
he  was  in  Julian’s  green  map  of  Hawaii  with  native  dancers,  oversized,
swaying near the dots that marked various tourist attractions. Meanwhile his
own  voice,  neutral  and  monotonous,  murmured  steadily:  In  Germanythe
commercial traveler must be punctual for all appointments,in Switzerland he
should  be  five  minutes  early,  in  Italy  delays  of  several  hours  are  not
uncommon . . .

He woke. It was pitch dark, but through the open window he heard distant

laughter, a strain of music, faint cheers as if some sort of game were going on.
He squinted at the clock radio: three thirty. Who would be playing a game at
this hour? And on this street—this worn, sad street where nothing went right
for anyone, where the men had dead-end jobs or none at all and the women
were running to fat and the children were turning out badly. But another cheer
went up, and someone sang a line from a song. Macon found himself smiling.
He turned toward Muriel and closed his eyes; he slept dreamlessly the rest of
the night.

The mailman rang the doorbell and presented a long, tube-shaped package

addressed to Macon. “What’s this?” Macon asked. He returned to the living
room,  frowning  down  at  the  label.  Muriel  was  reading  a  paperback  book
called Beauty Tips from the Stars. She glanced up and said, “Why not open it
and find out.”

“Oh? Is this some of your doing?”

She only turned a page.

Another plea for the France trip, he supposed. He pulled off the tape on one

end and shook the package till a cylinder of glossy paper slid out. When he
unrolled it, he found a full-color photo of two puppies in a basket, with DR.
MACK’S PETVITES above it and a calendar for January below it.

“I don’t understand,” he said to Muriel.

She turned another page.

“Why would you send me a calendar for a year that’s half gone?”

“Maybe there’s something written on it,” she told him.

He flipped through February, March, April. Nothing there. May. Then June:

a scribble of red ink across a Saturday, “Wedding,” he read out. “Wedding?
Whose wedding?”

“Ours?” she asked him.

“Oh, Muriel . . .”

“You’ll  be  separated  a  year  then,  Macon.  You’ll  be  able  to  get  your

divorce.”

“But, Muriel—”

“I always did want to have a June wedding.”

“Muriel, please, I’m not ready for this! I don’t think I ever will be. I mean I

don’t think marriage ought to be as common as it is; I really believe it ought
to be the exception to the rule; oh, perfect couples could marry, maybe, but
who’s a perfect couple?”

“You and Sarah, I suppose,” Muriel said.

The name brought Sarah’s calm face, round as a daisy.

“No, no . . .” he said weakly.

all these fancy reasons for never doing a single thing I want!”

Then she flung down her book and ran upstairs.

Macon  heard  the  cautious,  mouselike  sounds  of  Alexander  as  he tiptoed

around the kitchen fixing himself a snack.

Muriel’s  sister  Claire  arrived  on  the  doorstep  with  a  suitcase  spilling

clothes and her eyes pink with tears. “I’m never speaking to Ma again,” she
told  them.  She  pushed  past  them  into  the  house.  “You want to know what
happened?  Well,  I’ve  been  dating  this  guy,  see:  Claude  McEwen.  Only  I
didn’t let on to Ma, you know how she’s scared I’ll turn out like Muriel did,
and so last night when he came for me I jumped into his car and she happened
to  catch  sight  of  me  from  the  window,  noticed  he  had  a  bumper  sticker
reading EDGEWOOD. That’s because he used to go to a high school called
Edgewood Prep in Delaware, but Ma thought it was Edgewood Arsenal and
therefore he must be an Army man. So anyhow, this morning I get up and
there she is fit to be tied, says, ‘I know what you’ve been up to! Out all hours
last night with the General!’ and I say, ‘Who? The what?’ but there’s never
any stopping her once she gets started. She tells me I’m grounded for life and
can’t ever see the General again or she’ll have him hauled up for court-martial
and all his stars ripped off his uniform, so quick as a wink I packed up my
clothes . . .”

Macon, listening absently while Edward sighed at his feet, had a sudden

view of his life as rich and full and astonishing. He would have liked to show
it off to someone. He wanted to sweep out an arm and say, “See?”

But the person he would have liked to show it to was Sarah.

Rose  and  Julian  were  back  from  their  honeymoon;  they  were  giving  a

family supper and Macon and Muriel were invited. Macon bought a bottle of
very good wine as a hostess gift. He set the bottle on the counter, and Muriel
came along and said, “What’s this?”

“It’s wine for Rose and Julian.”

“Thirty-six dollars and ninety-nine cents!” she said, examining the sticker.

“Yes, well, it’s French.”

“I didn’t know a wine could cost thirty-six ninety-nine.”

“I figured since, you know, this’ll be our first visit to their apartment . . .”

“You sure do think a lot of your family,” Muriel said.

“Yes, of course.”

“You never bought me any wine.”

“I  didn’t  know  you  wanted  any;  you  told  me  it  makes  your  teeth  feel

rough.”

She didn’t argue with that.

Later that day he happened to notice that the bottle had been moved. And

was opened. And was half emptied. The cork lay beside it, still impaled on the
corkscrew.  A  cloudy  little  juice  glass  gave  off  the  smell  of  grapes.  Macon
called, “Muriel?”

“What,” she answered from the living room.

He went to the living room doorway. She was watching a ball game with

Alexander. He said, “Muriel, have you been drinking that wine I bought?”

“Yes.”

He said, “Why, Muriel?”

“Oh, I just had this irresistible urge to try it out,” she said.

Then she looked at him with slitted eyes, tilting her chin. He felt she was

challenging him to take some action, but he said nothing. He picked up his car
keys and went out to buy another bottle.

Macon  felt  shy  about  attending  this  dinner,  as  if  Rose  had  turned into a

stranger. He took longer than usual dressing, unable to decide between two
shirts, and Muriel seemed to be having some trouble too. She kept putting on
outfits and taking them off; brightly colored fabrics began to mount on the
bed and on the floor all around it. “Oh, Lord, I wish I was just a totally nother
person,” she sighed. Macon, concentrating on tying his tie, said nothing. Her
baby photo grinned out at him from the frame of the mirror. He happened to

notice the date on the border: AUG 60. Nineteen sixty.

be married.

Downstairs,  Dominick  Saddler  was  sitting  on  the  couch  with  Alexander.

“Now this here is your paste wax,” he was saying. He held up a can. “You
never want to polish a car with anything but paste wax. And here we have a
diaper. Diapers make real good rags because they don’t shed hardly no lint. I
generally buy a dozen at a time from Sears and Roebuck. And chamois skins:
well, you know chamois skins. So what you do is, you get yourself these here
supplies and a case of good beer and a girl, and you head on out to Loch
Raven. Then you park in the sun and you take off your shirt and you and the
girl start to polishing. Ain’t no sweeter way that I know of to use up a spring
afternoon.”

Dominick’s  version  of  a  bedtime  story,  Macon  supposed.  He  was  baby-

sitting  tonight.  (The  Butler  twins  had  dates,  and  Claire  was  out  with  the
General. As everybody referred to him now.) In payment, Muriel’s car would
be Dominick’s to use for a week; mere money would never have persuaded
him. He slouched next to Alexander with the diaper spread over one knee,
muscles bulging under a T-shirt that read WEEKEND WARRIOR. A Greek
sailor  cap  was  tipped  back  on  his  head  with  a  Judas  Priest  button  pinned
above the visor. Alexander looked enthralled.

Muriel came tapping down the stairs; she arrived craning her neck to see if

her slip showed. “Is this outfit okay?” she asked Macon.

“It’s very nice,” he said, which was true, although it was also totally unlike

her. Evidently, she had decided to take Rose for her model. She had pulled her
hair back in a low bun and she wore a slim gray dress with shoulder pads.
Only her spike-heeled sandals seemed her own; probably she didn’t possess
any  shoes  so  sensible  as  Rose’s  schoolgirl  flats.  “I  want  you  to  tell  me  if
there’s anything not right,” she said to Macon. “Anything you think is tacky.”

“Not a thing,” Macon assured her.

She kissed Alexander, leaving a dark red mark on his cheek. She made one

last survey in the mirror beside the front door, meanwhile calling, “Don’t let
him stay up too late now, Dommie; don’t let him watch anything scary on T V
—”

Macon said, “Muriel.”

“I look like the wrath of God.”

The  Leary  children  had  been  raised  to  believe  that  when  an  invitation

involved a meal, the guests should arrive exactly on time. Never mind that
they often caught their hostess in curlers; they went on doing what they were
taught.  So  Macon  pressed  the  buzzer  in  the  lobby  at  precisely  six  twenty-
seven, and Porter and Charles joined them in front of the elevator. They both
told Muriel it was nice to see her. Then they rode upward in a gloomy silence,
eyes fixed on the numbers over the door. Charles carried a potted jade tree,
Porter another bottle of wine.

“Isn’t this exciting?” Muriel said. “We’re their first invited guests.”

“At home now we’d be watching the CBS Evening News,” Charles told

her.

Muriel couldn’t seem to think of any answer to that.

By  six  thirty  sharp  they  were  ringing  the  doorbell,  standing  in  a  hushed

corridor  carpeted  in  off-white.  Rose  opened  the  door  and  called, “They’re
here!” and set her face lightly against each of theirs. She wore Grandmother
Leary’s lace-trimmed company apron and she smelled of lavender soap, the
same as always.

But there was a strip of peeling sunburn across the bridge of her nose.

Julian,  natty  and  casual  in  a  navy  turtleneck  and  white  slacks  (when  it

wasn’t  yet  Memorial  Day),  fixed  the  drinks  while  Rose  retreated  to  the
kitchen. This was one of those ultra-modern apartments where the rooms all
swam  into  each  other,  so  they  could  see  her  flitting  back  and  forth.  Julian
passed around snapshots of Hawaii. Either he had used inferior film or else
Hawaii was a very different place from Baltimore, because some of the colors
were wrong. The trees appeared to be blue. In most of the photos Rose stood
in front of flower beds or flowering shrubs, wearing a white sleeveless dress
Macon had never seen before, hugging her arms and smiling too broadly so
that she looked older than she was. “I tell Rose you’d think she went on our
honeymoon  by  herself,”  Julian  said.  “I’m  the  one  who  took  the  pictures
because Rose never did learn how to work my camera.”

“She didn’t?” Macon asked.

“It was one of those German models with all the buttons.”

“She couldn’t figure out the buttons?”

“I tell her, ‘People will think I wasn’t even there.’ ”

“Why, Rose could have taken that camera apart and put it together twice

over,” Macon said.

“No, this was one of those German models with—”

“It wasn’t very logically constructed,” Rose called from the kitchen.

“Ah,” Macon said, sitting back.

She entered the room with a tray and placed it on the glass coffee table.

Then she knelt and began to spread pâté on little crackers. There was some
change in the way she moved, Macon noticed. She was more graceful, but
also more self-conscious. She offered the pâté first to Muriel, then to each of
her brothers, last to Julian. “In Hawaii I started learning to sail,” she said. She
pronounced  the  two i’s  in  “Hawaii”  separately;  Macon  thought  it  sounded
affected. “Now I’m going to practice out on the Bay.”

“She’s trying to find her sea legs,” Julian said. “She tends to feel motion-

sick.”

Macon bit into his cracker. The pâté was something familiar. It was rough

in  texture  but  delicate  in  taste;  there  was  a  kind  of  melting  flavor  that  he
believed came from adding a great amount of butter. The recipe was Sarah’s.
He sat very still, not chewing. He was flooded by a subtle blend of tarragon
and cream and home.

“Oh, I know just what you’re going through,” Muriel said to Rose. “All I

have to do is look at a boat and I get nauseous.”

Macon  swallowed  and  gazed  down  at  the  carpet  between  his  feet.  He

waited for someone to correct her, but nobody did. That was even worse.

In bed she said, “You wouldn’t ever leave me, would you? Would you ever

think of leaving me? You won’t be like the others, will you? Will you promise

not to leave me?”

“Yes, yes,” he said, floating in and out of dreams.

“You do take me seriously, don’t you? Don’t you?”

“Oh, Muriel, for pity’s sake . . .” he said.

But later, when she turned in her sleep and moved away from him, his feet

followed hers of their own accord to the other side of the bed.

eighteen

rang. Actually it took him a second to realize it was the phone. He happened
to be having a very good time with a mysterious object he’d just discovered—
an ivory-painted metal cylinder affixed to the wall above the bed. He’d never
noticed such a thing before, although he’d stayed in this hotel on two previous
trips. When he touched the cylinder to see what it was, it rotated, disappearing
into the wall, while from within the wall a light bulb swung out already lit. At
the same moment, the phone rang. Macon experienced an instant of confusion
during which he imagined it was the cylinder that was ringing. Then he saw
the  telephone  on  the  nightstand.  Still  he  was  confused.  No  one  had  his
number, so far as he knew.

He picked up the receiver and said, “Yes?”

“Macon.”

His heart lurched. He said, “Sarah?”

“Have I caught you at a bad time?”

“No, no . . . How did you know where I was?”

“Well, Julian thought you’d be in either Toronto or Winnipeg by now,” she

said, “so I looked in your last guidebook, and I knew the hotels where you
discussed night noises were the ones where you stayed yourself, so . . .”

“Is anything wrong?” he asked.

“No, I just needed a favor. Would it be all right with you if I moved back

into our house?”

“Um—”

“Just as a place to stay,” she said hastily. “Just for a little while. My lease

runs out at the end of the month and I can’t find a new apartment.”

“But the house is a mess,” he told her.

“Oh, I’ll take care of that.”

“No,  I  mean  something  happened  to  it  over  the  winter,  pipes  burst  or

something, ceiling came down—”

“Yes, I know.”

“You do?”

“Your brothers told me.”

“My brothers?”

“I  went  to  ask  them  your  whereabouts  when  they  wouldn’t  answer  their

phone. And Rose said she’d been over to the house herself and—”

“You went to Rose’s, too?”

“No, Rose was at your brothers’.”

“Oh.”

“She’s living there for a while.”

“I see,” he said. Then he said, “She’s what?”

“Well, June has had her baby,” Sarah said, “so she asked Porter to keep the

children a while.”

“But what does that have to do with Rose?” he said. “Does Rose imagine

Porter  can’t  open  a  tin  of  soup  for  them?  And  how  come  June  sent  them
away?”

“Oh, you know June, she always was kind of a birdbrain.”

She sounded like her old self, when she said that. Up till now there’d been

something careful about her voice, something wary and ready to retreat, but
now a certain chuckly, confiding quality emerged. Macon leaned back against
his pillow.

“She told the children she needs time to bond,” Sarah said.

“Time to what?”

“She and her husband need to bond with the baby.”

“Good grief,” Macon said.

“When Rose heard that, she told Porter she was coming home. Anyhow she

didn’t think the boys were eating right, Porter and Charles; and also there’s a
crack  in  the  side  of  the  house  and  she  wanted  to  get  it  patched  before  it
spreads.”

“What kind of crack?” Macon asked.

“Some little crack in the masonry; I don’t know. When the rain comes from

a certain direction water seeps in above the kitchen ceiling, Rose says, and
Porter and Charles were planning to fix it but they couldn’t agree on the best
way to do it.”

Macon slipped out of his shoes and hoisted his feet up onto the bed. He

said, “So is Julian living alone now, or what?”

“Yes, but she brings him casseroles,” Sarah said. Then she said, “Have you

thought about it, Macon?”

His heart gave another lurch. He said, “Have I thought about what?”

“About my using the house.”

“Oh. Well. It’s fine with me, but I don’t believe you realize the extent of the

damage.”

“But we’d have to fix that anyway, if we were to sell it. So here’s what I

was  thinking:  I  could  pay  for  the  repairs  myself—anything  the  insurance
doesn’t cover—with what I’d ordinarily use for rent. Does that seem fair to
you?”

“Yes, of course,” Macon said.

“And maybe I’ll get someone to clean the upholstery,” she said.

“Yes.”

“And the rugs.”

“Yes.”

After all these years, he knew when she was leading up to something. He

recognized that distracted tone that meant she was bracing herself for what
she really wanted to say.

“Incidentally,” she said, “the papers came through from the lawyer.”

“Ah.”

“The final arrangements. You know. Things I have to sign.”

“Yes.”

“It was kind of a shock.”

He said nothing.

“I mean, of course I knew that they were coming; it’s been nearly a year; in

fact he called ahead and told me they were coming, but when I saw them in
black and white they just seemed so brisk. They didn’t take into account the
feelings of the thing. I guess I wasn’t expecting that.”

Macon  had  a  sense  of  some  danger  approaching,  something  he  couldn’t

handle.  He  said,  “Ah!  Yes!  Certainly!  That  seems  a  natural  reaction.  So
anyway, good luck with the house, Sarah.”

He hung up quickly.

His seatmate on the flight to Edmonton was a woman who was scared of

flying. He knew that before the plane had left the ground, before he’d looked
in her direction. He was gazing out the window, keeping to himself as usual,
and he heard her swallowing repeatedly. She kept tightening and releasing her
grasp on the armrests and he could feel that, too. Finally he turned to see who
this  was.  A  pair  of  pouched  eyes  met  his.  A  very  old,  baggy  woman  in  a
flowered dress was staring at him intently, had perhaps been willing him to
turn. “Do you think this plane is safe,” she said flatly, not exactly asking.

“It’s perfectly safe,” he told her.

“Then  why  have  all  these  signs  about.  Oxygen.  Life  vests.  Emergency

exits. They’re clearly expecting the worst.”

“That’s just federal regulations,” Macon said.

Then  he  started  thinking  about  the  word  “federal.”  In  Canada,  would  it

apply?  He  frowned  at  the  seat  ahead  of  him,  considering.  Finally  he  said,
“Government regulations.” When he checked the old woman’s expression to
see if this made any better sense to her, he discovered that she must have been
staring at him all this time. Her face lunged toward him, gray and desperate.
He began to worry about her. “Would you like a glass of sherry?” he asked.

“They don’t give us sherry till we’re airborne. By then it’s much too late.”

“Just a minute,” he said.

He bent to unzip his bag, and from his shaving kit he took a plastic travel

flask. This was something he always packed, in case of sleepless nights. He
had never used it, though—not because he’d never had a sleepless night but
because he’d gone on saving it for some occasion even worse than whatever
the  current  one  was,  something  that  never  quite  arrived.  Like  his  other
emergency supplies (the matchbook-sized sewing kit, the tiny white Lomotil
tablet), this flask was being hoarded for the real emergency. In fact, its metal
lid  had  grown  rusty  inside,  as  he  discovered  when  he  unscrewed  it.  “I’m
afraid this may have . . . turned a bit, or whatever sherry does,” he told the old
woman. She didn’t answer but continued staring into his eyes. He poured the
sherry into the lid, which was meant to double as a cup. Meanwhile the plane
gave a creak and started moving down the runway. The old woman drank off
the sherry and handed him the cup. He understood that she was not returning
it for good. He refilled it. She drank that more slowly and then let her head tip
back against her seat.

“Better?” he asked her.

“My name is Mrs. Daniel Bunn,” she told him.

He thought it was her way of saying she was herself again—her formal,

dignified self. “How do you do,” he said. “I’m Macon Leary.”

“I  know  it’s  foolish,  Mr.  Leary,”  she  said,  “but  a  drink  does  give  the

illusion one is doing something to cope, does it not.”

“Absolutely,” Macon said.

He  wasn’t  convinced,  though,  that  she  was  coping  all  that  well.  As the

plane gathered speed, her free hand tightened on the armrest. Her other hand
—the one closest to him, clutching the cup— grew white around the nails. All
at once the cup popped up in the air, squeezed out of her grip. Macon caught
it  nimbly  and  said,  “Whoa  there!”  and  screwed  it  onto  the  flask.  Then  he
replaced the flask in his bag. “Once we’re off the ground—” he said.

But a glance at her face stopped him. She was swallowing again. The plane

was beginning to rise now—the nose was lifting off— and she was pressed
back against her seat. She seemed flattened. “Mrs. Bunn?” Macon said. He
was scared she was having a heart attack.

Instead  of  answering,  she  turned  toward  him  and  crumpled  onto  his

shoulder.  He  put  an  arm  around  her.  “Never  mind,”  he  said.  “Goodness.
You’ll be all right. Never mind.”

The plane continued slanting backward. When the landing gear retracted

(groaning),  Macon  felt  the  shudder  through  Mrs.  Bunn’s  body.  Her  hair
smelled  like  freshly  ironed  tea  cloths.  Her  back  was  large  and  boneless,  a
mounded shape like the back of a whale.

He was impressed that someone so old still wanted so fiercely to live.

Then the plane leveled off and she pulled herself together— straightening

and drawing away from him, brushing at the teardrops that lay in the folds
beneath  her  eyes.  She  was  full  of  folds,  wide  and  plain  and  sagging,  but
valiantly wore two pearl buttons in her long, spongy earlobes and maintained
a coat of brave red lipstick on a mouth so wrinkled that it didn’t even have a
clear outline.

He asked, “Are you all right?”

“Yes,  and  I  apologize  a  thousand  times,”  she  said.  And  she  patted  the

brooch at her throat.

When the drink cart came he ordered her another sherry, which he insisted

on paying for, and he ordered one for himself as well, even though he didn’t
plan to drink it. He thought it might be needed for Mrs. Bunn. He was right,
as things turned out, because their flight was unusually rough. The seatbelt

sign stayed lit the whole way, and the plane bounced and grated as if rolling
over gravel. Every now and then it dropped sharply and Mrs. Bunn winced,
but she went on taking tiny sips of sherry. “This is nothing,” Macon told her.
“I’ve been in much worse than this.” He told her how to give with the bumps.
“It’s like traveling on a boat,” he said. “Or on wheels, on roller skates. You
keep your knees loose. You bend. Do you understand what I’m saying? You
go along with it. You ride it out.”

Mrs. Bunn said she’d certainly try.

Not only was the air unsteady, but also little things kept going wrong inside

the plane. The drink cart raced away from the stewardess every time she let
go of it. Mrs. Bunn’s tray fell into her lap twice without warning. At each new
mishap  Macon  laughed  and  said,  “Ah,  me,”  and  shook  his  head.  “Oh,  not
again,” he said. Mrs. Bunn’s eyes remained fixed on his face, as if Macon
were her only hope. Once there was a bang and she jumped; the door to the
cockpit had flung itself open for no good reason. “What? What?” she said, but
Macon pointed out that now she could see for herself how unconcerned the
pilot was. They were close enough to the front so she could even hear what
the  pilot  was  talking  about;  he  was  shouting  some  question  to  the  copilot,
asking  why  any  ten-year-old  girl  with  half  a  grain  of  sense  would  wear  a
metal  nightbrace  in  a  sauna  room.  “You  call  that  a  worried  man?”  Macon
asked Mrs. Bunn. “You think a man about to bail out of his plane would be
discussing orthodontia?”

“Bail out!” Mrs. Bunn said. “Oh, my, I never thought of that!”

Macon laughed again.

He  was  reminded  of  a  trip  he’d  taken  alone  as  a  boy,  touring  colleges.

Heady with his new independence, he had lied to the man sitting next to him
and said he came from Kenya, where his father led safaris. In the same way
he  was  lying  now,  presenting  himself  to  Mrs.  Bunn  as  this  merry,  tolerant
person.

But after they had landed (with Mrs. Bunn hardly flinching, bolstered by all

those sherries), and she had gone off with her grown daughter, a very small
child ran headlong into Macon’s kneecap. This child was followed by another
and another, all more or  less  the  same  size—some  kind  of  nursery  school,
Macon  supposed,  visiting  the  airport  on  a  field  trip—and  each  child,  as  if
powerless  to  veer  from  the  course  the  first  had  set,  careened  off  Macon’s

knees  and  said,  “Oops!”  The  call  ran  down  the  line  like  little  bird  cries
—“Oops!” “Oops!” “Oops!”—while behind the children, a harassed-looking
woman clapped a hand to her cheek. “Sorry,” she said to Macon, and he said,
“No harm done.”

Only later, when he passed a mirror and noticed the grin on his face, did he

realize that, in fact, he might not have been lying to Mrs. Bunn after all.

“The plumber says it won’t be hard to fix,” Sarah told him. “He says it

looks bad but really just one pipe is cracked.”

“Well, good,” Macon said.

He was not as surprised this time by her call, of course, but he did feel

there was something disconcerting about it—standing in an Edmonton hotel
room on a weekday afternoon, listening to Sarah’s voice at the other end of
the line.

“I  went  over  there  this  morning  and  straightened  up  a  little,”  she  said.

“Everything’s so disorganized.”

“Disorganized?”

“Why are some of the sheets sewn in half? And the popcorn popper’s in the

bedroom. Were you eating popcorn in the bedroom?”

“I guess I must have been,” he said.

He  was  near  an  open  window,  and  he  could  look  out  upon  a  strangely

beautiful landscape: an expanse of mathematical flatness, with straight-edged
buildings  rising  in  the  distance  like  a  child’s  toy  blocks  on  a  rug.  It  was
difficult, in these surroundings, to remember why he’d had a popcorn popper
in the bedroom.

“So how’s the weather there?” Sarah asked.

“Kind of gray.”

“Here it’s sunny. Sunny and humid.”

“Well, it’s certainly not humid here,” he told her. “The air’s so dry that rain

disappears before it hits the ground.”

“Really? Then how can you tell it’s raining?”

“You can see it above the plains,” he said. “It looks like stripes that just

fade away about halfway down from the sky.”

“I wish I were there to watch it with you,” Sarah said.

Macon swallowed.

Gazing out of the window, he all at once recalled Ethan as an infant. Ethan

used to cry unless he was tightly wrapped in a blanket; the pediatrician had
explained that new babies have a fear of flying apart. Macon had not been
able to imagine that at the time, but now he had no trouble. He could picture
himself separating, falling into pieces, his head floating away with terrifying
swiftness in the eerie green air of Alberta.

In Vancouver she asked if the rain vanished there as well. “No,” he said.

“No?”

“No, it rains in Vancouver.”

It was raining this minute—a gentle night rain. He could hear it but not see

it, except for the cone of illuminated drops spilling beneath a street lamp just
outside his hotel room. You could almost suppose it was the lamp itself that
was raining.

“Well,  I’ve  moved  back  into  the  house,”  she  said.  “Mostly  I  just  stay

upstairs.  The  cat  and  I:  We  camp  in  the  bedroom.  Creep  downstairs  for
meals.”

“What cat is that?” he asked.

“Helen.”

“Oh, yes.”

“I  went  and  picked  her  up  at  Rose’s.  I  needed  company.  You  wouldn’t

believe how lonely it is.”

Yes, he would believe it, he could have said. But didn’t.

won her attention only by withdrawing. He wasn’t surprised when she said,
“Macon? Do you . . . What’s her name? The person you live with?”

“Muriel,” he said.

Which she knew before she asked, he suspected.

“Do you plan on staying with Muriel forever?”

“I really couldn’t say,” he said.

He was noticing how oddly the name hung in this starchy, old-fashioned

hotel room. Muriel. Such a peculiar sound. So unfamiliar, suddenly.

On  the  flight  back,  his  seatmate  was  an  attractive  young  woman  in  a

tailored suit. She spread the contents of her briefcase on her folding tray, and
she  riffled  through  computer  printout  sheets  with  her  perfectly  manicured
hands. Then she asked Macon if he had a pen she might borrow. This struck
him as amusing—her true colors shining out from beneath her businesslike
exterior. However, his only pen was a fountain pen that he didn’t like lending,
so he said no. She seemed relieved; she cheerfully repacked all she’d taken
from her briefcase. “I could have sworn I swiped a ballpoint from my last
hotel,” she said, “but maybe that was the one before this one; you know how
they all run together in your mind.”

“You must do a lot of traveling,” Macon said politely.

“Do I? Some mornings when I wake up I have to check my hotel stationery

just to find out what city I’m in.”

“That’s terrible.”

“Oh, I like it,” she said, bending to slip her briefcase under her seat. “It’s

the only time I can relax anymore. When I come home I’m all nervous, can’t
sit still. I prefer to be a . . . moving target, you could say.”

Macon thought of something he’d once read about heroin: how it’s not a

pleasure,  really,  but  it  so  completely  alters  the  users’  body  chemistry  that
they’re forced to go on once they’ve started.

He turned down drinks and dinner, and so did his seatmate; she rolled her

suit  jacket  expertly  into  a  pillow  and  went  to  sleep.  Macon  got  out  Miss
MacIntosh and stared at a single page for a while. The top line began with
brows bristling, her hair streaked with white. He studied the words so long
that  he  almost  wondered  if  they  were  words;  the  whole  English  language
seemed  chunky  and  brittle.  “Ladies  and  gentlemen,”  the  loudspeaker  said,
“we will be starting our descent . . .” and the word “descent” struck him as an
invention, some new euphemism concocted by the airlines.

After they landed in Baltimore, he took a shuttle bus to the parking lot and

retrieved his car. It was late evening here and the sky was pale and radiant
above  the  city.  As  he  drove  he  continued  to  see  the  words  from  Miss
MacIntosh.  He  continued  to  hear  the  stewardess’s  gliding  voice:
complimentary beverages and the captain has asked us and trays in an upright
position.  He  considered  switching  on  the  radio  but  he  didn’t  know  what
station  it  was  set  to.  Maybe  it  was  Muriel’s  country  music  station.  This
possibility made him feel weary; he felt he wouldn’t have the strength to press
the buttons, and so he drove in silence.

He came to Singleton Street and flicked his signal on but didn’t turn. After

a  while  the  signal  clicked  off  on  its  own.  He  rode  on  through  the  city,  up
Charles Street, into his old neighborhood. He parked and cut the engine and
sat  looking  at  the  house.  The  downstairs  windows  were  dark.  The  upstairs
windows were softly glowing. Evidently, he had come home.

nineteen

it—actually just half a Saturday, because Sarah had a class to attend in the
afternoon. At breakfast, she flipped through  an  interior  decorating  book  so
they could get a head start on their decision. “I’m beginning to think along the
lines of something flowered,” she told Macon. “We’ve never had a flowered
couch before. Or would that be too frilly?”

“Well, I don’t know. I wonder about winter,” Macon said.

“Winter?”

“I mean right now in the middle of June a flowered couch looks fine, but it

might seem out of place in December.”

“So you prefer something in a solid,” Sarah said.

“Well, I don’t know.”

“Or maybe stripes.”

“I’m not sure.”

“I know you don’t like plaids.”

“No.”

“How do you feel about tweeds?”

“Tweeds,” Macon said, considering.

Sarah handed over the book and started loading the dishwasher.

Macon  studied  pictures  of  angular  modern  couches,  cozy  chintz-covered

couches,  and  period  reproduction  couches  covered  in  complex  fabrics.  He
took the book to the living room and squinted at the spot where the couch

would be sitting. The old one, which had turned out to be too waterlogged to
salvage, had been carted away, along with both armchairs. Now there was just
a long blank wall, with the freshly plastered ceiling glaring above it. Macon
observed that a room without furniture had a utilitarian feeling, as if it were
merely a container. Or a vehicle. Yes, a vehicle: He had a sense of himself
speeding through the universe as he stood there.

While Sarah got dressed, Macon took the dog out. It was a warm, golden

morning. Neighbors were trimming their grass and weeding their flower beds.
They nodded as Macon walked past. He had not been back long enough for
them to feel at ease yet; there was something a little too formal about their
greetings. Or maybe he was imagining that. He made an effort to remind them
of  how  many  years  he  had  lived  here:  “I’ve  always  liked  those  tulips  of
yours!” and “Still got that nice hand mower, I see!” Edward marched beside
him with a busybody waggle of his hind end.

In  movies  and  such,  people  who  made  important  changes  in  their  lives

accomplished  them  and  were  done  with  it.  They  walked  out  and  never
returned;  or  they  married  and  lived  happily  ever  after.  In  real  life,  things
weren’t so clean-cut. Macon, for instance, had had to go down to Muriel’s and
retrieve his dog, once he’d decided to move back home. He had had to collect
his clothing and pack up his typewriter while Muriel watched in silence with
her accusing, reproaching eyes. Then there were all kinds of other belongings
that he discovered too late he’d forgotten—clothes that had been in the wash
at  the  time,  and  his  favorite  dictionary,  and  the extra-large pottery mug he
liked to drink his coffee from. But of course he couldn’t go back for them. He
had  to  abandon  them—  messy,  trailing  strings  of  himself  cluttering  his
leavetaking.

By the time he and Edward returned from their outing, Sarah was waiting

in the front yard. She wore a yellow dress that made her tan glow; she looked
very  pretty.  “I  was  just  wondering  about  the  azaleas,”  she  told  Macon.
“Weren’t we supposed to feed them in the spring?”

“Well, probably,” Macon said, “but they seem all right to me.”

“In April, I think,” she said. “Or maybe May. No one was here to do it.”

Macon veered away from that. He preferred to pretend that their lives had

been going on as usual. “Never mind, Rose has whole sacks of fertilizer,” he
said. “We’ll pick up some from her while we’re out.”

“No one was here to seed the lawn, either.”

“The lawn looks fine,” he said, more forcefully than he’d meant to.

They shut Edward in the house and climbed into Macon’s car. Sarah had

brought along a newspaper because there were several furniture ads. “Modern
Housewares,” she read off. “But that’s all the way down on Pratt Street.”

“Might as well give it a try,” Macon said. Pratt was one of the few streets

he knew how to find.

After they left their neighborhood, with its trees arching overhead, the car

grew hotter and Macon rolled his window down. Sarah lifted her face to the
sunlight. “Be a good day to go to the pool,” she said.

“Well, if we have time. I was thinking of asking you to lunch.”

“Oh, where?”

“Anywhere you like. Your choice.”

“Aren’t you nice,” she said.

Macon drove past two unshaven men talking on a corner. Sarah locked her

door.  Macon  thought  of  what  the  men  would  be  saying:  “What’s  coming
down, man?” “Not all that much.”

The  sidewalks  grew  more  crowded.  Women  lugged  string-handled

shopping bags, an old man dragged a grocery cart, and a girl in a faded dress
leaned her head against a bus stop sign.

At  Modern  Homewares,  huge  paper  banners  covered  the  plate  glass

windows.  SPECIAL  FOR  FATHER’S  DAY!  they  read.  Sarah  hadn’t
mentioned  that  this  was  a  Father’s  Day  sale.  Macon  made  a  point  of
mentioning it himself, to show it didn’t bother him. Taking her arm as they
entered,  he  said,  “Isn’t  that  typical.  Father’s  Day!  They’ll  capitalize  on
anything.”

Sarah looked away from him and said, “All they seem to have is beds.”

“I suppose it began with reclining chairs,” Macon said. “A Barcalounger

for Dad, and next thing you know it’s a whole dinette set.”

“Could we see your couches,” Sarah told a salesman firmly.

Macon. He didn’t really care. Sarah said, “What do you think? Legs? Or flush
with the floor.”

“It’s  all  the  same  to  me,”  he  said.  He  sat  down  heavily  on  something

covered in leather.

Sarah  chose  a  long,  low  couch  that  opened  into  a  queen-sized  bed.

“Macon? What do you say?” she asked. “Do you like what you’re sitting on
better?”

“No, no,” he said.

“Well, what do you think of this one?”

“It’s fine.”

“Don’t you have any opinion?”

“I just gave you my opinion, Sarah.”

Sarah sighed and asked the salesman if he offered same-day delivery.

They’d been so efficient about picking out the couch that time remained for

other errands as well. First they drove to Hutzler’s and bought queen-sized
sheets. Then they checked the furniture department for armchairs; there was a
Father’s Day sale there, too. “Maybe we’re on a roll,” Sarah told Macon. But
they weren’t as lucky with the armchairs; nothing looked just right. Not to
Macon, at least. He gave up trying and stood watching a kiddie show on a row
of television sets.

After Hutzler’s they went to get fertilizer from Rose, but Macon braked on

the  way  and  said,  “Wait!  There’s  my  bank.”  It  had  come  upon  him
unexpectedly—the  branch  where  he  rented  a  safe  deposit  box.  “I  need  my
passport for the France trip,‘ he told Sarah. “Might as well pick it up while
I’m here.”

Sarah said she’d just wait in the car.

He had to stand in line; two elderly women were ahead of him. They were

checking out their jewels for Saturday night, he liked to imagine. Or clipping
their coupons—whatever coupons were. While he stood there he kept feeling
the presence of someone behind him. For some reason he didn’t want to turn
and  find  out  who  it  was.  He  just  kept  staring  ahead,  every  now  and  then
glancing at his watch in a businesslike way. This person breathed very gently
and  smelled  like  flowers—bitter,  real-life  flowers,  not  the  kind in perfume
bottles.  But  when  he  finally  squared  his  shoulders  and  looked  around,  he
found only another stranger waiting for her jewels.

It wasn’t true that Muriel had watched in silence as he packed. Actually,

she had spoken. She had said, “Macon? Are you really doing this? Do you
mean to tell me you can just use a person up and then move on? You think
I’m some kind of . . . bottle of something you don’t have any further need for?
Is that how you see me, Macon?”

His  turn  for  the  vault  had  arrived,  and  he  followed  a  girl  in  a  miniskirt

across  a  carpeted  area,  into  the  windowless  cubicle  lined  with  drawers.  “I
won’t need to take my box to the other room,” he told the girl. “I just want to
get one thing.”

She gave him his card to sign and accepted his key. After she had unlocked

his box she stood back, scrutinizing her nails, while he rummaged through
various papers for his passport. Then he turned to tell her he was finished, but
all at once he was so moved by her tact in looking elsewhere, by the delicacy
that people could come up with on their own (for surely it wouldn’t have been
written into the bank’s instructions) . . . Well, he must be going soft in the
head. It was the weather or something; it was the season or something; he had
not been sleeping well. He said, “Thank you very much,” and took back his
key and left.

At  his  grandfather’s  house,  Rose  was  out  front  pruning  the  hedge.  Her

gardening  smock  was  an  enormous  gray  workshirt  inherited  from  Charles.
When she saw their car pull up she straightened and waved. Then she went on
pruning while they consulted her about fertilizers. “For azaleas and what else
do you have, andromeda, acid-loving plants . . .” she mused.

Sarah said, “Where are the children today?”

“Children?”

“Your nephew and nieces.”

“Oh, they went home to their mother.”

Sarah said, “I just assumed, since you hadn’t moved back with Julian . . .”

“Well, not yet, of course,” Rose said.

Macon,  anxious  to  guard  her  privacy,  murmured,  “No,  of  course  not,”

practically at the same moment, but Sarah said, “Why? What’s keeping you?”

“Oh, Sarah, you wouldn’t believe what a state I found the boys in when I

came back here,” Rose said. “They were living in their pajamas so as not to
have too much laundry. They were eating gorp for their suppers.”

“I’m not even going to ask what gorp is,” Sarah said.

“It’s a mixture of wheat germ and nuts and dried—”

“But what about your apartment, Rose? What about Julian?”

“Oh, you know, I kept losing that apartment every time I turned around,”

Rose said vaguely. “I’d head one block east to the grocery store and then turn
west  to  get  back  again  and  I’d  always  be  wrong;  always.  The  apartment
building would have worked over to the east somehow; I don’t know how.”

There was a silence. Finally Macon said, “Well, if you could get us some of

that fertilizer, Rose . . .”

“Certainly,” she said. And she went off to the toolshed.

They had lunch at the Old Bay Restaurant—Sarah’s idea. Macon said, “Are

you sure?” and Sarah said, “Why wouldn’t I be?”

“But you always tell me it’s boring,” Macon said.

“There are worse things than boring, I’ve decided.”

He  didn’t  think  that  was  much  of  a  recommendation,  but  he  went along

with it.

The restaurant was full, even though it was barely noon, and they had to

wait a few minutes to be seated. Macon stood by the hostess’s podium trying
to adjust to the dimness. He surveyed the other diners and found something

odd about them. They were not the usual Old Bay crowd—middle aged, one
face  much  like  the  next—but  an  assortment  of  particular  and  unusual
individuals. He saw a priest offering a toast to a woman in a tennis dress, and
a smartly suited woman with a young man in an orange gauze robe, and two
cheerful  schoolgirls  loading  all  their  potato  chips  onto  the  plate of a small
boy. From where he stood Macon couldn’t hear what any of these people were
saying; he had to guess. “Maybe the woman wants to join a convent,” he told
Sarah, “and the priest is trying to discourage her.”

“Pardon?”

“He’s  pointing  out  that  sorting  her  husband’s  socks  can  be  equally

whatever-he’d-call-it, equally holy. And the young man in gauze, well . . .”

“The young man in gauze is Ashley Demming,” Sarah said. “You know

Ashley. Peter and Lindy Demming’s son. My, he’s aged poor Lindy twenty
years in the last six months, hasn’t he? I don’t think they’re ever going to get
over this.”

“Ah, well,” Macon said.

Then they were shown to a table.

Sarah ordered something called a White Lady and Macon ordered a sherry.

With their meal they had a bottle of wine. Macon wasn’t used to drinking in
the daytime; he grew a little fuzzy. So did Sarah, evidently, for she drifted off
in the middle of a sentence about upholstery fabrics. She touched his hand,
which was lying on the tablecloth. “We ought to do this more often,” she said.

“Yes, we ought to.”

“You  know  what  I  missed  most  when  we  were  separated?  The  little,

habitual  things.  The  Saturday  errands.  Going  to  Eddie’s  for  coffee  beans.
Even things that used to seem tiresome, like the way you’d take forever in the
hardware store.”

When he folded her hand into a fist it was round, like a bird. It had no sharp

angles.

“I’m not sure if you know this,” she said, “but for a while I was seeing

another man.”

“Well, fine; whatever; eat your salad,” he told her.

“No, I want to say it, Macon. He was just getting over the death of his wife,

and I was getting over things too so of course . . . Well, we started out very
slowly, we started as friends, but then he began talking about getting married
someday. After we’d given ourselves some time, he meant. In fact I think he
really loved me. He took it hard when I told him you’d moved back.”

She looked straight at Macon when she said that, her eyes a sudden blue

flash. He nodded.

“But there were these things I had trouble with,” she said. “I mean good

things;  qualities  I’d  always  wished  for.  He  was  a  very  dashing  driver,  for
instance.  Not  unsafe;  just  dashing.  At  first,  I  liked  that.  Then  bit  by  bit  it
began to feel wrong. ‘Double-check your rearview mirror!’ I wanted to tell
him. ‘Fasten your seatbelt! Inch past stop signs the way my husband does!’
He never examined a restaurant bill before he paid it—shoot, he didn’t even
take his credit card receipt when he walked away from a table—and I thought
of all the times I sat stewing while you totted up every little item. I thought,
‘Why do I miss that? It’s perverse!’ ”

Like “eck cetera,” Macon thought.

Like Muriel saying, “eck cetera.” And Macon wincing.

And  the  emptiness  now,  the  thinness  when  he  heard  it  pronounced

correctly.

He stroked the dimpled peaks that were Sarah’s knuckles.

“Macon, I think that after a certain age people just don’t have a choice,”

Sarah said. “You’re who I’m with. It’s too late for me to change. I’ve used up
too much of my life now.”

You mean to tell me you can just use a person up and then move on? Muriel

had asked.

Evidently so, was the answer. For even if he had stayed with Muriel, then

wouldn’t Sarah have been left behind?

“After a certain age,” he told Sarah, “it seems to me you can only choose

what to lose.”

“What?” she said.

you cut it.”

“Well, of course,” she said.

He supposed she’d always known that.

They  finished  their  meal  but  they  didn’t  order  coffee  because  they were

running  late.  Sarah  had  her  class;  she  was  studying  with  a  sculptor  on
Saturdays. Macon called for the bill and paid it, self-consciously totaling it
first. Then they stepped out into the sunshine. “What a pretty day,” Sarah said.
“It makes me want to play hooky.”

“Why don’t you?” Macon asked. If she didn’t go to class, he wouldn’t have

to work on his guidebook.

But she said, “I can’t disappoint Mr. Armistead.”

They  drove  home,  and  she  changed  into  a  sweat  suit  and  set  off  again.

Macon carried in the fertilizer, which Rose had poured into a bucket. It was
something  shredded  that  had  no  smell—or  only  a  harsh,  chemical  smell,
nothing  like  the  truckloads  of  manure  the  men  used  to  bring  for  his
grandmother’s camellias. He set it on the pantry floor and then he took the
dog out. Then he made himself a cup of coffee to clear his head. He drank it
at the kitchen sink, staring into the yard. The cat rubbed against his ankles and
purred. The clock over the stove ticked steadily. There was no other sound.

When  the  telephone  rang,  he  was  glad.  He  let  it  ring  twice  before  he

answered so as not to seem overeager. Then he picked up the receiver and
said, “Hello?”

“Mr. Leary?”

“Yes!”

“This is Mrs. Morton calling, at Merkle Appliance Store. Are you aware

that the maintenance policy on your hot water heater expires at the end of the
month?”

“No, I hadn’t realized,” Macon said.

renew  it  for  another  two  years  the  cost  of  course  would  be  slightly higher
since your hot water heater is older.”

“Well,  that  makes  sense,”  Macon  said.  “Gosh!  How  old  is that thing  by

now?”

“Let’s see. You purchased it three years ago this July.”

“Well, I’d certainly like to keep the maintenance policy.”

“Wonderful. I’ll send you a new contract then, Mr. Leary, and thank you for

—”

“And would that still include replacement of the tank?” Macon asked.

“Oh, yes. Every part is covered.”

“And they’d still do the yearly checkups.”

“Why, yes.”

“I’ve always liked that. A lot of the other stores don’t offer it; I remember

from when I was shopping around.”

“So I’ll send you the contract, Mr.—”

“But I would have to arrange for the checkup myself, as I recall.”

“Yes, the customer schedules the checkup.”

“Maybe I’ll just schedule it now. Could I do that?”

“That’s  a  whole  different  department,  Mr.  Leary.  I’ll  mail  you  out  the

contract and you can read all about it. Bye bye.”

She hung up.

Macon hung up too.

He thought a while.

He had an urge to go on talking; anyone would do. But he couldn’t think

what number to dial. Finally he called the time lady. She answered before the
first ring was completed. (She had no worries about seeming overeager.) “At
the tone,” she said, “the time will be one . . . forty-nine. And ten seconds.”
What a voice. So melodious, so well modulated. “At the tone the time will be
one . . . forty-nine. And twenty seconds.”

He  listened  for  over  a  minute,  and  then  the  call  was  cut  off.  The  line

clicked and the dial tone started. This made him feel rebuffed, although he
knew he was being foolish. He bent to pat the cat. The cat allowed it briefly
before walking away.

There was nothing to do but sit down at his typewriter.

He was behind schedule with this guidebook. Next week he was supposed

to start on France, and he still hadn’t finished the conclusion to the Canada
book.  He  blamed  it  on  the  season.  Who  could  sit  alone  indoors  when
everything outside was blooming? Travelers should be forewarned, he typed,
but  then  he  fell  to  admiring  a  spray  of  white  azaleas  that  trembled  on  the
ledge of his open window. A bee crawled among the blossoms, buzzing. He
hadn’t known the bees were out yet. Did Muriel know? Would she recall what
a single bee could do to Alexander?

. . . should be forewarned, he read over, but his concentration was shot now.

She was so careless, so unthinking; how could he have put up with her?

That  unsanitary  habit  she  had  of  licking  her  finger  before  she  turned  a
magazine page; her tendency to use the word “enormity” as if it referred to
size.  There  wasn’t  a  chance  in  this  world  that  she’d  remember  about  bee
stings.

He reached for the phone on his desk and dialed her number. “Muriel?”

“What,” she said flatly.

“This is Macon.”

“Yes, I know.”

He paused. He said, “Um, it’s bee season, Muriel.”

“So?”

summer creeps up, and I was wondering if you’d thought about Alexander’s
shots.”

“Don’t you believe I can manage that much for myself?” she screeched.

“Oh. Well.”

“What do you think I am, some sort of ninny? Don’t you think I know the

simplest dumbest thing?”

“Well, I wasn’t sure, you see, that—”

“A fine one you are! Ditch that child without a word of farewell and then

call me up on the telephone to see if I’m raising him right!”

“I just wanted to—”

“Criticize, criticize! Tell me Oodles of Noodles is not a balanced meal and

then go off and desert him and then have the nerve to call me up and tell me
I’m not a good mother!”

“No, wait, Muriel—”

“Dominick is dead,” she said.

“What?”

“Not that you would care. He died.”

Macon  noticed  how  the  sounds  in  the  room  had  stopped.  “Dominick

Saddler?” he asked.

“It was his night to take my car and he went to a party in Cockeysville and

coming home he crashed into a guardrail.”

“Oh, no.”

“The girl he had with him didn’t get so much as a scratch.”

“But Dominick . . .” Macon said, because he didn’t believe it yet.

“But Dominick died instantly.”

“Oh, my Lord.”

wax.

“Want  to  hear  something  awful?  My  car  will  be  just  fine,”  Muriel  said.

“Straighten the front end and it’ll run good as ever.”

Macon rested his head in his hand.

“I have to go now and sit with Mrs. Saddler in the funeral home,” she said.

“Is there something I can do?”

“No,” she said, and then spitefully, “How could you be any help?”

“I could stay with Alexander, maybe.”

“Alexander’s got people of our own to stay with him,” she said.

The doorbell rang, and Edward started barking. Macon heard him in the

front hall.

“Well,  I’ll  say  good-bye  now,”  Muriel  said.  “Sounds  like  you  have

company.”

“Never mind that.”

“I’ll let you get back to your life,” she said. “So long.”

He kept the receiver to his ear for a moment, but she had hung up.

He went out to the hall and tapped his foot at Edward. “Down!” he said.

Edward  lay  down,  the  hump  on  his  back  still  bristling.  Macon  opened  the
door and found a boy with a clipboard.

“Modern Housewares,” the boy told him.

“Oh. The couch.”

While the couch was being unloaded, Macon shut Edward in the kitchen.

Then he returned to the hall and watched the couch lumbering toward him,
borne  by  the  first  boy  and  another,  just  slightly  older,  who  had  an  eagle

tattooed  on  his  forearm.  Macon  thought  of  Dominick  Saddler’s  muscular,
corded arms grappling beneath the hood of Muriel’s car. The first boy spat as
he approached the house, but Macon saw how young and benign his face was.
“Aw, man,” the second one said, stumbling over the doorstep.

Macon said, “That’s all right,” and gave them each a five-dollar bill when

they’d placed the couch where he directed.

After they’d gone he sat down on the couch, which still had some sort of

cellophane covering. He rubbed his hands on his knees. Edward barked in the
kitchen. Helen padded in softly, stopped still, eyed the couch, and continued
through the room with an offended air. Macon went on sitting.

When Ethan died, the police had asked Macon to identify the body. But

Sarah, they suggested, might prefer to wait outside. Yes, Sarah had said; she
would. She had taken a seat on a molded beige chair in the hallway. Then
she’d looked up at Macon and said, “Can you do this?”

“Yes,” he’d told her, evenly. He had felt he was barely breathing; he was

keeping himself very level, with most of the air emptied out of his lungs.

He had followed a man into a room. It was not as bad as it could have been

because  someone  had  folded  a  wad  of  toweling  under  the  back  of  Ethan’s
head to hide the damage. Also it wasn’t Ethan. Not the real Ethan. Odd how
clear it suddenly became, once a person had died, that the body was the very
least of him. This was simply an untenanted shell, although it bore a distant
resemblance to Ethan—the same groove down the upper lip, same cowlick
over the forehead. Macon had a sensation like pressing against a blank wall,
willing with all his being something that could never happen: Please, please
come back inside. But finally he said, “Yes. That is my son.”

He’d returned to Sarah and given her a nod. Sarah had risen and put her

arms around him. Later, when they were alone in their motel, she’d asked him
what he had seen. “Not really much of anything, sweetheart,” he had told her.
She kept at him. Was Ethan . . . well, hurt-looking? Scared? He said, “No, he
was nothing.” He said, “Let me get you some tea.”

“I don’t want tea, I want to hear!” she’d said. “What are you hiding?” He

had the impression she was blaming him for something. Over the next few
weeks it seemed she grew to hold him responsible, like a bearer of bad tidings
—the only one who could say for a fact that Ethan had truly died. She made

several references to Macon’s chilliness, to his appalling calm that night in the
hospital morgue. Twice she expressed some doubt as to whether, in fact, he
was really capable of distinguishing Ethan from some similar boy. In fact, that
may not have been Ethan at all. It may have been somebody else who had
died. She should have ascertained for herself. She was the mother, after all;
she knew her child far better; what did Macon know?

Macon said, “Sarah. Listen. I will tell you as much as I can. He was very

pale and still. You wouldn’t believe how still. He didn’t have any expression.
His eyes were closed. There was nothing bloody or gruesome, just a sense of .
. . futility. I mean I wondered what the purpose had been. His arms were down
by his sides and I thought about last spring when he started lifting weights. I
thought, ‘Is this what it comes to? Lift weights and take vitamins and build
yourself up and then—nothing?’ ”

He hadn’t been prepared for Sarah’s response. “So what are you saying?”

she asked him. “We die in the end, so why bother living in the first place? Is
that what you’re saying?”

“No—” he said.

“It all comes down to a question of economy?” she asked.

“No, Sarah. Wait,” he had said.

Thinking back on that conversation now, he began to believe that people

could, in fact, be used up—could use each other up, could be of no further
help to each other and maybe even do harm to each other. He began to think
that who you are when you’re with somebody may matter more than whether
you love her.

Lord knows how long he sat there.

Edward had been barking in the kitchen all this time, but now he went into

a frenzy. Somebody must have knocked. Macon rose and went to the front of
the house, where he found Julian standing on the porch with a file folder. “Oh.
It’s you,” Macon said.

“What’s all that barking I hear?”

“Don’t worry, he’s shut in the kitchen. Come on in.”

you the material for Paris,” Julian said.

“I see,” Macon said. But he suspected he was really here for some other

reason.  Probably  hoping  to  hurry  the  Canada  book.  “Well,  I  was  just  this
minute touching up my conclusion,” he said, leading the way to the living
room. And then, hastily, “Few details here and there I’m not entirely happy
with; may be a little while yet . . .”

Julian  didn’t  seem  to  be  listening.  He  sat  down  on  the  cellophane  that

covered the couch. He tossed the folder aside and said, “Have you seen Rose
lately?”

“Yes, we were over there just this morning.”

“Do you think she’s not coming back?”

Macon hadn’t expected him to be so direct. In fact, Rose’s situation had

begun to look like one of those permanent irregularities that couples never
refer to. “Oh, well,” he told Julian, “you know how it is. She’s worried about
the boys. They’re eating glop or something.”

“Those are not boys, Macon. They’re men in their forties.”

Macon stroked his chin.

“I’m afraid she’s left me,” Julian said.

“Oh, now, you can’t be sure of that.”

“And not even for a decent reason!” Julian said. “Or for any reason. I mean

our marriage was working out fine; that much I can swear to. But she’d worn
herself a groove or something in that house of hers, and she couldn’t help
swerving back into it. At least, I can’t think of any other explanation.”

“Well, it sounds about right,” Macon told him.

“I  went  to  see  her  two  days  ago,”  Julian  said,  “but  she  was  out.  I  was

standing in the yard wondering where she’d got to when who should drive
past  but  Rose  in  person,  with  her  car  stuffed  full  of  old  ladies.  All  the
windows packed with these little old faces and feathered hats. I shouted after
her, I said, ‘Rose! Wait!’ but she didn’t hear me and she drove on by. Then

just at the last minute she caught sight of me, I guess, and she turned and
stared, and I got the funniest feeling, like the car was driving her—like she
was just gliding past helpless and couldn’t do a thing but send me one long
look before she disappeared.”

Macon said, “Why don’t you give her a job, Julian.”

“Job?”

“Why don’t you show her that office of yours. That filing system you never

get sorted, that secretary chewing her gum and forgetting whose appointment
is when. Don’t you think Rose could take all that in hand?”

“Well, sure, but—”

“Call her up and tell her your business is going to pieces. Ask if she could

just  come  in  and  get  things  organized,  get  things  under  control. Put it that
way. Use those words. Get things under control, tell her. Then sit back and
wait.”

Julian thought that over.

“But of course, what do I know,” Macon said.

“No, you’re right.”

“Now let’s see your folder.”

“You’re absolutely right,” Julian said.

“Look at this!” Macon said. He held up the topmost letter. “Why do you

bother me with this? I just wanted to appraise you folks of a wonderful little
hotel in . . . A man who says he wants to ‘appraise’ us, do you really suppose
he’d know a good hotel when he saw one?”

“Macon,” Julian said.

“The whole damn language has been slaughtered,” Macon said.

“Macon, I know you feel I’m crass and brash.”

This took Macon a moment to answer, only partly because he first heard it

as “crash and brass.” “Oh,” he said. “Why, no, Julian, not at—”

than  anything  else  in  the  world.  It’s  not  just  Rose,  it’s  the  whole  way  she
lives, that house and those turkey dinners and those evening card games. And
I care about you, too, Macon. Why, you’re my best friend! At least, I hope
so.”

“Oh, why, ah—” Macon said.

Julian rose and shook his hand, mangling all the bones inside, and clapped

him on the shoulder and left.

Sarah came home at five-thirty. She found Macon standing at the kitchen

sink with yet another cup of coffee. “Did the couch get here?” she asked him.

“All safe and sound.”

“Oh, good! Let’s see it.”

She  went  into  the  living  room,  leaving  tracks  of  gray  dust  that  Macon

supposed was clay or granite. There was dust in her hair, even. She squinted
at the couch and said, “What do you think?”

“Seems fine to me,” he said.

“Honestly,  Macon.  I  don’t  know  what’s  come  over  you;  you  used  to  be

downright finicky.”

“It’s fine, Sarah. It looks very nice.”

She stripped off the cellophane and stood back, arms full of crackling light.

“We ought to see how it opens out,” she said.

While she was stuffing the cellophane into the wastebasket, Macon pulled

at  the  canvas  strap  that  turned  the  couch  into  a  bed.  It  made  him  think  of
Muriel’s house. The strap’s familiar graininess reminded him of all the times
Muriel’s sister had slept over, and  when  the  mattress  slid  forth  he  saw  the
gleam of Claire’s tangled golden hair.

“Maybe we should put on the sheets, now that we’ve got it open,” Sarah

said.  She  brought  the  sack  of  linens  from  the  front  hall.  With  Macon

positioned at the other side of the couch, she floated a sheet about the mattress
and then bustled up and down, tucking it in. Macon helped, but he wasn’t as
fast  as  Sarah.  The  clay  dust  or  whatever  it  was  had  worked  itself  into  the
seams  of  her  knuckles,  he  saw.  There  was  something  appealing  about  her
small, brown, creased hands against the white percale. He said, “Let’s give
the bed a trial run.”

Sarah didn’t understand at first. She looked up from unfolding the second

sheet and said, “Trial run?”

But she allowed him to take the sheet away and slip her sweat shirt over her

head.

Making love to Sarah was comfortable and soothing. After all their years

together, her body was so well known to him that he couldn’t always tell the
difference between what he was feeling and what she was feeling. But wasn’t
it sad that they hadn’t the slightest uneasiness about anyone walking in on
them? They were so alone. He nestled his face in her warm, dusty neck and
wondered if she shared that feeling as well—if she sensed all the empty air in
the house. But he would never ask.

While Sarah took a shower, he shaved. They were supposed to go to Bob

and Sue Carney’s for supper. When he came out of the bathroom Sarah was
standing in front of the bureau, screwing on little gold earrings. (She was the
only  woman  Macon  knew  of  who  didn’t  have  pierced  ears.)  He  thought
Renoir could have painted her: Sarah in her slip with her head cocked slightly,
plump tanned arms upraised. “I’m really not in the mood to go out,” she said.

“Me neither,” Macon said, opening his closet door.

“I’d be just as content to stay home with a book.”

He pulled a shirt off a hanger.

“Macon,” she said.

“Hmm.”

“You never asked me if I slept with anyone while we were separated.”

Macon paused, halfway into one sleeve.

“Don’t you want to know?” she asked him.

“No,” he said.

He put on the shirt and buttoned the cuffs.

“I would think you’d wonder.”

“Well, I don’t,” he said.

“The trouble with you is, Macon—”

It was astonishing, the instantaneous flare of anger he felt. “Sarah,” he said,

“don’t  even  start.  By  God,  if  that  doesn’t  sum  up  every single thing that’s
wrong with being married. ‘The trouble with you is, Macon—’ and, ‘I know
you better than you know yourself, Macon—’ ”

“The trouble with you is,” she continued steadily, “you think people should

stay in their own sealed packages. You don’t believe in opening up. You don’t
believe in trading back and forth.”

“I certainly don’t,” Macon said, buttoning his shirt front.

“You know what you remind  me of? The telegram Harpo Marx sent  his

brothers: No message. Harpo.”

That made him grin. Sarah said, “You would think it was funny.”

“Well? Isn’t it?”

“It isn’t at all! It’s sad! It’s infuriating! It would be infuriating to go to your

door and sign for that telegram and tear it open and find no message!”

He took a tie from the rack in his closet.

“For  your  information,”  she  said,  “I  didn’t  sleep  with  anyone  the  whole

entire time.”

He felt like she’d won some kind of contest. He pretended he hadn’t heard

her.

Bob and Sue had invited just neighbors—the Bidwells and a new young

couple  Macon  hadn’t  met  before.  Macon  stuck  mainly  to  the  new  couple

because with them, he had no history. When they asked if he had children, he
said, “No.” He asked if they had any children.

“No,” Brad Frederick said.

“Ah.”

Brad’s wife was in transit between girlhood and womanhood. She wore her

stiff navy blue dress and large white shoes as if they belonged to her mother.
Brad  himself  was  still  a  boy.  When  they  all  went  out  back  to  watch  the
barbecue,  Brad  found  a  Frisbee  in  the  bushes  and  flung  it  to  little  Delilah
Carney. His white polo shirt pulled loose from his trousers. Dominick Saddler
came to Macon’s mind like a deep, hard punch. He remembered how, after his
grandfather died, the sight of any old person could make his eyes fill with
tears. Lord, if he wasn’t careful he could end up feeling sorry for the whole
human race. “Throw that thing here,” he said briskly to Delilah, and he set
aside his sherry and held out a hand for the Frisbee. Before long they had a
real game going—all the guests joining in except Brad’s wife, who was still
too close to childhood to risk getting stuck there on a visit back.

At supper, Sue Carney seated Macon at her right. She put a hand on his and

said it was wonderful that he and Sarah had worked things out. “Well, thank
you,” Macon said. “Gosh you make a really good salad, Sue.”

“We all have our ups and downs,” she said. For a second he thought she

meant  her  salads  weren’t  consistently  successful.  “I’ll  be  honest,”  she  told
him, “there’ve been times when I have wondered if Bob and I would make it.
There’s  times  I  feel  we’re  just  hanging  in  there,  you  know  what  I  mean?
Times  I  say,  ‘Hi,  honey,  how  was  your  day?’  but  inside  I’m  feeling  like  a
Gold Star mother.”

Macon turned the stem of his glass and tried to think what step he’d missed

in her logic.

“Like someone who’s suffered a loss in a war,” she said, “and then forever

afterward she has to go on supporting the war; she has to support it louder
than anyone else, because otherwise she’d be admitting the loss was for no
purpose.”

“Um . . .”

“But that’s just a passing mood,” she said.

“Well, naturally,” Macon said.

He and Sarah walked home through air as heavy as water. It was eleven

o’clock  and  the  teenagers  who  had  eleven  o’clock  curfews  were  just
returning. These were the youngest ones, most of them too young to drive,
and  so  they  were  chauffeured  by  grownups.  They  jumped  out  of  cars
shouting, “See you! Thanks! Call me tomorrow, hear?” Keys jingled. Front
doors blinked open and blinked shut again. The cars moved on.

Sarah’s skirt had the same whispery sound as the Tuckers’ lawn sprinkler,

which was still revolving slowly in a patch of ivy.

When they reached the house, Macon let Edward out for one last run. He

tried to get the cat to come in, but she stayed hunched on the kitchen window
ledge glaring down at him, owlish and stubborn; so he let her be. He moved
through the rooms turning off lights. By the time he came upstairs Sarah was
already  in  bed,  propped  against  the  headboard  with  a  glass  of  club  soda.
“Have some,” she said, holding out the glass. But he said no, he was tired;
and he undressed and slid under the covers.

The  tinkling  of  Sarah’s  ice  cubes  took  on  some  meaning  in  his  mind. It

seemed that with every tinkle, he fell deeper. Finally he opened a door and
traveled down an aisle and stepped into the witness stand. They asked him the
simplest  of  questions.  “What  color  were  the  wheels?”  “Who  brought  the
bread?” “Were the shutters closed or open?” He honestly couldn’t remember.
He tried but he couldn’t remember. They took him to the scene of the crime, a
winding road like something in a fairy tale. “Tell us all you know,” they said.
He didn’t know a thing. By now it was clear from their faces that he wasn’t
merely  a  witness;  they  suspected  him.  So  he  racked  his  brain,  but  still  he
came up empty. “You have to see my side of this!” he cried. “I put it all out of
my mind; I worked to put it out! Now I can’t bring it back.”

“Not even to defend yourself?” they asked.

He opened his eyes. The room was dark, and Sarah breathed softly next to

him. The clock radio said it was midnight. The midnight-curfew group was
just returning. Hoots and laughter rang out, tires scraped a curb, and a fanbelt
whinnied as someone struggled to park. Then gradually the neighborhood fell
silent.  It  would  stay  that  way,  Macon  knew,  till  time  for  the  one-o’clock

group. He would first hear faint strands of their music and then more laughter,
car doors slamming, house doors slamming. Porch lights would switch off all
along the street, gradually dimming the ceiling as he watched. In the end, he
would be the only one left awake.

twenty

The plane to New York was a little bird of a thing, but the plane to Paris

was  a  monster,  more  like  a  building.  Inside,  great  crowds  were  cramming
coats  and  bags  into  overhead  compartments,  stuffing  suitcases  under  seats,
arguing,  calling  for  stewardesses.  Babies  were  crying  and  mothers  were
snapping at children. Steerage could not have been worse than this, Macon
felt.

He took his place next to a window and was joined almost immediately by

an elderly couple speaking French. The man sat next to Macon and gave him
a deep, unsmiling nod. Then he said something to his wife, who passed him a
canvas bag. He unzipped it and sorted through its contents. Playing cards, an
entire  tin  of  Band-aids,  a  stapler,  a  hammer,  a  lightbulb  .  .  .  Macon  was
fascinated. He kept sliding his eyes to the right to try and see more. When a
wooden  mousetrap  tumbled  out,  he  began  to  wonder  if  the  man  might  be
some  sort  of  lunatic;  but  of  course  even  a  mousetrap  could  be  explained,
given a little thought. Yes, what he was witnessing, Macon decided, was just
one answer to the traveler’s eternal choice: Which was better? Take all you
own,  and  struggle  to  carry  it?  Or  travel  light,  and  spend  half  your  trip
combing  the  shops  for  what  you’ve  left  behind?  Either  way  had  its
drawbacks.

He glanced up the aisle, where more passengers were arriving. A Japanese

man festooned with cameras, a nun, a young girl in braids. A woman with a
little red vanity kit, her hair a dark tent, her face a thin triangle.

Muriel.

First he felt a kind of flush sweep through him—that flood of warmth that

comes when someone familiar steps forth from a mass of strangers. And then:
Oh, my God, he thought, and he actually looked around for some means of
escape.

She walked toward him in a graceful, picky way, watching her feet, and

then  when  she  was  next  to  him  she  raised  her  eyes  and  he  saw that she’d

known all along he was there. She wore a white suit that turned her into one
of those black-white-and-red women he used to admire on movie screens as a
child.

“I’m going to France,” she told him.

“But you can’t!” he said.

The French couple peered at him curiously, the wife sitting slightly forward

so as to see him better.

More passengers arrived behind Muriel. They muttered and craned around

her, trying to edge past. She stood in the aisle and said, “I’m going to walk
along the Seine.”

The wife made a little O with her mouth.

Then Muriel noticed the people behind her and moved on.

Macon wasn’t even sure it was possible to walk along the Seine.

As soon as the aisle was cleared he half stood and peered over the back of

his  seat,  but  she  had  vanished.  The  French  couple  turned  to  him,  eyes
expectant. Macon settled down again.

Sarah would find out about this. She would just somehow know. She had

always said he had no feelings and this would confirm it—that he could tell
her good-bye so fondly and then fly off to Paris with Muriel.

Well,  it  was  none  of  his  doing  and  he’d  be  damned  if  he’d  assume  the

blame.

By the time it was dark they were airborne, and some kind of order had

emerged inside the plane. It was one of those flights as fully programmed as a
day in kindergarten. Safety film, drinks, headphones, dinner, movie. Macon
turned down all he was offered and studied Julian’s file folder instead. Most
of the material was ridiculous.  Sam’n’Joe’s  Hotel,  indeed!  He  wondered  if
Julian had made it up to tease him.

A woman passed wearing white and he glanced at her surreptitiously, but it

was no one he knew.

one of the lavatories near the rear. Unfortunately other people had had the
same idea. Both doors were locked, and he was forced to wait in the aisle. He
felt someone arrive at his side. He looked and there was Muriel.

He said, “Muriel, what in—”

“You don’t own this plane!” she told him.

Heads turned.

“And you don’t own Paris, either,” she said.

She was standing very close to him, face to face. She gave off a scent that

barely eluded him; it was not just her perfume, no, but her house; yes, that
was it—the smell inside her closet, the tantalizing unsettling smell of other
people’s  belongings.  Macon  pressed  his  left  temple.  He  said,  “I  don’t
understand any of this. I don’t see how you knew which flight to take, even.”

“I called your travel agent.”

“Becky? You called Becky? What must she have thought?”

“She thought I was your editorial assistant.”

“And how could you afford the fare?”

“Oh, some I borrowed from Bernice and then some from my sister, she had

this money she earned at . . . and I did everything economy-style, I took a
train to New York instead of a plane—”

“Well, that wasn’t smart,” Macon said. “It probably cost you the same, in

the long run, or maybe even more.”

“No, what I did was—”

“But the point is, why, Muriel? Why are you doing this?”

She lifted her chin. (Her chin could get so sharp, sometimes.) “Because I

felt like it,” she said.

“You felt like spending five days alone in a Paris hotel? That’s what it will

be, Muriel.”

“You need to have me around,” she said.

“Need you!”

“You were falling to pieces before you had me.”

A  latch  clicked  and  a  man  stepped  out  of  one  of  the  lavatories.  Macon

stepped inside and locked the door quickly behind him.

He wished he could just vanish. If there had been a window, he believed he

would have pried it open and jumped—not because he wanted to commit any
act so definite as suicide but because he wanted to erase it all; oh, Lord, just
go back and erase all the untidy, unthinking things he’d been responsible for
in his life.

If she had read even one of his guidebooks, she’d have known not to travel

in white.

When he emerged, she was gone. He went back to his seat. The French

couple drew in their knees to let him slide past; they were transfixed by the
movie screen, where a blonde wearing nothing but a bath towel was pounding
on a front door. Macon got out Miss MacIntosh just for something to pin his
mind  to.  It  didn’t  work,  though.  Words  flowed  across  his  vision  in  a  thin,
transparent stream, meaningless. He was conscious only of Muriel somewhere
behind him. He felt wired to her. He caught himself wondering what she made
of this—the darkened plane, the invisible ocean beneath her, the murmur of
half-real voices all around her. When he turned off his reading light and shut
his eyes, he imagined he could sense that she was still awake. It was a feeling
in the air—something alert, tense, almost vibrating.

By morning he was resolved. He used a different lavatory, toward the front.

For once he was glad to be in such a large crowd. When they landed he was
almost  the  first  one  off,  and  he  cleared  Immigration  quickly  and  darted
through  the  airport.  The  airport  was  Charles  de  Gaulle,  with  its  space-age
pods of seats. Muriel would be thoroughly lost. He exchanged his money in
haste. Muriel must still be at Baggage Claims. He knew she would carry lots
of baggage.

There was no question of waiting for a bus. He hailed a cab and sped off,

feeling  wonderfully  lightweight  all  of  a  sudden.  The  tangle  of  silvery
highways struck him as actually pleasant. The city of Paris, when he entered,
was as wide and pale and luminous as a cool gray stare, and he admired the
haze that hung over it. His cab raced down misty boulevards, turned onto a
cobbled  street,  lurched  to  a  stop.  Macon  sifted  through  his  envelopes  of
money.

Not till he was entering his hotel did he recall that his travel agent knew

exactly where he was staying.

It wasn’t a very luxurious hotel—a small brown place where mechanical

things tended to go wrong, as Macon had discovered on past visits. This time,
according to a sign in the lobby, one of the two elevators was not marching.
The bellman led him into the other,  then  up  to  the  third  floor  and  down  a
carpeted corridor. He flung  open  a  door,  loudly  exclaiming  in  French  as  if
overcome by such magnificence. (A bed, a bureau, a chair, an antique T V.)
Macon burrowed into one of his envelopes. “Thank you,” he said, offering his
tip.

Once he was alone, he unpacked and he hung up his suit coat, then he went

to the window. He stood looking out over the roof-tops; the dust on the glass
made them seem removed in time, part of some other age.

How would she manage alone in such an unaccustomed place?

He thought of the way she navigated a row of thrift shops—the way she

cruised  a  street,  deft  and  purposeful,  greeting  passersby  by  name.  And  the
errands  she  took  the  neighbors  on:  chauffeuring  Mr.  Manion  to  the
reflexologist  who  dissolved  his  kidney  stones  by  massaging  his  toes;  Mr.
Runkle  to  the  astrologer  who  told  him  when  he’d  win  the  million-dollar
lottery; Mrs. Carpaccio to a certain tiny grocery near Johns Hopkins where
the sausages hung from the ceiling like strips of flypaper. The places Muriel
knew!

But she didn’t know Paris. And she was entirely on her own. She didn’t

even have a credit card, probably carried very little money, might not have
known to change what she did carry into francs. Might be wandering helpless,
penniless, unable to speak a word of the language.

By the time he heard her knock, he was so relieved that he rushed to open

the door.

window. “I have a better view, though. Just think, we’re really in Paris! The
bus driver said it might rain but I told him I didn’t care. Rain or shine, it’s
Paris.”

“How did you know what bus to take?” he asked her.

“I brought along your guidebook.”

She patted her pocket.

“Want  to  go  to  Chez  Billy  for  breakfast?”  she  asked.  “That’s  what your

book recommends.”

“No, I don’t. I can’t,” he said. “You’d better leave, Muriel.”

“Oh. Okay,” she said. She left.

Sometimes  she  would  do  that.  She’d  press  in  till  he  felt  trapped,  then

suddenly draw back. It was like a tug of war where the other person all at
once drops the rope, Macon thought. You fall flat on the ground; you’re so
unprepared. You’re so empty-feeling.

He  decided  to  call  Sarah.  At  home  it  was  barely  dawn,  but  it  seemed

important to get in touch with her. He went over to the phone on the bureau
and picked up the receiver. It was dead. He pressed the button a few times.
Typical. He dropped his key in his pocket and went down to the lobby.

The lobby telephone was housed in an ancient wooden booth, very genteel.

There was a red leather bench to sit on. Macon hunched over and listened to
the ringing at the other end, far away. “Hello?” Sarah said.

“Sarah?”

“Who is this?”

“It’s Macon.”

“Macon?”

She took a moment to absorb that. “Macon, where are you?” she asked.

“What’s the matter?”

“Nothing’s the matter. I just felt like talking to you.”

“What? What time is it?”

“I  know  it’s  early  and  I’m  sorry  I  woke  you  but  I  wanted  to  hear  your

voice.”

“There’s some kind of static on the line,” she said.

“It’s clear at this end.”

“You sound so thin.”

“That’s because it’s an overseas call,” he said. “How’s the weather there?”

“How’s who?”

“The weather! Is it sunny?”

“I don’t know. All the shades are down. I don’t think it’s even light yet.”

“Will you be gardening today?”

“What?”

“Gardening!”

“Well, I hadn’t thought. It depends on whether it’s sunny, I guess.”

“I wish I were there,” he said. “I could help you.”

“You hate to garden!”

“Yes, but . . .”

“Macon, are you all right?”

“Yes, I’m fine,” he said.

“How was the flight over?”

“Oh, the flight, well, goodness! Well, I don’t know; I guess I was so busy

reading that I didn’t really notice,” he said.

“Reading?” she said. Then she said, “Maybe you’ve got jet lag.”

“Yes, maybe I do,” he told her.

down the sidewalk, scribbling in the margins of his guidebook. He did not go
near  Chez  Billy.  It’s  puzzling,  he  wrote,  how  the  French  are  so  tender  in
preparing their food but so rough in servingit. In the window of a restaurant,
a black cat closed her eyes at him. She seemed to be gloating. She was so
much at home, so sure of her place.

Displays of crushed velvet, scattered with solid gold chains and watches no

thicker than poker chips. Women dressed as if for the stage: elaborate hairdos,
brilliant makeup, strangely shaped trousers that had nothing to do with the
human  anatomy.  Old  ladies  in  little-girl  ruffles  and  white  tights  and  Mary
Janes. Macon descended the steps to the Métro; he ostentatiously dropped his
canceled ticket into  a  tiny  receptacle  marked  PAPIERS.  Then  he  turned  to
glare at all the others who flung their tickets on the floor, and as he turned he
thought he saw Muriel, her white face glimmering in the crowd, but he must
have been mistaken.

In the evening he returned to his hotel—footsore, leg muscles aching—and

collapsed on his bed. Not two minutes later he heard a knock. He groaned and
rose  to  open  the  door.  Muriel  stood  there  with  her  arms  full  of  clothes.
“Look,” she said, pushing past him. “See what-all I bought.” She dumped the
clothes on the bed. She held them up one by one: a shiny black cape, a pair of
brown  jodhpurs,  a  bouffant  red  net  evening  dress  sprinkled  with  different-
sized  disks  of  glass  like  the  reflectors  on  bicycles.  “Have  you  lost  your
senses?” Macon asked. “What must all this have cost?”

“Nothing!  Or  next  to  nothing,”  she  said.  “I  found  a  place  that’s  like the

granddaddy of all garage sales. A whole city of garage sales! This French girl
was telling me about it where I went to have my breakfast. I complimented
her hat and she told me where she got it. I took a subway train to find it; your
book’s really helpful about the subways; and sure enough there’s everything
there. Tools and gadgets too, Macon. Old car batteries, fuse boxes . . . and if
you say something’s too expensive, they’ll bring the price down till it’s cheap
enough. I saw this leather coat I would have killed for but that never did get
cheap enough; the man wanted thirty-five francs.”

“Thirty-five  francs!”  Macon  said.  “I  don’t  know  how  you  could  get any

cheaper than that. Thirty-five francs is four dollars or so.”

“Oh, really? I thought francs and dollars were about the same.”

“Lord, no.”

“Well, then these things were super bargains,” Muriel said. “Maybe I’ll try

again tomorrow.”

“But how will you get all this stuff on the plane?”

“Oh, I’ll figure out some way. Now let me take it back to my room so we

can go eat.”

He stiffened. He said, “No, I can’t.”

“What harm would it do to eat supper with me, Macon? I’m someone from

home! You’ve run into me in Paris! Can’t we have a bite together?”

When she put it that way, it seemed so simple.

They went to the Burger King on the Champs-Elysées; Macon wanted to

recheck the place anyhow. He ordered two ‘Woppaires.’ “Careful,” he warned
Muriel, “these are not the Whoppers you’re used to. You’ll want to scrape the
extra pickle and onion off.” But Muriel, after trying hers, said she liked it the
way it was. She sat next to him on a hard little seat and licked her fingers. Her
shoulders touched his. He was amazed, all at once, that she really was here.

“Who’s looking after Alexander?” he asked her.

“Oh, different people.”

“What different people? I hope you haven’t just parked him, Muriel. You

know how insecure a child that age can—”

“Relax. He’s fine. Claire has him in the daytime and then Bernice comes in

and cooks supper and any time Claire has a date with the General the twins
will keep him or if the twins can’t do it then the General says Alexander can .
. .”

Singleton  Street  rose  up  in  front  of  Macon’s  eyes,  all  its  color  and

confusion.

After supper Muriel suggested they take a walk, but Macon said he was

tired. He was exhausted, in fact. They returned to their hotel. In the elevator
Muriel asked, “Can I come to your room a while? My TV set only gets snow.”

“We’d better say good night,” he told her.

“Can’t I just come in and keep you company?”

“No, Muriel.”

“We wouldn’t have to do anything,” she said.

The elevator stopped at his floor. He said, “Muriel. Don’t you understand

my position? I’ve been married to her forever. Longer than you’ve been alive,
almost. I can’t change now. Don’t you see?”

She just stood in her corner of the elevator with her eyes on his face. All

her makeup had worn off and she looked young and sad and defenseless.

“Good night,” he said.

He got out, and the elevator door slid shut.

He  went  to  bed  immediately  but  couldn’t  sleep  after  all,  and  ended  up

switching  on  the  T  V.  They  were  showing  an  American  western,  dubbed.
Rangy cowboys spoke a fluid, intricate French. Disaster followed disaster—
tornadoes,  Indians,  droughts,  stampedes.  The  hero  stuck  in  there,  though.
Macon had long ago noticed that all adventure movies had the same moral:
Perseverance  pays.  Just  once  he’d  like  to  see  a  hero  like  himself—not  a
quitter, but a man who did face facts and give up gracefully when pushing
onward was foolish.

He rose and switched the set off again. He tossed and turned a long time

before he slept.

Large  hotels,  small  hotels,  dingy  hotels  with  their  wallpaper  flaking,

streamlined  hotels  with  king-sized  American  beds  and  Formica-topped
American  bureaus.  Dim  café  windows  with  the  proprietors  displayed  like
mannequins, clasping their hands behind their backs and rocking from heel to
toe. Don’t fall for prix fixe. It’s like a mother saying, “Eat, eat”—all those
courses forced on you . . .

crossing the final intersection when he saw Muriel up ahead. Her arms were
full  of  parcels,  her  hair  was  flying  out,  and  her  spike-heeled  shoes  were
clipping along. “Muriel!” he called. She turned and he ran to catch up with
her.

“Oh, Macon, I’ve had the nicest day,” she said. “I met these people from

Dijon and we ended up eating lunch together and they told me about . . . Here,
can you take some of these? I think I overbought.”

He accepted several of her parcels—crumpled, used-looking bags stuffed

with  fabrics.  He  helped  her  carry  them  into  the  hotel  and  up  to  her  room,
which  seemed  even  smaller  than  it  was  because  of  the  piles  of  clothing
everywhere. She dumped her burdens on the bed and said, “Let me show you,
now, where is it . . .”

“What’s  this?”  Macon  asked.  He  was  referring  to  an  oddly  shaped  soft

drink bottle on the bureau.

“Oh, I found that in the fridge,” she said. “They have this little fridge in the

bathroom, Macon, and it’s just full of soft drinks, and wine and liquor too.”

“Muriel, don’t you know those cost an arm and a leg? They’ll put it on

your  bill,  don’t  you  know  that?  Now,  that  fridge  is  called  a  mini-bar,  and
here’s what you use it for: In the morning, when they wheel in the continental
breakfast, they bring a pitcher of hot milk for some strange reason and you
just take that pitcher and stick it in the mini-bar so later you can have a glass
of milk. Otherwise, Lord knows how you’d get your calcium in this country.
And don’t eat the rolls; you know that, don’t you? Don’t start your day with
carbohydrates, especially under the strain of travel. You’re better off taking
the trouble to go to some café for eggs.”

“Eggs, ugh,” Muriel said. She was stepping out of her skirt and trying on

another—one  she’d  just  bought,  with  long  fringes  at  the  hem.  “I  like  the
rolls,” she said. “And I like the soft drinks, too.”

“Well,  I  don’t  know  how  you  can  say  that,”  he  said.  He  picked  up  the

bottle. “Just look at the brand name: Pschitt. If that’s not the most suspicious-
sounding . . . and there’s another kind called Yukkie, Yukkery, something like
that—”

“That’s  my  favorite.  I  already  finished  those  off,”  Muriel  said.  She was

pinning her hair on top of her head. “Where we having dinner tonight?”

“Well, I don’t know. I guess it’s time to try someplace fancy.”

“Oh, goody!”

He moved what appeared to be an antique satin bedjacket and sat down to

watch her put her lipstick on.

They went to a restaurant lit with candles, although it wasn’t quite dark yet,

and were seated next to a tall, curtained window. The only other customers
were American—four American business types, plainly enjoying themselves
over four large platters of snails. (Sometimes Macon wondered if there really
was any call for his books.)

“Now, what do I want?” Muriel said, studying the menu. “If I ask them

what something is in English, do you think they’ll be able to tell me?”

“Oh, you don’t have to bother doing that,” Macon said. “Just order Salade

Niçoise.”

“Order what?”

“I thought you said you’d read my guide. Salade Niçoise. It’s the one safe

dish. I’ve been all through France eating nothing but, day in and day out.”

“Well, that sounds kind of monotonous,” Muriel said.

“No, no. Some places put green beans in it, some don’t. And at least it’s

low-cholesterol, which is more than you can say for—”

“I think I’ll just ask the waiter,” Muriel told him. She laid her menu aside.

“Do you suppose they call them French windows in France?”

“What? I wouldn’t have the slightest idea,” he said. He looked toward the

window,  which  was  paned  with  deep,  greenish  glass.  Outside,  in  an
overgrown courtyard, a pitted stone cherub was cavorting in a fountain.

The  waiter  spoke  more  English  than  Macon  had  expected.  He  directed

Muriel  toward  a  cream  of  sorrel  soup  and  a  special  kind  of  fish.  Macon
decided to go for the soup as well, rather than sit idle while Muriel had hers.

“There,” Muriel said. “Wasn’t he nice?”

“That was a rare exception,” Macon said.

something’s  crawling  up  my  leg,”  she  said.  “Where  you  going  tomorrow,
Macon?”

“Out of Paris altogether. Tomorrow I start on the other cities.”

“You’re leaving me here alone?”

“This  is  high-speed  travel,  Muriel.  Not  fun.  I’m  waking  up  at  crack  of

dawn.”

“Take me anyway.”

“I can’t.”

“I haven’t been sleeping so good,” she said. “I get bad dreams.”

“Well, then you certainly don’t want to go gallivanting off to more new

places.”

“Last night I dreamed about Dominick,” she said. She leaned toward him

across the table, two spots of color high on her cheek-bones. “I dreamed he
was mad at me.”

“Mad?”

“He wouldn’t talk to me. Wouldn’t look at me. Kept kicking something on

the sidewalk. Turned out he was mad because I wouldn’t let him use the car
anymore. I said, ‘Dommie, you’re dead. You can’t use the car. I’d let you if I
could, believe me.’ ”

“Well, don’t worry about it,” Macon said. “It was just a travel dream.”

“I’m scared it means he’s mad for real. Off wherever he’s at.”

“He’s not,” Macon told her. “He wouldn’t be mad.”

“I’m scared he is.”

“He’s happy as a lark.”

“You really think so?”

own. And it’s always spring and the sun is always shining and there’s always
some blonde in a halter top to help him with the buffing.”

“You really think that might be true?” Muriel asked.

“Yes,  I  do,”  he  said.  And  the  funny  thing  was  that  he  did,  just  at  that

moment. He had a vivid image of Dominick in a sunlit meadow, a chamois
skin in his hand and a big, pleased, cocky grin on his face.

She said at the end of the evening that she wished he would come to her

room—couldn’t he? to guard against bad dreams?— and he said no and told
her good night. And then he felt how she drew at him, pulling deep strings
from inside him, when the elevator creaked away with her.

In his sleep he conceived a plan to take her along tomorrow. What harm

would it do? It was only a day trip. Over and over in his scattered, fitful sleep
he picked up his phone and dialed her room. It was a surprise when he woke
in the morning, to find he hadn’t invited her yet.

He sat up and reached for the phone and remembered only then—with the

numb receiver pressed to his ear—that the phone was out of order and he’d
forgotten  to  report  it.  He  wondered  if  it  were  something  he  could  repair
himself,  a  cord  unplugged  or  something.  He  rose  and  peered  behind  the
bureau. He stooped to hunt for a jack of some kind.

And his back went out.

No doubt about it—that little twang! in a muscle to the left of his spine.

The pain was so sharp it snagged his breath. Then it faded. Maybe it was gone
for good. He straightened, a minimal movement. But it was enough to bring
the pain zinging in again.

He lowered himself to the bed inch by inch. The hard part was getting his

feet up, but he set his face and accomplished that too. Then he lay pondering
what to do next.

Once he had had this happen and the pain had vanished in five minutes and

not returned. It had been only a freaky thing like a foot cramp.

But then, once he’d stayed flat in bed for two weeks and crept around like a

very old man for another month after that.

He  lay  rearranging  his  agenda  in  his  mind.  If  he  canceled  one  trip,

postponed another . . . Yes, possibly what he’d planned for the next three days
could be squeezed into two instead. If only he were able to get around by
tomorrow.

He must have gone back to sleep. He didn’t know for how long. He woke

to a knock and thought it was breakfast, though he’d left instructions for none
to be brought today. But then he heard Muriel. “Macon? You in there?” She
was hoping he hadn’t left Paris yet; she was here to beg again to go with him.
He knew that as clearly as if she’d announced it. He was grateful now for the
spasm that  gripped  him  as  he  turned  away  from  her  voice.  Somehow  that
short sleep had cleared his head, and he saw that he’d come perilously close
to falling in with her again. Falling in: That was the way he put it to himself.
What  luck  that  his  back  had  stopped  him.  Another  minute—another  few
seconds—and he might have been lost.

He dropped into sleep so suddenly that he didn’t even hear her walk away.

When he woke again it was much later, he felt, although he didn’t want to

go through the contortions necessary to look at his watch. A wheeled cart was
passing his room and he heard voices— hotel employees, probably—laughing
in the corridor. They must be so comfortable here; they must all know each
other so well. There was a knock on his door, then a jingle of keys. A small,
pale  chambermaid  poked  her  face  in  and  said,  “Pardon,  monsieur.”  She
started to retreat but then stopped and asked him something in French, and he
gestured toward his back and winced. “Ah,” she said, entering, and she said
something else very rapidly. (She would be telling him about her back.) He
said, “If you would just help me up, please,” for he had decided he had no
choice but to go call Julian. She seemed to understand what he meant and
came over to the bed. He turned onto his stomach and then struggled up on
one arm—the only way he could manage to rise without excruciating pain.
The chambermaid took his other arm and braced herself beneath his weight as
he stood. She was much shorter than he, and pretty in a fragile, meek way. He
was conscious of his unshaven face and his rumpled pajamas. “My jacket,” he
told her, and they proceeded haltingly to the chair where his suit jacket hung.
She  draped  it  around  his  shoulders.  Then  he  said,  “Downstairs?  To  the

telephone?”  She  looked  over  at  the  phone  on  the  bureau,  but  he  made  a
negative  movement  with  the  flat  of  his  hand—a  gesture  that  cost  him.  He
grimaced. She clucked her tongue and led him out into the corridor.

Walking  was  not  particularly  difficult;  he  felt  hardly  a  twinge.  But  the

elevator  jerked  agonizingly  and  there  was  no  way  he  could  predict  it.  The
chambermaid  uttered  soft  sounds  of  sympathy.  When  they  arrived  in  the
lobby she led him to the telephone booth and started to seat him, but he said,
“No, no, standing’s easier. Thanks.” She backed out and left him there. He
saw her talking to the clerk at the desk, shaking her head in pity; the clerk
shook his head, too.

Macon worried Julian wouldn’t be in his office yet, and he didn’t know his

home  number.  But  the  phone  was  answered  on  the  very  first  ring.
“Businessman’s  Press.”  A  woman’s  voice,  confusingly  familiar,  threading
beneath the hiss of long distance.

“Um—” he said. “This is Macon Leary. To whom am I—”

“Oh, Macon.”

“Rose?”

“Yes, it’s me.”

“What are you doing there?”

“I work here now.”

“Oh, I see.”

“I’m putting things in order. You wouldn’t believe the state this place is in.”

“Rose, my back has gone out on me,” Macon said.

“Oh, no, of all times! Are you still in Paris?”

“Yes, but I was just about to start my day trips and there are all these plans

I have to change—appointments, travel reservations— and  no  telephone  in
my room. So I was wondering if Julian could do it from his end. Maybe he
could get the reservations from Becky and—”

“I’ll take care of it myself,” Rose said. “Don’t you bother with a thing.”

“I don’t know when I’m going to get to the other cities, tell him. I don’t

have any idea when I’ll be—”

“We’ll work it out. Have you seen a doctor?”

“Doctors don’t help. Just bed rest.”

“Well, rest then, Macon.”

He gave her the name of his hotel, and she repeated it briskly and then told

him to get on back to bed.

When he emerged from the phone booth the chambermaid had a bellboy

there  to  help  him,  and  between  the  two  of  them  he  made  it  to  his  room
without much trouble. They were very solicitous. They seemed anxious about
leaving him alone, but he assured them he would be all right.

All that afternoon he lay in bed, rising twice to go to the bathroom and

once  to  get  some  milk  from  the  mini-bar.  He  wasn’t  really  hungry.  He
watched the brown flowers on the wallpaper; he thought he had never known
a hotel room so intimately. The side of the bureau next to the bed had a streak
in the woodgrain that looked like a bony man in a hat.

At suppertime he took a small bottle of wine from the mini-bar and inched

himself into the armchair to drink it. Even the motion of raising the bottle to
his lips caused him pain, but he thought the wine would help him sleep. While
he was sitting there the chambermaid knocked and let herself in. She asked
him, evidently, whether he wanted anything to eat, but he thanked her and
said no. She must have been on her way home; she carried a battered little
pocketbook.

Later there was another knock, after he had dragged himself back to bed,

and Muriel said, “Macon? Macon?” He kept absolutely silent. She went away.

The air grew fuzzy and then dark. The man on the side of the bureau faded.

Footsteps crossed the floor above him.

He  had  often  wondered  how  many  people  died  in  hotels.  The  law  of

averages said some would, right? And some who had no close relatives—say
one of his readers, a salesman without a family— well, what was done about

such people? Was there some kind of potters’ field for unknown travelers?

switching from one to the other meant waking up, consciously deciding to
undertake the ordeal, plotting his strategy. Then he returned to a fretful, semi-
consciousness.

He dreamed he was seated on an airplane next to a woman dressed all in

gray,  a  very  narrow,  starched,  thin-lipped  woman,  and  he  tried  to  hold
perfectly still because he sensed she disapproved of movement. It was a rule
of hers; he knew that somehow. But he grew more and more uncomfortable,
and so he decided to confront her. He said, “Ma’am?” She turned her eyes on
him, mild, mournful eyes under finely arched brows. “Miss MacIntosh!” he
said. He woke in a spasm of pain. He felt as if a tiny, cruel hand had snatched
up part of his back and wrung it out.

When the waiter brought his breakfast in the morning, the  chambermaid

came along. She must keep grueling hours, Macon thought. But he was glad
to  see  her.  She  and  the  waiter  fussed  over  him,  mixing  his  hot  milk  and
coffee, and the waiter helped him into the bathroom while the chambermaid
changed  his  sheets.  He  thanked  them  over  and  over;  “Merci,”  he  said
clumsily. He wished he knew the French for “I don’t know why you’re being
so kind.” After they left he ate all of his rolls, which the chambermaid had
thoughtfully buttered and spread with strawberry jam. Then he turned on the
TV for company and got back in bed.

He was sorry about the TV when he heard the knock on the door, because

he thought it was Muriel and she would hear. But it seemed early for Muriel
to be awake. And then a key turned in the lock, and in walked Sarah.

He said, “Sarah?”

She wore a beige suit, and she carried two pieces of matched luggage, and

she brought a kind of breeze of efficiency with her. “Now, everything’s taken
care of,” she told him. “I’m going to make your day trips for you.” She set
down  her  suitcases,  kissed  his  forehead,  and  picked  up  a  glass  from  his
breakfast table. As she went off to the bathroom she said, “We’ve rescheduled
the other cities and I start on them tomorrow.”

“But how did you get here so soon?” he asked.

to  thank  for  that,”  she  said,  switching  off  the  T  V.  “Rose  is just a wizard.
She’s revamped that entire office. Here’s a pill from Dr. Levitt.”

“You know I don’t take pills,” he said.

“This time you do,” she told him. She helped him rise up on one elbow.

“You’re going to sleep as much as you can, so your back has a chance to heal.
Swallow.”

The pill was tiny and very bitter. He could taste it even after he’d lain down

again.

“Is the pain bad?” she asked him.

“Kind of.”

“How’ve you been getting your meals?”

“Well, breakfast comes anyway, of course. That’s about it.”

“I’ll ask about room service,” she told him, picking up the phone. “Since

I’ll be gone so . . . What’s the matter with the telephone?”

“It’s dead.”

“I’ll go tell the desk. Can I bring you anything while I’m out?”

“No, thank you.”

When she left, he almost wondered if he’d imagined her. Except that her

suitcases sat next to his bed, sleek and creamy—the same ones she kept on the
closet shelf at home.

He thought about Muriel, about what would happen if she were to knock

now. Then he thought about two nights ago, or was it three, when she had
strolled in with all her purchases. He wondered if she’d left any traces. A belt
lost  under  the  bed,  a  glass  disk  fallen  off  her  cocktail  dress?  He  began  to
worry about it seriously. It seemed to him almost inevitable; of course she’d
left something. The only question was, what. And where.

Groaning, he rolled over and pushed himself upright. He struggled off the

bed and then sagged to his knees to peer beneath it. There didn’t seem to be
anything there. He got to his feet and tilted over the armchair to feel around
the  edges  of  the  cushion.  Nothing  there  either.  Actually  she  hadn’t  gone
anywhere  near  the  armchair,  to  his  recollection;  nor  had  she  gone  to  the
bureau, but even so he slid out the drawers one by one to make sure. His own
belongings— just a handful—occupied one drawer. The others were empty,
but  the  second  one  down  had  a  sprinkling  of  pink  face  powder.  It  wasn’t
Muriel’s, of course, but it looked like hers. He decided to get rid of it. He
tottered  into  the  bathroom,  dampened  a  towel,  and  came  back  to  swab  the
drawer clean. Then he saw that the towel had developed a large pink smear, as
if a woman wearing too much makeup had wiped her face with it. He folded
the towel so the smear was concealed and laid it in the back of the drawer.
No, too incriminating. He took it out again and hid it beneath the armchair
cushion. That didn’t seem right either. Finally he went into the bathroom and
washed the towel by hand, scrubbing it with a bar of soap till the spot was
completely gone. The pain in his back was constant, and beads of sweat stood
out on his forehead. At some point he decided he was acting very peculiar; in
fact it must be the pill; and he dropped the wet towel in a heap on the floor
and crawled back into bed. He fell asleep at once. It wasn’t a normal sleep; it
was a kind of burial.

He knew Sarah came in but he couldn’t wake up to greet her. And he knew

she left again. He heard someone knock, he heard lunch being brought, he
heard the chambermaid whisper, “Monsieur?” He remained in his stupor. The
pain  was  muffled  but  still  present—just  covered  up,  he  thought;  the  pill
worked like those inferior room sprays in advertisements, the ones that only
mask  offending  odors.  Then  Sarah  came  back  for  the  second  time  and  he
opened his eyes. She was standing over the bed with a glass of water. “How
do you feel?” she asked him.

“Okay,” he said.

“Here’s your next pill.”

“Sarah, those things are deadly.”

“They help, don’t they?”

“They knock me out,” he said. But he took the pill.

She sat down on the edge of the mattress, careful not to jar him. She still

wore her suit and looked freshly groomed, although she must be bushed by
now. “Macon,” she said quietly.

“Hmm.”

“I saw that woman friend of yours.”

He tensed. His back seized up.

“She saw me, too,” she said. “She seemed very surprised.”

“Sarah, this is not the way it looks,” he told her.

“What is it then, Macon? I’d like to hear.”

“She came over on her own. I didn’t even know till just before the plane

took off, I swear it! She followed me. I told her I didn’t want her along. I told
her it was no use.”

She kept looking at him. “You didn’t know till just before the plane took

off,” she said.

“I swear it,” he said.

He wished he hadn’t taken the pill. He felt he wasn’t in full possession of

his faculties.

“Do you believe me?” he asked her.

“Yes, I believe you,” she said, and then she got up and started uncovering

his lunch dishes.

He  spent  the  afternoon  in  another  stupor,  but  he  was  aware  of  the

chambermaid’s checking on him twice, and he was almost fully awake when
Sarah  came  in  with  a  bag  of  groceries.  “I  thought  I’d  make  you  supper
myself,” she told him. “Fresh fruit and things; you always complain you don’t
get enough fresh fruit when you travel.”

“That’s very nice of you, Sarah.”

He worked himself around till he was half sitting, propped against a pillow.

Sarah was unwrapping cheeses. “The phone’s fixed,” she said. “You’ll be able

to call for your meals and all while I’m out. Then I was thinking: After I’ve
finished the trips, if your back is better, maybe we could do a little sightseeing
on  our  own.  Take  some  time  for  ourselves,  since  we’re  here.  Visit  a  few
museums and such.”

“Fine,” he said.

“Have a second honeymoon, sort of.”

“Wonderful.”

He  watched  her  set  the  cheeses  on  a  flattened  paper  bag.  “We’ll  change

your  plane  ticket  for  a  later  date,”  she  said.  “You’re  reserved  to  leave
tomorrow morning; no chance you could manage that. I left my own ticket
open-ended. Julian said I should. Did I tell you where Julian is living?”

“No, where?”

“He’s moved in with Rose and your brothers.”

“He’s what?”

“I  took  Edward  over  to  Rose’s  to  stay  while  I  was  gone,  and  there was

Julian. He sleeps in Rose’s bedroom; he’s started playing Vaccination every
night after supper.”

“Well, I’ll be damned,” Macon said.

“Have some cheese.”

He accepted a slice, changing position as little as possible.

“Funny, sometimes Rose reminds me of a flounder,” Sarah said. “Not in

looks, of course . . . She’s lain on the ocean floor so long, one eye has moved
to the other side of her head.”

He  stopped  chewing  and  stared  at  her.  She  was  pouring  two  glasses  of

cloudy brown liquid. “Apple cider,” she told him. “I figured you shouldn’t
drink wine with those pills.”

“Oh. Right,” he said.

She passed him a glass. “A toast to our second honeymoon,” she said.

“Our second honeymoon,” he echoed.

“Twenty-one more years together.”

“Twenty-one!” he said. It sounded like such a lot.

“Or would you say twenty.”

“No, it’s twenty-one, all right. We were married in nineteen—”

“I mean because we skipped this past year.”

“Oh,” he said. “No, it would still be twenty-one.”

“You think so?”

“I consider last year just another stage in our marriage,” he said. “Don’t

worry: It’s twenty-one.”

She clinked her glass against his.

Their main dish was a potted meat that she spread on French bread, and

their dessert was fruit. She washed the fruit in the bathroom, returning with
handfuls  of  peaches  and  strawberries;  and  meanwhile  she  kept  up  a  cozy
patter that made him feel he was home again. “Did I mention we had a letter
from the Averys? They might be passing through Baltimore later this summer.
Oh, and the termite man came.”

“Ah.”

“He couldn’t find anything wrong, he said.”

“Well, that’s a relief.”

“And  I’ve  almost  finished  my  sculpture  and  Mr.  Armistead  says  it’s  the

best thing I’ve done.”

“Good for you,” Macon said.

“Oh,”  she  said,  folding  the  last  paper  bag,  “I  know  you  don’t  think  my

sculptures are important, but—”

“Who says I don’t?” he asked.

“I know you think I’m just this middle-aged lady playing artist—”

“Who says?”

“Oh, I know what you think! You don’t have to pretend with me.”

Macon started to slump against his pillow, but was brought up short by a

muscle spasm.

She cut a peach into sections, and then she sat on the bed and passed him

one of the sections. She said, “Macon. Just tell me this. Was the little boy the
attraction?”

“Huh?”

“Was the fact that she had a child what attracted you to that woman?”

He said, “Sarah, I swear to you, I had no idea she was planning to follow

me over here.”

“Yes,  I  realize  that,”  she  said,  “but  I  was  wondering  about  the  child

question.”

“What child question?”

“I was remembering the time you said we should have another baby.”

“Oh, well, that was just—I don’t know what that was,” he said. He handed

her back the peach; he wasn’t hungry anymore.

“I was thinking maybe you were right,” Sarah said.

“What? No, Sarah; Lord, that was a terrible idea.”

“Oh,  I  know  it’s  scary,”  she  told  him.  “I  admit  I’d  be  scared  to  have

another.”

“Exactly,” Macon said. “We’re too old.”

“No, I’m talking about the, you know, the world we’d be bringing him into.

So much evil and danger. I admit it: I’d be frantic any time we let him out on

the street.”

Macon  saw  Singleton  Street  in  his  mind,  small  and  distant  like  Julian’s

little  green  map  of  Hawaii  and  full  of  gaily  drawn  people  scrubbing  their
stoops, tinkering with their cars, splashing under fire hydrants.

“Oh, well, you’re right,” he said. “Though really it’s kind of . . . heartening,

isn’t it? How most human beings do try. How they try to be as responsible and
kind as they can manage.”

“Are you saying yes, we can have a baby?” Sarah asked.

Macon swallowed. He said, “Well, no. It seems to me we’re past the time

for that, Sarah.”

“So,” she said, “her little boy wasn’t the reason.”

“Look, it’s over with. Can’t we close the lid on it? I don’t cross-examine

you, do I?”

“But I don’t have someone following me to Paris!” she said.

“And what if you did? Do you think I’d hold you to blame if someone just

climbed on a plane without your knowing?”

“Before it left the ground,” she said.

“Pardon? Well, I should hope so!”

“Before it left the ground, you saw her. You could have walked up to her

and said, ‘No. Get off. Go this minute. I want nothing more to do with you
and I never want to see you again.’ ”

“You think I own the airline, Sarah?”

“You  could  have  stopped  her  if  you’d  really  wanted,”  Sarah  said.  “You

could have taken steps.”

And then she rose and began to clear away their supper.

She gave him his next pill, but he let it stay in his fist for a while because

he didn’t want to risk moving. He lay with his eyes closed, listening to Sarah

undress. She ran water in the bathroom, slipped the chain on the door, turned
off  the lights. When she got into bed  it stabbed  his back, even though she
settled carefully, but he gave no sign. He heard her breathing soften almost at
once. She must have been exhausted.

He reflected that he had not taken steps very often in his life, come to think

of it. Really never. His marriage, his two jobs, his time with Muriel, his return
to  Sarah—all  seemed  to  have  simply  befallen  him.  He  couldn’t  think  of  a
single major act he had managed of his own accord.

Was it too late now to begin?

Was there any way he could learn to do things differently?

He opened his hand and let the pill fall among the bedclothes. It was going

to be a restless, uncomfortable night, but anything was better than floating off
on that stupor again.

In the morning, he negotiated the journey out of bed and into the bathroom.

He shaved and dressed, spending long minutes on each task. Creeping around
laboriously,  he  packed  his  bag.  The  heaviest  thing  he  packed  was  Miss
MacIntosh, My Darling, and after thinking that over a while, he took it out
again and set it on the bureau.

Sarah said, “Macon?”

“Sarah. I’m glad you’re awake,” he said.

“What are you doing?”

“I’m packing to leave.”

She sat up. Her face was creased down one side.

“But  what  about  your  back?”  she  asked.  “And  I’ve  got  all  those

appointments! And we were going to take a second honeymoon!”

“Sweetheart,” he said. He lowered himself cautiously till he was sitting on

the bed. He picked up her hand. It stayed lifeless while she watched his face.

“You’re going back to that woman,” she said.

“Yes, I am,” he said.

“Why, Macon?”

“I just decided, Sarah. I thought about it most of last night. It wasn’t easy.

It’s not the easy way out, believe me.”

She sat staring at him. She wore no expression.

“Well, I don’t want to miss the plane,” he said.

He  inched  to  a  standing  position  and  hobbled  into  the  bathroom  for  his

shaving kit.

“You know what this is? It’s all due to that pill!” Sarah called after him.

“You said yourself it knocks you out!”

“I didn’t take the pill.”

There was a silence.

She said, “Macon? Are you just trying to get even with me for the time I

left you?”

He returned with the shaving kit and said, “No, sweetheart.”

“I suppose you realize what your life is going to be like,” she said. She

climbed out of bed. She stood next to him in her nightgown, hugging her bare
arms. “You’ll be one of those mismatched couples no one invites to parties.
No one will know what to make of you. People will wonder whenever they
meet  you,  ‘My  God,  what  does  he  see  in  her?  Why  choose  someone  so
inappropriate? It’s grotesque, how does he put up with her?’ And her friends
will no doubt be asking the same about you.”

“That’s probably true,” Macon said. He felt a mild stirring of interest; he

saw now how such couples evolved. They were not, as he’d always supposed,
the  result  of  some  ludicrous  lack  of  perception,  but  had  come  together  for
reasons that the rest of the world would never guess.

He zipped his overnight bag.

“I’m sorry, Sarah. I didn’t want to decide this,” he said.

against  his  shoulder.  It  struck  him  that  even  this  moment  was  just  another
stage  in  their  marriage.  There  would  probably  be  still  other  stages  in  their
thirtieth year, fortieth year—forever, no matter what separate paths they chose
to travel.

He didn’t take the elevator; he felt he couldn’t bear the willynilliness of it.

He  went  down  the  stairs  instead.  He  managed  the  front  door  by  backing
through it, stiffly.

Out  on  the  street  he  found  the  usual  bustle  of  a  weekday  morning—

shopgirls hurrying past, men with briefcases. No taxis in sight. He set off for
the next block, where his chances were better. Walking was fairly easy but
carrying his bag was torture. Lightweight though it was, it twisted his back
out of line. He tried it in his left hand, then his right. And after all, what was
inside it? Pajamas, a change of underwear, emergency supplies he never used
. . . He stepped over to a building, a bank or office building with a low stone
curb running around its base. He set the bag on the curb and hurried on.

Up ahead he saw a taxi with a boy just stepping out of it, but he discovered

too  late  that  hailing  it  was  going  to  be  a  problem.  Raising  either  arm  was
impossible.  So  he  was  forced  to  run  in  an  absurd,  scuttling  fashion  while
shouting  bits  of  French  he’d  never  said  aloud  before: “Attendez!  Attendez,
monsieur!”

The taxi was already moving off and the boy was just slipping his wallet

back into his jeans, but then he looked up and saw Macon. He acted fast; he
spun  and  called  out  something  and  the  taxi  braked.  “Merci  beaucoup,”
Macon panted and the boy, who had a sweet, pure face and shaggy yellow
hair, opened the taxi door for him and gently assisted him in. “Oof!” Macon
said, seized by a spasm. The boy shut the door and then, to Macon’s surprise,
lifted a hand in a formal good-bye. The taxi moved off. Macon told the driver
where he was going and sank back into his seat. He patted his inside pocket,
checking passport, plane ticket. He unfolded his handkerchief and wiped his
forehead.

Evidently his sense of direction had failed him, as usual. The driver was

making  a  U-turn,  heading  back  where  Macon  had  just  come  from.  They
passed the boy once again. He had a jaunty, stiff-legged way of walking that
seemed familiar.

person?

He would have turned to give the boy another look, except that he couldn’t

manage the movement.

The  taxi  bounced  over  the  cobblestones.  The  driver  whistled  a  tune

between his teeth. Macon found that bracing himself on one arm protected his
back somewhat from the jolts. Every now and then, though, a pothole caught
him off guard.

And  if  dead  people  aged,  wouldn’t  it  be  a  comfort?  To  think  of  Ethan

growing up in heaven—fourteen years old now instead of twelve—eased the
grief  a  little.  Oh,  it  was  their  immunity  to  time  that  made  the  dead  so
heartbreaking.  (Look  at  the  husband  who  dies  young,  the  wife  aging  on
without  him;  how  sad  to  imagine  the  husband  coming  back  to  find  her  so
changed.)  Macon  gazed  out  the  cab  window,  considering  the  notion  in  his
mind. He felt a kind of inner rush, a racing forward. The real adventure, he
thought, is the flow of time; it’s as much adventure as anyone could wish.
And if he pictured Ethan still part of that flow—in some other place, however
unreachable—he believed he might be able to bear it after all.

The  taxi  passed  Macon’s  hotel—brown  and  tidy,  strangely  home-like.  A

man was just emerging with a small anxious dog on his arm. And there on the
curb stood Muriel, surrounded by suitcases and string-handled shopping bags
and  cardboard  cartons  overflowing  with  red  velvet.  She  was  frantically
waving down taxis—first one ahead, then Macon’s own. “Arrêtez!”  Macon
cried to the driver. The taxi lurched to a halt. A sudden flash of sunlight hit
the  windshield,  and  spangles  flew  across  the  glass.  The  spangles  were  old
water  spots,  or  maybe  the  markings  of  leaves,  but  for  a  moment  Macon
thought  they  were  something  else.  They  were  so  bright  and  festive,  for  a
moment he thought they were confetti.

The Accidental Tourist

ANNE TYLER

A Reader’s Guide

A Conversation with Anne Tyler

Q: Can Macon be described as an accidental tourist in his own life? Can we all?

AT: Certainly Macon can, but I wouldn’t say that accidental tourism is a universal condition. Some
people seem to have very meticulous itineraries for their lives.

Q: Ethan’s tragic death looms over all of the characters in this novel. Why are so many characters
angry at, or at least disapproving of, Macon for his manner of grieving?

AT: Because to someone not very perceptive, Macon’s manner of grieving doesn’t really look like grief.

Q: Is it simply inertia that prevents Macon from dealing with Edward’s misbehavior for so long?
Why does he find the process of training Edward to be so difficult and painful?

AT: While I was writing this book, I wondered the same thing. I asked myself, Why do I seem to be
going on and on about this ridiculous dog, who has nothing to do with the main plot? Then when Muriel
asked Macon, “Do you want a dog who’s angry all the time?” (or words to that effect), I thought, Oh!
Of course! That’s exactly what he wants! This dog is angry for him!

Q: Would you agree that Edward’s reactions to Muriel mirror Macon’s to some degree?

AT: Oh, I think Edward is way ahead of Macon in his reactions.

Q: What does Singleton Street represent for Macon?

AT: Otherness. The opposite of his own narrow self.

Q: Macon, like many characters in this novel, feels trapped by other people’s perceptions of him.
Does Muriel see Macon as he truly is, or as someone he wants to be?

A Reader’s Guide

AT: Neither, really. She sees the person she herself wants him to be; but since she’s an accepting and
non-judgmental type, who he really is turns out to be all right with her.

Q: Macon’s friends and family are mostly disapproving of “that Muriel person.” Is it simply a
matter of class prejudice?

AT: Class for the most part; but also personality style. To a family so undemonstrative, Muriel would be
a bit daunting.

Q: If not for Muriel’s persistence, would Macon have made a different choice?

AT: Yes, certainly. Muriel is a pretty powerful force.

Q: In The Accidental Tourist, you write of Macon: “He began to think that who you are when
you’re with somebody may matter more than whether you love her.” Ultimately, does Macon love
Muriel?

AT: I think he really does.

Q: Macon remembers finding a magazine quiz in which Sarah answered that she loved her spouse
more  than  he  loved  her.  How  accuratewas  her  answer?  Was  Sarah  correct  in  writing  that  she
loved Macon more than he loved her?

AT: Her answer reflected her limited understanding of Macon, I believe, more than the true situation.

Q:  Is  Macon  being  honest  when  he  tells  Sarah  that  Muriel’s  young  son  did  not  draw  him  to
Muriel?

AT: I did mean that to be his honest answer. If anything, her son was a negative quality—at least in the
beginning.

Q:  This  novel  explores  the  vexed  nature  of  romantic  relationships.  Do  the  couples  that  have
formed over the course of this novel stand a chance?

AT: Yes, of course they do. These are flawed relationships—as all are—and they require compromise—
as all do. But at least one member of each couple has found a way to make those compromises.

Q: The Learys are at once remarkable comic figures and deeply human characters. How difficult
is it to achieve this delicate balance and neitherveer into parody nor a humorless character study?

AT: In early drafts, when I didn’t know the Learys all that well, I did veer over one or the other edge
from time to time. But the most rewarding experience in writing a novel is the gradually deepening
understanding of its characters; and once I knew the Learys better, the balance came naturally.

Q: Is the Leary siblings’ geographic dyslexia treatable?

AT: Speaking from personal experience, I would say absolutely not. It’s biological.

Q: Will Rose and Julian’s relationship survive the transplant to the Leary homestead?

AT: Yes, Julian will become a funny sort of quasi-Leary, purely out of love for Rose, and a helpful
liaison to the outside world.

Q: Is there any hope for Porter or Charles?

AT: Well, not much hope they’ll truly change, of course. But they seem contented as they are.

Q: Do you have the narrative fairly well mapped out before you begin writing a novel, or do you
find yourself taking detours? For instance, did you know all along how this novel would end?

AT: I map my books out in a very cursory way—say, about a page for each novel—and I always think I
know how they’ll end, but I’m almost always wrong. In the case of The Accidental Tourist, I actually
began a chapter in which Macon stayed with Sarah. But it didn’t work; something in the characters
themselves persuaded me the ending would have to be different.

Q: Do your characters ever surprise you?

AT: All the time.

Q: What do you most enjoy about your life as writer? And least?

AT: The best part about being a writer is the experience of learning, gradually, what it is like to be a
person completely different from me. The hard part is that for years on end, I am working in a vacuum.
Is this a story anyone will believe? Anyone will care about? I won’t know that until I’m finished.

Q: If you could invite any writer, living or dead, to attend a reading group meeting to discuss their
work, who would it be? What would you most like to learn from her or him?

A: I would rather read the writer, not hear him or her talk. I know that from being a writer myself: what
I have to say, I have already said through my stories.

Q: What are you reading right now?

AT:  Lately,  I  have  fallen  in  love  with  Ann  Patchett’s  Bel Canto.  It’s  a  mesmerizing  novel,  moving,
amusing, and enlightening. And I am telling everyone to watch for Mary Lawson’s Crow Lake, a soon-
to-be-published novel about a family of orphans in the northernmost reaches of Canada.

Reading Group Questions and Topics for Discussion

Would you characterize yourself as an accidental tourist in your own
life? Do you know anyone you might consider an accidental tourist?

What kind of traveler are you? Would you find Macon’s guides helpful?

Macon has come up with a technique to avoid contact with others on
airplanes. Public transportation can lead to an awkward intimacy with
strangers. How do you handle such situations? Does Macon’s approach
work for you?

There was no memorial service for Ethan in Baltimore. Whose idea do
you think that was? Do you agree with Garner, Macon’s neighbor, who
chastises him for not having one?

Macon’s style of mourning offends many people, including his wife. Do
their complaints have any merit?

According to Macon, “it was their immunity to time that made the dead
so heartbreaking.” Discuss the meaning of this statement.

What is the significance of Macon and Susan’s conversation about
Ethan? What do they each gain from it?

Why doesn’t Macon repair his house after it is seriously damaged by
water?

The loss of a child can be devastating to a marriage. How do you think a
relationship survives such a cataclysmic event?

Macon believes he became a different person for Sarah. How much do
we change in the name of love? How much should we change?

Do you think Sarah ever really understood Macon?

Macon realizes that while he and Sarah tried too hard to have a child,
once they had Ethan, it made their differences that much more glaring.

Do you think they would have remained together if Ethan had lived?

Macon remarks that he just didn’t want to get involved with Muriel and
her messy life, but somehow he has. Does this ring true? Did Muriel
simply overwhelm him?

Initially, Macon and Alexander are very wary of each other. Discuss the
nature of Macon and Alexander’s relationship and what they have to
offer each other.

Rose decides to love Julian despite her brothers’ obvious disapproval.
What do you think drives her to make such a difficult decision?

Julian describes Rose’s retreat back to the Leary house as though she’d
worn herself a groove or something in that house of hers, and she
couldn’t help swerving back into it. Do you think Rose has made a
mistake?

Do you find yourself as fascinated by the Learys as Julian is? Why or
why not?

When Rose declares that she and her siblings are the most conventional
people she knows, Macon cannot explain why he disagrees with her. Can
you?

Do you think the Learys will ever purchase an answering machine? Do
you think Julian might slip one in the house?

Do you or does anyone you know suffer from geographic dyslexia?

Why does Sarah return to Macon? Do you think they could have worked
it out or had they used each other up?

Macon does not think he has ever taken steps in his life and acted. Do
you think this insight is accurate, or is it a product of the helplessness he
feels in the wake of his son’s death?

Do you think Macon has made the right decision in the end? Will the
relationship work out?

Do you think any of the couples in this novel stand a chance?

In the end, Macon comforts himself with the thought that perhaps the
dead age, and are part of the flow of time. Does this idea comfort you?

If you could learn more about a particular character in this novel, which
would it be and why?

Would your group recommend this novel to other reading groups? How
does this novel compare to other works the group has read?

About the Author

Anne Tyler was born in Minneapolis in 1941 but grew up in Raleigh, North
Carolina. She graduated at nineteen from Duke University and went on to do

graduate work in Russian studies at Columbia University. Anne Tyler’s

eleventh novel, Breathing Lessons, was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 1988.
She is a member of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.

She lives in Baltimore.

 

 

From the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of Breathing Lessons

ANNE TYLER

Her new novel

THE AMATEUR MARRIAGE

A rich and compelling novel, spanning
three generations, about a mismatched

marriage—and its consequences.

Available in bookstores everywhere

PLEASE VISIT www.aaknopf.com

By Anne Tyler

If Morning Ever Comes

The Tin Can Tree

A Slipping-Down Life

The Clock Winder

Celestial Navigation

Searching for Caleb

Earthly Possessions

Morgan’s Passing

Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant

The Accidental Tourist

Breathing Lessons

Saint Maybe

Ladder of Years

A Patchwork Planet

Back When We Were Grownups

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are either the product of the author’s

imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business

establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

A Ballantine Book

Published by The Random House Publishing Group

Copyright © 1985 by Anne Tyler Modarressi

Reading group guide copyright © 2002 by Anne Tyler Modarressi and The Random House Publishing

Group, a division of Random House, Inc.

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, an imprint of 

The Random House Publishing Group, a division of 

Random House, Inc., New York.

Ballantine and colophon are registered 

trademarks of Random House, Inc.

Reader’s Circle and colophon are trademarks 

of Random House, Inc.

www.thereaderscircle.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: 2002090731

This edition published by arrangement with Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.

First Ballantine Books Edition: May 2002

www.randomhouse.com

eISBN: 978-0-307-41683-4

v3.0

