THE PILGRIM’S 

PROGRESS

© 2014 Desiring God

Published by Desiring God 
Post Office Box 2901 
Minneapolis, MN 55402 
www.desiringGod.org

Permissions

You are permitted and encouraged to reproduce and distribute this 
material in any format provided that you do not alter the wording in 
any way and do not charge a fee beyond the cost of reproduction. For 
web posting, a link to this document on our website is preferred. Any 
exceptions to the above must be approved by Desiring God.

Please include the following statement on any distributed copy: 
© Desiring God. Website: desiringGod.org

Cover Design: Peter Voth

Typesetting: Ryan Leichty

Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the ESV® 
Bible (The Holy Bible, English Standard Version ®), copyright © 2001 
by Crossway. Used by permission. All rights reserved. All emphases in 
Scripture quotations have been added by the author or editor.

Material for this book has been taken from The Hidden Smile of God 
by John Piper, © 2001. Used by permission of Crossway, a publishing 
ministry of Good News Publishers, Wheaton, IL 60187, www.crossway.
org. For more biographies from John Piper, see Crossway’s series, The 
Swans Are Not Silent.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword by Leland Ryken I

To Live Upon God Who Is Invisible: The Life 
of John Bunyan by John Piper IX

Preface by John Newton (1776) XXXIX

The Pilgrim’s Progress

The Jail 1

Conviction of the Necessity of Flying 5

The Slough of Despond 9

Evangelist Findeth Christian Under Mount Sinai, 
and Looketh Severely Upon Him 19

Proceeds to the Cross 39

Christian Saluted by the Three Shining Ones 41

The Hill of Difficulty 45

The Valley of Humiliation 61

Combat with Appolyon 65

Christian Overtakes Faithful 75

Christian Has Another Companion 111

The Delectable Mountains 135

Christian, Hopeful, and the Shepherds 139

Adventures on the Enchanted Ground 155

Ministering Spirits Meet Christian and Hopeful 183

The Conclusion 187

Scripture Index 189

Acknowledgements  197

I

FOREWORD

Leland Ryken

The book that became known to posterity as The Pilgrim’s 
Progress is a Christian classic whose importance is impossi-
ble to overstate. For more than two centuries after its first 
publication, The Pilgrim’s Progress ranked just behind the 
King James Bible as the most important book in evangelical 
Protestant households. The book has been translated into 
some two hundred languages, including eighty in Africa. 
Any book that has achieved such popularity has a very large 
claim to our attention.

Facts of Publication

The Pilgrim’s Progress actually has two publication dates, cor-
responding to the two books that comprise it. The first book 
was published in 1678 and bore the title The Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress:  From This World to That Which Is to Come, Delivered 
Under the Similitude of a Dream. It tells the story of the spir-
itual journey of the protagonist named Christian from the 
City of Destruction to the Celestial City (meaning heaven).

Book II was published six years later as part of an old 

artistic tradition known as a “companion piece.” It tells the 
story of the same journey, this time undertaken by Chris-
tian’s wife, Christiana, and their four sons. The two books 

II

Foreword

continued to be published separately until 1728, not being 
published as a combined book until forty-four years after 
the first appearance of Book II. This new edition from De-
siring God resembles the early publication strategy of The 
Pilgrim’s Progress by releasing Book I individually.

Additionally, in order to provide more insight into the 

life of Bunyan, this new edition features an introduction by 
John Piper that traces the character of Bunyan’s faith in the 
midst of suffering. This new edition also includes a preface 
written by John Newton in 1776. Newton’s preface accom-
panied several publications of The Pilgrim’s Progress in the 
eighteenth century, but has virtually been non-existent for 
the last century. The recovery of this preface and incorpora-
tion into the present volume sets it apart from other editions 
currently in print.

Author and Composition

The author of The Pilgrim’s Progress is John Bunyan (1628–
1688), one of the most famous preachers in English history 
as well as a popular British author. Externally Bunyan led a 
difficult life. He was poor from childhood. He married his 
first wife at the age of twenty, and Bunyan once claimed that 
when the couple married they had not “so much household 
stuff as a dish or spoon betwixt us both.” By Bunyan’s own 
account, he led a wild youth and was converted at the ap-
proximate age of thirty. 

Therein lay a difficulty. Religious tolerance had not yet ar-
rived on the scene, and only one state-sanctioned Christian 
group enjoyed freedom of worship. In Bunyan’s day that 
group was the Church of England, also known as the An-
glican Church. Bunyan was a Baptist preacher who refused 
to stop preaching without an official license. As a result, 

III

Foreword

Bunyan found himself in and out of prison over a period of 
twelve years (1659–1671). While imprisoned, he eked out a 
living for his family by making shoe laces.

Much great literature and art have been produced in 

the crucible of suffering, and The Pilgrim’s Progress is such 
a work. The consensus of scholarly opinion is that Bunyan 
wrote Book I of his masterpiece while in prison. (He is also 
reputed to have secretly carved a flute from a table leg in the 
prison.)

Bunyan was emphatically not a one-book author. De-

spite his chaotic and stressful external life (including the 
death of his first wife when he was approximately thirty and 
the blindness of his daughter Mary), Bunyan was a prolific 
author. He published over thirty books, mainly theological 
in nature.

Bunyan was also one of the most famous preachers of 

his day (which partly explains why the civil and Anglican 
officials singled him our for particularly harsh treatment). 
After his release from prison, Bunyan sometimes traveled 
all the way from his native Bedford to London to preach (a 
two-day journey in Bunyan’s day). On one recorded event, 
1,200 Londoners turned out on a cold winter morning to 
hear Bunyan preach.

Bunyan’s death at the age of sixty was caused by pneumo-

nia resulting from exposure to drenching rain while Bunyan 
made a two-day trip on horseback to heal relations between 
a father and his estranged son. Bunyan was buried in the 
famous nonconformist cemetery in London called Bunhill 
Fields. The monument on his tomb is today the most prom-
inent site in the cemetery. On its side is the carved figure of 
a person carrying a burden on his back, a picture of the most 
famous moment in The Pilgrim’s Progress where Christian 
loses his burden of sin at the foot of the cross.

Foreword

The Pilgrim’s Progress As a Literary Classic

The Pilgrim’s Progress is a paradox. On the one hand it is a 
work of folk literature. This makes it a book of the common 
people, just like the Bible. Through the ages, parents have 
read The Pilgrim’s Progress to their children much as they 
read Bible stories to them. Reinforcing this identity of being 
a book for ordinary people rather than literary scholars is the 
religious nature of the book. It is a book of edification first, 
and beyond that it offers whatever entertainment value we 
might wish to find in it.

But that is only half of the picture. The Pilgrim’s Progress 

is also a complex work of literature, appealing to people of 
literary sophistication as well as the common person. Per-
haps no other literary masterpiece incorporates as many dif-
ferent literary genres as The Pilgrim’s Progress.

The primary genre is narrative or story. This means that 

readers need to be ready to respond to the three narrative 
ingredients of setting, characters, and plot. Most storytellers 
excel in one of these or perhaps two, but we would be hard 
pressed to decide which of the three Bunyan is best at. He 
is good at all three. His ability to describe scenes cannot be 
surpassed. But just as we think that this is Bunyan’s specialty, 
we remember his skill with character creation and remind 
ourselves that few authors have given us a greater gallery of 
memorable characters than Bunyan. And then we further 
recall that Bunyan’s skill with plot is breathtaking.

What kind of story is The Pilgrim’s Progress? The list of 

subgenres is nearly endless.  The main storyline is a travel 
story, in the specific form of a perilous journey (surely one 
of the five greatest story motifs of all time). The virtues of 
the travel story are one of the leading appeals of The Pil-
grim’s Progress, as we are entranced by strange settings re-
mote from our daily routine (though somehow familiar), 

V

Foreword

encounters with unusual characters, and narrow escapes in 
abundance.

Many travel stories are quest stories, and this is true of 

The Pilgrim’s Progress. The protagonists of the two books—
Christian in Book I and Christiana in Book II—leave the 
City of Destruction in a search to find the Celestial City. 
The story of their quests is an adventure story par excellence. 
Danger and suspense greet us at every turn.

An Allegory

Much more could be said about the story qualities of The 
Pilgrim’s Progress, but the really essential final thing that we 
need to note is that Bunyan’s story is an allegory. An allegor-
ical story is one in which the literal, physical level of action 
is intended as a picture of something else. Double meaning 
is at the heart of allegory. The details in an allegorical story 
stand for something else. In The Pilgrim’s Progress, for exam-
ple, a slough or bog (modeled, incidentally, on a notorious 
bog on the outskirts of Bunyan’s home town) stands for spir-
itual despair over one’s lost state.

There is a right way and wrong way to deal with the al-

legorical aspect of The Pilgrim’s Progress. The wrong way is to 
slight the literal, physical level of action on the premise that 
the religious meaning is what really matters. The right way 
is to abandon ourselves to the story qualities of the work 
and let the second level of understanding grow out of that 
narrative experience. Giant Despair first of all needs to be a 
terrifying giant in our imagination, and then he becomes a 
picture of psychological and theological realities.

Allegory can easily become reductionistic, but this need 

not happen. For example, a character with the allegorical 
name of Talkative is immediately recognizable to us: he is 
someone who talks too much. But the Bunyan magic is such 

Foreword

that Talkative is simultaneously (a) a personality type, (b) 
a social type (the overly talkative person who quickly be-
comes a social pest), and (c) a spiritual reality (someone who 
substitutes talk for genuine faith and Christian action). The 
allegorical names of Bunyan’s characters should not lull us 
into thinking that they are one-dimensional.

The Religious Vision of The Pilgrim’s Progress

Bunyan was a belated Puritan. Puritanism was the English 
branch of the Protestant Reformation.  At every point in 
The Pilgrim’s Progress we can see Puritan inclinations of 
mind and belief. The preoccupations of the book are Puri-
tan—the Bible as the authority for religious belief (the book 
is a virtual mosaic of Bible verses); human sinfulness as the 
natural state of all people; salvation of one’s soul as the one 
thing needful; the substitutionary atonement of Jesus as the 
basis for the forgiveness of sin; heaven as the ultimate long-
ing of every person.

But the picture is a little more complex than simply call-

ing Bunyan a Puritan. When Bunyan was finally freed from 
imprisonment, he became a Baptist preacher. If Bunyan 
were living today, we would call him an evangelical Chris-
tian, but more specifically a Reformed Calvinistic Baptist.

Tips for Reading Bunyan’s Masterpiece

The Pilgrim’s Progress is initially a difficult book for mod-
ern readers. The first obstacle is the archaic language of the 
book. The language of The Pilgrim’s Progress is decidedly 
old-fashioned (like the King James Bible, which it more 
closely resembles than any other English-language literary 
work). The solution to the problem is to accept the archaic 
language as a feature of the book and enjoy it as part of 

Foreword

its arresting strangeness (a phrase that comes from J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s endorsement of fantasy and fairy tales as literary 
genres).

Secondly, the taste for allegory is today somewhat out 

of vogue (though it has always remained part of the folk 
imagination). We will fare just fine with Bunyan’s allegorical 
story if we read it as a travel story and adventure story first, 
and then allow the theological and moral level to emerge as 
an extra source of enjoyment and edification.

Some people read The Pilgrim’s Progress for edification 

and receive literary enjoyment as a byproduct. Others sit 
down to read it for its narrative qualities and gain edification 
as a byproduct. It makes absolutely no difference which of 
those two models is true for a given reader. What matters 
is that once we start to read the story we open ourselves to 
both aspects of the book—its literary qualities (which exist 
in abundance) and its religious meanings. The Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress is a “crossover” book that appears in lists of both literary 
classics and religious (or even devotional) classics. It is an 
expansive book that holds up under virtually any approach 
that we bring to it. It is a book for all readers and all tastes.

TO LIVE UPON GOD 
WHO IS INVISIBLE

The Life of John Bunyan

by John Piper

In 1672, about fifty miles northwest of London in Bedford, 
John Bunyan was released from twelve years of imprison-
ment. He was forty-four years old. Just before his release he 
updated his spiritual autobiography called Grace Abounding 
to the Chief of Sinners. He looked back over the hardships of 
the last twelve years and wrote about how he was enabled by 
God to survive and even flourish in the Bedford jail. One 
of his comments gives me the title for this short biography.

He quotes 2 Corinthians 1:9 where Paul says, “We had 

this sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust 
in ourselves, but in God that raiseth the dead.” Bunyan 
writes,

By this scripture I was made to see that if ever I would 
suffer rightly, I must first pass a sentence of death upon 
every thing that can be properly called a thing of this life, 
even to reckon myself, my wife, my children, my health, 
my enjoyment, and all, as dead to me, and myself as dead 
to them. The second was, to live upon God who is invis-
ible, as Paul said in another place; the way not to faint, is 
to “look not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are tem-
poral, but the things which are not seen are eternal.”

The phrase that I have fastened on for the title, and focus of 
this study of Bunyan, is the phrase, “to live upon God who 
is invisible.” He discovered that if we are to suffer rightly 
we must die not only to sin, but to the innocent and pre-
cious things of this world, including family and freedom. 

We must “live upon God who is invisible.” Everything else 
in the world we must count as dead to us and we to it. That 
was Bunyan’s passion from the time of his conversion as a 
young married man to the day of his death when he was 
sixty years old.

Suffering: Normal and Essential

In all my reading of Bunyan, what has gripped me most is 
his suffering and how he responded to it—what it made of 
him, and what it might make of us. All of us come to our 
tasks with a history and many predispositions. I come to 
John Bunyan with a growing sense that suffering is a normal, 
useful, essential, and God-ordained element in Christian life 
and ministry—not only for the sake of weaning us off the 
world and teaching us to live on God, as 2 Corinthians 1:9 
says, but also to make pastors who are more able to love the 
church (2 Tim 2:10; Col 1:24) and make missionaries who 
are more able to reach the nations (Matt 10:16–28), so that 
they can learn to live on God and not the bread that perishes 
(John 6:27).

I see in the world today and what I see in the Bible. As you 
read this book, there are sure to be flashpoints of suffering 
somewhere in the world. The followers of Jesus will suffer 
as long as the world stays and the word of Jesus stands. “In 
the world you have tribulation” (John 16:33). “Behold, I 
send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves” (Matt 10:16). 
Today churches are being burned in some countries, and 
Christians are being killed by anti-Christian mobs. Chris-
tians endure systematic starvation and enslavement. China 
perpetuates its official repression of religious freedom and 
lengthy imprisonments. India, with its one billion people 
and unparalleled diversity, heaves with tensions between 

XIII

major religions and extremist violence. There are consistent 
reports that thousands of Christians across the world die as 
martyrs every year. 

And as I come to Bunyan’s life and suffering, I see in the 

Bible that “through many tribulations we must enter the 
kingdom” (Acts 14:22); and the promise of Jesus, “If they 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you” (John 15:20); 
and the warning from Peter “not to be surprised at the fiery 
ordeal among you, which comes upon you for your testing, 
as though some strange thing were happening to you” (1 
Pet 4:12); and the utter realism of Paul that we who “have 
the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within 
ourselves, waiting eagerly for our adoption as sons, the re-
demption of our body” (Rom 8:23); and the reminder that 
“our outer nature is wasting away” (2 Cor 4:16); and that the 
whole creation “was subjected to futility” (Rom 8:20).

As I look around me in the world and in the word of 

God, my own sense is that what we need from Bunyan right 
now is a glimpse into how he suffered and how he learned 
to “live on God that is invisible.” I want that for myself, my 
family, and my church—and I want that for all who read 
this book. Nothing glorifies God more than when we main-
tain our stability and even our joy having lost everything but 
God (Hab 3:17–18). That day is coming for each of us, and 
we do well to get ready.

The Times of the Redwoods

John Bunyan was born in Elstow, about a mile south of Bed-
ford, England on November 30, 1628, the same year that 
William Laud became the bishop of London during the 
reign of king Charles I. That connection with Bishop Laud 
is important because you can’t understand the sufferings of 

Bunyan apart from the religious and political times in which 
he lived.

In those days there were tremendous conflicts between 

Parliament and monarchy. Bishop Laud, together with 
Charles I, opposed the reforms of the Church of England 
desired by the Puritans. But in 1640, Oliver Cromwell—an 
advocate for the Puritans—was elected to Parliament, and 
civil war broke out in 1642 between the forces loyal to the 
king and those loyal to Parliament. In 1645, the Parliament 
took control of the Monarchy. Bishop Laud was executed 
that year and the use of the Book of Common Prayer was 
overthrown. The Westminster Assembly completed the 
Westminster Confession for the dominant Presbyterian 
church in 1646, and the king was beheaded in 1649. Crom-
well led the new Commonwealth until his death in 1658. His 
main concern was a stable government with freedom of re-
ligion for Puritans, like John Bunyan and others, including 
Jews, who had been excluded from England since 1290 and 
finally allowed to return in 1655.

After Cromwell’s death, his son Richard was unable 

to hold the government together. The longing for stability 
with a new king swelled (How quickly the favor of man can 
turn!). The Parliament turned against the Nonconformists 
like John Bunyan and passed a series of acts that resulted in 
increasing restrictions on the Puritan preachers. Charles II 
was brought home in what is known as the Restoration of 
the Monarchy, and proclaimed king in 1660, the same year 
that Bunyan was imprisoned for preaching without state ap-
proval.

Two Thousand Pastors Ejected

In 1662, the Act of Uniformity was passed that required ac-
ceptance of the Prayer Book and Episcopal ordination. That 

August, two thousand Puritan pastors were forced out of 
their churches. Twelve years later there was a happy turn 
of affairs with the Declaration of Religious Indulgence that 
resulted in Bunyan’s freedom, his license to preach, and then 
his call as the official pastor of the non-conformist church in 
Bedford. But there was political instability until he died in 
1688 at the age of 60. He was imprisoned one other time in 
the mid 1670’s when he probably wrote The Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress.

These were the days of John Bunyan’s sufferings, and we 

must be careful not to overstate or understate the terror he 
experienced. We would overstate it if we thought he was tor-
tured in the Bedford jail. In fact, some jailers let him out to 
see his family or make brief trips. But we would understate 
it if we thought he was not in frequent danger of execution. 
For example, in the Bloody Assizes of 1685, three hundred 
people were put to death in the western counties of England 
for doing no more than Bunyan did as a non-conformist 
pastor.

Young Heartache and Fear

Bunyan learned the trade of metalworking, also known as a 
“tinker” or “brasyer,” from his father. He received the ordi-
nary education of the poor to read and write, but nothing 
more. He had no formal higher education of any kind, which 
makes his writing and influence all the more astonishing. 
The more notable suffering of his life begins in his teens. In 
1644, when he was fifteen, his mother and sister died within 
one month of each other. His sister was thirteen. To add to 
the heartache, his father remarried within a month. All this 
while, not many miles away in that same month of loss, the 
king attacked a church in Leighton and “began to cut and 
wound right and left.” And later that fall, when Bunyan had 

turned sixteen, he was drafted into the Parliamentary Army. 
For about two years he was taken from his home for military 
service. There were harrowing moments he tells us, as once 
when a man took his place as a sentinel and was killed by a 
musket ball shot in the head.

Bunyan was not a believer during this time. He tells us, 

“I had few equals, especially considering my years, which 
were tender, for cursing, swearing, lying, and blaspheming 
the holy name of God . . . Until I came to the state of mar-
riage, I was the very ringleader of all the youth that kept me 
company, in all manner of vice and ungodliness.”

Precious Books Came with His Wife

He “came to the state of matrimony” when he was twenty or 
twenty-one, but we never learn his first wife’s name. What 
we do learn is that she was poor, but had a godly father who 
had died and left her two books that she brought to the mar-
riage, The Plain Man’s Pathway to Heaven and The Practice of 
Piety. Bunyan said, “In these two books I would sometimes 
read with her, wherein I also found some things that were 
somewhat pleasing to me; but all this while I met with no 
conviction.” But the work of God’s drawing him had begun.

John and his wife had four children: Mary, Elizabeth, 

John, and Thomas. Mary, the oldest, was born blind. This 
not only added to the tremendous burden of his heart in 
caring for Mary and the others, it would make his imprison-
ment when Mary was ten years old an agonizing separation.

“Thy Righteousness Is in Heaven”

During the first five years of marriage, Bunyan was pro-
foundly converted to Christ and to the baptistic, non-con-
formist church life in Bedford. He came under the influence 

XVII

of John Gifford, the pastor in Bedford, and moved from 
Elstow to Bedford with his family and joined the church 
there in 1653, though he was not as sure as they were that 
he was a Christian. It’s hard to put a date on his conversion 
because in retelling the process in Grace Abounding to the 
Chief of Sinners he includes almost no dates or times. But we 
do know it was a lengthy and agonizing process.

He was pouring over the Scriptures but finding no peace 

or assurance. There were seasons of great doubt about the 
Scriptures and about his own soul. “A whole flood of blas-
phemies, both against God, Christ, and the Scriptures were 
poured upon my spirit, to my great confusion an astonish-
ment . . . . How can you tell but that the Turks had as good 
scriptures to prove their Mahomet the Savior as we have to 
prove our Jesus?” “My heart was at times exceeding hard. If 
I would have given a thousand pounds for a tear, I could not 
shed one.”

When he thought that he was established in the gospel 

there came a season of overwhelming darkness following a 
terrible temptation when he heard the words, “sell and part 
with this most blessed Christ . . . . Let him go if he will.” He 
tells us that “I felt my heart freely consent thereto. Oh, the 
diligence of Satan; Oh, the desperateness of man’s heart.” 
For two years, he tells us, he was in the doom of damnation. 
“I feared that this wicked sin of mine might be that sin un-
pardonable.” “Oh, no one knows the terrors of those days 
but myself.” “I found it a hard work now to pray to God 
because despair was swallowing me up.”

Then comes what seemed to be the decisive moment.

One day as I was passing into the field . . . this sentence 
fell upon my soul. Thy righteousness is in heaven. And 
methought, withal, I saw with the eyes of my soul Jesus 
Christ at God’s right hand; there, I say, was my righteous-

XVIII

ness; so that wherever I was, or whatever I was doing, God 
could not say of me, he lacks my righteousness, for that 
was just before him. I also saw, moreover, that it was not 
my good frame of heart that made my righteousness better, 
nor yet my bad frame that made my righteousness worse, 
for my righteousness was Jesus Christ himself, “The same 
yesterday, today, and forever” (Heb 13:8). Now did my 
chains fall off my legs indeed. I was loosed from my af-
flictions and irons; my temptations also fled away; so that 
from that time those dreadful scriptures of God [about the 
unforgivable sin] left off to trouble me; now went I also 
home rejoicing for the grace and love of God.

Under God, one key influence here, besides Pastor Gifford 
in Bedford, was Martin Luther. “The God in whose hands 
are all our days and ways, did cast into my hand one day a 
book of Martin Luther’s; it was his Commentary on Galatians 
. . . . I found my condition in his experience so largely and 
profoundly handled, as if his book had been written out of 
my heart . . . . I do prefer this book of Martin Luther upon 
the Galatians, excepting the Holy Bible, before all the books 
that ever I have seen, as most fit for a wounded conscience.”

A Preacher Is Born

So in 1655, when the matter of his soul was settled, he was 
asked to exhort the church, and suddenly a great preacher 
was discovered. He would not be licensed as a pastor of the 
Bedford church until seventeen years later, but his popular-
ity as a powerful lay preacher exploded. The extent of his 
work grew. “When the country understood that the tinker 
had turned preacher,” John Brown tells us, “they came to 
hear the word by hundreds, and that from all parts.” Charles 
Doe, a comb maker in London, said (later in Bunyan’s life), 

“Mr. Bunyan preached so New Testament-like he made me 
admire and weep for joy, and give him my affections.” In the 
days of toleration, a day’s notice would get a crowd of over a 
thousand to hear him preach at seven o’clock in the morn-
ing on a weekday. Once, in prison, a whole congregation of 
sixty people were arrested and brought in at night. A witness 
tells us, “I . . . heard Mr. Bunyan both preach and pray with 
that mighty spirit of Faith and Plerophory of Divine Assis-
tance, that . . . made me stand and wonder.” The greatest Pu-
ritan theologian and contemporary of Bunyan, John Owen, 
when asked by King Charles why he, a great scholar, went to 
hear an uneducated tinker preach, replied, “I would willing-
ly exchange my learning for the tinker’s power of touching 
men’s hearts.”

The Incredible Elizabeth Bunyan

In 1658, ten years after he was married, when Bunyan was 
thirty, his wife died, leaving him with four children under 
ten, one of them blind. A year later, he married Elizabeth, 
who was a remarkable woman. The year after their marriage, 
Bunyan was arrested and put in prison. She was pregnant 
with their firstborn and miscarried in the crisis. Then she 
cared for the Bunyan children as their step-mother for 
twelve years alone, and bore Bunyan two more children, 
Sarah and Joseph.

She deserves at least one story here about her valor in 

the way she went to the authorities in August of 1661, a year 
after John’s imprisonment. She had already been to London 
with one petition. Now, as recounted by Bunyan’s biogra-
pher, she was met with one stiff question:

“Would he stop preaching?”

“My lord, he dares not leave off preaching as long a he 

can speak.”

“What is the need of talking?”
“There is need for this, my lord, for I have four small 

children that cannot help themselves, of which one is 
blind, and we have nothing to live upon but the charity of 
good people.”

Matthew Hale with pity asks if she really has four 

children being so young.

“My lord, I am but mother-in-law to them, having 

not been married to him yet full two years. Indeed, I was 
with child when my husband was first apprehended; but 
being young and unaccustomed to such things, I being 
smayed at the news, fell into labor, and so continued for 
eight days, and then was delivered; but my child died.”

Hale was moved, but other judges were hardened and 

spoke against him. “He is a mere tinker!”

“Yes, and because he is a tinker and a poor man, 

therefore he is despised and cannot have justice.”

One Mr. Chester is enraged and says that Bunyan will 

preach and do as he wishes.

“He preacheth nothing but the word of God!” she says.
Mr. Twisden, in a rage: “He runneth up and down 

and doeth harm.”

“No, my lord, it is not so; God hath owned him and 

done much good by him.”

The angry man: “His doctrine is the doctrine of the 

devil.”

She: “My lord, when the righteous Judge shall appear, 

it will be known that his doctrine is not the doctrine of the 
devil!”

Bunyan’s biographer comments, “Elizabeth Bunyan was 

simply an English peasant woman: could she have spoken 
with more dignity had she been a crowned queen?”

Imprisoned from “My Poor Blind Child”

So for twelve years Bunyan chooses prison and a clear con-
science over freedom and a conscience soiled by the agree-
ment not to preach. He could have had his freedom when he 
wanted it. But he and Elizabeth were made of the same stuff. 
When asked to recant and not to preach he said, 

If nothing will do unless I make of my conscience a con-
tinual butchery and slaughter-shop, unless, putting out my 
own eyes, I commit me to the blind to lead me, as I doubt 
not is desired by some, I have determined, the Almighty 
God being my help and shield, yet to suffer, if frail life 
might continue so long, even till the moss shall grow on 
mine eye-brows, rather than thus to violate my faith and 
principles.

Nevertheless he was sometimes tormented that he may not 
be making the right decision in regard to his family.

The parting with my Wife and poor children hath often 
been to me in this place as the pulling of the Flesh from my 
bones; and that not only because I am somewhat too fond 
of these great Mercies, but also because I should have often 
brought to my mind the many hardships, miseries and 
wants that my poor Family was like to meet with should 
I be taken from them, especially my poor blind child, who 
lay nearer my heart than all I had besides; O the thoughts 
of the hardship I thought my Blind one might go under, 
would break my heart to pieces.

XXII

Persevering in Bedford, Not London

Yet he stayed in Bedford. In 1672 he was released because 
of the Declaration of Religious Indulgence. Immediately he 
was licensed as the pastor of the church in Bedford, which 
he had been serving all along, even from within prison by 
writings and periodic visits. A barn was purchased and ren-
ovated as their first building and this is where Bunyan min-
istered as pastor for the next sixteen years until his death. 
He never was wooed away from this little parish by the larg-
er opportunities in London. The estimate is that, in 1676, 
there were perhaps 120 non-conformists in Bedford, with 
others undoubtedly coming to hear him from around the 
surrounding villages.

There was one more imprisonment in the winter and 

spring of 1675–76. John Brown thinks that this was the time 
when The Pilgrim’s Progress was written. But even though 
Bunyan wasn’t in prison again during his ministry, the ten-
sion of the days was extraordinary. Ten years after his last 
imprisonment in the mid-1680’s, persecution was heavy 
again. “Richard Baxter, though an old man now, was shut 
up in jail, where he remained for two years more, and where 
he had innumerable companions in distress.”

Meetings were broken in upon, worshipers hurried to 

prison, “separatists changed the place of gathering from 
time to time, set their sentinels on the watch, left off singing 
hymns in their services, and for the sake of greater security 
worshipped again and again at the dead of night. Ministers 
were introduced to their pulpits through trap-doors in floor 
or ceiling, or through doorways extemporized in walls.” 
Bunyan expected to be taken away again and deeded over all 
his possessions to his wife Elizabeth so that she would not be 
ruined by his fines or imprisonment.

XXIII

A Pilgrim Dies Away from Home

But God spared him, until August 1688. In that month he 
traveled the fifty miles to London to preach and to help 
make peace between a man in his church and his alienated 
father. He was successful in both missions. But after a trip 
to an outlying district, he returned to London on horseback 
through excessive rains. He fell sick of a violent fever, and 
on August 31, 1688, at age sixty, Bunyan followed his famous 
fictional Pilgrim from the “City of Destruction” across the 
river to the “New Jerusalem.”

His last sermon had been on August 19 in London at 

Whitechapel on John 1:13. His last words from the pulpit 
were, “Live like the children of God, that you may look your 
Father in the face with comfort another day.” His wife and 
children were probably unaware of the crisis till after it was 
too late. It is likely that Bunyan died without the comfort 
of family—just as he had spent so much of his life without 
the comforts of home. “The inventory of Bunyan’s proper-
ty after his death added up to a total of forty-two pounds 
and nineteen shillings. This is more than the average tinker 
would leave, but it suggests that most of the profits from The 
Pilgrim’s Progress had gone to printers of pirated editions.” 
He was born poor and never let himself become wealthy in 
this life. He is buried in London at Bunhill Fields.

early, almost simultaneous, death of his mother and sister; 
the immediate remarriage of his father; the military draft 
in the midst of his teenage grief; the discovery that his first 
child was blind; the spiritual depression and darkness for the 
early years of his marriage; the death of his first wife leaving 
him with four small children; a twelve year imprisonment 
cutting him off from his family and church; the constant 
stress and uncertainty of imminent persecution, including 

XXIV

one more imprisonment; and the final sickness and death 
far from those he loved most. And this summary doesn’t 
include any of the normal pressures and pains of ministry 
and marriage and parenting and controversy and criticism 
and sickness along the way.

Writing for the Afflicted Church

The question, then, that I bring to Bunyan’s suffering is: 
What was its effect? How did he respond to it? What did it 
bring about? What difference did it make in his life? Know-
ing that I am leaving out many important things, I would 
answer that with five observations.

1. Bunyan’s suffering confirmed him in his calling as a writer, 

especially for the afflicted church.

Probably the greatest distortion of Bunyan’s life in the por-
trait I have given you so far is that it passes over one of the 
major labors of his life: his writing. Books had awakened his 
own spiritual quest and guided him in it. Books would be 
his main legacy to the church and the world.

Of course, he is famous for The Pilgrim’s Progress—“next 

to the Bible, perhaps the world’s best-selling book . . . trans-
lated into over 200 languages.” It was immediately success-
ful with three editions in the first year it was published in 
1678. It was despised at first by the intellectual elite, but as 
Lord Macaulay points out, “The Pilgrim’s Progress is perhaps 
the only book about which, after the lapse of a hundred 
years, the educated minority has come over to the opinion 
of the common people.”

But most people don’t know that Bunyan was a prolific 

writer before and after The Pilgrim’s Progress. Christopher 
Hill’s index of “Bunyan’s Writings” lists fifty-eight books. 

XXV

The variety in these books was remarkable: controversy (like 
those concerning the Quakers, and concerning justification 
and baptism), collections of poems, children’s literature, al-
legory (like The Holy War and The Life and Death of Mr. 
Badman). But the vast majority were practical doctrinal ex-
positions of Scripture built from sermons for the sake of 
strengthening and warning and helping Christian pilgrims 
make their way successfully to heaven.

four books before he went to prison at age thirty-two, and 
in one year alone—1688, the year he died—five books were 
published. This is extraordinary for a man with no formal 
education. He knew neither Greek nor Hebrew, and had no 
theological degrees. This was such an offense even in his own 
day that his pastor, John Burton, came to his defense, writ-
ing a foreword for his first book in 1656 (when he was 28):

This man is not chosen out of an earthly but out of the 
heavenly university, the Church of Christ . . . . He hath 
through grace taken these three heavenly degrees, to wit, 
union with Christ, the anointing of the Spirit, and expe-
riences of the temptations of Satan, which do more fit a 
man for that mighty work of preaching the Gospel than all 
university learning and degrees that can be had.

Bunyan’s suffering left its mark on all his written work. 
George Whitefield said of The Pilgrim’s Progress, “It smells of 
the prison. It was written when the author was confined in 
Bedford jail. And ministers never write or preach so well as 
when under the cross: the Spirit of Christ and of Glory then 
rests upon them.”

The fragrance of affliction was on most of what he wrote. 

In fact, I suspect that one of the reasons the Puritans are still 
being read today with so much profit is that their entire ex-

XXVI

perience, unlike ours, was one of persecution and suffering. 
To our chipper age (at least in the prosperous West) this may 
seem somber at times, but the day you hear that you have 
cancer, or that your child is blind, or that a mob is coming, 
you turn away from the chipper books to the weighty ones 
that were written on the precipice of eternity where the fra-
grance of heaven and the stench of hell are both in the air.

Bunyan’s writings were an extension of his pastoral min-

istry, mainly to his flock in Bedford who lived in constant 
danger of harassment and prison. His suffering fit him well 
for the task. Which leads to the second effect of Bunyan’s 
suffering I want to mention.

2. Bunyan’s suffering deepened his love for his flock and gave 

his pastoral labor the fragrance of eternity.

His writings were filled with love to his people. For example, 
three years into his imprisonment he wrote a book called 
Christian Behavior, which he ended like this:

Thus have I, in a few words, written to you before I die, a 
word to provoke you to faith and holiness, because I desire 
that you may have the life that is laid up for all them that 
believe in the Lord Jesus, and love one another, when I am 
deceased. Though then I shall rest from my labors, and be 
in paradise, as through grace I comfortably believe, yet it 
is not there, but here, I must do you good. Wherefore, I not 
knowing the shortness of my life, nor the hindrance that 
hereafter I may have of serving my God and you, I have 
taken this opportunity to present these few lines unto you 
for your edification.

In his autobiography, written about halfway through his im-
prisonment, he spoke of his church and the effect he hoped 

XXVII

his possible martyrdom would have on them: “I did often 
say before the Lord, that if to be hanged up presently before 
their eyes would be means to awake in them and confirm 
them in the truth, I gladly should consent to it.” In fact, 
many of his flocked joined him in jail and he ministered to 
them there. He echoed the words of Paul when he described 
his longings for them: “In my preaching I have really been 
in pain, I have, as it were, travailed to bring forth Children 
to God.”

He gloried in the privilege of the gospel ministry. This 

too flowed from his suffering. If all is well and this world 
is all that matters, a pastor may become jealous of prosper-
ous people who spend their time in leisure. But if suffering 
abounds, and if prosperity is a cloak for the true condition 
of frisky, fun-loving perishing Americans, then being a pas-
tor may be the most important and glorious of all work. 
Bunyan thought it was: “My heart hath been so wrapped 
up in the glory of this excellent work, that I counted myself 
more blessed and honored of God by this, than if I had 
made me the emperor of the Christian world, or the lord of 
all the glory of the earth without it.”

with it and with them to the end of his life. He served them 
and he served the world from a village parish with perhaps 
120 members.

3. Bunyan’s suffering opened his understanding to the truth 
that the Christian life is hard and that following Jesus means 

having the wind in your face.

In 1682, six years before his death, he wrote a book called 
The Greatness of the Soul, based on Mark 8:36–37, “What 
does it profit a man to gain the whole world, and forfeit his 
soul? For what will a man give in exchange for his soul?”

XXVIII

He says that his aim is to “awaken you, rouse you off 

of your beds of ease, security, and pleasure, and fetch you 
down upon your knees before him, to beg of him grace to be 
concerned about the salvation of your souls.” And he does 
not mean the point of conversion but the process of perse-
verance. “The one who endures to the end, he will be saved” 
(Mark 13:13). He hears Jesus warning us that life with him 
is hard:

Following of me is not like following of some other mas-
ters. The wind sits always on my face and the foaming rage 
of the sea of this world, and the proud and lofty waves 
thereof do continually beat upon the sides of the bark or 
ship that myself, my cause, and my followers are in; he 
therefore that will not run hazards, and that is afraid to 
venture a drowning, let him not set foot into this vessel.

Two years later, commenting on John 15:2 (“Every branch 
that bears fruit, he prunes”), he says, “It is the will of God, 
that they that go to heaven should go thither hardly or with 
difficulty. The righteous shall scarcely be saved. That is, they 
shall, but yet with great difficulty, that it may be the sweet-
er.”

He had tasted this at the beginning of his Christian life 

and at every point along the way. In the beginning: “My 
soul was perplexed with unbelief, blasphemy, hardness of 
heart, questions about the being of God, Christ, the truth 
of the Word, and certainty of the world to come: I say, then 
I was greatly assaulted and tormented with atheism.” “Of all 
the temptations that ever I met with in my life, to question 
the being of God and the truth of his gospel is the worst, 
and the worst to be borne.”

In The Excellency of a Broken Heart (the last book he 

took to the publisher) he says,

XXIX

Conversion is not the smooth, easy-going process some men 
seem to think . . . . It is wounding work, of course, this 
breaking of the hearts, but without wounding there is no 
saving. . . . Where there is grafting there is a cutting, the 
scion must be let in with a wound; to stick it on to the 
outside or to tie it on with a string would be of no use. 
Heart must be set to heart and back to back, or there will 
be no sap from root to branch, and this I say, must be done 
by a wound.

Bunyan’s suffering made him passionate about these 
things—and patient. You can hear his empathy with strug-
glers in these typically earthy words in a book from 1678 
called Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ:

He that comes to Christ cannot, it is true, always get on as 
fast as he would. Poor coming soul, thou art like the man 
that would ride full gallop whose horse will hardly trot. 
Now the desire of his mind is not to be judged of by the 
slow pace of the dull jade he rides on, but by the hitching 
and kicking and spurring as he sits on his back. Thy flesh 
is like this dull jade, it will not gallop after Christ, it will 
be backward though thy soul and heaven lie at stake.

It seems to me that Bunyan knew the balance of Philippians 
2:12–13, “So then, my beloved . . . work out your salvation 
with fear and trembling; for it is God who is at work in you, 
both to will and to work for His good pleasure.” First, he 
publishes a book called Saved By Grace based on Ephesians 
2:5, “By grace you are saved.” And then in the same year he 
follows it with a book called, The Strait Gate, based on Luke 
13:24, “Strive to enter at the strait gate; for many, I say unto 
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.”

Bunyan’s sufferings had taught him the words of Jesus 

XXX

first hand, “The way is hard, that leads to life, and those who 
find it are few” (Matt. 7:14).

4. Bunyan’s sufferings strengthened his assurance that God is 
sovereign over all the afflictions of his people and will bring 

them safely home.

There have always been, as there are today, people who try 
to solve the problem of suffering by denying the sovereignty 
of God—that is the all-ruling providence of God over Satan 
and over nature and over human hearts and deeds. But it is 
remarkable how many of those who stand by the doctrine 
of God’s sovereignty over suffering have been those who suf-
fered most and who found in the doctrine the most comfort 
and help.

Bunyan was among that number. In 1684 he wrote an 

exposition for his suffering people based on 1 Peter 4:19: “Let 
them that suffer according to the will of God commit the 
keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful 
Creator.” The book was called Seasonable Counsels: Advice to 
Sufferers. He takes the phrase “according to the will of God,” 
and unfolds the sovereignty of God in it for the comfort of 
his people.

It is not what enemies will, nor what they are resolved 
upon, but what God will, and what God appoints; that 
shall be done. . . . No enemy can bring suffering upon a 
man when the will of God is otherwise, so no man can 
save himself out of their hands when God will deliver him 
up for his glory. . . [just as Jesus showed Peter “by what 
death he would glorify God”]. We shall or shall not suffer, 
even as it pleaseth him.

Thus God has appointed the persons who will suffer, the 

XXXI

time of their suffering, the place of their suffering, and how 
they will suffer.

“God has appointed who shall suffer”

In the first case, “God has appointed who shall suffer. Suffer-
ing comes not by chance, or by the will of man, but by the 
will and appointment of God.” Thus Bunyan cites 1 Thes-
salonians 3:3 (KJV): “. . . that no man should be moved by 
these afflictions: for yourselves know that we are appointed 
thereunto.” We must not think that suffering is a strange 
thing for those who fear God (1 Pet 4:12), he reminds us and 
appeals to Revelation 6:11 where the martyrs under the altar 
in heaven are told “that they should rest for a little while 
longer, until the number of their fellow servants and their 
brethren who were to be killed [“mark that,” Bunyan says] 
even as they had been, would be completed also.” An ap-
pointed number of martyrs! From which Bunyan concludes, 
“Suffering for righteousness and for righteousness’ sake, is 
by the will of God. God has appointed who shall suffer.”

“My Times Are in Thy Hands”

Secondly, God has appointed when they shall suffer . . . for 
his truth in the world. Suffering for such and such a man 
are timed, as to when he shall be tried for his faith.” Hence 
when Paul was afraid in Corinth, the Lord strengthened him 
in a dream by saying, “Do not be afraid any longer, but go 
on speaking and do not be silent; for I am with you, and no 
man will attack you in order to harm you, for I have many 
people in this city” (Acts 18:9–10). “His time of suffering,” 
Bunyan says, “was not yet come there.” In the same way it 
was said of Jesus, “They sought to take him: but no man laid 
hands on him, because his hour was not yet come” (John 

XXXII

7:30, KJV). Bunyan concludes, “The times, then, and the 
seasons, even for the sufferings of the people of God, are not 
in the hands of their enemies, but in the hand of God; as 
David said, ‘My times are in thy hand’” (Ps 31:15).

“By the Hand of God Here and There”

Thirdly, God has appointed where this, that, or the other 
good man shall suffer. Moses and Elias [Elijah], when they 
appeared on the holy mount, told Jesus of the suffering 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem” (Luke 9:30–31). 
“The saints are sprinkled by the hand of God here and there, 
as salt is sprinkled upon meat to keep it from stinking. And 
as they are sprinkled, that they may season the earth; so ac-
cordingly, where they must suffer is also appointed for the 
better confirming of the truth. Christ said, it could not be 
that a prophet should ‘perish out of Jerusalem’ (Luke 13:33). 
But why . . . ? God has appointed that they should suffer 
there. So then, who, when, and where, is at the will of God, 
and they, accordingly, are ordered by that will.”

“By What Death He Should Glorify God”

Fourth, “God has appointed . . . what kind of sufferings this 
or that saint shall undergo. . . . God said that he would show 
Paul beforehand how great things he should suffer for his 
sake (Acts 9:16). And it is said that Christ did signify to Pe-
ter beforehand ‘by what death he should glorify God’ (John 
21:19).” As with the time and place and persons, so it is with 
the kind of sufferings we endure: They “are all writ down 
in God’s book; and though the writing seem as unknown 
characters to us, yet God understands them very well. . . . It 
is appointed who of them should die of hunger, who with 
the sword, who should go into captivity, and who should be 

XXXIII

eating up of beasts. Let it then be concluded, that hitherto 
it appears, that the sufferings of saints are ordered and dis-
posed by the will of God.”

We could go even further with Bunyan as he shows “for 

what truth” his saints will suffer, and “by whose hand” and 
“how long.” But let us ask, What is Bunyan’s aim in this 
exposition of the sovereignty of God in suffering? He tells 
us plainly: “I have, in a few words, handled this . . . to show 
you that our sufferings are ordered and disposed by him, 
that you might always, when you come into trouble for this 
name, not stagger nor be at a loss, but be stayed, composed, 
and settled in your minds, and say, ‘The will of the Lord be 
done.’ (Acts 21:14).”

The Mercy That We Suffer Rather Than Torture

He warns against feelings of revenge.

Learn to pity and bewail the condition of the enemy . . . 
Never grudge them their present advantages. ‘Fret not thy 
self because of evil men. Neither be thou envious at the 
workers of iniquity’ (Prov. 24:19). Fret not, though they 
spoil thy resting place. It is God that hath bidden them 
do it, to try thy faith and patience thereby. Wish them no 
ill with what they get of thine; it is their wages for their 
work, and it will appear to them ere long that they have 
earned it dearly. . . . Bless God that thy lot did fall on 
the other side. . . . How kindly, therefore, doth God deal 
with us, when he chooses to afflict us but for a little, that 
with everlasting kindness he may have mercy upon us (Isa 
54:7–8).

XXXIV

“No Fruit, Because There Is no Winter There”

The key to suffering rightly is to see in all things the hand 
of a merciful and good and sovereign God and “to live upon 
God who is invisible.” There is more of God to be had in 
times of suffering than any other time.

There is that of God to be seen in such a day as cannot be 
seen in another. His power in holding up some, his wrath 
in leaving of others; his making of shrubs to stand, and his 
suffering of cedars to fall; his infatuating of the counsels 
of men, and his making of the devil to outwit himself; his 
giving of his presence to his people, and his leaving of his 
foes in the dark; his discovering [disclosing] the uprightness 
of the hearts of his sanctified ones, and laying open the 
hypocrisy of others, is a working of spiritual wonders in 
the day of his wrath, and of the whirlwind and storm. . . . 
We are apt to overshoot, in the days that are calm, and to 
think ourselves far higher, and more strong than we find 
we be, when the trying day is upon us. . . . We could not 
live without such turnings of the hand of God upon us. We 
should be overgrown with flesh, if we had not our season-
able winters. It is said that in some countries trees will 
grow, but will bear no fruit, because there is no winter 
there.

So Bunyan begs his people to humble themselves under the 
mighty hand of God and trust that all will be for their good. 
“Let me beg of thee, that thou wilt not be offended either 
with God, or men, if the cross is laid heavy upon thee. Not 
with God, for he doth nothing without a cause, nor with 
men, for . . . they are the servants of God to thee for good. 
(Ps 17:14 KJV; Jer 24:5). Take therefore what comes to thee 
from God by them, thankfully.”

XXXV

5. Bunyan’s suffering deepened in him a confidence in the Bible 
as the word of God and a passion for biblical exposition as the 

key to perseverance.

If “living upon God who is invisible” is the key to suffering 
rightly, what is the key to living upon God? Bunyan’s answer 
is to lay hold on Christ through the word of God, the Bible. 
Prison proved for Bunyan to be a hallowed place of commu-
nion with God because his suffering unlocked the word and 
the deepest fellowship with Christ he had ever known.

I never had in all my life so great an inlet into the Word 
of God as now [in prison]. Those scriptures that I saw 
nothing in before were made in this place and state to 
shine upon me. Jesus Christ also was never more real and 
apparent than now. Here I have seen him and felt him 
indeed. . . I have had sweet sights of the forgiveness of my 
sins in this place, and of my being with Jesus in another 
world. . . I have seen that here that I am persuaded I shall 
never, while in this world, be able to express.

“In My Chest Pocket I Have a Key”

He especially cherished the promises of God as the key for 
opening the door of heaven.

I tell thee, friend, there are some promises that the Lord 
hath helped me to lay hold of Jesus Christ through and by, 
that I would not have out of the Bible for as much gold 
and silver as can lie between York and London piled up to 
the stars.

One of the greatest scenes in The Pilgrim’s Progress is when 
Christian recalls in the dungeon of Doubting-castle that he 

XXXVI

has a key to the door. Very significant is not only what the 
key is, but where it is:

“What a fool I have been, to lie like this in a stinking 
dungeon, when I could have just as well walked free. In 
my chest pocket I have a key called Promise that will, I am 
thoroughly persuaded, open any lock in Doubting-Castle.” 
“Then,” said Hopeful, “that is good news. My good broth-
er, do immediately take it out of your chest pocket and try 
it.” Then Christian took the key from his chest and began 
to try the lock of the dungeon door; and as he turned the 
key, the bolt unlocked and the door flew open with ease, so 
that Christian and hopeful immediately came out.

“Prick Him Anywhere . . . His Blood Is Bibline”

Three times Bunyan says that the key was in Christians “chest 
pocket” or simply his “chest.” I take this to mean that Chris-
tian had hidden it in his heart by memorization and that it 
was now accessible in prison for precisely this reason. This is 
how the promises sustained and strengthened Bunyan. He 
was filled with Scripture. Everything he wrote was saturated 
with Bible. He poured over his English Bible, which he had 
most of the time. This is why he can say of his writings, “I 
have not for these things fished in other men’s waters; my 
Bible and Concordance are my only library in my writings.”

Charles Spurgeon put it like this:

He had studied our Authorized Version . . . till his whole 
being was saturated with Scripture; and though his writ-
ings . . . continually make us feel and say, ‘Why, this man 
is a living Bible!’ Prick him anywhere; and you will find 
that his blood is Bibline, the very essence of the Bible flows 

XXXVII

from him. He cannot speak with out quoting a text, for 
his soul is full of the word of God.

Bunyan reverenced the word of God and trembled at the 
prospect of dishonoring it. “Let me die . . . with the Philis-
tines (Judg 16:30) rather than deal corruptly with the blessed 
word of God.” This, in the end, is why Bunyan is still with 
us today rather than disappearing into the mist of history. 
He is with us and ministering to us because he reverenced 
the word of God and was so permeated by it that his blood is 
“Bibline” and that “the essence of the Bible flows from him.”

And this is what he has to show us. That “to live upon 

God who is invisible” is to live upon God in his word. And 
to serve and suffer out of a life in God is to serve and suffer 
out of a life drenched with the word of God. This is how we 
shall live, this is how we shall suffer, and this is how we shall 
help those we love get safely to the Celestial City. We will 
woo them with the word. We will say to them what Bunyan 
said to his people:

God hath strewed all the way from the gate of hell, where 
thou wast, to the gate of heaven, whither thou art going, 
with flowers out of his own garden. Behold how the prom-
ises, invitations, calls, and encouragements, like lilies, lie 
round about thee! Take heed that thou dost not tread them 
under thy foot.

XXXIX

PREFACE

John Newton, 1776

The writings of Mr. Bunyan need no recommendatory pref-
ace. The various editions they have passed through, and the 
different languages into which many of them have been 
translated, sufficiently prove that the gifts of God which 
were in him, have, by the divine blessing, been made very 
acceptable and useful to the churches. Though he was called 
to the knowledge and ministry of the gospel from a low 
state of life, as well as from a vicious course of conversation, 
and was unfurnished with human literature, the Lord, the 
great, the effectual, the only effectual teacher, made him, in 
an eminent degree, an able and successful minister of the 
New Testament. It is probable that only the people to whom 
he personally preached would have been benefited by his 
zeal and experience, had not the Lord permitted the rage 
of his enemies to prevail against him for a season. He lived 
in more trying days than those in which our lot is fallen. 
For preaching the word of life to sinners, he was sentenced 
to perpetual banishment, but what he actually suffered was 
imprisonment for more than twelve years. But his spirit was 
not bound. Though secluded from his public work, he could 
not be idle. He applied himself to writing books, and most 
of the treatises, by which being dead he still speaketh (in 
number about threescore) were composed during his con-

Preface

finement in Bedford Jail. Thus his adversaries themselves 
contributed to extend his usefulness by the very methods 
they took to prevent it. And (as in the apostle’s case) the 
things that happened to him, proved rather to the further-
ance than the hindrance of the gospel.

His books, though devoid of that art and those orna-

ments, on which writers who seek the praise of men lay so 
great a stress, have been, and still are highly esteemed by 
those who have a taste for divine truth; and greatly instru-
mental, in the hands of the Holy Spirit, to the awakening of 
the careless, and the encouragement of those who are seeking 
salvation. And we doubt not but they will be farther owned 
of God for these purposes, to many who are yet unborn. But 
as among the stars one excelleth another in glory, so of all 
our author’s writings, there is no one perhaps so universally 
and deservedly admired as his Pilgrim’s Progress, in which he 
gives a delineation of the Christian life under the idea of a 
journey or a pilgrimage, from the City of Destruction to 
the heavenly Jerusalem. In this treatise he appears not only 
as a writer well instructed in the mysteries of the kingdom, 
but a man of real genius. Though he had not a learned ed-
ucation, God had given him considerable natural abilities, 
a lively invention, a penetrating spirit, a strong judgment, 
and his style, though plain and simple, is remarkably clear, 
animated, and engaging. By the exercises through which the 
Lord led him, and a close study of the Word of God, he 
acquired a singular knowledge of the human heart, and its 
various workings, both in a state of nature and grace, and of 
the various snares and dangers to which a believer is exposed 
from the men and things of the world, and the subtlety of 
Satan. These fruits of his experience and observation he has 
exhibited in a very pleasing and instructive manner in his 
pilgrim, which may be considered as a map of the Christian 
profession in its present mixed state, while the wheat and 

Preface

the tares are growing in the same field. A map, so exactly 
drawn, that we can hardly meet with a case or character, 
amidst the vast variety of persons and incidents, that daily 
occur to our observation, to which we cannot easily point 
out a counterpart in the pilgrim. And he is peculiarly happy 
in fixing the attention of his readers: many have read this 
book with a kind of rapturous pleasure, though they have 
not understood the authors design, (which only they who 
have the eyes of their minds enlightened by the Spirit of 
God can fully enter into) and they who understand it best, 
and who have read it often, usually find fresh pleasure and 
instruction upon every perusal.

As many persons who have read this allegory, though 

they find benefit from the whole, are at a loss to determine 
the author’s meaning in some particular parts of his rep-
resentation, an edition containing some brief notes to il-
lustrate the more difficult passages, has been long desired. 
An attempt of this kind is now submitted to the public. 
The annotator does not pretend to be positive that he has 
always precisely taken up the thought the author had upon 
his mind at the time of writing, though he thinks there are 
but few places in which he is in danger of greatly missing it. 
He hopes however that he has proposed no illustration but 
what will be found agreeable to the analogy of faith and the 
experience of believers.

The unusual demand for the Pilgrim’s Progress upon 

its first appearance, induced the author some time after to 
send forth a second part. In which there are many beautiful 
passages that sufficiently demonstrate it to be the work of 
the same masterly hand. But the plan of that which is now 
called the First Part, was so comprehensive, and so well exe-
cuted, that the subject was too much exhausted to admit of 
a Second Part, capable of standing in competition with the 
former. It is upon the whole greatly inferior to it, though a 

XLII

Preface

few pages here and there might be selected, which, for their 
beauty, propriety, and energy, almost deserve the epithet of 
inimitable (See the character of Mr. Fearing, and Standfast’s 
discourse when in the river).

the third part of the Pilgrim’s Progress. It can hardly be neces-
sary to inform any but those who have not read it, that this 
pretended third part, with Mr. Bunyan’s name, is a gross im-
position on the public, and that the title is almost the only 
part of it which bears any resemblance to Bunyan’s Pilgrim, 
excepting when the writer has borrowed the same names. 
But Bunyan’s spirit and manner he could not borrow, and 
his principles he openly contradicts. A common hedge-stake 
deserves as much to be compared to Aaron’s rod, which 
yielded blossoms and almonds, as this poor performance to 
be obtruded upon the world under the title of the third part 
of the Pilgrim’s Progress.

Thus much concerning our book: Let the v close with 

a word to the reader’s heart. If you are not convinced of 
sin, and led by the Spirit to seek Jesus, notwithstanding the 
notes, the Pilgrim will still be a riddle to you. A well-wish-
er to your soul assures you, that whether you know these 
things or not, they are important realities. The Pilgrim is a 
parable, but it has an interpretation in which you are nearly 
concerned. If you are living in sin, you are in the City of De-
struction. O hear the warning voice! “Flee from the wrath 
to come.” Pray that the eyes of your mind may be opened, 
then you will see your danger, and gladly follow the shining 
light of the word, till you enter by Christ, the straight gate, 
into the way of salvation. If death surprise you before you 
get into this road, you are lost forever.

If you are indeed asking the way to Zion with your face 

thitherward, I bid you good speed. Behold an open door is 
set before you, which none can shut. Yet prepare to endure 

XLIII

Preface

hardship, for the way lies through many tribulations. There 
are hills and valleys to be passed, lions and dragons to be met 
with, but the Lord of the hill will guide and guard his peo-
ple. “Put on the whole armor of God, fight the good fight 
of faith.” Beware of the Flatterer. Beware of the Enchanted 
Ground. See the Land of Beulah, yea, the city of Jerusalem 
itself is before you:

There Jesus the forerunner waits.

To welcome travelers home.

JOHN NEWTON.

THE PILGRIM’S 

PROGRESS

In The Similitude of a Dream

By John Bunyan

“I have used similitudes.”—Hosea 12:10

THE JAIL

As I walked through the wilderness of this world, I lighted on 
a certain place, where was a den; and I laid me down in that 
place to sleep: and as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I dreamed, 
and, behold, “I saw a man clothed with rags, standing in a 
certain place, with his face from his own house, a book in 
his hand, and a great burden upon his back.”1 I looked, and 
saw him open the book, and read therein; and as he read, he 
wept and trembled; and not being able longer to contain, he 
brake out with a lamentable cry, saying, “What shall I do?”2

In this plight, therefore, he went home, and refrained 

himself as long as he could, that his wife and children 
should not perceive his distress; but he could not be silent 
long, because that his trouble increased. Wherefore at length 
he brake his mind to his wife and children; and thus he 
began to talk to them: “O my dear wife,” said he, “and you, 
the children of my bowels, I, your dear friend, am in myself 
undone, by reason of a burden that lieth hard upon me; 
moreover, I am for certain informed that this our city will be 
burned with fire from Heaven; in which fearful overthrow, 
both myself, with thee, my wife, and you, my sweet babes, 
shall miserably come to ruin, except (the which yet I see 
not) some way of escape can be found, whereby we may be 

1 Isa. 64:6; Luke 14:33; Psa. 38:4; Hab. 2:2; Acts 16:31
2 Acts 2:37

delivered.” At this, his relations were sore amazed; not for 
that they believed that what he had said to them was true, 
but because they thought that some frenzy distemper had 
got into his head; therefore, it drawing towards night, and 
they hoping that sleep might settle his brains, with all haste 
they got him to bed. But the night was as troublesome to 
him as the day; wherefore, instead of sleeping, he spent it 
in sighs and tears. So when the morning was come, they 
would know how he did; he told them, worse and worse; 
he also set to talking to them again, but they began to be 
hardened. They also thought to drive away his distemper 
by harsh and surly carriages to him. Sometimes they would 
deride, sometimes they would chide, and sometimes they 
would quite neglect him. Wherefore he began to retire him-
self to his chamber to pray for, and pity them, and also to 
condole his own misery. He would also walk solitarily in the 
fields, sometimes reading, and sometimes praying; and thus 
for some days he spent his time.

Now I saw upon a time, when he was walking in the 

fields, that he was, as he was wont, reading in his book, 
and greatly distressed in his mind; and as he read, he burst 
out, as he had done before, crying, “What shall I do to be 
saved?”3 

he would run; yet he stood still, because, as I perceived, he 
could not tell which way to go. I looked then, and saw a 
man named Evangelist coming to him, who asked, “Where 
fore dost thou cry?”

He answered, Sir, I perceive, by the book in my hand, 

that I am condemned to die, and after that to come to judg-

3 Acts 16:30, 31

The Jail

ment, and I find that I am not willing4 to do the first, nor 
able5 to do the second.

Then said Evangelist, Why not willing to die, since this 

life is attended with so many evils? The man answered, be-
cause I fear that this burden that is upon my back will sink 
me lower than the grave; and I shall fall into Tophet.6 And, 
Sir, if I be not fit to go to prison, I am not fit, I am sure, 
to go to judgment, and from thence to execution; and the 
thoughts of these things make me cry.

4 Job 16:21, 22
5 Ezek. 22:14
6 Isa. 30:33

CONVICTION OF  
THE NECESSITY  

OF FLYING

Then said Evangelist, If this be thy condition, why standest 
thou still? He answered, Because I know not whither to go. 
Then he gave him a parchment roll, and there was written 
within, “Fly from the wrath to come”.7

The man therefore, read it, and looking upon Evangelist 

very carefully, said, Whither must I fly? Then said Evange-
list, pointing with his finger over a very wide field, Do you 
see yonder wicket gate?8 The man said, No. Then said the 
other, Do you see yonder shining light?9 He said, I think I 
do. Then said Evangelist, Keep that light in your eye, and 
go up directly thereto, so shalt thou see the gate; at which, 
when thou knockest, it shall be told thee what thou shalt do. 
So I saw in my dream that the man began to run. Now, he 
had not ran far from his own door, but his wife and children 
perceiving it, began to cry after him to return;10 but the man 
put his fingers in his ears, and ran on, crying, Life! life! Eter-

7 Matt. 3:7
8 Matt. 7:13
9 Psa. 119:105; 2 Pet. 1:19
10 Luke 14:26

nal life! So he looked not behind him, but fled towards the 
middle of the plain.

ran, some mocked, others threatened, and some cried after 
him to return; and among those that did so, there were two 
that were resolved to fetch him back by force.11 The name 
of the one was Obstinate, and the name of the other Pli-
able. Now by this time, the man was got a good distance 
from them; but, however, they were resolved to pursue him; 
which they did, and in a little time they overtook him. Then 
said the man, Neighbours, wherefore are ye come? They 
said, To persuade you to go back with us. But he said, That 
can by no means be. You dwell, said he, in the City of De-
struction, the place also where I was born; I see it to be so; 
and dying there, sooner or later, you will sink lower than the 
grave, into a place that burns with fire and brimstone. Be 
content, good neighbours, and go along with me.

What, said Obstinate, and leave our friends and our 

comforts behind us?

Yes, said Christian, for that was his name, because that 

all “which you shall forsake”12 is not worthy to be compared 
with a little of that which I am seeking to enjoy; and if you 
will go along with me, and hold it, you shall fare as I myself, 
for there, where I go, is enough and to spare.13 Come away, 
and prove my words.

the world to find them?

CHRISTIAN. I seek an “inheritance incorruptible, unde-

filed, and that fadeth not away”14 and it is laid up in Heav-

11 Jer. 20:10
12 2 Cor. 4:18
13 Luke 15:17
14 1 Peter 1:4

Conviction of the Necessity of Flying 

en15, and safe there, to be bestowed, at the time appointed, 
on them that diligently seek it. Read it so, if you will, in my 
book.

OBSTINATE. Tush, said Obstinate, away with your book; 

will you go back with us, or no?

CHRISTIAN. No, not I, saith the other; because I have 

laid my hand to the plough.16

OBSTINATE. Come, then, neighbour Pliable, let us turn 

again, and go home without him; there is a company of 
these crazed-headed coxcombs, that when they take a fancy 
by the end, are wiser in their own eyes than seven men that 
can render a reason.17

PLIABLE. Then said Pliable, Do not revile; if what the 

good Christian says is true, the things he looks after are bet-
ter than ours; my heart inclines to go with my neighbour.

OBSTINATE. What! more fools still? Be ruled by me, and 

go back; who knows whither such a brain-sick fellow will 
lead you? Go back, go back, and be wise.

CHRISTIAN. Nay, but do thou come with thy neighbour 

Pliable: there are such things to be had which I spoke of, and 
many more glories besides; if you believe not me, read here 
in this book, and for the truth of what is expressed therein, 
behold, all is confirmed by the blood of Him that made it.18

PLIABLE. Well, neighbour Obstinate, saith Pliable, I be-

gin to come to a point; I intend to go along with this good 
man, and to cast in my lot with him. But, my good compan-
ion, do you know the way to this desired place?

CHRISTIAN. I am directed by a man whose name is Evan-

15 Heb. 11:16
16 Luke 9:62
17 Prov. 26:16
18 Heb. 13:20, 21; 9:17–21

gelist, to speed me to a little gate that is before us, where we 
shall receive instructions about the way.

Then they went both together.

OBSTINATE. And I will go back to my place, said Ob-

stinate; I will be no companion of such misled fantastical 
fellows.

THE SLOUGH OF 

DESPOND

Now I saw in my dream, that when Obstinate was gone 
back, Christian and Pliable went talking over the plain; and 
thus they began their discourse.

CHRISTIAN. Come, neighbour Pliable, how do you do? 

I am glad you are persuaded to go along with me; had even 
Obstinate himself but felt what I have felt, of the powers 
and terrors of what is yet unseen, he would not thus lightly 
have given us the back.

PLIABLE. Come, neighbour Christian, since there is 

none but us two here, tell me now further, what the things 
are, and how to be enjoyed, whither we are going.

CHRISTIAN. I can better conceive of them with my 

mind, than speak of them with my tongue; but yet since 
you are desirous to know, I will read of them in my book.

PLIABLE. And do you think that the words of your book 

are certainly true?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, verily, for it was made by Him that can-

not lie.19

PLIABLE. Well said. What things are they?
CHRISTIAN. There is an endless kingdom to be inhabit-

19 Titus 1:2

ed, and everlasting life to be given us, that we may inhabit 
that kingdom forever.20

PLIABLE. Well said. And what else?
CHRISTIAN. There are crowns of glory to be given us, 

and garments that will make us shine like the sun in the 
firmament of Heaven!21

PLIABLE. This is very pleasant. And what else?
CHRISTIAN. There shall be no more crying, nor sorrow; 

for He that is owner of the place will wipe all tears from our 
eyes.22

PLIABLE. And what company shall we have there?
CHRISTIAN. There we shall be with seraphims, and Cher-

ubims, creatures that will dazzle your eyes to look on them. 
There, also, you shall meet with thousands and ten thou-
sands that have gone before us to that Place; none of them 
are hurtful, but loving and holy, everyone walking in the 
sight of God, and standing in His presence with acceptance 
forever; in a word, there we shall see the elders with their 
golden crowns; there we shall see the holy virgins with their 
golden harps; there we shall see men, that by the world were 
cut in pieces, burnt in flames, eaten of beasts, drowned in 
the seas, for the love that they bare to the Lord of the Place; 
all well, and clothed with immortality as with a garment.23

heart; but are these things to be enjoyed? How shall we get 
to be sharers thereof?

CHRISTIAN. The Lord, the Governor of the country, 

hath recorded, that in this book, the substance of which is, 

20 Isa. 45:17; John 10:27–29
21 2 Tim. 4:8; Rev. 3:4; Matt. 13:43
22 Isa. 25:8; Rev. 7:17, 17; 21:4
23 Isa. 6:2; 1 Thess. 4:16, 17; Rev. 7:17; 4:4; 14:1–5; John 12:25; 2 Cor. 5:2–5

The Slough of Despond

if we be truly willing to have it, He will bestow it upon us 
freely. 24

of these things; come on, let us mend our pace.

this burden that is on my back. Now I saw in my dream, 
that, just as they had ended this talk, they drew near to a 
very miry slough that was in the midst of the plain; and 
they, being heedless, did both fall suddenly into the bog. 
The name of the slough was Despond. Here, therefore, they 
wallowed for a time, being grievously bedaubed with the 
dirt; and Christian, because of the burden that was on his 
back, began to sink in the mire.

where are you now?

CHRISTIAN. Truly, said Christian, I do not know.
PLIABLE. At that Pliable began to be offended, and an-

grily said to his fellow, Is this the happiness you have told 
me all this while of? If we have such ill speed at our first set-
ting out, what may we expect betwixt this and our journey’s 
end? May I get out again with my life, you shall possess the 
brave country alone for me. And with that he gave a des-
perate struggle or two, and got out of the mire on that side 
of the slough which was next to his own house: so away he 
went, and Christian saw him no more. Wherefore Christian 
was left to tumble in the Slough of Despond alone; but still 
he endeavoured to struggle to that side of the slough that 
was still further from his own house, and next to the wick-
et-gate; the which he did, but could not get out, because 
of the burden that was upon his back. But I beheld in my 
dream, that a man came to him, whose name was Help, and 
asked him what he did there?

24 Isa. 55:1, 2, 12; John 7:37; 6:37; Psa. 21:6; 22:17

CHRISTIAN. Sir, said Christian, I was bid go this way 

by a man called Evangelist, who directed me also to yonder 
gate, that I might escape the wrath to come. And as I was 
going thither, I fell in here.

HELP. But why did not you look for the steps?
CHRISTIAN. Fear followed me so hard, that I fled the 

next way, and fell in.

HELP. Then said he, Give me thy hand; so he gave him 

his hand, and he drew him out, and set him upon sound 
ground, and bid him go on his way.25

Then I stepped to him that plucked him out, and said, 

Sir, wherefore (since over this place is the way from the City 
of Destruction, to yonder gate) is it that this plat is not 
mended, that poor travelers might go thither with more se-
curity? And he said unto me, This miry slough is such a place 
as cannot be mended. It is the descent whither the scum and 
filth that attends conviction for sin, doth continually run, 
and therefore it is called the Slough of Despond: for still, as 
the sinner is awakened about his lost condition, there ariseth 
in his soul many fears, and doubts, and discouraging appre-
hensions, which all of them get together, and settle in this 
place. And this is the reason of the badness of this ground.

It is not the pleasure of the King that this place should 

remain so bad;26 his labourers, also, have, by the directions 
of his Majesty’s surveyors, been, for above these 1,600 years, 
employed about this patch of ground, if, perhaps, it might 
have been mended; yea, and to my knowledge, said he, here 
have been swallowed up at least 20,000 cart-loads; yea, mil-
lions of wholesome instructions, that have, at all seasons, 
been brought from all places of the King’s dominions, and 
they that can tell, say, they are the best materials to make 

25 Psa. 40:2
26 Isa. 35:3, 4

The Slough of Despond

good ground of the place, if so be it might have been mend-
ed; but it is the Slough of Despond still; and so will be when 
they have done what they can.

True, there are, by the direction of the Lawgiver, certain 

good and substantial steps, placed even through the very 
midst of this slough; but at such time as this place doth 
much spew out its filth, as it doth against change of weath-
er, these steps are hardly seen; or if they be, men, through 
the dizziness of their heads, step besides, and then they are 
bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps be there; but 
the ground is good, when they are once got in at the gate.27

Now I saw in my dream, that, by this time, Pliable was 

got home to his house again; so that his neighbours came to 
visit him; and some of them called him wise man for com-
ing back, and some called him fool for hazarding himself 
with Christian; others, again, did mock at his cowardliness, 
saying, “Surely, since you began to venture, I would not 
have been so base to have given out for a few difficulties.” So 
Pliable sat sneaking among them. But, at last, he got more 
confidence, and then they all turned their tales, and began 
to deride poor Christian behind his back. And thus much 
concerning Pliable.

espied one afar off come crossing over the field to meet him; 
and their hap was to meet just as they were crossing the way 
of each other. The gentleman’s name that met him was Mr. 
Worldly-wiseman; he dwelt in the town of Carnal Policy, a 
very great town, and also hard by from whence Christian 
came. This man, then, meeting with Christian, and having 
some inkling of him, for Christian’s setting forth from the 
City of Destruction was much noised abroad, not only in 
the town where he dwelt, but, also, it began to be the town-

27 1 Sam. 12:23

talk in some other places. Master Worldly-wiseman, there-
fore, having some guess of him, by beholding his laborious 
going, by observing his sighs and groans, and the like, began 
thus to enter into some talk with Christian.

WORLD. How now, good fellow, whither away after this 

burdened manner?

CHRISTIAN. A burdened manner, indeed, as ever, I 

think, poor creature had! And whereas you ask me, Whither 
away? I tell you, Sir, I am going to yonder wicket-gate before 
me; for there, as I am informed, I shall be put into a way to 
be rid of my heavy burden.

WORLD. Hast thou a wife and children?
CHRISTIAN. Yes; but I am so laden with this burden, that 

I cannot take that pleasure in them as formerly; methinks I 
am as if I had none.28

WORLD. Wilt thou hearken unto me if I give thee coun-

sel?

CHRISTIAN. If it be good, I will; for I stand in need of 

good counsel.

WORLD. I would advise thee, then, that thou with all 

speed get thyself rid of thy burden: for thou wilt never be 
settled in thy mind till then; nor canst thou enjoy the bene-
fits of the blessing which God hath bestowed upon thee till 
then.

CHRISTIAN. That is that which I seek for, even to be rid 

of this heavy burden; but get it off myself, I cannot; nor is 
there any man in our country that can take it off my shoul-
ders; therefore am I going this way, as I told you, that I may 
be rid of my burden.

WORLD. Who bid you go this way to be rid of thy bur-

den?

CHRISTIAN. A man that appeared to me to be a very 

28 1 Cor. 7:29

The Slough of Despond

great and honourable person; his name, as I remember, is 
Evangelist.

more dangerous and trouble some way in the world than is 
that unto which he hath directed thee; and that thou shalt 
find, if thou wilt be ruled by his counsel. Thou hast met 
with something, as I perceive already; for I see the dirt of 
the Slough of Despond is upon thee; but that slough is the 
beginning of the sorrows that do attend those that go on in 
that way. Hear me, I am older than thou; thou art like to 
meet with, on the way which thou goest, wearisomeness, 
painfulness, hunger, perils, nakedness, sword, lions, drag-
ons, darkness, and, in a word, death, and what not! These 
things are certainly true, having been confirmed by many 
testimonies. And why should a man so carelessly cast away 
himself, by giving heed to a stranger?

CHRISTIAN. Why, Sir, this burden upon my back is 

more terrible to me than are all these things which you have 
mentioned; nay, methinks I care not what I meet with in 
the way, if so be I can also meet with deliverance from my 
burden.

WORLD. How camest thou by the burden at first?
CHRISTIAN. By reading this book in my hand.
WORLD. I thought so; and it is happened unto thee as 

to other weak men, who, meddling with things too high for 
them, do suddenly fall into thy distractions; which distrac-
tions do not only unman men, as thine, I perceive, has done 
thee, but they run them upon desperate ventures, to obtain 
they know not what.

CHRISTIAN. I know what I would obtain; it is ease for 

my heavy burden.

WORLD. But why wilt thou seek for ease this way, seeing 

so many dangers attend it? especially since, hadst thou but 
patience to hear me, I could direct thee to the obtaining of 

what thou desirest, without the dangers that thou in this 
way wilt run thyself into; yea, and the remedy is at hand. 
Besides, I will add, that, instead of those dangers, thou shalt 
meet with much safety, friendship, and content.

CHRISTIAN. Pray, Sir, open this secret to me.
WORLD. Why, in yonder village—the village is named 

Morality—there dwells a gentleman whose name is Legality, 
a very judicious man, and a man of a very good name, that 
has skill to help men off with such burdens as thine are from 
their shoulders: yea, to my knowledge, he hath done a great 
deal of good this way; aye, and besides, he hath skill to cure 
those that are somewhat crazed in their wits with their bur-
dens. To him, as I said, thou mayest go, and be helped pres-
ently. His house is not quite a mile from this place, and if he 
should not be at home himself, he hath a pretty young man 
to his son, whose name is Civility, that can do it (to speak 
on) as well as the old gentleman himself; there, I say, thou 
mayest be eased of thy burden; and if thou art not minded 
to go back to thy former habitation, as, indeed, I would not 
wish thee, thou mayest send for thy wife and children to 
thee to this village, where there are houses now stand empty, 
one of which thou mayest have at reasonable rates; provision 
is there also cheap and good; and that which will make thy 
life the more happy is, to be sure, there thou shalt live by 
honest neighbours, in credit and good fashion.

Now was Christian somewhat at a stand; but presently 

he concluded, if this be true, which this gentleman hath 
said, my wisest course is to take his advice; and with that he 
thus further spoke.

house?

WORLD. Do you see yonder hill?
CHRISTIAN. Yes, very well.

The Slough of Despond

WORLD. By that hill you must go, and the first house 

you come at is his.

So Christian turned out of his way, to go to Mr. Legali-

ty’s house for help; but, behold, when he was got now hard 
by the hill, it seemed so high, and also that side of it that 
was next the wayside, did hang so much over, that Christian 
was afraid to venture further, lest the hill should fall on his 
head; wherefore there he stood still, and wotted not what to 
do. Also his burden now seemed heavier to him, than while 
he was in his way. There came also flashes of fire out of the 
hill, that made Christian afraid that he should be burned.29 
Here, therefore, he sweat and did quake for fear.30 And now 
he began to be sorry that he had taken Mr. Worldly-wise-
man’s counsel.

29 Exod. 19:16, 18
30 Heb. 12:21

EVANGELIST FINDETH 

CHRISTIAN UNDER 
MOUNT SINAI, AND 
LOOKETH SEVERELY 

UPON HIM

And with that he saw Evangelist coming to meet him; at the 
sight also of whom he began to blush for shame. So Evan-
gelist drew nearer and nearer; and coming up to him, he 
looked upon him with a severe and dreadful countenance, 
and thus began to reason with Christian.

EVANGELIST. What dost thou here, Christian? said he: 

at which words Christian knew not what to answer; where-
fore at present he stood speechless before him. Then said 
Evangelist further, Art not thou the man that I found crying 
without the walls of the City of Destruction?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, dear Sir, I am the man.
EVANGELIST. Did not I direct thee the way to the little 

wicket-gate?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, dear Sir, said Christian.
EVANGELIST. How is it, then, that thou art so quickly 

turned aside? for thou art now out of the way.

CHRISTIAN. I met with a gentleman so soon as I had 

got over the Slough of Despond, who persuaded me that I 

might, in the village before me, find a man that could take 
off my burden.

EVANGELIST. What was he?
CHRISTIAN. He looked like a gentleman, and talked 

much to me, and got me at last to yield; so I came hither: 
but when I beheld this hill, and how it hangs over the way, I 
suddenly made a stand, lest it should fall on my head.

Evangelist. What said that gentleman to you?
CHRISTIAN. Why, he asked me whither I was going? 

And I told him.

EVANGELIST. And what said he then?
CHRISTIAN. He asked me if I had a family? And I told 

him. But, said I, I am so loaden with the burden that is on 
my back, that I cannot take pleasure in them as formerly.

EVANGELIST. And what said he then?
CHRISTIAN. He bid me with speed get rid of my burden; 

and I told him it was ease that I sought. And, said I, I am 
therefore going to yonder gate, to receive further direction 
how I may get to the place of deliverance. So he said that 
he would show me a better way, and short, not so attended 
with difficulties as the way, Sir, that you set me in; which 
way, said he, will direct you to a gentleman’s house that hath 
skill to take off these burdens: so I believed him, and turned 
out of that way into this, if haply I might be soon eased 
of my burden. But when I came to this place, and beheld 
things as they are, I stopped for fear (as I said) of danger: but 
I now know not what to do.

EVANGELIST. Then, said Evangelist, stand still a little, 

that I may show thee the words of God. So he stood trem-
bling. Then said Evangelist, “See that ye refuse not Him that 
speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused Him that spa-
ke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away 

from Him that speaketh from Heaven”.31 He said, moreover, 
“Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, 
My soul shall have no pleasure in him”.32 He also did thus 
apply them: Thou art the man that art running into this 
misery; thou hast begun to reject the counsel of the Most 
High, and to draw back thy foot from the way of peace, even 
almost to the hazarding of thy perdition!

Then Christian fell down at his foot as dead, crying, 

“Woe is me, for I am undone!” At the sight of which, Evan-
gelist caught him by the right hand, saying, “All manner of 
sin and blasphemies shall be forgiven unto men”; “Be not 
faithless, but believing”.33 Then did Christian again a little 
revive, and stood up trembling, as at first, before Evangelist.

heed to the things that I shall tell thee of. I will now show 
thee who it was that deluded thee, and who it was also to 
whom he sent thee.—The man that met thee is one World-
ly-wiseman, and rightly is he so called; partly, because he 
savoureth only the doctrine of this world34, (therefore he 
always goes to the town of Morality to church); and partly 
because he loveth that doctrine best, for it saveth him best 
from the cross.35 And because he is of this carnal temper, 
therefore he seeketh to prevent my ways, though right. Now 
there are three things in this man’s counsel, that thou must 
utterly abhor.

render the cross odious to thee. And, 3. His setting thy feet 
in that way that leadeth unto the administration of death.

31 Heb. 12:25
32 Heb. 10:38
33 John 20:27
34 1 John 4:5
35 Gal. 6:12

First, Thou must abhor his turning thee out of the way; 

yea, and thine own consenting thereto: because this is to 
reject the counsel of God for the sake of the counsel of a 
Worldly-wiseman. The Lord says, “Strive to enter in at the 
strait gate”36 the gate to which I send thee; for “strait is the 
gate which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.”37 
From this little wicket-gate, and from the way thereto, hath 
this wicked man turned thee, to the bringing of thee almost 
to destruction; hate, therefore, his turning thee out of the 
way, and abhor thyself for hearkening to him.

Secondly, Thou must abhor his labouring to render the 

cross odious unto thee; for thou art to prefer it “before the 
treasures in Egypt.”38 Besides, the King of glory hath told 
thee, that he that “will save his life shall lose it”39 And, “He 
that comes after Him, and hate not his father, and mother, 
and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and 
his own life also, he cannot be My disciple”40 I say, therefore, 
for man to labour to persuade thee, that that shall be thy 
death, without which, THE TRUTH hath said, thou canst not 
have eternal life; this doctrine thou must abhor.

Thirdly, Thou must hate his setting of thy feet in the way 

that leadeth to the ministration of death. And for this thou 
must consider to whom he sent thee, and also how unable 
that person was to deliver thee from thy burden.

He to whom thou wast sent for ease, being by name 

Legality, is the son of the bond woman which now is, and 
is in bondage with her children;41 and is, in a mystery, this 

36 Luke 13:24
37 Matt. 7:14
38 Heb. 11:25, 26
39 Mark 8:35; John 12:25; Matt. 10:39
40 Luke 14:26
41 Gal. 4:21–27

mount Sinai, which thou hast feared will fall on thy head. 
Now, if she, with her children, are in bondage, how canst 
thou expect by them to be made free? This Legality, there-
fore, is not able to set thee free from thy burden. No man 
was as yet ever rid of his burden by him; no, nor ever is like 
to be: ye cannot be justified by the works of the law; for by 
the deeds of the law no man living can be rid of his burden: 
therefore, Mr. Worldly-wiseman is an alien, and Mr. Legal-
ity is a cheat; and for his son Civility, notwithstanding his 
simpering looks, he is but a hypocrite, and cannot help thee. 
Believe me, there is nothing in all this noise, that thou hast 
heard of these sottish men, but a design to beguile thee of 
thy salvation, by turning thee from the way in which I had 
set thee. After this, Evangelist called aloud to the heavens 
for confirmation of what he had said: and with that there 
came words and fire out of the mountain under which poor 
Christian stood, that made the hair of his flesh stand up. 
The words were thus pronounced: “As many as are of the 
works of the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed 
is everyone that continueth not in all things which are writ-
ten in the book of the law to do them.42

to cry out lamentably; even cursing the time in which he 
met with Mr. Worldly-wiseman; still calling himself a thou-
sand fools for hearkening to his counsel: he also was greatly 
ashamed to think that this gentleman’s arguments, flowing 
only from the flesh, should have the prevalency with him as 
to cause him to forsake the right way. This done, he applied 
himself again to Evangelist, in words and sense as follows:—

now go back, and go up to the wicket-gate? Shall I not be 
abandoned for this, and sent back from thence ashamed? I 

am sorry I have hearkened to this man’s counsel. But may 
my sin be forgiven?

very great, for by it thou hast committed two evils; thou hast 
forsaken the way that is good, to tread in forbidden paths; 
yet will the man at the gate receive thee, for he has good-will 
for men; only, said he, take heed that thou turn not aside 
again, “lest thou perish from the way, when His wrath is kin-
dled but a little”.43 Then did Christian address himself to go 
back; and Evangelist, after he had kissed him, gave him one 
smile, and bid him God-speed. So he went on with haste, 
neither spake he to any man by the way; nor, if any asked 
him, would he vouchsafe them an answer. He went like one 
that was all the while treading on forbidden ground, and 
could by no means think himself safe, till again he was got 
into the way which he left, to follow Mr. Worldly-wiseman’s 
counsel. So, in process of time, Christian got up to the gate. 
Now, over the gate there was written, “Knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you”44

He knocked, therefore, more than once or twice, say-

ing—

“May I now enter here? Will He within 
Open to sorry me, though I have been 
An undeserving rebel? Then shall I 
Not fail to sing His lasting praise on high.”

At last there came a grave person to the gate, named Good-
will, who asked who was there? and whence he came? and 
what he would have?

CHRISTIAN. Here is a poor burdened sinner. I come 

43 Psa. 2:12
44 Matt. 7:8

from the City of Destruction, but am going to Mount Zion, 
that I may be delivered from the wrath to come. I would, 
therefore, Sir, since I am informed that by this gate is the 
way thither, know if you are willing to let me in!

with that he opened the gate.

So when Christian was stepping in, the other gave him a 

pull. Then said Christian, What means that? The other told 
him. A little distance from this gate, there is erected a strong 
castle, of which Beelzebub is the captain; from thence, both 
he and them that are with him shoot arrows at those that 
come up to this gate, if haply they may die before they can 
enter in.

Then said Christian, I rejoice and tremble. So when he 

was got in, the man of the gate asked him who directed him 
thither?

CHRISTIAN. Evangelist bid me come hither, and knock 

(as I did); and he said that you, Sir, would tell me what I 
must do.

GOOD-WILL. An open door is set before thee, and no 

man can shut it.

CHRISTIAN. Now I begin to reap the benefits of my haz-

ards.

GOOD-WILL. But how is it that you came alone?
CHRISTIAN. Because none of my neighbours saw their 

danger, as I saw mine.

GOOD-WILL. Did any of them know of your coming?
CHRISTIAN. Yes; my wife and children saw me at the 

first, and called after me to turn again; also, some of my 
neighbours stood crying and calling after me to return; but I 
put my fingers in my ears, and so came on my way.

GOOD-WILL. But did none of them follow you, to per-

suade you to go back?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, both Obstinate and Pliable; but when 

they saw that they could not prevail, Obstinate went railing 
back, but Pliable came with me a little way.

GOOD-WILL. But why did he not come through?
CHRISTIAN. We, indeed, came both together, until we 

came at the Slough of Despond, into the which we also 
suddenly fell. And then was my neighbour, Pliable, discour-
aged, and would not adventure further. Wherefore getting 
out again on that side next to his own house, he told me I 
should possess the brave country alone for him; so he went 
his way, and I came mine—he after Obstinate, and I to this 
gate.

GOOD-WILL. Then said Good-will, Alas, poor man! is 

the celestial glory of so small esteem with him, that he coun-
teth it not worth running the hazards of a few difficulties to 
obtain it?

CHRISTIAN. Truly, said Christian, I have said the truth 

of Pliable, and if I should also say all the truth of myself, it 
will appear there is no betterment betwixt him and myself. 
It is true, he went back to his own house, but I also turned 
aside to go in the way of death, being persuaded thereto by 
the carnal arguments of one Mr. Worldly-wiseman.

GOOD-WILL. Oh! did he light upon you? What! he 

would have had you a sought for ease at the hands of Mr. 
Legality. They are, both of them, a very cheat. But did you 
take his counsel?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, as far as I durst; I went to find out Mr. 

Legality, until I thought that the mountain that stands by 
his house would have fallen upon my head; wherefore, there 
I was forced to stop.

GOOD-WILL. That mountain has been the death of 

many, and will be the death of many more; it is well you 
escaped being by it dashed in pieces.

CHRISTIAN. Why, truly, I do not know what had be-

come of me there, had not Evangelist happily met me again, 

as I was musing in the midst of my dumps; but it was God’s 
mercy that he came to me again, for else I had never come 
hither. But now I am come, such a one as I am, more fit, 
indeed, for death, by that mountain, than thus to stand 
talking with my Lord; but, O! what a favour is this to me, 
that yet I am admitted entrance here!

GOOD-WILL. We make no objections against any, not-

withstanding all that they have done before they come 
hither. They are “in no wise cast out”45 and therefore, good 
Christian, come a little way with me, and I will teach thee 
about the way thou must go. Look before thee; dost thou see 
this narrow way? THAT is the way thou must go; it was cast 
up by the patriarchs, prophets, Christ, and His Apostles; 
and it is as straight as a rule can make it. This is the way 
thou must go.

CHRISTIAN. But, said Christian, are there no turnings 

nor windings, by which a stranger may lose his way?

this, and they are crooked and wide. But thus thou mayest 
distinguish the right from the wrong, the right only being 
straight and narrow.46

Then I saw in my dream, that Christian asked him fur-

ther if he could not help him off with his burden that was 
upon his back; for as yet he had not got rid thereof, nor 
could he by any means get it off without help.

until thou comest to the place of deliverance; for there it will 
fall from thy back of itself.

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and to address 

himself to his journey. So the other told him, That by that 
he was gone some distance from the gate, he would come at 

45 John 6:37
46 Matt. 7:14

the house of the Interpreter; at whose door he should knock, 
and he would show him excellent things. Then Christian 
took his leave of his friend, and he again bid him God-speed.

Then he went on till he came at the house of the Inter-

preter, where he knocked over and over; at last one came to 
the door, and asked who was there.

acquaintance of the good man of this house to call here for 
my profit; I would therefore speak with the master of the 
house. So he called for the master of the house, who, after a 
little time, came to Christian, and asked him what he would 
have.

CHRISTIAN. Sir, said Christian, I am a man that am 

come from the City of Destruction, and am going to the 
Mount Zion; and I was told by the man that stands at the 
gate, at the head of this way, that if I called here, you would 
show me excellent things, such as would be a help to me in 
my journey.

INTERPRETER. Then said the Interpreter, Come in; I 

will show thee that which will be profitable to thee. So He 
commanded His man to light the candle, and bid Christian 
follow Him: so He had him into a private room, and bid 
His man open a door; the which when he had done, Chris-
tian saw the picture of a very grave person hang up against 
the wall; and this was the fashion of it. It had eyes lifted up 
to Heaven, the best of books in his hand, the law of truth 
was written upon his lips, the world was behind his back. 
It stood as if it pleaded with men, and a crown of gold did 
hang over its head.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, What meaneth this?
INTERPRETER. The man whose picture this is, is one of a 

thousand; he can beget children,47 travail in birth with chil-

47 1 Cor. 4:15

dren,48 and nurse them himself when they are born. And 
whereas thou seest him with his eves lift up to Heaven, the 
best of books in his hand, and the law of truth writ on his 
lips, it is to show thee, that his work is to know and unfold 
dark things to sinners; even as also thou seest him stand as 
if he pleaded with men; and whereas thou seest the world 
as cast behind him, and that a crown hangs over his head, 
that is to show thee that slighting and despising the things 
that are present, for the love that he hath to his Master’s 
service, he is sure in the world that comes next to have glo-
ry for his reward. Now, said the Interpreter, I have showed 
thee this picture first, because the man whose picture this is, 
is the only man whom the Lord of the place whither thou 
art going, hath authorized to be thy guide in all difficult 
places thou mayest meet with in the way; wherefore, take 
good heed to what I have showed thee, and bear well in thy 
mind what thou hast seen, lest in thy journey thou meet 
with some that pretend to lead thee right, but their way goes 
down to death.

large parlour that was full of dust, because never swept; the 
which, after He had reviewed a little while, the Interpreter 
called for a man to sweep. Now, when he began to sweep, 
the dust began so abundantly to fly about, that Christian 
had almost therewith been choked. Then said the Interpret-
er to a damsel that stood by, Bring hither the water, and 
sprinkle the room; the which, when she had done, it was 
swept and cleansed with pleasure.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, What means this?
INTERPRETER. The Interpreter answered, This parlour 

is the heart of a man that was never sanctified by the sweet 
grace of the Gospel; the dust is his original sin and inward 

corruptions, that have defiled the whole man. He that began 
to sweep at first, is the Law; but she that brought water, and 
did sprinkle it, is the Gospel. Now, whereas thou sawest, 
that so soon as the first began to sweep, the dust did so fly 
about that the room by him could not be cleansed, but that 
thou wast almost choked therewith; this is to show thee, 
that the law, instead of cleansing the heart (by its working) 
from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase it in 
the soul, even as it doth discover and forbid it, for it doth 
not give power to subdue.49

Again, as thou sawest the damsel sprinkle the room with 

water, upon which it was cleansed with pleasure; this is to 
show thee, that when the Gospel comes in the sweet and 
precious influences thereof to the heart, then, I say, even as 
thou sawest the damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the floor 
with water, so is sin vanquished and subdued, and the soul 
made clean, through the faith of it, and consequently fit for 
the King of glory to inhabit.50

I saw, moreover, in my dream, that the Interpreter took 

him by the hand, and had him into a little room, where 
sat two little children, each one in his chair. The name of 
the elder was Passion, and the name of the other Patience. 
Passion seemed to be much discontented; but Patience was 
very quiet. Then Christian asked, What is the reason of the 
discontent of Passion? The Interpreter answered, The Gov-
ernor of them would have him stay for his best things till 
the beginning of the next year; but he will have all now; but 
patience is willing to wait.

Then I saw that one came to Passion, and brought him a 

bag of treasure, and poured it down at his feet, the which he 
took up and rejoiced therein, and withal laughed Patience to 

49 Rom. 7:6; 1 Cor. 15:56; Rom. 5:20
50 John 15:3; Eph. 5:26; Acts 15:9; Rom. 16:25, 26; John 15:13

scorn. But I beheld but a while, and he had lavished all away, 
and had nothing left him but rags.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian to the Interpreter, Ex-

pound this matter more fully to me.

INTERPRETER. So He said, These two lads are figures: 

Passion, of the men of this world; and Patience, of the men 
of that which is to come; for, as here thou seest, Passion will 
have all now this year, that is to say, in this world; so are the 
men of this world: they must have all their good things now, 
they cannot stay till next year, that is, until the next world, 
for their portion of good. That proverb, “A bird in the hand 
is worth two in the bush,” is of more authority with them 
than are all the Divine testimonies of the good of the world 
to come. But as thou sawest that he had quickly lavished all 
away, and had presently left him nothing but rags; so will it 
be with all such men at the end of this world.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, Now I see that Pa-

tience has the best wisdom, and that upon many accounts. 
First, Because he stays for the best things. Second, And also 
because he will have the glory of his, when the other has 
nothing but rags.

INTERPRETER. Nay, you may add another, to wit, the 

glory of the next world will never wear out; but these are 
suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had not so much reason 
to laugh at Patience, because he had his good things first, as 
Patience will have to laugh at Passion, because he had his 
best things last; for first must give place to last, because last 
must have his time to come; but last gives place to nothing; 
for there is not another to succeed. He, therefore, that hath 
his portion first, must needs have a time to spend it; but he 
that hath his portion last, must have it lastingly; therefore it 
is said of Dives, “Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good 

things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is com-
forted, and thou art tormented”.51

CHRISTIAN. Then I perceive it is not best to covet things 

that are now, but to wait for things to come.

INTERPRETER. You say the truth: “For the things which 

are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are 
eternal”.52 But though this be so, yet since things present, 
and our fleshly appetite, are such near neighbours one to an-
other; and again, because things to come, and carnal sense, 
are such strangers one to another; therefore it is that the first 
of these so suddenly fall into amity, and that distance is so 
continued between the second. Then I saw in my dream 
that the Interpreter took Christian by the hand, and led him 
into a place where was a fire burning against a wall, and 
one standing by it, always casting much water upon it, to 
quench it; yet did the fire burn higher and hotter.

Then said Christian, What means this?
The Interpreter answered, This fire is the work of grace 

that is wrought in the heart; he that casts water upon it, 
to extinguish and put it out, is the Devil; but in that thou 
seest the fire notwithstanding burn higher and hotter, thou 
shalt also see the reason of that. So he had him about to the 
backside of the wall, where be saw a man with a vessel of oil 
in his hand, of the which He did also continually cast, but 
secretly, into the fire.

Then said Christian, What means this?
The Interpreter answered, This is Christ, who contin-

ually, with the oil of his grace, maintains the work already 
begun in the heart: by the means of which, notwithstanding 
what the devil can do, the souls of His people prove gracious 

51 Luke 16:25
52 2 Cor. 4:18

still.53 And in that thou sawest that the man stood behind 
the wall to maintain the fire, that is to teach thee that it is 
hard for the tempted to see how this work of grace is main-
tained in the soul.

I saw also, that the Interpreter took him again by the 

hand, and led him into a pleasant place, where was builded 
a stately palace, beautiful to behold; at the sight of which 
Christian was greatly delighted; he saw also, upon the top 
thereof, certain persons walking, who were clothed all in 
gold.

Then said Christian, May we go in thither?
Then the Interpreter took him, and led him up towards 

the door of the palace; and behold, at the door stood a great 
company of men, as desirous to go in, but durst not. There 
also sat a man at a little distance from the door, at a ta-
ble-side, with a book and his inkhorn before him, to take 
the name of him that should enter therein; he saw also, that 
in the doorway stood many men in armour to keep it, being 
resolved to do the men that would enter what hurt and mis-
chief they could. Now was Christian somewhat in amaze. 
At last, when every man started back for fear of the armed 
men, Christian saw a man of a very stout countenance come 
up to the man that sat there to write, saying, “Set down 
my name, Sir”: the which when he had done, he saw the 
man draw his sword, and put an helmet upon his head, and 
rush toward the door upon the armed men, who laid upon 
him with deadly force: but the man, not at all discouraged, 
fell to cutting and hacking most fiercely. So after he had 
received and given many wounds to those that attempted to 
keep him out, he cut his way through them all,54 and pressed 
forward into the palace, at which there was a pleasant voice 

53 2 Cor. 12:9
54 Acts 14:22

heard from those that were within, even of those that walked 
upon the top of the palace, saying—

“Come in, come in; 
Eternal glory thou shalt win.”

So he went in, and was clothed with such garments as they. 
Then Christian smiled and said, I think verily I know the 
meaning of this.

Now, said Christian, let me go hence. Nay, stay, said the 

Interpreter, till I have showed thee a little more, and after 
that thou shalt go on thy way. So He took him by the hand 
again, and led him into a very dark room, where there sat a 
man in an iron cage.

Now the man, to look on, seemed very sad; he sat with 

his eyes looking down to the ground, his hands folded to-
gether, and he sighed as if he would break his heart. Then 
said Christian, What means this? At which the Interpreter 
bid him talk with the man.

Then Said Christian to the man, What art thou? The 

man answered, I am what I was not once.

CHRISTIAN. What wast thou once?
MAN. The man said, I was once a fair and flourishing 

professor, both in mine own eyes, and also in the eyes of oth-
ers; I once was, as I thought, fair for the Celestial City, and 
had then even joy at the thoughts that I should get thither.55

CHRISTIAN. Well, but what art thou now?
MAN. I am now a man of despair, and am shut up in it, 

as in this iron cage. I cannot get out. O now I cannot!

CHRISTIAN. But how camest thou in this condition?
MAN. I left off to watch and be sober; I laid the reins 

upon the neck of my lusts; I sinned against the light of the 

Word, and the goodness of God; I have grieved the Spirit, 
and He is gone; I tempted the devil, and he is come to me; 
I have provoked God to anger, and He has left me; I have so 
hardened my heart, that I cannot repent.

hope for such a man as this? Ask him, said the Interpreter. 
Nay, said Christian, pray Sir, do you.

INTERPRETER. Then said the Interpreter, Is there no 

hope, but you must be kept in the iron cage of despair?

MAN. No, none at all.
INTERPRETER. Why, the Son of the Blessed is very piti-

ful.

MAN. I have crucified Him to myself afresh;56 I have de-

spised His person;57 I have despised His righteousness; I have 
“counted His blood an unholy thing”; I have “done despite 
to the Spirit of grace”.58 Therefore I have shut myself out of 
all the promises, and there now remains to me nothing but 
threatenings, dreadful threatenings, fearful threatenings of 
certain judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour 
me as an adversary.

INTERPRETER. For what did you bring yourself into this 

condition?

MAN. For the lusts, pleasures, and profits of this world; 

in the enjoyment of which I did then promise myself much 
delight; but now every one of those things also bite me, and 
gnaw me like a burning worm.

INTERPRETER. But canst thou not now repent and turn?
MAN. God hath denied me repentance. His Word gives 

me no encouragement to believe; yea, Himself hath shut me 
up in this iron cage; nor can all the men in the world let me 

56 Heb. 4:6
57 Luke 19:14
58 Heb. 10:28, 29

out. O eternity! eternity! how shall I grapple with the misery 
that I must meet with in eternity!

Let this man’s misery be remembered by thee, and be an 
everlasting caution to thee.

CHRISTIAN. Well, said Christian, this is fearful! God 

help me to watch and be sober, and to pray that I may shun 
the cause of this man’s misery! Sir, is it not time for me to go 
on my way now?

more, and then thou shalt go on thy way.

So He took Christian by the hand again, and led him 

into a chamber, where there was one rising out of bed; and 
as he put on his raiment, he shook and trembled. Then said 
Christian, Why doth this man thus tremble? The Interpreter 
then bid him tell to Christian the reason of his so doing. 
So he began and said, This night, as I was in my sleep, I 
dreamed, and behold the heavens grew exceeding black; also 
it thundered and lightened in most fearful wise, that it put 
me into an agony; so I looked up in my dream, and saw 
the clouds rack at an unusual rate, upon which I heard a 
great sound of a trumpet, and saw also a man sit upon a 
cloud, attended with the thousands of Heaven; they were 
all in flaming fire: also the heavens were in a burning flame. 
I heard then a voice saying, “Arise, ye dead, and come to 
judgment”; and with that the rocks rent, the graves opened, 
and the dead that were therein came forth. Some of them 
were exceeding glad, and looked upward; and some sought 
to hide themselves under the mountains.59 Then I saw the 
man that sat upon the cloud open the book, and bid the 
world draw near. Yet there was, by reason of a fierce flame 

59 1 Cor. 15:52; 1 Thess. 4:16; Jude 14; John 5:28, 29; 2 Thess. 1:7, 8; Rev. 
20:11–14; Isa. 26:21; Micah 7:16, 17; Psa. 95:1–3; Dan. 7:10

which issued out and came from before him, a convenient 
distance betwixt him and them, as betwixt the judge and the 
prisoners at the bar.60 I heard it also proclaimed to them that 
attended on the man that sat on the cloud, “Gather togeth-
er the tares, the chaff, and stubble, and cast them into the 
burning lake”61 And with that, the bottomless pit opened, 
just whereabouts I stood; out of the mouth of which there 
came, in an abundant manner, smoke and coals of fire, with 
hideous noises. It was also said to the same persons, “Gath-
er My wheat into the garner”.62 And with that I saw many 
catched up and carried away into the clouds, but I was left 
behind.63 I also sought to hide myself, but I could not, for 
the man that sat upon the cloud still kept his eye upon me: 
my sins also came into my mind; and my conscience did ac-
cuse me on every side.64 Upon this I awaked from my sleep.

CHRISTIAN. But what was it that made you so afraid of 

this sight?

MAN. Why, I thought that the day of judgment was 

come, and that I was not ready for it: but this frighted me 
most, that the angels gathered up several, and left me be-
hind; also the pit of hell opened her mouth just where I 
stood. My conscience, too, afflicted me; and, as I thought, 
the Judge had always his eye upon me, showing indignation 
in his countenance.

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, Hast thou con-

sidered all these things?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, and they put me in hope and fear.
INTERPRETER. Well, keep all things so in thy mind that 

60 Mal. 3:2, 3; Dan. 7:9, 10
61 Matt. 3:12; 13:30; Mal. 4:1
62 Luke 3:17
63 1 Thess. 4:16, 17
64 Rom. 2:14, 15

they may be as a goad in thy sides, to prick thee forward 
in the way thou must go. Then Christian began to gird up 
his loins, and to address himself to his journey. Then said 
the Interpreter, The Comforter be always with thee, good 
Christian, to guide thee in the way that leads to the City. So 
Christian went on his way, saying—

“Here I have seen things rare and profitable; 
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable 
In what I have begun to take in hand; 
Then let me think on them, and understand 
Wherefore they showed me were, and let me be 
Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee.”

PROCEEDS TO  

THE CROSS

Now I saw in my dream, that the highway up which Chris-
tian was to go, was fenced on either side with a wall, and 
that wall was called Salvation.65 Up this way, therefore, did 
burdened Christian run, but not without great difficulty, be-
cause of the load on his back.

He ran thus till he came to a place somewhat ascend-

ing, and upon that place stood a cross, and a little below, in 
the bottom, a sepulchre. So I saw in my dream, that just as 
Christian came up with the cross, his burden loosed from 
off his shoulders, and fell from off his back, and began to 
tumble, and so continued to do, till it came to the mouth of 
the sepulchre, where it fell in, and I saw it no more.

Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and said, with 

a merry heart, “He hath given me rest by His sorrow, and 
life by His death.” Then he stood still awhile to look and 
wonder; for it was very surprising to him, that the sight of 
the cross should thus ease him of his burden. He looked, 
therefore, and looked again, even till the springs that were in 
his head sent the waters down his checks.66 Now, as he stood 
looking and weeping, behold three Shining Ones came to 
him and saluted him with “Peace be to thee.” So the first 

65 Isa. 26:1
66 Zech. 12:10

said to him, “Thy sins be forgiven thee:67 the second stripped 
him of his rags, and clothed him “with change of raiment”;68 
the third also set a mark in his forehead, and gave him a roll 
with a seal upon it, which he bade him look on as he ran, 
and that he should give it in at the Celestial Gate (Eph. 1:13). 
So they went their way. Then Christian gave three leaps for 
joy, and went on singing—

Thus far I did come laden with my sin; 
Nor could aught ease the grief that I was in 
Till I came hither: What a place is this! 
Must here be the beginning of my bliss? 
Must here the burden fall from off my back 
Must here the strings that bound it to me crack? 
Blest cross! blest sepulchre! blest rather be 
The man that there was put to shame for me!

I saw then in my dream, that he went on thus, even until he 
came at a bottom, where he saw, a little out of the way, three 
men fast asleep, with fetters upon their heels. The name of 
the one was Simple, another Sloth, and the third Presump-
tion.

67 Mark 2:15
68 Zech. 3:4

CHRISTIAN SALUTED BY 

THE THREE SHINING 

ONES

Christian then seeing them lie in this case, went to them, if 
peradventure he might awake them, and cried, You are like 
them that sleep on the top of a mast, for the Dead Sea is 
under you—a gulf that hath no bottom.69 Awake, therefore, 
and come away; be willing also, and I will help you off with 
your irons. He also told them, If he that “goeth about like a 
roaring lion” comes by, you will certainly become a prey to 
his.70 With that they looked upon him, and began to reply 
in this sort: Simple said, “I see no danger”; Sloth said, “Yet 
a little more sleep”; and Presumption said, “Every fat must 
stand upon its own bottom; what is the answer else that I 
should give thee?” And so they lay down to sleep again, and 
Christian went on his way.

Yet was he troubled to think that men in that danger 

should so little esteem the kindness of him that so freely of-
fered to help them, both by awakening of them, counseling 
of them, and proffering to help them off with their irons. 
And as he was troubled thereabout, he espied two men come 
tumbling over the wall, on the left hand of the narrow way; 

69 Prov. 23:34
70 1 Peter 5:8

and they made up apace to him. The name of the one was 
Formalist, and the name of the other Hypocrisy. So, as I 
said, they drew up unto him, who thus entered with them 
into discourse.

CHRISTIAN. Gentlemen, whence came you, and whither 

go you?

FORMALIST and HYPOCRISY. We were born in the land 

of Vain-glory, and are going for praise to Mount Sion.

CHRISTIAN. Why came you not in at the gate, which 

standeth at the beginning of the way? Know you not that 
it is written, that he that cometh not in by the door, “but 
climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a rob-
ber?”.71

FORMALIST and HYPOCRISY. They said, that to go to the 

gate for entrance was, by all their countrymen, counted too 
far about; and that, therefore, their usual way was to make a 
short cut of it, and to climb over the wall, as they had done.

CHRISTIAN. But will it not be counted a trespass against 

the Lord of the city whither we are bound, thus to violate 
His revealed will?

FORMALIST and HYPOCRISY. They told him, that, as for 

that, he needed not to trouble his head thereabout; for what 
they did, they had custom for; and could produce, if need 
were, testimony that would witness it for more than a thou-
sand years.

CHRISTIAN. But, said Christian, will your practice stand 

a trial at law?

FORMALIST and HYPOCRISY. They told him, That cus-

tom, it being of so long a standing as above a thousand years, 
would, doubtless, now be admitted as a thing legal by any 
impartial judge; and beside, said they, if we get into the way, 
what’s matter which way we get in? if we are in, we are in; 

Christian Saluted by the Three Shining Ones

thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive, came in at the 
gate; and we, are also in the way, that came tumbling over 
the wall; wherein, now, is thy condition better than ours?

CHRISTIAN. I walk by the rule of my Master; you walk 

by the rude working of your fancies. You are counted thieves 
already, by the Lord of the way; therefore, I doubt you will 
not be found true men at the end of the way. You come in 
by yourselves, without His direction; and shall go out by 
yourselves, without His mercy.

To this they made him but little answer; only they bid 

him look to himself. Then I saw that they went on every 
man in his way, without much conference one with another; 
save that these two men told Christian, that as to laws and 
ordinances, they doubted not but they should as conscien-
tiously do them as he; therefore, said they, we see not where-
in thou differest from us, but by the coat that is on thy back, 
which was, as we trow given thee by some of thy neighbours, 
to hide the shame of thy nakedness.

CHRISTIAN. By laws and ordinances you will not be 

saved, since you came not in by the door.72 And as for this 
coat that is on my back, it was given me by the Lord of the 
place whither I go; and that, as you say, to cover my naked-
ness with. And I take it as a token of His kindness to me; for 
I had nothing but rags before. And, besides, thus I comfort 
myself as I go: Surely, think I, when I come to the gate of the 
city, the Lord thereof will know me for good, since I have 
His coat on my back—a coat that He gave me in the day 
that He stripped me of my rags. I have, moreover, a mark in 
my forehead, of which, perhaps, you have taken no notice, 
which one of my Lord’s most intimate associates fixed there 
in the day that my burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell 
you, moreover, that I had then given me a roll, sealed, to 

72 Gal. 1:16

comfort me by reading, as I go on the way; I was also bid to 
give it in at the Celestial Gate, in token of my certain going 
in after it; all which things, I doubt, you want, and want 
them because you came not in at the gate.

To these things they gave him no answer; only they 

looked upon each other, and laughed. Then I saw that they 
went on all, save that Christian kept before, who had no 
more talk but with himself, and that sometimes sighingly 
and sometimes comfortably also he would be often reading 
in the roll that one of the Shining Ones gave him, by which 
he was refreshed.

THE HILL OF 
DIFFICULTY

I beheld, then, that they all went on till they came to the 
foot of the Hill Difficulty; at the bottom of which was a 
spring. There were also in the same place two other ways 
besides that which came straight from the gate; one turned 
to the left hand, and the other to the right, at the bottom 
of the hill; but the narrow way lay right up the hill, and the 
name of the going up the side of the hill is called Difficul-
ty. Christian now went to the spring, and drank thereof, to 
refresh himself,73 and then began to go up the hill, saying—

“The hill, though high, I covet to ascend, 
The difficulty will not me offend; 
For I perceive the way to life lies here. 
Come, pluck up heart, let’s neither faint nor fear; 
Better, though difficult, the right way to go, 
Than wrong, though easy, where the end is Woe.”

The other two also came to the foot of the hill; but when 
they saw that the hill was steep and high, and that there were 
two other ways to go; and supposing also that these two 
ways might meet again, with that up which Christian went, 
on the other side of the hill; therefore they were resolved to 

73 Isa. 49:10

go in those ways. Now the name of one of those ways was 
Danger, and the name of the other Destruction. So the one 
took the way which is called Danger, which led him into 
a great wood, and the other took directly up the way to 
Destruction, which led him into a wide field, full of dark 
mountains, where he stumbled and fell, and rose no more.

hill, where I perceived he fell from running to going, and 
from going to clambering upon his hands and his knees, 
because of the steepness of the place. Now, about the mid-
way to the top of the hill was a pleasant arbour, made by the 
Lord of the hill for the refreshing of weary travelers; thither, 
therefore, Christian got, where also he sat down to rest him. 
Then he pulled his roll out of his bosom, and read therein 
to his comfort; he also now began afresh to take a review 
of the coat or garment that was given him as he stood by 
the cross. Thus pleasing himself awhile, he at last fell into 
a slumber, and thence into a fast sleep, which detained him 
in that place until it was almost night; and in his sleep his 
roll fell out of his hand. Now, as he was sleeping, there came 
one to him, and awaked him, saying, “Go to the ant, thou 
sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise”.74 And with that 
Christian suddenly started up, and sped him on his way, and 
went apace, till be came to the top of the hill.

Now, when he was got up to the top of the hill, there 

came two men running to meet him amain; the name of 
the one was Timorous, and of the other Mistrust; to whom 
Christian said, Sirs, what’s the matter? You run the wrong 
way. Timorous answered, that they were going to the City 
of Zion, and had got up that difficult place; but, said he, the 
further we go, the more danger we meet with; wherefore we 
turned, and are going back again.

Yes, said Mistrust, for just before us lie a couple of lions 

in the way, whether sleeping or waking we know not, and 
we could not think, if we came within reach, but they would 
presently pull us in pieces.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, You make me afraid, 

but whither shall I fly to be safe? If I go back to mine own 
country, that is prepared for fire and brimstone, and I shall 
certainly perish there. If I can get to the Celestial City, I 
am sure to be in safety there. I must venture. To go back is 
nothing but death; to go forward is fear of death, and life 
everlasting beyond it. I will yet go forward. So Mistrust and 
Timorous ran down the hill, and Christian went on his way. 
But, thinking again of what he heard from the men, be felt 
in his bosom for his roll, that he might read therein, and be 
comforted; but he felt, and found it not. Then was Christian 
in great distress, and knew not what to do; for he wanted 
that which used to relieve him, and that which should have 
been his pass into the Celestial City. Here, therefore, he be-
gan to be much perplexed, and knew not what to do. At last, 
he bethought himself, that he had slept in the arbour that 
is on the side of the hill; and, falling down upon his knees, 
he asked God’s forgiveness for that his foolish act, and then 
went back to look for his roll. But all the way he went back, 
who can sufficiently set forth the sorrow of Christian’s heart! 
Sometimes he sighed, sometimes he wept, and oftentimes 
he chid himself for being so foolish to fall asleep in that 
place, which was erected only for a little refreshment for his 
weariness. Thus therefore he went back, carefully looking on 
this side, and on that, all the way as he went, if happily he 
might find his roll, that had been his comfort so many times 
in his journey. He went thus, till he came again within sight 
of the arbour where he sat and slept; but that sight renewed 
his sorrow the more, by bringing again, even afresh, his evil 

of sleeping into his mind.75 Thus, therefore, he now went on 
bewailing his sinful sleep, saying, “O wretched man that I 
am!” that I should sleep in the day time! that I should sleep 
in the midst of difficulty! that I should so indulge the flesh, 
as to use that rest for ease to my flesh, which the Lord of the 
hill hath erected only for the relief of the spirits of pilgrims!

How many steps have I took in vain! Thus it happened 

to Israel, for their sin; they were sent back again by the way 
of the Red Sea; and I am made to tread those steps with 
sorrow, which I might have trod with delight, had it not 
been for this sinful sleep. How far might I have been on my 
way by this time! I am made to tread those steps thrice over, 
which I needed not to have trod but once; yea, now also I 
am like to be benighted, for the day is almost spent. O that 
I had not slept!

Now by this time he was come to the arbour again, 

where for a while he sat down and wept; but at last, as 
Christian would have it, looking sorrowfully down under 
the settle, there he espied his roll; the which he, with trem-
bling and haste, catched up, and put it into his bosom. But 
who can tell how joyful this man was when he had gotten 
his roll again! for this roll was the assurance of his life and 
acceptance at the desired haven. Therefore he laid it up in 
his bosom, gave thanks to God for directing his eye to the 
place where it lay, and with joy and tears betook himself 
again to his journey. But O how nimbly now did he go up 
the rest of the hill! Yet, before be got up, the sun went down 
upon Christian; and this made him again recall the vanity 
of his sleeping to his remembrance; and thus he again began 
to condole with himself. O thou sinful sleep! how, for thy 
sake am I like to be benighted in my journey! I must walk 
without the sun; darkness must cover the path of my feet; 

75 Rev. 2:5; 1 Thess. 5:7, 8

and I must hear the noise of the doleful creatures, because 
of my sinful sleep.76 Now also he remembered the story that 
Mistrust and Timorous told him of, how they were frighted 
with the sight of the lions. Then said Christian to himself 
again, These beasts range in the night for their prey; and if 
they should meet with me in the dark, how should I shift 
them? How should I escape being by them torn in pieces? 
Thus he went on his way. But while he was thus bewailing 
his unhappy miscarriage, he lift up his eyes, and behold there 
was a very stately palace before him, the name of which was 
Beautiful; and it stood just by the highway side.

So I saw in my dream, that he made haste and went 

forward, that if possible he might get lodging there. Now 
before he had gone far, he entered into a very narrow pas-
sage, which was about a furlong off of the porter’s lodge; and 
looking very narrowly before him as he went, he espied two 
lions in the way. Now, thought he, I see the dangers that 
Mistrust and Timorous were driven back by. (The lions were 
chained, but he saw not the chains). Then he was afraid, and 
thought also himself to go back after them, for he thought 
nothing but death was before him. But the porter at the 
lodge, whose name is Watchful, perceiving that Christian 
made a halt as if he would go back, cried unto him, saying, 
Is thy strength so small?77 Fear not the lions, for they are 
chained, and are placed there for trial of faith where it is, 
and for discovery of those that have none. Keep in the midst 
of the path, and no hurt shall come unto thee.

Then I saw that he went on, trembling for fear of the 

lions, but taking good heed to the directions of the por-
ter; he heard them roar, but they did him no harm. Then 
he clapped his hands, and went on till he came and stood 

76 1 Thess. 5:6, 7
77 Mark 13:34–37

before the gate, where the porter was. Then said Christian 
to the porter, Sir, what house is this? and may I lodge here 
tonight? The porter answered, This house was built by the 
Lord of the hill, and He built it for the relief and security of 
pilgrims. The porter also asked whence he was, and whither 
he was going.

CHRISTIAN. I am come from the City of Destruction, 

and am going to Mount Zion; but because the sun is now 
set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here tonight.

PORTER.What is your name?
CHRISTIAN. My name is now Christian, but my name at 

the first was Graceless; I came of the race of Japheth, whom 
God will persuade to dwell in the tents of Shem.78

The sun is set.

CHRISTIAN. I had been here sooner, but that, “wretched 

man that I am!” I slept in the arbour that stands on the 
hill side; nay, I had, notwithstanding that, been here much 
sooner, but that, in my sleep, I lost my evidence, and came 
without it to the brow of the hill; and then feeling for it, 
and finding it not, I was forced, with sorrow of heart, to go 
back to the place where I slept my sleep, where I found it, 
and now I am come.

PORTER.Well, I will call out one of the virgins of this 

place, who will, if she likes your talk, bring you in to the rest 
of the family, according to the rules of the house. So Watch-
ful, the porter, rang a bell, at the sound of which came out at 
the door of the house, a grave and beautiful damsel, named 
Discretion, and asked why she was called.

The porter answered, This man is in a journey from the 

City of Destruction to Mount Zion, but being weary and 
benighted, he asked me if he might lodge here tonight; so I 

78 Gen. 9:27

told him I would call for thee, who, after discourse had with 
him, mayest do as seemeth thee good, even according to the 
law of the house.

Then she asked him whence he was, and whither he was 

going; and he told her. She asked him also how he got into 
the way; and he told her. Then she asked him what he had 
seen and met with in the way; and he told her. And last she 
asked his name; so he said, It is Christian, and I have so 
much the more a desire to lodge here tonight, because, by 
what I perceive, this place was built by the Lord of the hill, 
for the relief and security of pilgrims. So she smiled, but the 
water stood in her eyes; and after a little pause, she said, I 
will call forth two or three more of the family. So she ran 
to the door, and called out Prudence, Piety, and Charity, 
who, after a little more discourse with him, had him into 
the family; and many of them meeting him at the threshold 
of the house, said, “Come in, thou blessed of the Lord”; this 
house was built by the Lord of the hill, on purpose to enter-
tain such pilgrims in. Then he bowed his head, and followed 
them into the house. So when he was come in and sat down, 
they gave him something to drink, and consented together, 
that until supper was ready, some of them should have some 
particular discourse with Christian, for the best improve-
ment of time; and they appointed Piety, and Prudence, and 
Charity to discourse with him; and thus they began:

PIETY. Come, good Christian, since we have been so 

loving to you, to receive you into our house this night, let 
us, if perhaps we may better ourselves thereby, talk with you 
of all things that have happened to you in your pilgrimage.

you are so well disposed.

PIETY. What moved you at first to betake yourself to a 

pilgrim’s life?

CHRISTIAN. I was driven out of my native country, by a 

dreadful sound that was in mine ears; to wit, that unavoid-
able destruction did attend me, if I abode in that country 
place where I was.

PIETY. But how did it happen that you came out of your 

country this way?

CHRISTIAN. It was as God would have it; for when I was 

under the fears of destruction, I did not know whither to 
go; but by chance there came a man, even to me, as I was 
trembling and weeping, whose name is Evangelist, and he 
directed me to the wicket-gate, which else I should never 
have found, and so set me into the way that hath led me 
directly to this house.

PIETY. But did you not come by the house of the Inter-

preter?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, and did see such things there, the re-

membrance of which will stick by me as long as I live; espe-
cially three things, to wit, how Christ, in despite of Satan, 
maintains His work of grace in the heart; how the man had 
sinned himself quite out of hopes of God’s mercy; and also 
the dream of him that thought in his sleep the day of judg-
ment was come.

PIETY. Why, did you hear him tell his dream?
CHRISTIAN. Yes, and a dreadful one it was. I thought it 

made my heart ache as he was telling of it; but yet I am glad 
I heard it.

PIETY. Was that all that you saw at the house of the In-

terpreter?

CHRISTIAN. No; he took me and had me where he 

showed me a stately palace, and how the people were clad in 
gold that were in it; and how there came a venturous man 
and cut his way through the armed men that stood in the 
door to keep him out; and how he was bid to come in, and 
win eternal glory. Methought those things did ravish my 

heart! I would have staid at that good man’s house a twelve-
month, but that I knew I had further to go.

PIETY. And what saw you else in the way?
CHRISTIAN. Saw! why, I went but a little further, and I 

saw one, as I thought in my mind, hang bleeding upon the 
tree; and the very sight of Him made my burden fall off my 
back (for I groaned under a very heavy burden), but then 
it fell down from off me. It was a strange thing to me, for I 
never saw such a thing before; yea, and while I stood look-
ing up, for then I could not forbear looking, three Shining 
Ones came to me. One of them testified that my sins were 
forgiven me; another stripped me of my rags, and gave me 
this broidered coat which you see; and the third set the mark 
which you see in my forehead, and gave me this sealed roll. 
(And with that he plucked it out of his bosom).

PIETY. But you saw more than this, did you not?
CHRISTIAN. The things that I have told you were the 

best, yet some other matters I saw, as, namely, I saw three 
men, Simple, Sloth, and Presumption, lie asleep a little out 
of the way, as I came, with irons upon their heels; but do 
you think I could awake them? I also saw Formality and 
Hypocrisy come tumbling over the wall, to go, as they pre-
tended, to Zion, but they were quickly lost, even as I myself 
did tell them; but they would not believe. But above all, I 
found it hard work to get up this hill, and as hard to come 
by the lions’ mouths; and truly if it had not been for the 
good man, the porter that stands at the gate, I do not know 
but that after all I might have gone back again; but now, I 
thank God I am here, and I thank you for receiving of me.

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few ques-

tions, and desired his answer to them.

PRUDENCE. Do you not think sometimes of the country 

from whence you came?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, but with much shame and detestation: 

“truly if I had been mindful of that country from whence I 
came out, I might have had opportunity to have returned; 
but now I desire a better country, that is, an heavenly”79

PRUDENCE. Do you not yet bear away with you some of 

the things that then you were conversant withal?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, but greatly against my will; especial-

ly my inward and carnal cogitations, with which all my 
countrymen, as well as myself, were delighted; but now all 
those things are my grief; and might I but choose mine own 
things, I would choose never to think of those things more; 
but when I would be doing of that which is best, that which 
is worst is with me.80

PRUDENCE. Do you not find sometimes, as if those 

things were vanquished, which at other times are your per-
plexity?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, but that is but seldom; but they are to 

me golden hours, in which such things happen to me.

PRUDENCE. Can you remember by what means you find 

your annoyances, at times, as if they were vanquished?

that will do it; and when I look upon my broidered coat, 
that will do it; also when I look into the roll that I carry in 
my bosom, that will do it; and when my thoughts wax warm 
about whither I am going, that will do it.

PRUDENCE. And what is it that makes you so desirous to 

go to Mount Zion?

hang dead on the cross; and there I hope to be rid of all 
those things that to this day are in me an annoyance to me; 
there, they say, there is no death; and there I shall dwell with 

79 Heb. 11:15, 16
80 Rom. 7

such company as I like best.81 For, to tell you truth, I love 
Him, because I was by Him eased of my burden; and I am 
weary of my inward sickness. I would fain be where I shall 
die no more, and with the company that shall continually 
cry, “Holy, holy, holy.”

Then said Charity to Christian, Have you a family? Are 

you a married man?

CHRISTIAN. I have a wife and four small children.
CHARITY. And why did you not bring them along with 

you?

CHRISTIAN. Then Christian wept, and said, O how will-

ingly would I have done it! but they were all of them utterly 
averse to my going on pilgrimage.

CHARITY. But you should have talked to them, and have 

endeavoured to have shown them the danger of being be-
hind.

CHRISTIAN. So I did; and told them also what God had 

shown to me of the destruction of our city; “but I seemed to 
them as one that mocked,” and they believed me not (Gen. 
19:14).

CHARITY. And did you pray to God that He would bless 

your counsel to them?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, and that with much affection; for you 

must think that my wife and poor children were very dear 
unto me.

CHARITY. But did you tell them of your own sorrow, and 

fear of destruction? for I suppose that destruction was visible 
enough to you.

also see my fears in my countenance, in my tears, and also in 
my trembling under the apprehension of the judgment that 

81 Isa. 25:8; Rev. 21:4

did hang over our heads; but all was not sufficient to prevail 
with them to come with me.

they came not?

CHRISTIAN. Why, my wife was afraid of losing this 

world, and my children were given to the foolish delights of 
youth; so what by one thing, and what by another, they left 
me to wander in this manner alone.

CHARITY. But did you not, with your vain life, damp all 

that you by words used by way of persuasion to bring them 
away with you?

CHRISTIAN. Indeed, I cannot commend my life; for I am 

conscious to myself of many failings therein; I know also, 
that a man by his conversation may soon overthrow, what 
by argument or persuasion he doth labour to fasten upon 
others for their good. Yet this I can say, I was very wary 
of giving them occasion, by any unseemly action, to make 
them averse to going on pilgrimage. Yea, for this very thing, 
they would tell me I was too precise, and that I denied my-
self of things, for their sakes, in which they saw no evil. Nay, 
I think I may say, that if what they saw in me did hinder 
them, it was my great tenderness in sinning against God, or 
of doing any wrong to my neighbour.

CHARITY. Indeed Cain hated his brother, “because his 

own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous”82 and if 
thy wife and children have been offended with thee for this, 
they thereby show themselves to be implacable to good, and 
“thou hast delivered thy soul from their blood”83

Now I saw in my dream, that thus they sat talking to-

gether until supper was ready. So when they had made ready, 
they sat down to meat. Now the table was furnished “with 

82 1 John 3:12
83 Ezek. 3:19

fat things, and with wine that was well refined”: and all their 
talk at the table was about the Lord of the hill; as, namely, 
about what He had done, and wherefore He did what He 
did, and why He had builded that house. And by what they 
said, I perceived that He had been a great warrior, and had 
fought with and slain “him that had the power of death,” 
but not without great danger to Himself, which made me 
love Him the more.84

For, as they said, and as I believe (said Christian), He 

did it with the loss of much blood; but that which put glory 
of grace into all He did, was, that He did it out of pure love 
to His country. And besides, there were some of them of 
the household that said they had been and spoke with Him 
since He did die on the cross; and they have attested that 
they had it from His own lips, that He is such a lover of 
poor pilgrims, that the like is not to be found from the east 
to the west.

They, moreover, gave an instance of what they affirmed, 

and that was, He had stripped Himself of His glory, that 
He might do this for the poor; and that they heard Him say 
and affirm, “that He would not dwell in the mountain of 
Zion alone.” They said, moreover, that He had made many 
pilgrims princes, though by nature they were beggars born, 
and their original had been the dunghill.85

Thus they discoursed together till late at night; and after 

they had committed themselves to their Lord for protec-
tion, they betook themselves to rest: the Pilgrim they laid in 
a large upper chamber, whose window opened toward the 
sun-rising; the name of the chamber was Peace; where he 
slept till break of day, and then he awoke and sang—

84 Heb. 2:14, 15
85 1 Sam. 2:8; Psa. 113:7

Where am I now? Is this the love and care 
Of Jesus for the men that pilgrims are? 
Thus to provide! that I should be forgiven! 
And dwell already the next door to Heaven!

So, in the morning, they all got up; and after some more 
discourse, they told him that he should not depart till they 
had shown him the rarities of that place. And first, they had 
him into the study, where they showed him records of the 
greatest antiquity; in which, as I remember my dream, they 
showed him first the pedigree of the Lord of the hill, that He 
was the Son of the Ancient of Days, and came by that eter-
nal generation. Here also was more fully recorded the acts 
that He had done, and the names of many hundreds that He 
had taken into His service; and how He had placed them in 
such habitations, that could neither by length of days, nor 
decays of nature, be dissolved.

Then they read to him some of the worthy acts that some 

of His servants had done: as, how they had “subdued king-
doms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped 
the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped 
the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the 
aliens.86

They then read again in another part of the records 

of the house, where it was showed how willing their Lord 
was to receive into His favour any, even any, though they 
in time past had offered great affronts to His person and 
proceedings. Here also were several other histories of many 
other famous things, of all which Christian had a view; as of 
things both ancient and modern; together with prophecies 
and predictions of things that have their certain accomplish-

86 Heb. 11:33, 34

ment, both to the dread and amazement of enemies, and the 
comfort and solace of pilgrims.

The next day they took him and had him into the ar-

moury, where they showed him all manner of furniture, 
which their Lord had provided for pilgrims, as sword, 
shield, helmet, breastplate, all-prayer, and shoes that would 
not wear out. And there was here enough of this to harness 
out as many men, for the service of their Lord, as there be 
stars in the Heaven for multitude.

some of his servants had done wonderful things. They 
showed him Moses’ rod; the hammer and nail with which 
Jael slew Sisera; the pitchers, trumpets, and lamps too, with 
which Gibeon put to flight the armies of Midian. Then they 
showed him the ox’s goad wherewith Shamgar slew 600 
men. They showed him, also, the jaw-bone with which Sam-
son did such mighty feats. They showed him, moreover, the 
sling and stone with which David slew Goliath of Gath; and 
the sword, also, with which their Lord will kill the Man of 
Sin, in the day that he shall rise up to the prey. They showed 
him, besides, many excellent things, with which Christian 
was much delighted. This done, they went to their rest again.

to go forward; but they desired him to stay till the next day 
also; and then, said they, we will, if the day be clear, show 
you the Delectable Mountains, which, they said, would yet 
further add to his comfort, because they were nearer the de-
sired haven than the place where at present he was; so he 
consented and staid. When the morning was up, they had 
him to the top of the house, and bid him look south; so he 
did; and, behold, at a great distance, he saw a most pleas-
ant mountainous country, beautified with woods, vineyards, 
fruits of all sorts, flowers also, with springs and fountains, 

very delectable to behold.87 Then he asked the name of the 
country. They said it was Immanuel’s Land; and it is as com-
mon, said they, as this hill is, to and for all the pilgrims. 
And when thou comest there, from thence, said they, thou 
mayest see to the gate of the Celestial City, as the shepherds 
that live there will make appear.

Now, he bethought himself of setting forward, and they 

were willing he should, But first, said they, let us go again 
into the armoury. So they did; and when they came there, 
they harnessed him from head to foot with what was of 
proof, lest, perhaps, he should meet with assaults in the way. 
He being, therefore, thus accoutred, walketh out with his 
friends to the gate, and there he asked the porter if he saw 
any pilgrims pass by. Then the porter answered, Yes.

CHRISTIAN. Pray, did you know him? said he.
PORTER. I asked his name, and he told me it was Faith-

ful.

townsman, my near neighbour; he comes from the place 
where I was born. How far do you think he may be before?

PORTER. He is got by this time below the hill.
CHRISTIAN. Well, said Christian, good Porter, the Lord 

be with thee, and add to all thy blessings much increase, for 
the kindness that thou hast showed to me.

87 Isa. 33:16, 17

THE VALLEY OF 
HUMILIATION

Then he began to go forward; but Discretion, Piety, Charity, 
and Prudence, would accompany him down to the foot of 
the hill. So they went on together, reiterating their former 
discourses, till they came to go down the hill. Then, said 
Christian, as it was difficult coming up, so, so far as I can 
see, it is dangerous going down. Yes, said Prudence, so it is, 
for it is a hard matter for a man to go down into the Valley 
of Humiliation, as thou art now, and to catch no slip by the 
way; therefore, said they, are we come out to accompany 
thee down the hill. So he began to go down, but very warily; 
yet he caught a slip or two. Then I saw in my dream that 
these good companions, when Christian was gone to the 
bottom of the hill, gave him a loaf of bread, a bottle of wine, 
and a cluster of raisins; and then he went on his way.

But now, in this Valley of Humiliation, poor Christian 

was hard put to it; for he had gone but a little way, before 
he espied a foul fiend coming over the field to meet him; his 
name is Apollyon. Then did Christian begin to be afraid, 
and to cast in his mind whether to go back or to stand his 
ground. But he considered again that he had no armour 
for his back; and, therefore, thought that to turn the back 
to him might give him the greater advantage, with ease to 
pierce him with his darts. Therefore he resolved to venture 
and stand his ground; for, thought he, had I no more in 

mine eye than the saving of my life, it would be the best way 
to stand.

So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now the mon-

ster was hideous to behold; he was clothed with scales, like a 
fish (and they are his pride), he had wings like a dragon, feet 
like a bear, and out of his belly came fire and smoke, and his 
mouth was as the mouth of a lion. When he was come up 
to Christian, he beheld him with a disdainful countenance, 
and thus began to question with him.

APOLLYON. Whence come you? and whither are you 

bound?

CHRISTIAN. I am come from the City of Destruction, 

which is the place of all evil, and am going to the City of 
Zion.

APOLLYON. By this I perceive thou art one of my sub-

jects, for all that country is mine, and I am the prince and 
god of it. How is it, then, that thou hast run away from 
thy king? Were it not that I hope thou mayest do me more 
service, I would strike thee now, at one blow, to the ground.

your service was hard, and your wages such as a man could 
not live on, “for the wages of sin is death”;88 therefore, when 
I was come to years, I did as other considerate persons do, 
look out, if, perhaps, I might mend myself.

APOLLYON. There is no prince that will thus lightly lose 

his subjects, neither will I as yet lose thee; but since thou 
complainest of thy service and wages, be content to go back; 
what our country will afford, I do here promise to give thee.

CHRISTIAN. But I have let myself to another, even to the 

King of princes; and how can I, with fairness, go back with 
thee?

APOLLYON. Thou hast done in this according to the 

88 Rom. 6:23

The Valley of Humiliation

proverb, “Changed a bad for a worse”; but it is ordinary for 
those that have professed themselves His servants, after a 
while to give Him the slip, and return again to me. Do thou 
so too, and all shall be well.

CHRISTIAN. I have given Him my faith, and sworn my 

allegiance to Him; how, then, can I go back from this, and 
not be hanged as a traitor?

APOLLYON. Thou didst the same to me, and yet I am 

willing to pass by all, if now thou wilt yet turn again and 
go back.

CHRISTIAN. What I promised thee was in my nonage; 

and, besides, I count the Prince under whose banner now 
I stand is able to absolve me; yea, and to pardon also what 
I did as to my compliance with thee; and besides, O thou 
destroying Apollyon! to speak truth, I like His service, His 
wages, His servants, His government, His company, and 
country, better than thine; and, therefore, leave off to per-
suade me further; I am His servant, and I will follow Him.

APOLLYON. Consider again, when thou art in cool blood, 

what thou art like to meet with in the way that thou goest. 
Thou knowest that, for the most part, His servants come 
to an ill end, because they are transgressors against me and 
my ways. How many of them have been put to shameful 
deaths! and, besides, thou countest His service better than 
mine, whereas He never came yet from the place where He 
is to deliver any that served Him out of their hands; but as 
for me, how many times, as all the world very well knows, 
have I delivered, either by power or fraud, those that have 
faithfully served me, from Him and His, though taken by 
them; and so I will deliver thee.

CHRISTIAN. His forbearing at present to deliver them is 

on purpose to try their love, whether they will cleave to Him 
to the end; and as for the ill end thou sayest they come to, 
that is most glorious in their account; for, for present deliv-

erance, they do not much expect it, for they stay for their 
glory, and then they shall have it, when their Prince comes 
in His and the glory of the angels.

APOLLYON. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy ser-

vice to Him; and how dost thou think to receive wages of 
Him?

CHRISTIAN. Wherein, O Apollyon! have I been unfaith-

ful to Him?

thou wast almost choked in the Gulf of Despond; thou didst 
attempt wrong ways to be rid of thy burden, whereas against 
thou shouldest have stayed till thy Prince had taken it off; 
thou didst sinfully sleep, and lose thy choice thing; thou 
wast, also, almost persuaded to go back, at the sight of the li-
ons; and when thou talkest of thy journey, and of what thou 
hast heard and seen, thou art inwardly desirous of vain-glory 
in all that thou sayest or doest.

CHRISTIAN. All this is true, and much more which thou 

has left out; but the Prince, whom I serve and honour, is 
merciful, and ready to forgive; but, besides, these infirmities 
possessed me in thy country, for there I sucked them in; and 
I have groaned under them, been sorry for them, and have 
obtained pardon of my Prince.

COMBAT WITH 

APPOLYON

APOLLYON. Then Apollyon broke out into a grievous rage, 
saying, I am an enemy to this Prince; I hate His person, His 
laws, and people; I am come out on purpose to withstand 
thee.

CHRISTIAN. Apollyon, beware what you do; for I am in 

the king’s highway, the way of holiness; therefore take heed 
to yourself.

APOLLYON. Then Apollyon straddled quite over the 

whole breadth of the way, and said, I am void of fear in this 
matter: prepare thyself to die; for I swear by my infernal 
den, that thou shalt go no further; here will I spill thy soul.

And with that he threw a flaming dart at his breast; but 

Christian had a shield in his hand, with which he caught it, 
and so prevented the danger of that.

Then did Christian draw; for he saw it was time to bestir 

him: and Apollyon as fast made at him, throwing darts as 
thick as hail; by the which, notwithstanding all that Chris-
tian could do to avoid it, Apollyon wounded him in his 
head, his hand, and foot. This made Christian give a little 
back; Apollyon, therefore, followed his work amain, and 
Christian again took courage, and resisted as manfully as he 
could. This sore combat lasted for above half a day, even till 
Christian was almost quite spent; for you must know, that 

Christian, by reason of his wounds, must needs grow weaker 
and weaker.

Then Apollyon, espying his opportunity, began to gath-

er up close to Christian, and wrestling with him, gave him a 
dreadful fall; and with that, Christian’s sword flew out of his 
hand. Then said Apollyon, I am sure of thee now. And with 
that he had almost pressed him to death; so that Christian 
began to despair of life: but as God would have it, while 
Apollyon was fetching of his last blow, thereby to make a 
full end of this good man, Christian nimbly stretched out 
his hand for his sword, and caught it, saying, “Rejoice not 
against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise”89; and 
with that gave him a deadly thrust, which made him give 
back, as one that had received his mortal wound. Christian 
perceiving that, made at him again, saying, “Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors, through Him that 
loved us”90 And with that Apollyon spread forth his dragon’s 
wings, and sped him away, that Christian for a season saw 
him no more.91

and heard as I did, what yelling and hideous roaring Apol-
lyon made all the time of the fight—he spake like a dragon; 
and, on the other side, what sighs and groans burst from 
Christian’s heart. I never saw him all the while give so much 
as one pleasant look, till he perceived he had wounded Apol-
lyon with his two-edged sword; then, indeed, he did smile, 
and look upward; but it was the most dreadful sight that 
ever I saw.

So when the battle was over, Christian said, “I will here 

give thanks to Him that delivered me out of the mouth of 

89 Micah. 7:8
90 Rom. 8:37
91 James 4:7

Combat with Appolyon

the lion, to Him that did help me against Apollyon.” And 
so he did, saying—

Great Beelzebub, the captain of this fiend, 
Design’d my ruin; therefore to this end 
He sent him harness’d out; and he with rage, 
That hellish was, did fiercely me engage. 
But blessed Michael helped me, and I, 
By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly. 
Therefore to him let me give lasting praise, 
And thank and bless his holy name always.

Then there came to him a hand, with some of the leaves of 
the tree of life, the which Christian took, and applied to the 
wounds that he had received in the battle, and was healed 
immediately. He also sat down in that place to eat bread, 
and to drink of the bottle that was given him a little before; 
so being refreshed, he addressed himself to his journey, with 
his sword drawn in his hand; for he said, I know not but 
some other enemy may be at hand. But he met with no oth-
er affront from Apollyon quite through this valley.

Now, at the end of this valley, was another, The Val-

ley of the Shadow of Death. and Christian must needs go 
through it, because the way to the Celestial City lay through 
the midst of it. Now this valley is a very solitary place. The 
prophet Jeremiah thus describes it: “A wilderness, a land 
of deserts, and of pits, a land of drought, and of the shad-
ow of death, a land that no man” (but a Christian) “passed 
through, and where no man dwelt”92.

Now here Christian was worse put to it than in his fight 

with Apollyon; as by the sequel you shall see.

I saw then in my dream, that when Christian was got 

92 Jer. 2:6

to the borders of the Shadow of Death, there met him two 
men, children of them that brought up an evil report of the 
good land,93 making haste to go back; to whom Christian 
spake as follows—

CHRISTIAN. Whither are you going?
MEN. They said, Back! back! and we would have you to 

do so too, if either life or peace is prized by you.

CHRISTIAN. Why? what’s the matter? said Christian.
MEN. Matter! said they; we were going that way as you 

are going, and went as far as we durst; and indeed we were 
almost past coming back; for had we gone a little further, we 
had not been here to bring the news to thee.

CHRISTIAN. But what have you met with? said Chris-

tian.

MEN. Why, we were almost in the Valley of the Shadow 

of Death; but that, by good hap, we looked before us, and 
saw the danger before we came to it.94

CHRISTIAN. But what have you seen? said Christian.
MEN. Seen! Why, the valley itself, which is as dark as 

pitch; we also saw there the hobgoblins, satyrs, and dragons 
of the pit; we heard also in that Valley a continual howling 
and yelling, as of a people under unutterable misery, who 
there sat bound in affliction and irons; and over that Valley 
hangs the discouraging clouds of confusion. Death also doth 
always spread his wings over it. In a word, it is every whit 
dreadful, being utterly without order.95

what you have said, but that this is my way to the desired 
haven.96

93 Num. 13
94 Psa. 44:19; 107:10
95 Job 3:5; 10:22
96 Jer. 2:6

Combat with Appolyon

they parted, and Christian went on his way, but still with his 
sword drawn in his hand; for fear lest he should be assaulted.

I saw then in my dream so far as this valley reached, 

there was on the right hand a very deep ditch: that ditch is 
it into which the blind have led the blind in all ages, and 
have both there miserably perished.97 Again, behold, on the 
left hand, there was a very dangerous quag, into which, if 
even a good man falls, he can find no bottom for his foot to 
stand on. Into that quag king David once did fall, and had 
no doubt therein been smothered, had not HE that is able 
plucked him out.

The pathway was here also exceeding narrow, and there-

fore good Christian was the more put to it; for when he 
sought, in the dark, to shun the ditch on the one hand, he 
was ready to tip over into the mire on the other; also when 
he sought to escape the mire, without great carefulness he 
would be ready to fall into the ditch. Thus he went on, and 
I heard him here sigh bitterly; for besides the dangers men-
tioned above, the pathway was here so dark, that ofttimes, 
when he lift up his foot to set forward, he knew not where, 
or upon what he should set it next.

About the midst of this valley, I perceived the mouth 

of hell to be, and it stood also hard by the way-side. Now, 
thought Christian, what shall I do? And ever and anon the 
flame and smoke would come out in such abundance, with 
sparks and hideous noises (things that cared not for Chris-
tian’s sword, as did Apollyon before), that he was forced to 
put up his sword, and betake himself to another weapon, 
called All-prayer.98 So he cried in my hearing, “O Lord, I 

97 Psa. 69:14, 15
98 Eph. 4:18

beseech Thee, deliver my soul!”.99 Thus he went on a great 
while, yet still the flames would be reaching towards him. 
Also he heard doleful voices, and rushings to and fro, so 
that sometimes he thought he should be torn in pieces, or 
trodden down like mire in the streets. This frightful sight 
was seen, and these dreadful noises were heard by him for 
several miles together. And, coming to a place, where he 
thought he heard a company of fiends coming forward to 
meet him, he stopped and began to muse what he had best 
to do. Sometimes he had half a thought to go back; then 
again he thought he might be half way through the valley; 
he remembered also how he had already vanquished many 
a danger, and that the danger of going back might be much 
more than for to go forward; so he resolved to go on. Yet 
the fiends seemed to come nearer and nearer; but when they 
were come even almost at him, he cried out with a most ve-
hement voice, “I will walk in the strength of the Lord God”; 
so they gave back, and came no further.

One thing I would not let slip; I took notice that now 

poor Christian was so confounded, that he did not know his 
own voice; and thus I perceived it. Just when he was come 
over against the mouth of the burning pit, one of the wick-
ed ones got behind him, and stept up softly to him, and, 
whisperingly, suggested many grievous blasphemies to him, 
which he verily thought had proceeded from his own mind. 
This put Christian more to it than anything that he met 
with before; even to think that he should now blaspheme 
Him that he loved so much before; yet, if he could have 
helped it, he would not have done it; but he had not the 
discretion either to stop his ears, or to know from whence 
these blasphemies came.

When Christian had traveled in this disconsolate con-

99 Psa. 116:4

Combat with Appolyon

dition some considerable time, he thought he heard the 
voice of a man, as going before him, saying, “Though I walk 
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; 
for Thou art with me”.100

Then he was glad, and that for these reasons:
First, Because he gathered from thence, that some who 

feared God, were in this valley as well as himself.

Secondly, For that he perceived God was with them, 

though in that dark and dismal state; and why not, thought 
he, with me? though, by reason of the impediment that at-
tends this place, I cannot perceive it.101

Thirdly, For that he hoped, could he overtake them, to 

have company by and by. So he went on, and called to him 
that was before; but he knew not what to answer; for that 
he also thought himself to be alone. And by and by the day 
broke; then said Christian, He hath turned “the shadow of 
death into the morning”.102

desire to return, but to see, by the light of the day, what 
hazards he had gone through in the dark. So he saw more 
perfectly the ditch that was on the one hand, and the quag 
that was on the other; also how narrow the way was which 
led betwixt them both; also now he saw the hobgoblins, and 
satyrs, and dragons of the pit, but all afar off (for after break 
of day, they came not nigh); yet they were discovered to 
him, according to that which is written, “He discovereth 
deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the 
shadow of death”.103

100 Psa. 23:4
101 Job. 9:11
102 Amos 5:8
103 Job 12:22

from all the dangers of his solitary way; which dangers, 
though he feared them more before, yet he saw them more 
clearly now, because the light of the day made them con-
spicuous to him. And about this time the sun was rising, 
and this was another mercy to Christian; for you must note, 
that though the first part of the Valley of the Shadow of 
Death was dangerous, yet this second part which he was 
yet to go, was, if possible, far more dangerous: for from the 
place where he now stood, even to the end of the valley, the 
way was all along set so full of snares, traps, gins, and nets 
here, and so full of pits, pitfalls, deep holes, and shelvings 
down there, that had it now been dark, as it were when he 
came the first part of the way, had he had a thousand souls, 
they had in reason been cast away; but, as I said, just now 
the sun was rising. Then said he, “His candle shineth upon 
my head, and by His light I walk through darkness”.104

In this light, therefore, he came to the end of the valley. 

Now I saw in my dream, that at the end of this valley lay 
blood, bones, ashes, and mangled bodies of men, even of 
pilgrims that had gone this way formerly; and while I was 
musing what should be the reason, I espied a little before 
me a cave, where two giants, POPE and PAGAN, dwelt in old 
time; by whose power and tyranny the men whose bones, 
blood, ashes, etc., lay there, were cruelly put to death. But 
by this place Christian went without much danger, whereat 
I somewhat wondered; but I have learnt since, that PAGAN 
has been dead many a day; and as for the other, though he 
be yet alive, he is, by reason of age, and also of the many 
shrewd brushes that he met with in his younger days, grown 
so crazy and stiff in his joints, that he can now do little more 
than sit in his cave’s mouth, grinning at pilgrims as they go 
by, and biting his nails because he cannot come at them.

104 Job 29:3

Combat with Appolyon

So I saw that Christian went on his way; yet, at the sight 

of the Old Man that sat in the mouth of the cave, he could 
not tell what to think, especially because he spake to him, 
though he could not go after him; saying, “You will never 
mend, till more of you be burned.” But he held his peace, 
and set a good face on it, and so went by and catched no 
hurt. Then sang Christian,

O world of wonders! (I can say no less) 
That I should be preserv’d in that distress 
That I have met with here! O blessed be 
That hand that from it hath deliver’d me! 
Dangers in darkness, devils, hell, and sin, 
Did compass me, while I this vale was in: 
Yea, snares and pits, and traps, and nets, did lie 
My path about, that worthless, silly I 
Might have been catch’d, entangled, and cast down; 
But since I live, let JESUS wear the crown.

Now, as Christian went on his way, he came to a little as-
cent, which was cast up on purpose, that pilgrims might see 
before them. Up there, therefore, Christian went; and look-
ing forward, he saw Faithful before him, upon his journey. 
Then said Christian aloud, “Ho! ho! Soho! stay, and I will 
be your companion.” At that, Faithful looked behind him; 
to whom Christian cried again, “Stay, stay, till I come up to 
you.” But Faithful answered, “No, I am upon my life, and 
the avenger of blood is behind me.”

CHRISTIAN OVERTAKES 

FAITHFUL

At this, Christian was somewhat moved, and putting to 
all his strength, he quickly got up with Faithful, and did 
also overrun him; so the last was first. Then did Christian 
vain-gloriously smile, because he had gotten the start of his 
brother; but not taking good heed to his feet, he suddenly 
stumbled and fell, and could not rise again, until Faithful 
came up to help him.

Then I saw in my dream, they went very lovingly on 

together, and had sweet discourse of all things that had hap-
pened to them in their pilgrimage; and thus Christian be-
gan.

CHRISTIAN. My honoured and well-beloved brother, 

Faithful, I am glad that I have overtaken you; and that God 
has so tempered our spirits, that we can walk as companions 
in this so pleasant a path.

FAITHFUL. I had thought, dear friend, to have had your 

company quite from our town; but you did get the start of 
me, wherefore I was forced to come thus much of the way 
alone.

CHRISTIAN. How long did you stay in the City of De-

struction, before you set out after me on your pilgrimage

FAITHFUL. Till I could stay no longer; for there was great 

talk presently after you were gone out, that our city would, 

in short time, with fire from Heaven, be burned down to 
the ground.

CHRISTIAN. What! did your neighbours talk so?
FAITHFUL. Yes, it was for a while in everybody’s mouth.
CHRISTIAN. What! and did no more of them but you 

come out to escape the danger?

FAITHFUL. Though there were, as I said, a great talk 

thereabout, yet I do not think they did firmly believe it. For 
in the heat of the discourse, I heard some of them deridingly 
speak of you, and of your desperate journey (for so they 
called this your pilgrimage), but I did believe, and do still, 
that the end of our city will be with fire and brimstone from 
above; and therefore I have made my escape.

CHRISTIAN. Did you hear no talk of neighbour Pliable?
FAITHFUL. Yes, Christian, I heard that he followed you 

till he came at the Slough of Despond, where, as some said, 
he fell in; but he would not be known to have so done; but 
I am sure he was soundly bedabbled with that kind of dirt.

CHRISTIAN. And what said the neighbours to him?
FAITHFUL. He hath, since his going back, been had 

greatly in derision, and that among all sorts of people; some 
do mock and despise him; and scarce will any set him on 
work. He is now seven times worse than if he had never 
gone out of the City.

CHRISTIAN. But why should they be so set against him, 

since they also despise the way that he forsook?

was not true to his profession. I think God has stirred up 
even his enemies to hiss at him, and make him a proverb, 
because he hath forsaken the way.105

CHRISTIAN. Had you no talk with him before you came 

out?

105 Jer. 29:18, 19

away on the other side, as one ashamed of what he had done; 
so I spake not to him.

CHRISTIAN. Well, at my first setting out, I had hopes 

of that man; but now I fear he will perish in the overthrow 
of the city; For it is happened to him according to the true 
proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the 
sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire”.106

FAITHFUL. These are my fears of him too; but who can 

hinder that which will be?

CHRISTIAN. Well, neighbour Faithful, said Christian, let 

us leave him, and talk of things that more immediately con-
cern ourselves. Tell me now, what you have met with in the 
way as you came; for I know you have met with some things, 
or else it may be writ for a wonder.

FAITHFUL. I escaped the Slough that I perceived you fell 

into, and got up to the gate without that danger; only I met 
with one whose name was Wanton, who had like to have 
done me a mischief.

CHRISTIAN. It was well you escaped her net; Joseph was 

hard put to it by her, and he escaped her as you did; but it 
had like to have cost him his life.107 But what did she do to 
you?

FAITHFUL. You cannot think, but that you know some-

thing, what a flattering tongue she had; she lay at me hard 
to turn aside with her, promising me all manner of content.

a good conscience.

FAITHFUL. You know what I mean; all carnal and fleshly 

content.

106 2 Peter 2:22
107 Gen. 39:11–13

CHRISTIAN. Thank God you have escaped her; “the ab-

horred of the Lord shall fall into her ditch” (Pro. 22:14).

FAITHFUL. Nay, I know not whether I did wholly escape 

her or no.

CHRISTIAN. Why, I trow you did not consent to her de-

sires?

FAITHFUL. No, not to defile myself; for I remembered 

an old writing that I had seen, which said, “Her steps take 
hold on hell”.108 So I shut mine eyes, because I would not 
be bewitched with her looks.109 Then she railed on me, and 
I went my way.

CHRISTIAN. Did you meet with no other assault as you 

came?

Difficulty, I met with a very aged man, who asked me what 
I was, and whither bound. I told him that I am a pilgrim, 
going to the Celestial City. Then said the old man, Thou 
lookest like an honest fellow; wilt thou be content to dwell 
with me for the wages that I shall give thee? Then I asked 
him his name, and where he dwelt. He said his name was 
Adam the First, and that he dwelt in the town of Deceit.110 I 
asked him then, what was his work, and what the wages that 
he would give. He told me, that his work was many delights; 
and his wages, that I should be his heir at last. I further 
asked him, what house he kept, and what other servants he 
had. So he told me, that his house was maintained with all 
the dainties in the world; and that his servants were those of 
his own begetting. Then I asked if he had any children. He 
said that he had but three daughters; the Lust of the Flesh, 
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, and that I should 

108 Prov. 5:5
109 Job 31:1
110 Eph. 4:22

marry them all if I would.111 Then I asked how long time he 
would have me live with him? And he told me, As long as 
he lived himself.

CHRISTIAN. Well, and what conclusion came the old 

man and you to, at last?

FAITHFUL. Why, at first, I found myself somewhat in-

clinable to go with the man, for I thought he spake very fair; 
but looking in his forehead, as I talked with him, I saw there 
written, “Put off the old man with his deeds.”

CHRISTIAN. And how then?
FAITHFUL. Then it came burning hot into my mind, 

whatever he said, and however he flattered, when he got me 
home to his house, he would sell me for a slave. So I bid 
him forbear to talk, for I would not come near the door of 
his house. Then he reviled me, and told me, that he would 
send such a one after me, that should make my way bitter 
to my soul. So I turned to go away from him; but just as I 
turned myself to go thence, I felt him take hold of my flesh, 
and give me such a deadly twitch back, that I thought he 
had pulled part of me after himself. This made me cry, “O 
wretched man!”.112 So I went on my way up the hill.

Now when I had got about half way up, I looked be-

hind, and saw one coming after me, swift as the wind; so 
he overtook me just about the place where the settle stands.

CHRISTIAN. Just there, said Christian, did I sit down to 

rest me; but being overcome with sleep, I there lost this roll 
out of my bosom

the man overtook me, he was but a word and a blow, for 
down he knocked me, and laid me for dead. But when I 
was a little come to myself again, I asked him wherefore 

111 1 John 2:16
112 Rom. 7:24

he served me so. He said, because of my secret inclining to 
Adam the First: and with that he struck me another deadly 
blow on the breast, and beat me down backward; so I lay 
at his foot as dead as before. So, when I came to myself 
again, I cried him mercy; but he said, I know not how to 
show mercy; and with that knocked me down again. He had 
doubtless made an end of me, but that One came by, and 
bid him forbear.

CHRISTIAN. Who was that that bid him forbear.
FAITHFUL. I did not know Him at first, but as He went 

by, I perceived the holes in His hands, and in His side; then 
I concluded that He was our Lord. So I went up the hill.

CHRISTIAN. That man that overtook you was Moses. He 

spareth none, neither knoweth he how to show mercy to 
those that transgress his law.

FAITHFUL. I know it very well; it was not the first time 

that he has met with me. It was he that came to me when I 
dwelt securely at home, and that told me he would burn my 
house over my head, if I stayed there.

CHRISTIAN. But did you not see the house that stood 

there on the top of the hill, on the side of which Moses met 
you?

FAITHFUL. Yes, and the lions too, before I came at it; but 

for the lions, I think they were asleep; for it was about noon; 
and because I had so much of the day before me, I passed by 
the porter, and came down the hill.

CHRISTIAN. He told me indeed, that he saw you go by, 

but I wish you had called at the house, for they would have 
showed you so many rarities, that you would scarce have 
forgot them to the day of your death. But pray tell me, Did 
you meet nobody in the Valley of Humility?

FAITHFUL. Yes, I met with one Discontent, who would 

willingly have persuaded me to go back again with him; his 
reason was, for that the valley was altogether without hon-

our. He told me, moreover, that there to go was the way 
to disobey all my friends, as Pride, Arrogancy, Self-conceit, 
Worldly-glory, with others, who, he knew, as he said, would 
be very much offended, if I made such a fool of myself as to 
wade through this valley.

CHRISTIAN. Well, and how did you answer him?
FAITHFUL. I told him that although all these that he 

named might claim kindred of me, and that rightly, for in-
deed they were my relations according to the flesh, yet since 
I became a pilgrim, they have disowned me, as I also have 
rejected them; and therefore they were to me now no more 
than if they had never been of my lineage.

I told him, moreover, that as to this valley he had quite 

misrepresented the thing; “for before honour is humility; 
and a haughty spirit before a fall.” Therefore, said I, I had 
rather go through this valley to the honour that was so ac-
counted by the wisest, than choose that which he esteemed 
most worthy our affections.

CHRISTIAN. Met you with nothing else in that valley?
FAITHFUL. Yes, I met with Shame; but of all the men 

that I met with in my pilgrimage, he, I think, bears the 
wrong name. The others would be said nay, after a little ar-
gumentation, and somewhat else; but this bold-faced Shame 
would never have done.

CHRISTIAN. Why, what did he say to you?
FAITHFUL. What! why, he objected against religion it-

self; he said it was a pitiful, low, sneaking business for a man 
to mind religion; he said that a tender conscience was an 
unmanly thing; and that for a man to watch over his words 
and ways, so as to tie up himself from that hectoring liberty, 
that the brave spirits of the times accustom themselves unto, 
would make him the ridicule of the times. He objected also, 
that but few of the mighty, rich, or wise, were ever of my 

opinion;113 nor any of them neither,114 before they were per-
suaded to be fools, and to be of a voluntary fondness, to 
venture the loss of all, for nobody knows what. He moreover 
objected the base and low estate and condition of those that 
were chiefly the pilgrims, of the times in which they lived; 
also their ignorance, and want of understanding in all natu-
ral science. Yea, he did hold me to it at that rate also, about 
a great many more things than here I relate; as, that it was 
a shame to sit whining and mourning under a sermon, and 
a shame to come sighing and groaning home; that it was a 
shame to ask my neighbour forgiveness for petty faults, or to 
make restitution where I have taken from any. He said also, 
that religion made a man grow strange to the great, because 
of a few vices, which he called by finer names; and made 
him own and respect the base, because of the same religious 
fraternity. And is not this, said he, a shame?

CHRISTIAN. And what did you say to him?
FAITHFUL. Say! I could not tell what to say at the first. 

Yea, he put me so to it, that my blood came up in my face; 
even this Shame fetched it up, and had almost beat me quite 
off. But, at last, I began to consider, that “that which is high-
ly esteemed among men, is had in abomination with God”.115 
And I thought again, this Shame tells me what men are; but 
it tells me nothing what God, or the Word of God is. And I 
thought, moreover, that at the day of doom, we shall not be 
doomed to death or life, according to the hectoring spirits 
of the world, but according to the wisdom and law of the 
Highest. Therefore, thought I, what God says is best, indeed 
is best, though all the men in the world are against it. See-
ing, then, that God prefers His religion; seeing God prefers 

113 1 Cor. 1:26; 3:18; Phil. 3:7, 8
114 John 7:48
115 Luke 16:15

a tender conscience; seeing they that make themselves fools 
for the kingdom of Heaven are wisest; and that the poor 
man that loveth Christ is richer than the greatest man in the 
world that hates Him; Shame, depart, thou art an enemy 
to my salvation. Shall I entertain thee against my sovereign 
Lord? How then shall I look Him in the face at His coming? 
Should I now be ashamed of His ways and servants, how can 
I expect the blessing?116 But, indeed, this Shame was a bold 
villain; I could scarce shake him out of my company; yea, he 
would be haunting of me, and continually whispering me in 
the ear, with some one or other of the infirmities that attend 
religion; but at last I told him it was but in vain to attempt 
further in this business; for those things that he disdained, 
in those did I see most glory; and so at last I got past this 
importunate one. And when I had shaken him off, then I 
began to sing—

The trials that those men do meet withal, 
That are obedient to the heavenly call, 
Are manifold, and suited to the flesh, 
And come, and come, and come again afresh; 
That now, or sometime else, we by them may 
Be taken, overcome, and cast away. 
O let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims, then, 
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men.

CHRISTIAN. I am glad, my brother, that thou didst with-
stand this villain so bravely; for of all, as thou sayest, I think 
he has the wrong name; for he is so bold as to follow us in 
the streets, and to attempt to put us to shame before all men; 
that is, to make us ashamed of that which is good; but if he 
were not himself audacious, he would never attempt to do 

116 Mark 8:38

as he does. But let us still resist him; for notwithstanding all 
his bravadoes, he promoteth the fool, and none else. “The 
wise shall inherit glory,” said Solomon, “but shame shall be 
the promotion of fools”.117

FAITHFUL. I think we must cry to Him for help against 

Shame, who would have us to be valiant for the truth upon 
the earth.

CHRISTIAN. You say true; but did you meet nobody else 

in that valley?

FAITHFUL. No, not I, for I had sunshine all the rest of 

the way through that, and also through the Valley of the 
Shadow of Death.

CHRISTIAN. It was well for you. I am sure it fared far 

otherwise with me; I had for a long season, as soon almost 
as I entered into that valley, a dreadful combat with that foul 
fiend Apollyon; yea, I thought verily he would have killed 
me, especially when he got me down and crushed me under 
him, as if he would have crushed me to pieces; for as he 
threw me, my sword flew out of my hand; nay, he told me 
he was sure of me; but I cried to God, and He heard me, and 
delivered me out of all my troubles. Then I entered into the 
Valley of the Shadow of Death, and had no light for almost 
half the way through it. I thought I should have been killed 
there, over and over; but at last day broke, and the sun rose, 
and I went through that which was behind with far more 
ease and quiet.

Moreover, I saw in my dream, that as they went on, 

Faithful, as he chanced to look on one side, saw a man whose 
name is Talkative, walking at a distance besides them; for in 
this place, there was room enough for them all to walk. He 
was a tall man, and something more comely at a distance 

117 Prov. 3:35

than at hand. To this man Faithful addressed himself in this 
manner.

heavenly country?

TALKATIVE. I am going to the same place.
FAITHFUL. That is well; then I hope we may have your 

good company.

TALKATIVE. With a very good will, will I be your com-

panion.

FAITHFUL. Come on, then, and let us go together, and 

let us spend our time in discoursing of things that are prof-
itable.

TALKATIVE. To talk of things that are good, to me is very 

acceptable, with you, or with any other; and I am glad that 
I have met with those that incline to so good a work; for, 
to speak the truth, there are but few that care thus to spend 
their time (as they are in their travels), but choose much 
rather to be speaking of things to no profit; and this hath 
been a trouble to me.

FAITHFUL. That is indeed a thing to be lamented; for 

what things so worthy of the use of the tongue and mouth 
of men on earth, as are the things of the God of Heaven?

are full of conviction; and I will add, what thing is so pleas-
ant, and what so profitable, as to talk of the things of God? 
What things so pleasant (that is, if a man hath any delight 
in things that are wonderful)? For instance, if a man doth 
delight to talk of the history or the mystery of things; or if a 
man doth love to talk of miracles, wonders, or signs, where 
shall he find things recorded so delightful, and so sweetly 
penned, as in the Holy Scripture?

FAITHFUL. That is true; but to be profited by such things 

in our talk should be that which we design.

TALKATIVE. That is it that I said; for to talk of such things 

is most profitable; for by so doing, a man may get knowl-
edge of many things; as of the vanity of earthly things, and 
the benefit of things above. Thus, in general, but more par-
ticularly, by this, a man may learn the necessity of the new 
birth; the insufficiency of our works; the need of Christ’s 
righteousness, etc. Besides, by this a man may learn, by talk, 
what it is to repent, to believe, to pray, to suffer, or the like; 
by this also a man may learn what are the great promises and 
consolations of the Gospel, to his own comfort. Further, by 
this a man may learn to refute false opinions, to vindicate 
the truth, and also to instruct the ignorant.121

FAITHFUL. All this is true, and glad am I to hear these 

things from you.

TALKATIVE. Alas! the want of this is the cause why so few 

understand the need of faith, and the necessity of a work of 
grace in their soul, in order to eternal life; but ignorantly live 
in the works of the law, by which a man can by no means 
obtain the kingdom of Heaven.

FAITHFUL. But, by your leave, heavenly knowledge of 

these is the gift of God; no man attaineth to them by human 
industry, or only by the talk of them.

TALKATIVE. All this I know very well. For a man can 

receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven; all is 
of grace, not of works. I could give you a hundred scriptures 
for the confirmation of this.

thing that we shall at this time found our discourse upon?

TALKATIVE. What you will. I will talk of things heavenly, 

or things earthly; things moral, or things evangelical; things 
sacred, or things profane; things past, or things to come; 
things foreign, or things at home; things more essential, or 
things circumstantial; provided that all be done to our prof-
it.

FAITHFUL. Now did Faithful begin to wonder; and step-

ping to Christian (for he walked all this while by himself), 
he said to him (but softly), What a brave companion have 
we got! Surely this man will make a very excellent pilgrim.

CHRISTIAN. At this Christian modestly smiled, and said, 

This man, with whom you are so taken, will beguile, with 
that tongue of his, of them that know him not.

FAITHFUL. Do you know him, then?
CHRISTIAN. Know him! Yes, better than he knows him-

self.

FAITHFUL. Pray, what is he?
CHRISTIAN. His name is Talkative; he dwelleth in our 

town; I wonder that you should be a stranger to him, only I 
consider that our town is large.

FAITH. Whose son is he? And whereabout does he dwell?
CHRISTIAN. He is the son of one Say-well; he dwelt in 

Prating Row; and he is known of all that are acquainted with 
him, by the name of Talkative in Prating Row; and notwith-
standing his fine tongue, he is but a sorry fellow.

FAITHFUL. Well, he seems to be a very pretty man.
CHRISTIAN. That is, to them who have not thorough 

acquaintance with him; for he is best abroad; near home, he 
is ugly enough. Your saying that he is a pretty man, brings 
to my mind what I have observed in the work of the painter, 
whose pictures show best at a distance, but, very near, more 
unpleasing.

FAITHFUL. But I am ready to think you do but jest, be-

cause you smiled.

smiled) in this matter, or that I should accuse any falsely! I 
will give you a further discovery of him. This man is for any 
company, and for any talk; as he talketh now with you, so 
will he talk when he is on the ale-bench; and the more drink 
he hath in his crown, the more of these things he hath in 
his mouth; religion hath no place in his heart, or house, or 

conversation; all he hath, lieth in his tongue, and his religion 
is to make a noise therewith.

deceived.

CHRISTIAN. Deceived! you may be sure of it; remember 

the proverb, “They say, and do not”.118 But the “kingdom of 
God is not in word, but in power”.119 He talketh of prayer, 
of repentance, of faith, and of the new birth; but he knows 
but only to talk of them. I have been in his family, and have 
observed him both at home and abroad; and I know what 
I say of him is the truth. His house is as empty of religion, 
as the white of an egg is of savour. There is there, neither 
prayer, nor sign of repentance for sin; yea, the brute in his 
kind serves God far better than he. He is the very stain, re-
proach, and shame of religion, to all that know him; it can 
hardly have a good word in all that end of the town where 
he dwells, through him.120 Thus say the common people that 
know him, A saint abroad, and a devil at home. His poor 
family finds it so, he is such a churl, such a railer at, and so 
unreasonable with his servants, that they neither know how 
to do for, or speak to him. Men that have any dealings with 
him, say, it is better to deal with a Turk than with him; for 
fairer dealing they shall have at their hands. This Talkative 
(if it be possible) will go beyond them, defraud, beguile, and 
over-reach them. Besides, he brings up his sons to follow his 
steps; and if he findeth in any of them a foolish timorousness 
(for so he calls the first appearance of a tender conscience), 
he calls them fools, and blockheads, and by no means will 
employ them in much, or speak to their commendations 
before others. For my part, I am of opinion, that he has, by 

118 Matt. 23:3
119 1 Cor. 4:20
120 Rom. 2:24, 25

his wicked life, caused many to stumble and fall; and will be, 
if God prevent not, the ruin of many more.

not only because you say you know him, but also because, 
like a Christian, you make your reports of men. For I cannot 
think that you speak these things of ill-will, but because it is 
even so as you say.

CHRISTIAN. Had I known him no more than you, I 

might perhaps have thought of him as, at the first, you did; 
yea, had he received this report at their hands only that are 
enemies to religion, I should have thought it had been a 
slander—a lot that often falls from bad men’s mouths upon 
good men’s names and professions; but all these things, yea, 
and a great many more as bad, of my own knowledge, I 
can prove him guilty of. Besides, good men are ashamed 
of him; they can neither call him brother, nor friend; the 
very naming of him among them makes them blush, if they 
know him.

FAITHFUL. Well, I see that saying and doing are two 

things, and hereafter I shall better observe this distinction.

CHRISTIAN. They are two things indeed, and are as di-

verse as are the soul and the body; for as the body without 
the soul is but a dead carcass, so saying, if it be alone, is but 
a dead carcass also. The soul of religion is the practical part: 
“Pure religion and undefiled, before God and the Father, is 
this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and 
to keep himself unspotted from the world”.121 This Talkative 
is not aware of; he thinks that hearing and saying will make 
a good Christian, and thus he deceiveth his own soul. Hear-
ing is but as the sowing of the seed; talking is not sufficient 
to prove that fruit is indeed in the heart and life; and let 
us assure ourselves, that at the day of doom men shall be 

121 James 1:27; see vv. 22–26

judged according to their fruits.122 It will not be said then, 
Did you believe? but, Were you doers, or talkers only? and 
accordingly shall they be judged. The end of the world is 
compared to our harvest; and you know men at harvest re-
gard nothing but fruit. Not that anything can be accepted 
that is not of faith, but I speak this to show you how insig-
nificant the profession of Talkative will be at that day.

FAITHFUL. This brings to my mind that of Moses, by 

which he describeth the beast that is clean.123 He is such a 
one that parteth the hoof and cheweth the cud; not that par-
teth the hoof only, or that cheweth the cud only. The hare 
cheweth the cud, but yet is unclean, because be parteth not 
the hoof. And this truly resembleth Talkative, he cheweth 
the cud, he seeketh knowledge, he cheweth upon the word; 
but he divideth not the hoof, he parteth not with the way 
of sinners; but, as the hare, he retaineth the foot of a dog or 
bear, and therefore he is unclean.

CHRISTIAN. You have spoken, for aught I know, the true 

Gospel sense of those texts. And I will add another thing: 
Paul calleth some men, yea, and those great talkers too, 
“sounding brass, and tinkling cymbals,” that is, as he ex-
pounds them in another place, “things without life, giving 
sound”.124 Things without life, that is, without the true faith 
and grace of the Gospel; and consequently, things that shall 
never be placed in the kingdom of Heaven among those that 
are the children of life; though their sound, by their talk, be 
as if it were the tongue or voice of an angel.

FAITHFUL. Well, I was not so fond of his company at 

first, but I am as sick of it now. What shall we do to be rid 
of him?

122 Matt. 13:25
123 Lev. 11; Deut. 14
124 1 Cor. 13:1–3; 14:7

CHRISTIAN. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, and 

you shall find that he will soon be sick of your company too, 
except God shall touch his heart, and turn it.

FAITHFUL. What would you have me to do?
CHRISTIAN. Why, go to him, and enter into some se-

rious discourse about the power of religion; and ask him 
plainly (when he has approved of it, for that he will) wheth-
er this thing be set up in his heart, house, or conversation?

FAITHFUL. Then Faithful stepped forward again, and 

said to Talkative, Come, what cheer? How is it now?

TALKATIVE. Thank you, well. I thought we should have 

had a great deal of talk by this time.

FAITHFUL. Well, if you will, we will fall to it now; and 

since you left it with me to state the question, let it be this: 
How doth the saving grace of God discover itself, when it is 
in the heart of man?

TALKATIVE. I perceive then, that our talk must be about 

the power of things. Well, it is a very good question, and I 
shall be willing to answer you. And take my answer in brief, 
thus: First, Where the grace of work of God is in the heart, 
it causeth there a great outcry against sin. Secondly—

FAITHFUL. Nay, hold, let us consider of one at once. I 

think you should rather say, It shows itself by inclining the 
soul to abhor its sin.

TALKATIVE. Why, what difference is there between cry-

ing out against, and abhorring of sin?

FAITHFUL. O! a great deal. A man may cry out against 

sin of policy, but he cannot abhor it, but by virtue of a godly 
antipathy against it. I have heard many cry out against sin 
in the pulpit, who yet can abide it well enough in the heart, 
house, and conversation. Joseph’s mistress cried out with a 
loud voice, as if she had been very holy; but she would will-
ingly, notwithstanding that, have committed uncleanness 

with him.125 Some cry out against sin, even as the mother 
cries out against her child in her lap, when she calleth it slut 
and naughty girl, and then falls to hugging and kissing it.

TALKATIVE. You lie at the catch, I perceive.
FAITHFUL. No, not I; I am only for setting things right. 

But what is the second thing whereby you would prove a 
discovery of a work of grace in the heart?

TALKATIVE. Great knowledge of Gospel mysteries.
FAITHFUL. This sign should have been first; but first or 

last, it is also false; for knowledge, great knowledge, may be 
obtained in the mysteries of the Gospel, and yet no work of 
grace in the soul.126 Yea, if a man have all knowledge, he may 
yet be nothing, and so consequently be no child of God. 
When Christ said, “Do you know all these things?” and the 
disciples had answered, Yes; He addeth, “Blessed are ye if ye 
do them.” He doth not lay the blessing in the knowing of 
them, but in the doing of them. For there is a knowledge 
that is not attended with doing: “He that knoweth his mas-
ter’s will, and doeth it not.” A man may know like an angel, 
and yet be no Christian, therefore your sign of it is not true. 
Indeed, to know is a thing that pleaseth talkers and boasters; 
but to do is that which pleaseth God. Not that the heart 
can be good without knowledge; for without that the heart 
is naught. There is, therefore, knowledge and knowledge. 
Knowledge that resteth in the bare speculation of things; 
and knowledge that is accompanied with the grace of faith 
and love; which puts a man upon doing even the will of God 
from the heart: the first of these will serve the talker; but 
without the other the true Christian is not content. “Give 

125 Gen. 39:15
126 1 Cor. 13

me understanding, and I shall keep Thy law; yea, I shall 
observe it with my whole heart”.127

edification. 

FAITHFUL. Well, if you please, propound another sign 

how this work of grace discovereth itself where it is.

TALKATIVE. Not I, for I see we shall not agree.
FAITHFUL. Well, if you will not, will you give me leave 

to do it?

TALKATIVE. You may use your liberty.
FAITHFUL. A work of grace in the soul discovereth itself, 

either to him that hath it, or to standers by.

To him that hath it thus: It gives him conviction of sin, 

especially of the defilement of his nature and the sin of un-
belief (for the sake of which he is sure to be damned, if he 
findeth not mercy at God’s hand, by faith in Jesus Christ.128 
This sight and sense of things worketh in him sorrow and 
shame for sin; he findeth, moreover, revealed in Him the 
Saviour of the world, and the absolute necessity of closing 
with Him for life, at the which he findeth hungerings and 
thirstings after Him; to which hungerings, etc., the promise 
is made.129 Now, according to the strength or weakness of 
his faith in his Saviour, so is his joy and peace, so is his love 
to holiness, so are his desires to know Him more, and also 
to serve Him in this world. But though I say it discovereth 
itself thus unto him, yet it is but seldom that he is able to 
conclude that this is a work of grace; because his corruptions 
now, and his abused reason, make his mind to misjudge in 
this matter; therefore, in him that hath this work, there is 

127 Psa. 119:34
128 John 16:8; Rom. 7:24; John 16:9; Mark 16:16
129 Psa. 38:18; Jer. 31:19; Gal. 2:16; Acts 4:12; Matt. 5:6; Rev. 21:26

required a very sound judgment before he can, with steadi-
ness, conclude that this is a work of grace.

To others, it is thus discovered:
1. By an experimental confession of his faith in Christ130 
2. By a life answerable to that confession; to wit, a life of 

holiness; heart-holiness, family-holiness (if he hath a fami-
ly), and by conversation-holiness in the world; which, in the 
general, teacheth him, inwardly, to abhor his sin, and him-
self for that, in secret; to suppress it in his family, and to pro-
mote holiness in the world; not by talk only, as a hypocrite 
or talkative person may do, but by a practical subjection, in 
faith and love, to the power of the Word.131 And now, Sir, as 
to this brief description of the work of grace, and also the 
discovery of it, if you have aught to object, object; if not, 
then give me leave to propound to you a second question.

TALKATIVE. Nay, my part is not now to object, but to 

hear; let me, therefore, have your second question.

FAITHFUL. It is this: Do you experience this first part of 

this description of it? and doth your life and conversation 
testify the same? or standeth your religion in word or in 
tongue, and not in deed and truth? Pray, if you incline to 
answer me in this, say no more than you know the God 
above will say Amen to; and, also, nothing but what your 
conscience can justify you in; “for, not he that commendeth 
himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.” Be-
sides, to say, I am thus, and thus, when my conversation, 
and all my neighbours, tell me I lie, is great wickedness.

recovering himself, thus he replied: You come now to ex-
perience, to conscience, and God; and to appeal to Him 
for justification of what is spoken. This kind of discourse I 

130 Rom. 10:10; Phil. 1:27; Matt. 5:19
131 John 14:15; Psa. 1:2–3; Job 42:5, 6; Ezek. 20:43

did not expect; nor am I disposed to give an answer to such 
questions, because I count not myself bound thereto, un-
less you take upon you to be a catechiser, and, though you 
should so do, yet I may refuse to make you my judge. But, I 
pray, will you tell me why you ask me such questions?

FAITHFUL. Because I saw you forward to talk, and be-

cause I knew not that you had aught else but notion. Be-
sides, to tell you all the truth, I have heard of you, that you 
are a man whose religion lies in talk, and that your conver-
sation gives this your mouth-profession the lie. They say, 
you are a spot among Christians; and that religion fareth 
the worse for your ungodly conversation; that some already 
have stumbled at your wicked ways, and that more are in 
danger of being destroyed thereby; your religion, and an 
ale-house, and covetousness, and uncleanness, and swear-
ing, and lying, and vain company keeping, etc., will stand 
together. The proverb is true of you which is said of a whore, 
to wit, that she is a shame to all women; so are you a shame 
to all professors.

TALKATIVE. Since you are ready to take up reports, and 

to judge so rashly as you do, I cannot but conclude you are 
some peevish or melancholy man, not fit to be discoursed 
with; and so adieu.

CHRISTIAN. Then came up Christian, and said to his 

brother, I told you how it would happen; your words and 
his lusts could not agree; he had rather leave your company 
than reform his life. But he is gone, as I said; let him go, the 
loss is no man’s but his own; he has saved us the trouble of 
going from him; for he continuing (as I suppose he will do) 
as he is, he would have been but a blot in our company; be-
sides, the apostle says, “From such withdraw thyself.”

FAITHFUL. But I am glad we had this little discourse 

with him; it may happen that he will think of it again; how-

ever, I have dealt plainly with him, and so am clear of his 
blood, if he perisheth.

CHRISTIAN. You did well to talk so plainly to him as you 

did; there is but little of this faithful dealing with men now-
a-days, and that makes religion to stink so in the nostrils 
of many, as it doth; for they are these talkative fools whose 
religion is only in word, and are debauched and vain in their 
conversation, that (being so much admitted into the fellow-
ship of the godly) do puzzle the world, blemish Christianity, 
and grieve the sincere. I wish that all men would deal with 
such as you have done; then should they either be made 
more conformable to religion, or the company of saints 
would be too hot for them. Then did Faithful say,

How Talkative at first lifts up his plumes! 
How bravely doth he speak! How he presumes 
To drive down all before him! But so soon 
As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon 
That’s past the full, into the wane he goes. 
And so will all, but he that HEART-WORK knows.

Thus they went on talking of what they had seen by the 
way, and so made that way easy which would, otherwise, 
no doubt, have been tedious to them; for now they went 
through a wilderness.

Now, when they were got almost quite out of this wil-

derness, Faithful chanced to cast his eye back, and espied 
one coming after them, and he knew him. Oh! said Faithful 
to his brother, Who comes yonder? Then Christian looked, 
and said, It is my good friend Evangelist. Aye, and my good 
friend too, said Faithful, for it was he that set me the way to 
the gate. Now was Evangelist come up unto them, and thus 
saluted them:

EVANGELIST. Peace be with you, dearly beloved; and 

peace be to your helpers.

CHRISTIAN. Welcome, welcome, my good Evangelist; 

the sight of thy countenance brings to my remembrance thy 
ancient kindness and unwearied labouring for my eternal 
good.

FAITHFUL. And a thousand times welcome, said good 

Faithful. Thy company, O sweet Evangelist, how desirable it 
is to us poor pilgrims!

with you, my friends, since the time of our last parting? 
What have you met with, and how have you behaved your-
selves?

Then Christian and Faithful told him of all things that 

had happened to them in the way; and how and with what 
difficulty, they had arrived to that place.

EVANGELIST. Right glad am I, said Evangelist, not that 

you have met with trials, but that you have been victors; 
and for that you have, notwithstanding many weaknesses, 
continued in the way to this very day.

I say, right glad am I of this thing, and that for mine 

own sake and yours. I have sowed, and you have reaped; 
and the day is coming, when both he that sowed and they 
that reaped shall rejoice together; that is, if you hold out; 
“for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not”.132 The crown 
is before you, and it is an incorruptible one; “so run, that 
you may obtain” it.133 Some there be that set out for this 
crown, and, after they have gone far for it, another comes 
in, and takes it from them; hold fast, therefore, that you 
have, let no man take your crown.134 You are not yet out of 

132 John 4:36; Gal. 6:9
133 1 Cor. 9:24–27
134 Rev. 3:11

the gun-shot of the devil; you have not resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin; let the kingdom be always before you, 
and believe steadfastly concerning things that are invisible. 
Let nothing that is on this side the other world get within 
you; and, above all, look well to your own hearts, and to 
the lusts thereof, “for they are deceitful above all things, and 
desperately wicked”; set your faces like a flint; you have all 
power in Heaven and earth on your side.

CHRISTIAN. Then Christian thanked him for his exhor-

tation; but told him, withal, that they would have him speak 
further to them for their help the rest of the way, and the 
rather, for that they well knew that he was a prophet, and 
could tell them of things that might happen unto them, and 
also how they might resist and overcome them. To which 
request Faithful also consented. So Evangelist began as fol-
loweth:

EVANGELIST. My sons, you have heard in the words of 

the truth of the Gospel that you must, through many tribu-
lations, enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And again, that 
in every city bonds and afflictions abide in you; and there-
fore you cannot expect that you should go long on your 
pilgrimage without them, in some sort or other. You have 
found something of the truth of these testimonies upon you 
already, and more will immediately follow; for now, as you 
see, you are almost out of this wilderness, and therefore you 
will soon come into a town that you will by and by see be-
fore you; and in that town you will be hardly beset with 
enemies, who will strain hard but they will kill you; and be 
you sure that one or both of you must seal the testimony 
which you hold, with blood; but be you faithful unto death, 
and the King will give you a crown of life. He that shall die 
there, although his death will be unnatural, and his pain 
perhaps great, he will yet have the better of his fellow; not 
only because he will be arrived at the Celestial City soon-

est, but because he will escape many miseries that the other 
will meet with in the rest of his journey. But when you are 
come to the town, and shall find fulfilled what I have here 
related, then remember your friend and quit yourselves like 
men, and commit the keeping of your souls to your God in 
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Then I saw in my dream, that when they were got out 

of the wilderness, they presently saw a town before them, 
and the name of that town is Vanity; and at the town there 
is a fair kept, called Vanity Fair: it is kept all the year long; it 
beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because the town where it 
is kept is lighter than vanity; and also because all that is there 
sold, or that cometh thither, is vanity. As is the saying of the 
wise, “All that cometh is vanity”.135

This fair is no new-erected business, but a thing of an-

cient standing; I will show you the original of it.

Almost 5,000 years agone, there were pilgrims walking 

to the Celestial City as these two honest persons are: and 
Beelzebub, Apollyon, and Legion, with their companions, 
perceiving by the path that the pilgrims made, that their way 
to the city lay through this town of Vanity, they contrived 
here to set up a fair; a fair wherein should be sold all sorts 
of vanity, and that it should last all the year long: therefore 
at this fair are all such merchandise sold, as houses, lands, 
trades, places, honours, preferments, titles, countries, king-
doms, lusts, pleasures, and delights of all sorts, as whores, 
bawds, wives, husbands, children, masters, servants, lives, 
blood, bodies, souls, silver, gold, pearls, precious stones, and 
what not. And, moreover, at this fair there is at all times, to 
be seen juggling, cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves, 
and rogues, and that of every kind.

Here are to be seen too, and that for nothing, thefts, 

135 Eccl. 1; 2:11, 17; 11:8; Isa. 40:17

murders, adulteries, false swearers, and that of a blood-red 
colour.

And as in other fairs of less moment, there are the several 

rows and streets, under their proper names, where such and 
such wares are vended; so here likewise you have the proper 
places, rows, streets (viz. countries and kingdoms), where 
the wares of this fair are soonest to be found. Here is the 
Britain Row, the French Row, the Italian Row, the Spanish 
Row, the German Row, where several sorts of vanities are to 
be sold. But, as in other fairs, some one commodity is as the 
chief of all the fair, so the ware of Rome and her merchan-
dise is greatly promoted in this fair; only our English nation, 
with some others, have taken a dislike thereat.

Now, as I said, the way to the Celestial City lies just 

through this town where this lusty fair is kept; and he that 
will go to the City, and yet not go through this town, must 
needs “go out of the world”.136 The Prince of princes Him-
self, when here, went through this town to His own country, 
and that upon a fair day too; yea, and as I think, it was Beel-
zebub, the chief lord of this fair, that invited Him to buy 
of his vanities; yea, would have made Him lord of the fair, 
would He but have done him reverence as He went through 
the town.137 Yea, because He was such a person of honour, 
Beelzebub had Him from street to street, and showed Him 
all the kingdoms of the world in a little time, that he might, 
if possible, allure the Blessed One to cheapen and buy some 
of his vanities; but He had no mind to the merchandise, 
and therefore left the town, without laying out so much as 
one farthing upon these vanities.This fair, therefore, is an 
ancient thing, of long standing, and a very great fair. Now 
these Pilgrims, as I said, must needs go through this fair. 

136 1 Cor. 5:10
137 Matt. 4:8; Luke 4:5–7

Well, so they did; but, behold, even as they entered into 
the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, and the town 
itself as it were in a hubbub about them; and that for several 
reasons; for—

First, The pilgrims were clothed with such kind of rai-

ment as was diverse from the raiment of any that traded in 
that fair. The people, therefore, of the fair, made a great gaz-
ing upon them: some said they were fools, some they were 
bedlams, and some they are outlandish men.138

Secondly, And as they wondered at their apparel, so they 

did likewise at their speech; for few could understand what 
they said; they naturally spoke the language of Canaan, but 
they that kept the fair were the men of this world; so that, 
from one end of the fair to the other, they seemed barbarians 
each to the other.

Thirdly, But that which did not a little amuse the mer-

chandisers was, that these pilgrims set very light by all their 
wares; they cared not so much as to look upon them; and if 
they called upon them to buy, they would put their fingers 
in their ears, and cry, “Turn away mine eyes from beholding 
vanity,” and look upwards, signifying that their trade and 
traffic was in heaven.139

One chanced mockingly, beholding the carriage of the 

men, to say unto them, What will ye buy? But they, looking 
gravely upon him, answered, “We buy the truth”.140 At that 
there was an occasion taken to despise the men the more: 
some mocking, some taunting, some speaking reproachfully, 
and some calling upon others to smite them. At last things 
came to a hubbub, and great stir in the fair, insomuch that 
all order was confounded. Now was word presently brought 

138 1 Cor. 2:7, 8
139 Psa. 119:37; Phil. 3:19, 20
140 Psa. 23:2–3

to the great one of the fair, who quickly came down, and de-
puted some of his most trusty friends to take these men into 
examination, about whom the fair was almost overturned. 
So the men were brought to examination; and they that sat 
upon them, asked them whence they came, whither they 
went, and what they did there in such an unusual garb? The 
men told them, that they were pilgrims and strangers in the 
world, and that they were going to their own country, which 
was the heavenly Jerusalem;141 and that they had given no oc-
casion to the men of the town, nor yet to the merchandisers, 
thus to abuse them, and to let them in their journey, except 
it was, for that, when one asked them what they would buy, 
they said they would buy the truth. But they that were ap-
pointed to examine them did not believe them to be any 
other than bedlams and mad, or else such as came to put all 
things into a confusion in the fair. Therefore they took them 
and beat them, and besmeared them with dirt, and then put 
them into the cage, that they might be made a spectacle to 
all the men of the fair. There, therefore, they lay for some 
time, and were made the objects of any man’s sport, or mal-
ice, or revenge, the great one of the fair laughing still at all 
that befell them. But the men being patient, and not render-
ing railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing, and giving 
good words for bad, and kindness for injuries done, some 
men in the fair that were more observing, and less preju-
diced than the rest, began to check and blame the baser sort 
for their continual abuses done by them to the men; they, 
therefore, in angry manner, let fly at them again, counting 
them as bad as the men in the cage, and telling them that 
they seemed confederates, and should be made partakers 
of their misfortunes. The other replied, that for aught they 
could see, the men were quiet, and sober, and intended no-

141 Heb. 9:13–16

body any harm; and that there were many that traded in 
their fair, that were more worthy to be put into the cage, yea, 
and pillory too, than were the men that they had abused. 
Thus, after divers words had passed on both sides, the men 
behaving themselves all the while very wisely and soberly 
before them, they fell to some blows among themselves, and 
did harm one to another. Then were these two poor men 
brought before their examiners again, and there charged as 
being guilty of the late hubbub that had been in the fair. So 
they beat them pitifully, and hanged irons upon them, and 
led them in chains up and down the fair, for an example 
and a terror to others, lest any should speak in their behalf, 
or join themselves unto them. But Christian and Faithful 
behaved themselves yet more wisely, and received the igno-
miny and shame that was cast upon them, with so much 
meekness and patience, that it won to their side, though but 
few in comparison of the rest, several of the men in the fair. 
This put the other party yet into greater rage, insomuch that 
they concluded the death of these two men. Wherefore they 
threatened, that the cage nor irons should serve their turn, 
but that they should die, for the abuse they had done, and 
for deluding the men of the fair.

Then were they remanded to the cage again, until fur-

ther order should be taken with them. So they put them in, 
and made their feet fast in the stocks.

Here, therefore, they called again to mind what they 

had heard from their faithful friend Evangelist, and were 
the more confirmed in their way and sufferings, by what he 
told them would happen to them. They also now comforted 
each other, that whose lot it was to suffer, even he should 
have the best of it; therefore each man secretly wished that 
he might have that preferment: but committing themselves 
to the all-wise disposal of Him that ruleth all things, with 

much content they abode in the condition in which they 
were, until they should be otherwise disposed of.

them forth to their trial, in order to their condemnation. 
When the time was come, they were brought before their 
enemies and arraigned. The Judge’s name was Lord Hate-
good. Their indictment was one and the same in substance, 
though somewhat varying in form, the contents whereof 
were this—

“That they were enemies to, and disturbers of their trade; 

that they had made commotions and divisions in the town, 
and had won a party to their own most dangerous opinions, 
in contempt of the law of their prince.”

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had only set 

himself against that which had set itself against Him that 
is higher than the highest. And, said he, as for disturbance, 
I make none, being myself a man of peace; the parties that 
were won to us, were won by beholding our truth and inno-
cence, and they are only turned from the worse to the better. 
And as to the king you talk of, since be is Beelzebub, the 
enemy of our Lord, I defy him and all his angels.

Then proclamation was made, that they that had aught 

to say for their lord the king against the prisoner at the bar, 
should forthwith appear and give in their evidence. So there 
came in three witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition, and 
Pickthank. They were then asked if they knew the prisoner 
at the bar; and what they had to say for their lord the king 
against him.

Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect, My Lord, 

I have known this man a long time, and will attest upon my 
oath before this honourable bench, that he is—

JUDGE. Hold. Give him his oath. (So they sware him). 

Then he said—

ENVY. My Lord, this man, notwithstanding his plausible 

name, is one of the vilest men in our country. He neither 
regardeth prince nor people, law nor custom; but doth all 
that he can to possess all men with certain of his disloyal 
notions, which he in the general calls principles of faith and 
holiness. And, in particular, I heard him once myself affirm, 
that Christianity and the customs of our town of Vanity, 
were diametrically opposite, and could not be reconciled. By 
which saying, my Lord, he doth at once not only condemn 
all our laudable doings, but us in the doing of them.

more to say?

ENVY. My Lord, I could say much more, only I would 

not be tedious to the court. Yet, if need be, when the other 
gentlemen have given in their evidence, rather than any-
thing shall be wanting that will despatch him, I will enlarge 
my testimony against him. So he was bid stand by.

Then they called Superstition, and bid him look upon 

the prisoner. They also asked, what he could say for their 
lord the king against him. Then they sware him; so he began.

SUPER. My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this 

man, nor do I desire to have further knowledge of him; how-
ever, this I know, that he is a very pestilent fellow, from some 
discourse that, the other day, I had with him in this town; 
for then talking with him, I heard him say, that our religion 
was naught, and such by which a man could by no means 
please God. Which sayings of his, my Lord, your Lordship 
very well knows, what necessarily thence will follow, to wit, 
that we do still worship in vain, are yet in our sins, and fi-
nally shall be damned; and this is that which I have to say.

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he knew, 

in behalf of their lord the king, against the prisoner at the 
bar.

PICKTHANK. My Lord, and you gentlemen all, This fel-

low I have known of a long time, and have heard him speak 

things that ought not to be spoke; for he hath railed on our 
noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken contemptibly of 
his honourable friends, whose names are the Lord Old Man, 
the Lord Carnal Delight, the Lord Luxurious, the Lord De-
sire of Vain Glory, my old Lord Lechery, Sir Having Greedy, 
with all the rest of our nobility; and he hath said, moreover, 
That if all men were of his mind, if possible, there is not one 
of these noblemen should have any longer a being in this 
town. Besides, he hath not been afraid to rail on you, my 
Lord, who are now appointed to be his judge, calling you an 
ungodly villain, with many other such like vilifying terms, 
with which he hath bespattered most of the gentry of our 
town.

When this Pickthank had told his tale, the Judge direct-

ed his speech to the prisoner at the bar, saying, Thou runa-
gate, heretic, and traitor, hast thou heard what these honest 
gentlemen have witnessed against thee?

FAITHFUL. May I speak a few words in my own defence?
JUDGE. Sirrah! Sirrah! thou deservest to live no longer, 

but to be slain immediately upon the place; yet, that all men 
may see our gentleness towards thee, let us hear what thou, 
vile runagate, hast to say.

FAITHFUL. 1. I say, then, in answer to what Mr. Envy 

hath spoken, I never said aught but this, That what rule, 
or laws, or custom, or people, were flat against the Word 
of God, are diametrically opposite to Christianity. If I have 
said amiss in this, convince me of my error, and I am ready 
here before you to make my recantation.

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, and his 

charge against me, I said only this, That in the worship of 
God there is required a Divine faith; but there can be no 
Divine faith without a Divine revelation of the will of God. 
Therefore, whatever is thrust into the worship of God that 
is not agreeable to Divine revelation, cannot be done but by 

a human faith, which faith will not be profitable to eternal 
life.

terms, as that I am said to rail, and the like), that the prince 
of this town, with all the rabblement, his attendants, by this 
gentleman named, are more fit for a being in hell, than in 
this town and country: and so, the Lord have mercy upon 
me!

stood by, to hear and observe; Gentlemen of the jury, you 
see this man about whom so great an uproar hath been 
made in this town. You have also heard what these worthy 
gentlemen have witnessed against him. Also you have heard 
his reply and confession. It lieth now in your breasts to hang 
him, or save his life; but yet I think meet to instruct you 
into our law.

There was an Act made in the days of Pharaoh the Great, 

servant to our prince, that lest those of a contrary religion 
should multiply, and grow too strong for him, their males 
should be thrown into the river.142 There was also an Act 
made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another of 
his servants, that whosoever would not fall down and wor-
ship his golden image, should be thrown into a fiery fur-
nace.143 There was also an Act made in the days of Darius, 
that whoso, for some time, called upon any God but him, 
should be cast into the lions’ den.144 Now the substance of 
these laws this rebel has broken, not only in thought (which 
is not to be borne) but also in word and deed; which must 
therefore needs be intolerable.

For that of Pharaoh, his law was made upon a supposi-

142 Exo. 1
143 Dan. 3
144 Dan. 6

tion, to prevent mischief, no crime being yet apparent; but 
here is a crime apparent. For the second and third, you see 
he disputeth against our religion; and for the treason he hath 
confessed, he deserveth to die the death.

Then went the jury out, whose names were, Mr. Blind-

man, Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-
loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, 
Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable; who every 
one gave in his private verdict against him among them-
selves, and afterwards unanimously concluded to bring him 
in guilty before the Judge. And first, among themselves, Mr. 
Blind-man, the foreman, said, I see clearly that this man is 
a heretic. Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fel-
low from the earth. Ay, said Mr. Malice, for I hate the very 
looks of him. Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure 
him. Nor I, said Mr. Live-loose, for he would always be con-
demning my way. Hang him, hang him, said Mr. Heady. A 
sorry scrub, said Mr. High-mind. My heart riseth against 
him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a rogue, said Mr. Liar. Hanging 
is too good for him, said Mr. Cruelty. Let us despatch him 
out of the way, said Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr. Impla-
cable, Might I have all the world given me, I could not be 
reconciled to him; therefore, let us forthwith bring him in 
guilty of death. And so they did; therefore he was presently 
condemned, to be had from the place where he was, to the 
place from whence he came, and there to be put to the most 
cruel death that could be invented.

They, therefore, brought him out, to do with him ac-

cording to their law; and, first, they scourged him, then they 
buffeted him, then they lanced his flesh with knives; after 
that, they stoned him with stones, then pricked him with 
their swords; and, last of all, they burned him to ashes at the 
stake. Thus came Faithful to his end.

Now I saw that there stood behind the multitude, a 

chariot and a couple of horses, waiting for Faithful, who 
(so soon as his adversaries had despatched him) was tak-
en up into it, and straightway was carried up through the 
clouds, with sound of trumpet, the nearest way to the Celes-
tial Gate. But as for Christian, he had some respite, and was 
remanded back to prison. So he there remained for a space; 
but He that overrules all things, having the power of their 
rage in His own hand, so wrought it about, that Christian 
for that time escaped them, and went his way; and as he 
went, he sang, saying—

Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest Unto thy Lord; 
with whom thou shalt be blest, When faithless ones, with 
all their vain delights, Are crying out under their hellish 
plights, Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive; For, 
though they kill’d thee, thou art yet alive.

CHRISTIAN HAS 

ANOTHER COMPANION

Now I saw in my dream, that Christian went not forth 
alone, for there was one whose name was Hopeful (being 
made so by the beholding of Christian and Faithful in their 
words and behaviour, in their sufferings at the Fair), who 
joined himself unto him, and, entering into a brotherly cov-
enant, told him that he would be his companion. Thus, one 
died to bear testimony to the truth, and another rises out of 
his ashes, to be a companion with Christian in his pilgrim-
age. This Hopeful also told Christian, that there were many 
more of the men in the Fair, that would take their time and 
follow after.

So I saw that quickly after they were got out of the Fair, 

they overtook one that was going before them, whose name 
was By-ends; so they said to him, What countryman, Sir? 
and how far go you this way? He told them, that he came 
from the town of Fair-speech, and he was going to the Ce-
lestial City, but told them not his name.

From Fair-speech! said Christian. Is there any good that 

lives there?.145

BY-ENDS. Yes, said By-ends, I hope.
CHRISTIAN. Pray, Sir, What may I call you? Said Chris-

tian.

145 Prov. 26:25

be going this way, I shall be glad of your company; if not, I 
must be content.

CHRISTIAN. This town of Fair-speech, said Christian, I 

have heard of; and, as I remember, they say it is a wealthy 
place.

BY-ENDS. Yes, I will assure you that it is; and I have very 

many rich kindred there.

may be so bold.

BY-ENDS. Almost the whole town; and in particular, 

my Lord Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my Lord Fair-
speech (from whose ancestors that town first took its name), 
also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr. Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any-
thing; and the parson of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was 
my mother’s own brother, by father’s side; and to tell you 
the truth, I am become a gentleman of good quality, yet my 
great-grandfather was but a waterman, looking one way and 
rowing another, and I got most of my estate by the same 
occupation.

CHRISTIAN. Are you a married man?
BY-ENDS. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous woman, 

the daughter of a virtuous woman; she was my Lady Feign-
ing’s daughter, therefore she came of a very honourable 
family, and is arrived to such a pitch of breeding, that she 
knows how to carry it to all, even to prince and peasant. 
It is true we somewhat differ in religion from those of the 
stricter sort, yet but in two small points; first, we never strive 
against wind and tide; secondly, we are always most zealous 
when religion goes in his silver slippers; we love much to 
walk with him in the street, if the sun shines, and the people 
applaud him.

Then Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow Hope-

ful, saying, It runs in my mind that this is one By-ends of 

Fair-speech; and if it be he, we have as very a knave in our 
company, as dwelleth in all these parts. Then said Hopeful, 
Ask him; methinks he should not be ashamed of his name. 
So Christian came up with him again, and said, Sir, you talk 
as if you knew something more than all the world doth; and 
if I take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half a guess of 
you: Is not your name Mr. By-ends, of Fair-speech?

BY-ENDS. This is not my name, but indeed it is a nick-

name that is given me by some that cannot abide me; and I 
must be content to bear it as a reproach, as other good men 
have borne theirs before me.

CHRISTIAN. But did you never give an occasion to men 

to call you by this name?

BY-ENDS. Never, never! The worst that ever I did to give 

them an occasion to give me this name was, that I had al-
ways the luck to jump in my judgment with the present 
way of the times, whatever it was, and my chance was to get 
thereby; but if things are thus cast upon me, let me count 
them a blessing; but let not the malicious load me therefore 
with reproach.

CHRISTIAN. I thought, indeed, that you were the man 

that I heard of; and to tell you what I think, I fear this name 
belongs to you more properly than you are willing we should 
think it doth.

BY-ENDS. Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help 

it; you shall find me a fair company-keeper, if you will still 
admit me your associate.

CHRISTIAN. If you will go with us, you must go against 

wind and tide; the which, I perceive, is against your opinion; 
you must also own religion in his rags, as well as when in his 
silver slippers; and stand by him, too, when bound in irons, 
as well as when he walketh the streets with applause.

BY-ENDS. You must not impose, nor lord it over my 

faith; leave me to my liberty, and let me go with you.

CHRISTIAN. Not a step further, unless you will do in 

what I propound, as we.

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old princi-

ples, since they are harmless and profitable. If I may not go 
with you, I must do as I did before you overtook me, even 
go by myself, until some overtake me that will be glad of my 
company.

Now I saw in my dream, that Christian and Hopeful 

forsook him, and kept their distance before him; but one of 
them looking back, saw three men following Mr. By-ends, 
and behold, as they came up with him, he made them a very 
low conge; and they also gave him a compliment. The men’s 
names were Mr. Hold-the-world, Mr. Money-love, and Mr. 
Save-all; men that Mr. By-ends had formerly been acquaint-
ed with; for in their minority they were schoolfellows, and 
were taught by one Mr. Gripeman, a schoolmaster in Love-
gain, which is a market town in the county of Coveting, in 
the north. This schoolmaster taught them the art of getting, 
either by violence, cozenage, flattery, lying, or by putting on 
a guise of religion; and these four gentlemen had attained 
much of the art of their master, so that they could each of 
them have kept such a school themselves.

Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted each other, 

Mr. Money-love said to Mr. By-ends, Who are they upon 
the road before us? (for Christian and Hopeful were yet 
within view).

BY-ENDS. They are a couple of far countrymen, that, af-

ter their mode, are going on pilgrimage.

MONEY-LOVE. Alas! Why did they not stay, that we 

might have had their good company? for they, and we, and 
you, Sir, I hope, are all going on a pilgrimage.

BY-ENDS. We are so, indeed; but the men before us are 

so rigid, and love so much their own notions, and do also so 
lightly esteem the opinions of others, that let a man be never 

so godly, yet if he jumps not with them in all things, they 
thrust him quite out of their company.

righteous overmuch; and such men’s rigidness prevails with 
them to judge and condemn all but themselves. But, I pray, 
what, and how many, were the things wherein you differed?

BY-ENDS. Why, they, after their headstrong manner, 

conclude that it is duty to rush on their journey all weathers; 
and I am for waiting for wind and tide. They are for hazard-
ing all for God at a clap; and I am for taking all advantages 
to secure my life and estate. They are for holding their no-
tions, though all other men are against them; but I am for 
religion in what, and so far as the times, and my safety, will 
bear it. They are for religion when in rags and contempt; but 
I am for him when he walks in his golden slippers, in the 
sunshine, and with applause.

MR. HOLD-THE-WORLD. Aye, and hold you there still, 

good Mr. By-ends; for, for my part, I can count him but a 
fool, that, having the liberty to keep what he has, shall be 
so unwise as to lose it. Let us be wise as serpents; it is best 
to make hay when the sun shines; you see how the bee lieth 
still all winter, and bestirs her only when she can have profit 
with pleasure. God sends sometimes rain, and sometimes 
sunshine; if they be such fools to go through the first, yet 
let us be content to take fair weather along with us. For my 
part, I like that religion best, that will stand with the secu-
rity of God’s good blessings unto us; for who can imagine, 
that is ruled by his reason, since God has bestowed upon 
us the good things of this life, but that He would have us 
keep them for His sake? Abraham and Solomon grew rich in 
religion. And Job says, that a good man shall lay up gold as 
dust. But he must not be such as the men before us, if they 
be as you have described them.

MR. SAVE-ALL. I think that we are all agreed in this mat-

ter, and therefore there needs no more words about it.

MR. MONEY-LOVE. No, there needs no more words 

about this matter indeed; for he that believes neither Scrip-
ture nor reason (and you see we have both on our side), 
neither knows his own liberty, nor seeks his own safety.

MR. BY-ENDS. My brethren, we are, as you see, going all 

on pilgrimage; and for our better diversion from things that 
are bad, give me leave to propound unto you this question: 
Suppose a man, a minister, or a tradesman, etc., should have 
an advantage lie before him, to get the good blessings of this 
life, yet so as that he can by no means come by them except, 
in appearance at least, he becomes extraordinary zealous in 
some points of religion that he meddled not with before; 
may he not use this means to attain his end, and yet be a 
right honest man?

MR. MONEY-LOVE. I see the bottom of your question; 

and, with these gentlemen’s good leave, I will endeavour to 
shape you an answer. And first to speak to your question as 
it concerns a minister himself: Suppose a minister, a wor-
thy man, possessed but of a very small benefice, and has in 
his eye a greater, more fat, and plump by far; he has also 
now an opportunity of getting of it, yet so as by being more 
studious, by preaching more frequently, and zealously, and, 
because the temper of the people requires it, by altering of 
some of his principles; for my part, I see no reason but a 
man may do this (provided he has a call), aye, and more a 
great deal besides, and yet be an honest man. For why—

1. His desire of a greater benefice is lawful (this cannot 

be contradicted), since it is set before him by Providence; 
so then, he may get it, if he can, making no question for 
conscience sake.

2. Besides, his desire after that benefice makes him more 

studious, a more zealous preacher, etc., and so makes him a 

better man; yea, makes him better improve his parts, which 
is according to the mind of God.

3. Now, as for his complying with the temper of his peo-

ple, by dissenting, to serve them, some of his principles, this 
argueth—(1). That he is of a self-denying temper. (2). Of a 
sweet and winning deportment. And so (3). More fit for the 
ministerial function.

4. I conclude then, that a minister that changes a small 

for a great, should not, for so doing, be judged as covetous; 
but rather, since he is improved in his parts and industry 
thereby, be counted as one that pursues his call, and the 
opportunity put into his hand to do good.

And now to the second part of the question, which con-

cerns the tradesman you mentioned. Suppose such an one 
to have but a poor employ in the world, but by becoming 
religious, he may mend his market, perhaps get a rich wife, 
or more, and far better customers to his shop; for my part, I 
see no reason but that this may be lawfully done. For why—

1. To become religious is a virtue, by what means soever 

a man becomes so.

2. Nor is it unlawful to get a rich wife, or more custom 

to my shop.

3. Besides, the man that gets these by becoming reli-

gious, gets that which is good, of them that are good, by 
becoming good himself; so then here is a good wife, and 
good customers, and good gain, and all these by becoming 
religious, which is good; therefore, to become religious to 
get all these, is a good and profitable design.

By-end’s question, was highly applauded by them all; where-
fore they concluded, upon the whole, that it was most whole-
some and advantageous. And because, as they thought, no 
man was able to contradict it, and because Christian and 
Hopeful were yet within call, they jointly agreed to assault 

them with the question as soon as they overtook them; and 
the rather because they had opposed Mr. By-ends before. So 
they called after them, and they stopped, and stood still till 
they came up to them; but they concluded, as they went, 
that not Mr. By-ends, but old Mr. Hold-the-world, should 
propound the question to them, because, as they supposed, 
their answer to him would be without the remainder of that 
heat that was kindled betwixt Mr. By-ends and them, at 
their parting a little before.

So they came up to each other, and after a short sal-

utation, Mr. Hold-the-world propounded the question to 
Christian and his fellow, and bid them to answer it if they 
could.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, Even a babe in religion 

may answer 10,000 such questions. For if it be unlawful to 
follow Christ for loaves (as it is in the sixth of John), how 
much more abominable is it to make of him and religion a 
stalking-horse, to get and enjoy the world! Nor do we find 
any other than heathens, hypocrites, devils, and witches, 
that are of this opinion.

1. Heathens; for when Hamor and Shechem had a mind 

to the daughter and cattle of Jacob, and saw that there was 
no ways for them to come at them, but by becoming cir-
cumcised; they say to their companions, if every male of 
us be circumcised, as they are circumcised, shall not their 
cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs, be ours? 
Their daughter and their cattle were that which they sought 
to obtain, and their religion the stalking-horse they made 
use of to come at them. Read the whole story.146

2. The hypocritical Pharisees were also of this religion; 

long prayers were their pretence; but to get widows’ houses 

146 Gen. 34:20–23

was their intent; and greater damnation was from God their 
judgment (Luke 20:46, 47).

3. Judas the devil was also of this religion; he was reli-

gious for the bag, that he might be possessed of what was 
therein; but he was lost, cast away, and the very son of per-
dition.

4. Simon the witch was of this religion too; for he would 

have had the Holy Ghost, that he might have got money 
therewith; and his sentence from Peter’s mouth was accord-
ing.147

5. Neither will it out of my mind, but that that man 

that takes up religion for the world, will throw away religion 
for the world; for so surely as Judas designed the world in 
becoming religious, so surely did he also sell religion and his 
Master for the same.To answer the question therefore affir-
matively, as I perceive you have done; and to accept of, as 
authentic, such answer, is both heathenish, hypocritical, and 
devilish; and your reward will be according to your works. 
Then they stood staring one upon another, but had not 
wherewith to answer Christian. Hopeful also approved of 
the soundness of Christian’s answer; so there was a great si-
lence among them. Mr. By-ends and his company also stag-
gered and kept behind, that Christian and Hopeful might 
outgo them. Then said Christian to his fellow, If these men 
cannot stand before the sentence of men, what will they do 
with the sentence of God? And if they are mute when dealt 
with by vessels of clay, what will they do when they shall be 
rebuked by the flames of a devouring fire?

Then Christian and Hopeful outwent them again, and 

went till they came at a delicate plain, called Ease, where 
they went with much content; but that plain was but nar-
row, so they were quickly got over it. Now at the further side 

147 Acts 8:19–20

of that plain, was a little Hill called Lucre, and in that hill 
a silver mine, which some of them that had formerly gone 
that way, because of the rarity of it, had turned aside to see; 
but going too near the brink of the pit, the ground being 
deceitful under them, broke, and they were slain; some also 
had been maimed there, and could not, to their dying day, 
be their own men again.

Then I saw in my dream, that a little off the road, over 

against the silver mine, stood Demas (gentleman-like) to call 
to passengers to come and see; who said to Christian and his 
fellow, Ho! turn aside hither, and I will show you a thing.

CHRISTIAN. What thing so deserving as to turn us out 

of the way to see it?

DEMAS. Here is a silver mine, and some digging in it for 

treasure. If you will come, with a little pains you may richly 
provide for yourselves.

HOPEFUL. Then said Hopeful, Let us go see.
CHRISTIAN. Not I, said Christian, I have heard of this 

place before now; and how many have there been slain; and 
besides that, treasure is a snare to those that seek it; for it 
hindereth them in their pilgrimage. Then Christian called 
to Demas, saying, Is not the place dangerous? Hath it not 
hindered many in their pilgrimage?148

DEMAS. Not very dangerous, except to those that are 

careless (but withal, he blushed as he spake).

stir a step, but still keep on our way.

HOPEFUL. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes up, 

if he hath the same invitation as we, he will turn in thither 
to see.

CHRISTIAN. No doubt thereof, for his principles lead 

him that way, and a hundred to one but he dies there.

148 Hosea 14:8

DEMAS. Then Demas called again, saying, But will you 

not come over and see?

Demas, thou art an enemy to the right ways of the Lord of 
this way, and hast been already condemned for thine own 
turning aside, by one of his Majesty’s judges;149 and why 
seekest thou to bring us into the like condemnation? Be-
sides, if we at all turn aside, our Lord the King will certain-
ly hear thereof, and will there put us to shame, where we 
would stand with boldness before Him. Demas cried again, 
That he also was one of their fraternity; and that if they 
would tarry a little, he also himself would walk with them.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian, What is thy name? Is it 

not the same by the which I have called thee?

DEMAS. Yes, my name is Demas; I am the son of Abra-

ham.

CHRISTIAN. I know you; Gehazi was your great-grand-

father, and Judas your father; and you have trod in their 
steps.150 It is but a devilish prank that thou usest; thy father 
was hanged for a traitor, and thou deservest no better re-
ward. Assure thyself, that when we come to the King, we 
will do Him word of this thy behaviour. Thus they went 
their way.

By this time By-ends and his companions were come 

again within sight, and they, at the first beck, went over to 
Demas. Now, whether they fell into the pit by looking over 
the brink thereof, or whether they went down to dig, or 
whether they were smothered in the bottom by the damps 
that commonly arise, of these things I am not certain; but 
this I observed, that they never were seen again in the way. 
Then sang Christian—

149 2 Tim. 4:10
150 2 Kings 5:20; Matt. 26:14, 15; 27:1–5

By-ends and silver Demas both agree; 
One calls, the other runs, that he may be 
A sharer in his lucre; so these do 
Take up in this world, and no further go.

Now I saw that, just on the other side of this plain, the Pil-
grims came to a place where stood an old monument, hard 
by the highway side; at the sight of which they were both 
concerned, because of the strangeness of the form thereof; 
for it seemed to them as if it had been a woman transformed 
into the shape of a pillar; here therefore they stood looking, 
and looking upon it, but could not for a time tell what they 
should make thereof. At last Hopeful espied written above 
the head thereof, a writing in an unusual hand; but he be-
ing no scholar, called to Christian (for he was learned) to 
see if he could pick out the meaning; so he came, and after 
a little laying of letters together, he found the same to be 
this, “Remember Lot’s wife.” So he read it to his fellow; after 
which they both concluded that that was the pillar of salt 
into which Lot’s wife was turned, for her looking back with 
a covetous heart, when she was going from Sodom for safe-
ty;151 which sudden and amazing sight gave them occasion of 
this discourse.

it came opportunely to us after the invitation which Demas 
gave us to come over to view the Hill Lucre; and had we 
gone over, as he desired us, and as thou wast inclining to do, 
my brother, we had, for aught I know, been made ourselves 
like this woman, a spectacle for those that shall come after 
to behold.

HOPEFUL. I am sorry that I was so foolish, and am made 

to wonder that I am not now as Lot’s wife; for wherein was 

151 Gen. 19:26

the difference betwixt her sin and mine? She only looked 
back; and I had a desire to go see. Let grace be adored, and 
let me be ashamed, that ever such a thing should be in mine 
heart.

CHRISTIAN. Let us take notice of what we see here, for 

our help for time to come. This woman escaped one judg-
ment, for she fell not by the destruction of Sodom; yet she 
was destroyed by another, as we see she is turned into a pillar 
of salt.

HOPEFUL. True, and she may be to us both caution and 

example; caution, that we should shun her sin; or a sign of 
what judgment will overtake such as shall not be prevent-
ed by this caution; so Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with 
the 250 men that perished in their sin, did also become a 
sign or example to others to beware.152 But above all, I muse 
at one thing, to wit, how Demas and his fellows can stand 
so confidently yonder to look for that treasure, which this 
woman, but for looking behind her, after (for we read not 
that she stepped one foot out of the way) was turned into a 
pillar of salt; especially since the judgment which overtook 
her did make her an example, within sight of where they 
are; for they cannot choose but see her, did they but lift up 
their eyes.

CHRISTIAN. It is a thing to be wondered at, and it ar-

gueth that their hearts are grown desperate in the case; and I 
cannot tell who to compare them to so fitly, as to them that 
pick pockets in the presence of the judge, or that will out 
purses under the gallows. It is said of the men of Sodom, 
that they were sinners exceedingly, because they were sinners 
before the Lord, that is, in His eyesight, and notwithstand-
ing the kindnesses that He had showed them,153 for the land 

152 Num. 26:9, 10
153 Gen. 13:13

of Sodom was now like the garden of Eden heretofore.154 
This, therefore, provoked Him the more to jealousy, and 
made their plague as hot as the fire of the Lord out of Heav-
en could make it. And it is most rationally to be concluded, 
that such, even such as these are, that shall sin in the sight, 
yea, and that too in despite of such examples that are set 
continually before them, to caution them to the contrary, 
must be partakers of severest judgments.

a mercy is it, that neither thou, but especially I, am not 
made myself this example! This ministereth occasion to us 
to thank God, to fear before Him, and always to remember 
Lot’s wife.

I saw, then, that they went on their way to a pleasant 

river; which David the king called “the river of God,” but 
John “the river of the water of life”.155 Now their way lay just 
upon the bank of the river; here, therefore, Christian and 
his companion walked with great delight; they drank also 
of the water of the river, which was pleasant, and enlivening 
to their weary spirits: besides, on the banks of this river, on 
either side, were green trees, that bore all manner of fruit; 
and the leaves of the trees were good for medicine; with the 
fruit of these trees they were also much delighted; and the 
leaves they eat to prevent surfeits, and other diseases that 
are incident to those that heat their blood by travels. On ei-
ther side of the river was also a meadow, curiously beautified 
with lilies, and it was green all the year long. In this meadow 
they lay down, and slept; for here they might lie down safely. 
When they awoke, they gathered again of the fruit of the 
trees, and drank again of the water of the river, and then lay 

154 Gen. 13:10
155 Psa. 65:9; Rev. 22; Ezek. 47

down again to sleep.156 Thus they did several days and nights. 
Then they sang—

Behold ye how these crystal streams do glide, 
To comfort pilgrims by the highway side; 
The meadows green, besides their fragrant smell, 
Yield dainties for them: and he that can tell 
What pleasant fruit, yea, leaves, these trees do yield, 
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field.

So when they were disposed to go on (for they were not, as 
yet, at their journey’s end), they ate and drank, and depart-
ed.

Now, I beheld in my dream, that they had not journeyed 

far, but the river and the way for a time parted; at which they 
were not a little sorry; yet they durst not go out of the way. 
Now the way from the river was rough, and their feet tender, 
by reason of their travels; “so the souls of the pilgrims were 
much discouraged because of the way”.157 Wherefore, still 
as they went on, they wished for better way. Now, a little 
before them, there was on the left hand of the road a mead-
ow, and a stile to go over into it; and that meadow is called 
By-path Meadow. Then said Christian to his fellow, If this 
meadow lieth along by our way-side, let us go over into it. 
Then he went to the stile to see, and behold, a path lay along 
by the way, on the other side of the fence. It is according 
to my wish, said Christian. Here is the easiest going; come, 
good Hopeful, and let us go over.

HOPEFUL. But how if this path should lead us out of 

the way?

CHRISTIAN. That is not like, said the other. Look, doth it 

156 Psa. 23:2; Isa. 14:30
157 Num. 21:4

not go along by the way-side? So Hopeful, being persuaded 
by his fellow, went after him over the stile. When they were 
gone over, and were got into the path, they found it very easy 
for their feet; and withal, they, looking before them, espied 
a man walking as they did (and his name was Vain-confi-
dence); so they called after him, and asked him whither that 
way led. He said, to the Celestial Gate. Look, said Christian, 
did not I tell you so? By this you may see we are right. So 
they followed, and he went before them. But, behold, the 
night came on, and it grew very dark; so that they that were 
behind, lost the sight of him that went before.

He, therefore, that went before (Vain-confidence by 

name), not seeing the way before him, fell into a deep pit,158 
which was on purpose there made, by the Prince of those 
grounds, to catch vain-glorious fools withal, and was dashed 
in pieces with his fall.

Now Christian and his fellow heard him fall. So they 

called to know the matter, but there was none to answer; 
only they heard a groaning. Then said Hopeful, Where are 
we now? Then was his fellow silent, as mistrusting that he 
had led him out of the way; and now it began to rain, and 
thunder, and lighten in a very dreadful manner; and the wa-
ter rose amain.

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying, O that I had 

kept on my way!

CHRISTIAN. Who could have thought that this path 

should have led us out of the way?

HOPEFUL. I was afraid on it at the very first, and there-

fore gave you that gentle caution. I would have spoke plain-
er, but that you are older than I.

CHRISTIAN. Good brother, be not offended; I am sorry 

I have brought thee out of the way, and that I have put thee 

158 Isa. 9:16

into such imminent danger; pray, my brother, forgive me; I 
did not do it of an evil intent.

and believe too that this shall be for our good.

but we must not stand thus: let us try to go back again.

HOPEFUL. But, good brother, let me go before.
CHRISTIAN. No, if you please, let me go first, that if 

there be any danger, I may be first therein, because by my 
means we are both gone out of the way.

HOPEFUL. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first; for 

your mind being troubled may lead you out of the way 
again. Then, for their encouragement, they heard the voice 
of one saying, “Set thine heart toward the highway, even the 
way which thou wentest; turn again”.159 But by this time the 
waters were greatly risen, by reason of which the way of go-
ing back was very dangerous. (Then I thought that it is easier 
going out of the way when we are in, than going in when we 
are out). Yet they adventured to go back, but it was so dark, 
and the flood was so high, that in their going back they had 
like to have been drowned nine or 10 times.

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again 

to the stile that night. Wherefore, at last, lighting under a 
little shelter, they sat down there until the day-break; but, 
being weary, they fell asleep. Now there was, not far from 
the place where they lay, a castle, called Doubting Castle, 
the owner whereof was Giant Despair; and it was in his 
grounds they now were sleeping: wherefore he, getting up 
in the morning early, and walking up and down in his fields, 
caught Christian and Hopeful asleep in his grounds. Then, 
with a grim and surly voice, he bid them awake; and asked 
them whence they were, and what they did in his grounds. 

159 Jer. 31:21

They told him they were pilgrims, and that they had lost 
their way. Then said the Giant, You have this night tres-
passed on me, by trampling in, and lying on my grounds, 
and therefore you must go along with me. So they were 
forced to go, because he was stronger than they. They also 
had but little to say, for they knew themselves in a fault. 
The Giant therefore drove them before him, and put them 
into his castle, into a very dark dungeon, nasty and stinking 
to the spirits of these two men.160 Here then they lay from 
Wednesday morning till Saturday night, without one bit of 
bread, or drop of drink, or light, or any to ask how they 
did; they were therefore here in evil case, and were far from 
friends and acquaintance. Now in this place Christian had 
double sorrow, because it was through his unadvised counsel 
that they were brought into this distress.

Now, Giant Despair had a wife, and her name was Dif-

fidence. So, when he was gone to bed, he told his wife what 
he had done; to wit, that he had taken a couple of prison-
ers, and cast them into his dungeon, for trespassing on his 
grounds. Then he asked her also what he had best to do 
further to them. So she asked him what they were, whence 
they came, and whither they were bound; and he told her. 
Then she counselled him, that when he arose in the morning 
he should beat them without any mercy. So, when he arose, 
he getteth him a grievous crab-tree cudgel, and goes down 
into the dungeon to them, and there first falls to rating of 
them as if they were dogs, although they never gave him a 
word of distaste. Then he falls upon them, and beats them 
fearfully, in such sort, that they were not able to help them-
selves, or to turn them upon the floor. This done, he with-
draws and leaves them, there to condole their misery, and 
to mourn under their distress. So all that day they spent the 

160 Psa. 88:18

time in nothing but sighs and bitter lamentations. The next 
night, she, talking with her husband about them further, 
and understanding that they were yet alive, did advise him 
to counsel them to make away themselves. So when morn-
ing was come, he goes to them in a surly manner as before, 
and perceiving them to be very sore with the stripes that he 
had given them the day before, he told them, that since they 
were never like to come out of that place, their only way 
would be forthwith to make an end of themselves, either 
with knife, halter, or poison, for why, said he, should you 
choose life, seeing it is attended with so much bitterness? 
But they desired him to let them go. With that he looked 
ugly upon them, and, rushing to them, had doubtless made 
an end of them himself, but that he fell into one of his fits 
(for he sometimes, in sunshiny weather, fell into fits), and 
lost for a time the use of his hand; wherefore he withdrew, 
and left them as before, to consider what to do. Then did the 
prisoners consult between themselves, whether it was best 
to take his counsel or no; and thus they began to discourse:

The life that we now live is miserable. For my part, I know 
not whether is best, to live thus, or to die out of hand. “My 
soul chooseth strangling rather than life,” and the grave is 
more easy for me than this dungeon.161 Shall we be ruled by 
the Giant?

death would be far more welcome to me than thus for ever 
to abide; but yet, let us consider, the Lord of the country to 
which we are going hath said, Thou shalt do no murder: no, 
not to another man’s person; much more, then, are we for-
bidden to take his counsel to kill ourselves. Besides, he that 
kills another, can but commit murder upon his body; but 

161 Job 7:15

for one to kill himself, is to kill body and soul at once. And, 
moreover, my brother, thou talkest of ease in the grave; but 
hast thou forgotten the hell, whither for certain the murder-
ers go? For “no murderer hath eternal life,” etc. And let us 
consider, again, that all the law is not in the hand of Giant 
Despair. Others, so far as I can understand, have been taken 
by him, as well as we; and yet have escaped out of his hand. 
Who knows, but that God that made the world may cause 
that Giant Despair may die? or that, at some time or other, 
he may forget to lock us in? or that he may, in a short time, 
have another of his fits before us, and may lose the use of 
his limbs? and if ever that should come to pass again, for my 
part, I am resolved to pluck up the heart of a man, and to 
try my utmost to get from under his hand. I was a fool that 
I did not try to do it before; but, however, my brother, let 
us be patient, and endure a while. The time may come that 
may give us a happy release; but let us not be our own mur-
derers. With these words, Hopeful at present did moderate 
the mind of his brother; so they continued together (in the 
dark) that day, in their sad and doleful condition.

Well, towards evening, the Giant goes down into the 

dungeon again, to see if his prisoners had taken his counsel; 
but when he came there, he found them alive; and truly, 
alive was all; for now, what for want of bread and water, 
and by reason of the wounds they received when he beat 
them, they could do little but breathe. But, I say, he found 
them alive; at which he fell into a grievous rage, and told 
them, that seeing they had disobeyed his counsel, it should 
be worse with them than if they had never been born.

At this they trembled greatly, and I think that Chris-

tian fell into a swoon; but, coming a little to himself again, 
they renewed their discourse about the Giant’s counsel, and 
whether yet they had best to take it or no. Now Christian 

again seemed to be for doing it, but Hopeful made his sec-
ond reply as followeth—

HOPEFUL. My brother, said he, rememberest thou not 

how valiant thou hast been heretofore? Apollyon could not 
crush thee, nor could all that thou didst hear, or see, or feel, 
in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. What hardship, ter-
ror, and amazement hast thou already gone through! And 
art thou now nothing but fear! Thou seest that I am in the 
dungeon with thee, a far weaker man by nature than thou 
art; also, this Giant has wounded me as well as thee, and 
hath also cut off the bread and water from my mouth; and 
with thee I mourn without the light. But let us exercise a 
little more patience; remember how thou playedst the man 
at Vanity Fair, and wast neither afraid of the chain, nor cage, 
nor yet of bloody death. Wherefore let us (at least to avoid 
the shame, that becomes not a Christian to be found in) 
bear up with patience as well as we can.

wife being in bed, she asked him concerning the prisoners, 
and if they had taken his counsel. To which he replied, They 
are sturdy rogues, they choose rather to bear all hardship, 
than to make away themselves. Then said she, Take them 
into the castle-yard tomorrow, and show them the bones 
and skulls of those that thou hast already despatched, and 
make them believe, ere a week comes to an end, thou also 
wilt tear them in pieces, as thou hast done their fellows be-
fore them.

again, and takes them into the castle-yard, and shows them, 
as his wife had bidden him. These, said he, were pilgrims as 
you are, once, and they trespassed in my grounds, as you 
have done; and when I thought fit, I tore them in pieces, 
and so, within 10 days, I will do you. Go, get you down 
to your den again; and with that, he beat them all the way 

thither. They lay, therefore, all day on Saturday in a lamen-
table case, as before. Now, when night was come, and when 
Mrs. Diffidence and her husband, the Giant, were got to 
bed, they began to renew their discourse of their prisoners; 
and withal the old Giant wondered, that he could neither 
by his blows nor his counsel bring them to an end. And 
with that his wife replied, I fear, Said she, that they live in 
hope that some will come to relieve them, or that they have 
picklocks about them, by the means of which they hope to 
escape. And sayest thou so, my dear? said the Giant; I will, 
therefore, search them in the morning.

Well, on Saturday, about midnight, they began to pray, 

and continued in prayer till almost break of day.

Now, a little before it was day, good Christian, as one 

half-amazed, brake out in this passionate speech: What a 
fool, quoth he, am I, thus to lie in a stinking dungeon, when 
I may as well walk at liberty! I have a key in my bosom, 
called Promise, that will, I am persuaded, open any lock in 
Doubting Castle. Then said Hopeful, That is good news, 
good brother; pluck it out of thy bosom, and try.

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and began to 

try at the dungeon door, whose bolt (as he turned the key) 
gave back, and the door flew open with ease, and Chris-
tian and Hopeful both came out. Then he went to the out-
ward door that leads into the castle-yard, and, with his key, 
opened that door also. After, he went to the iron gate, for 
that must be opened too; but that lock went damnable hard, 
yet the key did open it. Then they thrust open the gate to 
make their escape with speed, but that gate, as it opened, 
made such a creaking, that it waked Giant Despair, who, 
hastily rising to pursue his prisoners, felt his limbs to fail, for 
his fits took him again, so that he could by no means go after 
them. Then they went on, and came to the King’s highway, 
and so were safe, because they were out of his jurisdiction.

Now, when they were gone over the stile, they began 

to contrive with themselves what they should do at that 
stile, to prevent those that should come after, from falling 
into the hands of Giant Despair. So they consented to erect 
there a pillar, and to engrave upon the side thereof this sen-
tence—“Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which 
is kept by Giant Despair, who despiseth the King of the 
Celestial Country, and seeks to destroy His holy pilgrims.” 
Many, therefore, that followed after, read what was written, 
and escaped the danger. This done, they sang as follows—

Out of the way we went, and then we found 
What ‘twas to tread upon forbidden ground; 
And let them that come after have a care, 
Lest heedlessness makes them, as we, to fare. 
Lest they for trespassing his prisoners are, 
Whose castle’s Doubting, and whose name’s Despair.

THE DELECTABLE 

MOUNTAINS

They went then till they came to the Delectable Mountains, 
which mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which 
we have spoken before; so they went up to the mountains, 
to behold the gardens and orchards, the vineyards and foun-
tains of water; where also they drank and washed themselves, 
and did freely eat of the vineyards. Now there were on the 
tops of these mountains, shepherds feeding their flocks, and 
they stood by the highway side. The Pilgrims therefore went 
to them, and leaning upon their staves (as is common with 
weary pilgrims, when they stand to talk with any by the 
way), they asked, Whose Delectable Mountains are these? 
And whose be the sheep that feed upon them?

SHEPHERDS. These mountains are Immanuel’s Land, 

and they are within sight of His city; and the sheep also are 
His, and He laid down His life for them.162

CHRISTIAN. Is this the way to the Celestial City?
SHEPHERDS. You are just in your way.
CHRISTIAN. How far is it thither?
SHEPHERDS. Too far for any but those that shall get 

thither indeed.

CHRISTIAN. Is the way safe or dangerous?

162 John 10:11

SHEPHERDS. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe; but 

the transgressors shall fall therein.163

CHRISTIAN. Is there, in this place, any relief for pilgrims 

that are weary and faint in the way?

SHEPHERDS. The Lord of these mountains hath given 

us a charge not to be “forgetful to entertain strangers”;164 
therefore the good of the place is before you.

I saw also in my dream, that when the Shepherds per-

ceived that they were wayfaring men, they also put ques-
tions to them, to which they made answer as in other places; 
as, Whence came you? And, How got you into the way? 
And, by what means have you so persevered therein? For but 
few of them that begin to come hither, do show their face 
on these mountains. But when the Shepherds heard their 
answers, being pleased therewith, they looked very lovingly 
upon them, and said, Welcome to the Delectable Moun-
tains.

The Shepherds, I say, whose names were Knowledge, 

Experience, Watchful, and Sincere, took them by the hand, 
and had them to their tents, and made them partake of that 
which was ready at present. They said, moreover, We would 
that ye should stay here a while, to be acquainted with us; 
and yet more to solace yourselves with the good of these 
Delectable Mountains. They then told them that they were 
content to stay; so they went to their rest that night, because 
it was very late.

Then I saw in my dream, that in the morning the Shep-

herds called up Christian and Hopeful to walk with them 
upon the mountains: so they went forth with them, and 
walked a while, having a pleasant prospect on every side. 
Then said the Shepherds one to another, Shall we show these 

163 Hosea 14:9
164 Heb. 13:2

The Delectable Mountains

Pilgrims some wonders? So when they had concluded to do 
it, they had them first to the top of a hill Error, which was 
very steep on the furthest side, and bid them look down to 
the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and 
saw at the bottom several men dashed all to pieces by a fall 
that they had from the top. Then said Christian, What mea-
neth this? The Shepherds answered, Have you not heard of 
them that were made to err, by hearkening to Hymeneus 
and Philetus, as concerning the faith of the resurrection of 
the body?165 They answered, Yes. Then said the Shepherds, 
Those that you see lie dashed in pieces at the bottom of 
this mountain are they; and they have continued to this day 
unburied, as you see, for an example to others to take heed 
how they clamber too high, or how they come too near the 
brink of this mountain.

Then I saw that they had them to the top of another 

mountain, and the name of that is Caution, and bid them 
look afar off; which, when they did, they perceived, as they 
thought, several men walking up and down among the 
tombs that were there; and they perceived that the men were 
blind, because they stumbled sometimes upon the tombs, 
and because they could not get out from among them. Then 
said Christian, What means this?

The Shepherds then answered, Did you not see a little 

below these mountains a stile that led into a meadow, on 
the left hand of this way? They answered, Yes. Then said 
the Shepherds, From that stile there goes a path that leads 
directly to Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant De-
spair, and these, pointing to them among the tombs, came 
once on pilgrimage as you do now, even till they came to 
that same stile; and because the right way was rough in that 
place, they chose to go out of it into that meadow, and there 

165 2 Tim. 2:17, 18

were taken by Giant Despair, and cast into Doubting Castle: 
where, after they had been a while kept in the dungeon, he 
at last did put out their eyes, and led them among those 
tombs, where he has left them to wander to this very day, 
that the saying of the wise man might be fulfilled, “He that 
wandereth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in 
the congregation of the dead”.166 Then Christian and Hope-
ful looked upon one another, with tears gushing out, but yet 
said nothing to the Shepherds.

166 Prov. 21:16

CHRISTIAN, HOPEFUL, 
AND THE SHEPHERDS

Then I saw in my dream, that the Shepherds had them to 
another place, in a bottom, where was a door in the side 
of a hill, and they opened the door, and bid them look in. 
They looked in, therefore, and saw that within it was very 
dark and smoky; they also thought that they heard there a 
rumbling noise as of fire, and a cry of some tormented, and 
that they smelt the scent of brimstone. Then said Christian, 
What means this? The Shepherds told them, This is a byway 
to hell, a way that hypocrites go in at; namely, such as sell 
their birthright, with Esau; such as sell their master, with 
Judas; such as blaspheme the Gospel, with Alexander; and 
that lie and dissemble, with Ananias and Sapphira his wife. 
Then said Hopeful to the Shepherds, I perceive that these 
had on them, even every one, a show of pilgrimage, as we 
have now; had they not?

SHEPHERDS. Yes, and held it a long time too.
HOPEFUL. How far might they go on in pilgrimage in 

their day, since they notwithstanding were thus miserably 
cast away?

SHEPHERDS. Some further, and some not so far, as these 

mountains.

Then said the Pilgrims one to another, We had need to 

cry to the Strong for strength.

you have it, too.

By this time the Pilgrims had a desire to go forward, and 

the Shepherds a desire they should; so they walked together 
towards the end of the mountains. Then said the Shepherds 
one to another, Let us here show to the Pilgrims the gates 
of the Celestial City, if they have skill to look through our 
perspective glass. The Pilgrims then lovingly accepted the 
motion; so they had them to the top of a high hill, called 
Clear, and gave them their glass to look.

Then they essayed to look, but the remembrance of that 

last thing that the Shepherds had showed them, made their 
hands shake; by means of which impediment, they could 
not look steadily through the glass; yet they thought they 
saw something like the gate, and also some of the glory of 
the place. Then they went away, and sang this song—

Thus, by the Shepherds, secrets are reveal’d, 
Which from all other men are kept conceal’d 
Come to the Shepherds, then, if you would see 
Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be.

When they were about to depart, one of the Shepherds gave 
them a note of the way. Another of them bid them beware 
of the Flatterer. The third bid them take heed that they sleep 
not upon the Enchanted Ground. And the fourth bid them 
God speed. So I awoke from my dream.

Pilgrims going down the mountains along the highway to-
wards the city. Now, a little below these mountains, on the 
left hand, lieth the country of Conceit; from which country 
there comes into the way in which the Pilgrims walked, a lit-
tle crooked lane. Here, therefore, they met with a very brisk 
lad, that came out of that country; and his name was Igno-

rance. So Christian asked him from what parts he came, and 
whither he was going.

off there, a little on the left hand, and I am going to the 
Celestial City.

CHRISTIAN. But how do you think to get in at the gate? 

for you may find some difficulty there.

IGNORANCE. As other good people do, said he.
CHRISTIAN. But what have you to show at that gate, that 

may cause that the gate should be opened to you?

IGNOR. I know my Lord’s will, and I have been a good 

liver; I pay every man his own; I pray, fast, pay tithes, and 
give alms, and have left my country for whither I am going.

that is at the head of this way; thou camest in hither through 
that same crooked lane, and therefore, I fear, however thou 
mayest think of thyself, when the reckoning day shall come, 
thou wilt have laid to thy charge that thou art a thief and a 
robber, instead of getting admittance into the city.

IGNORANCE. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me, 

I know you not; be content to follow the religion of your 
country, and I will follow the religion of mine. I hope all will 
be well. And as for the gate that you talk of, all the world 
knows that that is a great way off of our country. I cannot 
think that any man in all our parts doth so much as know 
the way to it, nor need they matter whether they do or no, 
since we have, as you see, a fine pleasant green lane, that 
comes down from our country, the next way into the way.

conceit,” he said to Hopeful, whisperingly, “There is more 
hope of a fool than of him”.167 And said, moreover, “When 
he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, 

167 Prov. 26:12

and he saith to everyone that he is a fool” (Eccl. 10:3). What, 
shall we talk further with him, or out-go him at present, and 
so leave him to think of what he hath heard already, and 
then stop again for him afterwards, and see if by degrees we 
can do any good to him? Then said Hopeful—

Let Ignorance a little while now muse 
On what is said, and let him not refuse 
Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain 
Still ignorant of what’s the chiefest gain. 
God saith, those that no understanding have, 
Although He made them, them He will not save.

HOPEFUL. He further added, It is not good, I think, to say 
all to him at once; let us pass him by, if you will, and talk to 
him anon, even as he is able to bear it.

So they both went on, and Ignorance he came after. Now 

when they had passed him a little way, they entered into a 
very dark lane, where they met a man whom seven devils 
had bound with seven strong cords, and were carrying of 
him back to the door that they saw on the side of the hill.168 
Now good Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful 
his companion; yet as the devils led away the man, Christian 
looked to see if he knew him; and he thought it might be 
one Turn-away, that dwelt in the town of Apostasy. But he 
did not perfectly see his face, for he did hang his head like 
a thief that is found. But being once past, Hopeful looked 
after him, and espied on his back a paper with this inscrip-
tion, “Wanton professor, and damnable apostate.” Then said 
Christian to his fellow, Now I call to remembrance, that 
which was told me of a thing that happened to a good man 
hereabout. The name of the man was Little-faith, but a good 

168 Matt. 12:45; Prov. 5:22

man, and he dwelt in the town of Sincere. The thing was this: 
At the entering in at this passage, there comes down from 
Broad-way Gate, a lane called Dead Man’s Lane; so called 
because of the murders that are commonly done there; and 
this Little-faith going on pilgrimage, as we do now, chanced 
to sit down there, and slept. Now there happened, at that 
time, to come down the lane from Broad-way Gate, three 
sturdy rogues, and their names were Faint-heart, Mistrust, 
and Guilt (three brothers), and they espying Little-faith, 
where he was, came galloping up with speed. Now the good 
man was just awake from his sleep, and was getting up to go 
on his journey. So they came up all to him, and with threat-
ening language bid him stand. At this, Little-faith looked 
as white as a cloud, and had neither power to fight nor fly. 
Then said Faint-heart, Deliver thy purse. But he making no 
haste to do it (for he was loath to lose his money), Mis-
trust ran up to him, and thrusting his hand into his pocket, 
pulled out thence a bag of silver. Then he cried out, Thieves! 
Thieves! With that, Guilt, with a great club that was in his 
hand, struck Little-faith on the head, and with that blow 
felled him flat to the ground; where be lay bleeding as one 
that would bleed to death. All this while the thieves stood 
by. But, at last, they hearing that some were upon the road, 
and fearing lest it should be one Great-grace, that dwells in 
the city of good-confidence, they betook themselves to their 
heels, and left this good man to shift for himself. Now, after 
a while, Little-faith came to himself, and getting up, made 
shift to scrabble on his way. This was the story.

had?

CHRISTIAN. No; the place where his jewels were they 

never ransacked, so those he kept still. But, as I was told, 
the good man was much afflicted for his loss, for the thieves 
got most of his spending-money. That which they got not 

(as I said) were jewels, also he had a little odd money left, 
but scarce enough to bring him to his journey’s end;169 nay, 
if I were not misinformed, he was forced to beg as be went, 
to keep himself alive; for his jewels he might not sell. But 
beg, and do what he could, he went (as we say) with many a 
hungry belly the most part of the rest of the way.

his certificate, by which he was to receive his admittance at 
the Celestial Gate?

CHRISTIAN. It is a wonder; but they got not that, though 

they missed it not through any good cunning of his; for he, 
being dismayed with their coming upon him, had neither 
power nor skill to hide anything; so it was more by good 
Providence than by his endeavour, that they missed of that 
good thing.

HOPEFUL. But it must needs be a comfort to him, that 

they got not this jewel from him.

CHRISTIAN. It might have been great comfort to him, 

had he used it as he should; but they that told me the story 
said, that he made but little use of it all the rest of the way, 
and that because of the dismay that he had in the taking 
away his money; indeed, he forgot it a great part of the rest 
of his journey; and besides, when at any time it came into 
his mind, and he began to be comforted therewith, then 
would fresh thoughts of his loss come again upon him, and 
those thoughts would swallow up all.170

grief to him.

CHRISTIAN. Grief! aye, a grief indeed. Would it not have 

been so to any of us, had we been used as he, to be robbed, 
and wounded too, and that in a strange place, as he was? It 

169 1 Peter 4:18
170 1 Peter 1:9

is a wonder he did not die with grief, poor heart! I was told 
that he scattered almost all the rest of the way with noth-
ing but doleful and bitter complaints; telling also to all that 
overtook him, or that he overtook in the way as he went, 
where he was robbed, and how; who they were that did it, 
and what he lost; how he was wounded, and that he hardly 
escaped with his life.

HOPEFUL. But it is a wonder that his necessity did not 

put him upon selling or pawning some of his jewels, that he 
might have wherewith to relieve himself in his journey.

CHRISTIAN. Thou talkest like one upon whose head is 

the shell to this very day; for what should he pawn them, 
or to whom should he sell them? In all that country where 
he was robbed, his jewels were not accounted of; nor did he 
want that relief which could from thence be administered 
to him. Besides, had his jewels been missing at the gate of 
the Celestial City, he had (and that he knew well enough) 
been excluded from an inheritance there; and that would 
have been worse to him than the appearance and villany of 
10,000 thieves.

HOPEFUL. Why art thou so tart, my brother? Esau sold 

his birthright, and that for a mess of pottage, and that birth-
right was his greatest jewel; and if he, why might not Lit-
tle-faith do so too?171

CHRISTIAN. Esau did sell his birthright indeed, and so 

do many besides, and by so doing exclude themselves from 
the chief blessing, as also that caitiff did; but you must put 
a difference betwixt Esau and Little-faith, and also betwixt 
their estates. Esau’s birthright was typical, but Little-faith’s 
jewels were not so; Esau’s belly was his god, but Little-faith’s 
belly was not so; Esau’s want lay in his fleshly appetite, Lit-
tle-faith’s did not so. Besides, Esau could see no further than 

171 Heb. 12:16

to the fulfilling of his lusts; “Behold I am at the point to 
die (said he), and what profit shall this birthright do me?”172 
But Little-faith, though it was his lot to have but a little 
faith, was by his little faith kept from such extravagances, 
and made to see and prize his jewels more than to sell them, 
as Esau did his birthright. You read not anywhere that Esau 
had faith, no, not so much as a little; therefore no marvel 
if, where the flesh only bears sway (as it will in that man 
where no faith is to resist), if he sells his birthright, and his 
soul and all, and that to the devil of hell; for it is with such, 
as it is with the ass, who in her occasions cannot be turned 
away.173 When their minds are set upon their lusts, they will 
have them whatever they cost. But Little-faith was of anoth-
er temper, his mind was on things divine; his livelihood was 
upon things that were spiritual, and from above; therefore, 
to what end should he that is of such a temper sell his jewels 
(had there been any that would have bought them) to fill his 
mind with empty things? Will a man give a penny to fill his 
belly with hay; or can you persuade the turtle-dove to live 
upon carrion like the crow? Though faithless ones can, for 
carnal lusts, pawn, or mortgage, or sell what they have, and 
themselves outright to boot; yet they that have faith, saving 
faith, though but a little of it, cannot do so. Here, therefore, 
my brother, is thy mistake.

HOPEFUL. I acknowledge it; but yet your severe reflec-

tion had almost made me angry.

CHRISTIAN. Why, I did but compare thee to some of the 

birds that are of the brisker sort, who will run to and fro in 
untrodden paths, with the shell upon their heads; but pass 
by that, and consider the matter under debate, and all shall 
be well betwixt thee and me.

172 Gen. 25:32
173 Jer. 2:24

HOPEFUL. But, Christian, these three fellows, I am per-

suaded in my heart, are but a company of cowards; would 
they have run else, think you, as they did, at the noise of 
one that was coming on the road? Why did not Little-faith 
pluck up a greater heart? He might, methinks, Have stood 
one brush with them, and have yielded when there had been 
no remedy.

CHRISTIAN. That they are cowards, many have said, but 

few have found it so in the time of trial. As for a great heart, 
Littlefaith had none; and I perceive by thee, my brother, 
hadst thou been the man concerned, thou art but for a 
brush, and then to yield. And, verily, since this is the height 
of thy stomach, now they are at a distance from us, should 
they appear to thee as they did to him, they might put thee 
to second thoughts.

But, consider again, they are but journeymen thieves, 

they serve under the king of the bottomless pit, who, if need 
be, will come in to their aid himself, and his voice is as the 
roaring of a lion.174 I myself have been engaged as this Lit-
tle-faith was, and I found it a terrible thing. These three 
villains set upon me, and I beginning, like a Christian, to re-
sist, they gave but a call, and in came their master. I would, 
as the saying is, have given my life for a penny; but that, as 
God would have it, I was clothed with armour of proof. Aye, 
and yet, though I was so harnessed, I found it hard work to 
quit myself like a man. No man can tell what in that combat 
attends us, but he that hath been in the battle himself.

HOPEFUL. Well, but they ran, you see, when they did 

but suppose that one Great-grace was in the way.

their master, when Great-grace hath but appeared; and no 
marvel; for he is the King’s Champion. But, I trow, you 

174 Psa. 7:2; 1 Pet. 5:8

will put some difference betwixt Little-faith and the King’s 
Champion. All the King’s subjects are not His champions, 
nor can they, when tried, do such feats of war as he. Is it 
meet to think that a little child should handle Goliath as 
David did? Or that there should be the strength of an ox in 
a wren? Some are strong, some are weak; some have great 
faith, some have little. This man was one of the weak, and 
therefore he went to the wall.

HOPEFUL. I would it had been Great-grace for their 

sakes.

CHRISTIAN. If it had been, he might have had his hands 

full; for I must tell you, that though Great-grace is excellent 
good at his weapons, and has, and can, so long as be keeps 
them at sword’s point, do well enough with them; yet, if 
they get within him, even Faint-heart, Mistrust, or the oth-
er, it shall go hard but they will throw up his heels. And 
when a man is down, you know, what can he do?

Whoso looks well upon Great-grace’s face, shall see those 

scars and cuts there, that shall easily give demonstration of 
what I say. Yea, once I heard that he should say (and that 
when he was in the combat), “We despaired even of life.” 
How did these sturdy rogues and their fellows make David 
groan, mourn, and roar? Yea, Heman and Hezekiah, too, 
though champions in their day, were forced to bestir them, 
when by these assaulted; and yet, notwithstanding, they had 
their coats soundly brushed by them. Peter, upon a time, 
would go try what he could do; but though some do say of 
him that he is the prince of the apostles, they handled him 
so, that they made him at last afraid of a sorry girl.

Besides, their king is at their whistle. He is never out 

of hearing; and if at any time they be put to the worst, he, 
if possible, comes in to help them; and of him it is said, 
“The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold; the spear, 
the dart, nor the habergeon: he esteemeth iron as straw, and 

brass as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him flee; sling 
stones are turned with him into stubble. Darts are counted 
as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear”175 What can 
a man do in this case? It is true, if a man could, at every turn, 
have Job’s horse, and had skill and courage to ride him, he 
might do notable things; “for his neck is clothed with thun-
der, he will not be afraid of the grasshopper; the glory of 
his nostrils is terrible; he paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth 
in his strength, he goeth on to meet the armed men. He 
mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turneth he 
back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the 
glittering spear, and the shield. He swalloweth the ground 
with fierceness and rage, neither believeth he that it is the 
sound of the trumpet. He saith among the trumpets, Ha, 
ha! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the 
captains, and the shouting”176

But for such footmen as thee and I are, let us never de-

sire to meet with an enemy, nor vaunt as if we could do bet-
ter, when we hear of others that they have been toiled, nor 
be tickled at the thoughts of our own manhood; for such 
commonly come by the worst when tried. Witness Peter, of 
whom I made mention before. He would swagger, aye, he 
would; he would, as his vain mind prompted him to say, do 
better, and stand more for his Master than all men; but who 
so foiled, and run down by these villains, as he?

on the King’s highway, two things become us to do:

with us; for it was for want of that, that he that laid so lustily 
at Leviathan could not make him yield; for, indeed, if that 
be wanting, he fears us not at all. Therefore, he that had skill 

175 Job. 12:16–19
176 Job 34:16–25

hath said, “Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith 
ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked”177

2. It is good, also, that we desire of the King a convoy, 

yea, that he will go with us Himself. This made David re-
joice when in the Valley of the Shadow of Death; and Moses 
was rather for dying where he stood, than to go one step 
without his God.178 O my brother, if He will but go along 
with us, what need we be afraid of ten thousands that shall 
set themselves against us?179 But, without Him, the proud 
helpers “fall under the slain”180

I, for my part, have been in the fray before now; and 

though, through the goodness of Him that is best, I am, as 
you see, alive; yet I cannot boast of my manhood: Glad shall 
I be, if I meet with no more such brunts; though, I fear, 
we are not got beyond all danger. However, since the lion 
and the bear have not as yet devoured me, I hope God will 
also deliver us from the next uncircumcised Philistine. Then 
sang Christian—

Poor Little-faith! Hast been among the thieves? 
Wast robb’d? Remember this, whoso believes, 
And gets more faith, shall then a victor be 
Over ten thousand, else scarce over three.

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. They went then 
till they came at a place where they saw a way put itself 
into their way, and seemed withal to lie as straight as the 
way which they should go; and here they knew not which 
of the two to take, for both seemed straight before them; 

177 Eph. 6:16
178 Exo. 33:15
179 Psa. 3:5–8; 27:1–3
180 Isa. 10:4

therefore, here they stood still to consider. And as they were 
thinking about the way, behold a man, black of flesh, but 
covered with a very light robe, came to them, and asked 
them why they stood there. They answered, they were going 
to the Celestial City, but knew not which of these ways to 
take. Follow me, said the man, it is thither that I am going. 
So they followed him in the way that but now came into the 
road, which by degrees turned, and turned them so from 
the city that they desired to go to, that, in little time, their 
faces were turned away from it; yet they followed him. But 
by and by, before they were aware, he led them both within 
the compass of a net, in which they were both so entangled, 
that they knew not what to do; and with that the white robe 
fell off the black man’s back. Then they saw where they were. 
Wherefore, there they lay crying some time, for they could 
not get themselves out.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do I 

see myself in an error. Did not the Shepherds bid us beware 
of the flatterers? As is the saying of the wise man, so we 
have found it this day, “A man that flattereth his neighbour, 
spreadeth a net for his feet”181

the way, for our more sure finding thereof; but therein we 
have also forgotten to read, and have not kept ourselves 
from the paths of the destroyer. Here David was wiser than 
we; for, saith he, “Concerning the works of men, by the 
word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the de-
stroyer”182 Thus they lay bewailing themselves in the net. At 
last they espied a Shining One coming towards them, with 
a whip of small cord in his hand. When he was come to the 
place where they were, he asked them whence they came, 

181 Prov. 29:5
182 Psa. 16:4

and what they did there. They told him that they were poor 
pilgrims going to Zion, but were led out of their way by a 
black man, clothed in white, who bid us, said they, follow 
him, for he was going thither too. Then said he with the 
whip, It is Flatterer, a false apostle, that hath transformed 
himself into an angel of light.183 So he rent the net, and let 
the men out. Then said he to them, Follow me, that I may 
set you in your way again. So he led them back to the way 
which they had left to follow the Flatterer. Then he asked 
them, saying, Where did you lie the last night? They said, 
With the Shepherds, upon the Delectable Mountains. He 
asked them then, if they had not of those Shepherds a note 
of direction for the way. They answered, Yes. But did you, 
said he, when you were at a stand, pluck out and read your 
note? They answered, No. He asked them, Why? They said, 
they forgot. He asked, moreover, if the Shepherds did not 
bid them beware of the Flatterer. They answered, Yes, but 
we did not imagine, said they, that this fine-spoken man 
had been he.184

Then I saw in my dream, that he commanded them to 

lie down; which, when they did, he chastised them sore, to 
teach them the good way wherein they should walk;185 and as 
he chastised them, he said, “As many as I love, I rebuke and 
chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent”.186 This done, he 
bid them go on their way, and take good heed to the other 
directions of the Shepherds. So they thanked him for all his 
kindness, and went softly along the right way, singing—

Come hither, you that walk along the way; 

183 Prov. 29:5; Dan. 11:32; 2 Cor. 11:13, 14
184 Rom. 16:18
185 Deut. 25:2
186 Rev. 3:19; 2 Chron. 6:26, 27

See how the pilgrims fare that go astray! 
They catched are in an entangling net, 
‘Cause they good counsel lightly did forget: 
‘Tis true, they rescued were, but yet you see, 
They’re scourg’d to boot. Let this your caution be.

Now, after a while, they perceived, afar off, one coming soft-
ly and alone, all along the highway to meet them. Then said 
Christian to his fellow, Yonder is a man with his back toward 
Zion, and he is coming to meet us.

HOPEFUL. I see him, let us take heed to ourselves now, 

lest he should prove a flatterer also. So he drew nearer and 
nearer, and at last came up unto them. His name was Athe-
ist, and he asked them whither they were going.

CHRISTIAN. We are going to the Mount Zion.
Then Atheist fell into a very great laughter.
CHRISTIAN. What is the meaning of your laughter?
ATHEIST. I laugh to see what ignorant persons you are, 

to take upon you so tedious a journey, and yet are like to 
have nothing but your travel for your pains.

CHRISTIAN. Why, man, do you think we shall not be 

received?

of in all this world.

CHRISTIAN. But there is in the world to come.
ATHEIST. When I was at home in mine own country, I 

heard as you now affirm, and from that hearing went out to 
see, and have been seeking this city this 20 years; but find no 
more of it than I did the first day I set out.187

is such a place to be found.

ATHEIST. Had not I, when at home, believed, I had not 

187 Jer. 22:12; Eccl. 10:15

come thus far to seek; but finding none (and yet I should, 
had there been such a place to be found, for I have gone to 
seek it further than you), I am going back again, and will 
seek to refresh myself with the things that I then cast away, 
for hopes of that which, I now see, is not.

CHRISTIAN. Then said Christian to Hopeful his fellow, 

Is it true which this man hath said?

HOPEFUL. Take heed, he is one of the flatterers; remem-

ber what it hath cost us once already for our hearkening to 
such kind of fellows. What! no Mount Zion? Did we not 
see, from the Delectable Mountains, the gate of the city? 
Also, are we not now to walk by faith? Let us go on, said 
Hopeful, lest the man with the whip overtake us again.188

You should have taught me that lesson, which I will 

round you in the ears withal: “Cease, my son, to hear the 
instruction that causeth to err from the words of knowl-
edge”.189 I say, my brother, cease to hear him, and let us “be-
lieve to the saving of the soul”.190

CHRISTIAN. My brother, I did not put the question to 

thee, for that I doubted of the truth of our belief myself, but 
to prove thee, and to fetch from thee a fruit of the honesty 
of thy heart. As for this man, I know that he is blinded by 
the god of this world. Let thee and I go on, knowing that we 
have belief of the truth, “and no lie is of the truth”191

HOPEFUL. Now do I rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 

So they turned away from the man; and he, laughing at 
them, went his way.

188 2 Cor. 5:7
189 Prov. 19:17
190 Heb. 10:39
191 1 John 2:21

ADVENTURES ON  
THE ENCHANTED 

GROUND

I saw then in my dream, that they went till they came into 
a certain country, whose air naturally tended to make one 
drowsy, if he came a stranger into it. And here Hopeful be-
gan to be very dull and heavy of sleep; wherefore he said 
unto Christian, I do now begin to grow so drowsy that I can 
scarcely hold up mine eyes; let us lie down here, and take 
one nap.

CHRISTIAN. By no means, said the other; lest, sleeping, 

we never awake more.

HOPEFUL. Why, my brother? Sleep is sweet to the la-

bouring man; we may be refreshed if we take a nap.

CHRISTIAN. Do you not remember that one of the Shep-

herds bid us beware of the Enchanted Ground? He meant 
by that, that we should beware of sleeping; “Therefore let 
us not sleep, as do others, but let us watch and be sober”192

HOPEFUL. I acknowledge myself in a fault; and had I 

been here alone, I had by sleeping run the danger of death. 
I see it is true that the wise man saith, “Two are better than 

192 1 Thess. 5:6

one.” Hitherto hath thy company been my mercy, and thou 
shalt have a good reward for thy labour.193

CHRISTIAN. Now then, said Christian, to prevent drows-

iness in this place, let us fall into good discourse.

HOPEFUL. With all my heart, said the other.
CHRISTIAN. Where shall we begin?
HOPEFUL. Where God began with us. But do you begin, 

if you please.

CHRISTIAN. I will sing you first this song—

When saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither, 
And hear how these two pilgrims talk together: 
Yea, let them learn of them, in any wise, 
Thus to keep ope their drowsy slumb’ring eyes. 
Saints’ fellowship, if it be manag’d well, 
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell.

CHRISTIAN. Then Christian began, and said, I will ask you 
a question. How came you to think at first of so doing as 
you do now?

HOPEFUL. Do you mean, how came I at first to look 

after the good of my soul?

CHRISTIAN. Yes, that is my meaning.
HOPEFUL. I continued a great while in the delight of 

those things which were seen and sold at our fair; things 
which, I believe now, would have, had I continued in them 
still, drowned me in perdition and destruction.

CHRISTIAN. What things were they?
HOPEFUL. All the treasures and riches of the world. Also 

I delighted much in rioting, revelling, drinking, swearing, 
lying, uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking, and what not, that 
tended to destroy the soul. But I found at last, by hearing 

193 Eccl. 4:9

and considering of things that are Divine, which indeed I 
heard of you, as also of beloved Faithful, that was put to 
death for his faith and good living in Vanity Fair, that “the 
end of these things is death”194 And that for these things’ 
sake, “cometh the wrath of God upon the children of dis-
obedience”195

of this conviction?

HOPEFUL. No, I was not willing presently to know the 

evil of sin, nor the damnation that follows upon the com-
mission of it; but endeavoured, when my mind at first began 
to be shaken with the Word, to shut mine eyes against the 
light thereof.

CHRISTIAN. But what was the cause of your carrying of 

it thus to the first workings of God’s blessed Spirit upon 
you?

HOPEFUL. The causes were, 1. I was ignorant that this 

was the work of God upon me. I never thought that by 
awakenings for sin, God at first begins the conversion of a 
sinner. 2. Sin was yet very sweet to my flesh, and I was loath 
to leave it. 3. I could not tell how to part with mine old com-
panions, their presence and actions were so desirable unto 
me. 4. The hours in which convictions were upon me, were 
such troublesome and such heart-affrighting hours, that I 
could not bear, no not so much as the remembrance of them 
upon my heart.

your trouble?

again, and then I should be as bad, nay, worse than I was 
before.

194 Rev. 6:12–13
195 Eph. 5:6

CHRISTIAN. Why, what was it that brought your sins to 

mind again?

HOPEFUL. Many things; as,
1. If I did but meet a good man in the streets; or,
2. If I have heard any read in the Bible; or,
3. If mine head did begin to ache; or,
4. If I were told that some of my neighbours were sick; 

or,

5. If I heard the bell toll for some that were dead; or,
6. If I thought of dying myself; or,
7. If I heard that sudden death happened to others;
8. But especially, when I thought of myself, that I must 

quickly come to judgment.

off the guilt of sin, when, by any of these ways, it came upon 
you?

HOPEFUL. No, not I, for then they got faster hold of my 

conscience; and then, if I did but think of going back to sin 
(though my mind was turned against it), it would be double 
torment to me.

CHRISTIAN. And how did you do then?
HOPEFUL. I thought I must endeavour to mend my life; 

for else, thought I, I am sure to be damned.

CHRISTIAN. And did you endeavour to mend? 
HOPEFUL. Yes; and fled from not only my sins, but sinful 

company too; and betook me to religious duties, as prayer, 
reading, weeping for sin, speaking truth to my neighbours, 
etc. These things did I, with many others, too much here to 
relate.

CHRISTIAN. And did you think yourself well then?
HOPEFUL. Yes, for a while; but, at the last, my trouble 

came tumbling upon me again, and that over the neck of all 
my reformations.

CHRISTIAN. How came that about, since you were now 

reformed?

especially such sayings as these: “All our righteousnesses are 
as filthy rags”.196 “By the works of the law shall no flesh be 
justified”.197 “When ye shall have done all those things, say, 
We are unprofitable”;198 with many more such like. From 
whence I began to reason with myself thus: If ALL my righ-
teousnesses are filthy rags; if, by the deeds of the law, NO 
man can be justified; and if, when we have done ALL, we are 
yet unprofitable, then it is but a folly to think of Heaven 
by the law. I further thought thus: If a man runs a hundred 
pounds into the shopkeeper’s debt, and after that shall pay 
for all that he shall fetch; yet, if this old debt stands still in 
the book uncrossed, for that the shopkeeper may sue him, 
and cast him into prison till he shall pay the debt.

CHRISTIAN. Well, and how did you apply this to your-

self?

HOPEFUL. Why, I thought thus with myself: I have, by 

my sins, run a great way into God’s book, and that my now 
reforming will not pay off that score; therefore I should 
think still, under all my present amendments, But how shall 
I be freed from that damnation that I have brought myself 
in danger of, by my former transgressions?

CHRISTIAN. A very good application; but, pray, go on.
HOPEFUL. Another thing that hath troubled me, even 

since my late amendments, is, that if I look narrowly into 
the best of what I do now, I still see sin, new sin, mixing 
itself with the best of that I do; so that now I am forced to 
conclude, that notwithstanding my former fond conceits of 

196 Isa. 64:6
197 Gal. 2:16
198 Luke 17:10

myself and duties, I have committed sin enough in one duty 
to send me to hell, though my former life had been faultless.

CHRISTIAN. And what did you do then?
HOPEFUL. Do! I could not tell what to do, until I brake 

my mind to Faithful, for he and I were well acquainted. And 
he told me, that unless I could obtain the righteousness of 
a man that never had sinned, neither mine own, nor all the 
righteousness of the world, could save me.

CHRISTIAN. And did you think he spake true?
HOPEFUL. Had he told me so when I was pleased and 

satisfied with mine own amendment, I had called him fool 
for his pains; but now, since I see mine own infirmity, and 
the sin that cleaves to my best performance, I have been 
forced to be of his opinion.

CHRISTIAN. But did you think, when at first he sug-

gested it to you, that there was such a man to be found, of 
whom it might justly be said, that He never committed sin?

strangely, but after a little more talk and company with him, 
I had full conviction about it.

CHRISTIAN. And did you ask him what man this was, 

and how you must be justified by Him?

HOPEFUL. Yes, and he told me it was the Lord Jesus, that 

dwelleth on the right hand of the Most High. And thus, 
said he, you must be justified by Him, even by trusting to 
what He hath done by Himself in the days of His flesh, and 
suffered when He did hang on the tree. I asked him further, 
how that man’s righteousness could be of that efficacy to jus-
tify another before God? And he told me He was the mighty 
God, and did what He did, and died the death also, not for 
Himself, but for me; to whom His doings, and the worthi-
ness of them, should be imputed, if I believed on Him.199

199 Heb. 10; Rom. 4; Col. 1; 1 Peter 1

CHRISTIAN. And what did you do then?
HOPEFUL. I made my objections against my believing, 

for that I thought He was not willing to save me.

CHRISTIAN. And what said Faithful to you then?
HOPEFUL. He bid me go to Him and see. Then I said 

it was presumption; but he said, No, for I was invited to 
come.200 Then he gave me a book of Jesus, His inditing, to 
encourage me the more freely to come; and he said, con-
cerning that book, that every jot and tittle thereof stood 
firmer than Heaven and earth.201 Then I asked him, What I 
must do when I came; and he told me, I must entreat upon 
my knees, with all my heart and soul, the Father to reveal 
Him to me.202 Then I asked him further, how I must make 
my supplication to Him? And he said, Go, and thou shalt 
find Him upon a mercy-seat, where He sits all the year long, 
to give pardon and forgiveness to them that come. I told 
him that I knew not what to say when I came. And he bid 
me say to this effect, God be merciful to me a sinner, and 
make me to know and believe in Jesus Christ; for I see, that 
if His righteousness had not been, or I have not faith in that 
righteousness, I am utterly cast away. Lord, I have heard that 
Thou art a merciful God, and hast ordained that Thy Son Je-
sus Christ should be the Saviour of the world; and moreover, 
that thou art willing to bestow Him upon such a poor sinner 
as I am (and I am a sinner indeed), Lord, take therefore this 
opportunity, and magnify Thy grace in the salvation of my 
soul, through Thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen.203

CHRISTIAN. And did you do as you were bidden?
HOPEFUL. Yes; over, and over, and over.

200 Matt. 11:28
201 Matt. 24:35
202 Psa. 95:6; Dan. 6:10; Jer. 29:12, 13
203 Exo. 25:22; Lev. 16:2; Num. 7:89; Heb. 4:16

CHRISTIAN. And did the Father reveal His Son to you?
HOPEFUL. Not at the first, nor second, nor third, nor 

fourth, nor fifth; no, nor at the sixth time neither.

CHRISTIAN. What did you do then?
HOPEFUL. What! why I could not tell what to do.
CHRISTIAN. Had you not thoughts of leaving off pray-

ing?

HOPEFUL. Yes, a hundred times twice told.
CHRISTIAN. And what was the reason you did not?
HOPEFUL. I believed that that was true which had 

been told me, to wit, that without the righteousness of 
this Christ, all the world could not save me; and therefore, 
thought I with myself, if I leave off I die, and I can but die 
at the throne of grace. And withal, this came into my mind, 
“Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it 
will not tarry”.204 So I continued praying until the Father 
showed me His Son.

CHRISTIAN. And how was He revealed unto you?
HOPEFUL. I did not see Him with my bodily eyes, but 

with the eyes of my understanding;205 and thus it was: One 
day I was very sad, I think sadder than at any one time in 
my life, and this sadness was through a fresh sight of the 
greatness and vileness of my sins. And as I was then looking 
for nothing but hell, and the everlasting damnation of my 
soul, suddenly, as I thought, I saw the Lord Jesus look down 
from Heaven upon me, and saying, “Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved”.206

And He answered, “My grace is sufficient for thee”.207 Then 

204 Hab. 2:3
205 Eph. 1:18, 19
206 Acts 16:31
207 2 Cor. 12:9

I said, But, Lord, what is believing? And then I saw from 
that saying, “He that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and 
he that believeth on Me shall never thirst”; that believing 
and coming was all one; and that he that came, that is, ran 
out in his heart and affections after salvation by Christ, he 
indeed believed in Christ.208 Then the water stood in mine 
eyes, and I asked further, But, Lord, may such a great sinner 
as I am, be indeed accepted of Thee, and be saved by Thee? 
And I heard him say, “And him that cometh to Me, I will in 
no wise cast out”.209 Then I said, But how, Lord, must I con-
sider of Thee in my coming to Thee, that my faith may be 
placed aright upon Thee? Then He said, “Christ Jesus came 
into the world to save sinners”.210 “He is the end of the law 
for righteousness to every one that believeth”.211 “He died for 
our sins, and rose again for our justification”.212 “He loved 
us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood”.213 “He 
is mediator betwixt God and us”.214 “He ever liveth to make 
intercession for us”.215 From all which I gathered, that I must 
look for righteousness in His person, and for satisfaction 
for my sins by His blood; that what He did in obedience to 
His Father’s law, and in submitting to the penalty thereof, 
was not for Himself, but for him that will accept it for his 
salvation, and be thankful. And now was my heart full of 
joy, mine eyes full of tears, and mine affections running over 
with love to the name, people, and ways of Jesus Christ.

208 John 6:35
209 John 6:37
210 1 Tim. 1:15
211 Rom. 10:4
212 Rom. 4:25
213 Rev. 1:5
214 1 Tim. 2:5
215 Heb. 7:25

indeed; but tell me particularly what effect this had upon 
your spirit.

HOPEFUL. It made me see that all the world, notwith-

standing all the righteousness thereof, is in a state of con-
demnation. It made me see that God the Father, though 
He be just, can justly justify the coming sinner. It made me 
greatly ashamed of the vileness of my former life, and con-
founded me with the sense of mine own ignorance; for there 
never came thought into my heart before now, that showed 
me so the beauty of Jesus Christ. It made me love a holy 
life, and long to do something for the honour and glory of 
the name of the Lord Jesus; yea, I thought that had I now a 
thousand gallons of blood in my body, I could spill it all for 
the sake of the Lord Jesus.

I saw then in my dream that Hopeful looked back and 

saw Ignorance, whom they had left behind, coming after. 
Look, said he to Christian, how far yonder youngster loiter-
eth behind.

CHRISTIAN. Aye, aye, I see him; he careth not for our 

company.

HOPEFUL. But I trow it would not have hurt him, had 

he kept pace with us hitherto.

otherwise.

HOPEFUL. That I think he doth; but, however, let us tar-

ry for him. So they did.

Then Christian said to him, Come away, man, why do 

you stay so behind?

more a great deal than in company, unless I like it the better.

Then said Christian to Hopeful (but softly), Did I not 

tell you he cared not for our company? But, however, said 
he, come up, and let us talk away the time in this solitary 
place. Then, directing his speech to Ignorance, he said, 

Come, how do you? How stands it between God and your 
soul now?

motions, that come into my mind, to comfort me as I 
walk.216

CHRISTIAN. What good motions? pray, tell us.
IGNORANCE. Why, I think of God and Heaven.
CHRISTIAN. So do the devils and damned souls.
IGNORANCE. But I think of them, and desire them.
CHRISTIAN. So do many that are never like to come 

there. “The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath noth-
ing”.217

IGNORANCE. But I think of them, and leave all for them.
CHRISTIAN. That I doubt; for leaving all is a hard mat-

ter; yea, a harder matter than many are aware of. But why, or 
by what, art thou persuaded that thou hast left all for God 
and Heaven?

IGNORANCE. My heart tells me so.
CHRISTIAN. The wise man says, “He that trusts his own 

heart is a fool”.218

IGNORANCE. This is spoken of an evil heart, but mine is 

a good one.

CHRISTIAN. But how dost thou prove that?
IGNORANCE. It comforts me in hopes of Heaven.
CHRISTIAN. That may be through its deceitfulness; for 

a man’s heart may minister comfort to him in the hopes of 
that thing, for which he yet has no ground to hope.

therefore my hope is well grounded.

216 Prov. 28:26
217 Prov. 13:4
218 Prov. 28:26

together?

IGNORANCE. My heart tells me so.
CHRISTIAN. Ask my fellow if I be a thief! Thy heart tells 

thee so! Except the Word of God beareth witness in this 
matter, other testimony is of no value.

IGNOR. But is it not a good heart that hath good 

thoughts? and is not that a good life that is according to 
God’s commandments?

thoughts, and that is a good life that is according to God’s 
commandments; but it is one thing, indeed, to have these, 
and another thing only to think so.

life according to God’s commandments?

CHRISTIAN. There are good thoughts of divers kinds; 

some respecting ourselves, some God, some Christ, and 
some other thing.

IGNORANCE. What be good thoughts respecting our-

selves?

CHRISTIAN. Such as agree with the Word of God.
IGNORANCE. When do our thoughts of ourselves agree 

with the Word of God?

CHRISTIAN. When we pass the same judgment upon 

ourselves which the Word passes. To explain myself—the 
Word of God saith of persons in a natural condition, “There 
is none righteous, there is none that doeth good”.219 It saith 
also, that “every imagination of the heart of man is only 
evil, and that continually”.220 And again, “The imagination 
of man’s heart is evil from his youth”.221 Now then, when we 

219 Rom. 3
220 Gen. 6:5
221 Gen. 8:21

think thus of ourselves, having sense thereof then are our 
thoughts good ones, because according to the Word of God.

IGNORANCE. I will never believe that my heart is thus 

bad.

CHRISTIAN. Therefore thou never hadst one good 

thought concerning thyself in thy life. But let me go on. As 
the Word passeth a judgment upon our heart, so it passeth 
a judgment upon our ways; and when our thoughts of our 
hearts and ways agree with the judgment which the Word 
giveth of both, then are both good, because agreeing thereto.

IGNORANCE. Make out your meaning.
CHRISTIAN. Why, the Word of God saith that man’s 

ways are crooked ways; not good, but perverse.222 It saith 
they are naturally out of the good way, that they have not 
known it (Rom. 3). Now, when a man thus thinketh of his 
ways; I say, when he doth sensibly, and with heart humili-
ation, thus think, then hath he good thoughts of his own 
ways, because his thoughts now agree with the judgment of 
the Word of God.

IGNORANCE. What are good thoughts concerning God?
CHRISTIAN. Even as I have said concerning ourselves, 

when our thoughts of God do agree with what the Word 
saith of Him; and that is, when we think of His being and 
attributes as the Word hath taught, of which I cannot now 
discourse at large; but to speak of Him with reference to us: 
Then we have right thoughts of God, when we think that 
He knows us better than we know ourselves, and can see sin 
in us when and where we can see none in ourselves; when we 
think He knows our inmost thoughts, and that our heart, 
with all its depths, is always open unto His eyes; also, when 
we think that all our righteousness stinks in His nostrils, and 

222 Psa. 125; Prov. 2:15

that, therefore, He cannot abide to see us stand before Him 
in any confidence, even in all our best performances.

think God can see no further than I? or, that I would come 
to God in the best of my performances?

CHRISTIAN. Why, how dost thou think in this matter?
IGNORANCE. Why, to be short, I think I must believe in 

Christ for justification.

CHRISTIAN. How! think thou must believe in Christ, 

when thou seest not thy need of Him! Thou neither seest 
thy original nor actual infirmities; but hast such an opinion 
of thyself, and of what thou dost, as plainly renders thee 
to be one that did never see a necessity of Christ’s personal 
righteousness to justify thee before God. How, then, dost 
thou say, I believe in Christ?

IGNORANCE. I believe well enough for all that.
CHRISTIAN. How dost thou believe?
IGNORANCE. I believe that Christ died for sinners; and 

that I shall be justified before God from the curse, through 
His gracious acceptance of my obedience to His law. Or 
thus, Christ makes my duties, that are religious, acceptable 
to His Father, by virtue of His merits; and so shall I be jus-
tified.

thy faith.

1. Thou believest with a fantastical faith; for this faith is 

nowhere described in the Word.

justification from the personal righteousness of Christ, and 
applies it to thy own.

3. This faith maketh not Christ a justifier of thy person, 

but of thy actions; and of thy person for thy actions’ sake, 
which is false.

4. Therefore, this faith is deceitful, even such as will 

leave thee under wrath, in the day of God Almighty; for true 
justifying faith puts the soul, as sensible of its lost condition 
by the law, upon flying for refuge unto Christ’s righteous-
ness, which righteousness of His is not an act of grace, by 
which He maketh, for justification, thy obedience accepted 
with God; but His personal obedience to the law, in doing 
and suffering for us what that required at our hands; this 
righteousness, I say, true faith accepteth; under the skirt of 
which, the soul being shrouded, and by it presented as spot-
less before God, it is accepted, and acquit from condemna-
tion.

IGNORANCE. What! would you have us trust to what 

Christ, in His own person, has done without us? This con-
ceit would loosen the reins of our lust, and tolerate us to 
live as we list; for what matter how we live, if we may be 
justified by Christ’s personal righteousness from all, when 
we believe it?

CHRISTIAN. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy name is, 

so art thou; even this thy answer demonstrateth what I say. 
Ignorant thou art of what justifying righteousness is, and 
as ignorant how to secure thy soul, through the faith of it, 
from the heavy wrath of God. Yea, thou also art ignorant of 
the true effects of saving faith in this righteousness of Christ, 
which is, to bow and win over the heart to God in Christ, to 
love His name, His Word, ways, and people, and not as thou 
ignorantly imaginest.

from Heaven.

IGNORANCE. What! you are a man for revelations! I be-

lieve that what both you, and all the rest of you, say about 
that matter, is but the fruit of distracted brains.

HOPEFUL. Why, man! Christ is so hid in God from the 

natural apprehensions of the flesh, that He cannot by any 

man be savingly known, unless God the Father reveals Him 
to them.

I doubt not, is as good as yours, though I have not in my 
head so many whimsies as you.

CHRISTIAN. Give me leave to put in a word. You ought 

not so slightly to speak of this matter; for this I will boldly 
affirm, even as my good companion hath done, that no man 
can know Jesus Christ but by the revelation of the Father;223 
yea, and faith too, by which the soul layeth hold upon 
Christ, if it be right, must be wrought by the exceeding 
greatness of His mighty power; the working of which faith, 
I perceive, poor Ignorance, thou art ignorant of.224 Be awak-
ened then, see thine own wretchedness, and fly to the Lord 
Jesus; and by His righteousness, which is the righteousness 
of God, for He Himself is God, thou shalt be delivered from 
condemnation.

you. Do you go on before; I must stay a while behind.

Then they said—

Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be, 
To slight good counsel, ten times given thee? 
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know, 
Ere long, the evil of thy doing so. 
Remember, man, in time, stoop, do not fear; 
Good counsel taken well, saves: therefore hear. 
But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou wilt be 
The loser (Ignorance) I’ll warrant thee.

Then Christian addressed thus himself to his fellow—

223 Matt. 11:27
224 1 Cor. 12:3; Eph 1:18, 19

CHRISTIAN. Well, come, my good Hopeful, I perceive 

that thou and I must walk by ourselves again.

and Ignorance he came bobbling after. Then said Christian 
to his companion, It pities me much for this poor man, it 
will certainly go ill with him at last.

condition, whole families, yea, whole streets, and that of pil-
grims too; and if there be so many in our parts, how many, 
think you, must there be in the place where he was born?

CHRISTIAN. Indeed the Word saith, “He hath blinded 

their eyes, lest they should see,” etc. But now we are by our-
selves, what do you think of such men? Have they at no 
time, think you, convictions of sin, and so consequently 
fears that their state is dangerous?

HOPEFUL. Nay, do you answer that question yourself, 

for you are the elder man.

CHRISTIAN. Then I say, sometimes (as I think) they may; 

but they being naturally ignorant, understand not that such 
convictions tend to their good; and therefore they do des-
perately seek to stifle them, and presumptuously continue to 
flatter themselves in the way of their own hearts.

HOPEFUL. I do believe, as you say, that fear tends much 

to men’s good, and to make them right, at their beginning 
to go on pilgrimage.

CHRISTIAN. Without all doubt it doth, if it be right; for 

so says the Word, “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of 
wisdom”.225

HOPEFUL. How will you describe right fear?
CHRISTIAN. True or right fear is discovered by three 

things—

1. By its rise; it is caused by saving convictions for sin.

225 Prov. 1:7; 9:10; Psa. 111:10; Job. 28:28

2. It driveth the soul to lay fast hold of Christ for salva-

tion.

3. It begetteth and continueth in the soul a great rev-

erence of God, his Word, and ways, keeping it tender, and 
making it afraid to turn from them, to the right hand or 
to the left, to anything, that may dishonour God, break 
its peace, grieve the Spirit, or cause the enemy to speak re-
proachfully.

HOPEFUL. Well said; I believe you have said the truth. 

Are we now almost got past the Enchanted Ground?

CHRISTIAN. Why, art thou weary of this discourse?
HOPEFUL. No, verily, but that I would know where we 

are.

CHRISTIAN. We have not now above two miles further 

to go thereon. But let us return to our matter. Now the igno-
rant know not that such convictions as tend to put them in 
fear are for their good, and therefore they seek to stifle them.

HOPEFUL. How do they seek to stifle them?
CHRISTIAN. 1. They think that those fears are wrought 

by the devil (though indeed they are wrought of God); and, 
thinking so, they resist them as things that directly tend to 
their overthrow. 2. They also think that these fears tend to 
the spoiling of their faith, when, alas for them, poor men 
that they are, they have none at all! and therefore they hard-
en their hearts against them. 3. They presume they ought 
not to fear; and therefore, in despite of them, wax presump-
tuously confident. 4. They see that those fears tend to take 
away from them their pitiful old self-holiness, and therefore 
they resist them with all their might.

HOPEFUL. I know something of this myself; for, before I 

knew myself, it was so with me.

CHRISTIAN. Well, we will leave, at this time, our neigh-

bour Ignorance by himself, and fall upon another profitable 
question.

HOPEFUL. With all my heart, but you shall still begin.
CHRISTIAN. Well then, did you not know, about 10 years 

ago, one Temporary in your parts, who was a forward man 
in religion then?

HOPEFUL. Know him! yes, he dwelt in Graceless, a town 

about two miles off of Honesty, and he dwelt next door to 
one Turnback.

CHRISTIAN. Right, he dwelt under the same roof with 

him. Well, that man was much awakened once; I believe 
that then he had some sight of his sins, and of the wages that 
were due thereto.

HOPEFUL. I am of your mind, for, my house not being 

above three miles from him, he would ofttimes come to me, 
and that with many tears. Truly I pitied the man, and was 
not altogether without hope of him; but one may see, it is 
not every one that cries, Lord, Lord.

CHRISTIAN. He told me once that he was resolved to go 

on pilgrimage, as we do now; but all of a sudden he grew 
acquainted with one Save-self, and then he became a strang-
er to me.

HOPEFUL. Now, since we are talking about him, let us 

a little inquire into the reason of the sudden backsliding of 
him and such others.

CHRISTIAN. It may be very profitable, but do you begin.
HOPEFUL. Well then, there are in my judgment four 

reasons for it—

1. Though the consciences of such men are awakened, 

yet their minds are not changed; therefore, when the power 
of guilt weareth away, that which provoked them to be re-
ligious ceaseth, wherefore they naturally turn to their own 
course again, even as we see the dog that is sick of what he 
has eaten, so long as his sickness prevails, he vomits and casts 
up all; not that he doth this of a free mind (if we may say a 
dog has a mind), but because it troubleth his stomach; but 

now, when his sickness is over, and so his stomach eased, 
his desire being not at all alienate from his vomit, he turns 
him about and licks up all, and so it is true which is written, 
“The dog is turned to his own vomit again”.226 Thus I say, 
being hot for Heaven, by virtue only of the sense and fear of 
the torments of hell, as their sense of hell, and the fears of 
damnation, chills and cools, so their desires for Heaven and 
salvation cool also. So then it comes to pass, that when their 
guilt and fear is gone, their desires for Heaven and happiness 
die, and they return to their course again.

2. Another reason is, they have slavish fears that do over-

master them; I speak now of the fears that they have of men, 
for “the fear of man bringeth a snare”.227 So then, though 
they seem to be hot for Heaven, so long as the flames of 
hell are about their ears, yet, when that terror is a little over, 
they betake themselves to second thoughts; namely, that it 
is good to be wise, and not to run (for they know not what) 
the hazard of losing all, or, at least, of bringing themselves 
into unavoidable and unnecessary troubles, and so they fall 
in with the world again.

3. The shame that attends religion lies also as a block in 

their way; they are proud and haughty, and religion in their 
eye is low and contemptible; therefore, when they have lost 
their sense of hell and wrath to come, they return again to 
their former course.

They like not to see their misery before they come into it; 
though perhaps the sight of it first, if they loved that sight, 
might make them fly whither the righteous fly and are 
safe. But because they do, as I hinted before, even shun the 
thoughts of guilt and terror, therefore, when once they are 

226 2 Peter 2:22
227 Prov. 29:25

rid of their awakenings about the terrors and wrath of God, 
they harden their hearts gladly, and choose such ways as will 
harden them more and more.

CHRISTIAN. You are pretty near the business, for the bot-

tom of all is, for want of a change in their mind and will. 
And therefore they are but like the felon that standeth be-
fore the judge, he quakes and trembles, and seems to repent 
most heartily, but the bottom of all is the fear of the halter; 
not that he hath any detestation of the offence, as is evident, 
because, let but this man have his liberty, and he will be a 
thief, and so a rogue still, whereas, if his mind were changed, 
he would be otherwise.

HOPEFUL. Now, I have showed you the reasons of their 

going back, do you show me the manner thereof.

CHRISTIAN. So I will, willingly.
1. They draw off their thoughts, all that they may, from 

the remembrance of God, death, and judgment to come.

2. Then they cast off by degrees private duties, as closet 

prayer, curbing their lusts, watching, sorrow for sin, and the 
like.

3. Then they shun the company of lively and warm 

Christians.

4. After that, they grow cold to public duty, as hearing, 

reading, godly conference, and the like.

5. Then they begin to pick holes, as we say, in the coats 

of some of the godly; and that devilishly, that they may have 
a seeming colour to throw religion (for the sake of some in-
firmity they have espied in them) behind their backs.

6. Then they begin to adhere to, and associate them-

selves with, carnal, loose, and wanton men.

7. Then they give way to carnal and wanton discourses 

in secret; and glad are they if they can see such things in any 
that are counted honest, that they may the more boldly do 
it through their example.

8. After this, they begin to play with little sins openly.
9. And then, being hardened, they show themselves as 

they are. Thus, being launched again into the gulf of misery, 
unless a miracle of grace prevent it, they everlastingly perish 
in their own deceivings.

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time the Pilgrims 

were got over the Enchanted Ground, and entering into the 
country of Beulah, whose air was very sweet and pleasant, 
the way lying directly through it, they solaced themselves 
there for a season.228 Yea, here they heard continually the 
singing of birds, and saw every day the flowers appear in 
the earth, and heard the voice of the turtle in the land.229 In 
this country the sun shineth night and day; wherefore this 
was beyond the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and also out 
of the reach of Giant Despair, neither could they from this 
place so much as see Doubting Castle. Here they were with-
in sight of the city they were going to, also here met them 
some of the inhabitants thereof; for in this land the Shining 
Ones commonly walked, because it was upon the borders 
of Heaven. In this land also the contract between the bride 
and the bridegroom was renewed; yea, here, “As the bride-
groom rejoiceth over the bride, so did their God rejoice over 
them”.230 Here they had no want of corn and wine; for in 
this place they met with abundance of what they had sought 
for in all their pilgrimage.231 Here they heard voices from out 
of the city, loud voices, saying, “Say ye to the daughter of 
Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh! Behold, His reward is 
with Him!”.232 Here all the inhabitants of the country called 

228 Isa. 62:4
229 Song. 2:10–12
230 Isa. 62:5
231 Isa. 62:8
232 Isa. 62:11

them, “The holy people, The redeemed of the Lord, Sought 
out,” etc.233

Now, as they walked in this land, they had more rejoic-

ing than in parts more remote from the kingdom to which 
they were bound; and drawing near to the city, they had yet 
a more perfect view thereof. It was builded of pearls and 
precious stones, also the street thereof was paved with gold; 
so that by reason of the natural glory of the city, and the 
reflection of the sunbeams upon it, Christian with desire 
fell sick. Hopeful also had a fit or two of the same disease. 
Wherefore, here they lay by it a while, crying out, because 
of their pangs, “If ye find my Beloved, tell Him that I am 
sick of love.234

But being a little strengthened, and better able to bear 

their sickness, they walked on their way, and came yet near-
er and nearer, where were orchards, vineyards, and gardens, 
and their gates opened into the highway. Now, as they came 
up to these places, behold, the gardener stood in the way, to 
whom the Pilgrims said, Whose goodly vineyards and gar-
dens are these? He answered, They are the King’s, and are 
planted here for His own delight, and also for the solace 
of pilgrims. So the gardener had them into the vineyards, 
and bid them refresh themselves with the dainties.235 He also 
showed them there the King’s walks, and the arbours, where 
He delighted to be; and here they tarried and slept.

Now I beheld in my dream, that they talked more in 

their sleep at this time than ever they did in all their journey; 
and being in a muse thereabout, the gardener said even to 
me, Wherefore musest thou at the matter? It is the nature 

233 Isa. 62:12
234 Song. 5:8
235 Deut. 23:24

of the fruit of the grapes of these vineyards to go down so 
sweetly, as to cause the lips of them that are asleep to speak.

So I saw that when they awoke, they addressed them-

selves to go up to the city. But, as I said, the reflection of 
the sun upon the city (for “the city was pure gold”),236 was 
so extremely glorious, that they could not, as yet, with open 
face behold it, but through an instrument made for that 
purpose (2 Cor. v). So I saw, that as they went on, there met 
them two men, in raiment that shone like gold; also their 
faces shone as the light.

These men asked the Pilgrims whence they came; and 

they told them. They also asked them where they had lodged, 
what difficulties and dangers, what comforts and pleasures 
they had met in the way; and they told them. Then said the 
men that met them, You have but two difficulties more to 
meet with, and then you are in the city.

Christian then, and his companion, asked the men to 

go along with them; so they told them they would. But, said 
they, you must obtain it by your own faith. So I saw in my 
dream that they went on together, until they came in sight 
of the gate.

Now, I further saw, that betwixt them and the gate was 

a river, but there was no bridge to go over; the river was very 
deep. At the sight, therefore, of this river, the Pilgrims were 
much stunned: but the men that went with them said, You 
must go through, or you cannot come at the gate.

The Pilgrims then began to inquire if there was no other 

way to the gate; to which they answered, Yes; but there hath 
not any, save two, to wit, Enoch and Elijah, been permit-
ted to tread that path, since the foundation of the world, 
nor shall, until the last trumpet shall sound).237 The Pilgrims 

236 Rev. 21:18
237 1 Cor. 15:51, 52

then, especially Christian, began to despond in their minds, 
and looked this way and that, but no way could be found 
by them, by which they might escape the river. Then they 
asked the men if the waters were all of a depth. They said, 
No; yet they could not help them in that case; for, said they, 
you shall find it deeper or shallower, as you believe in the 
King of the place.

They then addressed themselves to the water; and en-

tering, Christian began to sink, and crying out to his good 
friend Hopeful, he said, I sink in deep waters; the billows go 
over my head, all his waves go over me! Selah.

Then said the other, Be of good cheer, my brother, I feel 

the bottom, and it is good. Then, said Christian, Ah! my 
friend, “the sorrows of death have compassed me about”; I 
shall not see the land that flows with milk and honey; and 
with that a great darkness and horror fell upon Christian, so 
that he could not see before him. Also here he in great mea-
sure lost his senses, so that he could neither remember, nor 
orderly talk of any of those sweet refreshments that he had 
met with in the way of his pilgrimage. But all the words that 
he spake still tended to discover that he had horror of mind, 
and heart fears that he should die in that river, and never ob-
tain entrance in at the gate. Here also, as they that stood by 
perceived, he was much in the troublesome thoughts of the 
sins that he had committed, both since and before he began 
to be a pilgrim. It was also observed that he was troubled 
with apparitions of hobgoblins and evil spirits; for ever and 
anon he would intimate so much by words. Hopeful, there-
fore, here had much ado to keep his brother’s head above 
water; yea, sometimes he would be quite gone down, and 
then, ere awhile, he would rise up again half dead. Hope-
ful also would endeavour to comfort him, saying, Brother, I 
see the gate, and men standing by to receive us; but Chris-
tian would answer, It is you, it is you they wait for; you 

have been Hopeful ever since I knew you. And so have you, 
said he to Christian. Ah, brother! said he, surely if I were 
right He would now arise to help me; but for my sins He 
hath brought me into the snare, and hath left me. Then said 
Hopeful, My brother, you have quite forgot the text, where 
it is said of the wicked, “There are no bands in their death; 
but their strength is firm. They are not in trouble as other 
men, neither are they plagued like other men.238 These trou-
bles and distresses that you go through in these waters are 
no sign that God hath forsaken you; but are sent to try you, 
whether you will call to mind that which heretofore you 
have received of His goodness, and live upon Him in your 
distresses. Then I saw in my dream, that Christian was as in a 
muse a while. To whom also Hopeful added this word, Be of 
good cheer, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole; and with that 
Christian brake out with a loud voice, O! I see Him again, 
and He tells me, “When thou passest through the waters, I 
will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not over-
flow thee”.239 Then they both took courage, and the enemy 
was after that as still as a stone, until they were gone over. 
Christian therefore presently found ground to stand upon, 
and so it followed that the rest of the river was but shallow. 
Thus they got over. Now, upon the bank of the river, on the 
other side, they saw the two shining men again, who there 
waited for them; wherefore, being come out of the river, 
they saluted them, saying, We are ministering spirits, sent 
forth to minister for those that shall be heirs of salvation. 
Thus they went along towards the gate. Now you must note 
that the city stood upon a mighty hill, but the Pilgrims went 
up that hill with ease, because they had these two men to 
lead them up by the arms; also, they had left their mortal 

238 Psa. 73:4, 5
239 Isa. 43:2

garments behind them in the river, for though they went in 
with them, they came out without them. They, therefore, 
went up here with much agility and speed, though the foun-
dation upon which the city was framed was higher than the 
clouds. They, therefore, went up through the regions of the 
air, sweetly talking as they went, being comforted, because 
they safely got over the river, and had such glorious compan-
ions to attend them.

glory of the place; who told them that the beauty and glo-
ry of it was inexpressible. There, said they, is the “Mount 
Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable company of 
angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect”.240 You are 
going now, said they, to the paradise of God, wherein you 
shall see the tree of life, and eat of the never-fading fruits 
thereof; and when you come there, you shall have white 
robes given you, and your walk and talk shall be every day 
with the King, even all the days of eternity.241 There you shall 
not see again such things as you saw when you were in the 
lower region upon the earth, to wit, sorrow, sickness, afflic-
tion, and death, “for the former things are passed away.” You 
are now going to Abraham, to Isaac, and Jacob, and to the 
prophets—men that God hath taken away from the evil to 
come, and that are now resting upon their beds, each one 
walking in his righteousness.242 The men then asked, what 
must we do in the holy place? To whom it was answered, 
You must there receive the comforts of all your toil, and 
have joy for all your sorrow; you must reap what you have 
sown, even the fruit of all your prayers, and tears, and suffer-

240 Heb. 12:22–24
241 Rev. 2:7; 3:4; 22:5
242 Isa. 57:1, 2; 65:17

ings for the King by the way.243 In that place you must wear 
crowns of gold, and enjoy the perpetual sight and vision 
of the Holy One, for “there you shall see Him as He is”.244 
There also you shall serve Him continually with praise, with 
shouting and thanksgiving, whom you desired to serve in 
the world, though with much difficulty, because of the in-
firmity of your flesh. There your eyes shall be delighted with 
seeing, and your ears with hearing the pleasant voice of the 
Mighty One. There you shall enjoy your friends again, that 
are gone thither before you; and there you shall with joy 
receive, even every one that follows into the holy place after 
you. There also shall you be clothed with glory and majesty, 
and put into an equipage fit to ride out with the King of 
glory. When He shall come with sound of trumpet in the 
clouds, as upon the wings of the wind, you shall come with 
Him; and when He shall sit upon the throne of judgment, 
you shall sit by Him; yea, and when He shall pass sentence 
upon all the workers of iniquity, let them be angels or men, 
you also shall have a voice in that judgment, because they 
were His and your enemies.245 Also when He shall again re-
turn to the city, you shall go too, with sound of trumpet, 
and be ever with Him.

243 Gal. 6:7
244 1 John 3:2
245 1 Thess. 4:13–17; Jude 14; Dan. 7:9, 10; 1 Cor. 6:2, 3

MINISTERING SPIRITS 
MEET CHRISTIAN AND 

HOPEFUL

Now, while they were thus drawing towards the gate, behold 
a company of the heavenly host came out to meet them; to 
whom it was said, by the other two Shining Ones, These are 
the men that have loved our Lord when they were in the 
world, and that have left all for His holy name; and He hath 
sent us to fetch them, and we have brought them thus far 
on their desired journey, that they may go in and look their 
Redeemer in the face with joy. Then the heavenly host gave 
a great shout, saying, “Blessed are they which are called unto 
the marriage supper of the Lamb”.246 There came out also 
at this time to meet them, several of the King’s trumpeters, 
clothed in white and shining raiment, who, with melodious 
noises, and loud, made even the heavens to echo with their 
sound. These trumpeters saluted Christian and his fellow 
with 10,000 welcomes from the world; and this they did 
with shouting, and sound of trumpet.

This done, they compassed them round on every side; 

some went before, some behind, and some on the right 
hand, some on the left (as it were to guard them through 
the upper regions), continually sounding as they went, with 

246 Rev. 19:9

melodious noise, in notes on high; so that the very sight was 
to them that could behold it, as if Heaven itself was come 
down to meet them. Thus, therefore, they walked on togeth-
er; and as they walked, ever and anon these trumpeters, even 
with joyful sound, would, by mixing their music with looks 
and gestures, still signify to Christian and his brother, how 
welcome they were into their company, and with what glad-
ness they came to meet them; and now were these two men, 
as it were, in Heaven, before they came at it, being swal-
lowed up with the sight of angels, and with hearing of their 
melodious notes. Here also they had the city itself in view, 
and they thought they heard all the bells therein to ring, to 
welcome them thereto. But above all, the warm and joyful 
thoughts that they had about their own dwelling there, with 
such company, and that forever and ever. O by what tongue 
or pen can their glorious joy be expressed! And thus they 
came up to the gate.

written over it in letters of gold, “Blessed are they that do 
His commandments, that they may have right to the tree 
of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city”.247

call at the gate; the which, when they did, some looked from 
above over the gate, to wit, Enoch, Moses, and Elijah, etc., 
to whom it was said, These pilgrims are come from the City 
of Destruction, for the love that they bear to the King of this 
place; and then the pilgrims gave in unto them each man his 
certificate, which they had received in the beginning; those, 
therefore, were carried into the King, who, when He had 
read them, said, Where are the men? To whom it was an-
swered, They are standing without the gate. The King then 

247 Rev. 22:14

Ministering Spirits Meet Christian and Hopeful

commanded to open the gate, “That the righteous nation,” 
said He, “which keepeth the truth, may enter in”.248

the gate; and lo, as they entered, they were transfigured, and 
they had raiment put on that shone like gold. There were 
also that met them with harps and crowns, and gave them to 
them—the harps to praise withal, and the crowns in token 
of honour. Then I heard in my dream that all the bells in the 
city rang again for joy, and that it was said unto them, “EN-
TER YE INTO THE JOY OF YOUR LORD.” I also heard the men 
themselves, that they sang with a loud voice, saying, “BLESS-
ING, AND HONOUR, AND GLORY, AND POWER, BE UNTO HIM 
THAT SITTETH UPON THE THRONE, AND UNTO THE LAMB, 
FOREVER AND EVER”.249

Now just as the gates were opened to let in the men, 

I looked in after them, and, behold, the City shone like 
the sun; the streets also were paved with gold, and in them 
walked many men, with crowns on their heads, palms in 
their hands, and golden harps to sing praises withal. There 
were also of them that had wings, and they answered one 
another without intermission, saying, “Holy, holy, holy, is 
the Lord”.250 And after that, they shut up the gates; which, 
when I had seen, I wished myself among them.

my head to look back, and saw Ignorance come up to the 
river side; but he soon got over, and that without half that 
difficulty which the other two men met with. For it hap-
pened that there was then in that place, one Vain-hope, a 
ferryman, that with his boat helped him over; so he, as the 
other I saw, did ascend the hill, to come up to the gate, 

248 Isa. 26:2
249 Rev. 5:13
250 Rev. 4:8

only he came alone; neither did any man meet him with 
the least encouragement. When he was come up to the gate, 
he looked up to the writing that was above, and then be-
gan to knock, supposing that entrance should have been 
quickly administered to him; but he was asked by the men 
that looked over the top of the gate, Whence came you? and 
what would you have? He answered, I have eat and drank in 
the presence of the King, and He has taught in our streets. 
Then they asked him for his certificate, that they might go 
in and show it to the King; so he fumbled in his bosom for 
one, and found none. Then said they, Have you none? But 
the man answered never a word. So they told the King, but 
He would not come down to see him, but commanded the 
two Shining Ones that conducted Christian and Hopeful to 
the City, to go out and take Ignorance, and bind him hand 
and foot, and have him away. Then they took him up, and 
carried him through the air, to the door that I saw in the 
side of the hill, and put him in there. Then I saw that there 
was a way to hell, even from the gates of Heaven, as well as 
from the City of Destruction! So I awoke, and behold it was 
a dream.

THE CONCLUSION

Now, READER, I have told my dream to thee; 
See if thou canst interpret it to me, 
Or to thyself, or neighbour; but take heed 
Of misinterpreting; for that, instead 
Of doing good, will but thyself abuse: 
By misinterpreting, evil ensues. 
Take heed also, that thou be not extreme, 
In playing with the outside of my dream: 
Nor let my figure or similitude 
Put thee into a laughter or a feud. 
Leave this for boys and fools; but as for thee, 
Do thou the substance of my matter see. 
Put by the curtains, look within my veil, 
Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail; 
There, if thou seekest them, such things to find, 
As will be helpful to an honest mind. 
What of my dross thou findest there, be bold 
To throw away, but yet preserve the gold; 
What if my gold be wrapped up in ore?— 
None throws away the apple for the core. 
But if thou shalt cast all away as vain, 
I know not but ‘twill make me dream again.

THE END

SCRIPTURE INDEX

Genesis
6:5 
 
166

8:21 
 
166

9:27 
 
50

13:10 
 
124

13:13 
 
123

19:26 
 
122

25:32 
 
146

34:20–823 
 
118

39:11–813 
 
77

39:15 
 
92

Exodus
1 
 
107

19:16 
 
17

19:18 
 
17

25:22 
 
161

33:15 
 
150

Leviticus
11 
 
90

16:2 
 
161

Numbers
7:89 
 
161

13 
 
68

21:4 
 
125

26:9–10 
 
123

Deuteronomy
14 
 
90

23:24 
 
177

25:2 
 
152

1 Samuel
2:8 
 
57

12:23 
 
13

2 Kings
5:20 
 
121

2 Chronicles
6:26-27 
 
152

Job
3:5 
 
68

7:15 
 
129

9:11 
 
71

10:22 
 
68

12:16–19 
 
149

12:22 
 
71

16:21 
 
3

Scripture Index

16:22 
 
3

28:28 
 
171

29:3 
 
72

31:1 
 
78

34:16–25 
 
149

42:5–6 
 
94

Psalm
1:2–3 
 
94

2:12 
 
24

3:5–8 
 
150

7:2 
 
147

16:4 
 
151

17:14 
 
XXXIV

21:6 
 
11

22:17 
 
11

23:2–3 
 
101, 125

23:4 
 
71

27:1–3 
 
150

31:15 
 
XXXII

38:18 
 
93

40:2 
 
12

44:19 
 
68

65:9 
 
124

69:14–15 
 
69

73:4–5 
 
180

88:18 
 
128

95:1–3 
 
36

95:6 
 
161

107:10 
 
68

111:10 
 
171

113:7 
 
57

116:4 
 
70

119:34 
 
93

119:37 
 
101

119:105 
 
5

125 
 
167

Proverbs
1:7 
 
171

2:15 
 
167

3:35 
 
84

5:5 
 
78

5:22 
 
142

6:6 
 
46

9:10 
 
171

13:4 
 
165

19:17 
 
154

21:16 
 
138

23:34 
 
41

24:19 
 
XXXIII

26:12 
 
141

26:16 
 
7

26:25 
 
111

28:26 
 
165

29:5 
 
151

29:25 
 
174

Ecclesiastes
1 
 
99

2:11 
 
99

2:17 
 
99

4:9 
 
156

10:15 
 
153

11:8 
 
99

Song of Solomon
2:10–12 
 
176

5:8 
 
177

Isaiah
6:2 
 
10

9:16 
 
126

10:4 
 
150

14:30 
 
125

Scripture Index

25:8 
 
10, 55

26:1 
 
39

26:2 
 
185

26:21 
 
36

30:33 
 
3

33:16–17 
 
60

35:3, 4 
 
12

40:17 
 
99

43:2 
 
180

45:17 
 
10

49:10 
 
45

54:7–8 
 
XXXIII

55:1, 2 
 
11

55:12 
 
11

57:1–2 
 
181

62:4 
 
176

62:5 
 
176

62:8 
 
176

62:11 
 
176

62:12 
 
177

64:6 
 
1, 159

65:17 
 
181

Jeremiah
2:6 
 
67, 68

2:24 
 
146

20:10 
 
6

22:12 
 
153

24:5 
 
XXXIV

29:12–13 
 
161

29:18–19 
 
76

31:19 
 
93

31:21 
 
127

Ezekiel
3:19 
 
56

20:43 
 
94

22:14 
 
3

47 
 
124

Daniel
3 
 
107

6 
 
107

6:10 
 
161

7:9–10 
 
37, 182

7:10 
 
36

11:32 
 
152

Hosea
14:8 
 
120

14:9 
 
136

Amos
5:8 
 
71

Micah
7:8 
 
66

7:16–17 
 
36

Habakkuk
2:2 
 
1

2:3 
 
162

3:17–18 
 
XIII

Zechariah
3:4 
 
40

12:10 
 
39

Malachi
3:2 
 
37

4:1 
 
37

Matthew
3:7 
 
5

Scripture Index

3:12 
 
37

4:8 
 
100

5:6 
 
93

5:19 
 
94

7:8 
 
24

7:13 
 
5

7:14 
 
22, 27

10:16 
 
XII

10:16–28 
 
XII

10:39 
 
22

11:27 
 
170

11:28 
 
161

12:45 
 
142

13:25 
 
90

13:30 
 
37

13:43 
 
10

23:3 
 
88

24:35 
 
161

26:14–15 
 
121

27:1–5 
 
121

Mark
2:15 
 
40

8:35 
 
22

8:36–37 
 
XXVII

8:38 
 
83

13:13 
 
XXVIII

13:34–37 
 
49

16:16 
 
93

Luke
3:17 
 
37

4:5–7 
 
100

8:13 
 
34

9:30–31 
 
XXXII

9:62 
 
7

13:24 
 
XXIX, 22

13:33 
 
XXXII

14:26 
 
5, 22

14:33 
 
1

15:17 
 
6

16:15 
 
82

16:25 
 
32

17:10 
 
159

19:14 
 
35

John
4:36 
 
97

5:28–29 
 
36

6:27 
 
XII

6:35 
 
163

6:37 
 
11, 27, 163

7:30 
 
XXXII

7:37 
 
11

7:48 
 
82

10:1 
 
42

10:11 
 
135

10:27–29 
 
10

12:25 
 
22

14:15 
 
94

15:2 
 
XXVIII

15:13 
 
30

15:20 
 
XIII

16:8 
 
93

16:16 
 
93

16:33 
 
XII

20:27 
 
21

21:19 
 
XXXII

Acts
2:37 
 
1

4:12 
 
93

8:19–20 
 
119

9:16 
 
XXXII

Scripture Index

14:22 
 
XIII

15:9 
 
30

16:30 
 
2

16:31 
 
1

18:9–10 
 
XXXI

21:14 
 
XXXIII

Romans
2:14–15 
 
37

2:24–25 
 
88

3 
 
166

4 
 
160

4:25 
 
163

6:23 
 
62

7 
 
54

7:6 
 
30

7:24 
 
79, 93

8:20 
 
XIII

8:23 
 
XIII

8:37 
 
66

10:4 
 
163

10:10 
 
163

16:18 
 
152

16:25–26 
 
30

1 Corinthians
1:26 
 
82

2:7–8 
 
101

3:18 
 
82

4:15 
 
28

4:20 
 
88

5:10 
 
100

7:29 
 
14

9:24–27 
 
97

12:3 
 
170

13 
 
92

13:1–3 
 
90

14:7 
 
90

15:51–52 
 
178

15:52 
 
36

2 Corinthians
1:9 
 
XI, XII

4:16 
 
XIII

4:18 
 
6

5:2–5 
 
10

5:7 
 
154

11:13–14 
 
152

12:9 
 
33

Galatians
1:16 
 
43

2:16 
 
93

3:10 
 
23

4:19 
 
29

4:21–27 
 
22

6:7 
 
182

6:9 
 
97

6:12 
 
21

Ephesians
1:18–19 
 
162, 170

2:5 
 
XXIX

4:18 
 
69

4:22 
 
78

5:6 
 
157

5:26 
 
30

6:16 
 
150

Philippians
1:27 
 
94

2:12–13 
 
XXIX

3:7–8 
 
82

3:19–20 
 
101

Scripture Index

Colossians
1 
 
160

1:24 
 
XII

1 Thessalonians
3:3 
 
XXXI

4:13–17 
 
182

4:16 
 
36

4:16–17 
 
10, 37

5:6 
 
155

5:6–7 
 
49

5:7–8 
 
48

2 Thessalonians
1:7–8 
 
36

1 Timothy
1:15 
 
163

2:5 
 
163

2 Timothy
2:10 
 
XII

2:17–18 
 
137

4:8 
 
10

4:10 
 
121

Titus
1:2 
 
9

Hebrews
2:14–15 
 
57

4:6 
 
35

4:16 
 
161

7:25 
 
163

9:13–16 
 
102

9:17–21 
 
7

10 
 
160

10:28–29 
 
35

10:38 
 
21

10:39 
 
154

11:15–16 
 
54

11:16 
 
7

11:25–26 
 
22

11:33–34 
 
58

12:16 
 
145

12:21 
 
17

12:22–24 
 
181

12:25 
 
21

13:2 
 
136

13:8 
 
XVIII

13:20–21 
 
7

James
1:22–26 
 
89

1:27 
 
89

4:7 
 
66

1 Peter
1 
 
160

1:4 
 
6

1:9 
 
144

4:12 
 
XIII, XXXI

4:18 
 
144

4:19 
 
XXX

5:8 
 
41, 147

2 Peter
1:19 
 
5

2:22 
 
77, 174

1 John
2:16 
 
79

2:21 
 
154

3:2 
 
182

Scripture Index

3:12 
 
56

4:5 
 
21

Jude
14 
 
36, 182

Revelation
1:5 
 
163

2:5 
 
48

2:7 
 
181

3:4 
 
10, 181

3:11 
 
97

3:19 
 
152

4:4 
 
10

4:8 
 
185

5:13 
 
185

6:11 
 
XXXI

6:12–13 
 
157

7:17 
 
10

14:1–5 
 
10

19:19 
 
183

20:11–14 
 
36

21:4 
 
10, 55

21:18 
 
178

21:26 
 
93

22 
 
124

22:5 
 
181

22:14 
 
184

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

At the beginning of The Pilgrim’s Progress, when Evangelist 
commissions Christian to “keep that light in your eye” and 
set out on the journey, Christian is described as running 
in tears, fingers in his ears, resisting the cries of his family, 
friends, and foes who might convince him to stay. This ini-
tial lack of support in Christian’s story is envied by no one—
and nothing could be further from the truth in the events 
that surrounded our efforts to tell his story afresh.

Since the team at desiringGod.org first entertained the 

idea of publishing a new version of Bunyan’s classic, there 
emerged a sweet fellowship for the road that lay ahead, and 
I would be amiss not to make mention of my companions 
now by way of thanks to God and them. Thank you, David 
Mathis, for your executive leadership and unremitting loyal-
ty to produce good content. Thank you, Marshall Segal, for 
your attention to my questions and the whimsical sugges-
tion to publish John Piper’s biography not simultaneous to 
this present volume, but within it. Thank you, Stefan Green, 
for your encouraging optimism about us trying new things 
in content production and resource development. Thank 
you, Tony Reinke, for your research skills, and appreciation 
for the man, John Newton. His 1776 preface gives this ver-
sion a special touch, and that is owing to you, both in your 
discovery of the preface at the Library of Congress and your 
generosity to let us include it.

Acknowledgements

Special thanks along the way also goes to Leland Ryken, 

who served as a consultant on this project from the begin-
ning and offered wonderful advice along the way. Thank 
you, Caleb Kormann, our summer intern, for doing the 
meticulous work of reformatting the text and rearranging 
Scripture citations in order to increase readability. Also, 
thank you, Peter Voth and Ryan Leichty, for your artistic 
skill in the cover and typesetting, respectively.

Thank you, John Piper, for your great service to the 

saints in telling the lives of past saints, in particular your 
biography of John Bunyan that encourages us, especially in 
the midst of suffering, to live upon God and his word. Our 
hope is that this new edition of The Pilgrim’s Progress might 
be one small means to help us on our way.

“For here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city 

that is to come” (Heb. 13:14).

Jonathan Parnell
desiringGod.org

Acknowledgements

Everyone wants to be happy. Our website was born and 
built for happiness. We want people everywhere to under-
stand and embrace the truth that God is most glorified in 
us when we are most satisfied in him. We’ve collected more 
than thirty years of John Piper’s speaking and writing, 
including translations into more than forty languages. 
We also provide a daily stream of new written, audio, and 
video resources to help you find truth, purpose, and satis-
faction that never end. And it’s all available free of charge, 
thanks to the generosity of people who’ve been blessed by 
the ministry.

If you want more resources for true happiness, or if you 

want to learn more about our work at Desiring God, we 
invite you to visit us at www.desiringGod.org.

www.desiringGod.org

