The Santaroga Barrier

Frank Herbert

First published in a shorter version in Amazing 
Stories magazine, 1967.

Chapter 1

The sun went down as the ﬁve-year-old Ford camper-
pickup truck ground over

the pass and started down the long grade into 
Santaroga Valley. A

crescent-shaped turn-off had been leveled beside the 
ﬁrst highway curve.

Gilbert Dasein pulled his truck onto the gravel, 
stopped at a white barrier

fence and looked down into the valley whose secrets 
he had come to expose.

Two men already had died on this project, Dasein 
reminded himself. Accidents.

Natural accidents. What was down there in that bowl 
of shadows inhabited by

random lights? Was there an accident waiting for 
him?

Dasein's back ached after the long drive up from 
Berkeley. He shut off the

motor, stretched. A burning odor of hot oil permeated 
the cab. The union of

truckbed and camper emitted creakings and 
poppings.

The valley stretching out below him looked somehow 
different from what Dasein

had expected. The sky around it was a ring of 
luminous blue full of sunset

glow that spilled over into an upper belt of trees and 
rocks.

There was a sense of quiet about the place, of an 
island sheltered from

storms.

What did I expect the place to be? Dasein wondered. 
He decided all the maps

he'd studied, all the reports on Santaroga he'd read, 
had led him to believe

he knew the valley. But maps were not the land. 
Reports weren't people.

Dasein glanced at his wristwatch: almost seven. He 
felt reluctant to

continue.

Far off to the left across the valley, strips of green 
light glowed among

trees. That was the area labeled "greenhouses" on the 
map. A castellated

block of milky white on an outcropping down to his 
right he identiﬁed as the

Jaspers Cheese Cooperative. The yellow gleam of 
windows and moving lights

around it spoke of busy activity.

Dasein grew aware of insect sounds in the darkness 
around him, the

swoop-humming of air through nighthawks' wings 
and, away in the distance, the

mournful baying of hounds. The voice of the pack 
appeared to come from beyond

the Co-op.

He swallowed, thinking that the yellow windows 
suddenly were like baleful eyes

peering into the valley's darker depths.

Dasein shook his head, smiled. That was no way to 
think. Unprofessional.

All the ominous nonsense muttered about Santaroga 
had to be put aside. A

scientiﬁc investigation could not operate in that 
atmosphere. He turned on

the cab's dome light, took his briefcase from the seat 
beside him. Gold

 lettering on the brown leather identiﬁed it: "Gilbert 
Dasein -- Department

of Psychology -- University of California -- Berkeley."

In a battered folder from the case he began writing: 
"Arrived Santaroga

Valley approximately 6:45 p.m. Setting is that of a 
prosperous farm community

. . ." Presently, he put case and folder aside. 
Prosperous farm community,

he thought. How could he know it was prosperous? 
No-prosperity wasn't what

he saw. That was something he knew from the 
reports.

The real valley in front of him now conveyed a sense 
of waiting, of quietness

punctuated by occasional tinklings of cowbells. He 
imagined husbands and

wives down there after a day of work. What did they 
discuss now in their

waiting darkness?

What did Jenny Sorge discuss with her husband -- 
provided she had a husband?

It seemed impossible she'd still be single -- lovely, 
nubile Jenny. It was

more than a year since they'd last seen each other at 
the University.

Dasein sighed. No escaping thoughts of Jenny -- not 
here in Santaroga. Jenny

contained part of Santaroga's mystery. She was an 
element of the Santaroga

Barrier and a prime subject for his present 
investigation.

Again, Dasein sighed. He wasn't fooling himself. He 
knew why he'd accepted

this project. It wasn't the muniﬁcent sum those chain 
stores were paying the

university for this study, nor the generous salary 
provided for himself.

He had come because this was where Jenny lived.

Dasein told himself he'd smile and act normal, 
perfectly normal, when he met

her. He was here on business, a psychologist detached 
from his usual teaching

duties to make a market study in Santaroga Valley.

What was a perfectly normal way to act with Jenny, 
though? How did one

achieve normalcy when encountering the 
paranormal?

Jenny was a Santarogan -- and the normalcy of this 
valley deﬁed normal

explanations.

His mind went to the reports, "the known facts." All 
the folders of data, the

collections of oﬃcial pryings, the second-hand secrets 
which were the stock

in a trade of the bureaucracy -- all this really added 
up to a single "known

fact" about Santaroga: There was something 
extraordinary at work here,

something far more disturbing than any so-called 
market study had ever tackled

before.

Meyer Davidson, the soft looking, pink ﬂeshed little 
man who'd presented

himself as the agent of the investment corporation, 
the holding company behind

the chain stores paying for this project, had put it in 
an angry nutshell at

the ﬁrst orientation meeting: "The whole thing about 
Santaroga boils down to

this -- Why were we forced to close our branches 
there? Why won't even one

Santarogan trade with an outsider? That's what we 
want to know. What's this

Santaroga Barrier which keeps us from doing 
business there?"

Davidson wasn't as soft as he looked.

Dasein started the truck, turned on his headlights, 
resumed his course down

the winding grade.

All the data was a single datum.

 Outsiders found no houses for rent or sale in this 
valley.

Santaroga oﬃcials said they had no juvenile 
delinquency ﬁgures for the

state's statistics.

Servicemen from Santaroga always returned when 
they were discharged. In fact,

no Santarogan had ever been known to move out of 
the valley.

Why? Was it a two-way barrier?

And the curious anomalies: The data had included a 
medical journal article by

Jenny's uncle, Dr. Lawrence Piaget, reputedly the 
valley's leading physician.

The article: "The Poison Oak Syndrome in Santaroga." 
Its substance:

Santarogans had a remarkable susceptibility to 
allergens when forced to live

away from their valley for extended periods. This was 
the chief reason for

service rejection of Santaroga's youths.

Data equaled datum.

Santaroga reported no cases of mental illness or 
mental deﬁciency to the

State Department of Mental Hygiene. No Santarogan 
could be found in a state

mental hospital. (The psychiatrist who headed 
Dasein's university department,

Dr. Chami Selador, found this fact "alarming.")

Cigarette sales in Santaroga could be accounted for by 
transient purchasers.

Santarogans manifested an iron resistance to national 
advertising. (An

un-American symptom, according to Meyer 
Davidson.)

No cheese, wines or beers made outside the valley 
could be marketed to

Santarogans.

All the valley's businesses, including the bank, were 
locally owned. They

ﬂatly rejected outside investment money.

Santaroga had successfully resisted every "pork 
barrel" government project the

politicians had offered. Their State Senator was from 
Porterville, ten miles

had interviewed to lay the groundwork for his study, 
the State Senator was one

of the few who didn't think Santarogans were "a pack 
of kooks, maybe religious

nuts of some kind."

"Look, Dr. Dasein," he'd said, "all this mystery crap 
about Santaroga is just

that -- crap."

The Senator was a skinny, intense man with a shock 
of gray hair and red-veined

eyes. Barstow was his name; one of the old California 
families.

Barstow's opinion: "Santaroga's a last outpost of 
American individualism.

They're Yankees, Down Easters living in California. 
Nothing mysterious about

'em at all. They don't ask special favors and they don't 
fan my ears with

stupid questions. I wish all my constituents were as 
straightforward and

honest."

One man's opinion, Dasein thought.

An isolated opinion.

Dasein was down into the valley proper now. The 
two-lane road leveled into a

passage through gigantic trees. This was the Avenue 
of the Giants winding

 between rows of sequoia gigantea.

There were homes set back in the trees. The datum-
data said some of these

homes had been here since the gold rush. The scroll 
work of carpenter gothic

lined their eaves. Many were three stories high, 
yellow lights in their

windows.

Dasein grew aware of an absence, a negative fact 
about the houses he saw: No

television ﬂicker, no cathode living rooms, no walls 
washed to skimmed-milk

gray by the omnipresent tube.

The road forked ahead of him. An arrow pointed left 
to "City Center" and two

arrows directed him to the right to "The Santaroga 
House" and "Jaspers Cheese

Co-op."

Dasein turned right.

His road wound upward beneath an arch: "Santaroga, 
The Town That Cheese

Built." Presently, it emerged from the redwoods into 
an oak ﬂat. The Co-op

loomed gray white, bustling with lights and activity 
behind a chain fence on

his right. Across the road to his left stood Dasein's ﬁrst 
goal here, a long

three-storey inn built in the rambling 1900 style with 
a porch its full

length. Lines of multipaned windows (most dark) 
looked down onto a gravel

parking area. The sign at the entrance read: 
"Santaroga House -- Gold Rush

Museum -- Hours 9 a.m. to 5 p.m."

Most of the cars nosed to a stone border parallel to 
the porch were well-kept

older models. A few shiny new machines were parked 
in a second row as though

standing aloof.

Dasein parked beside a 1939 Chevrolet whose paint 
gleamed with a rich waxy

gloss. Red-brown upholstery visible through the 
windows appeared to be

hand-tailored leather.

Rich man's toy, Dasein thought.

He took his suitcase from the camper, turned to the 
inn. There was a smell of

new mown lawn in the air and the sound of running 
water. It reminded Dasein

of his childhood, his aunt's garden with the brook 
along the back. A strong

sense of nostalgia gripped him.

Abruptly, a discordant note intruded. From the upper 
ﬂoors of the inn came

the raucous sound of a man and woman arguing, the 
man's voice brusk, the

woman's with a strident ﬁshwife quality.

"I'm not staying in this godforsaken hole one more 
night," the woman screamed.

"They don't want our money! They don't want us! You 
do what you want; I'm

leaving!"

"Belle, stop it! You've . . ."

A window slammed. The argument dimmed to a 
muted screeching-mumbling.

Dasein took a deep breath. The argument restored his 
perspective. Here were

two more people with their noses against the 
Santaroga Barrier.

Dasein strode along the gravel, up four steps to the 
porch and through

swinging doors with windows frosted by scroll 
etching. He found himself in a

high-ceilinged lobby, crystal chandeliers overhead. 
Dark wood paneling,

heavily grained like ancient charts enclosed the 
space. A curved counter

 stretched across the corner to his right, an open door 
behind it from which

came the sound of a switchboard. To the right of this 
counter was a wide

opening through which he glimpsed a dining room -- 
white tablecloths, crystal,

silver. A western stagecoach was parked at his left 
behind brass posts

supporting a maroon velvet rope with a "Do Not 
Touch" sign.

Dasein stopped to study the coach. It smelled of dust 
and mildew. A framed

card on the boot gave its history: "Used on the San 
Francisco-Santaroga route

from 1868 to 1871." Below this card was a slightly 
larger frame enclosing a

yellowed sheet of paper with a brass legend beside it: 
"A note from Black

Bart, the Po-8 Highwayman." In sprawling script on 
the yellow paper it read:

"So here I've stood while wind and rain

Have set the trees a-sobbin'

And risked my life for that damned stage

That wasn't worth the robbin'."

Dasein chuckled, shifted his briefcase to his left arm, 
crossed to the counter

and rang the call bell.

A bald, wrinkled stick of a man in a black suit 
appeared in the open doorway,

stared at Dasein like a hawk ready to pounce. "Yes?"

"I'd like a room," Dasein said.

"What's your business?"

Dasein stiffened at the abrupt challenge. "I'm tired," 
he said. "I want a

night's sleep."

"Passing through, I hope," the man grumbled. He 
shuﬄed to the counter,

pushed a black registry ledger toward Dasein.

Dasein took a pen from its holder beside the ledger, 
signed.

The clerk produced a brass key on a brass tag, said: 
"You get two ﬁfty-one

next to that dang' couple from L.A. Don't blame me if 
they keep y' awake

arguing." He slapped the key onto the counter. "That'll 
be ten dollars . . .

in advance."

"I'm hungry," Dasein said, producing his wallet and 
paying. "Is the dining

room open?" He accepted a receipt.

"Closes at nine," the clerk said.

"Is there a bellboy?"

"You look strong enough to carry your own bag." He 
pointed beyond Dasein.

"Room's up them stairs, second ﬂoor."

Dasein turned. There was an open area behind the 
stagecoach. Scattered

through it were leather chairs, high wings and heavy 
arms, a few occupied by

elderly men sitting, reading. Light came from heavy 
brass ﬂoor lamps with

fringed shades. A carpeted stairway led upward 
beyond the chairs.

 It was a scene Dasein was to think of many times later 
as his ﬁrst clue to

the real nature of Santaroga. The effect was that of 
holding time securely in

a bygone age.

Vaguely troubled, Dasein said: "I'll check my room 
later. May I leave my bag

here while I eat?"

"Leave it on the counter. No one'll bother it."

Dasein put the case on the counter, caught the clerk 
studying him with a ﬁxed

stare.

"Something wrong?" Dasein asked.

"Nope."

The clerk reached for the briefcase under Dasein's 
arm, but Dasein stepped

back, removed it from the questing ﬁngers, met an 
angry stare.

"Hmmmph!" the clerk snorted. There was no 
mistaking his frustration. He'd

wanted a look inside the briefcase.

Inanely, Dasein said: "I . . . uh, want to look over some 
papers while I'm

eating." And he thought: Why do I need to explain?

Feeling angry with himself, he turned, strode through 
the passage into the

dining room. He found himself in a large square 
room, a single massive

chandelier in the center, brass carriage lamps spaced 
around walls of dark

wood paneling. The chairs at the round tables were 
heavy with substantial

arms. A long teak bar stretched along the wall at his 
left, a wood-framed

mirror behind it. Light glittered hypnotically from the 
central chandelier

and glasses stacked beneath the mirror.

The room swallowed sounds. Dasein felt he had 
walked into a sudden hush with

people turning to look at him. Actually, his entrance 
went almost unnoticed.

A white-coated bartender on duty for a scattering of 
customers at the bar

glanced at him, went back to talking to a swarthy 
man hunched over a mug of

beer.

Family groups occupied about a dozen of the tables. 
There was a card game at

a table near the bar. Two tables held lone women 
busy with their forks.

There was a division of people in this room, Dasein 
felt. It was a matter of

nervous tension contrasted with a calmness as 
substantial as the room itself.

He decided he could pick out the transients -- they 
appeared tired, more

rumpled; their children were closer to rebellion.

-- fatigue lines on his slender face, the curly black hair 
mussed by the wind,

brown eyes glazed with attention, still driving the car. 
A smudge of road

dirt drew a dark line beside the cleft in his chin. 
Dasein rubbed at the

smudge, thought: Here's another transient.

"You wish a table, sir?"

A Negro waiter had appeared at his elbow -- white 
jacket, hawk nose, sharp

Moorish features, a touch of gray at the temples. 
There was a look of command

about him all out of agreement with the menial 
costume. Dasein thought

immediately of Othello. The eyes were brown and 
wise.

 "Yes, please: for one," Dasein said.

"This way, sir."

Dasein was guided to a table against the near wall. 
One of the carriage lamps

bathed it in a warm yellow glow. As the heavy chair 
enveloped him, Dasein's

attention went to the table near the bar -- the card 
game . . . four men. He

recognized one of the men from a picture Jenny had 
carried: Piaget, the

a large, gray-haired man, bland round face, a curious 
suggestion of the

Oriental about him that was heightened by the fan of 
cards held close to his

chest.

"You wish a menu, sir?"

"Yes. Just a moment . . . the men playing cards with 
Dr. Piaget over there."

"Sir?"

"Who are they?"

"You know Dr. Larry, sir?"

"I know his niece, Jenny Sorge. She carried a photo of 
Dr. Piaget."

The waiter glanced at the briefcase Dasein had placed 
in the center of the

table. "Dasein," he said. A wide smile put a ﬂash of 
white in the dark

face. "You're Jenny's friend from the school."

The waiter's words carried so many implications that 
Dasein found himself

staring, open-mouthed.

"Jenny's spoken of you, sir," the waiter said.

"Oh."

"The men playing cards with Dr. Larry -- you want to 
know who they are." He

turned toward the players. "Well, sir, that's Captain Al 
Marden of the

Highway Patrol across from Dr. Larry. On the right 
there, that's George Nis.

He manages the Jaspers Cheese Co-op. The fellow on 
the left is Mr. Sam

Scheler. Mr. Sam runs our independent service 
station. I'll get you that

menu, sir."

The waiter headed toward the bar.

Dasein's attention remained on the card players, 
wondering why they held his

interest so ﬁrmly. Marden, sitting with his back partly 
turned toward

Dasein, was in mufti, a dark blue suit. His hair was a 
startling mop of red.

He turned his head to the right and Dasein glimpsed a 
narrow face,

tight-lipped mouth with a cynical downtwist.

Scheler of the independent service station (Dasein 
wondered about this

designation suddenly) was dark skinned, an angular 
Indian face with ﬂat nose,

heavy lips. Nis, across from him, was balding, sandy-
haired, blue eyes with

heavy lids, a wide mouth and deeply cleft chin.

"Your menu, sir."

The waiter placed a large red-covered folder in front 
of Dasein.

"That game's an institution, sir. Every week about this 
hour, regular as

sunset -- dinner here and that game."

"What do they play?"

"It varies, sir. Sometimes it's bridge, sometimes 
pinochle. They play whist

on occasion and even poker."

"What did you mean -- independent service station?" 
Dasein asked. He looked

up at the dark Moorish face.

"Well, sir, we here in the valley don't mess around 
with those companies

ﬁxin' their prices. Mr. Sam, he buys from whoever 
gives him the best offer.

We pay about four cents less a gallon here."

Dasein made a mental note to investigate this aspect 
of the Santaroga Barrier.

It was in character, not buying from the big 
companies, but where did they get

their oil products?

"The roast beef is very good, sir," the waiter said, 
pointing to the menu.

"You recommend it, eh?"

"I do that, sir. Grain fattened right here in the valley. 
We have fresh corn

on the cob, potatoes Jaspers -- that's with cheese 
sauce, very good, and we

have hot-house strawberries for dessert."

"Salad?" Dasein asked.

"Our salad greens aren't very good this week, sir. I'll 
bring you the soup.

It's borscht with sour cream. And you'd like beer with 
that. I'll see if I

can't get you some of our local product."

"With you around I don't need a menu," Dasein said. 
He returned the

red-covered folder. "Bring it on before I start eating 
the tablecloth."

"Yes, sir!"

Dasein watched the retreating black -- white coated, 
wide, conﬁdent.

Othello, indeed.

The waiter returned presently with a steaming bowl 
of soup, a white island of

sour cream ﬂoating in it, and a darkly amber mug of 
beer.

"I note you're the only Negro waiter here," Dasein 
said. "Isn't that kind of

type casting?"

"You asking if I'm their show Negro, sir?" The waiter's 
voice was suddenly

wary.

"I was wondering if Santaroga had any integration 
problems."

"Must be thirty, forty colored families in the valley, 
sir. We don't rightly

emphasize the distinction of skin color here." The 
voice was hard, curt.

"I didn't mean to offend you," Dasein said.

 "You didn't offend me." A smile touched the corners of 
his mouth, was gone.

"I must admit a Negro waiter is a kind of institutional 
accent. Place like

this . . ." He glanced around the solid, paneled room. " 
. . . must've had

plenty of Negro waiters here in its day. Kind of like 
local color having me

on the job." Again, that ﬂashing smile. "It's a good job, 
and my kids are

doing even better. Two of 'em work in the Co-op; 
other's going to be a

lawyer."

"You have three children?"

"Two boys and a girl. If you'll excuse me, sir; I have 
other tables."

"Yes, of course."

Dasein lifted the mug of beer as the waiter left.

He held the beer a moment beneath his nose. There 
was a tangy odor about it

with a suggestion of cellars and mushrooms. Dasein 
remembered suddenly that

Jenny had praised the local Santaroga beer. He sipped 
it -- soft on the

tongue, smooth, clean aftertaste of malt. It was 
everything Jenny had said.

Jenny, he thought. Jenny . . . Jenny . . .

Why had she never invited him to Santaroga on her 
regular weekend trips home?

She'd never missed a weekend, he recalled. Their 
dates had always been in

midweek. He remembered what she'd told him about 
herself: orphaned, raised

by the uncle, Piaget, and a maiden aunt . . . Sarah.

Dasein took another drink of the beer, sampled the 
soup. They did go well

together. The sour cream had a ﬂavor reminiscent of 
the beer, a strange new

tang.

There'd never been any mistaking Jenny's affection 
for him, Dasein thought.

They'd had a thing, chemical, exciting. But no direct 
invitation to meet her

family, see the valley. A hesitant probing, yes -- what 
would he think of

setting up practice in Santaroga? Sometime, he must 
talk to Uncle Larry about

some interesting cases.

What cases? Dasein wondered, remembering. The 
Santaroga information folders

Dr. Selador had supplied were deﬁnite: "No reported 
cases of mental

illness."

Jenny . . . Jenny . . .

Dasein's mind went back to the night he'd proposed.
No hesitant probing on

Jenny's part then -- Could he live in Santaroga?

He could remember his own incredulous demand:
"Why do we have to live in

Santaroga?"

"Because I can't live anywhere else." That was what 
she'd said. "Because I

can't live anywhere else."

Love me, love my valley.

No amount of pleading could wring an explanation 
from her. She'd made that

plain. In the end, he'd reacted with anger boiling out 
of injured manhood.

Did she think he couldn't support her any place but in 
Santaroga?

"Come and see Santaroga," she'd begged.

 "Not unless you'll consider living outside."

Impasse.

Remembering the ﬁght, Dasein felt his cheeks go 
warm. It'd been ﬁnals week.

She'd refused to answer his telephone calls for two 
days . . . and he'd

refused to call after that. He'd retreated into a hurt 
shell.

And Jenny had gone back to her precious valley. 
When he'd written, swallowed

his pride, offered to come and see her -- no answer. 
Her valley had swallowed

her.

This valley.

Dasein sighed, looked around the dining room, 
remembering Jenny's intensity

when she spoke about Santaroga. This paneled dining 
room, the Santarogans he

could see, didn't ﬁt the picture in his mind.

Why didn't she answer my letters? he asked himself.
Most likely she's

married. That must be it.

Dasein saw his waiter come around the end of the bar 
with a tray. The

bartender signaled, called: "Win." The waiter stopped, 
rested the tray on

the bar. Their heads moved close together beside the 
tray. Dasein received

the impression they were arguing. Presently, the 
waiter said something with a

chopping motion of the head, grabbed up the tray, 
brought it to Dasein's

table.

"Doggone busybody," he said as he put the tray down 
across from Dasein, began

distributing the dishes from it. "Try to tell me I can't 
give you Jaspers!

Good friend of Jenny's and I can't give him Jaspers."

The waiter's anger cooled; he shook his head, smiled, 
put a plate mounded with

food before Dasein.

"Too doggone many busybodies in this world, y' ask 
me."

"The bartender," Dasein said. "I heard him call you 
'Win.'"

"Winston Burdeaux, sir, at your service." He moved 
around the table closer to

Dasein. "Wouldn't give me any Jaspers beer for you 
this time, sir." He took

a frosted bottle from the tray, put it near the mug of 
beer he'd served

earlier. "This isn't as good as what I brought before. 
The food's real

Jaspers, though. Doggone busybody couldn't stop me 
from doing that."

"Jaspers," Dasein said. "I thought it was just the 
cheese."

Burdeaux pursed his lips, looked thoughtful. "Oh, no, 
sir. Jaspers, that's

in all the products from the Co-op. Didn't Jenny ever 
tell you?" He frowned.

"Haven't you ever been up here in the valley with her, 
sir?"

"No." Dasein shook his head from side to side.

"You are Dr. Dasein -- Gilbert Dasein?"

"Yes."

"You're the fellow Jenny's sweet on, then." He grinned, 
said: "Eat up, sir.

It's good food."

 Before Dasein could collect his thoughts, Burdeaux 
turned, hurried away.

"You're the fellow Jenny's sweet on," Dasein thought. 
Present tense . . . not

past tense. He felt his heart hammering, cursed 
himself for an idiot. It was

just Burdeaux's way of talking. That was all it could 
be.

Confused, he bent to his food.

The roast beef in his ﬁrst bite lived up to Burdeaux's 
prediction -- tender,

juicy. The cheese sauce on the potatoes had a ﬂowing 
tang reminiscent of the

beer and the sour cream.

The fellow Jenny's sweet on.

Burdeaux's words gripped Dasein's mind as he ate, 
ﬁlled him with turmoil.

Dasein looked up from his food, seeking Burdeaux. 
The waiter was nowhere in

sight. Jaspers. It was this rich tang, this new ﬂavor. 
His attention went

to the bottle of beer, the non-Jaspers beer. Not as 
good? He sampled it

directly from the bottle, found it left a bitter metallic 
aftertaste. A sip

of the ﬁrst beer from the mug -- smooth, soothing. 
Dasein felt it cleared

his head as it cleared his tongue of the other ﬂavor.

He put down the mug, looked across the room, caught 
the bartender staring at

him, scowling. The man looked away.

They were small things -- two beers, an argument 
between a waiter and a

bartender, a watchful bartender -- nothing but clock 
ticks in a lifetime, but

Dasein sensed danger in them. He reminded himself 
that two investigators had

met fatal accidents in the Santaroga Valley -- death by 
misadventure . . . a

car going too fast around a corner, off the road into a 
ravine . . . a fall

from a rocky ledge into a river -- drowned. Natural 
accidents, so certiﬁed

by state investigation.

Thoughtful, Dasein returned to his food.

Presently, Burdeaux brought the strawberries, 
hovered as Dasein sampled them.

"Good, sir?"

"Very good. Better than that bottle of beer."

"My fault, sir. Perhaps another time." He coughed 
discreetly. "Does Jenny

know you're here?"

Dasein put down his spoon, looked into his dish of 
strawberries as though

trying to ﬁnd his reﬂection there. His mind suddenly 
produced a memory

picture of Jenny in a red dress, vital, laughing, 
bubbling with energy. "No .

. . not yet," he said.

"You know Jenny's still a single girl, sir?"

Dasein glanced across to the card game. How leathery 
tan the players' skin

looked. Jenny not married? Dr. Piaget looked up from 
the card game, said

something to the man on his left. They laughed.

"Has . . . is she in the telephone directory, Mr. 
Burdeaux?" Dasein asked.

"She lives with Dr. Piaget, sir. And why don't you call 
me Win?"

 Dasein looked up at Burdeaux's sharp Moorish face, 
wondering suddenly about

the man. There was just a hint of southern accent in 
his voice. The probing

friendliness, the volunteered information about 
Jenny -- it was all faintly

southern, ultimate, kindly . . . but there were 
undertones of something else:

a questing awareness, harsh and direct. The 
psychologist in Dasein was fully

alert now.

"Have you lived very long here in the valley, Win?" 
Dasein asked.

"'Bout twelve years, sir."

"How'd you come to settle here?"

Burdeaux shook his head. A rueful half-smile touched 
his lips. "Oh, you

wouldn't like to hear about that, sir."

"But I would." Dasein stared up at Burdeaux, waiting. 
Somewhere there was a

wedge that would open this valley's mysteries to him. 
Jenny not married?

Perhaps Burdeaux was that wedge. There was an 
open shyness about his own

manner, Dasein knew, that invited conﬁdences. He 
relied upon this now.

"Well, if you really want to know, sir," Burdeaux said. 
"I was in the

N'Orleans jailhouse for cuttin' up." (Dasein noted a 
sudden richening of the

southern accent.) "We was doin' our numbers, usin' 
dirty language that'd make

your neck hair walk. I suddenly heard myself doin' 
that, sir. It made me

review my thinkin' and I saw it was kid stuff. 
Juvenile." Burdeaux mouthed

the word, proud of it. "Juvenile, sir. Well, when I got 
out of that

jailhouse, the high sheriff tellin' me never to come 
back, I went me home to

come here, sir."

"Just like that, you left?"

"We hit the road on our feet, sir. It wasn't easy an' 
there was some places

made us wish we'd never left. When we come here, 
though, we knew it was worth

it."

"You just wandered until you came here?"

"It was like God was leadin' us, sir. This place, well, 
sir, it's hard to

explain. But . . . well, they insist I go to school to better 
myself. That's

one thing. I can speak good standard English when I 
want . . . when I think

about it." (The accent began to fade.)

Dasein smiled encouragingly. "These must be very 
nice people here in the

valley."

"I'm going to tell you something, sir," Burdeaux said. 
"Maybe you can

understand if I tell you about something happened to 
me here. It's a thing

would've hurt me pretty bad one time, but here . . . 
We were at a Jaspers

party, sir. It was right after Willa, my girl, announced 
her engagement to

Cal Nis. And George, Cal's daddy, came over and put 
his arm across my

shoulder. 'Well there, Win, you old nigger bastard,' he 
said, 'we better have

us a good drink and a talk together because our kids 
are going to make us

related.' That was it, Mr. Dasein. He didn't mean a 
thing calling me nigger.

It was just like . . . like the way we call a pale blonde 
fellow here Whitey.

It was like saying my skin's black for identiﬁcation 
the way you might come

into a room and ask for Al Marden and I'd say: 'He's 
that redheaded fellow

over there playing cards." As he was saying it I knew 
that's all he meant.

 It just came over me. It was being accepted for what I 
am. It was the

friendliest thing George could do and that's why he 
did it."

Dasein scowled trying to follow the train of 
Burdeaux's meaning. Friendly to

call him nigger?

"I don't think you understand it," Burdeaux said. 
"Maybe you'd have to be

black to understand. But . . . well, perhaps this'll make 
you see it. A few

minutes later, George said to me: 'Hey, Win, I wonder 
what kind of

a kind of wonderment to him, that he might have 
black grandchildren. He

didn't care, really. He was curious. He found it 
interesting. You know,

when I told Annie about that afterward, I cried. I was 
so happy I cried."

It was a long colloquy. Dasein could see realization of 
this fact come over

Burdeaux. The man shook his head, muttered: "I talk 
too much. Guess I'd

better . . ."

He broke off at a sudden eruption of shouting at the 
bar near the card

players. A red-faced fat man had stepped back from 
the bar and was ﬂailing

it with a briefcase as he shouted at the bartender.

"You sons of bitches!" he screamed. "You think you're 
too goddamn' good to

buy from me! My line isn't good enough for you! You 
can make better . . ."

The bartender grabbed the briefcase.

"Leggo of that, you son of a bitch!" the fat man yelled. 
"You all think

you're so goddamn' good like you're some foreign 
country! An outsider am I?

Let me tell you, you pack of foreigners! This is 
America! This is a free . .

."

The red-headed highway patrol captain, Al Marden, 
had risen at the ﬁrst sign

of trouble. Now, he put a large hand on the 
screamer's shoulder, shook the

man once.

The screaming stopped. The angry man whirled, 
raised the briefcase to hit

Marden. In one long, drawn-out second, the man 
focused on Marden's glaring

eyes, the commanding face, hesitated.

"I'm Captain Marden of the Highway Patrol," Marden 
said. "And I'm telling you

we won't have any more of this." His voice was calm, 
stern . . . and, Dasein

thought, faintly amused.

The angry man lowered the briefcase, swallowed.

"You can go out and get in your car and leave 
Santaroga," Marden said. "Now.

And don't come back. We'll be watching for you, and 
we'll run you in if we

ever catch you in the valley again."

Anger drained from the fat man. His shoulders 
slumped. He swallowed, looked

around at the room of staring eyes. "I'm glad to go," 
he muttered.

"Nothing'd make me happier. It'll be a cold day in hell 
when I ever come back

to your dirty little valley. You stink. All of you stink." 
He jerked his

shoulder from Marden's grasp, stalked out through 
the passage to the lobby.

Marden returned to the card game shaking his head.

Slowly, the room returned to its previous sounds of 
eating and conversation.

Dasein could feel a difference, though. The salesman's 
outburst had separated

 Santarogans and transients. An invisible wall had 
gone up. The transient

families at their tables were hurrying their children, 
anxious to leave.

Dasein felt the same urgency. There was a pack 
feeling about the room now --

hunters and hunted. He smelled his own perspiration. 
His palms were sweaty.

He noted that Burdeaux had gone.

This is stupid! he thought. Jenny not married?

He reminded himself that he was a psychologist, an 
observer. But the observer

had to observe himself.

Why am I reacting this way? he wondered. Jenny not 
married?

Two of the transient families already were leaving, 
herding their young ahead

of them, voices brittle, talking about going "on to the 
next town."

Why can't they stay here? he asked himself. The rates 
are reasonable.

He pictured the area in his mind: Porterville was 
twenty-ﬁve miles away, ten

miles outside the valley on the road he had taken. The 
other direction led

over a winding, twisting mountain road some forty 
miles before connecting with

Highway 395. The closest communities were to the 
south along 395, at least

seventy miles. This was an area of National Forests, 
lakes, ﬁre roads,

moonscape ridges of lava rock -- all of it sparsely 
inhabited except for the

Santaroga Valley. Why would people want to travel 
through such an area at

night rather than stay at this inn?

Dasein ﬁnished his meal, left the rest of the beer. He 
had to talk this

place over with his department head, Dr. Chami 
Selador, before making another

move. Burdeaux had left the check on a discreet 
brown tray -- three dollars

and eighty-six cents. Dasein put a ﬁve dollar bill on 
the tray, glanced once

more around the room. The surface appeared so 
damn' normal! The card players

were intent on their game. The bartender was 
hunched over, chatting with two

customers. A child at a table off to the right was 
complaining that she

didn't want to drink her milk.

It wasn't normal, though, and Dasein's senses 
screamed this fact at him. The

brittle surface of this room was prepared to shatter 
once more and Dasein

didn't think he would like what might be revealed. He 
wiped his lips on his

napkin, took his briefcase and headed for the lobby.

His suitcase stood atop the desk beside the register. 
There was a buzzing and

murmurous sound of a switchboard being operated 
in the room through the doors

at the rear corner. He took the suitcase, ﬁngered the 
brass room key in his

pocket -- two ﬁfty-one. If there was no phone in the 
room, he decided he'd

come down and place his call to Chami from a booth.

Feeling somewhat foolish and letdown after his 
reaction to the scene in the

dining room, Dasein headed for the stairs. A few eyes 
peered at him over the

tops of newspapers from the lobby chairs. The eyes 
looked alert, inquisitive.

The stairs led to a shadowy mezzanine -- desks, 
patches of white paper. A

ﬁre door directly ahead bore the sign: "To Second 
Floor. Keep this door

closed."

The next ﬂight curved left, dim overhead light, wide 
panels of dark wood. It

led through another ﬁre door into a hall with an 
emergency exit sign off to

the left. An illuminated board opposite the door 
indicated room two ﬁfty-one

down the hall to the right. Widely spaced overhead 
lights, the heavy pile of

 a maroon carpet underfoot, wide heavy doors with 
brass handles and holes for

old-fashioned passkeys gave the place an aura of the 
Nineteenth Century.

Dasein half expected to see a maid in ruﬄed cap, 
apron with a bow at the

back, long skirt and black stockings, sensible shoes -- 
or a portly banker

type with tight vest and high collar, an expanse of 
gold chain at the waist.

He felt out of place, out of style here.

The brass key worked smoothly in the door of two 
ﬁfty-one; it let him into a

room of high ceilings, one window looking down onto 
the parking area. Dasein

turned on the light. The switch controlled a tasseled 
ﬂoor lamp beside a

curve-fronted teak dresser. The amber light revealed 
a partly opened doorway

into a tiled bathroom (the sound of water dripping 
there), a thick-legged

desk-table with a single straight chair pushed against 
it. The bed was narrow

and high with a heavily carved headboard.

Dasein pushed down on the surface of the bed. It felt 
soft. He dropped his

suitcase onto the bed, stared at it. An edge of white 
fabric protruded from

one end. He opened the suitcase, studied the contents. 
Dasein knew himself

for a prissy, meticulous packer. The case now 
betrayed a subtle disarray.

Someone had opened it and searched it. Well, it 
hadn't been locked. He

checked the contents -- nothing missing.

Why are they curious about me? he wondered.

He looked around for a telephone, found it, a 
standard French handset, on a

shelf beside the desk. As he moved, he caught sight of 
himself in the mirror

above the dresser -- eyes wide, mouth in a straight 
line. Grim. He shook his

head, smiled. The smile felt out of place.

Dasein sat down in the straight chair, put the phone 
to his ear. There was a

smell of disinfectant soap in the room -- and 
something like garlic. After a

moment, he jiggled the hook.

Presently, a woman's voice came on: "This is the 
desk."

"I'd like to place a call to Berkeley," Dasein said. He 
gave the number.

There was a moment's silence, then: "Your room 
number, sir?"

"Two ﬁfty-one."

"One moment, please."

He heard the sound of dialing, ringing. Another 
operator came on the line.

Dasein listened with only half his attention as the call 
was placed. The

smell of garlic was quite strong. He stared at the high 
old bed, his open

suitcase. The bed appeared inviting, telling him how 
tired he was. His chest

ached. He took a deep breath.

"Dr. Selador here."

Selador's India-cum-Oxford accent sounded familiar 
and close. Dasein bent to

the telephone, identiﬁed himself, his mind caught 
suddenly by that feeling of

intimate nearness linked to the knowledge of the 
actual distance, the humming

wires reaching down almost half the length of the 
state.

"Gilbert, old fellow, you made it all right, I see."
Selador's voice was full

of cheer.

"I'm at the Santaroga House, Doctor."

 "I hear it's quite comfortable."

"Looks that way." Through his buzzing tiredness, 
Dasein felt a sense of

foolishness. Why had he made this call? Selador's 
sharp mind would probe for

underlying meanings, motives.

"I presume you didn't call just to tell me you've 
arrived," Selador said.

"No . . . I . . ." Dasein realized he couldn't express his 
own vague

uneasiness, that it wouldn't make sense, this feeling of 
estrangement, the

separation of Santarogans and Outsiders, the 
pricklings of warning fear. "I'd

like you to look into the oil company dealings with 
this area," Dasein said.

"See if you can ﬁnd out how they do business in the 
valley. There's

apparently an independent service station here. I 
want to know who supplies

the gas, oil, parts -- that sort of thing."

"Good point, Gilbert. I'll put one of our . . ." There was 
a sudden

crackling, bapping sound on the line. It stopped and 
there was dead silence.

"Dr. Selador?"

Silence.

Damn! Dasein thought. He jiggled the hook.
"Operator. Operator!"

A masculine voice came on the line. Dasein 
recognized the desk clerk's twang.

"Who's that creating all that commotion?" the clerk 
demanded.

"I was cut off on my call to Berkeley," Dasein said.
"Could you . . . "

"Line's out," the clerk snapped.

"Could I come down to the lobby and place the call 
from a pay phone?" Dasein

asked. As he asked it, the thought of walking that long 
distance down to the

lobby repelled Dasein. The feeling of tiredness was a 
weight on his chest.

"There's no line out of the valley right now," the clerk 
said. "Call can't be

placed."

Dasein passed a hand across his forehead. His skin 
felt clammy and he

wondered if he'd picked up a germ. The room around 
him seemed to expand and

contract. His mouth was dry and he had to swallow 
twice before asking: "When

do they expect to have the line restored?"

"How the hell do I know?" the clerk demanded.

Dasein took the receiver away from his ear, stared at 
it. This was a very

peculiar desk clerk . . . and a very peculiar room the 
way it wavered and

slithered with its stench of garlic and its . . .

He grew aware of a faint hissing.

Dasein's gaze was drawn on a string of growing 
astonishment to an

old-fashioned gaslight jet that jutted from the wall 
beside the hall door.

Stink of garlic? Gas!

A yapping, barking voice yammered on the 
telephone.

Dasein looked down at the instrument in his hand.
How far away it seemed.

 Through the window beyond the phone he could see 
the Inn sign: Gold Rush

Museum. Window equaled air. Dasein found muscles 
that obeyed, lurched across

the desk, fell, smashing the telephone through the 
window.

The yapping voice grew fainter.

Dasein felt his body stretched across the desk. His 
head lay near the

shattered window. He could see the telephone cord 
stretching out the window.

There was cool air blowing on a distant forehead, a 
painful chill in his

lungs.

They tried to kill me, he thought. It was a wondering 
thought, full of

amazement. His mind focused on the two 
investigators who'd already died on

this project -- accidents. Simple, easily explained 
accidents . . . just like

this one!

The air -- how cold it felt on his exposed skin. His 
lungs burned with it.

There was a hammering pulse at his temple where it 
pressed against the desk

surface. The pulse went on and on and on . . .

A pounding on wood joined the pulse. For a space, 
they beat in an insane

syncopation.

"You in there! Open up!" How commanding, that 
voice. Open up, Dasein

thought. That meant getting to one's feet, crossing the 
room, turning a door

handle . . .

I'm helpless, he thought. They could still kill me.

He heard metal rasp against metal. The air blew 
stronger across his face.

Someone said: "Gas!"

Hands grabbed Dasein's shoulders. He was hauled 
back, half carried, half

dragged out of the room. The face of Marden, the red-
haired patrol captain,

swung across his vision. He saw the clerk: pale, 
staring face, bald forehead

glistening under yellow light. There was a brown 
ceiling directly in front of

Dasein. He felt a rug, hard and rasping, beneath his 
back.

A twanging voice said: "Who's going to pay for that 
window?" Someone else

said: "I'll get Dr. Piaget."

Dasein's attention centered on Marden's mouth, a 
blurred object seen through

layers of distortion. There appeared to be anger lines 
at the corners of the

mouth. It turned toward the hovering pale face of the 
desk clerk, said: "To

hell with your window, Johnson! I've told you enough 
times to get those gas

jets out of this place. How many rooms still have 
them?"

"Don't you take that tone with me, Al Marden. I've 
known you since . . ."

"I'm not interested in how long you've known me, 
Johnson. How many rooms

still have those gas jets?"

The clerk's voice came with an angry tone of hurt:
"Only this'n an' four

upstairs. Nobody in the other rooms."

"Get 'em out by tomorrow night," Marden said.

Hurrying footsteps interrupted the argument. Dr. 
Piaget's round face blotted

out Dasein's view of the ceiling. The face wore a look 
of concern. Fingers

reached down, spread Dasein's eyelids. Piaget said: 
"Let's get him on a

 bed."

"Is he going to be all right?" the clerk asked.

"It's about time you asked," Marden said.

"We got him in time," Piaget said. "Is that room across 
the hall empty?"

"He can have 260," the clerk said. "Ill open it."

"You realize this is Jenny's fellow from the school you 
almost killed?" Marden

asked, his voice receding as he moved away beside 
the clerk.

"Jenny's fellow?" There was the sound of a key in a 
lock. "But I thought . .

."

"Never mind what you thought!"

Piaget's face moved close to Dasein. "Can you hear 
me, young fellow?" he

asked.

Dasein drew in a painful breath, croaked, "Yes."

"You'll have quite a head, but you'll recover."

Piaget's face went away. Hands picked Dasein up. The 
ceiling moved. There

was another room around him: like the ﬁrst one -- tall 
ceiling, even the

undress him. Sudden nausea gripped him. Dasein 
pushed the hands away.

Someone helped him to the bathroom where he was 
sick. He felt better

afterward -- weak, but with a clearer head, a better 
sense of control over his

muscles. He saw it was Piaget who'd helped him.

"Feel like getting back to bed now?" Piaget asked.

"Yes."

"I'll give you a good shot of iron to counteract the gas 
effect on your

blood," Piaget said. "You'll be all right."

"How'd that gas jet get turned on?" Dasein asked. His 
voice came out a hoarse

whisper.

"Johnson got mixed up fooling with the valves in the 
kitchen," Piaget said.

"Wouldn't have been any harm done if some idiot 
hadn't opened the jet in your

room."

"I coulda sworn I had 'em all turned off." That was the 
clerk's voice from

somewhere beyond the bathroom door.

"They better be capped by tomorrow night," Marden 
said.

The look on Piaget's face could be nothing other than 
concern.

Could it have been a real accident? Dasein wondered.

He reminded himself then two men had died by 
accident in this valley while

engaged in the investigation.

 "All right," Piaget said. "Al, you and Pim and the 
others can clear out now.

I'll get him to bed."

"Okay, Larry. Clear out, all of you." That was Marden.

"I'll get his bags from the other room." That was a 
voice Dasein didn't

recognize.

Presently, with Piaget's help, Dasein found himself in 
pajamas and in the bed.

He felt clearheaded, wide awake and lonely even with 
Piaget still in the room.

Among strangers, Dasein thought.

"Here, take this," Piaget said. He pressed two pills into 
Dasein's mouth,

forced a glass of water on him. Dasein gulped, felt the 
pills rasp down his

throat in a wash of water.

"What was that?" Dasein asked as he pushed the glass 
away.

"The iron and a sedative."

"I don't want to sleep. The gas . . ."

"You didn't get enough gas to make that much 
difference. Now, you rest easy."

Piaget patted his shoulder. "Bed rest and fresh air are 
the best therapy you

can get. Someone'll look in on you from time to time 
tonight. I'll check

back on you in the morning."

"Someone," Dasein said. "A nurse?"

"Yes," Piaget said, his voice brusk. "A nurse. You'll be 
as safe here as in

a hospital."

Dasein looked at the night beyond the room's 
window. Why the feeling of

danger now, then? he wondered. Is it reaction? He 
could feel the sedative

blurring his senses, soothing him. The sense of 
danger persisted.

"Jenny will be happy to know you're here," Piaget 
said. He left the room,

turning off the light, closing the door softly.

Dasein felt he had been smothered in darkness. He 
fought down panic, restored

himself to a semblance of calm.

Jenny . . . Jenny . . .

Marden's odd conversation with the clerk, Johnson, 
returned to him. "...

Jenny's fellow from the school . . ."

What had Johnson thought? What was the thing 
Marden had cut short?

Dasein fought the sedative. The drip-drip of water in 
the bathroom invaded

his awareness. The room was an alien cell.

Was it just an accident?

He remembered the fragmented confusion of the 
instant when he'd focused on

that hissing gas jet. Now, when the danger was past, 
he felt terror.

It couldn't have been an accident!

 But why would Johnson want to kill him?

The disconnected telephone call haunted Dasein. Was 
the line really down?

What would Selador do? Selador knew the dangers 
here.

=-

Dasein felt the sedative pulling him down into sleep. 
He tried to focus on

the investigation. It was such a fascinating project. He 
could hear Selador

explaining the facets that made the Santaroga Project 
such a glittering gem-

"Taken singly, no item in this collection of facts could 
be considered

alarming or worthy of extended attention. You might 
ﬁnd it interesting that

no person from Clover-dale, California, could be 
found in a mental hospital.

It might be of passing interest to learn that the people 
of Hope, Missouri,

consumed very little tobacco. Would you be alarmed 
to discover that all the

business of Enumclaw, Washington, were locally 
owned? Certainly not. But

when you bring all of these and the other facts 
together into a single

community, something disturbing emerges. There is a 
difference at work here."

The drip of water in the bathroom was a compelling 
distraction. Dangerous

difference, Dasein thought. Who'll look in on me? he 
wondered.

It occurred to him to ask himself then who had 
sounded the alarm. The

breaking window had alerted someone. The most 
likely person would be Johnson,

the room clerk. Why would he bring help to the 
person he was trying to kill?

The paranoia in his own thoughts began to impress 
itself on Dasein.

It was an accident, Dasein thought. It was an accident 
in a place of

dangerous difference.

Dasein's morning began with a sensation of hunger. 
He awoke to cramping

pains. Events of the night ﬂooded into his memory. 
His head felt as though

it had been kicked from the inside.

Gently, he pushed himself upright. There was a 
window directly ahead of him

with the green branch of an oak tree across it. As 
though his muscles were

controlled by some hidden force, Dasein found 
himself looking up at the door

to see if there was a gas jet. Nothing met his questing 
gaze but a patch on

the wallpaper to mark the place where a jet had been.

Holding his head as level as possible, Dasein eased 
himself out of bed and

into the bathroom. A cold shower restored some of 
his sense of reality.

He kept telling himself: It was an accident.

A bluejay was sitting on the oak branch screeching 
when Dasein emerged from

the bathroom. The sound sent little clappers of pain 
through Dasein's head.

He dressed hurriedly, hunger urging him. The bluejay 
was joined by a

companion. They screeched and darted at each other 
through the oak tree,

their topknots twitching. Dasein gritted his teeth, 
faced the mirror to tie

his tie. As he was ﬁnishing the knot, he saw reﬂected 
in the mirror the

slow inward movement of the hall door. A corner of a 
wheeled tray appeared.

Dishes clattered. The door swung wider.

Jenny appeared in the doorway pushing the tray. 
Dasein stared at her in the

mirror, his hands frozen at the tie. She wore a red 
dress, her long black

hair caught in a matching bandeaux. Her skin 
displayed a healthy tan. Blue

eyes stared back at him in the mirror. Her oval face 
was set in a look of

watchful waiting. Her mouth was as full as he 
remembered it, hesitating on

 the edge of a smile, a dimple ﬂickering at her left 
cheek.

"Finish your tie," she said. "I've brought you some 
breakfast." Her voice

had a well-remembered, throaty, soothing tone.

Dasein turned, moved toward her as though pulled by 
strings. Jenny abandoned

the cart, met him half way. She came into his arms, 
lifting her lips to be

kissed. Dasein, feeling the warmth of her kiss and the 
familiar pressure of

her against him, experienced a sensation of coming 
home.

Jenny pulled away, studied his face. "Oh, Gil," she 
said, "I've missed you so

much. Why didn't you even write?"

He stared at her, surprised to silence for a moment, 
then: "But I did write.

You never answered."

She pushed away from him, her features contorted by 
a scowl. "Ohhh!" She

stamped her foot.

"Well, I see you found him." It was Dr. Piaget in the 
doorway. He pushed the

cart all the way into the room, closed the door.

Jenny whirled on him. "Uncle Larry! Did you keep 
Gil's letters from me?"

Piaget looked from her to Dasein. "Letters? What 
letters?"

"Gil wrote and I never got the letters!"

"Oh." Piaget nodded. "Well, you know how they are at 
the post oﬃce

sometimes -- valley girl, fellow from outside."

"Ohhh! I could scratch their eyes out!"

"Easy, girl." Piaget smiled at Dasein.

Jenny whirled back into Dasein's arms, surprised him 
with another kiss. He

broke away slightly breathless.

"There," she said. "That's for being here. Those old 
biddies at the post

oﬃce can't dump that in the trash basket."

"What old biddies?" Dasein asked. He felt he had 
missed part of the

conversation. The warmth of Jenny's kisses, her open 
assumption nothing had

after all. He'd managed to stay away from here for a 
year -- leaning on his

wounded masculine ego, true, fearful he'd ﬁnd Jenny 
married . . . lost to him

forever. But what had she leaned on? She could've 
come to Berkeley, if only

for a visit.

And I could've come here.

Jenny grinned.

"Why're you grinning?" he demanded. "And you 
haven't explained this about the

post oﬃce and the . . ."

"I'm grinning because I'm so happy," she said. "I'm 
grinning because I see

the wheels going around in your head. Why didn't 
one of us go see the other

before now? Well, you're here as I knew you would 
be. I just knew you would

be." She hugged him impulsively, said: "About the post 
oﬃce . . ."

 "I think Gilbert's breakfast is getting cold," Piaget said, 
"You don't mind if

I call you Gilbert?"

"He doesn't mind," Jenny said. Her voice was 
bantering, but there was a

sudden stiffness in her body. She pushed away from 
Dasein.

Piaget lifted a cover from one of the plates on the 
cart, said: "Jaspers

omelette, I see. Real Jaspers."

Jenny spoke defensively with a curious lack of 
vitality: "I made it myself in

Johnson's kitchen."

"I see," Piaget said. "Yes . . . well, perhaps that's best."
He indicated

the plate. "Have at it, Gilbert."

The thought of food made Dasein's stomach knot with 
hunger. He wanted to sit

down and bolt the omelette . . . but something made 
him hesitate. He couldn't

evade the nagging sense of danger. "What's this 
Jaspers business?" he asked.

"Oh, that," Jenny said, pulling the cart over to the 
chair by the desk. "That

just means something made with a product from the 
Co-op. This is our cheddar

in the omelette. Sit down and eat."

"You'll like it," Piaget said. He crossed the room, put a 
hand on Dasein's

shoulder, eased him into the chair. "Just let me have a 
quick look at you."

He pinched Dasein's left ear lobe, studied it, looked at 
his eyes. "You're

looking pretty ﬁt. How's the head?"

"It's better now. It was pretty ﬁerce when I woke up."

"Okay. Eat your breakfast. Take it easy for a day or 
two. Let me know if

you feel nauseated again or have any general 
symptoms of lethargy. I suggest

you eat liver for dinner and I'll have Jenny bring you 
some more iron pills.

You weren't in there long enough to cause you any 
permanent trouble."

"When I think of that Mr. Johnson's carelessness, I 
want to take one of his

cleavers to him," Jenny said.

"We are bloodthirsty today, aren't we," Piaget said.

Dasein picked up his fork, sampled the omelette. 
Jenny watched him, waiting.

The omelette was delicious -- moist and with a faint 
bite of cheese. He

swallowed, smiled at her.

Jenny grinned back. "You know," she said, "that's the 
ﬁrst food I ever

cooked for you."

"Don't rush him off his feet, girl," Piaget said. He 
patted her head, said:

I'll leave you two for now. Why don't you bring your 
young man along home for

dinner? I'll have Sarah make what he needs." He 
glanced at Dasein. "That

all right with you?"

Dasein swallowed another bite of the omelette. The 
cheese left a tangy

"I'd be honored, sir," he said.

"Honored, yet," Piaget said. "We'll expect you around 
seven." He glanced at

his wristwatch. "It's almost eight-thirty, Jenny. Aren't 
you working today?"

 "I called George and told him I'd be late."

"He didn't object?"

"He knows . . . I have a friend . . . visiting." She 
blushed.

"Like that, eh? Well, don't get into any trouble." Piaget 
turned, lumbered

from the room with a head-down purposeful stride.

Jenny turned a shy, questioning smile on Dasein. 
"Don't mind Uncle Larry,"

she said. "He darts around like that -- one subject then 
another. He's a

very real, wonderful person."

"Where do you work?" Dasein asked.

"At the Co-op."

"The cheese factory?"

"Yes. I'm . . . I'm on the inspection line."

Dasein swallowed, reminded himself he was here to 
do a market study. He was a

spy. And what would Jenny say when she discovered 
that? But Jenny posed a

new puzzle. She had a superior talent for clinical 
psychology -- even

according to Dr. Selador whose standards were high. 
Yet . . . she worked in

the cheese factory.

"Isn't there any work . . . in your line here?" he asked.

legs "Finish your breakfast. I didn't make that coffee. 
It's out of the

hotel urn. Don't drink it if it's too strong. There's 
orange juice in the

metal pitcher. I remembered you take your coffee 
black and didn't bring any .

.."

"Whoa!" he said.

"I'm talking too much I know it," she said. She hugged 
herself. "Oh, Gil,

I'm so happy you're here. Finish your breakfast and 
you can take me across to

the Co-op. Maybe I can take you on the guided tour. 
It's a fascinating

place. There are lots of dark corners back in the 
storage cave."

Dasein drained his coffee, shook his head. "Jenny, you 
are incorrigible."

"Gil, you're going to love it here. I know you are," she 
said.

could see that in every look. And he . . . he felt the 
same way about her.

It was still love me love my valley, though. Her words 
betrayed it. Dasein

sighed. He could see the blank wall of an 
unresolvable difference looming

ahead of them. If her love could stand the discovery 
of his true role here,

could it also stand breaking away from the valley? 
Would she come away with

him?

"Gil, are you all right?" she asked.

He pushed his chair back, got up. "Yes. I'm . . ."

The telephone rang.

 Jenny reached behind her on the desk, brought the 
receiver to her ear. "Dr.

Dasein's room." She grinned at Dasein. The grin 
turned to a scowl. "Oh,

it's you, Mr. Pern Johnson, is it? Well, I'll tell you a 
thing or two, Mr.

Johnson! I think you're a criminal the way you almost 
killed Dr. Dasein! If

you'd . . . No! Don't you try to make excuses! Open gas 
jets in the rooms!

I think Dr. Dasein ought to sue you for every cent you 
have!"

A tinny, rasping noise came from the phone. Dasein 
recognized only a few

words. The grin returned to Jenny's face. "It's Jenny 
Sorge, that's who it

is," she said. "Don't you . . . well, I'll tell you if you'll be 
quiet for a

minute! I'm here bringing Dr. Dasein what the doctor 
ordered for him -- a

good breakfast. He doesn't dare eat anything you'd 
have prepared for him.

It'd probably have poison in it!"

Dasein crossed to a trunk stand where his suitcase 
had been left, opened it.

He spoke over his shoulder. "Jenny, what's he want, 
for heaven's sake?"

She waved him to silence.

Dasein rummaged in the suitcase looking for his 
briefcase. He tried to

remember what had been done with it, in the 
confusion of the previous night,

looked around the room. No sign of it. Someone had 
gone to the other room

for his things. Maybe whoever it was had missed the 
briefcase. Dasein

thought of the case's contents, wet his lips with his 
tongue. Every step of

his program to unravel the mystery of the Santaroga 
Barrier was outlined

there. In the wrong hands, that information could 
cause him trouble, throw up

new barriers.

"I'll tell him," Jenny said.

"Wait a minute," Dasein said. "I want to talk to him."
He took the phone

from her. "Johnson?"

"What do you want?" There was that twangy 
belligerency, but Dasein couldn't

blame him after the treatment he'd received from 
Jenny.

"My briefcase," Dasein said. "It was in the other room.     
Would you send up

someone with a key and . . ."

"Your damned briefcase isn't in that room, mister! I 
cleaned the place out

and I ought to know."

"Then where is it?" Dasein asked.

"If it's that case you were so touchy about last night, I 
saw Captain Marden

leave with something that looked like it last night 
after all the commotion

you caused."

"I caused?" Outrage ﬁlled Dasein's voice. "See here, 
Johnson! You stop

twisting the facts!"

After only a heartbeat of silence, Johnson said: "I was, 
wasn't I? Sorry."

Johnson's abrupt candor disarmed the psychologist in 
Dasein. In a way, it

reminded him of Jenny. Santarogans, he found, 
displayed a lopsided reality

that was both attractive and confusing. When he'd 
collected his thoughts, all

Dasein could say was: "What would Marden be doing 
with my case?"

"That's for him to say and you to ﬁnd out," Johnson 
said with all his old

belligerence. There was a sharp click as he broke the 
connection.

 Dasein shook his head, put the phone back on its 
hook.

"Al Marden wants you to have lunch with him at the 
Blue Ewe," Jenny said.

"Hmmm?" He looked up at her, bemused, her words 
taking a moment to register.

"Marden . . . lunch?"

"Twelve noon. The Blue Ewe's on the Avenue of the 
Giants where it goes

through town . . . on the right just past the ﬁrst cross 
street."

"Marden? The Highway patrol captain?"

"Yes. Johnson just passed the message along." She 
slipped down off the desk,

a ﬂash of knees, a swirl of the red skirt. "Come along. 
Escort me to work."

That damn' briefcase with all its forms and notes and 
letters, he thought.

The whole show! But it gave him a perverse feeling of 
satisfaction to know

that everything would be out in the open. I wasn't cut 
out to be a cloak and

dagger type.

There was no escaping the realization, though, that 
revelation of his real

purpose here would intensify Santaroga's conspiracy 
of silence. And how would

Jenny react?

Chapter 2

Dasein's ﬁrst impression of the Jasper Cheese 
Cooperative with the people at

work in and around it was that the place was a hive. 
It loomed whitely behind

its fence as Jenny led him from the Inn. He found it 
an odd companion for the

Inn, just across the road, nestled against a steep hill, 
poking odd squares

and rectangles up onto an outcropping. The previous 
night's brooding look had

been replaced by this appearance of humming 
eﬃciency with electric carts

buzzing across the yard, their platforms loaded with 
oblong packages. People

walked with a leaning sense of purpose.

A hive, Dasein thought. There must be a queen inside 
and these were the

workers, guarding, gathering food.

A uniformed guard, a police dog on a leash beside 
him, took Dasein's name as

dog grinned wolﬁshly at Dasein, whined.

Dasein remembered the baying he'd heard when he'd 
ﬁrst looked down into the

valley. That had been less than fourteen hours ago, 
Dasein realized. The

tune felt stretched out, longer. He asked himself why 
dogs guarded the Co-op.

The question bothered him.

 The yard they crossed was an immaculate concrete 
surface. Now that he was

close to the factory, Dasein saw that it was a complex 
of structures that had

been joined by ﬁlling the between areas with odd 
additions and covered

walkways.

Jenny's mood changed markedly once they were well 
inside the grounds. Dasein

saw her become more assertive, sure of herself. She 
introduced Dasein to four

persons while crossing the yard -- Willa Burdeaux 
among them. Willa turned

out to be a small husky-voiced young woman with a 
face that was almost ugly in

petite ﬁgure.

"I met your father last night," Dasein said.

"Daddy told me," she said. She turned a knowing look 
on Jenny, added:

"Anything I can do, just tell me, honey."

"Maybe later," Jenny said. "We have to be running."

"You're going to like it here, Gilbert Dasein," Willa 
said. She turned away

with a wave, hurried across the yard.

Disturbed by the undertones of the conversation, 
Dasein allowed himself to be

led down a side bay, into a wide door that opened 
onto an aisle between

stacked cartons of Jaspers Cheese. Somewhere 
beyond the stacks there was a

multiplexity of sounds -- hissings, stampings, gurgling 
water, a

clank-clank-clank.

The aisle ended in a short ﬂight of wide steps, up to a 
loading bay with hand

trucks racked along its edge. Jenny led him through a 
door marked "Oﬃce."

It was such an ordinary place -- clips of order forms 
racked along a wall, two

desks with women seated at them typing, a long 
counter with a gate at one end,

windows opening onto the yard and a view of the Inn, 
a door labeled "Manager"

beyond the women.

The door opened as Dasein and Jenny stopped at the 
counter. Out stepped one

of the card players from the Inn's dining room -- the 
balding sandy hair, the

deeply cleft chin and wide mouth -- George Nis. The 
heavily lidded blue eyes

swept past Dasein to Jenny.

"Problems in Bay Nine, Jenny," Nis said. "You're 
needed over there right

away."

"Oh, darn!" Jenny said.

"I'll take care of your friend," Nis said. "We'll see if we 
can't let you off

early for your dinner date."

Jenny squeezed Dasein's hand, said: "Darling, forgive 
me. Duty and all

that." She blinked a smile at him, whirled and was 
back out the door, the red

skirt swirling.

The women at their typewriters looked up, seemed to 
take in Dasein with one

look, went back to their work. Nis came to the gate in 
the counter, opened

it.

"Come on in, Dr. Dasein." He extended a hand.

The handshake was ﬁrm, casual.

 Dasein followed the man into an oak-paneled oﬃce, 
unable to get his mind off

the fact that Nis knew about the dinner date with 
Jenny. How could the man

know? Piaget had extended the invitation only a few 
minutes before.

They sat down separated by a wide desk, its top 
empty of papers. The chairs

were padded, comfortable with sloping arms. In large 
frames behind Nis hung

an aerial photograph of the Co-op and what appeared 
to be a ground plan.

Dasein recognized the layout of the yard and front of 
the building. The back

became heavy dark lines that wandered off into the 
hill like the tributaries

of a river. They were labeled with the initial J and 
numbers -- J-5 . . .

J-14

Nis saw the direction of Dasein's gaze, said: "Those 
are the storage caverns

-- constant temperature and humidity." He coughed 
discreetly behind a hand,

said: "You catch us at an embarrassing moment, Dr. 
Dasein. I've nobody I can

release to show you through the plant. Could Jenny 
bring you back another

day?"

"At your convenience," Dasein said. He studied Nis, 
feeling oddly wary, on

guard.

"Please don't wear any cologne or hair dressing or 
anything like that when you

come," Nis said. "You'll notice that our women wear 
no makeup and we don't

allow female visitors from outside to go into the cave 
or storage areas. It's

quite easy to contaminate the culture, give an odd 
ﬂavor to an entire batch."

Dasein was suddenly acutely aware of the aftershave 
lotion he'd used that

morning.

"Ill be pure and clean," he said. He looked to the right 
out the windows,

caught suddenly by motion there on the road 
between the Co-op and the Inn.

A peculiar high-wheeled vehicle went lurching past. 
Dasein counted eight

pairs of wheels. They appeared to be at least ﬁfteen 
feet in diameter, big

ballooning doughnuts that hummed on the pavement. 
The wheels were slung on

heavy arms like insect legs.

In an open cab, high up in front, four leashed hounds 
seated behind him, rode

Al Marden. He appeared to be steering by using two 
vertical handles.

"What in the devil is that?" Dasein demanded. He 
jumped up, crossed to the

window to get a better look at the machine as it sped 
down the road. "Isn't

that Captain Marden driving it?"

"That's our game warden's bush buggy," Nis said. "Al 
acts as game warden

sometimes when the regular man's sick or busy on 
something else. Must've been

out patroling the south hills. Heard there were some 
deer hunters from

outside messing around there this morning."

"You don't allow outsiders to hunt in the valley, is that 
it?" Dasein asked.

"Nobody hunts in the valley," Nis corrected him. "Too 
much chance of stray

bullets hitting someone. Most of the people around 
this area know the law,

but we occasionally get someone from down south 
who blunders in. There're

very few places the buggy can't get to them, though. 
We set them straight in

a hurry."

Dasein imagined that giant-wheeled monstrosity 
lurching over the brush,

 descending on some hapless hunter who'd blundered 
into the valley. He found

his sympathies with the hunter.

"I've never seen a vehicle like that before," Dasein 
said. "Is it something

new?"

"Sam, Sam Scheler, built the bush buggy ten, twelve 
years ago," Nis said. "We

were getting some poachers from over by Porterville 
then. They don't bother

us anymore."

"I imagine not," Dasein said.

"I hope you'll forgive me," Nis said. "I do have a great 
deal of work and

we're short-handed today. Get Jenny to bring you 
back later in the week . . .

after . . . well, later in the week."

After what? Dasein wondered. He found himself 
strangely alert. He'd never

felt this clearheaded before. He wondered if it could 
be some odd after

effect of the gas.

"I'll, ah, let myself out," he said, rising.

"The gate guard will be expecting you," Nis said. He 
remained seated, his

gaze ﬁxed on Dasein with an odd intensity until the 
door closed between them.

The women in the outer oﬃce glanced up as Dasein 
let himself through the

counter gate, went back to their work. A gang of men 
was loading hand trucks

on the ramp when Dasein emerged. He felt their eyes 
boring into him as he

made his way down the dock above them. A sliding 
door off to the left opened

suddenly. Dasein glimpsed a long table with a 
conveyor belt down its middle,

a line of men and women working along it, sorting 
packages.

Something about the people in that line caught his 
attention. They were oddly

dull-eyed, slow in their actions. Dasein saw their legs 
beneath the table.

The legs appeared to be held in stocks.

The door closed.

Dasein continued out into the sunshine, disturbed by 
what he had seen. Those

workers had appeared . . . mentally retarded. He 
crossed the yard wondering.

Problems in Bay 9? Jenny was a competent 
psychologist. More than competent.

What did she do here? What did she realy do?

The gate guard nodded to him, said: "Come again, Dr. 
Dasein." The man went

into his little house, lifted a telephone, spoke brieﬂy 
into it.

='

'The gate guard will be expecting you,' Dasein thought

He crossed to the Inn, ran lightly up the steps and into 
the lobby. A

gray-haired woman sat behind the desk working at 
an adding machine. She

looked up at Dasein.

"Could I get a line out to Berkeley?" he asked.

"All the lines are out," she said. "Some trouble with a 
brush ﬁre."

"Thanks."

Dasein went outside, paused on the long porch, 
scanned the sky. Brush ﬁre?

There wasn't a sign or smell of smoke.

 Everything about Santaroga could appear so natural, 
he thought, if it weren't

for the underlying sense of strangeness and secrecy 
that made his neck hairs

crawl.

Dasein took a deep breath, went down to his truck, 
nursed it to life.

This time, he took the turn to 'City Center.' The 
Avenue of the Giants

widened to four lanes presently with homes and 
business mixed at seeming

random on both sides. A park opened on the left-
paved paths, central

spire into the sky. The sign on its lawn read: "Church 
of All Faiths . . .

Sermon: 'Intensity of God response as a function of 
anxiety.'"

Intensity of God response? Dasein wondered. It was 
quite the oddest sermon

announcement he had ever seen. He made a mental 
note to try and catch that

sermon on Sunday.

The people on the streets began to catch Dasein's 
attention. Their alertness,

the brisk way they moved, was a contrast to the 
dullness of the line he'd seen

in the Co-op. Who were those dull creatures? For that 
matter, who were these

swiftly striding folk on the streets?

There was vitality and a happy freedom in the people 
he saw, Dasein realized.

He wondered if the mood could be infectious. He had 
never felt more vital

himself.

Dasein noted a sign on his right just past the park: A 
gamboling sheep with

the letters "Blue Ewe" carved in a rolling script. It was 
a windowless front

faced with blue stone, an impersonal facade broken 
only by wide double doors

containing one round glass port each.

So Marden wanted to have lunch with him there. 
Why? It seemed obvious the

patrol captain had taken the briefcase. Was he going 
to pull the

'go-and-never-darken-my-door' routine he'd used on 
the hapless salesman in the

dining room of the Inn? Or would it be something 
more subtle designed for

'Jenny's friend from the school'?

At the far end of the town, the street widened once 
more to open a broad

access to a twelve-sided service station. Dasein 
slowed his truck to admire

the structure. It was the largest service station he had 
ever seen. A canopy

structure jutted from each of the twelve sides. 
Beneath each canopy were

three rows of pumps, each row designed to handle 
four vehicles. Just beyond

it, separated from the giant wheel of the station, stood 
a building containing

rows of grease racks. Behind the station was a 
football-ﬁeld-sized parking

area with a large building at the far end labeled 
"Garage."

Dasein drove into the station, stopped at an outside 
row of pumps, got out to

study the layout. He counted twenty grease racks, six 
cars being serviced.

Cars were coming and going all around him. It was 
another hive. He wondered

why none of the datum-data mentioned this complex. 
The place swarmed with

young men in neat blue-gray uniforms.

One of the neat young men came trotting up to 
Dasein, said: "What grade,

sir?"

"Grade?"

"What octane gas do you want?"

 "What do you have?"

"Eighty, ninety and a hundred-plus."

"Fill it with ninety and check the oil."

Dasein left the young man to his labors, walked out 
toward the street to get a

better perspective on the station. It covered at least 
four acres, he

estimated. He returned to the truck as the young man 
emerged from beneath the

hood holding the dipstick.

"Your oil's down a bit more than a quart," the young 
man said.

"Put in thirty-weight detergent," Dasein said.

"Excuse me," he said, "but I heard this clunker drive 
in. We carry an

aircraft grade of forty weight. I'd recommend you use 
it. You won't burn

quite as much."

"What's it cost?"

"Same as all the others -- thirty-ﬁve cents a quart."

"Okay." Dasein shook his head. Aircraft grade at that 
price? Where did Mr.

Sam buy it?

"How do you like Santaroga?" the young man asked, 
his voice bright with the

invitation for a compliment.

"Fine," Dasein said. "Beautiful little town. You know, 
this is the biggest

service station I've ever seen. It's a wonder there 
haven't been any

newspaper or magazine articles about it."

"Old Sam doesn't cotton to publicity," the attendant 
said.

"Why's it so damn' big?" Dasein asked.

"Has to be big. It's the only one in the valley." The 
young man worked his

way around the engine, checking the water in the 
radiator, the level in the

battery. He grinned at Dasein. "Kinda surprises most 
outsiders. We ﬁnd it

handy. Some of the farmers have their own pumps 
and there's service at the

airport, but they all get their supplies through Sam." 
He closed the hood.

"And where does Old Sam get his supplies?

The attendant leveled a probing stare at Dasein. "I 
sure hope you haven't

taken on a sideline with one of the big oil companies, 
sir," he said. "If

you're thinking of selling to Sam, forget it."

"I'm just curious," Dasein said. The attendant's choice 
of words was

puzzling. Sideline? Dasein chose to ignore it for the 
moment, intent on the

larger question.

"Sam orders his supplies once a year on open bid," 
the attendant said. He

topped off the truck's gas tank, returned the hose to 
its holder. "This year

it's a little company in Oklahoma. They truck it up 
here in convoys."

"That so?"

 "I wouldn't say it if it weren't so."

"I wasn't questioning your word," Dasein said. "I was 
registering surprise."

"Don't see much to get surprised about. Person ought 
to buy where he gets the

most value for his money. That'll be three dollars and 
three cents."

Dasein counted out the change, said: "Is there a pay 
phone around here?"

building, but no sense wasting your time if you're 
calling outside. Lines are

down. There was a ﬁre over on the ridge."

Dasein went to full alert, glared at the attendant.
"How'd you know my name?"

he demanded.

"Heck, mister, it's all over town. You're Jenny's fellow 
from the city.

You're the reason she sends all the locals packing."

The grin that went with this statement should have 
been completely disarming,

but it only made Dasein more wary.

"You're going to like it here," the attendant said. 
"Everybody does." The

grin faded somewhat. "If you'll excuse me, sir. I've 
other cars to service."

Dasein found himself staring at a retreating back. He 
suspected I might

represent an oil company, Dasein thought, but he 
knows my name . . . and he

knows about Jenny. It was a curious disparity and 
Dasein felt it should tell

him something. It could be the simple truth, though.

A long green Chrysler Imperial pulled into the empty 
space on the other side

of the pumps. The driver, a fat man smoking a 
cigarette in a holder, leaned

out, asked: "Hey! This the road out to 395?"

"Straight ahead," Dasein said.

"Any gas stations along the way?"

"Not here in the valley," Dasein said. "Maybe 
something outside." He

shrugged. "I've never been out that way."

"You damn' natives," the driver growled. The Imperial 
shot ahead in a surge

of power, swerved out onto the avenue and was gone.

"Up yours," Dasein muttered. "Who the hell you 
calling a native?"

He climbed into his truck, turned back the way he 
had come. At the fork, he

headed up the mountain toward Porterville. The road 
climbed up, up -- winding

its way out of the redwoods and into a belt of oaks. He 
came at last to the

turn off where he'd taken his ﬁrst long look at the 
valley. He pulled out

and parked.

A light smokey haze obscured details, but the Co-op 
stood out plainly and the

slash burner of a sawmill off to the left. The town 
itself was a patch of

color in the trees -- tile roofs -- and there was a 
serpentine river line out

of the hills straight across from him. Dasein glanced 
at his wristwatch --

ﬁve minutes to ten. He debated going out to 
Porterville and placing his call

to Selador there. That would crowd him on the date 
with Marden, though. He

decided to post a letter to Selador, have the "burned 
out phone lines" story

 checked from that end.

Without his briefcase and notes, Dasein felt at a 
disadvantage. He rummaged

in the glove compartment, found a small gas-record 
notebook and stub of

pencil, began setting down his observations for later 
formal entry in his

report.

"The township itself is small," he wrote, "but it 
appears to serve a large

market area. There are a great many people about 
during the day. Note twelve

double pumps in service station. Transients?

"Odd alertness about the natives. Sharpness of 
attitude toward each other and

outsiders.

"Question local use of Jaspers products. Why won't 
the cheese travel? What's

the reason for the decided local preference? It tastes 
different than what I

bought outside. What about aftertaste? Subjective? 
What relationship to the

beer?

"Investigate use of Jaspers as a label. Adjective?"

Something big was moving through the trees on the 
hill beyond the Co-op. The

movement caught Dasein's attention. He studied it a 
moment. Too many trees

intervened to permit a clear look.

Dasein went around to the camper back, found his 
binoculars there. He focused

them on the movement in the trees. The donut-
wheeled bush buggy leaped into

view. Marden was driving. It threaded its way 
through trees and buck brush.

The thing appeared to be herding something . . . or 
someone. Dasein scanned

ahead for a clearing, found one, waited. Three men in 
hunting clothes

emerged, hands clasped over their heads. Two dogs 
ﬂanked them, watchful,

guarding. The hunters appeared angry, frightened.

The group angled down into a stand of redwoods, was 
lost to view. Dasein

climbed back into the cab, made a note on what he 
had seen.

It was all of a pattern, he thought. These were things 
that could be resolved

by natural, logical explanations. A law enforcement 
oﬃcer had picked up

three illegal hunters. That was what law enforcement 
oﬃcers were supposed

to do. But the incident carried what Dasein was 
coming to recognize as a

Santaroga twist. There was something about it out of 
phase with the way the

rest of the world operated.

He headed his truck back into the valley, determined 
to question Marden about

the captive hunters.

Chapter 3

The Blue Ewe's interior was a low-key grotto, its walls 
painted in varying

intensities of pastel blue. Rather ordinary banquette 
booths with tables

 ﬂanked an open area of tables and chairs. A long bar 
with a mirror decorated

by dancing sheep occupied the back wall.

Marden awaited him in one of the booths. A tall iced 
drink stood in front of

him. The patrol captain appeared relaxed, his red 
hair neatly combed. The

collar tabs of his uniform shirt carried the double 
bars of a captain. He

wore no coat. His eyes followed Dasein's approach 
with an alert directness.

"Care for a drink?" he asked as Dasein sat down.

"What's that you're having?" Dasein nodded at the 
iced drink.

"Kind of an orange beer with Jaspers."

"I'll try it," Dasein said.

Marden raised a hand toward the bar, called: 
"Another ade, Jim." He returned

his attention to Dasein. "How's your head today?"

"I'm ﬁne," Dasein said. He found himself feeling edgy, 
wondering how Marden

would bring up the subject of the briefcase. The drink 
was put in front of

him. Dasein welcomed it as a distraction, sipped it. 
His tongue encountered

a sharp orange ﬂavor with the tangy, biting overtone 
of Jaspers.

"Oh, about your briefcase," Marden said.

Dasein put down his drink with careful deliberation, 
met Marden's level,

measuring stare. "Yes?"

"Hope it hasn't inconvenienced you, my taking it."

"Not too much."

"I was curious about technique mostly," Marden said.
"I already knew why you

were here, of course."

"Oh?" Dasein studied Marden carefully for a clue to 
the man's mood. How

could he know about the project?

Marden took a long swallow of the orange beer, 
wiped his mouth. "Great stuff,

this."

"Very tasty," Dasein agreed.

"You've laid out a pretty routine approach, really," 
Marden said. He stared

at Dasein. "You know, I've the funny feeling you don't 
realize how you're

being used."

There was amusement in Marden's narrow face. It 
touched off abrupt anger in

Dasein, and he struggled to hide his reaction. "What's 
that supposed to

mean?" he asked.

"Would it interest you to know you've been a subject 
of discussion before our

Town Council?" Marden asked.

"Me?"

"You. Several times. We knew they'd get to you sooner 
or later. Took 'em

longer than we expected." Marden shook his head. 
"We circulated a photograph

of you to key people -- waiters, waitresses, bartenders, 
clerks . . ."

 "Service station attendants," Dasein said. The pattern 
was becoming clear.

He made no attempt to conceal his anger. How dared 
they?

Marden was sweet reasonableness. "They were 
bound to get wind of the fact

that one of our girls was sweet on you," he said. 
"That's an edge, you

understand. You use any edge you can ﬁnd."

"Who's this they you keep referring to?" Dasein 
demanded.

"Hmmmm," Marden said.

Dasein took three deep breaths to calm himself. He 
had never really expected

to hide his purpose here indeﬁnitely, but he had 
hoped for more time before

exposure. What the devil was this crazy patrol 
captain talking about?

"You pose quite a problem," Marden said.

"Well, don't try tossing me out of the valley the way 
you did that stupid

salesman last night or those hunters you got today," 
Dasein said. "I'm

obeying the law."

"Toss you out? Wouldn't think of it. Say, what would 
you like to eat? We

did come here for lunch."

Dasein found himself psychologically off balance, his 
anger diverted by this

sudden change of subject, his whole attitude 
hampered by feelings of guilt.

"I'm not hungry," he growled.

"You will be by the time the food gets here. I'll order 
for both of us."

Marden signaled the waiter, said: "Two salads Jaspers 
on the special lunch."

"I'm not hungry," Dasein insisted.

"You will be." Marden smiled. "Hear a big two-ﬁsted 
outsider in a Chrysler

Imperial called you a native today. Did that tick you 
off?"

"News certainly gets around here," Dasein said.

"It certainly does, Doc. Of course, what that fellow's 
mistake says to me is

that you're just a natural Santarogan. Jenny didn't 
make any mistake about

you."

"Jenny has nothing to do with this."

"She has everything to do with it. Let's understand 
each other, Doc. Larry

needs another psychologist and Jenny says you're one 
of the best. We can make

a good place here in the valley for a fellow like you."

"How big a place?" Dasein asked, his mind on the two 
investigators who'd died

here. "About six feet long and six feet deep?"

"Why don't you stop running away from yourself, 
Dasein?"

"I learned early," Dasein said, "that a good run was 
better than a bad stand."

"Huh?" Marden turned a puzzled frown on him.

"I'm not running away from myself," Dasein said.
"That's what I mean. But

 I'm not going to stand still while you order my life for 
me the way you

ordered those salads."

"You don't like the food you don't have to eat it," 
Marden said. "Am I to

understand you won't consider the job Larry's 
offering?"

Dasein looked down at the table, absorbing the 
implications of the offer. The

smart thing would be to play along, he knew. This was 
his opportunity to get

behind the Santaroga Barrier, to ﬁnd out what really 
went on in the valley.

But he couldn't escape the thought of the Town 
Council at its meetings,

questioning Jenny about him, no doubt, discussing 
preparations for the Dasein

invasion! The anger wouldn't stay down.

"You and Jenny and the rest, you have it all ﬁgured 
out, eh?" he asked.

"Throw the poor sucker a bone. Buy him off with a . . 
."

"Slack off, Doc," Marden said. The voice was level and 
still with that tone

of amusement. "I'm appealing to your intelligence, 
not to your greed. Jenny

says you're a very sharp fellow. That's what we're 
counting on."

Dasein gripped his hands into ﬁsts beneath the table, 
brought himself under

control. So they thought he was a poor innocent jerk 
to be maneuvered by a

pretty female and money!

"You think I'm being used," he said.

"We know you're being used."

"You haven't said by whom."

"Who's behind it? A group of ﬁnanciers, Doc, who 
don't like what Santaroga

represents. They want in and they can't get in."

"The Santaroga Barrier," Dasein said.

"That's what they call it."

"Who are they!"

"You want names? Maybe we'll give them to you if 
that suits our purposes."

"You want to use me, too, is that it?"

"That isn't the way Santaroga runs, Dasein."

The salads came. Dasein looked down into an inviting 
array of greens, diced

chicken and a creamy golden dressing. A pang of 
hunger gripped him. He

sampled a bite of chicken with the dressing, tasted the 
now familiar tang of a

Jaspers cheese in it. The damned stuff was ubiquitous, 
he thought. But he

had to admit it was delicious. Perhaps there was 
something in the claim that

it wouldn't travel.

"Pretty good, isn't it?" Marden asked.

"Yes, it is." He studied the patrol captain a moment.
"How does Santaroga

run, Captain?"

"Council government with Town Meeting veto, annual 
elections. Every resident

above age eighteen has one vote."

 "Basic Democracy," Dasein said. "Very nice when you 
have a community this

size, but . . ."

"We had three thousand voters and ﬁfty-eight 
hundred proxies at the last Town

Meeting," Marden said. "It can be done if people are 
interested in governing

themselves. We're interested, Dasein. That's how 
Santaroga's run."

Dasein gulped the bite of salad in his mouth, put 
down his fork. Almost nine

thousand people over age eighteen in the valley! That 
was twice as many as

he'd estimated. What did they all do? A place like this 
couldn't exist by

taking in each others' wash.

"You want me to marry Jenny, settle here -- another 
voter," Dasein said. "Is

that it?"

"That's what Jenny appears to want. We tried to 
discourage her, but . . ."

He shrugged.

"Discourage her -- like interfering with the mails?"

"What?"

Dasein saw Marden's obvious puzzlement, told him 
about the lost letters.

"Those damn' biddies," Marden said. "I guess I'll have 
to go down there and

read them the riot act. But that doesn't change things, 
really."

"No?"

"No. You love Jenny, don't you?"

"Of course I love her!"

It was out before Dasein could consider his answer. 
He heard his own voice,

realized how basic this emotion was. Of course he 
loved Jenny. He'd been

sick with longing for her. It was a wonder he'd 
managed to stay away this

long -- testimony to wounded masculine pride and the 
notion he'd been

rejected.

Stupid pride!

"Well, ﬁne," Marden said. "Finish your lunch, go look 
around the valley, and

tonight you talk things over with Jenny."

He can't really believe it's that simple, Dasein thought.

"Here," Marden said. He brought Dasein's briefcase 
from the seat, put it on

the table between them. "Make your market study. 
They already know

everything you can ﬁnd out. That's not really how 
they want to use you."

"How do they want to use me?"

"Find out for yourself, Doc. That's the only way you'll 
believe it."

Marden returned to his salad, eating with gusto.

Dasein put down his fork, asked: "What happened to 
those hunters you picked

up today?"

"We cut off their heads and pickled them," Marden 
said. "What'd you think?

 They were ﬁned and sent packing. You want to see 
the court records?"

"What good would that do?"

"You know, Doc," Marden said, pointing a fork at 
Dasein, "you're taking this

much the same way Win did -- Win Burdeaux."

Taking what? Dasein wondered. But he asked: "How 
did Win take it?"

"He fought it. That's according to pattern, naturally. 
He caved in rather

quickly, though, as I remember. Win was tired of 
running even before he got

to Santaroga."

"You amateur psychologists," Dasein sneered.

"That's right, Doc. We could use another good 
professional."

Dasein felt baﬄed by Marden's unassailable good 
nature.

"Eat your salad," Marden said. "It's good for what ails 
you."

Dasein took another bite of the chicken drenched in 
Jaspers sauce. He had to

admit the food was making him feel better. His head 
felt clear, mind alert.

Hunger crept up on one at times, he knew. Food took 
off the pressures,

allowed the mind to function.

Marden ﬁnished eating, sat back.

"You'll come around," he said. "You're confused now, 
but if you're as sharp

as Jenny says, you'll see the truth for yourself. I think 
you'll like it

here."

Marden slid out of the booth, stood up.

"I'm just supposed to take your word for it that I'm 
being used," Dasein said.

"I'm not running you out of the valley, am I?" Marden 
asked.

"Are the phone lines still burned out?" Dasein asked.

"Darned if I know," Marden said. He glanced at his 
watch. "Look, I have work

to do. Call me after you've talked to Jenny."

With that, he left.

The waiter came up, started collecting dishes.

Dasein looked up into the man's round face, took in 
the gray hair, the bent

shoulders. "Why do you live here?" he asked.

"Huh?" The voice was a gravelly baritone.

"Why do you live in Santaroga?" Dasein asked.

"You nuts? This is my home."

"But why this place rather than San Francisco, say, or 
Los Angeles?"

"You are nuts! What could I get there I can't get here?"    
He left with the

dishes.

 Dasein stared at his briefcase on the table. Market 
study. On the seat

beyond it, he could see the corner of a newspaper. He 
reached across the

table, captured the paper. The masthead read: 
"Santaroga Press."

The left-hand column carried an international news 
summary whose brevity and

language startled Dasein. It was composed of 
paragraph items, one item per

story.

Item: "Those nuts are still killing each other in 
Southeast Asia."

It slowly dawned on Dasein that this was the Vietnam 
news.

Item: "The dollar continues to slip on the 
international money market,

although this fact is being played down or suppressed 
in the national news.

The crash is going to make Black Friday look like a 
picnic."

Item: "The Geneva disarmament talks are disarming 
nobody except the arrogant

and the complacent. We recall that the envoys were 
still talking the last

time the bombs began to fall."

Item: "The United States Government is still 
expanding that big hidey hole

under the mountain down by Denver. Wonder how 
many military bigshots,

government oﬃcials and their families have tickets 
into there for when the

blowup comes?"

Item: "France thumbed its nose at the U.S. again this 
week, said to keep U.S.

military airplanes off French air-bases. Do they know 
something we don't

know?"

Item: "Automation nipped another .4 percent off the 
U.S. job market last

month. The bites are getting bigger. Does anyone 
have a guess as to what's

going to happen to the excess population?"

Dasein lowered the paper, stared at it without seeing 
it. The damned thing

was subversive! Was it written by a pack of 
Communists? Was that the secret

of Santaroga?

He looked up to see the waiter standing beside him.

"That your newspaper?" the man asked.

"Yes."

"Oh. I guess Al must've given it to you." He started to 
turn away.

"Where does this restaurant buy its food?" Dasein 
asked.

"From all over the valley, Dr. Dasein. Our beef comes 
from Ray Allison's

ranch up at the head of the valley. Our chickens come 
from Mrs. Larson's

place out west of here. The vegetables and things we 
get at the greenhouses."

"Oh. Thanks." Dasein returned to the newspaper.

"You want anything else, Dr. Dasein? Al said to give 
you anything you want.

It's on his bill."

"No, thank you."

The waiter left Dasein to the paper.

 Dasein began scanning through it. There were eight 
pages, only a few

advertisements at the beginning, and half the back 
page turned over to

classiﬁed. The display ads were rather ﬂat 
announcements: "Brenner and

Sons have a new consignment of bedroom furniture 
at reasonable prices. First

come, ﬁrst served. These are all ﬁrst quality local.

"Four new freezer lockers (16 cubic feet) are available 
at the Lewis Market.

Call for rates." The illustration was a smiling fat man 
holding open the door

of a freezer locker.

The classiﬁed advertisements were mostly for trades: 
"Have thirty yards of

hand-loomed wool (54 inches wide) -- need a good 
chain saw. Call Ed Jankey at

Number One Mill.

"That '56 Ford one-ton truck I bought two years ago is 
still running. Sam

Scheler says its worth about $50 or a good heifer. 
William McCoy, River

Junction."

Dasein began thumbing back through the paper. 
There was a garden column:

"It's time to turn the toads loose in your garden to 
keep down the snails."

And one of the inside pages had a full column of 
meeting notices. Reading the

column, Dasein was caught by a repetitive phrase: 
"Jaspers will be served."

Jaspers will be served, he thought. Jaspers . . . Jaspers . 
. . It was

everywhere. Did they really consume that much of 
the stuff? He sensed a

hidden signiﬁcance in the word. It was a unifying 
thing, something

peculiarly Santarogan.

Dasein turned back to the newspaper. A reference in 
a classiﬁed ad caught

his eye: "I will trade two years' use of one half of my 
Jaspers Locker (20

cubic feet in level ﬁve of the Old Section) for six 
months of carpenter work.

Leo Merriot, 1018 River Road."

What the devil was a Jaspers Locker? Whatever it 
was, ten cubic feet of it

for two years was worth six months' carpentry -- no 
small item, perhaps four

thousand dollars.

A splash of sunlight brought his head up in time to 
see a young couple enter

the restaurant. The girl was dark haired with deeply 
set brown eyes and

beautiful, winged eyebrows, her young man fair, 
blue-eyed, a chisled Norman

face. They took the booth behind Dasein. He watched 
them in the tilted bar

mirror. The young man glanced over his shoulder at 
Dasein, said something to

the girl. She smiled.

The waiter served them two cold drinks.

Presently, the girl said: "After the Jaspers, we sat there 
and listened to

the sunset, a rope and a bird."

"Sometime you should feel the fur on the water," her 
companion said. "It's

the red upness of the wind."

Dasein came to full alert. That haunting, elusive 
quality of almost-meaning

-- it was schizophrenic or like the product of a 
psychedelic. He strained to

hear more, but they had their heads together, 
whispering, laughing.

Abruptly, Dasein's memory darted back more than 
three years to his

department's foray into LSD experiments and he 
recalled that Jenny Sorge, the

 graduate student from Santaroga, had demonstrated 
an apparent immunity to the

drug. The experiments, abandoned in the glare of 
sensational LSD publicity,

had never conﬁrmed this ﬁnding and Jenny had 
refused to discuss it. The

memory of that one report returned to plague Dasein 
now.

Why should I recall that? he wondered.

The young couple ﬁnished whatever they'd ordered, 
got up and left the

restaurant.

Dasein folded the newspaper, started to put it into his 
briefcase. A hand

touched his arm. He looked up to ﬁnd Marden staring 
down at him.

"I believe that's my paper," he said. He took it from 
Dasein's hand. "I was

halfway to the forks before I remembered it. See you 
later." He hurried out,

the paper tucked under his arm.

The casual bruskness, the speed with which he'd been 
relieved of that

interesting publication, left Dasein feeling angry. He 
grabbed up his

briefcase, ran for the door, was in time to see Marden 
pulling away from the

curb in a patrol car.

To hell with you! he thought. I'll get another one.

The drugstore on the corner had no newspaper racks 
and the skinny clerk

informed him coldly that the local newspaper could 
be obtained "by

subscription only." He professed not to know where it 
was published. The

the cashier in the grocery store across from where 
he'd parked his truck.

Dasein climbed into the cab, opened his briefcase and 
made notes on as many of

the paper's items as he could recall. When his 
memory ran dry, he started up

the truck began cruising up and down the town's 
streets looking for the

paper's sign or a job printing shop. He found nothing 
indicating the

Santaroga Press was printed in the town, but the 
signs in a used car lot

brought him to an abrupt stop across the street. He 
sat there staring at the

signs.

A four-year-old Buick bore the notice in its window:
"This one's an oil

burner but a good buy at $100."

On a year old Rover: "Cracked block, but you can 
afford to put a new motor in

it at this price: $500."

On a ten-year-old Chevrolet: "This car owned, and 
maintained by Jersey

Hofstedder. His widow only wants $650 for it."

His curiosity fully aroused, Dasein got out and 
crossed to Jersey Hofstedder's

Chevrolet, looked in at the dash. The odometer 
recorded sixty-one thousand

miles. The upholstery was leather, exquisitely ﬁtted 
and tailored. Dasein

couldn't see a scratch on the ﬁnish and the tires 
appeared to be almost new.

"You want to test drive it, Dr. Dasein?" It was a 
woman's voice and Dasein

turned to ﬁnd himself face to face with a handsome 
gray-haired matron in a

ﬂoral blouse and blue jeans. She had a big, open face, 
smooth tanned skin.

"I'm Clara Scheler, Sam's mother," she said. "I guess 
you've heard of my Sam

by now."

"And you know me, of course," Dasein said, barely 
concealing his anger. "I'm

Jenny's fellow from the city."

 "Saw you this morning with Jenny," she said. "That's 
one ﬁne girl there, Dr.

Dasein. Now, if you're interested in Jersey's car, I can 
tell you about it."

"Please do," Dasein said.

"Folks around here know how Jersey was," she said. 
"He was a goldanged

perfectionist, that's what. He had every moving part 
of this car out on his

running thing you ever heard. Got disc brakes now, 
too. You can see what he

did to the upholstery."

"Who was Jersey Hofstedder?" Dasein asked.

"Who . . . oh, that's right, you're new. Jersey was Sam's 
chief mechanic

until he died about a month ago. His widow kept the 
Cord touring car Jersey

was so proud of, but she says a body can only drive 
one car at a time. She

asked me to sell the Chevy. Here, listen to it."

She slipped behind the wheel, started the motor.

Dasein bent close to the hood. He could barely hear 
the engine running.

"Got dual ignition," Clara Scheler said. "Jersey 
bragged he could get thirty

miles to the gallon with her and I wouldn't be a bit 
surprised."

"Neither would I," Dasein said.

"You want to pay cash or credit?" Clara Scheler asked.

"I . . . haven't decided to buy it," Dasein said.

"You and Jenny couldn't do better than starting out 
with Jersey's old car,"

she said. "You're going to have to get rid of that 
clunker you drove up in.

I heard it. That one isn't long for this world unless you 
do something about

those bearings."

"I . . . if I decide to buy it, I'll come back with Jenny," 
Dasein said.

"Thank you for showing it to me." He turned, ran back
to his truck with a

feeling of escape. He had been strongly tempted to 
buy Jersey Hofstedder's

car and found this astonishing. The woman must be a 
master salesman.

He drove back to the Inn, his mind in a turmoil over 
the strange personality

which Santaroga presented. The bizarre candor of 
those used car signs, the

ads in the Santaroga Press -- they were all of the same 
pattern.

Casual honesty, Dasein thought. That could be brutal 
at the wrong time.

He went up to his room, lay down on the bed to try to 
think things through,

make some sense out of the day. Marden's 
conversation over lunch sounded even

more strange in review. A job with Piaget's clinic? The 
hauntingly obscure

conversation of the young couple in the restaurant 
plagued him. Drugged? And

the newspaper which didn't exist -- except by 
subscription. Jersey

Hofstedder's car -- Dasein was tempted to go back and 
buy it, drive it out to

have it examined by an outside mechanic.

A persistent murmuring of voices began to intrude on 
Dasein's awareness. He

got up, looked around the room, but couldn't locate 
the source. The edge of

sky visible through his window was beginning to 
gray. He walked over, looked

out. Clouds were moving in from the northwest.

 The murmur of voices continued.

Dasein made a circuit of the room, stopped under a 
tiny ventilator in the

corner above the dresser. The desk chair gave him a 
step up onto the dresser

and he put his ear to the ventilator. Faint but distinct, 
a familiar

television jingle advertising chewing gum came from 
the opening.

Smiling at himself, Dasein stepped down off the 
dresser. It was just somebody

watching TV. He frowned. This was the ﬁrst evidence 
he'd found that they

even had TV in the valley. He considered the 
geography of the area -- a

basin. To receive TV in here would require an 
antenna on one of the

surrounding hills, ampliﬁers, a long stretch of cable.

Back onto the dresser he went, ear to the ventilator. 
He found he could

separate the TV show (a daytime serial) from a 
background conversation between

three or four women. One of the women appeared to 
be instructing another in

knitting. Several times he heard the word "Jaspers" 
and once, very

distinctly, "A vision, that's all; just a vision."

Dasein climbed down from the dresser, went into the 
hall. Between his door

and the window at the end with its "Exit" sign there 
were no doors. Across

the hall, yes, but not on this side. He stepped back 
into his room, studied

the ventilator. It appeared to go straight through the 
wall, but appearances

could be deceiving. It might come from another ﬂoor. 
What was in this whole

rear corner of the building, though? Dasein was 
curious enough now to

investigate.

Downstairs he trotted, through the empty lobby, 
outside and around to the

back. There was the oak tree, a rough-barked 
patriarch, one big branch

curving across a second-ﬂoor window. That window 
must be his, Dasein

decided. It was in the right place and the branch 
conﬁrmed it. A low porch

roof over a kitchen service area angled outward 
beneath the window. Dasein

swept his gaze toward the corner, counted three 
other windows in that area

where no doors opened into a room. All three 
windows were blank with drawn

shades.

No doors, but three windows, Dasein thought.

He set a slower pace back up to his room. The lobby 
was still empty, but

there were sounds of voices and the switchboard 
from the oﬃce behind the

desk.

Once more in his room, Dasein stood at the window, 
looked down on the porch

roof. The slope was shallow, shingles dry. He eased 
open the window, stepped

out onto the roof. By leaning against the wall, he 
found he could work his

way sideways along the roof.

At the ﬁrst window, he took a ﬁrm grip on the ledge, 
looked for a gap in the

curtain. There was no opening, but the sound of the 
TV was plain when he

pressed his ear against the glass. He heard part of a 
soap commercial and one

of the women in the room saying: "That's enough of 
this channel, switch to

NEC."

Dasein drew back, crept to the next window. There 
was a half-inch gap at the

bottom of the shade. He almost lost his balance 
bending to peer in it, caught

himself, took a ﬁrm grip on the ledge and crouched to 
put his eyes to the gap

-- the swimming wash of cathode gray in a shadowy 
room met his gaze. He could

just make out a bank of eight TV receivers against the 
wall at his right.

Five women sat in comfortable arm chairs at a good 
viewing distance from the

 screens. One of the women he noted with some 
satisfaction was knitting.

Another appeared to be making notes on a shorthand 
pad. Yet another was

operating some sort of recorder.

There was a businesslike women-at-work look about 
the group. They appeared to

be past middle age, but when they moved it was with 
the grace of people who

remained active. A blonde woman with a good ﬁgure 
stood up on the right,

racked a clip-board across the face of the top right-
hand screen, turned off

the set. She ﬂopped back into her chair with an 
exaggerated fatigue, spoke

loudly:

"My God! Imagine letting that stuff pour uncensored 
into your brain day after

day after day after . . ."

"Save it for the report, Suzie!" That was the woman 
with the recorder.

Report? Dasein asked himself. What report?

He swept his gaze around the room. A row of ﬁling 
cabinets stood against the

far wall. He could just see the edge of a couch directly 
under the window. A

pull-down stairway of the type used for access to 
attics occupied the corner

at the left. There were two typewriters on wheeled 
stands behind the women.

Dasein decided it was one of the most peculiar rooms 
he had ever seen. Here

were all the ﬁxtures of normalcy, but with that odd 
Santaroga twist to them.

Why the secrecy? Why eight TV receivers? What was 
in the ﬁling cabinets?

What report?

From time to time, the women made notes, used the 
recorder, switched channels.

All the time, they carried on casual conversations 
only parts of which were

audible to Dasein. None of it made much sense -- 
small talk: "I decided

up after work, I'll need a ride to town."

His exposed position on the roof began to bother 
Dasein. He told himself

there was nothing else to be learned from a vigil at 
the window. What

explanation could he give if he were caught here?

Carefully, he worked his way back to his room, 
climbed in, closed the window.

Again, he checked the hall. There just was no door 
into that strange room at

this level. He walked down to the exit sign, opened a 
narrow door onto a back

landing. An open stairway with doweled railing 
wound up and down from the

landing. Dasein peered over the railing, looked down 
two stories to a

basement level. He looked up. The stairwell was open 
to a skylight above the

third ﬂoor.

Moving quietly, he climbed to the next level, opened 
the landing door onto

another hall. He stepped in, looked at the wall above 
the secret room. Two

steps from the landing there was another door 
labeled "Linen Supplies."

Dasein tried the handle -- locked.

Frustrated, he turned back to the landing. As he 
stepped from the hall, his

right foot caught on a loose edge of carpeting. In one 
terrifying instant,

Dasein saw the railing and the open stairwell ﬂash 
toward him. His right

shoulder hit the rail with a splintering crash, slowing 
his fall but not

stopping it. He clutched at the broken rail with his left 
hand, felt it bend

out, knew then that he was going over -- three stories 
down to the basement.

The broken rail in his hand made a screeching sound 
as it bent outward. It

all seemed to be happening in a terrible slow motion. 
He could see the edges

 of the descending stairway where they had been 
painted and the paint had run

in little yellow lines. He saw a cobweb beneath one of 
the risers, a ball of

maroon lint caught in it.

The broken rail came free in one last splintering 
crack and Dasein went over.

In this deadly instant, as he saw in his mind his own 
body splattered on the

concrete three ﬂoors down, strong hands grabbed his 
ankles. Not quite

realizing what had happened, Dasein swung head 
down, released the broken rail

and saw it turn and twist downward.

He felt himself being pulled upward like a doll, 
dragged against the broken

edges of the railing, turned over onto his back on the 
landing.

Dasein found himself looking up into the scowling 
black face of Win Burdeaux.

"That were a mighty close one, sir," Burdeaux said. 
Dasein was gasping so

hard he couldn't answer. His right shoulder felt like a 
giant ball of pain.

The ﬁngers of his left hand were bent inward with an 
agonizing cramp from the

strength with which he had gripped the rail.

"I heard someone try the supply closet door," 
Burdeaux said. "I was in there,

sir, and I came out. There you were going through the 
railing, sir. How did

that happen?"

"Carpet," Dasein gasped. "Tripped."

Burdeaux bent to examine the area at the landing 
door. He straightened, said:

"I'll be blessed if that carpet isn't torn there, sir. That's 
a very

dangerous situation."

Dasein managed to straighten his cramped ﬁngers. He 
took a deep breath,

There was a long red scratch on his stomach and 
chest from being dragged

across the broken rail.

"You best take it easy for a few minutes, sir," 
Burdeaux said. "You want for

me to call the doctor?"

"No . . . no, thank you."

"It wouldn't take but a minute, sir."

"I'll . . . be all right."

Dasein looked at the torn carpet, a jagged edge of 
maroon fabric. He

remembered the piece of railing as it had tumbled 
away into the stairwell and

found it strange that he had no recollection of 
hearing the thing hit the

bottom. There was another picture in his mind, 
equally disturbing: the fatal

accidents of the two previous investigators. Dasein 
pictured himself dead at

the bottom of that stairwell, the investigation -- all 
very natural,

regrettable, but natural. Such things happened.

But were they accidents?

His shoulder was beginning to throb.

"I'd better get down to my room . . . and change," 
Dasein said. The pain in

his shoulder, intense now, told him he had to have 
medical attention. He

could feel some instinct in himself ﬁghting the idea, 
though, even as he

struggled upright.

 Burdeaux reached out to help him to his feet, but 
Dasein pulled away, knowing

the irrationality of the act as he did it.

"Sir, I mean you no harm," Burdeaux said. There was 
a gentle chiding in the

tone.

Was my fear of him that obvious? Dasein asked 
himself.

He remembered then the strong hands grabbing his 
ankles, the lifesaving catch

at the brink of the stairwell. A feeling of apology 
overcame Dasein.

"I . . . know you don't," he said. "You saved my life. 
There aren't words to

thank you for that. I . . . was thinking about the 
broken rail. Shouldn't

you see about ﬁxing that?"

Using the wall as a support, Dasein gained his feet. He 
stood there panting.

The shoulder was a massive agony.

"I will lock this door here, sir," Burdeaux said, his 
voice gentle, but ﬁrm.

"I am going to call the doctor, sir. You are favoring 
your shoulder. I

suspect there is much pain in it. Best the doctor see 
you, sir."

Dasein turned away, wondering at his own 
ambivalence. A doctor had to see the

shoulder -- yes. But did it have to be Piaget? Hugging 
the wall for support,

Dasein moved down the steps. Piaget . . . Piaget . . . 
Piaget. Had Piaget

been called on the two fatal accidents? Movement 
sent ﬁery pain through the

shoulder. Piaget . . . Piaget . . . How could this incident 
on the stairs

have been anything except an accident? Who could 
have predicted he'd be in

that particular place at that particular moment?

There came the sound of the door being closed and 
latched above him.

Burdeaux's heavy footsteps sounded on the stairs. 
The vibration sent more

pain through the aching shoulder. Dasein clutched 
the shoulder, paused on the

second ﬂoor landing.

"Sir?"

Dasein turned, looked up at the dark Moorish face, 
noting the expression of

concern.

"It will be best, sir," Burdeaux said, "if you do not go 
out on the roof

dangerous."

Chapter 4

The rain storm hit the valley just before dark. Dasein 
was settled into a

heavy old-fashioned chair in the Piaget house by 
then, his shoulder

immobilized by a ﬁrm bandage, Jenny sitting across 
from him on a hassock, an

 accusing look on her face.

A gentle, unswerving Burdeaux had driven him to the 
clinic adjoining Piaget's

house and had seen him into the antiseptic 
atmosphere of a tiled emergency

room before leaving.

Dasein didn't know what he'd expected -- certainly 
not the cold professional

detachment with which Piaget had set about treating 
the shoulder.

"Torn ligaments and a slight dislocation," Piaget had 
said. "What were you

trying to do -- commit suicide?"

Dasein winced as a bandage was drawn tightly into 
place. "Where's Jenny?"

"Helping with dinner. We'll tell her about your damn' 
foolishness after we

have you repaired." Piaget secured the end of a 
bandage. "You haven't told

me what you were up to."

"I was snooping!" Dasein growled.

"Were you now?" He adjusted a sling around Dasein's 
neck, set it to

immobilize the arm. "There, that should hold you for 
awhile. Don't move that

arm any more than you have to. I guess I don't have 
to tell you that. Leave

your coat off. There's a covered walkway to the 
house-right through that

door. Go on in and I'll send Jenny to entertain you 
until dinner."

The covered walkway had glass sides and was lined 
with potted geraniums. The

storm struck as Dasein was making his way between 
the pots and he paused a

moment to look out at a new-mown lawn, rows of 
standard roses, a lowering

blue-gray sky. The wind whipped rain down a street 
beyond the roses, bending

the branches of a line of white birches. There were 
people hurrying along the

sidewalk beside the birches. The damp hems of their 
coats lashed their legs

in each gust.

Dasein felt a bit light-headed, chilled in spite of the 
walk-way's protection.

What am I doing here? he asked himself. He 
swallowed in a dry throat, hurried

on to the door of the house and into a paneled living 
room full of big

furniture. There was the faint smell of a coal ﬁre in 
the room. His

shoulder was a place of dull throbbing. He made his 
way across the room, past

a sideboard full of massive cut-glass pieces, lowered 
himself carefully into a

deep, soft chair of corded green upholstery.

The lack of movement and its temporary easing of 
pain ﬁlled him with a

momentary sense of relief. Then the shoulder began 
throbbing again.

A door slammed -- hurrying feet.

Jenny burst upon him through a wide archway to the 
left. Her face was

ﬂushed. A damp wisp of hair strayed at her temple. 
She was wearing a simple

orange dress, a shocking splash of color in the dull 
tones of the big room.

With an odd sense of detachment, Dasein 
remembered telling her once that

orange was his favorite color. The memory ﬁlled him 
with an unexplainable

wariness.

"Gil, for heavens sake!" she said, stopping in front of 
him, hands on hips.

Dasein swallowed.

Jenny looked at his open shirt, the edge of bandages, 
the sling. Abruptly,

she dropped to her knees, put her head in his lap, 
clutching at him, and he

 saw she was crying -- silent tears that spread shiny 
dampness across her

cheeks.

"Hey!" Dasein said. "Jenny . . ." The tears, the lack of 
contortion in her

face -- he found it embarrassing. She ﬁlled him with a 
sense of guilt, as

though he'd betrayed her in some way. The feeling 
overrode his pain and

fatigue.

Jenny took his left hand, pressed her cheek against it.
"Gil," she whispered.

"Let's get married -- right away."

Why not? he wondered. But the guilt remained . . . 
and the unanswered

questions. Was Jenny bait in a trap that had been set 
for him? Would she

even know it if she were? Did the worm know it was 
impaled on the hook to

lure the trout?

A soft cough sounded from the archway to Dasein's 
left.

Jenny pulled back, but still held his hand.

Dasein looked up to ﬁnd Piaget there. The man had 
changed to a blue smoking

jacket that made him look even more the mandarin. 
The big head was tipped

slightly to the right with an air of amusement, but the 
dark eyes stared out

speculatively.

Behind Piaget, amber wall sconces had been turned 
on in a dining room. Dasein

could see a large oval table set with three places on 
white linen, the gleam

of silver and crystal.

"Jenny?" Piaget said.

She sighed, released Dasein's hand, retreated to the 
green ottoman, sat down

with her legs curled under her.

Dasein grew aware of the smell of roasting meat 
savory with garlic. It made

him acutely aware of hunger. In the heightening of 
his senses, he detected an

enticing tang, recognized the Jaspers odor.

"I think we should discuss your susceptibility to 
accidents," Piaget said.

"Do you mind, Gilbert?"

"By all means," Dasein said. He sat watching the 
doctor carefully. There was

an edge of caution in Piaget's voice, a hesitancy that 
went beyond a host's

reluctance to engage in an embarrassing 
conversation.

"Have you had many painful accidents?" Piaget asked. 
He strode across the

room as he spoke, crossing to a quilted leather chair 
behind Jenny. When he

sat, he was looking across Jenny's shoulder at Dasein 
and Dasein had the

abrupt suspicion that this position had been chosen 
with care. It aligned

Piaget and Jenny against him.

"Well?" Piaget asked.

"Why don't we trade answers?" Dasein countered.
"You answer a question for me

and I answer a question for you."

"Oh?" Piaget's face relaxed into the bemused smile of 
a private joke.

Jenny looked worried.

 "What's your question?" Piaget asked.

"A bargain's a bargain," Dasein said. "First, an answer. 
You ask if I've

been involved in many accidents. No, I have not. That 
is, not before coming

here. I can recall one other -- a fall from an apple tree 
when I was eight."

"So," Piaget said. "Now, you have a question for me."

Jenny frowned, looked away.

Dasein felt a sudden dryness in his throat, found his 
voice rasping when he

spoke: "Tell me, Doctor -- how did the two 
investigators die -- the ones who

came before me?"

Jenny's head snapped around. "Gil!" There was 
outrage in her voice.

"Easy, Jenny," Piaget said. A nerve began ticking on 
the broad plane of his

left cheek. "You're on the wrong track, young man," 
he growled. "We're not

savages here. There's no need. If we want someone to 
leave, he leaves."

"And you don't want me to leave?"

"Jenny doesn't want you to leave. And that's two 
questions from you. You owe

me an answer."

Dasein nodded. He stared across Jenny at Piaget, 
reluctant to look at her.

"Do you love Jenny?" Piaget asked.

Dasein swallowed, lowered his gaze to meet a 
pleading stare in Jenny's eyes.

Piaget knew the answer to that question! Why did he 
ask it now?

"You know I do," Dasein said.

Jenny smiled, but two bright tears beaded her 
eyelashes.

"Then why did you wait a year to come up here and 
tell her so?" Piaget asked.

There was an angry, accusatory bite in his voice that 
made Dasein stiffen.

Jenny turned, stared at her uncle. Her shoulders 
trembled.

"Because I'm a damn' stubborn fool," Dasein said. "I 
don't want the woman I

love to tell me where I have to live."

"So you don't like our valley," Piaget said. "Maybe we 
can change your

opinion about that. You willing to let us try?"

No! Dasein thought. I'm not willing! But he knew this 
answer, visceral and

instinctive, would come out petulant, childish. "Do 
your damnedest," he

muttered.

And Dasein wondered at himself. What were his 
instincts telling him? What

was wrong with this valley that put him on guard at 
every turn?

"Dinner's ready."

It was a woman's voice from the archway.

Dasein turned to ﬁnd a gaunt gray female in a gray 
dress standing there. She

was a Grant Woods early American come to life, long-
nosed, wary of eye,

 disapproval in every line of her face.

"Thank you, Sarah," Piaget said. "This is Dr. Dasein, 
Jenny's young man."

Her eyes weighed Dasein, found him wanting. "The 
food's getting cold," she

said.

Piaget lifted himself out of his chair. "Sarah's my 
cousin," he said. "She

comes from the old Yankee side of the family and 
absolutely refuses to dine

with us if we eat at a fashionable hour."

"Damn' foolishness, the hours you keep," she 
muttered. "My father was always

in bed by this time."

"And up at dawn," Piaget said.

"Don't you try to make fun of me, Larry Piaget," she 
said. She turned away.

"Come to table. I'll bring the roast."

Jenny crossed to Dasein, helped him to his feet. She 
leaned close, kissed his

cheek, whispered: "She really likes you. She told me 
so in the kitchen."

"What're you two whispering?" Piaget demanded.

"I was telling Gil what Sarah said about him."

"Oh, what'd Sarah say?"

"She said: 'Larry isn't going to browbeat that young 
man. He has eyes like

Grandpa Sather.'"

Piaget turned to study Dasein. "By George, he has. I 
hadn't noticed." He

turned away with an abrupt cutting-off motion, led 
the way into the dining

room. "Come along, or Sarah will change her good 
opinion. We can't have

that."

To Dasein, it was one of the strangest dinners of his 
life. There was the

pain of his injured shoulder, a steady throb that 
impelled him to an alertness

that made every word and motion stand out in sharp 
relief. There was Jenny --

she had never looked more warmly feminine and 
desirable. There was Piaget,

who declared a conversational truce for the meal and 
plied Dasein with

questions about his courses at the University, the 
professors, fellow

students, his ambitions. There was Sarah, hovering 
with the food -- a

muttering specter who had soft looks only for Jenny.

With Sarah, it's what Jenny wants, Jenny gets, Dasein 
thought.

Finally, there was the food: a rib roast cooked to a 
medium rare perfection,

the Jaspers sauce over peas and potato pancakes, the 
local beer with its

palate-cleansing tang, and fresh peaches with honey 
for dessert.

Beer with dinner struck Dasein as strange at ﬁrst 
until he experienced the

play of tastes, a subtle mingling of ﬂavor esters that 
made individual savors

sensations. It was a crossing of senses, he realized -- 
smells tasted, colors

amplifying the aromas.

At the ﬁrst serving of beer, Piaget had tasted it, 
nodded. "Fresh," he said.

"Within the hour just like you ordered," Sarah 
snapped. And she'd cast a

 strange probing stare at Dasein. It was shortly after 
9:30 when Dasein left.

"I had your truck brought around," Piaget said. "Think 
you can drive it, or

shall I have Jenny take you back to the hotel?"

"I'll be all right," Dasein said.

"Don't take those pain pills I gave you until you're 
safely in your room,"

Piaget said. "Don't want you running off the road."

They stood on the broad verandah at the front of the 
house then, street lights

casting wet shadows of the birches onto the lawn. The 
rain had stopped, but

there was a chilled feeling of dampness in the night 
air.

Jenny had thrown his coat around his shoulders. She 
stood beside him, a

worried frown on her face. "Are you sure you'll be all 
right?"

"You ought to know I can steer with one hand," he 
said. He grinned at her.

"Sometimes I think you're a terrible man," she said. "I 
don't know why I put

up with you."

"It's chemistry," he said.

Piaget cleared his throat. "Tell me, Gilbert," he said.
"What were you doing

on the hotel roof?"

Dasein felt an abrupt pang of fear, a sense of 
incongruity in the timing of

that question.

What the hell! he thought. Let's see what a straight 
answer does.

"I was trying to ﬁnd out why you're so all-ﬁred secret 
about your TV," he

said.

"Secret?" Piaget shook his head. "That's just a pet 
project of mine.

They're analyzing the silly infantilisms of TV, 
producing data for a book I

have in mind."

"Then why so secret?" Dasein felt Jenny clutching his 
arm, ignored the fear

he sensed in her reaction.

"It's consideration for the sensibilities of others, not 
secrecy," Piaget

said. "Most TV drives our people wild. We monitor the 
news, of course, but

even that is mostly pap, sugar-coated and spoon-fed."

There was a ring of partial truth in Piaget's 
explanation, Dasein felt, but he

wondered what was being left out. What else were 
those women researching in

that room.

"I see," Dasein said.

"You owe me an answer now," Piaget said.

"Fire away."

"Another time," Piaget said. "I'll leave you two to say 
good night, now."

He went inside, closed the door.

Presently, Dasein was headed down the street in his 
truck, the tingling

 sensation of Jenny's kiss still warm on his lips.

He arrived at the wye intersection to the hotel shortly 
before ten, hesitated,

then bore to the right on the road out of the valley to 
Porterville. There

was an odd feeling of self-preservation in the 
decision, but he told himself

it was just because he wanted to drive for awhile . . . 
and think.

was enveloped by such a feeling of disquiet that his 
stomach was knotted with

it. There was an odd broadening to his sense of being. 
It made him realize

that he had forced himself inward with his 
concentration on psychology, that

he had narrowed his world. Something was pushing 
at his self-imposed barriers

now, and he sensed things lurking beyond, things 
which he feared to confront.

Why am I here? he asked himself.

He could trace a chain of cause and effect back to the 
university, to Jenny .

. . but again he felt the interference of things outside 
this chain and he

feared these things.

The night sped past his truck and he realized he was 
ﬂeeing up the mountain,

trying to escape the valley.

He thought of Jenny as she'd appeared this night: an 
elf in orange dress and

orange shoes, lovely Jenny dressed to please him, her 
sincerity and love all

transparent on her face.

Bits and pieces of the dinner conversation began 
coming back to him. Jaspers.

"This is the old Jaspers -- deep." That had been Jenny 
tasting the sauce.

"Almost time to put down a new section of Jaspers in 
number ﬁve." That had

been Sarah bringing in the dessert. And Piaget: "I'll 
talk to the boys about

it tomorrow."

Now, recalling this, Dasein realized there'd been a 
faint, familiar tang even

in the honey. He wondered then about the way 
Jaspers ﬁgured so often in

their conversations. They never strayed far from it, 
seemed to ﬁnd nothing

unusual in the constancy of it. They talked Jaspers . . . 
and at the oddest

moments.

He was at the pass out of the valley now, trembling 
with an ambivalent feeling

of escape . . . and of loss.

There'd been a ﬁre across the slopes through which 
Dasein was now descending.

He smelled damp ashes on the wind that whipped 
through the ventilators,

recalled the reported trouble with telephone lines. 
Clouds had begun to clear

away here outside the valley. Dead trees stood out on 
the burned slopes like

Chinese characters brushstroked on the moonlighted 
hills.

Abruptly, his mind clamped on a logical reason for 
coming out of the valley:

The telephone! I have to call Selador and confer. 
There are no lines out of

the valley, but I can call from Porterville . . . before I 
go back.

He drove steadily then, his being suspended, static, 
held in a curious lack of

emotion -- nothing on his mind. Even the pain of his 
shoulder receded.

Porterville loomed out of the night, the highway 
becoming a wide main street

with a blue and white "Bus Depot" sign on the left 
over an all-night cafe --

two big truck-trailer rigs there beside a little 
convertible and a green and

white Sheriffs car. An orange glow across the street 
was "Frenchy's Mother

Lode Saloon." The cars at the curb conveyed a general 
decrepit look,

 depressingly alike in their battered oldness.

Dasein drove past, found a lonely phone booth 
beneath a street light at the

corner of a darkened Shell station. He turned in, 
stopped beside the booth.

The truck's engine was hot and tried to go on running 
with a clunking, jerking

motion after he shut off the ignition. He stopped the 
motion with the clutch,

creaked with distress at his movement.

The Sheriffs car drove past, its headlights casting 
enormous shadows on a

white fence behind the phone booth.

Dasein sighed, went into the booth. He felt strangely 
reluctant to make the

call, had to force himself.

Presently, Selador's precise accent came on the line: 
"Gilbert? Is that you,

Gilbert? Have they repaired the deuced telephone 
lines?"

"I'm calling from Porterville, just outside the valley."

"Is something wrong, Gilbert?"

Dasein swallowed. Even at long distance, Selador 
managed to remain

perceptive. Something wrong? Dasein delivered a 
brief recital of his

accidents.

After a prolonged silence, Selador said: "That's very 
odd, Gilbert, but I

fail to see how you can construe these incidents as 
other than accidents.

With the gas, for example, they put out a great effort 
to save you. And your

tumble -- how could anyone possibly have known 
you'd be the one to pass that

way?"

"I just wanted you to know about them," Dasein said.
"Piaget thinks I'm

accident prone."

"Piaget? Oh, yes -- the local doctor. Well, Gilbert, one 
should always

discount pronouncements that go outside one's 
specialty. I doubt Piaget's

qualiﬁed to diagnose an accident prone, even if there 
were such a syndrome --

which I sincerely disbelieve." Selador cleared his 
throat. "You don't

seriously think these people have malignant designs 
against you?"

Selador's sane, level tones had a soothing effect on 
Dasein. He was right, of

course. Here, removed from the valley, the events of 
the past twenty-four

hours took on a different shade of meaning. "Of 
course not," Dasein said.

"Good! You've always struck me as a very level head, 
Gilbert. Let me caution

you now that you may have intruded upon a situation 
where people are being

genuinely careless. Under those circumstances, the 
Inn might be an extremely

dangerous place, and you should leave."

"To go where?" Dasein asked.

"There must be other accommodations."

dangerous place, yes -- but only because it was part of 
the valley. He felt a

strong reluctance to agree with Selador. It was as 
though his own reluctance

were based on data unavailable to Selador.

Abruptly, Dasein saw how the loose carpet could have 
been aimed at him. He

 thought of a baited trap. The bait? That was the TV 
room, of course -- an

odd place certain to arouse his curiosity. Around the 
bait would be several

traps, all avenues covered. He wondered what trap he 
had missed on the roof.

As he thought about it, Dasein recalled how the stair 
rail had broken.

"Are you there, Gilbert?" Selador's voice sounded thin 
and distant.

"Yes-I'm here."

Dasein nodded to himself. It was so beautifully 
simple. It answered all the

vague uneasiness that had plagued him about the 
accidents. So simple -- like

a child's drawing on a steamy window: no excess 
lines or unnecessary data.

Bait and traps.

Even as he saw it, Dasein realized Selador wouldn't 
accept this solution. It

smacked of paranoia. If the theory were wrong, it 
would be paranoia. It

implied organization, the involvement of many 
people, many oﬃcials.

"Is there something else you wanted, Gilbert? We're 
paying for some rather

costly silence."

Dasein came to himself suddenly. "Yes, sir. You recall 
Piaget's article

about Santarogans and allergens?"

"Quite." Selador cleared his throat.

"I want you to query the public health oﬃcials and 
the department of

agriculture. Find out if they have chemical analyses 
of the valley's farm

products -- including the cheese."

"Public health . . . agriculture . . . cheese," Selador said.    
Dasein could

almost see him making notes. "Anything more?"

"Perhaps. Could you get to the attorneys for the real 
estate board and the

chain store people? I'm sure they must've explored 
possibilities of legal

recourse on the leased land they . . ."

"What're you driving at, Gilbert?"

"The chain stores leased the property and built their 
expensive installations

before discovering the Santarogans wouldn't trade 
with them. Is this a

pattern? Do Santaroga realtors trap unwary 
outsiders?"

"Conspiracy to defraud," Selador said. "I see. I'm 
rather inclined to

believe, Gilbert, that this avenue already has been 
exhausted."

Hearing him, Dasein thought Selador's usual 
acuteness had been blunted.

Perhaps he was tired.

"Most likely," Dasein said. "It wouldn't hurt, though, 
for me to see what the

legal eagles were thinking. I might get some new 
clues on the scene."

"Very well. And, Gilbert, when are you going to send 
me copies of your

notes?"

"I'll mail some carbons tonight from Porterville."

"Tomorrow will be all right. It's getting late and . . ."

"No, sir. I don't trust the Santaroga post oﬃce."

 "Why?"

Dasein recounted Jenny's anger at the women in the 
post oﬃce. Selador

chuckled.

"They sound like a veritable band of harpies," Selador 
said. "Aren't there

laws against tampering with the mails? But, of course, 
determined people and

all that. I hope you found Miss Sorge in good health."

"As beautiful as ever," Dasein said, keeping his voice 
light. He wondered

suddenly about Selador. Miss Sorge. No hesitation, no 
question at all about

her being unmarried.

"We're exploring the source of their petrol supply," 
Selador said. "Nothing

on that yet. Take care of yourself, Gilbert. I shouldn't 
want anything to

happen to you."

"That makes two of us," Dasein said.

"Good-bye, then," Selador said. His voice sounded 
hesitant. A click signaled

the breaking of the connection.

Dasein hung up, turned at a sound behind him. A 
Sheriff's car was pulling

into the station. It stopped facing the booth. A 
spotlight ﬂashed in

Dasein's eyes. He heard a door open, footsteps.

"Turn that damn' light out of my eyes!" Dasein said.

The light was lowered. He discerned a bulky shape in 
uniform standing outside

the booth, the gleam of a badge.

"Anything wrong?" It was an oddly squeaky voice to 
come from that bulk.

Dasein stepped out of the booth, still angry at the way 
they had ﬂashed the

light in his eyes. "Should there be?"

"You damn' Santarogans," the deputy muttered. "Must 
be important for one of

you to come over to make a phone call."

Dasein started to protest he wasn't a Santarogan, 
remained silent as his mind

was caught by a ﬂow of questions. What made 
outsiders assume he was a

Santarogan? The fat man in the Chrysler and now this 
deputy. Dasein recalled

Marden's words. What was the identifying tag?

"If you're through, you best be getting home," the 
deputy said. "Can't park

here all night."

Dasein saw an abrupt mental image of his gas gauge -
- it was faulty and

registered almost empty even when the tank was full. 
Would they believe he

had to wait for the station to open in the morning? 
What if they roused an

attendant and found his tank took only a few gallons?

Why am I debating petty deceptions? Dasein 
wondered.

It occurred to him that he was reluctant to return to 
Santaroga. Why? Was

living in the valley turning him into a Santarogan?

"That's a real artistic bandage you're wearing," the 
deputy said. "Been in an

accident?"

 "Nothing important," Dasein said. "Strained some 
ligaments."

"Good night, then," the deputy said. "Take it easy on 
that road." He

returned to his car, said something in a low voice to 
his companion. They

chuckled. The car pulled slowly out of the station.

They mistook me for a Santarogan, Dasein thought, 
and he considered the

reactions which had accompanied that mistake. 
They'd resented his presence

here, but with an odd kind of diﬃdence . . . as though 
they were afraid of

him. They hadn't hesitated to leave him alone here, 
though -- no question of

his being a criminal.

Disturbed by the incident and unable to explain his 
disturbance, Dasein

climbed back into his truck, headed for Santaroga.

Why had they assumed he was a Santarogan? The 
question kept gnawing at him.

A bump in the road made him acutely conscious of 
his shoulder. The pain had

settled into a dull ache. His mind felt clear and alert, 
though, poised on a

knife-edge peak of observation. He began to wonder 
about this sensation as he

drove.

The road ﬂowed beneath him, climbing . . . climbing . 
. .

As though part of the road's pattern, disconnected 
images began ﬂowing

through his mind. They came with words and 
phrases, madly jumbled, no thought

of order. Meaning eluded him. Feeling suddenly light-
headed, he tried to

grapple with the sensations-

Cave . . . limping man . . . ﬁre . . .

What cave? he wondered. Where have I seen a 
limping man? What ﬁre? Is it

the ﬁre that destroyed the telephone lines?

He had the sudden impression that he was the 
limping man. Fire and cave

eluded him.

Dasein felt he wasn't reasoning, but was pawing 
through old thoughts. Images

-- labels summoned objects before his mind's eye: Car. 
He saw Jersey

Hofstedder's polished old machine. Fence. He saw the 
chain-link fence around

the Co-op. Shadows. He saw bodiless shadows. What's 
happening to me?

He felt trembly with hunger . . . sweaty. Perspiration 
rolled off his

forehead and cheeks. He tasted it on his lips. Dasein 
opened his window,

allowed the cold wind to whip around him.

At the turn-off where he'd stopped the ﬁrst evening, 
Dasein pulled onto the

gravel, shut off engine and lights. The clouds were 
gone and an oblate silver

moon rode low on the horizon. He stared down into 
the valley -- widely spaced

lights, blue-green from the greenhouses far to his left, 
the bustle and stir

from the Co-op off to the right.

Up here, Dasein felt removed from all that, isolated.
The darkness enclosed

him. Cave? he wondered. Jaspers?

It was diﬃcult to think with his body behaving in this 
oddly erratic

fashion. His shoulder throbbed. There was a nodule 
of aching in his left

lung. He was aware of a tendon in his left ankle -- not 
pain, but knowledge

of a weakness there. He could trace in his mind the 
ﬁery line of scratches

 down his chest where Burdeaux had dragged him 
across the broken bannisters.

A picture of the map on George Nis's wall ﬂashed into 
his mind, was gone.

He felt possessed. Something had taken over his body. 
It was an ancient,

frightening thought. Mad. He gripped the steering 
wheel, imagined that it

writhed, jerked his hands away.

His throat was dry.

Dasein took his own pulse, staring at the luminous 
dial on his wristwatch.

The second hand jumped oddly. It was either that or 
his pulse was rapid and

erratic. Something was distorting his time sense.

Have I been poisoned? he wondered. Was there 
something in Piaget's dinner?

Ptomaine?

The black bowl of the valley was a forbidding hand 
that could reach up and

grab him.

Jaspers, he thought. Jaspers.

What did it really mean?

He sensed a oneness, a collective solitude focusing on 
the cooperative. He

imagined something lurking outside there in the 
darkness, hovering at the edge

of awareness.

Dasein put a hand to the seat. His ﬁngers groped 
across the briefcase with

its notes and documents, all the things that said he 
was a scientist. He

tried to cling to this idea.

I'm a scientist. This uneasiness is what Aunt Nora 
would've called "the

vapors."

What the scientist had to do was very clear in 
Dasein's mind. He had to

insinuate himself into the Santaroga world, ﬁnd his 
place in their oneness,

live their life for a time, think as they thought. It was 
the one sure way to

plumb the valley's mystery. There was a Santaroga 
state of mind. He had to

put it on like a suit of clothes, ﬁt it to his 
understanding.

This thought brought the sensation that something 
intruded on his inner

awareness. He felt that an ancient being had risen 
there and examined him.

It ﬁlled his whole subconscious, peering, urgent, 
restless -- sensed only by

reﬂection, indistinct, blurred . . . but real. It moved 
within him,

something heavy and blundering.

The sensation passed.

When it was gone, there was an emptiness in Dasein 
such that it explained the

whole concept of being empty. He felt himself to be a 
ﬂoating chip lost on

an endless sea, fearful of every current and eddy that 
moved him.

He knew he was projecting. He was afraid to go back 
down into the valley,

afraid to run away.

Jaspers.

There was another thing he had to do, Dasein knew. 
Again, he pictured the map

on George Nis's wall, the black tributary lines, the 
ganglia pattern.

 Cave.

He shivered, stared toward the distant bustling that 
was the Co-op. What lay

hidden there behind the chain fence, the guards, the 
dogs and the prowling

bush buggy? There could be a way to ﬁnd out. Dasein 
stepped from the truck,

locked the cab. The only weapon he could ﬁnd in the 
camper was a rusty

hunting knife with a mildewed sheath. He slipped the 
sheath onto his belt,

working clumsily one-handed, feeling more than a 
little foolish, but aware

also of that inner sense of danger. There was a 
penlight, too. He pocketed

it.

The movement set his shoulder throbbing. Dasein 
ignored the pain, telling

himself it would be too easy to ﬁnd a physical excuse 
for not doing what he

knew he had to do.

Dasein picked his way down the trail, marking the 
path in the moonlight until

it descended into brush-choked shadows.

Branches pulled at his clothing. He bulled his way 
through, guiding himself

by the moon and the bustle of the Co-op, which was 
visible whenever he topped

a ridge. Whatever the Santaroga mystery, Dasein 
knew, the answer lay there

behind that chain fence.

Once, he stumbled and slid down a hillside into a dry 
creekbed. Following the

creekbed brought him out onto a tiny alluvial plain 
that opened onto a

panoramic view of the Co-op and the valley beyond 
bathed in moonlight. Twice,

he startled deer, which went bounding and leaping 
off into the night. There

were frequent scampering sounds in the brush as 
small creatures ﬂed his

blundering approach.

Holding to a narrow game trail, he came at last to a 
rock ledge about a

thousand yards from the Co-op's fence and ﬁve 
hundred feet above it. Dasein

sat down on a rock to catch his breath and, in the 
sudden silence, heard a

powerful engine laboring somewhere to his right. A 
light swept the sky. He

crept back into a low copse of buck brush, crouched 
there.

The sound of the engine grew louder, louder. A set of 
giant wheels climbed

out against the stars to occupy a hill above him. From 
somewhere above the

wheels, a light ﬂashed on, swept across the brush, 
probing, pausing, darting

back and forth.

Dasein recognized the bush buggy, a monster vehicle 
some two hundred feet

away. He felt exposed, naked with only a shield of 
thin brush between him and

that nightmare creation. The light washed over the 
leaves above him.

Here it comes, he thought. It'll come right down the 
hill onto me.

The sound of the engine had grown muter while the 
bush buggy paused to search

its surroundings. It was so near Dasein heard a dog 
whining on it, remembered

the dogs that had accompanied Marden.

The dogs will smell me, he thought.

He tried to draw himself into as tight a ball as 
possible.

The engine sounds grew suddenly louder.

 Dasein moved a branch, ventured a look through the 
brush, preparing himself to

leap up and run. But the big machine turned up the 
ridge upon which it had

emerged. It passed across the hills above Dasein, the 
noise and light

receding.

When it was gone, he took a moment to calm himself, 
crept out to the lip of

the rock ledge. Dasein saw then why the buggy had 
not come down upon him.

This was a dead end, no trail down from here. He 
would have to climb up where

the machine had emerged upon the hill, backtrack on 
it to ﬁnd a way down.

He started to turn away, paused at sight of a black 
gash in the ﬂoor of the

ledge off to his right. Dasein crossed to the break in 
the rock, looked down

into darkness. The break in the rock wasn't more than 
three feet across,

opening out to the face of the ledge, narrowing to a 
point about twenty feet

to his right. Dasein knelt, risked a brief ﬂash of his 
penlight. The light

revealed a smooth-walled rock chimney leading 
down to another ledge. What was

more important, he could see a game trail down there 
in the moonlight. Dasein

slid his feet over the edge of the chimney, sat down 
there with his legs

hanging into the darkness, considered the problem. 
The injured shoulder made

him hesitate. Without that, he'd have gone right over, 
worked his way down,

back against one side, feet against the other. 
Dangerous, yes -- but a thing

he had done many times in mountains rougher than 
these. The other ledge was

no more than ﬁfty feet down there.

He looked around him, wondering if he dared risk it. 
In this instant, his

mind offered up the datum that he had forgotten to 
mail off the carbons of his

notes to Selador. It was like a cold dash of water in 
the face. He felt that

his own body had betrayed him, that he had 
conspired against himself.

How could I have forgotten? he wondered. There was 
anger in the thought, and

fear. Perspiration bathed his palms. He glanced at the 
luminous dial of his

wristwatch: almost midnight. There came over him 
then the almost

overpowering desire to retrace his way back to the 
road and the camper.

He was suddenly more afraid of what his own body 
might do to him than he was

of any danger which could come out of the night or of 
the climb down this

simple rock chimney. Dasein sat there trembling, 
recalling his feeling that

he was possessed. This was madness! He shook his 
head angrily.

There was no turning back; he had to go down there, 
ﬁnd a way into that

Co-op, expose its secrets. While the strength of anger 
was upon him, Dasein

probed across the chimney with his feet, found the 
other side, slid off his

perch and began working his way down. At each 
movement of his back, his

shoulder stabbed him with pain. He gritted his teeth, 
felt his way down

through the darkness. Rock scraped across his back. 
Once, his right foot

slipped and he strained with the left for purchase.

The ﬂoor of the chimney when he found it was almost 
an anticlimax, a slope of

loose rock which slid from beneath his feet and 
cascaded him out onto the game

trail he had seen from above.

Dasein lay there a moment regaining his breath, 
allowing the ﬁre in his

shoulder to subside to a dull throb. Presently, he 
struggled to his feet,

marked where the moonlighted trail led down to his 
right. He picked his way

down through a screen of brush onto a sloping 
meadow dotted with the dark

shapes of oaks. Moonlight gleamed on the fence 
beyond the meadow. There it

was, the boundary of the Co-op. He wondered if he 
could climb that fence

one-handed. It would be galling to come this far only 
to be stopped by a

fence.

 As he stood there examining the meadow and the 
fence, a deep humming sound

impressed itself on him. It came from off to his right. 
He searched for the

source of the sound, eyes hunting through shadows. 
Was that a gleam of metal

down there, something round emerging from the 
meadow? He crouched low in the

dry grass. There was a heavy odor of mushrooms all 
around. He recognized it

abruptly -- the smell of Jaspers. It came over Dasein 
that he was staring at

a ventilator.

Ventilator!

He lifted himself to his feet, trotted across the 
meadow toward the sound.

There was no mistaking that sound nor the wash of 
Jaspers-saturated air that

enveloped him. There was a big fan at work down 
there under the earth.

Dasein stopped beside the ventilator outlet. It was 
about four feet across,

stood approximately the same distance above the 
meadow topped by a cone-shaped

rain hood. He was about to examine the fastenings of 
the hood when he heard a

snuﬄing sound and crackling of brush from the 
direction of the fence. He

ducked behind the ventilator as two uniformed 
guards emerged from the brush

beyond the fence, dogs sniﬃng hungrily ahead of 
them, straining at their

leashes.

If they get my scent, Dasein thought.

He crouched behind the ventilator breathing softly 
through his mouth. There

was a tickling sensation on the back of his tongue. He 
wanted to cough, clear

his throat, fought down the impulse. Dogs and guards 
had stopped directly

below him.

A glaring light washed across the ventilator, swept 
the ground on both sides.

One of the dogs whined eagerly. There was a rattling 
sound, a sharp command

from one of the guards.

Dasein held his breath.

fence. Dasein ventured a quick glance around the 
ventilator. They were

ﬂashing a light along the base of the fence, looking for 
tracks. One of the

guards laughed. Dasein felt the touch of a light breeze 
on his cheeks,

realized he was downwind from the dogs, allowed 
himself to relax slightly.

The rattling sound came once more. Dasein saw it 
was one of the guards

dragging a stick along the fence.

The casual mood of the guards caused him to relax 
even more. He took a deep

breath. They were going over a low hill now, down 
the other side. The night

swallowed them.

Dasein waited until he no longer could hear them 
before straightening. His

left knee was trembling and it took a moment for this 
to subside.

Guards, dogs, that big bush buggy -- all spoke of 
something important here.

Dasein nodded to himself, began examining the 
ventilator. There was a heavy

screen beneath the rain cap. He ventured a ﬂash of 
the penlight, saw hood

and screen were a welded unit held to the ventilator 
by heavy sheet metal

screws.

Dasein brought out his hunting knife, tried one of the 
screws. Metal

screeched against metal as he turned it. He stopped, 
listened. His ears

detected only the sounds of the night. There was an 
owl somewhere in the

brush above him. Its mournful call ﬂoated across the 
night. Dasein returned

 to the screw. It came out in his hand and he pocketed 
it, moved on to the

next one. There were four in all.

When the last screw was out, he tried the screen. It 
and the hood lifted with

a rasping metallic protest. He ﬂashed his penlight 
inside, saw smooth metal

walls going straight down about ﬁfteen feet before 
curving back toward the

hills.

Dasein returned the screen and hood to their normal 
position, went searching

under the oaks until he found a fallen branch about 
six feet long. He used

this to prop the hood and screen, peered once more 
down the ventilator with

the penlight.

It was going to take two hands getting in there, he 
realized. No other way.

Gritting his teeth, he removed the sling, stuffed it into 
a pocket. Even

without the sling, he knew the arm wasn't going to be 
much use . . . except

perhaps in an emergency. He felt the rim of the 
ventilator -- sharp, rough

metal. The sling, he thought. He brought it out, rolled 
it into a pad for

his hands. Using this pad, he hauled himself across 
the lip of the

ventilator. The pad slipped and he felt metal bite his 
stomach. He grabbed

the edge, swung himself inward. Metal ripped buttons 
off his shirt. He heard

them clatter somewhere below. His good hand found 
a purchase over a bit of

the sling; he dropped down, pain screaming in his 
injured shoulder, swung his

feet to the opposite side, turned and braced himself. 
Feet and back held. He

slipped the hunting knife out of its sheath, reached 
up, knocked the limb prop

aside.

Screen and hood came down with a clang he felt must 
have been heard for a

mile. He waited, listening.

Silence.

Slowly, he began inching his way down.

Presently, his feet encountered the curve. He 
straightened, used the

penlight. The ventilator slanted back under the hill at 
a gentle slope of

about twenty degrees. There was something soft 
under his left foot. The

light revealed the sling. He picked it up. The front of 
his shirt was

sticking to his skin. He turned the light on it, saw red 
wetness, a section

of skin scraped off by the lip of the ventilator. The 
pain was as a minor

scratch compared to his shoulder.

I'm a mess, he thought. What the hell am I doing 
here?

The answer was there in his mind, clear and 
disturbing. He was here because

he had been maneuvered into a oneway passage as 
direct and conﬁning as this

ventilator tube. Selador and friends formed one side 
of the passage; Jenny

and fellow Santarogans formed the other side.

And here he was.

Dasein lifted the sling. It was torn but still 
serviceable. He gripped one

end in his teeth, managed to restore it to a semblance 
of its former position.

There was only one way to go now. He dropped to his 
knees, crawled backward

down the ventilator, using his light occasionally to 
probe the darkness.

The Jaspers odor ﬁlled the conﬁned space. It was a 
tangy essence of

mushrooms here. He received the distinct impression 
it cleared his head.

 The tube went on and on and on . . . He took it one 
step at a time. It

curved slowly toward what he felt was south and the 
slope steepened. Once, he

slipped, slid downward for twenty feet, cutting his 
left hand on a rivet. He

wasn't positive, but he thought the sound of the fan 
motor grew louder.

Again, the tube turned -- and again. Dasein lost all 
sense of direction in

the conﬁning darkness. Why had they constructed 
this ventilator with so many

turns? he wondered. Had they followed a natural 
fault in the rock? It seemed

likely.

His left foot encountered an edge of emptiness. 
Dasein stopped, used the

penlight. Its feeble glow illuminated a ﬂat metal wall 
about six feet away

and a square of shadows beneath it. He turned the 
light downward, exposed a

box-like opening about ﬁve feet deep with a heavy 
screen for one side. The

sound of the fan motor came from somewhere 
behind the screen and it deﬁnitely

was louder here.

Bracing himself with a hand in the screen, Dasein 
lowered himself into the

box. He stood there a moment examining his 
surroundings. The wall opposite

the screen appeared different from the others. There 
were six roundhead bolts

in it held by ﬂanged metal keepers as though they'd 
been designed to stay in

that position while nuts were tightened from the 
outside.

Dasein pried up one of the ﬂanges with his knife, 
turned the bolt. It moved

easily, too easily. He pulled back on it, turned it once 
more. That took

more effort and he was rewarded by having the bolt 
work backward into his

hand. The nut dropped outside with a sound of falling 
on wood. He waited,

listening for a response to that sound. Nothing.

Dasein put his eye to the bolt hole, peered out into an 
eerie red gloom. As

his eye grew accustomed to it, he made out a section 
of heavy screen across

from him, packages piled behind the screen.

He drew back. Well, Nis had said this was a storage 
cave.

Dasein applied himself to the other bolts. He left the 
bolt in the upper

right corner, bent the metal out and swung it aside. 
There was a wooden

catwalk immediately below him with three wing nuts 
on it. He slipped out to

the catwalk, scooped up the wing nuts. The other nuts 
obviously had dropped

through the space between the boards of the walk. He 
looked around, studying

what he saw with care, absorbing the implications of 
this place.

It was a troglodyte cave illuminated by dim red light. 
The light came from

globes beneath the catwalk and above it, casting 
enormous shadows on a rock

wall behind the ventilator panel and over stacked 
tiers of cage-walled

compartments. The cages were stuffed with packages 
and reminded Dasein of

nothing more than a public freezer locker.

The richly moist odor of Jaspers was all around him.

A sign to his right down the catwalk labeled this area 
as "Bay 21 - D-1 to

J-5."

Dasein returned his attention to the ventilator, 
restored three of the bolts,

forcing the cover plate back into position. A crease 
remained in the metal

where he had bent it, but he thought it would pass 
casual inspection.

He looked up and down the catwalk.

Where would he ﬁnd one of these compartments he 
could open to examine the

 contents? He crossed to the one opposite the 
ventilator plate, looked for a

door. Could he ﬁnd a compartment left unlocked by a 
careless Santarogan . .

. provided he could ﬁnd the door? There apparently 
was no door on the ﬁrst

compartment he inspected. The lack of a door ﬁlled 
Dasein with unease.

There had to be a door!

He stepped back, studied the line of compartments, 
gasped as he saw the

answer. The fronts of the compartments slid aside in 
wooden channels . . .

and there were no locks. Simple peg latches held 
them. Dasein opened the

front of a compartment, pulled out a small cardboard 
box. Its label read:

"Auntie Beren's spiced crab apples. Ex. April '55." He 
replaced the box,

extracted a salami-shaped package. Its label read: 
"Limburger exposed early

1929." Dasein replaced the limburger, closed the 
compartment. Exposed?

Methodically, Dasein worked his way down the line in 
Bay 21, examining one or

two packages in each compartment. Most of the time 
it was written "Ex" with a

date. The older packages spelled it out. Exposed.

Dasein sensed his mind racing. Exposed. Exposed to 
what? How?

The sound of footsteps on the lower catwalk behind 
him brought Dasein whirling

around, muscles tense. He heard a compartment door 
slide open. Papers

rustled.

Softly, Dasein worked his way along the catwalk away 
from the sound. He

passed steps, one set leading up, one down, hesitated. 
He couldn't be certain

whether he was going deeper into the cave complex 
or out of it. There was

another catwalk above him, a rock ceiling dimly 
visible above that. There

appeared to be at least three tiers of catwalks below 
him.

He chose the steps going up, lifted his head slowly 
above the ﬂoor level of

the next walk, glanced both ways. Empty.

This level was like the one below except for the rock 
ceiling. The rock

appeared to be a form of granite, but with oily brown 
veins.

Moving as silently as he could, Dasein climbed out 
onto the walk, moved back

in the direction of the ventilator listening for the 
person he had heard on

the lower level.

Someone was whistling down there, an idiot tune 
repeated endlessly. Dasein

pressed his back against a cage, peered down through 
the openings in the walk.

There came a scraping of wood against wood. The 
whistling went away to his

left, receded into silence.

That probably was the way out, then. He had heard 
the person down there but

hadn't been able to see him -- a fact which could work 
both ways.

Placing his feet carefully, Dasein moved along the 
walk. He came to a cross

way, peered around it. Empty both ways. The gloom 
appeared a little thicker

to the left.

It occurred to Dasein that up to this point he hadn't 
felt the need to worry

about how he was going to get out of the cave 
complex. He had been too intent

on solving the mystery. But the mystery remained . . . 
and here he was.

I can't just go marching out, he thought. Or can't I?
What could they do to

me?

His throbbing shoulder, memory of the gas jet, the 
knowledge that two previous

 investigators had died in this valley -- these were 
suﬃcient answer to the

question, he thought.

Wood slammed against wood off to the front and 
below. Footsteps pounded along

a catwalk -- at least two pair of feet, possibly more. 
The running stopped

almost directly beneath him. There came a low-
voiced conversation, mostly

unintelligible and sounding like instructions. Dasein 
recognized only three

words -- ". . . back . . ."" . . . away . . ." and a third word 
which set him

in motion running softly down the dim side passage 
to his left.

". . . ventilator . . ."

A man beneath him had said "ventilator" sharply and 
distinctly.

The pounding of feet resumed down there spreading 
out through the catwalks.

Dasein searched frantically ahead for a place to hide. 
There was a sound of

machinery humming somewhere down there. The 
catwalk turned left at about a

tiers below and smaller compartments on each side. 
The walk angled more

sharply to the right and there was only his walk and 
the one below, single

compartments on each side.

He had put himself into a dead-end side passage, 
Dasein realized. Still,

there was the sound of machinery ahead.

His catwalk ended in a set of wooden stairs going 
down. There was no choice;

he could hear someone running behind him.

Dasein went down.

The stairs turned left into a rock passage -- no 
compartments, just the cave.

There was a louvered door on the right, loud sound of 
an electric motor in

there. His pursuer was at the head of the steps above.

Dasein opened the door, slipped through, closed the 
door. He found himself in

a rectangular chamber about ﬁfty feet long, twenty 
feet wide and some ﬁfteen

feet to the ceiling. A row of large electric motors lined 
the left wall, all

of them extending into round metal throats with 
fanblades blurring the air

there. The far wall was one giant metal screen and he 
could feel air rushing

out of it toward the fans.

The right wall was piled high with cardboard cartons, 
sacks and wood boxes.

There was a space between the pile and the ceiling 
and it appeared darker up

there. Dasein scrambled up the pile, crawled along it, 
almost fell into a

space hollowed out of boxes and sacks near the far 
end. He slid into the

hole, found himself on what felt like blankets. His 
hand encountered

something metallic, which groping ﬁngers identiﬁed 
as a ﬂashlight.

The louvered door slammed open. Feet pounded into 
the room. Someone

scrambled up the far end of the pile. A woman's voice 
said: "Nothing up

here."

There came the sound of someone dropping lightly to 
the ﬂoor.

There'd been something familiar about the woman's 
voice. Dasein was willing

to swear he'd heard it before.

A man said: "Why'd you run this way? Did you hear 
something?"

 "I thought so, but I wasn't sure," the woman said.

"You sure there's nothing on top of the stores?"

"Look for yourself."

"Doggone, I wish we could use real lights in here."

"Now, don't you go doing something foolish."

"Don't worry about me. Doggone that Jenny anyway, 
getting herself mixed up

with an outsider!"

"Don't pick on Jenny. She knows what she's doing."

"I guess so, but it sure makes a lot of stupid extra 
work, and you know what's

liable to happen if we don't ﬁnd him pretty soon."

"So let's hurry it up."

They went out, closed the door.

Dasein lay quietly absorbing the import of what 
they'd said. Jenny knew what

she was doing, did she? What would happen if they 
didn't ﬁnd him?

It felt good to stretch out on the blankets. His 
shoulder was a steady aching

throb. He brought up the ﬂashlight he'd found here, 
pressed its switch. The

thing produced a dull red glow. The light revealed a 
tight little nest --

blankets, a pillow, a canteen half full of water. He 
drank some of it

thirstily, found it heavy with Jaspers.

He supposed nothing in the cave could escape that 
ﬂavor.

A ﬁt of shivering took over his muscles. The canteen's 
cap rattled as he

dim red light.

Nothing in the cave could escape the Jaspers ﬂavor!

That was it!

Exposed!

Something that could exist in this cave -- a mould or a 
fungus, something

related to mushrooms and dark places, something 
that wouldn't travel . . . a

Jaspers something invaded anything exposed to this 
environment.

But why was it so important to keep this fact secret?
Why the dogs and the

guards?

He heard the louvered door open, close, turned off 
the red ﬂashlight.

Someone ran lightly across the rock ﬂoor to a point 
just below him.

"Gilbert Dasein!" a voice hissed at him.

Dasein stiffened.

"It's Willa Burdeaux," the voice hissed. "It's Willa, 
Jenny's friend. I know

you're in there, in the place Cal made for us. Now, you 
listen. Arnulf will

be right back from the upper end and I have to be out 
of here before that.

 You don't have much time. There's too much Jaspers 
in here for someone who's

not used to it. You're breathing it and it's going in 
your pores and

everything."

What the hell? Dasein thought.

He crawled up out of the nest, leaned out and looked 
down at Willa Burdeaux's

dark, harshly-beautiful face.

"Why can't I take too much of it?" he asked.

"Hasn't that Jenny explained anything to you?" she 
whispered. "Well, no time

now. You have to get out of here. Do you have a 
watch?"

"Yes, but . . . "

"There's no time to explain; just listen. Give me ﬁfteen 
minutes to get

Arnulf out of the way. He's such a prig. In ﬁfteen 
minutes you come out of

this room. Turn left the way you came in, but go 
down instead of up. Take

the second crossway to your left and after that keep 
to your left. It's easy

to remember. Left turns only. You want the ramp out 
of Bay 2-G. I've left

the ramp's door unlocked. Lock it after you. It'll be 
about twenty steps

straight in front of that door to an emergency gate. 
The gate's unlocked. Go

able to make that on your own."

"Apparently, you've been rather busy."

"I was in the oﬃce when they sounded the alarm.
Now, get down out of sight

and do just what I told you."

Dasein ducked back into the nest.

Presently, he heard the door open and close. He 
looked at his wristwatch:

ﬁve minutes to three a.m. Where had the time gone?

Could he believe Willa Burdeaux? he wondered.

There'd been something about that black pixie face, 
an intensity . . . Dasein

thought of compartments loaded with valuable food, 
all unlocked. Why should

this evidence of a basic honesty alarm him? Perhaps 
it wasn't honesty. Fear

could control behavior, too.

Could he believe Willa? Did he have a choice?

So this was a trysting place Cal Nis had made for the 
two of them. Why not?

People in love usually wanted to be alone together.

Jenny knew what she was doing.

What did she know?

His mind felt clear and oiled, working at a furious 
pace. What was the danger

in exposure to Jaspers? He thought of that dull-eyed 
line he'd glimpsed up

there in the Co-op.

Was that what happened?

Dasein fought down a seige of trembling.

 Ten minutes after three, the moment of decision, 
came more quickly than he

wanted. He had no choice and knew it. His shoulder 
had gone stiff and there

was a painful burning along his scraped chest and 
stomach. Favoring his

shoulder, Dasein eased himself down off the storage 
pile.

The ramp door was unlocked as Willa had promised. 
He let himself out into a

darkened side yard, hesitated. The stars overhead 
looked cold and close. It

was cold. He felt goose pimples along his arms. There 
was no sign of a guard

out here, but he glimpsed lights and motion far up on 
the hillside.

Lock the ramp door, she'd said.

Dasein locked the door, darted across the yard. It was 
a narrow gate in the

chain fence. The hinges creaked and he thought the 
latch unnaturally loud.

There was a hasp and padlock. He closed the lock.

A narrow path led along the fence to the road. There 
was the Inn across the

way -- dark, but inviting. A dim yellow light glowed 
through the double

doors. Using the light as a beacon, Dasein limped 
down the path and across to

the Inn.

The lobby was empty, most of its lights turned off.
There was the sound of

snoring from the switchboard room behind the desk.

Dasein slipped quietly across the lobby, up the stairs 
and down the hall to

his room.

The key -- had he turned it in or left it in the truck? No 
. . . here it was

in his pocket. He opened the door softly, stepped into 
the darkness of his

room. He'd spent only one night in this room but it 
suddenly was a haven.

The truck! It was still up there on the road to 
Porterville. The hell with

it. He'd hire a ride up tomorrow and drive it down.

That Willa Burdeaux! Why had she done this?

Dasein began slipping out of his clothes. He wanted 
nothing more than a hot

shower and bed. It was slow work undressing in the 
dark, but he knew a light

might tell someone what time he'd returned.

What difference does that make? he asked himself. 
His clothing, torn, smeared

with dirt, still stinking of the cave, was evidence 
enough of where he'd been

and what he'd done.

Abruptly, he felt he no longer could sneak around.

Angry at himself, he turned on the light.

Directly ahead of him on the bedstand was a bottle of 
beer with a note

attached to it. Dasein lifted the note, read it: "This isn't 
much, but it's

all I could get. You'll need it in the morning. I'll call 
Jenny and tell her

you're all right. -- Willa."

Dasein picked up the bottle, looked at the label. There 
was a blue stamp on

it: "Exposed January 1959."

 Chapter 5

A steady, loud pounding invaded Dasein's dream.

He felt he was trapped inside a giant drum. 
Reverberations beat through his

brain. Each drumbeat became a stab of pain along his 
temples, through his

shoulders, across his stomach.

He was the drum! That was it!

His lips were dry. Thirst spread a scabby dustiness 
over his throat. His

tongue was thick, fuzzy.

My God! Would the pounding never stop?

He awoke feeling he'd been caught in a caricature of 
a hangover. The blankets

were twisted around his body, immobilizing his 
injured shoulder. The shoulder

felt better, and that was a relief, but something had to 
be done about his

head and that insane pounding.

His free arm was asleep. It tingled painfully when he 
tried to move it.

Sunlight ﬁltered through a tear in the curtain on the 
room's single window.

One thin ray outlined in dust motes stabbed across 
the room. It dazzled him,

hurt his eyes.

That damned pounding!

"Hey! Open up in there!"

It was a masculine voice from outside.

Dasein felt he knew that voice. Marden, the CHP 
captain? What was he doing

here at this hour. Dasein lifted his wristwatch, stared 
at it -- ten

twenty-ﬁve.

The pounding resumed.

"Just a minute!" Dasein shouted. His own voice sent 
waves of pain through his

head. Blessedly, the pounding stopped.

Dasein gasped with relief, twisted himself out of the 
blankets, sat up. The

room's walls began going around and around in a 
mad circle.

For the love of heaven! he thought. I've heard of 
hangovers, but nothing like

this.

"Open the door, Dasein."

That deﬁnitely was Marden.

"Right with you," Dasein rasped.

What's wrong with me? he wondered. He knew he'd 
had no more than the beers

with dinner. They couldn't possibly explain his 
present malaise. Could it be

 delayed reaction to the gas?

Beer.

There was something about beer.

Slowly so as not to dislocate his neck, Dasein turned 
his head toward the

bedstand. Yes, there was a beer. Willa had 
thoughtfully provided an opener.

He levered the cap off the bottle, drank hungrily.

Waves of soothing relief spread out from his stomach. 
He put down the empty

bottle, stood up. Hair of the dog. he thought. Hair of 
the Jaspers dog.

The bottle was redolent with the mushroom tang.

"Are you all right in there, Dasein?"

To hell with you, mister, Dasein thought. He tried to 
take a step, was

rewarded with instant nausea and a wave of 
dizziness. He leaned against the

wall breathing slowly, deeply.

I'm sick, he thought. I've caught something.

The beer felt as though it had begun to boil in his 
stomach.

"Open this door, Dasein! Now!"

All right -- all right, Dasein thought. He stumbled to 
the door, unlocked it,

stepped back.

The door was ﬂung open to reveal Al Marden in 
uniform, the captain's bars

glistening at his neck. His visored cap was pushed 
back to reveal a sweaty

band of red hair.

"Well," he said. "Haven't we been the busy one?" He 
stepped into the room,

closed the door. He carried something round and 
chromed in his left hand -- a

thermos. What the devil was he doing here at this 
hour with a thermos? Dasein

wondered.

One hand against the wall to steady himself, Dasein 
made his way back to the

bed, sat on the edge.

Marden followed.

"I hope you're worth all this trouble," he said.

Dasein looked up at the narrow, cynical face, 
remembering the glimpse he'd had

of the high-wheeled bush buggy wheeling down the 
road out there with Marden

steering, and the dogs beside him. That had been a 
proper setting for this

man. There was an elevated look about him, a

peering-down-at-the-world's-stupidity. What was it 
about him? Was it the

Santaroga look? But what had the Porterville deputies 
seen, then? What had

the man in the Chrysler seen.

Do I look that way? Dasein wondered.

"I brought you some coffee," Marden said. "You look 
like you could use it."

He opened the thermos, poured steaming amber 
liquid into the cup-top.

A rich smell of Jaspers rode on the steam from the 
cup. The smell set Dasein

trembling, sent a pulsing, throbbing ache through his 
head. The ache seemed

 timed to a wavering reﬂection on the surface of the 
coffee as Marden

presented it.

Dasein took the cup in both hands, tipped his head 
back and drank with a

gulping eagerness. The coffee produced the same 
sensation of soothing as the

beer.

Marden reﬁlled the cup.

Dasein held it beneath his nose, inhaled the Jaspers 
rich steam. His headache

began to fade. There was a hunger in him for the 
coffee that he realized went

beyond the cravings from a hangover.

"Drink up," Marden said.

Dasein sipped the coffee. He could feel it settling his 
stomach, his mind

coming alert. Marden no longer appeared superior -- 
only amused.

Why was a hangover amusing?

"The Jaspers, that's what gave me the screaming 
fantods, isn't it?" Dasein

asked. He returned the cup.

Marden concentrated on restoring the cap to the 
thermos.

"A person can get too much of it, eh?" Dasein 
persisted, recalling what Willa

Burdeaux had said.

"Overexposure too soon can cause a hangover," 
Marden admitted. "You'll be all

right when you get used to it."

"So you came up to play the good Samaritan," Dasein 
said. He could feel the

beginnings of anger.

"We found your truck up on the Porterville road and 
got worried about you,"

Marden said. "You can't abandon a vehicle like that."

"I didn't abandon it."

"Oh? What'd you do?"

"I went for a walk."

"And caused one helluva lot of trouble," Marden said. 
"If you wanted a tour

of the Co-op and the storage caves, all you had to do 
was ask."

"And I'd have had a nice safe guided tour."

"Any kind of tour you wanted."

"So you came up to arrest me."

"Arrest you? Don't talk stupid."

"How'd you know where I was?"

Marden looked at the ceiling, shook his head. "You're 
all alike, you young

folks," he said. "That Willa's too damn' romantic, but 
she doesn't lie worth

git all. None of us do, I guess." He turned his glance 
full of cynical

amusement on Dasein. "You feeling better?"

 "Yes!"

"Aren't we the intense one." He pursed his lips. "By 
the way, we broke into

your truck and hot-wired it to drive it down. It's 
parked out front."

"Gee, thanks."

Dasein looked down at his hands. Anger and 
frustration twisted through him.

He knew Marden wasn't a ﬁt object for this anger . . . 
nor Jenny . . . nor

Piaget . . . No person or thing presented itself to him 
as an object for

anger -- yet the emotion remained. He trembled with 
it.

"You sure you're all right?" Marden asked.

"Yes, I'm all right!"

"Okay, okay," Marden murmured. He turned away, 
but not before Dasein saw the

smile forming on his lips.

The smile, not the man, brought Dasein's anger to 
focus. That smile! It

embodied Santaroga -- self-satisﬁed, superior, 
secretive. He jumped to his

feet, strode to the window, whipped up the curtain.

Blazing sunshine on a ﬂower garden, a small stream, 
and beyond that the ﬂat

with its broken edge dropping down into the 
redwoods. It was a day of brassy

heat with the oaks sitting motionless, sun-drenched 
on the hillsides. He

counted three plumes of smoke hanging on the still 
air, glimpsed a serpentine

track of blue-green river in the distance.

This vale of pastoral beauty that was Santaroga, this 
was a ﬁtting object for

his anger, Dasein decided: Santaroga, this island of 
people in the

wilderness. He pictured the valley as a swarming 
place behind a facade like a

pyramid: solid, faceless, enduring. In there, behind 
the facade, Santaroga

did something to its people. They lost personal 
identity and became masks for

something that was the same in all of them.

He sensed a one-pointedness here such that every 
Santarogan became an

extension of every other Santarogan. They were like 
rays spreading out from a

pinhole in a black curtain.

What lay behind the black curtain?

There, he knew, was the real substance against which 
his anger was directed.

The valley existed within an evil enchantment. The 
Santarogans had been

trapped by a black sorcery, transmuted into the 
faceless pyramid.

With this thought, Dasein's anger faded. He realized 
he, too, had a place in

this pyramid. It was like an ecological pyramid 
planted in the wilderness

except for this gnome-change. The base of the 
pyramid had been ﬁrmly

imbedded in the earth, extending roots deep into a 
moist, dank cave.

He could see the shape of his problem.

One thing set this valley apart -- Jaspers. It brought 
Santarogans back as

though they were addicted. He thought of his own 
craving reaction. It was

the substance of the cave, the thing the pores drank 
and the lungs inhaled.

Marden stirred in the room behind him.

 Dasein turned, looked at the man.

Santarogans became extensions of that cave and its 
substance. There was a

drug-effect at work in this valley. It was a material in 
a way similar to

lysergic acid diethylamide -- LSD.

How did it work? he wondered.

Did it shift the serotonin balance?

Dasein felt his mind working with remarkable clarity, 
sorting out

possibilities, setting up avenues of investigation.

"If you're feeling all right now, I'll be running along," 
Marden said.

"Before you get any more harebrained ideas for night 
excursions, let us know,

huh?"

"Well, naturally," Dasein said.

For some reason, this provoked a ﬁt of laughter in 
Marden. He was still

laughing as he let himself out.

"To hell with you, wise-guy Santarogan," Dasein 
muttered.

He turned back to the window.

himself. What was the Jaspers effect on himself? An 
impression of heightened

awareness? Could it be an actual heightened 
awareness in the pattern of LSD?

This would require careful evaluation. What was the 
source of the

morning-after symptoms? Withdrawal?

He began to focus on the Santaroga personality 
pattern, their alertness, their

abrupt mannerisms, their apparent honesty. If 
awareness actually were

heightened, would that explain the honest 
advertising? Could you be anything

but bluntly honest with a wide-awake human being?

Avenues of attack opened all around. Barriers 
collapsed like sand walls

before the waves of his new awareness, but the 
exposed vistas contained their

own mysteries. Jenny.

Again, Dasein recalled how she'd been dropped from 
the university's attempt to

evaluate LSD. No apparent reaction. The ones 
running the tests had wanted to

explore this phenomenon, but Jenny had refused. 
Why? She'd been written off,

of course -- "a curious anomaly." The evaluation had 
gone on to its natural

end in the publicity ﬁasco. Jenny.

Dasein went into the shower, humming to himself, his 
mind busy. His shoulder

felt remarkably improved in spite of the way he'd 
mistreated it during the

night . . . or perhaps because of that -- the exercise.

I'll call Jenny, he thought, as he dressed. Maybe we 
can meet for lunch.

The prospect of seeing Jenny ﬁlled him with a 
wondering delight. He sensed

his own protectiveness toward her, the mutual 
emotional dependence. Love,

that was what it was. It was a sensation that wouldn't 
submit to analysis.

It could only be experienced.

Dasein sobered.

 His love for Jenny required that he save her from the 
Santaroga enchantment.

She'd have to help him whether she knew it or not, 
whether she wanted it or

not.

A brisk double knock sounded on his door.

"Come in," he called.

Jenny slipped in, closed the door.

She wore a white dress, red scarf, red handbag and 
shoes. The outﬁt made her

skin appear dark and exotic. She paused a moment at 
the door, her hand

resting lightly on the knob, eyes wide and probing.

"Jen!" he said.

All in one swift dash, she was across the room into his 
arms, hugging him.

Her lips were warm and soft on his. There was a 
clean spicy smell about her.

She pulled back, looked up at him. "Oh, darling, I was 
so frightened. I kept

imagining you driving off a cliff somewhere, your car 
wrecked, you in the

wreckage. Then Willa called. Why would you do such 
a thing?"

He put a ﬁnger on the tip of her nose, pressed gently.
"I'm perfectly

capable of taking care of myself."

"I don't know about that. Do you feel all right now? I 
met Al in the lobby.

He said he brought you some Jaspers coffee."

"I've had my hair of the dog."

"Your hair of . . . Oh. But why would you . . ."

"But me no buts. I'm sorry I worried you, but I have a 
job to do."

"Oh, that!"

"I'm going to do the job I'm being paid to do."

"You gave your word, I suppose?"

"That's only part of it."

"Then they'll have to get something from you."

"More than something, Jenny, m'love."

She grinned. "I like it when you call me your love."

"Stop changing the subject."

"But it's such a nice subject."

"Agreed. Another time, though, eh?"

"How about tonight?"

"You're a forward wench, aren't you."

"I know what I want."

 Dasein found himself studying her there in his arms. 
What had Willa said?

"Jenny knows what she's doing." Whatever it was, he 
couldn't doubt her love

for him. It was there in her eyes and her voice, a 
radiance and vivacity that

couldn't be mistaken.

Still, there was the certainty two men had died on this 
investigation --

accidents! The fading pain in his shoulder and its 
implications couldn't be

doubted either.

"You're so quiet suddenly," Jenny said, looking up at 
him.

He took a deep breath. "Can you get me some 
Jaspers?"

"I almost forgot," she said. She pulled away, 
rummaged in her handbag. "I

brought you a square of cheese and some wheat 
crackers for your lunch today.

They're from Uncle Larry's locker. I knew you'd need 
it because . . ." She

broke off, produced a sack from the bag. "Here they 
are." She proffered a

brown paper sack, stared at him, "Gil! You said 
Jaspers." There was a wary

look in her eyes.

"Why not?" He took the bag. She was reluctant to part 
with it, her ﬁngers

trailing across the paper as he pulled it away.

"I don't want to trick you, darling," she said.

"Trick me? How?"

She swallowed and her eyes glistened with unshed 
tears. "We gave you an

awfully strong dose last night, and then you went 
down into that stupid cave.

Was it bad this morning?"

"I had quite a hangover, if that's what you mean."

"I can just barely remember how it was when I was a 
child," she said. "When

you're growing up, your body changing, there are 
some severe metabolic

adjustments. At the school, when I took part in that 
crazy LSD test, I had a

hangover the next morning." She ran a ﬁnger along 
his forehead. "Poor dear.

I'd have been here this morning, but Uncle Larry 
needed me in the clinic.

Anyway, he said you weren't in any danger; Willa got 
you out in time."

"What would've happened if she hadn't got me out?"

Her eyes clouded as though with pain.

"What?" he insisted.

"You mustn't think about that."

"About what?"

"It can't happen to you anyway. Uncle Larry says 
you're the wrong type."

"Wrong type for what -- turning into a zombie like 
those I saw in the Co-op?"

"Zombies? What're you talking about?"

He described what he'd glimpsed through the wide 
door.

"Oh . . . them." She looked away from him, her 
manner suddenly distant.

 "Gilbert, are you going to put them in your report?"

"Maybe."

"You mustn't."

"Why not? Who are they? What are they?"

"We take care of our own," she said. "They're useful 
members of the

community."

"But not quite all there."

"That's right." She looked up at him with a ﬁerce 
intensity. "If the state

takes them over, they'll be moved out of the valley -- 
most of them. That can

be very bad for Santarogans, Gilbert. Believe me."

"I believe you."

"I knew you would."

"They're the failures, eh? The ones Jaspers ruined."

"Gilbert!" she said. Then -- "It's not what you think. 
Jaspers is . . .

something wonderful. We call it a 'Consciousness 
Fuel.' It opens your eyes

and your ears, it turns on your mind, it . . ." She broke 
off, smiled at him.

"But you already know."

"I know what it appears to be," he said. He glanced at 
the bag in his hand.

What did he hold here? Was it a paradisical gift for all 
mankind or something

out of hell? Was it the evil enchantment he'd pictured, 
or an ultimate

freedom?

"It's wonderful and you know it by now," Jenny said.

"Then why aren't you all shouting it from the 
rooftops?" he demanded.

"Gil!" She stared at him accusingly.

Abruptly, Dasein thought of what Meyer Davidson's 
reaction would be . . .

men.

What he held here in his hand was their enemy.

To those men in their oddly similar dark suits, their 
cold eyes weighing and

dismissing everything, the people of this valley were 
a foe to be defeated.

As he thought of it, Dasein realized all customers 
were "The Enemy" to these

men. Davidson and his kind were pitted against each 
other, yes, competitive,

but among themselves they betrayed that they were 
pitted more against the

masses who existed beyond that inner ring of 
knowledgeable ﬁnancial

operation.

The alignment was apparent in everything they did, 
in their words as well as

their actions. They spoke of "package grab-level" and 
"container ﬂash time"

-- of "puff limit" and "acceptance threshold." It was an 
"in" language of

militarylike maneuvering and combat. They knew 
which height on a shelf was

most apt to make a customer grab an item. They 
knew the "ﬂash time" -- the

shelf width needed for certain containers. They knew 
how much empty air could

be "puffed" into a package to make it appear a greater 
bargain. They knew how

 much price and package manipulation the customer 
would accept without jarring

him into a "rejection pattern."

And we're their spies, Dasein thought. The 
psychiatrists and psychologists --

all the "social scientists" -- we're the espionage arm.

He sensed the vast maneuvering of these armies, the 
conspiracy to maintain

"The Enemy" in a sleepy state of unawareness -- 
malleable. Whatever the

leaders of these armies did among themselves to each 
other, they maintained

their inner code. No one betrayed the real war.

Dasein never before viewed the market-study world 
in quite this way. He

thought of the brutal honesty in Santaroga's 
advertising, crumpled the neck of

the paper bag in his hand.

What was this stuff doing to him? He turned away 
from Jenny to hide a surge

of anger. It was making him imagine crazy things! 
Armies!

There was no way to avoid Jaspers here in Santaroga.
The investigation

required that he not avoid it.

I must insinuate myself into their minds, he reminded 
himself. I must live

their life, think as they think.

He saw the situation then as Jenny and her fellow 
Santarogans must see it.

They were involved in a form of guerrilla warfare. 
They had achieved a way of

life which wouldn't be tolerated by the outside. 
Santaroga offered too much

of a threat to the oligarchs of the money-industry 
world. The only hope for

Santaroga lay in isolation and secrecy.

Shout it from the rooftops, indeed. No wonder she'd 
snapped at him in

surprise.

Dasein turned, looked at Jenny standing there 
patiently waiting for him to

think his way through the maze. She smiled 
encouragingly at him and he

suddenly saw all Santarogans through her. They were 
the buffalo Indians,

people who needed to get away by themselves, to live 
and hunt in the way their

instincts told them. The trouble was, they lived in a 
world which couldn't be

culturally neutral. That world out there would keep 
trying to make people --

all people -- be everywhere alike.

Straddling both worlds, thinking with the drug and 
thinking with his memories

of the outside, he felt a deep sadness for Jenny. 
Santaroga would be

destroyed -- no doubt of that.

"I'm sure you see it," Jenny said.

"Jaspers would be equated with LSD, with narcotics," 
he said. "It'd be

legislated against as the Santaroga hashish. You'd be 
sneered out of

existence, destroyed."

"I never doubted you'd understand once you were 
exposed," she said. She moved

into his arms, leaned against him, hugging him 
ﬁercely. "I trusted you, Gil.

I knew I couldn't be wrong about you."

He couldn't ﬁnd words to answer her. A profound 
sadness held him. Exposed.

"You'll still have to do your report, of course," she 
said. "It wouldn't

solve anything if you failed. They'd just ﬁnd 
somebody else. We're getting

kind of tired of it."

 "Yes -- I'll have to do a report," he said.

"We understand."

Her voice sent a shudder through Dasein. "We 
understand." That was the We

which had searched his bag, had almost killed him . . . 
had actually killed

two men.

"Why are you shivering?" Jenny asked.

"Just a chill," he said.

He thought then of the thing he had sensed lurking 
just beyond his awareness,

that restless, urgently peering ancient being which 
had risen within his

consciousness like the neck of a dinosaur. It was still 
there, studying,

waiting to judge.

"I only work half a day today," Jenny said. "Some of 
my friends have arranged

a picnic at the lake. They want to meet you." She 
leaned back, peered up at

him. "I want to show you off, too."

"I . . . don't think I can go swimming," he said.

"Your poor shoulder," she said. "I know. But the lake's 
beautiful this time

of year. We'll have a bonﬁre tonight."

Which We is that? he asked himself.

"It sounds wonderful," he said.

And he wondered as he spoke why his stomach 
knotted with a congestion of fear.

He told himself it wasn't Jenny he feared -- not this 
warm and beautiful

woman. It might be goddess-Jenny he feared, though . 
. . this was a thought

that rose in his mind to leer at him.

Dasein sneered at himself then, thinking that he read 
too much into every

nuance of this valley and its people. That was the 
psychoanalyst's disease,

of course -- seeing everything through a haze of 
reasoning.

"Get some rest and meet me downstairs at noon," 
Jenny said.

She pulled away, went to the door, turned there to 
stare at him. "You're

acting very odd, Gil," she said. "Is something 
bothering you?"

Her voice carried a weighted probing that brought 
Dasein to sudden alertness.

This wasn't the spontaneous Jenny worried about the 
man she loved. This was

an . . . an observer probing for something personally 
dangerous.

"Nothing food and rest won't cure," he said. He tried 
to sound bantering,

knew he'd failed.

"I'll see you in a little while," she said, still in that 
distant tone.

Dasein watched the door close behind her. He had the 
feeling he'd been

playing to a special kind of camera, one that pursued 
irrelevancies. An

untethered thought wove through his mind: . . . the 
exposure of personality,

method and character.

Who wants to expose my personality, method and 
character? Dasein asked

 himself. He felt this was a dangerous question, full of 
charge and

countercharge.

The sack of food felt heavy in his hand. Dasein stared 
down at it, aware of

his hunger, equally aware of the threat in this 
package. Did the Jaspers

create irreversible change?

He tossed the sack onto his bed, went to the door, 
peered out into the hall.

Empty. He stepped out, looked down the expanse of 
wall that concealed the TV

room. It took a moment for him to realize something 
was wrong with that wall.

It was like a dislocation of reality -- a door occupied a 
space in that wall

where no door had been.

As though pulled by strings, Dasein went to the door, 
stared at it. The door

was framed in the same worn, polished wood that 
framed the other doors.

Well-preserved age, that was the effect. This was a 
door that had always been

here, that's what it said. The number plate carried a 
slight dent and a touch

of tarnish at the edges where the maids' polishing 
rags had missed. There was

a patina of long wear about the handle.

Dasein shook his head. He was tempted to try the 
door, resisted. He found

himself frightened by what might lie beyond. 
Normalcy -- a bed, a bath, desk

and chairs -- that would be the worst thing of all. The 
number plate -- 262

-- fascinated him. He toyed with the eerie sensation 
that he'd seen it before

. . . right here. The door was too ordinary.

Abruptly, Dasein whirled back and into his room, 
threw open his window. A

look through the windows from the porch roof would 
solve the mystery. He

started to climb out, stopped. A man stood on a rose-
bordered walk beyond the

giant oak tree.

Dasein recognized Winston Burdeaux. He was 
pumping a hand sprayer that sent

dust over the roses. As Dasein stared, Burdeaux 
looked up, waved.

Later, Dasein told himself. I'll look later.

He nodded to Burdeaux, withdrew, pulled the curtain.

So they'd cut a door through that wall, had they?
What were they trying to

do? Destroy his sense of reality?

The sack on the bed caught Dasein's attention. It drew 
him across the room.

He saw it as an ultimate temptation. It was more than 
food. There was a

hunger in him only the Jaspers could fulﬁll. Dasein 
felt abruptly that he

was like Tennyson's Ulysses, his aim "to strive, to seek, 
to ﬁnd and not to

yield." Still, the thought of the Jaspers in that sack 
drew his hand. He

felt the paper tear beneath his ﬁngers.

Jaspers cheese. That tantalizing aroma lifted from it. 
With a feeling of

spiritual helplessness, he found a bite of the cheese in 
his mouth. The food

radiated a sensation of warmth as it went down his 
throat. He continued

eating, hypnotized by his own actions.

Slowly, he sank back onto the bed, leaned against the 
pillow, gazed up at the

ceiling. The wood grain in a beam wavered like the 
lifting and falling of the

sea. It ﬁlled him with awe, undiluted and terrifying. 
He felt his own

consciousness stood as a barrier opposing the 
external world, and that

external world was a stupid mechanism without 
feeling or compassion.

His own identity became a narrowing beam of light, 
and he sensed a massive,

 streaming unconsciousness growing larger, larger . . . 
larger . . . building

up an intolerable weight.

It's a psychedelic, he told himself. Don't let go. But 
there was no stopping

the movement now. His awareness, exploding up and 
out, riding a geyser of

sense revelation, lifted him into a state of ﬂoating 
consciousness. There

was no inwardness now, only a timeless sense of 
being that existed without

anxiety. Dasein found himself reveling in the 
sensation. His mind quested.

Where are the children? he asked himself. It was a 
shocking sense of

revelation for him to realize he'd seen no children or 
schools in the valley.

Where are the children? Why haven't any of the other 
investigators remarked

on this? The other investigators are dead, he 
reminded himself. Death --

that was an oddly nonfrightening thought. He felt he 
had risen through a

consciousness decompression into a zone beyond all 
power struggles. The

valley, the Jaspers, had become a condition of his 
being. The room full of

probing sunlight, the leaves of the oak outside his 
window -- all was beauty,

innocent, uncluttered. The external universe had 
become translated into a

part of himself, wise, compassionate.

Dasein marveled at the feeling. The universe out 
there -- it was as though he

had just created that universe. Nama-Rupa, he 
thought. I am Nama-Rupa --

name and form, creator of the universe in which I 
live.

The pain of his injured shoulder occupied his drifting 
attention momentarily.

Pain, a brief crisis, something against which to project 
memories of pleasure.

The pain faded.

There came the sound of tires on gravel. He heard a 
bird singing. The sounds

were a moire playing against his awareness. They 
danced and scintillated. He

remembered Jenny's probing stare. This was an ugly, 
shocking memory that

jerked him up short, compressed him. He found 
diﬃculty breathing. There

was a sensation that he had been caught up in history, 
but it was a kind of

history he'd never experienced, peopled by goddesses 
and creatures of

terrifying powers. It was a history moving at an 
astonishing speed, defying

all preconceived notions of slowness. It was like a 
series of events that he

couldn't separate or distinguish. They ﬂashed across 
his consciousness,

leaving him irrevocably changed.

The Jaspers, he thought. I cannot return . . . to . . . 
what . . . I was . .

. before.

Tears rolled down his cheeks.

He thought of the way his bag had been searched. A 
sob shook him. What did

they want?

Dasein found himself believing there were demons 
around him, cunning, seeking

his blood and being, hungry for his soul. They 
gibbered beyond the charmed

circle of his lonely awareness. The sensation, 
primitive as a witch dance,

refused to leave. They were robots, automata with 
grimacing malleable faces

and headlight eyes.

He began to tremble, knew he was perspiring heavily, 
but it was a distant

sensation, something happening to a foreign person.

Head whirling, Dasein heaved himself off the bed, 
lurched to his feet,

stumbled across the room. At the wall, he turned, 
stumbled back -- forth and

back . . . back and forth. No hiding place existed for 
him. Sunlight

streaming in the window took on grotesque forms -- 
lizards with human faces,

 silvery gnomes, insects with clock-face wings

He slumped to the ﬂoor, clawed at the rug. A red 
braided pattern extruded

claws that reached for him. He retreated to the bed, 
fell across it. The

ceiling undulated with inverted waves.

Somewhere, someone played a piano -- Chopin.

Dasein felt abruptly that he was the piano. The 
sounds struck a crystal

brilliance through him, plucking out his anguish. 
Glaring white clarity began

to seep over him. He grew aware his clothes were 
soaked with perspiration.

His palms were slippery. He sensed he had come a 
long distance through a

dangerous passage. The journey had leeched all 
strength from him.

But he saw the room now with an uncluttered 
innocence. The ceiling beams were

objects to be understood, their grain receding back 
into trees . . . to

seedlings . . . to seeds . . . to trees. Every artifact that 
met his vision

extended into past and future for him. Nothing 
remained static. All was

motion and he was a part of that motion. Waves of 
sleep began creeping from

the back of his mind -- higher . . . higher . . . higher. 
Sleep enveloped

him.

In the darkness of his sleep, something laughed and 
laughed and laughed and

laughed . . .

Dasein awoke with a feeling he'd been asleep for a 
long time -- perhaps a

lifetime. A chuckle lifted from his throat. He heard 
the noise coming from

himself as from a stranger and it frightened him. A 
glance at his wristwatch

told him he'd been asleep more than two hours.

Again, the stranger-chuckle teased his throat. He 
pushed himself off the bed,

wondering at his weakness. His shoulder felt better, 
though, the pain

diminishing to a dull ache. A rap sounded on his door. 
"Yes?" Dasein called.

"It's Win Burdeaux, sir. Miss Jenny asked me to 
remind you she'll be here for

you in about a half hour."

"Oh . . . thank you."

"That's all right, sir. Hope you had a nice nap." Dasein 
stood staring at

the door for a moment. How did Burdeaux know I 
was asleep? Perhaps I snored.

No further sound came from the hall, but Dasein 
knew Burdeaux had gone away.

Thoughtful, Dasein stripped out of his wrinkled 
clothes, showered and changed.

He felt angry, frustrated. They were watching him 
every minute. It would be

so easy, he knew, to let his anger become rage. This 
was no time for rage,

though.

He wondered then if there was a season for rage.

A sensation of wetness drew his attention to his right 
hand. He was surprised

to ﬁnd himself still holding a washrag. Innocent thing 
with a green and

white braided edge. He threw it into the bathroom 
where it landed with a wet

slap.

Another rap sounded on his door and he knew it was 
Jenny.

Decision gripped Dasein.

 He strode across the room, threw open the door. She 
stood there in an orange

jumper dress with white blouse, a smile deepening 
the dimple on her left

cheek.

"I'm glad you're ready," she said. "Hurry up or we'll be 
late."

As he allowed her to lead him out and down the 
stairs, Dasein wondered if

imagination had played a trick on him, or had there 
been a brief moment of

worry before she smiled?

Jenny carried on a continuing babble of 
unanswerable conversation as they went

down the stairs, through the lobby onto the porch.

"You'll love the lake this time of year. I wish I could 
spend more time

there. You're not favoring your shoulder as much as 
you did. I'll bet it's

better. Uncle Larry wants you to stop by later for him 
to check you. All the

gang are anxious to meet you. Here they are now."

The gang occupied a stake truck.

Dasein recognized Willa Burdeaux's pixie face in the 
cab. She sat beside a

blonde, rather craggy-faced youth with large innocent 
blue eyes. As he looked

at her, she winked slowly, deliberately. At least a 
dozen couples stood in

man with ﬁerce dark eyes -- Walter Somebody; 
Dasein failed to catch the last

name . . . a set of twin young women, plump with long 
sandy hair, round faces

-- Rachel and Mariella.

Jenny performed the introductions too fast for Dasein 
to catch all the names,

but he did focus on the fact that the young man with 
Willa Burdeaux was her

ﬁance, Cal Nis.

Reaching hands helped him into the back of the truck, 
pulled Jenny up beside

him. There were boxes around the edges for seats. 
Dasein found himself

crowded onto a box with Jenny snuggled beside him. 
He began to absorb the

carnival air of the people around him -- uninhibited 
laughter, bantering

private jokes.

The truck rumbled into motion. Wind whipped them. 
Dasein had an impression

of passing trees, patches of sky, lurching movement . . 
. and the omnipresent

laughter.

It grew on him that he and Jenny, were being 
excluded from the laughter.

Was it a sense of delicacy in the group? Were they 
allowing the stranger time

to acclimate himself?

He tried to see the situation as a psychologist, but his 
own involvement kept

intruding. There was no way to focus his analytical 
eye on details without

ﬁnding his own shadow across the scene. To cap it, 
his injured shoulder

began to ache where Jenny pressed against it. Jenny's 
wind-tossed hair

brushed his face. Each lurch of the truck sent a 
twinge through his shoulder.

The situation began to take on a nightmare quality. 
Jenny stretched up, spoke

into his ear: "Oh, Gil -- I've dreamed of this day . . . 
when you'd be here,

one of us." One of us, Dasein thought. Am I really one 
of them? Walter

Somebody obviously had mistaken Jenny's move 
toward Dasein's ear. He waved

and shouted from across the truck: "Hey! No 
smooching before dark!"

This brought a short burst of laughter from the group, 
but no general shift in

their attention. They continued to look and speak 
around Dasein and Jenny.

 Smooching.

The word sent Dasein's mind into high gear. It was a 
word no longer in common

use outside, a word out of its time and place. On this 
Walter's lips, though,

it had carried the inﬂection of familiarity. It was a 
word they used here in

the valley.

Dasein began to see Santaroga in a new light. They 
were conservatives here in

the true sense of the word. They were clinging to the 
past, resisting change.

He modiﬁed this thought: They resisted some change. 
They were people who

had made a judgment that some things from the past 
should be maintained. This

was what made them foreign. The world outside was 
moving away from them. The

valley had become a preserve for conditions of 
another time.

The truck turned off onto another track through an 
avenue of overhanging

sycamores. Great patches of maple-shaped leaves cast 
a green-gold aura over

their world.

A jolting bump made Dasein wince with pain as Jenny 
lurched against his

shoulder.

The truck emerged, from the sycamores, passed 
through a stand of bull pine

onto a grassy ﬂat that merged into beach sand edging 
a cerulean lake.

Dasein stared out the open rear of the truck, hardly 
aware of the cascade of

people leaping down to the grass, ignoring Jenny's 
urgings that they leave.

Something about this lake -- some sense of familiarity 
-- had struck him with

a feeling of beauty and menace.

A narrow ﬂoating walkway reached out from the 
beach to a ﬂoat and diving

platform -- the wood all dark silver-gray from the sun. 
There were rowboats

tied along one side of the diving ﬂoat. Beauty and 
menace.

The sensation passed and he wondered at himself. He 
was seeing phantoms,

focusing too much inward. "Is it your shoulder?" 
Jenny asked.

"It'll be all right," Dasein said.

He followed her down off the truck, wishing he could 
let himself go, become a

laughing part of this group. They were having fun 
here -- carrying boxes to

tables set under the trees, preparing ﬁres in rock pits. 
Some wandered off

into the trees, returned in bathing suits.

Jenny had attached herself to a group laying out 
picnic lunches on the tables.

Presently, she joined the scampering movement 
toward the water, shedding her

dress to reveal an orange one-piece bathing suit 
beneath. She was a naiad,

limbs ﬂashing brown and lithe in the sun.

She waved to him from the ﬂoat, shouted: "See you in 
a minute, darling!"

Dasein watched her dive into the lake with a feeling 
she was suddenly lost to

him. He experienced an intense jealousy, imagining 
himself a decrepit old man

surrounded by playing children, unable to join them 
in their happiness. He

looked around at lake and verging woods. There was 
a breeze across the water.

The breeze had summer in it, fragrant with grass and 
evergreen needles. He

wished suddenly for some drink with which to salute 
this breeze and day, some

potion that would make him a part of the scene.

Slowly, Dasein walked down to the ﬂoating walk and 
out onto the boards.

There were ﬂeece clouds in the sky, and as he stared 
down at the water, he

 saw those clouds ﬂoating on the lake bottom. Waves 
shattered the illusion.

Jenny swam up, leaned her elbows on the boards. Her 
face all dripping water,

smiling, had never seemed more lovely.

"Darling, why don't you come out to the ﬂoat and sun 
yourself while we swim?"

she asked.

"All right," he said. "Maybe I can scull around in one 
of those boats."

"You go easy on that shoulder or I'll tell Uncle Larry," 
she said. She kicked

away from the walk, swam lazily out toward the ﬂoat.

Dasein followed, making his way through dripping 
swimmers running up and down

the walk. It struck him as odd how this crowd saw 
him but didn't see him.

They made way for him, but never looked at him. 
They shouted across him, but

not to him.

He moved to the ﬁrst boat in the line, untied its 
painter and prepared to get

into it. Jenny was swimming some ﬁfty feet out, a 
slow, smooth crawl that

took her diagonally away from the ﬂoat.

Dasein stood up, moved to step into the boat. As he 
stepped, something pushed

him in the middle of the back. His foot kicked the 
gunwale, thrusting the

boat out into the water. He saw he was going to fall 
into the lake, thought:

Oh, damn! I'll get my clothes all wet. The stern of the 
boat was turning

toward him and he thought of trying to reach for it, 
but his left foot on the

dock slipped in a patch of wet wood. Dasein found 
himself turning sideways

without any control over his motion.

The edge of the boat, seen out of the corner of an eye, 
rushed toward him. He

tried to reach up, but that was the side of his bad 
shoulder. His arm

wouldn't move fast enough.

There was an explosion of blackness in his head. 
Dasein felt himself sinking

into an enveloping cold, soundless, all dark and 
inviting.

A part of his mind screamed: Beauty! Menace!

He thought that an odd combination.

There was a distant ache in his lungs and it was cold -
- terrifyingly cold.

He felt pressure . . . and the cold . . . all distant and 
unimportant.

I'm drowning, he thought.

It was an unexciting thought -- something that 
concerned another person.

They won't see me . . . and I'll drown.

The cold grew more immediate -- wet.

Something turned him violently.

Still, everything remained remote -- all happening to 
that other being which

he knew to be himself, but which could not concern 
him.

Jenny's voice broke on him like a thunderclap: "Help 
me! Please! Someone

help me! Oh, God! Won't someone help me? I love 
him! Please help me!"

He grew aware suddenly of other hands, other voices.

 "All right, Jen. We've got him."

"Please save him!" Her voice carried a sobbing 
intensity.

Dasein felt himself draped across something hard 
that pressed into his

abdomen. Warmth gushed from his mouth. There 
was a blinding, terrible pain

in his chest.

Abruptly, he began to cough -- gasping, the pain 
tearing at his throat and

bronchia.

"He swallowed a lot of water." It was a man's voice, 
almost vacant of

emotion.

Jenny's voice came pleading beside Dasein's ear: "Is 
he breathing? Please

don't let anything happen to him." Dasein felt wetness 
on his neck, and still

Jenny's voice pleading there beside him: "I love him. 
Please save him."

That same unemotional male voice answered: "We 
understand, Jenny."

And another voice, husky, feminine: "There's only one 
thing to do, of

course."

"We're doing it!" Jenny screamed. "Don't you 
understand?"

Even as hands picked Dasein up, began carrying him, 
Dasein wondered: Doing

what?

His coughing had subsided, but the pain in his chest 
remained. It hurt when

he breathed.

Presently, there was grass under his back. Something 
warm and conﬁning was

wrapped around him. It was an oddly womblike 
sensation.

Dasein opened his eyes, found himself staring up at 
Jenny, her dark hair

framed by blue sky. She managed a trembling smile.

"Oh, thank God," she whispered.

Hands lifted his shoulders. Jenny's face went away. A 
cup full of steaming

brown liquid was pressed against his lips. Dasein 
experienced the almost

overpowering smell of Jaspers, felt hot coffee burn 
down his throat.

Immediately, a sense of warmth and well-being began 
to seep outward through

his body. The cup was pulled away, returned when he 
moved his mouth toward

it.

Someone laughed, said something that Dasein 
couldn't quite catch. It sounded

like, "Take a full load." But that didn't make sense and 
he rejected it.

The hands eased him gently back to the grass. That 
vacant masculine voice

said: "Keep him warm and quiet for awhile. He's 
okay."

Jenny's face returned. Her hand stroked his head.

"Oh, darling," she said. "I looked at the dock and you 
were gone. I didn't

see you fall, but I knew. And no one was paying any 
attention. It took me so

long to get there. Oh, your poor head. Such a bruise."

 Dasein felt the throbbing then as though her words 
had turned it on -- a

pulsing ache at the temple and across his ear. A blow 
like that -- shouldn't

I have X-rays? he wondered. How do they know I 
haven't a fractured skull . .

. or concussion?

"Cal says the boat must've been tipping away from 
you as you hit it," Jenny

said. "I don't think you've broken anything."

Pain shot through him as she touched the bruise.

"It's just a bad bruise."

Just a bad bruise! he thought. He was ﬁlled with 
abrupt anger at her. How

could they be so casual?

Still, that feeling of warmth spread out through him, 
and he thought: Of

course I'm all right. I'm young, healthy. I'll heal. And I 
have Jenny to

protect me. She loves me.

Something about this train of thought struck him as 
profoundly wrong then. He

blinked. As though that were the creative mechanism, 
his vision blurred,

resolved into ﬂashes of gemlike light, red, orange, 
yellow, brown, green,

violet, blue light with offshooting crystal shards.

The light resolved into a membranous inward 
sensation, a perception of

perception that reached out through his mind. He 
saw then strong pulses of

his own heart, the tender brain sheathing that rose 
and fell with the pulse,

the damaged area -- just a bruise, skull intact.

Dasein grew aware then why the Santarogans 
showed so little concern for his

injury. They knew the injury through him. If he were 
like them, he would

tell them when he needed help.

Then why didn't they try to rescue me until Jenny 
came? Dasein asked himself.

And the answer lay there to wonder at: Because I 
didn't cry out for help in

my thoughts!

"You shouldn't sleep now, I don't think," Jenny said.

She found his left hand, gripped it. "Isn't there 
something about not

sleeping after a head injury?"

Dasein stared up at her, seeing the dark wings of her 
hair disarrayed from

rescuing him, the way her eyes seemed to touch him, 
so intense was her

concentration. There was dampness on her lashes 
and he felt that he might

look behind her eyes and ﬁnd the way to a magic 
land.

"I love you," he whispered.

She pressed a ﬁnger against his lips. "I know."

I am a Santarogan now, Dasein thought.

He lay there rolling the thought in his mind, ﬁlled by 
this odd awareness

that let him reach out to Jenny even when she 
released his hand and left him

alone there on the grass. There was nothing of 
telepathy in this awareness.

It was more knowledge of mood in those around him. 
It was a lake in which

they all swam. When one disturbed the water, the 
others knew it.

My God! What this Jaspers could do for the world! 
Dasein thought.

 But this thought sent roiling waves through the lake 
of mutual awareness.

There was storm in this thought. It was dangerous. 
Dasein recoiled from it.

He remembered then why he had come here and saw 
the conﬂict from a new

perspective. The people who'd sent him -- what did 
they want? Proof, he

thought.

He found he couldn't focus on what they wanted to 
prove. It was all tied up

with Jersey Hofstedder's car and the blunt Yankee 
insularity of these people.

Jenny's friends were noticing him now, Dasein saw. 
They looked at him --

directly at him. They spoke to him. And when he felt 
he wanted to get up and

go to the big ﬁre they'd built against the evening chill, 
strong hands came

without bidding and helped him. Night fell.

Dasein found himself seated on a blanket beside 
Jenny. Someone was playing a

guitar in the darkness. Moon colored half the lake, 
leaving a great black

stone of night against one side. Wind-wrinkled water 
lapped at the stone and

he felt that if the blackness could only be moved it 
would blaze in light to

reveal fairyland.

Jenny snuggled against him, murmured: "You're 
feeling better. I know it."

He agreed with her silently.

Torches ﬂamed down by the lake -- people securing 
the boats. Someone handed

him a sandwich redolent with Jaspers. He ate, his 
attention on the torches

and the ﬁre -- the trees around them gleaming red, 
grotesque shadows

lurching, dove wings of smoke against the moon. 
Abruptly, Dasein secreted

part of his sandwich in a pocket.

For no reason he could explain, Dasein remembered 
a time shortly after Jenny

had left the school. It had rained. He remembered 
reaching out his window to

feel the rain, seeing the wet sparkle of the lawn 
beneath a window, like a

broken necklace scattered there.

Abruptly, the wind across the lake shifted, stung his 
eyes with smoke. He

swallowed a mouthful of the smoke and it brought 
him to an intense awareness

of the here and now, Jenny beside him . . . waiting.

As he thought about her, she reached up, pulled his 
lips down on hers. It was

a long kiss, full of guitar music, remembered rain and 
the taste of smoke.

How can I ever explain this? Dasein wondered.
Selador would think me mad.

Jenny stirred against him at this thought, stroked his 
neck.

"Let's get married soon," she whispered.

Why not? Dasein asked himself. I'm a Santarogan 
now.

But this thought brought a surge of fear that 
tightened his chest and made

Jenny shiver. She pulled away, stared at him with 
worry in her eyes.

"Everything will be all right," she whispered. "You'll 
see."

The worry remained in her voice, though. And Dasein 
sensed menace in the

night. The guitarist struck a sour note, fell silent.

Dasein saw that moonlight had moved into the black 
area of the lake . . . and

 it revealed no fairyland -- only more lake, more trees.

The night was deﬁnitely cold now.

Once more, Jenny pressed her lips to his.

Dasein knew he still loved her. It was a real thing to 
which he could cling.

But there was no more magic in this night. He felt 
that he had skirted

madness and the thing had left its taint on him.

When she pulled away, he whispered: "I want to 
marry you, Jenny. I love you

. . . but . . . I need time. I need . . ."

"I know, darling," she said. She stroked his cheek.
"Take all the time you

need."

felt the night's coldness then, the stillness of their 
companions.

Abruptly, there was a stirring in the people around 
them. They began moving

toward the truck.

"It's time to go back," Jenny said.

Back where? Dasein asked himself.

Jenny stood up, helped him to his feet. He stumbled in 
a brief spasm of

dizziness. Jenny steadied him.

"Do you want Uncle Larry to look at your head 
tonight?" she asked.

Piaget, Dasein thought. That was the back at which he 
was aimed. Piaget.

They would continue their trade of truths. The 
Jaspers change was forcing it.

I'll see him in the morning, Dasein said.

"Not tonight?"

In my own sweet time, Dasein thought. And he said:
"Not tonight."

The answer seemed to trouble Jenny. She sat barely 
touching him on the ride

back to town.

Chapter 6

When they were gone, leaving Dasein standing alone 
behind his truck in the Inn

yard, he stared up at the darkness of the sky, lost in 
thought. Jenny's

good-night kiss -- strained, trembling -- still tingled on 
his lips. There

was a smell of exhaust gases and oil in the air. From 
somewhere inside the

building came the faint sound of music -- a radio. The 
gravel of the driveway

 felt hard and immediate under his feet.

Slowly, Dasein brought his right hand from his 
pocket, opened it to stare at

the small ball of matter there -- an object indistinctly 
seen in the light

from the Inn sign. Now, there was a strong smell of 
Jaspers around him.

Dasein studied the object in his hand -- a compressed 
ball of bread, cheese

and ham, a bit of one of the sandwiches from the 
picnic.

Did they know I secreted this? he wondered.

He debated going inside and changing his clothes. The 
pants and shirt he'd

worn on the picnic, garments that had been soaked 
and allowed to dry on him,

felt wrinkled and twisted against his body.

Dasein felt that his mind wandered around this 
decision: to change or not to

change, that was the question. The object in his hand 
was more immediate,

though. Selador. Yes, Selador had to get this and 
examine it.

I'm not thinking clearly, Dasein told himself.

He felt torn between extremes, between decisions of 
enormous moment. The head

injury? he wondered. But he trusted the Jaspers-
induced insight that told him

the injury wasn't serious. Still . . . decisions . . .

With intense concentration, Dasein forced himself to 
get into his truck. He

leaned against the steering wheel, put the 
compressed ball of the Jaspers

sandwich on the seat beside him. There was warm 
wetness at his seat and he

pulled his wallet from his hip pocket, felt the water 
trapped in it. The

wallet went beside the bit of sandwich.

Now, Dasein told himself. Now, I will go.

But it was several minutes before he could muster the 
strength of decision to

start the motor and pull out of the parking area and 
onto the road toward

Porterville. He drove slowly, conscious of the blocking 
dullness inhibiting

his motions.

The headlights picked out a wedge of ﬂowing
roadway and bordering trees --

yellow center line, guard rails, driveways. Dasein 
opened his window, leaned

out into the wind trying to clear his head. Now, he 
was on the winding road

up out of the valley and the slowness of his mind 
grew like a deadly weight.

Headlights came toward him, passed.

Dark mass of rock beside the road -- yellow center 
lines, twisting scars of

repair lines on the paving . . . stars overhead . . . He 
came at last to the

notch that led out through the black skeletons of 
burned trees.

Dasein felt something was drawing him back, 
ordering him to turn around and

return to Santaroga. He fought it. Selador had to get 
that bit of food and

analyze it. Duty. Promises. Had to get out to 
Porterville.

Somewhere in his mind, Dasein sensed a looming 
black shape, anonymous,

terrifying. It studied him.

With an inner snapping sensation, Dasein felt his 
mind clear. The thing was

so abrupt he almost lost control of the wheel, swerved 
across the center line

and back, tires squealing.

 The road, the night, the steering wheel, his foot on the 
accelerator -- all

slammed against his senses with a confused 
immediacy. Dasein hit the brakes,

slowed almost to a crawl. Every nerve end yammered 
at him. His head whirled.

Dasein clung to the wheel, concentrated on steering. 
Slowly, his senses

sorted themselves out. He took a deep, trembling 
breath.

Drug reaction, he told himself. Have to tell Selador.

Porterville was the same dull street he had 
remembered -- cars parked at the

tavern, the single light beating down on the darkened 
gas station.

Dasein pulled to a stop beside the telephone booth, 
remembering the deputies

who'd questioned him there, mistaking him for a 
Santarogan. Had they been

premature? he wondered.

He gave the operator Selador's number, waited 
impatiently, tapping his ﬁnger

against the wall. A faint and reedy woman's voice 
came on the line --

"Selador residence."

Dasein leaned into the phone. "This is Gilbert Dasein.
Let me speak to Dr.

Selador."

"I'm sorry. The Seladors are out for the evening. Is 
there a message?"

"Damn!" Dasein stared at the phone. He felt an 
irrational anger at Selador.

It took a conscious effort of logic for Dasein to tell 
himself Selador had no

real reason to hang around the telephone. Life went 
on its normal way back in

Berkeley.

"Is there a message, sir?" the reedy voice repeated.

"Tell him Gilbert Dasein called," Dasein said. "Tell him 
I'm sending him a

package for chemical analysis."

"A package for chemical analysis. Yes sir. Is that all?"

"That's all."

Dasein replaced the receiver on its hook with a 
feeling of reluctance. He

felt abandoned suddenly -- alone up here with no one 
outside really caring

whether he lived or died.

Why not chuck them all? he asked himself. Why not 
marry Jenny, tell the rest

of the world to go to hell?

It was an intensely inviting prospect. He could feel 
himself sinking into

quiet security back in the valley. Santaroga beckoned 
to him with that

security. It was safe there.

That very sense of safety, though, was edged with 
danger. Dasein sensed it .

. . a lurking something in the outer darkness. He 
shook his head, annoyed at

the tricks his mind was playing. The vapors, again!

He returned to the truck, found a jar in the back 
where he'd kept a store of

matches. He dumped out the matches, put in the 
remains of the sandwich,

sealed the jar, packaged it with the remnants of a 
cardboard grocery box and a

scrap of wrapping paper, tied the whole thing with a 
length of ﬁshline and

addressed it to Selador. When it was done, he wrote a 
covering letter on a

page from his notebook, listed his reactions there 
painstakingly -- the drug

effect, the accident at the lake and his own 
impressions of the group . . .

 the wall they threw up to keep him at a distance . . . 
Jenny's terror . . .

It all went into the letter.

The effort of recalling the incidents made his head 
ache where he'd hit the

edge of the boat. He found an envelope in his case, 
addressed the letter and

sealed it.

With a sense of satisfaction, Dasein started up the 
truck, found a dark side

street and parked. He locked the cab, climbed into the 
back and lay down to

wait for morning when the Porterville post oﬃce 
would open.

They won't control the mail over here, he told 
himself. Let Selador get the

sample of Jaspers . . . we'll soon know what it is.

He closed his eyes and his lids became like a movie 
screen for a fantasy --

Jenny cringing, crying out, pleading with him. Selador 
laughing. A gigantic

Dasein ﬁgure stood bound like Prometheus, the eyes 
glazed . . . panting with

exertion . . .

Dasein's eyes popped open.

Waking fantasy!

He was over the hill -- around the bend!

Hesitantly, he closed his eyes. Only darkness . . . but 
there was sound in

this darkness -- Selador laughing.

Dasein pressed his hands over his ears. The sound 
changed to tolling bells,

slow cadence . . . mournful. He opened his eyes. The 
sound stopped.

camper and there was a musty smell. He found his 
sleeping bag, wrapped it

around him, sat there with his eyes open. There were 
cricket sounds outside,

faint creakings in the truck's metal.

Slowly, sleep crept up on him. His eyelids drooped, 
popped open.

How long would it take for the Jaspers effect to wear 
off? he wondered.

Surely, this was drug effect.

His eyes closed.

Somewhere in an echoing box, Jenny whispered: "Oh, 
Gil -- I love you. Gil, I

love you . . ."

He went to sleep with her voice whispering to him.

Chapter 7

 Daylight found Dasein staring up at the camper's 
metal ceiling with a sense of

disorientation. He recognized the ceiling, but couldn't 
locate it in space.

His head and shoulder throbbed. Ceiling . . . familiar 
ceiling.

A car horn honked. It brought him to the present and 
awareness. He threw off

the twisted folds of his sleeping bag, climbed out into 
a gray, overcast day.

His chin felt rough and stubbly. There was a sour 
taste in his mouth.

Two passing schoolboys stared at him, whispering.

I must look a sight, Dasein thought. He looked down 
at his clothes. They

were twisted and wrinkled as though he had gone 
swimming in them and then

slept in them until they dried. Dasein smiled to 
himself, thinking that was

exactly what had happened.

He climbed into the cab, turned around and found 
the main street, drove down

it until he saw the Post Oﬃce sign over the porch of a 
general store.

The postmaster had to ﬁnish selling candy to a girl 
before he could come

around behind his caged counter to weigh Dasein's 
package and letter. The man

was tall, pale with thinning black hair, darting, wary 
blue eyes. He sniffed

once at Dasein, said: "That'll be eighty-four for the 
package and ﬁve for

the letter."

Dasein pushed a dollar bill under the cage.

The man made change, looked once more at the 
package. "What's in the package,

mister?"

"Specimens for analysis at our laboratory," Dasein 
said.

"Oh."

The man didn't appear curious about specimens of 
what. "Any return address?"

he asked.

"Dr. Gilbert Dasein, general delivery, Santaroga," he 
said.

"Dasein," the man said with sudden interest. "Dasein . 
. . seems I got a

package for a Dasein. Just a minute."

He disappeared into the back, returned in a moment 
with a box about a foot

square wrapped neatly and tied with heavy twine. 
Even from a distance, Dasein

recognized Selador's precise script on the address.

Selador writing me here? Dasein wondered.

The air of conspiracy in this gave Dasein the abrupt 
sensation of being

completely transparent to Selador. The man could 
send a package here and know

it would be picked up. Immediately, Dasein told 
himself this was the simplest

thing to ﬁgure -- given the Santaroga Post Oﬃce 
situation as he'd described

it to Selador.

There remained, though, the feeling he was a pawn 
and his every move was known

to the masters of the game.

"Let's see your identiﬁcation," the postmaster said.

Dasein showed it.

 "Sign here," the man said.

Dasein signed, took the package. It felt heavy.

"Funny thing you Santarogans using my Post Oﬃce," 
the postmaster said.

"Something wrong with your own?"

Santarogans . . . plural, Dasein thought. He said: "Is 
some other . . .

Santarogan using your Post Oﬃce?"

"Well -- used to be," the man said. "Negro fellow over 
there . . . Burdeaux,

as I recollect. He used to send some mail from here. 
Got a package here once

from Louisiana. Long time ago that was."

"Oh, yes," Dasein said, not knowing how else to 
acknowledge this information.

"Haven't seen Burdeaux in quite a spell," the 
postmaster mused. "Nice fellow.

Hope he's all right."

"Quite all right," Dasein said. "Well -- thank you." He 
took his package,

went out to the truck.

With a feeling of caution he couldn't explain, Dasein 
left the package

unopened on the seat beside him while he drove east 
on the road to Santaroga

until he found a shady spot in which to pull off.

The box contained a .32 caliber automatic pistol with 
an extra clip and box of

cartridges. Wired to the trigger guard was a note 
from Selador: "Gilbert --

This has been gathering dust in my bureau drawer 
for many years and I'm

probably an old woman for sending it to you, but 
here it is. I think I'm

sending it in the hope you won't have to use it. The 
situation you describe,

however, has ﬁlled me with the oddest sensations of 
disquiet that I can

remember. I hope you're being extremely cautious."

On the reverse side of the note was a scrawled 
postscript: "No news yet on

the investigations you requested. These things move 
slowly. You give me

hope, though, that we'll get the goods on these 
people." It was signed: "S."

Dasein hefted the automatic, fought down an impulse 
to heave it out the

window. The thing embodied ultimate menace. What 
had he said to prompt

Selador to send it? Or was this part of some obscure 
motivational gambit

Selador was setting up?

Could it be a reminder of duty? His bruised head 
ached with thought.

A line in Selador's note came back to him and he 
reread it: ". . . get the

goods on these people."

Is that what I'm supposed to do? Dasein wondered.
Am I to set them up for

prosecution?

He remembered Marden alluding to the reasons an 
investigator had been sent.

Dasein swallowed. Selador's line, read once more, 
looked like a slip. Had

the good doctor tipped his hand? Sending a gun 
wasn't like the man. In fact,

Dasein realized if he'd been asked, he would've said 
Selador wasn't even the

type to own a gun.

What to do with the damn' thing now that he had it?

 Dasein checked it, found the clip full, no cartridge in 
the chamber. He

resisted the impulse to shove it in the glove 
compartment and forget it. If

the truck were searched. . . .

Damn Selador!

Feeling foolish as he did it, Dasein slipped the gun 
into a hip pocket, pulled

his coat over it. He'd settle with Selador later. Right 
now there was Piaget

. . . and Piaget had some answers to give.

Chapter 8

Piaget was in his oﬃce with a patient when Dasein 
arrived. The gaunt, gray

Sarah opened the door, allowed he could wait in the 
living room. With a

grudging show of hospitality, she added that she 
would bring him some coffee

if he wanted it.

With a stomach-gripping pang, Dasein realized he 
was ravenous with hunger. He

wondered if he could mention this fact.

As though she'd read his mind, Sarah said. "I'll bet 
you haven't eaten

breakfast." She looked him up and down. "You look 
like you'd slept in those

clothes. You doctors are all alike. Never care how you 
look."

"As a matter of fact, I haven't eaten," Dasein said.

"You're going to lead Jenny some life," she said. But 
she softened her words

with a smile.

Dasein stared in wonder at a double, whiteboned row 
of false teeth in the

wrinkled face.

"Got a leftover apple roll and some Jaspers cream," 
Sarah said. "Bet you'd

like that."

She turned away, went out through the dining room 
into a glistening white

kitchen, which Dasein glimpsed once through a 
swinging door. The door went

slap-slap behind her.

Dasein thought about that smile, recalled Jenny 
saying Sarah liked him. On

impulse, he followed her into the kitchen.

"Bet you don't like feeding people in the living room," 
he said.

"Feed people wherever they have to be fed," she said.

She put a dish on an oval table beside windows 
looking onto a ﬂower garden

brilliant in the morning sun. "Sit here, young man," 
she said. She poured a

thick ﬂow of cream from a pitcher onto the golden 
mound of crust in the dish.

 Dasein inhaled a strong smell of Jaspers. His hand 
trembled as he picked up

the spoon Sarah placed within his reach. The 
trembling stopped at his ﬁrst

swallow of the food.

The pastry was sweet and soothing, rich with apples.

With a detached feeling of shock, Dasein watched his 
hand guide the spoon into

the pastry for another bite, saw the food conveyed to 
his mouth, felt himself

swallow it.

Soothing.

I'm addicted to the stuff, he thought.

"Something wrong?" Sarah asked.

"I . . ." He put down his spoon. "You've trapped me, 
haven't you?" he asked.

"What're you talking about?" Sarah asked.

"What's it . . ." He nodded toward the pastry. ". . . 
doing to me?"

"I'm . . ." He shook his head. Her words sounded 
insane. Fluttery feeling

behind his eyes!

"I'll bring Doctor Larry," Sarah said. She darted out a 
connecting door at

the back of the kitchen and he saw her running along 
the covered walkway to

the clinic.

Presently, she reappeared with Piaget in tow. The 
doctor's face wore a

worried frown.

"What's this Sarah's telling me?" Piaget asked. He put 
a hand under Dasein's

chin, stared into Dasein's eyes.

"What's she telling you what?" Dasein asked. The 
words sounded foolish as

they spilled from his lips. He brushed Piaget's hand 
aside. The doctor's

frown, the squinting eyes -- he looked like an angry 
Buddha.

"You seem to be all right," Piaget said. "Any strange 
symptoms of . . ."

"You've trapped me," Dasein said. "That's what I told 
her. You've trapped

me." He gestured at the plate in front of him. "With 
this."

"Ohhh," Piaget said.

"Is he just ﬁghting it?" Sarah asked.

"Probably," Piaget said.

"Don't make sense," Sarah said.

"It happens," Piaget said.

"I know, but . . ."

"Will you two stop talking about me like I was a blob 
of something on a

 slide!" Dasein raged. He pushed away from the table, 
jumped to his feet. The

motion sent his bowl of food sliding off the table with 
a crash.

"Now look what you've done!" Sarah said.

"I'm a human being," Dasein said, "not some sort of . . 
."

"Easy, lad, easy," Piaget said.

Dasein whirled away, brushed past Piaget. He had to 
get away from this pair

or be consumed by rage. Dasein's mind kept focusing 
on the weapon in his hip

pocket.

Damn Selador!

"Here, now -- wait a minute!" Piaget called.

Dasein paused in the kitchen door, turned to glare 
slit-eyed at Piaget.

"You can't leave like this," Piaget said.

"Don't try to stop me," Dasein growled. The gun felt 
large and cold against

his hip.

Piaget fell silent -- a stillness that Dasein imagined 
came up from the toes

to stare out of measuring eyes. It was as though the 
man receded to become a

ﬁgure seen through a reversed telescope -- remote, 
secretive.

"Very well," Piaget said. His voice came from that far 
away.

Deliberately, Dasein turned, went out the door, 
through the living room -- out

of the house. He felt his feet hitting the concrete of the 
front walk, the

grass parking strip. His truck's door handle was cold 
under his hand. He

started the motor, wondering at his own sensations -- 
dreamlike.

A street ﬂowed past, receded -- signposts . . . 
pavement crawling beneath his

vision . . . the Inn. He parked facing the long porch, an 
old green car on

his left, make indeterminate, unimportant.

As though awakening, Dasein found his right hand on 
the Inn's front door --

tugging, tugging. The door resisted. A signal the 
center panel stared back

at him.

"Closed."

Dasein peered at the sign. Closed?

"Your luggage is right there by the steps, Dr. Dasein."

The voice Dasein recognized immediately -- the 
infuriating Al Marden:

Authority . . . Secrecy . . . Conspiracy.

Dasein turned, feeling himself bundled into a tight 
ball of consciousness.

There was Marden standing halfway down the porch: 
red-haired, the narrow

face, the green eyes, the tight-lipped mouth drawn 
into a straight line that

could have signiﬁed any emotion from anger to 
amusement.

"So you're turning me out," Dasein said.

"Hotel's closed," Marden said. "Health department."

 "The Inn, the restaurant, too?" Dasein asked.

"All closed." It was a ﬂat square of voice brooking no 
appeal.

"I can just go back where I came from, eh?" Dasein 
asked.

"Suit yourself."

"You have other hotels," Dasein said.

"Do we?"

"You must."

"Must we?"

Dasein stared at the patrol captain, experiencing the 
same sensation he'd had

with Piaget. The man receded.

"You can leave or go back to Dr. Piaget's," Marden 
said. "He'll likely put

you up." So far away, that voice.

"Back to Piaget's," Dasein said. "How'd you know I just 
came from there?"

Marden remained silent, eyes withdrawn . . . distant.

"You move fast around here," Dasein said.

"When we have to."

Back to Piaget's? Dasein asked himself. He smiled, 
husbanding his tight ball

of consciousness. No! They hadn't thought of 
everything. They hadn't

thought of quite everything.

Still smiling, Dasein scooped up his suitcase from 
beside the steps, strode

down to the truck, threw the bag into the cab, 
climbed behind the wheel.

"Best let people help you who know how," Marden 
called.

There was just a faint trace of worry in his voice now. 
It broadened Dasein's

smile, stayed with him as a satisfying memory as he 
drove back toward the

town.

In the rear-view mirror, Dasein saw the patrol car 
following him. They

wouldn't let him park in town, Dasein knew, but he 
remembered the map posted

on a window of Scheler's service station. The map had 
shown a state park on

the road west -- Sand Hills State Park.

Down the main street he drove, Marden's patrol car 
right behind. There was

the giant service station directly ahead. Dasein saw 
the telephone kiosk

beside the parking area, swerved in so suddenly that 
Marden went past,

screeched to a stop, backed up. Dasein already was 
out of the truck and at

the kiosk.

Marden stopped the patrol car on the street, waited, 
staring at Dasein. The

patrol car's motor seemed to rumble disapprovingly. 
Dasein turned, looked

back at the service station -- such a strange normality 
to the activity there:

cars pulling in, out . . . no one paying the slightest 
attention to Marden or

 the door. He put a dime in the slot, dialed the 
operator, asked for the

Cooperative's number.

"If you want Jenny, Dr. Dasein, she's already gone 
home." Dasein stared at

the telephone mouthpiece in front of him, letting the 
import of that

supercilious female voice sink home. Not only did 
they know who was calling,

they knew what he wanted before he could say it!

Dasein stared out at Marden, attention focused on the 
green eyes, the cynical

green eyes.

Anger boiled in Dasein. He put it down. Damn them!
Yes, he wanted to talk

to Jenny. He'd talk to her in spite of them.

"I don't have Dr. Piaget's number." A distinctly 
audible sigh came over the

line.

Dasein looked at the telephone directory chained to 
the kiosk wall, felt a

wave of guilt, unreasonable, damning, instantly 
repressed. He heard the

operator dialing, the ring.

Jenny's voice answered.

"Jenny!"

"Oh, hello, Gilbert."

Dasein experienced a cold sensation in his stomach.
Her voice was so casual.

"You know they're trying to run me out of the valley, 
Jenny?" he asked.

Silence.

"Jenny?"

"I heard you." Still that casual . . . distance in her tone.

"Is that all you have to say?" His voice betrayed hurt 
anger.

"Gilbert . . ." There was a long pause, then: ". . . maybe 
it'd be . . .

better . . . if you . . . just for a while, just for a while, 
went . . . well

. . . outside."

He sensed strain beneath the casual tone now.

"Jenny, I'm driving out to the Sand Hills Park and live 
in my camper. They're

not running me out."

"Gilbert, don't!"

"You . . . want me to leave?"

"I . . . Gilbert, please come back and talk to Uncle 
Larry."

"I talked to Uncle Larry."

"Please. For me."

"If you want to see me, come out to the park."

 "I . . . don't dare."

"You don't dare?" He was outraged. What pressure 
had they applied to her?

"Please don't ask me to explain."

He hesitated, then: "Jenny, I'm setting up camp in the 
park. To make my

point. I'll be back after I make my point."

"For the love of heaven, Gilbert -- please be careful."

"Careful of what?"

"Just . . . careful."

Dasein felt the gun in his pocket, a heavy weight that 
brought his mind to

bear on the nameless threats of this valley. That was 
the thing -- the

threats were nameless. They lacked form. What use 
was a gun against a

formless target?

"I'll be back, Jenny," he said. "I love you."

She began crying. He heard the sobs distinctly before 
she broke the

connection.

His muscles stiff with anger, Dasein marched back to 
his truck, pulled it

around the police car and headed out the east road, 
Marden right behind.

Let the son-of-a-bitch follow, Dasein told himself. He 
could feel the

reckless inanity of his actions, but there remained a 
driving current

underneath that told him he had to do this. This was 
asking for a showdown.

That was the thing. A showdown. Perhaps a 
showdown was needed to provide

answers.

He crossed the river on a concrete bridge, glimpsed 
rows of greenhouses off to

the left through the trees. The road climbed up 
through the trees, emerged

into scrub country -- madrone and mesquite. It 
twisted down through the scrub

and again the land changed. In the distance there 
were tree-covered heights,

but in between stretched low mounds of hills topped 
by gnarled bushes,

scattered weedy growths with bare gray dirt and 
pools of black water, miasmic

water untouched by growing things, in the low spots.

A smell of sulfur, dank and suffocating, hung over the 
land.

With almost a sense of recognition, Dasein realized 
these must be the sand

hills. A broken sign came into view on the right. It 
dangled from one post.

Another post leaned at a crazy angle.

Sand Hills State Park. Public camp ground.

Twin ruts led off through the sand to the right toward 
a fenced area with a

doorless outhouse at one end and crumbling stone 
ﬁreplaces spaced around the

edge.

Dasein turned into the ruts. The truck lurched and 
growled its way to the

parking area. He stopped beside one of the stone 
ﬁreplaces, stared around.

The place was outrageously drab.

A sound of wheels and laboring car engine brought 
Dasein's attention to the

left. Marden pulled the patrol car to a stop beside 
him, leaned across to the

 open window.

"What're you stopping here for, Dasein?" There was 
just a touch of petulance

in Marden's tone.

"This is a state park isn't it?" Dasein asked. "Any law 
says I can't camp

here?"

"Don't get smart with me, Dasein!"

"Unless you have a legal objection, I'm going to camp 
here," Dasein said.

"Here?" Marden gestured at the desolation of the 
place.

"I ﬁnd it relatively friendly after Santaroga," Dasein 
said.

"What're you trying to prove, Dasein?"

Dasein answered him with a silent stare.

Marden pulled back into the patrol car. Dasein could 
see the man's knuckles

white on the steering wheel. Presently, the patrol 
captain leaned back,

glared up at Dasein. "Okay, mister. It's your funeral."

The patrol car leaped ahead, made a sand-spewing 
turn around the parking area,

roared out to the highway and headed back toward 
town.

Dasein waited for the dust to settle before getting out. 
He climbed into the

camper, checked his emergency larder -- beans, 
powdered milk and powdered

eggs, canned frankfurters, two bottles of ketchup, a 
can of syrup and a half

empty box of prepared pancake mix . . . coffee, sugar . 
. . He sighed, sat

down on the bunk.

The window opposite framed a view of the sand hills 
and the doorless outhouse.

Dasein rubbed his forehead. There was an ache 
behind his eyes. The bruise on

his head throbbed. The pitiless light beating down on 
the drab hills ﬁlled

him with a sense of self-accusation.

For the ﬁrst time since pointing his truck down into 
the valley, Dasein began

to question his own actions. He felt there was an air 
of insanity around

everything he had done. It was a mad pavane -- Jenny 
. . . Marden . . .

Burdeaux, Piaget, Willa, Scheler, Nis . . . It was mad, 
yet with its own kind

of sense. His brushes with disaster became a part of 
the stately nonsense.

And there was Jersey Hofstedder's car -- somehow the 
most signiﬁcant thing of

all.

He felt he had been down once more beneath the 
lake, rising now into a brutal

honesty with himself. Jenny's "We" lost some of its 
terrors. That was the We

of the cave and the Jaspers, the We that waited 
patiently for him to make his

decision.

The decision was his, he saw. No matter what the 
substance out of that dim

red cave did to the psyche, the decision was his. It had 
to be his decision

or the mad pavane lost all meaning.

I'm still ﬁghting it, he thought. I'm still afraid I'll wind 
up "ﬂuttery

behind the eyes" and standing on a wrapping line at 
the Co-op.

Restlessly, he climbed down out of the camper, stood 
on the sand absorbing the

 mid-afternoon heat. A single crow ﬂew overhead so 
close he heard the rushing

harp sound of wind through its plumage.

Dasein gazed after the bird thinking how strange to 
see only one crow. They

were not a solitary bird. But here was this one -- alone 
as he was alone.

What was I before that I cannot return to? he 
wondered. And he thought if he

made the decision against Santaroga he'd be like that 
solitary crow, a

creature without its own kind anywhere.

The problem, he knew, lay in a compulsion 
somewhere within him to make an

honest report to those who'd hired him. The Jaspers 
clarity-of-being urged

it. His own remembered sense of duty urged it. To do 
anything less would be

a form of dishonesty, an erosion of selfdom. He felt a 
jealous possessiveness

about this self. No smallest part of it was cheap 
enough to discard.

This self of his, old but newly seen, precious beyond 
anything he'd ever

imagined, placed a terrifying burden on him, Dasein 
saw. He remembered the

wildness of the Jaspers revelation, the gamut he'd run 
to come through to this

peak.

The had-I-but-known quality of his immediate past 
settled on him then like a

fog that chilled him in spite of the afternoon's heat. 
Dasein shivered. How

pleasant it would be, he thought, to have no decisions. 
How tempting to allow

that restlessly stirring something within his 
consciousness lift up its

ancient snake's head and devour the disturbing parts 
of his awareness.

His view of the valley's people took on an Olympian 
cast. They stood beside

him for a moment in ghostly ranks, godlike, masters 
of the primitive.

Are they testing me? he wondered.

Then why would Jenny say she dared not come here 
to him?

And where are the children?

A coldly rational part of his mind weighed his 
thinking and found the balance

uncertain. How much of what's in my mind is the 
drug thinking? he asked

himself.

At the fulcrum of any decision, that was the essential 
question. Where could

he ﬁnd solid ground upon which to stand and say, 
"The things I'm to decide

about are there . . . and there . . . and there . . . ?"

No one could help him ﬁnd this ground, he knew. It 
must be a lonely search.

If he made an honest report to Meyer Davidson's 
crew, that would doom

Santaroga. But to make a false report would be to 
plant a cancer within

himself.

He had separated himself from Santaroga in a 
deﬁnite way, like a knife

stroke, Dasein realized. The Jaspers package he'd sent 
for analysis to

Selador loomed in his mind. The cutting off had 
begun there.

It had been a gesture, nothing more. Symbolic. Some 
part of him had known

even as he mailed it that the package would arrive 
with whatever Jaspers it

had contained completely dissipated. He'd been 
sending a gesture of deﬁance

to the Santaroga part of himself, Dasein realized.

Had Burdeaux done that? he wondered. What 
packages had Burdeaux exchanged

with Louisiana?

 The package to Selador -- it had been like a thrown 
rock that could not reach

its mark. He remembered as a child throwing a rock 
at a cat too far away to

hit. Gray cat. He remembered the sudden bird silence 
in his aunt's garden,

the gray cat slinking into view . . . the rock landing 
short. Piaget was the

gray cat.

The cat in the garden had looked up, momentarily 
surprised by the sound,

weighed the situation, and returned to its hunting 
with an insulting disdain

for distant boys with distant rocks. What had Piaget 
done?

Dasein experienced a sudden deitgrasp, an act of self-
discovery in which the

sky appeared to shimmer. He realized in this instant 
why he felt so

terrifyingly lonely.

He had no group, no place in a hive of fellow-activity, 
nothing to shield him

from personal decisions that might overwhelm him. 
Whatever decision he made,

no matter the consequences, that was his decision. 
Selador might face the

shame of his agent's failure. The school might lose its 
muniﬁcent grant.

The unique thing that was Santaroga might be 
dissipated.

All because of a decision, a gesture really, by a lone 
man standing in a patch

of barren sand hills, his mind caught up in fantasies 
about a solitary crow

and a gray cat.

It was a moment for positive action, and all he could 
think to do was re-enter

the camper and eat.

As he moved in the conﬁning space preparing himself 
a powdered-egg mess in

the frying pan, the truck emitted protesting creaks. 
Hunger gnawed at him,

but he didn't want this food. He knew what he 
wanted -- what he had ﬂed here

to escape, what his body craved until it was an ache 
at the core of him --

Jaspers.

Chapter 9

At full dark, Dasein switched on the camper's wall 
light, retreated into his

notes. He felt he had to keep his mind occupied, but 
the fetid smell of the

campground intruded. The camper was a tiny world 
with sharp boundaries, but

it couldn't hold off the universe out there. Dasein 
peered out a window at

stars: bright holes punched in blackness. They 
ampliﬁed his sense of

loneliness. He jerked his gaze away.

The notes . . .

Always the same items ﬂoated to the surface:

Where were the children?

What failure of the Jaspers change produced 
zombies?

 How could a whole community be ignited with the 
unconscious desire to kill a

person?

What was the Jaspers essence? What was it? What did 
it do to the body's

chemistry?

Dasein sensed the danger in putting his hand to these 
questions. They were

questions and at the same time an answer. This 
probing -- this was what

ignited the community.

He had to do it. Like a child poking at a sore, he had to 
do it. But once he

had done it, could he turn then and tell the whole 
story to Meyer Davidson's

crowd?

Even if he did ﬁnd the answers and decided to make a 
full and honest report,

would Santaroga permit it?

There were forces at work out there, Dasein realized, 
against which he was but

a candle ﬂickering in a gale.

He grew aware of footsteps crunching on the sand, 
turned off the light, opened

the door and peered out.

A ghostly blur of a ﬁgure in the starlight, a woman in 
a light dress or a

small man in a coat, was approaching along the 
tracks from the highway.

"Who's there?" Dasein called.

"Gil!"

"Jenny!"

He jumped down, strode to meet her. "I thought you 
couldn't come out here.

You told me . . ."

"Please don't come any closer," she said. She stopped 
about ten paces from

him.

Such an oddly brittle quality to her voice -- Dasein 
hesitated.

"Gil, if you won't come back to Uncle Larry's you must 
leave the valley," she

said.

"You want me to leave?"

"You must."

"Why?"

"I . . . they want you to go."

"What have I done?"

"You're dangerous to us. We all know it. We can feel it.   
You're dangerous."

"Jen . . . do you think I'd hurt you?"

"I don't know! I just know you're dangerous."

 "And you want me to leave?"

"I'm ordering you to leave."

"Ordering me?" He heard hysteria in her voice.

"Gil, please."

"I can't go, Jen. I can't."

"You must."

"I can't."

"Then come back to Uncle Larry's. We'll take care of 
you."

"Even if I turn into a zombie?"

"Don't say that!"

"It could happen, couldn't it?"

"Darling, we'll take care of you whatever happens!"

"You take care of your own."

"Of course we do."

"Jenny, do you know I love you?"

"I know," she whispered.

"Then why are you doing this to me?"

"We're not doing anything to you." She was crying, 
speaking through sobs.

"It's you who're doing . . . whatever it is you're doing."

"I'm only doing what I have to do."

"You don't have to do anything."

"Would you have me be dishonest . . . lie?"

"Gil, I'm begging you. For my sake . . . for your own 
sake, leave."

"Or come back to Uncle Larry's?"

"Oh, please."

"What'll happen to me if I don't?"

"If you really love me . . . Oh, Gil, I couldn't stand it if . 
. . if . . ."

She broke off, crying too hard to speak.

He moved toward her. "Jen, don't."

The crying stopped abruptly and she began backing 
away, shaking her head at

him. "Stay away from me!"

 "Jenny, what's wrong with you?"

She retreated even faster.

"Jenny, stop it."

Suddenly, she whirled, began running down the 
track. He started to run after

her, stopped. What was the use?

Her voice came back to him in a hysterical scream:
"Stay away from me! I

love you! Stay away!"

He stood in shocked silence until he heard a car door 
slam out there on the

highway. Lights came on; a car raced back toward 
town.

He remembered the soft moon of her face in the 
starlight, two black holes for

eyes. It had been like a mask. He trudged back to the 
camper, his mind in

turmoil. "I love you! Stay away!"

What do I really know about Jenny? he asked himself.

Nothing . . . except that she loved him.

Stay away?

Could that have been Jenny demanding, begging, 
ordering?

This speared his mind with a touch of madness. It 
transcended the

irrationality of people in love.

"You're dangerous. We all know it."

Indeed, they must.

In the Jaspers oneness he'd experienced at the lake, 
they must know him for a

danger. If he could stay away from the stuff, kick it -- 
would they know him

then?

How could they help but know him then? His action 
would be the ultimate

betrayal.

He thought of Santaroga then as a deceptive curtain 
of calmness over a pool of

violence. Olympian-like, they'd surmounted the 
primitive -- yes. But the

primitive was still there, more explosive because it 
could not be recognized

and because it had been held down like a coiled 
spring.

Jenny must sense it, he thought. Her love for him 
would give her a touch of

clarity.

"Stay away from me!"

Her cry still rang in his ears.

And this was how the other investigators had died -- 
releasing the explosion

that was Santaroga.

Voices intruded on Dasein's reverie. They came from 
the other side of the

camper away from the road. One voice deﬁnitely was 
that of a woman. He

couldn't be sure about the other two. Dasein stepped 
around the camper,

stared off toward the dank pools and sand hills. It 
was a shadowed starlit

 landscape with a suggestion of a glow in it.

A ﬂashlight came into view across the hills. It 
wavered and darted. There

were three black, lurching ﬁgures associated with the 
light. Dasein thought

of Macbeth's witches. They walked and slid down a 
hill, skirted a pool and

came on toward the campground.

Dasein wondered if he should call out. Perhaps they 
were lost. Why else

would three people be out here in the night?

There was a burst of laughter from the group, 
vaguely childlike. The woman's

voice came clearly out of the dark then: "Oh, Petey! 
It's so good to have

you with us."

Dasein cleared his throat, said: "Hello." Then, louder:
"Hello!"

The light stabbed toward him. The lilting woman's 
voice said: "Someone's in

the campground."

There was a masculine grunt.

"Who is it?" she asked.

"Just a camper," Dasein said. "Are you lost?"

"We've just been out frogging." It sounded very like 
the voice of a young

boy.

The trio came on toward him.

"Pretty poor place to camp," the woman said.

Dasein studied the approaching ﬁgures. That was a 
boy on the left --

deﬁnitely a boy. He appeared to be carrying a bow 
and a quiver of arrows.

The woman had a long gigging pole, a bulky bag of 
some kind on one shoulder.

The men carried the ﬂashlight and a string of 
bullfrogs. They stopped beside

the camper and the woman leaned against it to 
remove a shoe and pour sand from

it.

"Been out to the pond," she said.

"Hunh!" the man grunted.

"We got eight of them," the boy said. "Mom's gonna 
fry 'em for breakfast."

"Petey had his heart set on it," the woman said. "I 
couldn't say no, not on

his ﬁrst day home."

"I passed," the boy said. "Pop didn't pass, but I did."

"I see," Dasein said. He studied the man in the light 
reﬂected off the

aluminum side of the camper. He was a tall man, 
slim, rather gawky. Wisps of

blonde hair protruded from a stocking cap. His eyes 
were as vacant as two

pieces of blue glass.

The woman had put the shoe back on, now had the 
other one off emptying it.

She was wrapped in a heavy coat that gave her the 
appearance of having been

molded in a corrugated barrel. She was short, 
wouldn't stand any taller than

the man's shoulder, but there was a purposeful air 
about her that reminded

Dasein of Clara Scheler at the used-car lot.

 "Bill's the ﬁrst one in his family in eight generations 
didn't make it," she

said, restoring the shoe and straightening. "They 
think it was something in

his mother's diet before he was born. We were 
engaged before . . . Why'm I

telling you all this? I don't think I know you."

"Dasein . . . Gilbert Dasein," he said. And he thought:
So this is how they

take care of their own.

"Jenny's fellow!" the woman said. "Well, now."

Dasein looked at the boy. Petey. He appeared to be no 
more than twelve,

almost as tall as the woman. His face when the 
ﬂashlight beam brushed it was

a carbon copy of the man's. No denying parenthood 
there.

"Turn the light over here, Bill," the woman said. She 
spoke carefully and

distinctly as one might to a very young child. "Over 
here, hon."

"Over there, Pop." The boy directed the man's 
uncertain hand.

"That's it, love," the woman said. "I think I got the 
gigging hook caught in

my coat." She fussed with a length of line at her side.

"Hunh," the man said.

Dasein stared at him with a cold feeling of horror. He 
could see himself

there, Jenny "taking care" of him, their children 
helping.

"There," the woman said, pulling the line free and 
attaching it to the gigging

pole. "Turn the light down toward the ground now, 
Bill. Toward the ground,

hon."

"Down this way, Pop," the boy said, helping.

"That's a love," the woman said. She reached out, 
patted the man's cheek.

Dasein felt something obscene in the gesture, wanted 
to turn away, couldn't.

"He's real good, Bill is," the woman said.

The boy began playing with his bow, drawing it, 
releasing it.

"What you doing out here, Dr. Dasein?" the woman 
asked.

"I . . . wanted to be . . . alone for awhile." He forced 
himself to look at

her.

"Well, this is a place to be alone all right," she said.
"You feel all right?

No . . . gutters . . . or anything?"

"Quite all right," Dasein said. He shuddered.

The boy had knocked an arrow into the bow, was 
waving it about.

"I'm Mabel Jorick," the woman said. "This is Bill, my 
husband; our son,

Petey. Petey's been . . . you know, with Doc Piaget. Just 
got his bill of

health."

"I passed," the boy said.

 "Indeed you did, love." She looked at Dasein. "He's 
going outside to college

next year."

"Isn't he kind of young?" Dasein asked. "Fifteen," she 
said. "Hunh," the

man said.

The boy had drawn the bow to its full arc, Dasein saw.   
The arrow tip

glittered in the light from the ﬂash.

Up, down . . . right, left the arrow pointed.

Dasein moved uneasily as the tip traversed his chest -- 
across, back. Sweat

started on his forehead. He felt menace in the boy.

Instinctively, Dasein moved to put the man between 
himself and Petey, but

Jorick moved back, stared off toward the highway.

"I think he hears the car," the woman said. "My 
brother, Jim, coming to pick

us up." She shook her head wonderingly. "He has 
awful good hearing, Bill

has."

Dasein felt a crisis rushing upon him, dropped to his 
hands and knees. As he

fell, he heard the bow twang, felt the wind of an 
arrow brush the back of his

neck, heard it slam into the side of the camper.

"Petey!" the woman shouted. She snatched the bow 
from him. "What're you

doing?"

"It slipped, Ma."

Dasein climbed to his feet studying these people 
narrowly.

"Hunh," the man said.

The mother turned toward Dasein, the bow in her 
hand.

"He tried to kill me," Dasein whispered.

"It was just an accident!" the boy protested.

The man lifted the ﬂashlight, a menacing gesture.

Without looking at him, the woman said: "Point it 
toward the ground, hon."

She pushed the light down, stared at Dasein. "You 
don't think . . ."

"It was an accident," the boy said.

Dasein looked at the arrow. It had penetrated halfway 
through the camper's

wall on a level with his chest. He tried to swallow in a 
dry throat. If he

hadn't ducked at just that instant . . . An accident. A 
regrettable

accident. The boy was playing with a bow and arrow. 
It slipped.

Death by misadventure.

What warned me? Dasein wondered.

He knew the answer. It lay there in his mind, clearly 
readable. He had come

to recognize the Santaroga pattern of menace. The 
means might differ, but the

pattern carried a sameness -- something lethal in an 
apparently innocent

context.

 "It was just an accident," the woman whispered.
"Petey wouldn't harm a ﬂy."

She didn't believe it, Dasein saw.

And that was another thing. He was still connected by 
a tenuous thread to the

Jaspers oneness. The warning message along that line 
was unmistakable. She'd

received it, too.

"Wouldn't he?" Dasein asked. He looked once more at 
the arrow protruding from

the camper.

The woman turned, grabbed her son's shoulder in 
one hand, shook the bow at

him. "You want to go back?" she demanded. "Is that 
it?"

"Hunh," the man said. He shuﬄed his feet uneasily.

"It was an accident," the boy said. He obviously was 
near tears.

The woman turned a pleading look on Dasein. "You 
wouldn't say anything to

Doctor Larry, would you?"

"Say anything?" Dasein stared at her stupidly.

"He might . . . you know, misunderstand."

Dasein shook his head. What was she talking about?

"It's so hard," the woman said. "After Bill, I mean. You 
know how it is over

there." She gestured vaguely with her head. "The way 
they keep such a close

watch on you, picking at every little symptom. It's so 
hard having a son

there . . . knowing, seeing him only at visiting hours 
and . . . and never

really being sure until . . ."

"I'm all right, Mom," the boy said.

"Of course you are, love." She kept her eyes on 
Dasein.

"I wouldn't deliberately hurt anyone," Petey said.

"Of course you wouldn't, love."

Dasein sighed.

"I passed," the boy said. "I'm not like Pop."

"Hunh," the man said.

Dasein felt like crying.

"You wouldn't say anything, would you?" the woman 
pleaded.

So Piaget had rewarding work for him here in the 
valley, Dasein thought. A

clinic job . . . working with young people. And it was 
tied up with Jaspers,

of course.

"Are they going to send me back?" Petey asked. There 
was fear in his voice.

"Dr. Dasein, please . . ." the woman begged.

 "It was an accident," Dasein said. He knew it had not 
been an accident. The

woman knew it. The arrow had been meant to kill. He 
said: "Perhaps you'd

better take the bow and arrows away from him for 
awhile."

"Oh, don't you worry about that," she said. There was 
a deep sighing of

relief in her tone.

A car pulled to a stop on the highway at the entrance 
to the campground.

"There's Jim now," the woman said. She turned away, 
her shoulder bag swinging

toward Dasein. A rich aroma of Jaspers wafted across 
Dasein. It came from

the bag.

Dasein stopped his right hand as it automatically 
reached toward the bag.

Mabel Jorick glanced back at him. "I want to thank 
you for being so

understanding," she said. "If there's ever anything . . ." 
She broke off,

noting Dasein's attention on the bag. "Bet you smelled 
the coffee," she said.

"You want it?"

Dasein found himself unable to keep from nodding.

"Well, here." She swung the bag around in front of 
her. "Thermos is almost

run along, help your dad out to the car."

"All right, Mom. Good night, Dr. Dasein."

Dasein was unable to take his gaze from the woman's 
hands pulling a shiny

metal thermos from the bag.

"Take the thermos," she said, holding it toward him. 
"You can return it when

you come back to town. We're only half a block from 
the clinic on Salmon

Way."

Dasein felt his ﬁngers close around the corrugated 
sides of the thermos. He

began trembling.

"You sure you're all right?" the woman asked.

"I'm . . . it's the aftereffect . . . shock, I guess," he said.

"Sure. I'm so sorry." She moved behind Dasein to the 
camper, broke off the

protruding arrow. "I'm going to give this to Petey as a 
reminder of how

careful he should be."

Dasein tore his attention away from the thermos, 
looked along the sand track.

Petey and his father were almost halfway to the 
highway. The car's lights

carved out a funnel of brilliance there. A horn 
honked once.

"If you're sure you're all right," the woman said. "I 
better be going." She

looked at the camper, glanced once more at Dasein.
"If there's ever anything

we can do . . ."

"I'll . . . bring your thermos back as soon as I can," 
Dasein said.

"Oh, no hurry; no hurry at all." She pulled her coat 
tightly around her,

trudged off toward the highway. About twenty paces 
away, she paused, turned.

"That was real sweet of you, Dr. Dasein. I won't forget 
it."

 Dasein watched until the car turned back toward 
town. Before the car was out

of sight, he was in the camper, the lid off the thermos, 
pouring himself a

steaming cup of the coffee.

His hands trembled as he lifted the cup.

All the time and matter had been reduced to this 
moment, this cup, this

Jaspers rich steam enveloping him. He drained the 
cup.

It was a sensation of rays spreading out from a 
pinhead spot in his stomach.

Dasein groped his way to his bunk, wrapped the 
sleeping bag around him. He

felt supremely detached, a transitory being. His 
awareness moved within a

framework of glowing nets.

There was terror here. He tried to recoil, but the nets 
held him. Where is

the self that once I was? he thought. He tried to hold 
onto a self that bore

some familiarity, one he could identify. The very idea 
of a self eluded him.

It became an ear-shaped symbol he interpreted as 
mind-inaction.

For a ﬂickering instant he felt he had encountered the 
solid ground, a core

of relative truth from which he could make his 
decisions and justify all his

experiences. His eyes ﬂew open. In the faint starlight 
reﬂected into the

camper he saw something glittering on the wall, 
recognized the head of Petey's

arrow.

There it was -- the relative truth: an arrowhead. It 
had originated; it had

ceased.

Everything with origin has cessation, he told himself.

He sensed the stirring in his consciousness then, the 
ancient thing abiding

there, the mind eater. Sleep, Dasein told himself. 
There was an atman of

sleep within him. It resisted awakening. It was 
inﬁnite, circular. He lay

spread on its rim.

Dasein slept.

Chapter 10

Dawn light awakened him.

The coffee in the thermos was cold and had lost its 
Jaspers savor. He sipped

it anyway to ease the dryness in his throat.

There will be a place like a school, he thought. A 
boarding school . . . with

visiting hours. It will have the Santaroga difference. It 
will be something

besides a school.

He stared at the thermos. It was empty. The bitter 
taste of its contents

remained on his tongue, a reminder of his weakness 
in the night. The Jaspers

 had immersed him in nightmares. He remembered 
dreaming of glass houses, a

shattering of glass that tumbled about him . . . 
screaming.

House of glass, he thought. Greenhouses.

The sound of an approaching car intruded. Dasein 
stepped outside into chilly

morning air. A green Chevrolet was bumping up the 
track toward him. It

looked familiar. He decided the car either was Jersey 
Hofstedder's machine or

its double.

Then he saw the beefy, gray-haired woman driving 
the car and he knew. It was

Sam Scheler's mother -- Clara, the car dealer.

She pulled to a stop beside Dasein, slid across the seat 
and got out his side.

"They told me you were here and by golly you are," 
she said. She stood facing

Dasein, a covered dish in her hands.

Dasein looked at the car. "Did you drive clear out here 
to try to sell me

that car again?" he asked.

"The car?" She looked around at the car as though it 
had appeared there by

some form of magic. "Oh, Jersey's car. Plenty of time 
for that . . . later.

I brought you some hair of the dog." She presented 
the dish.

Dasein hesitated. Why should she bring him 
anything? "Petey's my grandson,"

she said. "Mabel, my daughter, told me how nice you 
were last night." She

glanced at the stub of the arrow in the side of Dasein's 
camper, returned her

attention to Dasein. "Occurred to me maybe your 
problem's you don't realize

how much we want you to be one of us. So I brought 
you some of my sour cream

stew -- plenty of Jaspers."

She thrust the dish at him.

Dasein took it. Smooth, warm china under his hands. 
He fought down an

unreasonable impulse to drop the dish and smash it. 
He was afraid suddenly.

Perspiration made his palms slippery against the 
dish.

"Go on, eat it," she said. "It'll set you up for the day."

I must not do it, Dasein told himself.

But that was irrational. The woman was just being 
kind, thoughtful . . .

Petey's grandmother. Thought of the boy brought the 
incident of the night

ﬂooding back into his mind.

School . . . observation . . . Jaspers . . .

A whuﬄing noise from the green Chevrolet distracted 
him. A gray-muzzled old

black-and-white border collie eased itself over onto 
the front seat, climbed

down to the sand. It moved with the patient pain of 
old age, sniffed at

Clara's heels.

She reached down, patted the dog's head. "I brought 
Jimbo," she said. "He

doesn't get out in the country much anymore. Dang 
nigh thirty-ﬁve years old

and I think he's going blind." She straightened, 
nodded to the dish in

Dasein's hands. "Go ahead, eat it."

But Dasein was fascinated by the dog. Thirty-ﬁve? 
That was equivalent to

more than two hundred years in a human. He put the 
dish on the camper's

 steps, bent to stare at the dog. Jimbo. Going blind, she 
said, but its eyes

carried that same disturbing Jaspers directness he 
saw in all the humans.

"You like dogs?" Clara Scheler asked.

Dasein nodded. "Is he really thirty-ﬁve?"

"Thirty-six in the spring . . . if he lasts."

Jimbo ambled across to, Dasein, aimed the gray 
muzzle at his face, sniffed.

Apparently satisﬁed, he curled up at the foot of the 
camper's steps, sighed,

stared off across the sand hills.

"You going to eat or aren't you?" Clara asked.

"Later," Dasein said. He was remembering how Jersey 
Hofstedder's car had

ﬁgured in his thoughts -- a key to Santaroga. Was it 
the car? he wondered.

Or was the car just a symbol? Which was the 
important thing -- the car or the

symbol?

Seeing his attention on the car, Clara said: "It's still 
priced at $650 if

you want it."

"I'd like to drive it," Dasein said.

"Right now?"

"Why not?"

She glanced at the dish on the camper's step, said:
"That stew won't heat

very well . . . and the Jaspers fades, you know."

"I had your daughter's coffee last night," Dasein said.

"No . . . aftereffects?"

It was a practical question. Dasein found himself 
probing his own bodily

sensations -- head injury fading, shoulder pain almost 
gone . . . a bit of

latent anger over Petey's arrow, but nothing time 
wouldn't heal.

"I'm ﬁne."

"Well! You're coming around," she said. "Jenny said 
you would. Okay." She

gestured toward the green Chevrolet. "Let's take a 
spin up the highway and

back. You drive." She climbed into the right-hand seat, 
closed the door.

The dog raised his head from his paws.

"You stay there, Jimbo," she said. "We'll be right back."

Dasein went around, climbed behind the wheel. The 
seat seemed to mould itself

to his back.

"Comfortable, huh?" Clara asked.

Dasein nodded. He had an odd feeling of deja vu, that 
he'd driven this car

before. It felt right beneath his hands. The engine 
purred alive, settled

into an almost noiseless motion. He backed the car 
around, eased it over the

ruts and out the track to the highway, turned right 
away from town.

 A touch on the throttle and the old Chevrolet leaped 
ahead -- ﬁfty . . .

sixty . . . seventy. He eased back to sixty-ﬁve. It 
cornered like a sports

car.

"Got torsion bars," Clara said. "Doesn't roll worth a 
sweet damn. Isn't she

pretty?"

Dasein touched the brakes -- no fading and the nose 
strayed not an inch. It

was as though the car rode on tracks.

"This car's in better shape right now than the day it 
came off the assembly

line," Clara said.

Dasein silently agreed with her. It was a pleasure to 
drive. He liked the

leather smell of the interior. The hand-ﬁnished wood 
of the dash glistened

with a dull luster. There was no distraction from it, 
just a tight cluster of

instruments set up high to be read easily without 
taking his eyes too long

from the road.

"Notice how he padded the dash on this side," Clara 
said. "Inch-and-a-half

thick and a thin roll of metal underneath. He cut the 
steering wheel about a

third of the way back, offset it on a U-joint. Hit 
anything with this car and

you won't have that wheel sticking out your back. 
Jersey was making safe cars

before Detroit even heard the word."

Dasein found a wide spot at a turn, pulled off, turned 
around and headed back

to the campground. He knew he had to have this car. 
It was everything this

woman said.

"Tell you what," Clara said. "I'll deliver the car over to 
the Doc's when I

get back. We'll ﬁgure out the details later. You won't 
ﬁnd me hard to deal

with, though I can't give you much for that clunker of 
a truck."

"I . . . don't know how I can pay for it," Dasein said.
"But . . ."

"Say no more. We'll ﬁgure out something."

The track into the campground came into view.
Dasein slowed, turned off onto

the ruts, shifted down to second.

"You really ought to use the seatbelt," Clara said. "I 
noticed you . . ."

She broke off as Dasein stopped behind the camper. 
"Something's wrong with

Jimbo!" she said, and she was out of the car and 
across to the dog.

Dasein turned off the, ignition, jumped out and ran 
around to her side.

The dog lay almost over on its back, feet stretched out 
stiff, neck curved

backward, its mouth open and tongue extended.

"He's dead," Clara said. "Jimbo's dead."

Dasein's attention went to the dish on the steps. Its 
cover had been pushed

aside and the contents disturbed. There was a splash 
of gravy beside the lid.

Again, he looked at the dog. The sand was scratched 
in a wide swirl around

Jimbo.

Abruptly, Dasein bent to the dish of stew, sniffed it. 
Beneath the heavy odor

of Jaspers there was a bitter aroma that curled his 
nostrils.

"Cyanide?" he asked. He stared accusingly at Clara 
Scheler.

 She looked at the dish. "Cyanide?"

"You were trying to kill me!"

She picked up the dish, smelled it. Her face went pale.      
She turned, stared

wide-eyed at Dasein.

"Oh, my God! The paint bleach," she said. She 
dropped the dish, whirled

away, dashed to the car before Dasein could stop her. 
The Chevrolet leaped to

life, turned in a whirl of sand and roared out the 
track to the highway. It

made a skidding turn onto the highway, raced back 
toward town.

Dasein stared after her.

She tried to kill me, he thought. Cyanide. Paint bleach.

But he couldn't shake the memory of her pale, wide-
eyed stare. She'd been

surprised, as shocked as he was. Paint bleach. He 
stared down at the dead

dog. Would she have left the dish there near her dog 
if she'd known it

contained poison? Not likely. Then why had she run?

Paint bleach.

There was contaminated food at her house, Dasein 
realized. She was racing

back to get it before it killed anyone.

I would've eaten the stew, Dasein thought.

An accident . . . another bloody accident.

He kicked the fallen dish aside, dragged the dog out of 
the way, got behind

the wheel of his camper. The Ford's engine was a 
dismal, throbbing mess after

Jersey's car. He maneuvered it gently out to the 
highway, turned toward town.

Accident, he thought.

A pattern was emerging, but he found it diﬃcult to 
accept. There was a

Holmesian ﬂavor to his thought -- ". . . when you have 
eliminated the

impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, 
must be the truth."

Jenny had screamed: "Stay away from me. I love you."

That was consistent. She did love him. Therefore, he 
had to stay away from

her.

For the time being.

The road forked and he turned right, following the 
direction by a sign

labeled: "Greenhouses."

There was a bridge over the river -- an old-fashioned 
bridge that crowned in

the middle . . . heavy planks rattling under the 
wheels. The river foamed and

bunched itself over the shell-backs of smooth stones 
under the bridge.

Dasein slowed the truck at the far side, taken 
suddenly by a warning sense of

caution which he had learned to trust.

The road followed the river's right bank. He paced the 
current, glanced

upstream toward the bridge, found it hidden by a 
stand of willows:

 It came over Dasein that there was something sliding 
and treacherous about the

river. He thought of a liquid snake, venomous, full of 
evil energy. It

contained a concentration of malevolence as it 
slipped down the rapids beside

the road. And the sound -- it laughed at him.

Dasein drew a sigh of relief when the road turned 
away from the river, wound

over two low hills and down into a shallow valley. He 
glimpsed the glass

through trees. It was an expanse of glistening green 
and covered a much

larger area than he'd expected.

The road ended at a paved parking lot in front of a 
long stone building. More

stone buildings -- tile roofs, curtained windows -- 
stepped in ranks up the

hill beside the greenhouses.

A great many cars waited in the parking lot, a fact 
Dasein found curious -- at

least a hundred cars.

And there were people -- men walking between the 
greenhouses, white-coated

ﬁgures behind the glass, briskly striding women 
coming and going.

Dasein drove down the line of cars looking for a place 
to park. He found a

slot beyond the end of the long stone building, pulled 
in to a stop and stared

around. Chanting.

Dasein turned toward the sound; it came from the 
ranks of buildings beyond the

greenhouses. A troop of children came marching into 
view down a path between

the buildings. They carried baskets. Three adults 
accompanied them. They

counted a marching cadence. The troop wound out of 
sight down into the

greenhouse level.

A tight feeling gripped Dasein's chest.

Footsteps sounded on his left. Dasein turned to ﬁnd 
Piaget striding down the

line of cars toward him. The doctor's bulky ﬁgure was 
accented by a long

white smock. He was hatless, his hair wind mussed.

Piaget turned into the slot beside Dasein, stopped to 
stand looking in the

truck's open window.

"Well," he said. "Jenny said there'd be an arriving."

Dasein shook his head. There was almost meaning in 
Piaget's words, but the

sense eluded him. He wet his lips with his tongue. 
"What?"

Piaget scowled. "Jenny knows rapport. She said you'd 
probably show up here."

His voice sounded suddenly full of effort.

An arriving, Dasein thought.

It was a label for an event, a statement withholding 
judgment. He studied

Piaget's wide, bland face.

"I saw children," Dasein said.

"What did you expect?"

Dasein shrugged. "Are you going to run me off?"

"Al Marden says the ones that run get the fever," 
Piaget said. "The ones that

 watch get the beneﬁt."

"Count me among the watchers," Dasein said.

Piaget grinned, opened the truck door. "Come."

Dasein remembered the river, hesitated. He thought 
of the torn carpet in the

He thought of Jenny running away from him -- "Stay 
away from me! I love you."

"Come along," Piaget said.

Still hesitating, Dasein said: "Why're the children kept 
here?"

"We must push back at the surface of childhood," 
Piaget said. "It's a brutal,

animate thing. But there's food growing." He gestured 
at the expanse of

greenhouses. "There's educating. There's useful 
energy. Waste not; want

not."

Again, Dasein shook his head. Almost-meaning.

Push back at the surface of childhood?

It was like schizophrenic talk and he recalled the 
incident in the Blue Ewe,

the haunting conversation of the young couple.

How could one hear a sunset?

"You . . . you're not speaking English," Dasein 
complained.

"I'm speaking," Piaget said.

"But . . ."

"Jenny says you'll be an understander." Piaget 
scratched his cheek, a pensive

look on his face. "You have the training, Dasein." 
Again, his voice took on

that leaden effort. "Where's your Weltanschauung? 
You do have a world view?

The whole is greater than the sum of its parts. What is 
it?"

Piaget's arm swept out to include the greenhouse 
complex and the entire

valley, the world and the universe beyond.

Dasein's mouth felt dry. The man was insane.

"You contain the Jaspers experience," Piaget said.
"Digest it. Jenny says

you can do it. Reality shoots through her words."

The tight sensation was a pain in Dasein's chest.
Thoughts tumbled through

his mind without order or sense.

In a heavy voice, Piaget said: "For approximately one 
in ﬁve hundred, the

Jaspers cannot . . ." He spread his arms, palms up. 
"You are not one of

those few. I stake a reputation on it. You will be an 
opening person."

Dasein looked at the stone building, the hurrying 
people. All that action and

purpose. He sensed it all might be like the dance of 
bees -- motions designed

to show him a direction. The direction escaped him.

"I will try to put it in the words of outside," Piaget 
said. "Perhaps then .

. ." He shrugged, leaned against the side of the door to 
bring his broad face

 close to Dasein. "We sift reality through screens 
composed of ideas. These

idea systems are limited by language. That is to say: 
language cuts the

grooves in which our thoughts must move. If we seek 
new validity forms, we

must step outside the language."

"What's that have to do with the children?" Dasein 
nodded toward the

greenhouses.

"Dasein! We have a common instinctive experience, 
you and I. What happens in

the unformed psyche? As individuals, as cultures and 
societies, we humans

reenact every aspect of the instinctive life that has 
accompanied our species

for uncounted generations. With the Jaspers, we take 
off the binding element.

Couple that with the brutality of childhood? No! We 
would have violence,

chaos. We would have no society. It's simple, isn't it? 
We must superimpose

a limiting order on the innate patterns of our nervous 
systems. We must have

common interests."

Dasein found himself grappling with these ideas, 
trying to see through them to

some sense in Piaget's earlier words. Push back at the 
surface of childhood?

World view?

"We must meet the survival needs of individuals," 
Piaget said. "We know the

civilization-culture-society outside is dying. They do 
die, you know. When

this is about to happen, pieces break off from the 
parent body. Pieces cut

themselves free, Dasein. Our scalpel -- that was 
Jaspers. Think, man!

You've lived out there. It's a Virgilian autumn . . . the 
dusk of a

civilization."

Piaget stepped back, studied Dasein.

For his part, Dasein found himself suddenly 
fascinated by the doctor. There

was a timeless essence in the man, powerful, 
intrusive on everything about

him. Framed in the white smock's collar was an 
Egyptian head, strong cheeks

and jaws, a nose out of Moses' time, white even teeth 
behind thin lips.

Piaget smiled, a deaf smile of ultimate stubbornness, 
let a honeyed look ﬂow

across the landscape around them, the greenhouses, 
the people.

Dasein knew then why he'd been sent here. No mere 
market report had prompted

this. Marden had nailed it. He was here to break this 
up, smash it.

The Santarogans were working their children here, 
training them. Child labor.

Piaget seemed not to care how much he revealed.

"Come along," Piaget said. "I'll show you our school."

Dasein shook his head. What would it be in there? An 
accidental push against

broken glass? A child with a knife?

"I'm . . . I have to think," Dasein said.

"Are you sure?" Piaget's words dropped on the air like 
a challenge.

Dasein thought of a fortress abbey in the Dark Ages, 
warrior monks. All this

was contained in Piaget and his valley, in the 
conﬁdence with which

Santarogans deﬁed the outside. Were they really 
conﬁdent? he wondered. Or

were they actors hypnotized by their own 
performance?

"You've been a swimmer on the surface," Piaget said. 
"You haven't even seen

the struggle. You haven't yet developed the innocent 
eye that sees the

 universe uncluttered by past assumptions. You were 
programmed and sent here

to break us up."

Dasein paled.

"To be programmed is to be prejudiced," Piaget said. 
"Because prejudice is

selecting and rejecting and that is programming." He 
sighed. "Such pains we

take with you because of our Jenny."

"I came here with an open mind," Dasein said.

"Not prejudiced?" Piaget raised his eyebrows.

"So you're contending with . . . groups outside over 
what's the right way . .

."

"Contending is too soft a word, Dasein. There's a 
power struggle going on

over control of the human consciousness. We are a 
cell of health surrounded

by plague. It's not men's minds that are at stake, but 
their consciousness,

their awareness. This isn't a struggle over a market 
area. Make no mistake

about it. This is a struggle over what's to be judged 
valuable in our,

universe. Outside, they value whatever can be 
measured, counted or tabulated.

Here, we go by different standards."

Dasein sensed threat in Piaget's voice. There was no 
longer a veneer of

pretense here. The doctor was setting up the sides in 
a war and Dasein felt

caught in the middle. He was, he knew, on more 
dangerous ground than he'd

ever been before. Piaget and his friends controlled 
the valley. An

ex-post-facto accident would be child's play for them.

"The ones who hired me," Dasein said, "they're men 
who believe . . ."

"Men!" Piaget sneered. "Out there . . ." He pointed 
beyond the hills which

enclosed the valley. " . . . they're destroying their 
environment. In the

process, they're becoming not-men! We are men." He 
touched his chest. "They

are not. Nature is a uniﬁed ﬁeld. A radical change in 
environment means

the inhabitants must change to survive. The not-men 
out there are changing to

survive."

Dasein gaped at Piaget. That was it, of course. The 
Santarogans were

conservatives . . . unchanging. He'd seen this for 
himself. But there was a

fanatic intensity to Piaget, a religious fervor, that 
repelled Dasein. So it

was a struggle over men's minds . . .

"You are saying to yourself," Piaget said, "that these 
fool Santarogans have a

psycheletic substance which makes them inhuman."

It was so close to his thoughts that Dasein grew still 
with fear. Could they

read minds? Was that a by-product of the Jaspers 
substance?

"You're equating us with the unwashed, sandaled 
users of LSD," Piaget said,

"Kooks, you would say. But you are like them -- 
unaware. We are aware. We

have truly released the mind. We have a power 
medicine -- just as whiskey and

gin and aspirin and tobacco . . . and, yes, LSD, just as 
these are power

medicines. But you must see the difference. Whiskey 
and the other

depressants, these keep their subjects docile. Our 
medicine releases the

animal that has never been tamed . . . up to now."

Dasein looked at the greenhouses.

 "Yes," Piaget said. "Look here. That is where we 
domesticate the human

animal."

With a shock of awareness, Dasein realized he had 
heard too much ever to be

allowed out of the valley. They had passed a point of 
no return with him. In

his present state of mind, there was only one answer 
for the Santarogans:

they had to kill him. The only question remaining 
was: Did they know it?

Was any of this conscious? Or did it truly operate at 
the level of instinct?

If he precipitated a crisis, Dasein knew he'd ﬁnd out. 
Was there a way to

avoid it? he wondered. As he hesitated, Piaget moved 
around the truck,

climbed in beside him.

"You won't come with me," he said. "I'll go with you."

"You'll go with me?"

"To my house; to the clinic." He turned, studied 
Dasein. "I love my niece,

you understand? I'll not have her hurt if I can prevent 
it."

"If I refuse?"

"Ahh, Gilbert, you would make the angels weep. We 
don't want weeping, do we?

We don't want Jenny's tears. Aren't you concerned 
about her?"

"I've some anxiety about . . ."

"When anxiety enters, inquiry stops. You have a hard 
head, Gilbert. A hard

head makes a sore back. Let us go to the clinic."

"What kind of death trap have you set up there?"

Piaget glared at him in outrage. "Death trap?"

Holding as reasonable a tone as he could manage, 
Dasein said: "You're trying

to kill me. Don't deny it. I've . . ."

"I'm disgusted with you, Gilbert. When have we tried 
to kill you?"

Dasein took a deep breath, held up his right hand, 
enumerated the accidents,

dropping a ﬁnger for each one until his hand was 
clenched into a ﬁst. He

had left out only the incident with Petey Jorick . . . and 
that because of a

promise.

"Accidents!" Piaget said.

"As we both know," Dasein said, "there are very few 
real accidents in this

world. Most of what we call accidents are 
unconscious violence. You say

you've opened your mind. Use it."

"Pah! Your thoughts are like muddy water!"

"Let the muddy water stand and it becomes clear," 
Dasein said.

"You can't be serious." He glared at Dasein. "But I see 
that you are." He

closed his eyes momentarily, opened them. "Well, 
would you believe Jenny?"

Stay away from me! I love you! Dasein thought.

"Let's go to your clinic," Dasein said. He started the 
truck, backed out of

 the parking lot and headed toward town.

"Trying to kill you," Piaget muttered. He stared out at 
the landscape rushing

past them.

Dasein drove in silence . . . thinking, thinking, 
thinking. The instant he

headed toward Jenny, the old fantasies gripped him. 
Jenny and her valley!

The place had enveloped him in its aura -- crazy, 
crazy, crazy! But the

pattern was emerging. It was going together with its 
own Santaroga kind of

logic.

"So not everyone can take your . . . power medicine?"
Dasein asked. "What

happens to the ones who fail?"

"We take care of our own," Piaget growled. "That's 
why I keep hoping you'll

stay."

"Jenny's a trained psychologist. Why don't you use 
her?"

"She does her tour of duty."

"I'm going to ask Jenny to leave with me," Dasein said.      
"You know that, don't

you?"

Piaget sniffed.

"She can break away from your . . . Jaspers," Dasein 
said. "Men go into the

service from here. They must . . ."

"They always come home when it's over," Piaget said. 
"That's in your notes.

Don't you realize how unhappy they are out there?" 
He turned toward Dasein.

"Is that the choice you'd offer Jenny?"

"They can't be all that unhappy about leaving," Dasein 
said. "Otherwise you

clever people would've found another solution."

"Hmmph!" Piaget snorted. "You didn't even do your 
homework for the people who

hired you." He sighed. "I'll tell you, Gilbert. The draft 
rejects most of

our young men -- severe allergy reaction to a diet 
which doesn't include

periodic administration of Jaspers. They can only get 
that here. The

approximately six percent of our young people who 
go out do so as a duty to

the valley. We don't want to call down the federal 
wrath on us. We have a

political accommodation with the state, but we're not 
large enough to apply

the same technique nationally."

They've already decided about me, Dasein thought.
They don't care what they

tell me.

The realization brought a tight sensation of fear in 
the pit of his stomach.

He rounded a corner and came parallel with the 
river. Ahead stood the clump

of willows and the long, down-sweeping curve to the 
bridge. Dasein recalled

his projection of evil onto the river, stepped on the 
throttle to get this

place behind him. The truck entered the curve. The 
road was banked nicely.

The bridge came into view. There was a yellow truck 
parked off the road at

the far side, men standing behind it drinking out of 
metal cups.

"Look out!" Piaget shouted.

In that instant, Dasein saw the reason for the truck -- 
a gaping hole in the

 center of the bridge where the planks had been 
removed. That was a county

work crew and they'd opened at least a ten foot hole 
in the bridge.

The truck sped some forty feet during the moment it 
took Dasein to realize his

peril.

Now, he could see a two-by-four stretched across each 
end of the bridge,

yellow warning ﬂags tied at their centers.

Dasein gripped the steering wheel. His mind shifted 
into a speed of

computation he had never before experienced. The 
effect was to slow the

external passage of time. The truck seemed to come 
almost to a stop while he

reviewed the possibilities --

Hit the brakes?

No. Brakes and tires were old. At this speed, the truck 
would skid onto the

bridge and into the hole.

Swerve off the road?

No. The river waited on both sides -- a deep cut in the 
earth to swallow

them.

Aim for a bridge abutment to stop the truck? Not at 
this speed and without

seat belts. Hit the throttle to increase speed? That was 
a possibility.

There was the temporary barrier to break through, 
but that was only a

two-by-four. The bridge rose in a slight arc up and 
over the river. The hole

had been opened in the center. Given enough speed, 
the truck could leap the

hole.

Dasein jammed the throttle to the ﬂoorboards. The 
old truck leaped ahead.

There came a sharp cracking sound as they smashed 
through the barrier. Planks

clattered beneath the wheels. There came a 
breathless instant of ﬂying, a

spring-crushing lurch as they landed across the hole, 
the "crack" of the far

barrier.

He hit the brakes, came to a screeching stop opposite 
the workmen. Time

resumed its normal pace as Dasein stared out at the 
crew -- ﬁve men, faces

pale, mouths agape.

"For the love of heaven!" Piaget gasped. "Do you 
always take chances like

that?"

"Was there any other way to get us out of that mess?" 
Dasein asked. He lifted

his right hand, stared at it. The hand was trembling.

Piaget reﬂected a moment, then: "You took what was 
probably the only way out

. . . but if you hadn't been driving so damn' fast on a 
blind . . ."

"I will make you a bet," Dasein said. "I'll bet the work 
on that bridge

wasn't necessary, that it was either a mistake or some 
sort of make-work."

Dasein reached for his door handle, had to grope 
twice to get it in his hand,

then found it took a conscious surge of effort to open 
the door. He stepped

out, found his knees rubbery. He stood a moment, 
took several deep breaths,

then moved around to the front of the truck.

Both headlights were smashed and there was a deep 
dent stretching across both

fenders and the grill.

 Dasein turned his attention to the workmen. One, a 
stocky, dark-haired man in

a plaid shirt and dungarees stood a step ahead of the 
others. Dasein focused

on the man, said: "Why wasn't there a warning sign 
back there around the

corner?"

"Good God, man!" the fellow said. His face reddened.
"Nobody comes down that

road this time of day."

Dasein walked down the road toward a pile of planks, 
dirt and oil on them

testifying that they'd been taken from the bridge. 
They looked to be

three-by-twelve redwood. He lifted the end of one, 
turned it over-no cracks

or checks. It gave off the sharp sound of an unbroken 
board when he dropped

it back to the pile.

He turned to see the workman he'd addressed 
approaching. Piaget was several

paces behind the man.

"When did you get the order to do this work?" Dasein 
asked.

"Huh?" The man stopped, stared at Dasein with a 
puzzled frown.

"When did you get orders to repair this bridge?" 
Dasein asked.

"Well . . . we decided to come up here about an hour 
ago. What the hell

difference does it make? You've smashed the . . ."

"You decided?" Dasein asked. "Aren't you assigned to 
jobs?"

"I'm the road crew foreman in this valley, mister. I 
decide, not that it's

any of your business."

Piaget came to a stop beside the man, said: "Dr. 
Dasein, this is Josh Marden,

Captain Marden's nephew."

"Nepotism begins at home, I see," Dasein said, his 
tone elaborately polite.

"Well, Mr. Marden, or may I call you Josh?"

"Now, you look here, Dr. Das . . ."

"Josh, then," Dasein said, still in that tone of calm 
politeness. "I'm very

curious, Josh. These appear to be perfectly sound 
planks. Why'd you decide

to replace them?"

"What the hell diff . . ."

"Tell him, Josh," Piaget said. "I confess to a certain 
curiosity of my own."

Marden looked at Piaget, back to Dasein. "Well . . . we 
inspected the bridge

. . . We make regular inspections. We just decided to 
do a little preventive

maintenance, put in new planks here and use the old 
ones on a bridge that

doesn't get as much traﬃc. There's nothing unusual 
about . . ."

"Is there any urgent road work in this valley?" Dasein 
asked. "Is there some

job you put off to come to this . . ."

"Now, look here, Mister!" Marden took a step toward 
Dasein. "You've no call

to . . ."

"What about the Old Mill Road?" Piaget asked. "Are 
those pot holes still on

 the curve by the ditch?"

"Now, look, Doc," Marden said, whirling toward 
Piaget. "Not you, too. We

decided . . ."

"Easy does it, Josh," Piaget said. "I'm just curious.
What about the Old

Mill Road?"

"Aw, Doc. It was such a nice day and the . . ."

"So that work still has to be done," Piaget said.

"I win the bet," Dasein said. He headed back toward 
his truck.

Piaget fell into step beside him.

"Hey!" Marden shouted. "You've broken county 
property and those boards you

landed on are probably . . ."

Dasein cut him off without turning. "You'd better get 
that bridge repaired

before somebody else has trouble here."

He slid behind the wheel of his truck, slammed the 
door. Reaction was setting

in now: his whole body felt tense with anger.

it still run?" he asked.

"Accident!" Dasein said.

Piaget remained silent.

Dasein put the truck in gear, eased it up to a steady 
thirty-ﬁve miles an

hour. The rear-view mirror showed him the crew 
already at work on the bridge,

one of their number with a warning ﬂag trudging 
back around the blind comer.

"Now, they send out a ﬂagman," Dasein said.

A corner cut off the view in the mirror. Dasein 
concentrated on driving. The

truck had developed new rattles and a front-end 
shimmy.

"They have to be accidents," Piaget said. "There's no 
other explanation."

A stop sign came into view ahead. Dasein stopped for 
the main highway. It

was empty of traﬃc. He turned right toward town. 
Piaget's protestations

deserved no answer, he thought, and he gave no 
answer.

They entered the outskirts of town. There was 
Scheler's station on the left.

Dasein pulled in behind the station, drove back to the 
large shed-roofed metal

building labeled "Garage."

"What're you doing here?" Piaget asked. "This 
machine isn't worth . . ."

"I want it repaired suﬃciently to get me out of 
Santaroga," Dasein said.

The garage doors were open. Dasein nosed the truck 
inside, stopped, climbed

out. There was a steady sound of work all around -- 
clanging of metal,

machinery humming. Lines of cars had been angled 
toward benches down both

sides of the garage. Lights glared down on the 
benches.

 A stocky, dark-skinned man in stained white coveralls 
came from the back of

the garage, stopped in front of the track.

"What the devil did you hit?" he asked.

Dasein recognized one of the quartet from the card 
game at the Inn -- Scheler

himself.

"Doctor Piaget here will tell you all about it," Dasein 
said. "I want some

headlights put on this thing and you might have a 
look at the steering."

"Why don't you junk it?" Scheler asked.

The truck door slammed and Piaget came up on the 
right. "Can you ﬁx it,

Sam?" he asked.

"Sure, but it isn't worth it."

"Do it anyway and put it on my bill. I don't want our 
friend here to think

we're trying to trap him in the valley."

"If you say so, Doc."

Scheler turned around, shouted: "Bill! Take that 
Lincoln off the rack and

put this truck on. I'll write up a ticket."

A young man in greasy blue coveralls came around 
from the left bench where he

had been hidden by a Lincoln Continental lifted 
halfway up on a hoist. The

young man had Scheler's build and dark skin, the 
same set of face and eyes:

bright blue and alert.

"My son, Bill," Scheler said. "He'll take care of it for 
you."

Dasein felt a twinge of warning fear, backed against 
the side of his truck.

The garage around him had taken on the same feeling 
of concentrated

malevolence he had sensed in the river.

Scheler started through the space between the 
Lincoln and an old Studebaker

truck, called over his shoulder: "If you'll sign the 
ticket over here, Dr.

Dasein, we'll get right at it."

Dasein took two steps after him, hesitated. He felt the 
garage closing in

around him.

"We can walk to the clinic from here," Piaget said.
"Sam will call when your

rig's ready."

Dasein took another step, stopped, glanced back. 
Young Bill Scheler was right

behind him. The sense of menace was a pounding 
drumbeat in Dasein's head. He

saw Bill reach out a friendly hand to guide him 
between the cars. There was

no doubt of the innocent intention of that hand, the 
smiling face behind it,

but Dasein saw the hand as the embodiment of 
danger. With an inarticulate

cry, Dasein sprang aside.

The young mechanic, caught off balance with nothing 
ahead of his thrusting

arm, lurched forward, stumbled, fell. As he fell, the 
hoist with the Lincoln

on it came crashing down. It rocked twice, subsided. 
Bill Scheler lay

halfway under it. One of his legs twitched, was still.

A pool of red began to ﬂow from beneath the car.

 Piaget dashed past him shouting for Scheler to raise 
the hoist.

A compressor began thumping somewhere in the 
background. The Lincoln jerked,

began to rise. It exposed a body, its head smashed 
beyond recognition by one

of the hoist's arms.

Dasein whirled away, ran out of the garage and was 
sick. That could've been

me, he thought. That was meant for me. He grew 
aware of a great bustle of

activity, the sound of a siren in the distance.

Two mechanics emerged from the garage with a pale-
faced, staggering Sam

Scheler between them.

It was his son, Dasein thought. He felt that this was of 
the deepest

signiﬁcance, but his shocked mind gave no 
explanation for that feeling.

He heard one of the mechanics with Scheler say: "It 
was an accident, Sam.

Nothing you could do."

They went into the station with him.

A siren began giving voice in the distance. Its wailing 
grew louder. Dasein

backed off to the edge of the station's parking area, 
stood against a low

fence.

His truck, nosed into the garage, lurched into motion, 
was swallowed by the

building.

The ambulance droned its way into the parking area, 
turned, backed into the

garage. Presently, it emerged, drove away with its 
siren silent.

Piaget came out of the garage.

He was an oddly subdued man, indecisive in his walk 
-- short strides, soft of

step. He saw Dasein, approached with an air of 
diﬃdence. There was a smear

of blood down the right side of his white smock, black 
grease at the hem,

grease on the left arm.

Blood and grease -- they struck Dasein as an odd 
combination but things out of

which an entire scene could be reconstructed. He 
shuddered.

"I . . . I need a cup of coffee," Piaget said. He closed his 
eyes brieﬂy,

opened them to stare pleadingly at Dasein. "There's a 
cafe around the corner.

Would you . . ." He broke off to take a deep, trembling 
breath. "I brought

that boy into the world." He shook his head. "Just 
when you think you're the

complete doctor, immune to all personal involvement 
. . ."

Dasein experienced a surge of compassion for Piaget, 
stepped away from the

fence to take the doctor's arm. "Where's this cafe? I 
could use something

myself."

The cafe was a narrow brick building squeezed 
between a hardware store and a

dark little shop labeled "Bootery." The screen door 
banged behind them. The

place smelled of steam and the omnipresent Jaspers. 
One of Scheler's station

attendants -- dark green jacket and white hat -- sat at 
a counter on the left

staring into a cup of coffee. A man in a leather apron, 
horn-callused hands,

gray hair, was eating a sandwich at the far end of the 
counter.

Dasein steered Piaget into a booth opposite the 
counter, sat down across from

 him.

The station attendant at the counter, turned, glanced 
at them. Dasein found

himself confronted by a face he knew to be another 
Scheler -- the same set to

the blue eyes, the same blocky ﬁgure and dark skin. 
The man looked at

Piaget, said: "Hi, Doc. There was a siren."

Piaget lifted his gaze from the tabletop, looked at the 
speaker. The glaze

left Piaget's eyes. He took two shallow breaths, looked 
away, back to the man

at the counter.

"Harry," Piaget said, and his voice was a hoarse croak.   
"I . . . couldn't . .

." He broke off.

The man slid off the counter stool. His face was a 
pale, frozen mask. "I've

been sitting here . . . feeling . . ." He brushed a hand 
across his mouth.

"It was . . . Bill!" He whirled, dashed out of the cafe. 
The door slammed

behind him.

"That's Scheler's other son," Piaget said.

"He knew," Dasein said, and he recalled the 
experience at the lake, the

feeling of rapport.

Life exists immersed in a sea of unconsciousness, he 
reminded himself. In the

drug, these people gain a view of that sea.

Piaget studied Dasein a moment, then: "Of course he 
knew. Haven't you ever

had a tooth pulled? Couldn't you feel the hole where it 
had been?"

A slender red-haired woman in a white apron, lines 
of worry on her face, came

up to the booth, stood looking down at Piaget. "I'll 
bring your coffee," she

said. She started to turn away, hesitated. "I . . . felt it . . 
. and Jim

next door came to the back to tell me. I didn't know 
how to tell Harry. He

just kept sitting there . . . getting lower and lower . . . 
knowing really but

refusing to face it. I . . ." She shrugged. "Anything 
besides coffee?"

Piaget shook his head. Dasein realized with a sense of 
shock the man was near

tears.

The waitress left, returned with two mugs of coffee, 
went back to the kitchen

-- all without speaking. She, too, had sensed Piaget's 
emotions.

Dasein sighed, lifted his coffee, started to put the mug 
to his lips,

hesitated. There was an odd bitter odor beneath the 
omnipresent Jaspers tang

in the coffee. Dasein put his nose to the mug, sniffed. 
Bitter. A plume of

steam rising from the dark liquid assumed for Dasein 
the shape of a hooded

cobra lifting its fanged head to strike him.

Shakily, he returned the mug to the table, looked up 
to meet Piaget's

questioning gaze.

"There's poison in that coffee," Dasein rasped.

Piaget looked at his own coffee.

Dasein took the mug from him, sniffed at it. The bitter 
odor was missing. He

touched his tongue to it -- heat, the soothing ﬂow of 
Jaspers . . . coffee .

..

 "Is something wrong?"

Dasein looked up to ﬁnd the waitress standing over 
him. "There's poison in

my coffee," he said.

"Nonsense." She took the mug from Dasein's hand, 
started to drink.

her the other mug.

She stared at it, smelled it, put it down, dashed for the 
kitchen. Presently,

she returned carrying a small yellow box. Her face 
was porcelain white,

freckles standing out across her cheeks and nose like 
the marks of some

disease.

"Roach powder," she whispered. "I . . . the box was 
spilled on the shelf over

the counter. I . . ." She shook her head.

Dasein looked at Piaget, but the doctor refused to 
meet his gaze.

"Another accident," Dasein said, holding his voice 
even. "Eh, doctor?"

Piaget wet his lips with his tongue.

Dasein slid out of the booth, pushing the waitress 
aside. He took the mug of

poisoned coffee, poured it deliberately on the ﬂoor. 
"Accidents will happen,

won't they . . . Vina?"

"Please," she said. "I . . . didn't . . ."

"Of course you didn't," Dasein said.

"You don't understand," Piaget said.

"But I do understand," Dasein said. "What'll it be next 
time? A gun

accident? How about something heavy dropped from 
a roof? Accidentally, of

course." He turned, strode out of the cafe, stood on 
the sidewalk to study

his surroundings.

It was such a normal town. The trees on the parking 
strip were so normal.

The young couple walking down the sidewalk across 
from him -- they were so

normal. The sounds -- a truck out on the avenue to his 
right, the cars there,

a pair of jays arguing in the treetops, two women 
talking on the steps of a

house down the street to his left -- such an air of 
normalcy about it all.

The screen door slapped behind him. Piaget came up 
to stand at Dasein's side.

"I know what you're thinking," he said.

"Do you, really?"

"I know how all this must look to you."

"Is that so?"

"Believe me," Piaget said, "all this is just a terrible 
series of coincidences

that . . ."

"Coincidence!" Dasein whirled on him, glaring. "How 
far can you stretch

credulity, doctor? How long can you rationalize 
before you have to admit . .

."

 "Gilbert, I'd cut off my right arm rather than let 
anything happen to you.

It'd break Jenny's heart to . . ."

"You actually don't see it, do you?" Dasein asked, his 
voice ﬁlled with awe.

"You don't see it. You refuse to see it."

"Dr. Dasein?"

The voice came from his right. Dasein turned to ﬁnd 
Harry -- "Scheler's

other son" -- standing there, hat in hand. He looked 
younger than he had in

the cafe -- no more than nineteen. There was a sad 
hesitancy in his manner.

"I wanted to . . ." He broke off. "My father said to tell 
you . . . We know

it wasn't your fault that . . ." He looked into Dasein's 
eyes, a look that

pleaded for help.

Dasein felt a pang of rapport for the young man. 
There was a basic decency at

work here. In the midst of their own grief, the 
Schelers had taken time to

try to ease Dasein's feelings.

They expected me to feel guilt about this, Dasein 
thought. The fact that he'd

experienced no such feeling ﬁlled Dasein now with 
an odd questing sensation

of remorse.

If I hadn't . . . He aborted the thought. If I hadn't 
what? That accident

was meant for me.

"It's all right, Harry," Piaget said. "We understand."

"Thanks, Doc." He looked at Piaget with relief. "Dad 
said to tell you . . .

the car, Dr. Dasein's truck . . . The new headlights are 
in it. That's all we

can do. The steering . . . You'll just have to drive slow 
unless you replace

the whole front end."

"Already?" Dasein asked.

"It doesn't take long to put in headlights, sir."

Dasein looked from the youth to Piaget. The doctor 
returned his stare with an

expression that said as clearly as words: "They want 
your truck out of there.

It's a reminder . . ."

Dasein nodded. Yes. The truck would remind them of 
the tragedy. This was

logical. Without a word, he set off for the garage.

Piaget sped up, matched his pace to Dasein's.

"Gilbert," he said, "I must insist you come over to the 
house. Jenny can . .

."

"Insist?"

"You're being very pig-headed, Gilbert."

Dasein put down a surge of anger, said: "I don't want 
to hurt Jenny any more

than you do. That's why I'm going to direct my own 
steps. I don't really

want you to know what I'm going to do next. I don't 
want any of you waiting

there in my path with one of your . . . accidents."

"Gilbert, you must put that idea out of your mind!
None of us want to hurt

 you."

They were on the parking area between the station 
and the garage now. Dasein

stared at the gaping door to the garage, overcome 
suddenly by the sensation

that the door was a mouth with deadly teeth ready to 
clamp down on him. The

door yawned there to swallow him.

Dasein hesitated, slowed, stopped.

"What is it now?" Piaget asked.

"Your truck's just inside," Harry Scheler said. "You can 
drive it and . . ."

"What about the bill?" Dasein asked, stalling for time.

"I'll take care of that," Piaget said. "Go get your truck 
while I'm settling

up. Then we'll go to . . ."

out of the path of anything that might come spewing 
from that mouth-door.

"I can understand your reluctance to go back in 
there," Piaget said, "but

really . . ."

"You drive it out for me, Harry," Dasein said.

The youth stared at Dasein with an oddly trapped 
look. "Well, I have some . .

."

"Drive the damn' car out for him!" Piaget ordered.
"This is nonsense!"

"Sir?" Harry looked at Piaget.

"I said drive the damn' car out here for him!" Piaget 
repeated. "I've had as

much of this as I can stomach!"

Hesitantly, the youth turned toward the garage door.
His feet moved with a

dragging slowness.

"See here, Gilbert," Piaget said, "you can't really 
believe we . . ."

"I believe what I see," Dasein said.

Piaget threw up his hands, tamed away in 
exasperation.

Dasein listened to the sounds from the garage. They 
were subdued in there --

voices, only a few mechanical noises, the whirring 
buzz of some machine.

A door slammed. It sounded like the door to the truck. 
Dasein recognized the

grinding of his starter. The engine caught with its 
characteristic banging,

as drowned immediately in a roaring explosion that 
sent a blast of ﬂame

shooting out the garage door.

Piaget leaped back with an oath.

Dasein ran diagonally past him to look into the 
garage. He glimpsed ﬁgures

rushing out a door at the far end. His truck stood in 
the central traﬃc

aisle at the core of a red-orange ball of ﬂame. As he 
stared at the truck, a

burning something emerged from the ﬂames, 
staggered, fell.

 Behind Dasein, someone screamed: "Harry!"

Without consciously willing it, Dasein found himself 
dashing through the

garage door to grab into the ﬂames and drag the 
youth to safety. There were

sensations of heat, pain. A roaring-crackling sound of 
ﬁre ﬁlled the air

around him. The smell of gasoline and char invaded 
Dasein's nostrils. He saw

a river of ﬁre reach toward him along the ﬂoor. A 
blazing beam crashed down

where the youth had lain. There were shouts, a great 
scrambling confusion.

Something white was thrown over the ﬁgure he was 
dragging, engulfed the

ﬂames. Hands eased him aside. Dasein realized he 
was out of the garage,

that Piaget was using his white smock to smother the 
ﬁre on Harry.

Someone appeared to be doing something similar to 
both Dasein's arms and the

front of his jacket, using a coat and a car robe. The 
coat and robe were

pulled away. Dasein stared down at his own arms -- 
black and red ﬂesh,

blisters forming. The sleeves of his shirt and jacket 
ended at the elbows in

jagged edgings of char.

The pain began -- a throbbing agony along the backs 
of both arms and hands.

Through a world hazed by the pain, Dasein saw a 
station-wagon screech to a

rocking stop beside him, saw men carry the smock-
shrouded ﬁgure of Harry into

the back of the wagon. More hands eased Dasein into 
the seat beside the

driver.

There were voices: "Easy there." "Get 'em to the clinic, 
Ed, and don't

loiter." "Give us a hand here." "Here! Over here!"

There was a sound of sirens, the pounding throb of 
heavy truck engines.

Dasein heard Piaget's voice from the rear of the 
station-wagon: "Okay, Ed.

Let's get going."

The wagon slipped into motion, dipped onto the 
street, turned, gathered speed.

Dasein looked at the driver, recognized, one of the 
station attendants, turned

to peer into the back.

Piaget crouched there working over the injured 
youth.

"How bad is he?" Dasein asked.

"He was wearing long Johns," Piaget said. "They 
helped. He seems to've

protected his face by burying it in his cap, but his 
back is bad. So're his

legs and arms and his hands."

Dasein stared at the injured youth.

"Will he . . ."

"I think we got to him in time," Piaget said. "I gave 
him a shot to put him

out." He looked at Dasein's arms. "Do you want a 
needle?"

Dasein shook his head from side to side. "No."

What made me rush in there to save him? Dasein 
asked himself. It had been an

instinctive reaction. Saving Harry had precipitated 
him into a semihelpless

situation, needing medical attention himself, caught 
in a car with two

Santarogans. Dasein probed at his embryo Jaspers 
awareness, the sixth sense

which had warned him of danger. He found nothing. 
The threat appeared to

have been withdrawn. Is that why I acted to save 
Harry? Dasein wondered. Did

 I hope to propitiate Santaroga by saving one of their 
own even while they were

trying to kill me?

"Another accident," Piaget said, and his voice carried 
a questioning tone of

self-doubt.

Dasein met the doctor's probing gaze, nodded.

The station-wagon turned onto a tree-lined street, and 
Dasein recognized the

broad, brown-shingled front of Piaget's house. They 
drove past it and onto a

graveled driveway that curved around to the rear 
through a tall board fence

and under a portico jutting from a two-storey brick 
building.

In spite of his pain, Dasein realized this building lay 
concealed from the

street by the fence and a border planting of 
evergreens, that it must be part

of the complex which included Piaget's house. It all 
seemed hazily

signiﬁcant.

White-coated attendants rushed a gurney out of the 
building, eased the burned

youth from the rear of the station wagon. Piaget 
opened Dasein's door, said:

"Can you get out under your own power, Gilbert?"

"I . . . think so."

Dasein held his arms out in front of him, slid from the 
car. The pain and the

motion required all his attention. There was a 
beginning ache along his

forehead now and down the right side of his face. The 
brick building, a pair

of swinging glass doors, hands gently guiding him -- 
all seemed rather distant

and receding.

I'm blacking out, he thought. He felt it might be 
extremely dangerous to sink

into unconsciousness. With a start, he realized he had 
been eased into a

wheelchair, that it was speeding down a green-walled 
hallway. The surge of

awareness sent his senses crashing into the pain. He 
felt himself recoiling

toward the blessed relief of unconsciousness. It was 
an almost physical

thing, as though his body was bouncing between 
limiting walls --

unconsciousness or pain.

Bright lights!

The light was all around him. He heard scissors 
snipping, looked down to see

hands working the scissors. They were cutting the 
sleeves of his jacket and

shirt, lifting the fabric away from seared ﬂesh.

That's my ﬂesh, Dasein thought. He tore his gaze 
away from it.

Dasein felt something cool at his left shoulder, a 
pricking sensation, a

pulling. A hand holding a hypodermic moved across 
his plane of vision. The

important thing to Dasein in this moment was that his 
vision was limited to a

plane. There was light, a foggy glittering out of which 
hands moved and faces

appeared. He felt himself being undressed. Something 
cool, soothing, sliding

was being applied to his hands and arms, to his face.

They've given me a shot to put me out, he thought. He 
tried to think about

danger then, about being totally helpless here. 
Consciousness refused to

respond. He couldn't push his awareness through the 
glittering fog.

There were voices. He concentrated on the voices. 
Someone said: "For the

love of heaven! He was carrying a gun." Another 
voice: "Put that down!"

 For some reason, this amused Dasein, but his body 
refused to laugh.

He thought then of his camper as he'd last seen it -- a 
ball of orange ﬂame.

All his records had been in there Dasein realized. 
Every bit of evidence he'd

accumulated about Santaroga had gone up in that 
ﬁre. Evidence? he thought.

Notes . . . speculations . . . It was all still in his mind, 
subject to

recall.

But memory is lost at death! he thought.

Fear galvanized a miniscule core of selfdom in him. 
He tried to shout. No

sound came. He tried to move. Muscles refused to 
obey.

When the darkness came, it was like a hand that 
reached up and seized him.

Chapter 11

Dasein awoke remembering a dream -- a 
conversation with faceless gods.

"Dunghills rise and castles fall." In the dream, 
something with an echo-box

voice had said that. "Dunghills rise and castles fall."

Dasein felt it important to remember all the dream. 
Yes. "I'm the man who

woke up." That was what he'd tried to tell the faceless 
gods. "I'm the man

who woke up."

The dream was a ﬂowing pattern in his memory, a 
process that couldn't be

separated from himself. It was full of pure deeds and 
anguish. There was a

chronic frustration in it. He had tried to do something 
that was inherently

impossible. What had he tried to do? It eluded him.

Dasein remembered the hand of darkness that had 
preceded the dream. He caught

his breath and his eyes popped open. Daylight. He 
was in a bed in a

green-walled room. Out a window at his left he could 
see a twisted red branch

of madrone, oily green leaves, blue sky. He felt his 
body then: bandages and

pain along his arms, bandages across his forehead 
and his right cheek. His

throat felt dry and there was a sourness on his 
tongue.

Still, the dream clung to him. It was a disembodied 
thing. Disembodied.

Death! That was a clue. He knew it. Dasein recalled 
Piaget speaking of "a

common instinctive experience." What did instinct 
have to do with the dream?

Instinct. Instinct. What was instinct? An innate 
pattern impressed on the

nervous system. Death. Instinct.

"Look inward, look inward, oh Man, on thyself," the 
faceless gods of the dream

had said. He recalled that now and felt like sneering.

It was the old know-thyself syndrome, the 
psychologist's disease. Inward,

ever inward. The death instinct was in there with all 
the other instincts.

Know thyself? Dasein sensed then he couldn't know 
himself without dying.

 Death was the background against which life could 
know itself.

A throat was cleared to Dasein's right.

He tensed, turned his head to look toward the sound.

Winston Burdeaux sat in a chair beside the door. The 
brown eyes staring out

of Burdeaux's moorish face held a quizzical 
expression.

Why Burdeaux? Dasein wondered.

"I'm happy to see you're awake, sir," Burdeaux said.

that why Burdeaux had been brought in? Dasein 
wondered. Had Burdeaux been

picked to soothe and lull the victim?

But I'm still alive, Dasein thought.

If they'd wanted to harm him, what better 
opportunity had presented itself?

He'd been helpless, unconscious . . .

"What time is it?" Dasein asked. The movement of 
speaking hurt his burned

cheek.

"It's almost ten o'clock of a beautiful morning," 
Burdeaux said. He smiled, a

ﬂash of white teeth in the dark features. "Is there 
anything you wish?"

At the question, Dasein's stomach knotted in a pang of 
hunger. He hesitated

on the point of asking for breakfast. What might be in 
any food served here?

he asked himself.

Hunger is more than an empty stomach, Dasein 
thought. I can go without a

meal.

"What I wish," Dasein said, "is to know why you're 
here."

"The doctor thought I might be the safest one," 
Burdeaux said. "I, myself,

was an outsider once. I can recall how it was."

"They tried to kill you, too?"

"Sir!"

"Well . . . did you have accidents?" Dasein asked.

"I do not share the doctor's opinion about . . . 
accidents," Burdeaux said.

"Once . . . I thought -- But I can see now how wrong I 
was. The people of

this valley wish to harm no man."

"Yet, you're here because the doctor decided you'd be 
the safest," Dasein

said. "And you haven't answered my question: Did 
you have accidents?"

"You must understand," Burdeaux said, "that when 
you don't know the ways of

the valley, you can get into . . . situations which . . ."

"So you did have accidents. Is that why you asked for 
secret packages from

Louisiana?"

"Secret packages?"

 "Why else did you have them sent to Porterville?"

"Oh, you know about that." Burdeaux shook his head, 
chuckled. "Haven't you

ever hungered for the foods of your childhood? I 
didn't think my new friends

would understand."

with fear at what the Jaspers in the local food was 
doing to you?"

Burdeaux scowled, then: "Sir, when I ﬁrst came here, 
I was an ignorant

nigger. Now, I'm an educated Negro . . . and a 
Santarogan. I no longer have

the delusions which I . . ."

"So you did try to ﬁght it!"

"Yes . . . I fought it. But I soon learned how foolish that 
was."

"A delusion."

"Indeed; a delusion."

To remove a man's delusions, Dasein thought, is to 
create a vacuum. What

rushes into that vacuum?

"Let us say," Burdeaux said, "that I shared your 
delusions once."

"It's normal to share the delusions of one's society," 
Dasein murmured, half

to himself. "It's abnormal to develop private 
delusions."

"Well put," Burdeaux said.

Again, he wondered: What rushed into the vacuum?
What delusions do

Santarogans share?

For one thing, he knew they couldn't see the 
unconscious violence which

created accidents for outsiders. Most of them couldn't 
see this, he corrected

himself. There was a possibility Piaget was beginning 
to understand. After

all, he'd put Burdeaux in here. And Jenny -- "Stay 
away from me! I love

you!"

Dasein began to see Santarogans in a new light. There 
was something

decorously Roman about them . . . and Spartan. They 
were turned in upon

themselves, unfriendly, insular, proud, cut off from 
exchange of ideas that

might . . . He hesitated on this thought, wondering 
about the TV room at the

Inn.

"The room you tried to hide from me," Dasein said.
"At the Inn -- the room

with the television receivers . . ."

"We didn't really want to hide that from you," 
Burdeaux said. "In a way, we

hide it from ourselves . . . and from chance outsiders. 
There's something

very alluring about the sickness that's poured over 
TV. That's why we rotate

the watchers. But we cannot ignore it. TV is the key to 
the outside and it's

gods."

"It's gods?" Dasein suddenly remembered his dream.

"They have very practical gods outside," Burdeaux 
said.

 "What's a practical god?" Dasein asked.

"A practical god? That'a a god who agrees with his 
worshipers. This is a way

to keep from being conquered, you see."

Dasein turned away from Burdeaux to stare up at the 
green ceiling. Conquer

the gods? Was that the dream's chronic frustration?

"I don't understand," he murmured.

"You still carry some of the outside's delusions," 
Burdeaux said. "Outside,

they don't really try to understand the universe. Oh, 
they say they do, but

that's not really what they're up to. You can tell by 
what they do. They're

trying to conquer the universe. Gods are part of the 
universe . . . even

man-made gods."

"If you can't beat 'em, join 'em," Dasein said. "To keep 
from being

conquered, a practical god agrees with his attackers. 
Is that it?"

"You're just as perceptive as Jenny said you'd be," 
Burdeaux said.

"So outsiders attack their gods," Dasein said.

"Anything less than abject submission has to have 
some attack in it," Burdeaux

said. "You try to change a god? What's that except 
accusing the god of not

agreeing with you?"

"And you get all this from the TV?"

"All this from . . ." Burdeaux broke into a chuckle. "Oh, 
no, Doctor Gil . .

. You don't mind if I call you Doctor Gil?"

Dasein turned to stare at the questioning look on 
Burdeaux's face. Doctor

Gil. To object would be to appear the stiffnecked fool. 
But Dasein felt that

agreement would be a step backward, the loss of an 
important battle. He could

see no way to object, though.

"Whatever you wish," Dasein said. "Just explain this 
about the TV."

"That's . . . our window on the outside," Burdeaux 
said. "That whole world of

the permanent expediency out there, that whole 
world is TV. And we watch it

through . . ."

"Permanent expediency?" Dasein tried to raise 
himself on his elbows, but the

effect set his burned arms to throbbing. He sank back, 
kept his gaze on

Burdeaux.

"Why, of course, sir. The outside works on the 
temporary expedient, Doctor

Gil. You must know that. And the temporary always 
turns into the permanent,

somehow. The temporary tax, the necessary little war, 
the temporary brutality

that will cease as soon as certain conditions end . . . 
the government agency

created for the permanent interim . . ."

"So you watch the news broadcasts and get all this 
from . . ."

"More than the news, Doctor Gil. All of it, and our 
watchers write condensed

reports that . . . You see, it's all TV out there -- life, 
everything.

Outsiders are spectators. They expect everything to 
happen to them and they

don't want to do more than turn a switch. They want 
to sit back and let life

happen to them. They watch the late-late show and 
turn off their TVs. Then

 they go to bed to sleep -- which is a form of turning 
themselves off just like

the TV. The trouble is, their late-late show is often 
later than they think.

There's a desperation in not being able to recognize 
this, Doctor Gil.

Desperation leads to violence. There comes a morning 
for almost every one of

those poor people outside when they realize that life 
hasn't happened to them

no matter how much TV they've watched. Life hasn't 
happened because they

didn't take part in it. They've never been onstage, 
never had anything real.

It was all illusion . . . delusion."

Dasein absorbed the intensity of the words, their 
meaning and what lay under

them. There was a terrifying sense of truth in 
Burdeaux's words.

"So they get turned off," Dasein murmured.

"It's all TV," Burdeaux said.

Dasein turned his head, looked out the window.

"You really ought to eat something, Doctor Gil," 
Burdeaux said.

"No."

"Doctor Gil, you're a wise man in some things, but in 
others . . ."

"Don't call me wise," Dasein said. "Call me 
experienced."

"The food here is the very best," Burdeaux said. "I'll 
get it and serve you

myself. You don't have to fear a . . ."

"I've been burned enough times," Dasein said.

"Fire won't crack a full pot, Doctor Gil."

"Win, I admire you and trust you. You saved my life. I 
don't think you were

accident could happen -- even with you."

"You hurt me to say that, Doctor Gil. I'm not the kind 
feeds you with the

corn and chokes you with the cob."

Dasein sighed. He'd offended Burdeaux, but the 
alternative . . . It occurred

to Dasein abruptly that he was sitting on a special 
kind of bomb. Santaroga

had abated its attack on him, probably in part 
because of his present

helplessness. But the community was capable of 
returning to the manufacture

of accidents if and when he should ever want 
something not permitted here.

At the moment, Dasein wanted nothing more than to 
be far away from here. He

wanted this desperately despite the certain 
knowledge this desire must be on

the proscribed list.

The door beside Burdeaux opened. A nurse backed 
into the room pulling a cart.

She turned. Jenny!

Dasein ignored his burns, lifted himself on his 
elbows.

Jenny stared at him with an oddly pained expression. 
Her full lips were

thrust out almost in a pout. The long black hair had 
been tied back in a neat

bun. She wore a white uniform, white stockings, 
white shoes -- no cap.

Dasein swallowed.

 "Miss Jenny," Burdeaux said. "What do you have on 
that cart?"

She spoke without taking her gaze from Dasein.
"Some food for this madman. I

prepared it myself."

"I've been trying to get him to eat," Burdeaux said, 
"but he says no."

"Would you leave us for a while, Win?" she asked. "I 
want . . ."

"The doctor said I wasn't to let . . ."

"Win, please?" She turned toward him, pleading.

Burdeaux swallowed. "Well . . . since it's you . . ."

"Thank you, Win."

"Twenty minutes," Burdeaux said. "I'll be right out in 
the hall where you can

call me if you need."

"Thank you, Win." She turned her attention back to 
Dasein.

Burdeaux left the room, closed the door softly.

Dasein said: "Jen, I . . ."

"Be quiet," she said. "You're not to waste your 
strength. Uncle Larry said .

. ."

"I'm not eating here," Dasein said.

She stamped a foot. "Gil, you're being . . ."

"I'm being a fool," he said. "But the important thing is 
I'm alive."

"But look at you! Look at . . ."

"How's Harry Scheler?"

She hesitated, then: "He'll live. He'll have some scars, 
and for that matter

so will you, but you . . ."

"Have they ﬁgured out what happened?"

"It was an accident."

"That's all? Just an accident?"

"They said something about the line from the fuel 
pump being broken . . . a

bad electrical connection to one of the lights and . . ."

"An accident," Dasein said. "I see." He sank back into 
his pillow.

"I've prepared you some coddled eggs and toast and 
honey," Jenny said.

"You've got to eat something to keep up . . ."

"No."

"Gil!"

 "I said no."

"What're you afraid of?"

"Another accident."

"But I prepared this myself!"

He turned his head, stared at her, spoke in a low 
voice: "Stay away from me.

I love you."

"Gilbert!"

"You said it," he reminded her.

Her face paled. She leaned against the cart, trembling. 
"I know," she

whispered. "Sometimes I can feel the . . ." She looked 
up, tears streaming

down her face. "But I do love you. And you're hurt 
now. I want to take care

of you. I need to take care of you. Look." She lifted the 
cover from one of

the dishes on the cart, spooned a bite of food into her 
mouth.

"Jenny," Dasein whispered. The look of hurt on her 
face, the intensity of his

love for her -- he wanted to take her in his arms and . 
. .

A wide-eyed look came over Jenny's face. She reached 
both hands to her

throat. Her mouth worked, but no sound came forth.

"Jenny!"

She shook her head, eyes staring wildly.

Dasein threw back the covers of his bed, winced as 
movement increased the pain

along his arms. He ignored the pain, slid his feet out 
to a cold tile ﬂoor,

straightened. A wave of dizziness gripped him. Jenny, 
hands still at her

throat, backed toward the door. Dasein started 
toward her, hospital

nightshirt ﬂopping around his knees. He found 
movement diﬃcult, his knees

rubbery.

Abruptly, Jenny slumped to the ﬂoor.

Dasein remembered Burdeaux, shouted: "Help! Win! 
Help!" He staggered,

clutched the edge of the cart. It started to roll.

Dasein found himself sitting helplessly on the ﬂoor as 
the door burst open.

Burdeaux stood there glaring at him, looked down at 
Jenny who lay with her

eyes closed, knees drawn up, gasping.

"Call the doctor," Dasein husked. "Something in the 
food. She ate some . .

."

Burdeaux took one quick breath of awareness, 
whirled away down the hall,

leaving the door open.

Dasein started to crawl toward Jenny. The room 
wavered and twisted around

him. His arms throbbed. There was a whistle in 
Jenny's gasping breaths that

made him want to dash to her, but he couldn't ﬁnd 
the strength. He had

covered only a few feet when Piaget rushed in with 
Burdeaux right behind.

Piaget, his round face a pale blank mask, knelt beside 
Jenny, motioned toward

 Dasein, said: "Get him back in bed."

"The food on the cart," Dasein rasped. "She ate 
something."

A blonde nurse in a stiff white cap wheeled an 
emergency cart in the door,

bent over Piaget's shoulder. They were cut from 
Dasein's view as Burdeaux

scooped him up, deposited him on the bed.

"You stay there, Doctor Gil," Burdeaux said. He 
turned, stared at the action

by the door.

"Allergenic reaction," Piaget said. "Throat's closing.
Give me a double

tube; we'll have to pump her."

The nurse handed something to Piaget, who worked 
over Jenny, his back

obscuring his actions.

"Atropine," Piaget said.

Again, he took something from the nurse.

Dasein found it diﬃcult to focus on the scene. Fear 
tightened his throat.

Why am I so weak? he wondered. Then: Dear God, 
she can't die. Please save

her.

Faces of more hospital personnel appeared at the 
door, wide-eyed, silent.

Piaget glanced up, said: "Get a gurney."

Some of the faces went away. Presently, there was a 
sound of wheels in the

corridor.

Piaget stood up, said: "That's as much as I can do here. 
Get her on the

gurney -- head lower than her feet." He turned to 
Dasein. "What'd she eat?"

"She took . . ." Dasein pointed to the food cart.
"Whatever it is, she took

the cover off. Eggs?"

Piaget took one stride to the cart, grabbed up a dish, 
sniffed at it. His

movement opened the view to the door for Dasein. 
Two orderlies and a nurse

were lifting Jenny there, carrying her out the door. 
There was one glimpse of

her pale face with a tube dangling from the corner of 
her mouth.

"Was it a poison?" Burdeaux asked, his voice hushed.

"Of course it was a poison!" Piaget snapped. "Acts like 
aconite." He turned

with the dish, rushed out.

the hall until Burdeaux closed the door, shutting out 
the sound.

His body bathed in perspiration, Dasein lay 
unresisting while Burdeaux eased

him under the blankets.

"For one moment there," Burdeaux said, "I . . . I 
thought you'd hurt Jenny."

She can't die, Dasein thought.

"I'm sorry," Burdeaux said. "I know you wouldn't hurt 
her."

 "She can't die," Dasein whispered.

He looked up to see tears draw glistening tracks down 
Burdeaux's dark cheeks.

The tears ignited an odd anger reaction in Dasein. He 
was aware of the anger

swelling in him, but unable to stop it. Rage! It was 
directed not at

Burdeaux, but at the disembodied essence of 
Santaroga, at the collective thing

which had tried to use the woman he loved to kill 
him. He glared at Burdeaux.

"Doctor Larry won't let anything happen to Jenny," 
Burdeaux said. "Hell . .

."

Burdeaux saw the expression in Dasein's eyes, 
instinctively backed away.

"Get out of here!" Dasein rasped.

"But the doctor said I was to . . ."

"Doctor Gil says you get the hell out of here!"

Burdeaux's face took on a stubborn set. "I'm not to 
leave you alone."

Dasein sank back. What could he do?

"You had a very bad shock reaction last night," 
Burdeaux said. "They had to

give you blood. You're not to be left alone."

They gave me a transfusion? Dasein wondered. Why 
didn't they kill me then?

They were saving me for Jenny!

"You all care so much for Jenny," Dasein said. "You'd 
let her kill me. It'd

destroy her, but that doesn't make any difference, 
does it? Sacriﬁce Jenny,

that's your verdict, you pack of . . ."

"You're talking crazy, Doctor Gil."

As quickly as it had come, the anger left Dasein. Why 
attack poor Win? Why

attack any of them? They couldn't see the monkey on 
their back. He felt

deﬂated. Of course this was crazy to Burdeaux. One 
society's reason was

another's unreason.

Dasein cursed the weakness that had seized his body.

Bad shock reaction.

He wondered then what he would do if Jenny died. It 
was a curiously

fragmented feeling -- part of him wailing in grief at 
the thought, another

part raging at the fate which had shunted him into 
this corner . . . and part

of him forever analyzing, analyzing . . .

How much of the shock had been a Jaspers reaction?
Had he become sensitized

the way Santarogans were?

They'll kill me out of hand if Jenny dies, he thought.

Burdeaux said: "I'll just sit here by the door. You be 
sure to tell me if

you need anything."

He sat down facing Dasein, folded his arms -- for all 
the world like a guard.

Dasein closed his eyes, thought: Jenny, please don't 
die. He recalled Piaget

 telling how Harry Scheler had known of the brother's 
death.

An empty place.

Where do I sense Jenny? Dasein asked himself.

It bothered him that he couldn't probe within himself 
somewhere and be

reassured by Jenny's presence. That kind of 
reassurance was worth any price.

She had to be there. It was a thing any Santarogan 
could do.

But I'm not a Santarogan.

Dasein felt that he teetered on the razor's edge. One 
side held the vast

unconscious sea of the human world into which he 
had been born. On the other

side -- there, it was like the green waters of a lake -- 
serene, contained,

every droplet knowing its neighbors.

He heard a door open, felt a storm begin in the 
unconscious sea, sensed a

breeze stirring the surface of the lake. The sensation 
of balancing receded.

Dasein opened his eyes.

Piaget stood in the middle of the room. He wore a 
stethoscope around his

neck. There was a feeling of fatigue around his eyes. 
He studied Dasein with

a puzzled frown.

"Jenny?" Dasein whispered.

"She'll live," Piaget said. "But it was close."

Dasein closed his eyes, took a deep breath. "How 
many more accidents like

that can we take?" he asked. He opened his eyes, met 
Piaget's gaze.

Burdeaux came up beside Piaget, said: "He's been 
talking crazy, Doctor

Larry."

"Win, would you leave us for a bit?" Piaget asked.

"You sure?" Burdeaux scowled at Dasein.

"Please," Piaget said. He pulled up a chair, sat down 
beside the bed, facing

Dasein.

"I'll be right outside," Burdeaux said. He went out, 
closed the door.

"You've upset Win and that's rather diﬃcult to do," 
Piaget said.

"Upset . . ." Dasein stared at him, speechless. Then: "Is 
that your

summation of what's happened?"

Piaget looked down at his own right hand, made a ﬁst, 
opened it. He shook

his head. "I didn't mean to sound ﬂippant, Gilbert. I . . 
." He looked up

at Dasein. "There must be some reasonable, rational 
explanation."

"You don't think the word accident explains all this?"

"An accident prone . . ."

"We both know there's no such thing as an accident 
prone in the popular sense

of that label," Dasein said.

 Piaget steepled his hands in front of him, leaned back.      
He pursed his lips,

then: "Well, in the psychiatric view . . ."

"Come off that!" Dasein barked. "You're going to fall 
back on the old cliche

about 'a neurotic tendency to inﬂict self-injury,' a 
defect in ego-control.

Where did I have any control over the work on that 
bridge? Or the boy with

the bow and arrow or . . .

"Boy with a bow and arrow?"

Dasein thought to hell with his promise, told about 
the incident at the park,

added: "And what about the garage hoist or the ﬁre? 
For that matter, what

about the poison in the food Jenny . . . Jenny, of all 
people! the food that

she . . ."

"All right! You have grounds to . . ."

"Grounds? I've an entire syndrome laid out in front of 
me. Santaroga is

trying to kill me. You've already killed an apparently 
inoffensive young man.

You've almost killed Jenny. What next?"

"In heaven's name, why would we . . ."

"To eliminate a threat. Isn't that obvious? I'm a 
threat."

"Oh, now really . . ."

"Now, really! Or is it perfectly all right if I take Jenny 
out of this crazy

valley and blow the whistle on you?"

"Jenny won't leave her . . ." He paused. "Blow the 
whistle? What do you

mean?"

"Now, who's making the angels weep?" Dasein asked. 
"You protest that you love

Jenny and won't have her hurt. What more terrible 
thing is there than to have

her be the instrument of my death?"

Piaget paled, drew two ragged breaths. "She . . . There 
must be . . . What

do you mean blow the whistle?"

"Has a Labor Department inspector ever looked into 
the child labor situation

out at your school?" Dasein asked. "What about the 
State Department of Mental

Hygiene? Your records say no mental illness from 
Santaroga."

"Gilbert, you don't know what you're talking about."

"Don't I? What about the antigovernment propaganda 
in your newspaper?"

"We're not antigovernment, Gilbert, we're . . ."

"What? Why, I've never seen such a . . ."

"Allow me to ﬁnish, please. We're not 
antigovernment; we're anti-outside.

That's a cat of quite different calico."

"You think they're all . . . insane?"

"We think they're all going to eat themselves up."

Madness, madness, Dasein thought. He stared at the 
ceiling. Perspiration

 bathed his body. The intensity of emotion he'd put 
into the argument with

Piaget . . .

"Why did you send Burdeaux to watch over me?" 
Dasein asked.

Piaget shrugged. "I . . . to guard against the possibility 
you might be right

in your . . ."

"And you picked Burdeaux." Dasein turned his eyes 
toward Piaget, studied the

man. Piaget appeared to be warring with himself, 
nervously clenching and

unclenching his ﬁsts.

"The reasons should be obvious," he said. "You can't 
let me leave the valley,

can you?" Dasein asked.

"You're in no physical condition to . . ."

"Will I ever be?"

Piaget met Dasein's gaze. "How can I prove to you 
what we really . . ."

"Is there any place here where I can protect myself 
from accidents?" Dasein

asked.

"Protect yourself from . . ." Piaget shook his head.

"You want to prove your honorable intentions," 
Dasein said.

Piaget pursed his lips, then: "There's an isolation 
suite, a penthouse on the

roof -- its own kitchen, facilities, everything. If you . . 
."

"Could Burdeaux get me up there without killing me?"

Piaget sighed. "Ill take you up there myself as soon as 
I can get a . . ."

"Burdeaux."

"As you wish. You can be moved in a wheelchair."

"I'll walk."

"You're not strong enough to . . ."

"Ill ﬁnd the strength. Burdeaux can help me."

"Very well. As to food, we can . . ."

"I'll eat out of cans picked at random from a market's 
shelves. Burdeaux can

shop for me until I'm . . ."

"Now, see here . . ."

"That's the way it's going to be, doctor. He'll get me a 
broad selection, and

I'll choose at random from that selection."

"You're taking unnecessary . . ."

"Let's give it a try and see how many accidents 
develop."

Piaget stared at him a moment, then: "As you wish."

 "What about Jenny? When can I see her?"

"She's had a severe shock to her system and some 
intestinal trauma. I'd say

she shouldn't have visitors for several days unless 
they . . ."

"I'm not leaving that isolation suite until I've 
convinced you," Dasein said.

"When can she come to see me?"

"It'll be several days." He pointed a ﬁnger at Dasein. 
"Now, see here,

Gilbert -- you're not going to take Jenny out of the 
valley. She'll never

consent to . . ."

"Let's let Jenny decide that."

"Very well." Piaget nodded. "You'll see." He went to the 
door, opened it.

"Win?"

Burdeaux stepped past Piaget into the room. "Is he 
still talking crazy,

Doctor Larry?"

"We're going to conduct an experiment, Win," Piaget 
said. "For reasons of Dr.

Dasein's health and Jenny's happiness, we're going to 
move him to the

isolation suite." Piaget jerked a thumb toward the 
ceiling. "He wants you to

move him."

"I'll get a wheelchair," Burdeaux said.

"Dr. Dasein wants to try walking," Piaget said.

"Can he do that?" Burdeaux turned a puzzled frown 
on Dasein. "He was too

weak to stand just a little . . ."

"Dr. Dasein appears to be relying on your strength," 
Piaget said. "Think you

can manage?"

"I could carry him," Burdeaux said, "but that seems 
like a . . ."

"Treat him with the same care you'd treat a helpless 
infant," Piaget said.

"If you say so, Doctor Larry."

Burdeaux crossed to the bed, helped Dasein to sit on 
the edge of the bed. The

effort set Dasein's head to whirling. In the fuzzy 
tipping and turning of the

room, he saw Piaget go to the door, open it and stand 
there looking at

Burdeaux.

"I'll take my evil inﬂuence elsewhere for the time 
being," Piaget said, "You

don't mind, do you, Gilbert, if I look in on you shortly 
-- purely in a

medical capacity?"

"As long as I have the ﬁnal say on what you do to me," 
Dasein said.

"It's only fair to warn you your bandages have to be 
changed," Piaget said.

"Can Win do it?"

"Your trust in Win is very touching," Piaget said. "I'm 
sure he's impressed."

"Can he . . ."

 "Yes, I'm certain he can -- with my instruction."

"All right then," Dasein said.

With Burdeaux's help, Dasein struggled to his feet. He 
stood there panting,

leaning on Burdeaux. Piaget went out, leaving the 
door open.

"You sure you can manage, sir?" Burdeaux asked.

Dasein tried to take a step. His knees were two 
sections of ﬂexing rubber.

He would have fallen had it not been for Burdeaux's 
support.

"Do we go by elevator?" Dasein asked.

"Yes, sir. It's right across the hall."

"Let's get on with it."

"Yes, sir. Excuse me, sir." Burdeaux bent, lifted Dasein 
in his arms, turned

to slip through the door.

Dasein glimpsed the startled face of a nurse walking 
down the hall. He felt

foolish, helpless -- stubborn. The nurse frowned, 
glanced at Burdeaux, who

ignored her, punched the elevator button with an 
elbow. The nurse strode off

down the hall, heels clicking.

Elevator doors slid open with a hiss.

Burdeaux carried him inside, elbowed a button 
marked "P."

Dasein felt his mouth go dry as the elevator doors 
closed. He stared up at a

cream ceiling, a milky oblong of light, thinking: "They 
didn't hesitate to

sacriﬁce Jenny. Why would they have a second 
thought about Burdeaux? What

if the elevator's rigged to crash?

A faint humming sounded. Dasein felt the elevator 
lift. Presently, the doors

opened and Burdeaux carried him out. There was a 
glimpse of a cream-walled

entrance foyer, a mahogany door labeled "Isolation" 
and they were inside.

It was a long room with three beds, windows opening 
onto a black tar roof.

Burdeaux deposited Dasein on the nearest bed, 
stepped back. "Kitchen's in

there," he said, pointing to a swinging door at the end 
of the room.

"Bathroom's through that door there." This was a 
door opposite the foot of

Dasein's bed. There were two more doors to the right 
of this one. "Other

doors are a closet and a lab. Is this what you wanted, 
Doctor?"

Dasein met a measuring stare in Burdeaux's eyes, 
said: "It'll have to do."

He managed a rueful smile, explained the eating 
arrangements.

"Canned food, sir?" Burdeaux asked.

"I'm imposing on you, I know," Dasein said. "But you 
were . . . like me . . .

once. I think you sympathise with me . . . 
unconsciously. I'm counting on

that to . . ." Dasein managed a weak shrug.

"Is this what Doctor Larry wants me to do?"

"Yes."

 "I just pick cans from the shelves . . . at random?"

"That's right."

"Well, it sounds crazy, sir . . . but I'll do it." He left the 
room,

muttering.

Dasein managed to crawl under the blankets, lay for a 
moment regaining his

strength. He could see a line of treetops beyond the 
roof -- tall evergreens

-- a cloudless blue sky. There was a sense of quiet 
about the room. Dasein

took a deep breath. Was this place really safe? A 
Santarogan had picked it.

But the Santarogan had been off balance with 
personal doubts.

For the ﬁrst time in days, Dasein felt he might relax. A 
profound lassitude

ﬁlled him.

What is this unnatural weakness? he wondered.

It was far more than shock reaction or a result of his 
burns. This was like

an injury to the soul, something that involved the 
entire being. It was a

central command to all his muscles, a compulsion of 
inactivity.

Dasein closed his eyes.

In the red darkness behind his eyelids Dasein felt 
himself to be shattered,

his ego huddled in a fetal crouch, terriﬁed. One must 
not move, he thought.

To move was to invite a disaster more terrible than 
death.

An uncontrollable shuddering shook his legs and 
hips, set his teeth

chattering. He fought himself to stillness, opened his 
eyes to stare at the

ceiling.

It's a Jaspers reaction, he thought.

There was a smell of it in the room. The aroma 
gnawed at his senses. He

sniffed, turned toward a metal stand beside the bed, a 
partly-opened drawer.

Dasein slid the drawer all the way out to a stop, rolled 
onto his side to peer

at the space he'd exposed.

Empty.

But there'd been a Jaspers something in the drawer -- 
and that recently.

What?

Dasein swept his gaze around the room. Isolation 
suite, Piaget had said.

Isolation of what? From what? For what?

He swallowed, sank back on the pillow.

The deliciously terrifying lassitude gripped him. 
Dasein sensed the green

waters of unconsciousness ready to enfold him. By a 
desperate effort of will,

he forced his eyes to remain open.

Somewhere, a cowering, fetal something moaned.

Faceless god chuckled.

The entrance door opened.

 Dasein held himself rigidly unmoving, afraid if he 
moved his head to one side

his face might sink beneath the upsurging 
unconsciousness, that he might drown

in . . .

Piaget came into his ﬁeld of vision, peering down at 
him. The doctor thumbed

Dasein's left eyelid up, studied the eye.

"Damned if you aren't still ﬁghting it," he said.

"Fighting what?" Dasein whispered.

"I was pretty sure it'd knock you out if you used that 
much energy at this

stage," Piaget said. "You're going to have to eat before 
long, you know."

onto the pain. It helped ﬁght off the enfolding green 
waves.

"Tell you what," Piaget said. He moved from Dasein's 
range of vision. There

came a scraping, a grunt. "Ill just sit here and keep 
watch on you until Win

gets back with something you'll stuff into that crazy 
face of yours. I won't

lay a hand on you and I won't let anyone else touch 
you. Your bandages can

wait. More important for you to rest -- sleep if you 
can. Stop ﬁghting it."

Sleep! Gods, how the lassitude beckoned.

Fighting what?

He tried to frame the question once more, couldn't 
ﬁnd the energy. It took

all of his effort merely to cling to a tiny glowing core 
of awareness that

stared up at a cream-colored ceiling.

"What you're ﬁghting," Piaget said in a conversational 
tone, "is the climb

out of the morass. Mud clings to one. This is what 
leads me to suspect your

theory may have a germ of truth in it -- that some 
stain of violence still

clings to us, reaching us on the blind side, as it were."

Piaget's voice was a hypnotic drone. Phrases threaded 
their way in and out of

Dasein's awareness.

" . . . experiment in domestication . . ." " . . . removed 
from ex-stasis,

from a ﬁxed condition . . ." " . . . must reimprint the 
sense of identity .

. ." " . . . nothing new: mankind's always in some sort 
of trouble . . ." "

. . . religious experience of a sort -- creating a new 
order of theobotanists

. . ." " . . . don't shrink from life or from awareness of 
life . . ." " . .

. seek a society that changes smoothly, ﬂowingly as 
the collective need

requires . . ."

One of the faceless gods produced a thundering 
whisper in Dasein's skull:

"This is my commandment given unto you: A poor 
man cannot afford principles

and a rich man doesn't need them."

Dasein lay suspended in a hammock of silence.

Fear of movement dominated him.

He sensed a world-presence somewhere beneath him. 
But he lay stranded here

above. Something beckoned. Familiar. He felt the 
familiar world and was

repelled. The place seethed with disguises that tried 
to conceal a rubble of

pretensions, devices, broken masks. Still, it beckoned. 
It was a place in

which he could ﬁt, shaped to him. He sensed himself 
reaching toward it with

 a feeling of exuberant self-gratiﬁcation, drew back. 
The rubble. It was

everywhere, a blanket over life, a creamy ennui -- 
soothing, cajoling,

saccharine.

Still, it beckoned.

The lure was inexhaustible, a brilliant bag of 
pyrotechnics, a palette ﬂooded

with gross colors.

It was all a trick.

He sensed this -- all a trick, a mass of signal cliches 
and canned reﬂexes.

It was a hateful world.

Which world? he asked himself. Was it Santaroga . . . 
or the outside?

Something grabbed Dasein's shoulder.

He screamed.

Dasein awoke to ﬁnd himself moaning, mumbling. It 
took a moment to place

himself. Where were the faceless gods?

Piaget leaned over him, a hand on Dasein's shoulder.

"You were having a nightmare," Piaget said. He took 
his hand away. "Win's

back with the food -- such as it is."

Dasein's stomach knotted in pain.

Burdeaux stood at his right next to the adjoining bed.
A box piled with

canned food rested on the next bed.

"Bring me a can opener and a spoon," Dasein said.

"Just tell me what you want and I'll open it," 
Burdeaux said.

"I'll do it," Dasein said. He raised himself on his 
elbows. Movement set his

arms to throbbing, but he felt stronger -- as though he 
had tapped a strength

of desperation.

"Humor him," Piaget said as Burdeaux hesitated.

Burdeaux shrugged, went out the door across from 
the bed.

Dasein threw back the blankets, swung his feet out. 
He motioned Piaget back,

sat up. His feet touched a cold ﬂoor. He took a deep 
breath, lurched across

to the adjoining bed. His knees felt stronger, but 
Dasein sensed the

shallowness of his reserves.

Burdeaux reappeared, handed Dasein a twist-handle 
can opener.

Dasein sat down beside the box, grabbed a fat green 
can out of it, not even

looking at the label. He worked the opener around 
the can, took a proffered

spoon from Burdeaux, lifted back the lid.

Beans.

An odor of Jaspers clamored at Dasein from the open 
can. He looked at the

 label: "Packed by the Jaspers Cooperative." There was 
a permit number, a

date of a year ago and the admonition: "Not for sale 
in interstate commerce.

Exposed Dec. '64."

Dasein stared at the can. Jaspers? It couldn't be. The 
stuff didn't ship.

It couldn't be preserved out of . . .

"Something wrong?" Piaget asked.

Dasein studied the can: shiny, a glistening label.

"Beans with meat sauce and beef," read the yellow 
letters.

Dasein ignored the lure of the aroma from the can, 
looked in the box. He

tried to remember whether the can had given off the 
characteristic hiss of a

vacuum seal breaking as it had been opened -- 
couldn't remember.

"What's wrong?" Piaget insisted.

"Can't be anything wrong," Burdeaux said. "That's all 
private stock."

Dasein looked up from the box. All the cans he could 
see bore the Co-op's

label. Private stock?

"Here," Piaget said. He took can and spoon from 
Dasein's hands, tasted a bite

of beans, smiled. He returned the can and spoon to 
Dasein, who took them,

automatically.

"Nothing wrong there," Piaget said.

"Better not be," Burdeaux said. "It came from Pete 
Maja's store, right off

the private stock shelf."

"It's Jaspers," Dasein rasped.

"Of course it is," Piaget said. "Canned right here for 
local consumption.

Stored here to preserve its strength. Won't keep long 
after it's opened,

though, so you'd better start eating. Got maybe ﬁve, 
ten minutes." He

chuckled. "Be thankful you're here. If you were 
outside and opened that can,

wouldn't last more'n a few seconds."

"Why?"

"Hostile environment," Piaget said. "Go ahead and eat.   
You saw me take some.

Didn't hurt me."

Dasein tested a bit of the sauce on his tongue. A 
soothing sensation spread

across his tongue, down his throat. They were 
delicious. He spooned a full

bite into his mouth, gulped it down.

The Jaspers went thump in his stomach. Dasein 
turned, wide-eyed toward

Burdeaux, met a look of wonder, dark brown eyes 
like African charms with

butter-yellow ﬂecks in them. The can drew Dasein's 
attention. He peered

into it. Empty.

Dasein experienced a sensation of strange recall -- 
like the fast rewind on a

tape recorder, a screech of memory: his hand in a 
piston movement spooning

the contents of the can into his mouth. Blurred 
gulpings.

He recognized the thump now. It had been a thump of 
awareness. He no longer

 was hungry.

My body did it, Dasein thought. A sense of wonder 
enfolded him. My body did

it.

Piaget took the can and spoon from Dasein's 
unresisting ﬁngers. Burdeaux

helped Dasein back into bed, pulled the blankets up, 
straightened them. My

body did it, Dasein thought. There'd been a trigger to 
action -- knowledge

that the Jaspers effect was fading . . . and 
consciousness had blanked out.

"There," Piaget said.

"What about his bandages?" Burdeaux asked.

Piaget examined the bandage on Dasein's cheek, bent 
close to sniff, drew back.

"Perhaps this evening," he said.

"You've trapped me, haven't you?" Dasein asked. He 
stared up at Piaget.

"There he goes again," Burdeaux said.

"Win," Piaget said, "I know you have personal matters 
to take care of. Why

don't you tend to them now and leave me with 
Gilbert? You can come back

around six if you would."

Burdeaux said: "I could call Willa and have her . . ."

"No need to bother your daughter," Piaget said. "Run 
along and . . ."

"But what if . . ."

"There's no danger," Piaget said.

"If you say so," Burdeaux said. He moved toward the 
foyer door, paused there

a moment to study Dasein, then went out.

"What didn't you want Win to hear?" Dasein asked.

"There he goes again," Piaget said, echoing Burdeaux.

"Something must've . . ."

"There's nothing Win couldn't hear!"

"Yet you sent him to watch over me . . . because he 
was special," Dasein said.

He took a deep breath, feeling his senses clear, his 
mind come alert. "Win

was . . . safe for me."

"Win has his own life to live and you're interfering," 
Piaget said. "He . .

."

"Why was Win safe?"

"It's your feeling, not mine," Piaget said. "Win saved 
you from falling.

You've shown a deﬁnite empathy . . ."

"He came from outside," Dasein said. "He was like me 
. . . once."

"Many of us came from outside," Piaget said.

 "You, too?"

"No, but . . . "

"How does the trap really work?" Dasein asked.

"There is no trap!"

"What does the Jaspers do to one?" Dasein asked.

"Ask yourself that question."

"Technically . . . doctor?"

"Technically?"

"What does the Jaspers do?"

"Oh. Among other things, it speeds up catalysis of the 
chemical transmitters

in the nervous system -- 5 hydroxytryptamine and 
serotonin."

"Changes in the Golgi cells?"

"Absolutely not. Its effect is to break down blockage 
systems, to open the

mind's image function and consciousness formulation 
processes. You feel as

though you had a better . . . an improved memory. Not 
true, of course, except

in effect. Merely a side effect of the speed with which 
. . ."

"Image function," Dasein said. "What if the person 
isn't capable of dealing

with all his memories? There are extremely 
disagreeable, shameful . . .

dangerously traumatic memories in some . . ."

"We have our failures."

"Dangerous failures?"

"Sometimes."

Dasein closed his mouth, an instinctive reaction. He 
drew in a deep breath

through his nostrils. The odor of Jaspers assailed his 
senses. He looked

toward the box of cans on the adjacent bed.

Jaspers. Consciousness fuel. Dangerous substance. 
Drug of ill omen.

Speculative fantasies ﬂitted through Dasein's mind. 
He turned, surprised a

mooning look on Piaget's face.

"You can't get away from it here in the valley, can 
you?" Dasein asked.

"Who'd want to?"

"You're hoping I'll stay, perhaps help you with your 
failures."

"There's certainly work to be done."

Anger seized Dasein. "How can I think?" he 
demanded. "I can't get away from

the smell of . . ."

"Easy," Piaget murmured. "Take it easy, now. You'll get 
so you don't even

notice it."

 Every society has its own essential chemistry, Dasein 
thought. Its own aroma,

a thing of profound importance, but least apparent to 
its own members.

Santaroga had tried to kill him, Dasein knew. He 
wondered now if it could

have been because he had a different smell. He stared 
at the box on the bed.

Impossible! It couldn't be anything that close to the 
surface.

Piaget moved around to the box, tore a small, curling 
strip of paper from it,

touched the paper to his tongue. "This box has been 
down in storage," he

said. "It's paper, organic matter. Anything organic 
becomes impregnated with

Jaspers after a certain exposure." He tossed the paper 
into the box.

"Will I be like that box?" Dasein asked. He felt he had 
a ghost at his heels,

an essence he couldn't elude. The lurking presence 
stirred in his mind.

"Will I . . ."

"Put such thoughts out of your mind," Piaget said.

"Will I be one of the failures?" Dasein asked.

"I said stop that!"

"Why should I?"

Dasein sat up, the strength of fear and anger in him, 
his mind crowded by

suppositions, each one worse than its predecessor. He 
felt more exposed and

vulnerable than a child running from a whipping.

With an abrupt shock of memory, Dasein fell back to 
the pillow. Why did I

choose this moment to remember that? he asked 
himself. A painful incident

from his childhood lay there, exposed to awareness. 
He remembered the pain of

the switch on his back.

"You're not the failure type," Piaget said.

Dasein stared accusingly at the odorous box.

Jaspers!

"You're the kind who can go very high," Piaget said. 
"Why do you really think

you're here? Just because of that silly market report? 
Or because of Jenny?

Ah, no. Nothing that isolated or simple. Santaroga 
calls out to some people.

They come."

Dasein looked sidelong at him.

"I came so you people could get the chance to kill me," 
Dasein said.

"We don't want to kill you!"

"One moment you suspect I may be right, the next 
you're denying it."

Piaget sighed.

"I have a suggestion," Dasein said.

"Anything."

"You won't like it," Dasein said.

 Piaget glared at him. "What's on your mind?"

"You'll be afraid to do it."

"I'm not . . ."

"It's something like a clinical test," Dasein said. "My 
guess is you'll try

not to do it. You'll look for excuses, anything to get out 
of it or to

discontinue it. You'll try to misunderstand me. You'll 
try to break away

from . . ."

"For the love of heaven! What's on your mind?"

"You may succeed."

"Succeed in what?"

"Not doing what I suggest."

"Don't try to crowd me into a corner, Gilbert."

"Thus it starts," Dasein said. He held up a hand as 
Piaget made as though to

speak. "I want you to let me hypnotize you."

"What?"

"You heard me."

"Why?"

"You're a native," Dasein said, "thoroughly 
conditioned to this . . .

consciousness fuel. I want to see what's under there, 
what kind of fears you

. . ."

"Of all the crazy . . ."

"I'm not some amateur meddler asking to do this," 
Dasein said. "I'm a

clinical psychologist well versed in hypnotherapy."

"But what could you possibly hope to . . ."

"What a man fears," Dasein said. "His fears are like a 
'homing beacon.' Home

in on a man's fears and you ﬁnd his underlying 
motivations. Under every

fear, there's a violence of no mean . . ."

"Nonsense! I have no . . ."

"You're a medical man. You know better than that."

Piaget stared at him, silently measuring. Presently, he 
said: "Well, every

man has a death fear, of course. And . . .

"More than that."

"You think you're some kind of god, Gilbert? You just 
go around . . ."

"Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make 
her nest on high?" Dasein

asked. He shook his head. "What do you worship?"

"Oh . . . religion." Piaget took a deep breath of relief.
"Thou shalt not be

 afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that 
ﬂieth by day; nor for

the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the 
destruction that wasteth

at noonday. Is that it? What do . . ."

"That is not it."

"Gilbert, I'm not ignorant of these matters, as you 
must realize. To stir up

the areas you're suggesting . . ."

"What would I stir up?"

"We both know that cannot be predicted with any 
accuracy."

"You're doing things as a community . . . a group, a 
society that you don't

want me digging into," Dasein said. "What does that 
society really worship?

With one hand, you say: 'Look anywhere you like.' 
With the other hand, you

slam doors. In every action of . . ."

"You really believe some of us tried to . . . kill you . . . 
for the

community?"

"Don't you?"

"Couldn't there be some other explanation?"

"What?"

Dasein held a steady gaze on Piaget. The doctor was 
disturbed, no doubt of

that. He refused to meet Dasein's eyes. He moved his 
hands about aimlessly.

His breathing had quickened.

"Societies don't believe they can die," Piaget said. "It 
must follow that a

society, as such, does not worship at all. If it cannot 
die, it'll never face

a ﬁnal judgment."

"And if it'll never face judgment," Dasein said, "it can 
do things as a

society that'd be too much for an individual to 
stomach."

"Perhaps," Piaget muttered. "Perhaps." Then: "All 
right, then. Why examine

me? I've never tried to harm you."

through a frame of trees a stretch of the hills which 
enclosed Santaroga. He

felt himself enclosed by that line of hills, entangled 
here in a web of

meanings.

"What about the people who have tried to kill me?" 
Dasein asked shortly.

"Would they be ﬁt subjects?"

"The boy, perhaps," Piaget said. "I'll have to examine 
him anyway."

"Petey, the Jorick boy," Dasein said. "A failure, eh?"

"I think not."

"Another opening person . . . like me?"

"You remember that?"

"Then, you said societies die, that you'd cut yourselves 
off here . . . with

 Jaspers."

"We had a speaking then, too, as I recall it," Piaget 
said. "Have you really

opened now? Are you seeing? Have you become?"

Dasein abruptly remembered Jenny's voice on the 
telephone: "Be careful." And

the fear when she'd said: "They want you to leave."

In this instant, Piaget became for him once more the 
gray cat in the garden,

silencing the birds, and Dasein knew himself to be 
alone yet, without a group.

He remembered the lake, the perception of 
perception -- knowing his own body,

that communal knowledge of mood, that sharing.

Every conversation he'd had with Piaget came back to 
Dasein then to be weighed

and balanced. He felt his Santaroga experiences had 
been building -- one

moment upon another -- to this instant.

"I'll get you some more Jaspers," Piaget said. "Perhaps 
then . . . "

"You suspect I'm ﬂuttery behind the eyes?" Dasein 
asked.

Piaget smiled. "Sarah clings to the phrases of the 
past," he said, "before we

systematized our dealings with Jaspers . . . and with 
the outside. But don't

laugh at her or her phrases. She has the innocent 
eye."

"Which I haven't."

"You still have some of the assumptions and 
prejudices of the not-men," Piaget

said.

"And I've heard too much, learned too much about 
you, ever to be allowed to

leave," Dasein said.

"Won't you even try to become?" Piaget asked.

"Become what?" Piaget's crazy, almost-schizophrenic 
talk enraged him. A

speaking! A seeing!

"Only you know that," Piaget said.

"Know what?"

Piaget merely stared at him.

"I'll tell you what I know," Dasein said. "I know you're 
terriﬁed by my

suggestion. You don't want to ﬁnd out how Vina's 
roach powder got into the

coffee. You don't want to know how Clara Scheler 
poisoned her stew. You

don't want to know what prompted someone to push 
me off a ﬂoat. You don't

want to know why a ﬁfteen-year-old boy would try to 
put an arrow through me.

You don't want to know how Jenny poisoned the eggs. 
You don't want to know

how a car was set up to crush me, or how my truck 
was rigged as a ﬁre bomb.

You don't want to . . ."

"All right!"

Piaget rubbed his chin, turned away.

"I told you you might succeed," Dasein said.

"'Iti vuccati'" Piaget murmured. " 'Thus it is said:
Every system and every

 interpretation becomes false in the light of a more 
complete system.' I

wonder if that's why you're here -- to remind us no 
positive statement may be

made that's free from contradictions."

He turned, stared at Dasein.

"What're you talking about?" Dasein asked. Piaget's 
tone and manner carried a

suddenly disturbing calmness.

"The inner enlightenment of all beings dwells in the 
self," Piaget said. "The

self which cannot be isolated abides in the memory as 
a perception of symbols.

We are conscious as a projection of self upon the 
receptive content of the

senses. But it happens the self can be led astray -- the 
self of a person or

the self of a community. I wonder . . ."

"Stop trying to distract me with gobbledygook," 
Dasein said. "You're trying

to change the subject, avoid . . ."

"A . . . void," Piaget said. "Ah, yes, The void is very 
pertinent to this.

Einstein cannot be conﬁned to mathematics. All 
phenomenal existence is

transitory, relative. No particular thing is real. It is 
passing into

something else at every moment."

Dasein pushed himself upright in the bed. Had the old 
doctor gone crazy?

"Performance alone doesn't produce the result," 
Piaget said. "You're grasping

at absolutes. To seek any ﬁxed thing, however, is to 
deal in false

imagination. You're trying to strain soap from the 
water with your ringers.

Duality is a delusion."

Dasein shook his head from side to side. The man was 
making no sense at all.

"I see you are confused," Piaget said. "You don't really 
understand your own

intellectual energy. You walk on narrow paths. I offer 
you new orbits of . .

."

"You can stop that," Dasein said. He remembered the 
lake then, the husky

feminine voice saying: "There's only one thing to do." 
And Jenny: "We're

doing it."

"You must adapt to conditional thought," Piaget said. 
"In that way, you'll be

able to understand relative self-existence and express 
the relative truth of

whatever you perceive. You have the ability to do it. I 
can see that. Your

insight into the violent actions which surround . . ."

"Whatever you're doing to me, you won't stop it, will 
you?" Dasein asked.

"You keep pushing and pushing and . . ."

"Who pushes?" Piaget asked. "Are you not the one 
exerting the greatest . . ."

"Damn you! Stop it!"

Piaget looked at him silently.

"Einstein," Dasein muttered. "Relativity . . . absolutes . 
. . intellectual

energy . . . phenomenal . . ." He broke off as his mind 
lurched momentarily

into a speed of computation very like what he had 
experienced when deciding to

hurdle the gap in the bridge.

Its sweep-rate, Dasein thought. It's like hunting 
submarines -- in the mind.

 It's how many search units you can put to the job and 
how fast they can

travel.

As quickly as it had come, the sensation was gone. But 
Dasein had never felt

as shaken in his life. No immediate danger had 
triggered this ability . . .

not this time.

Narrow paths, he thought. He looked up at Piaget in 
wonder. There was more

here than fell upon the ears. Could that be the way 
Santarogans thought?

Dasein shook his head. It didn't seem possible . . . or 
likely.

"May I elaborate?" Piaget asked.

Dasein nodded.

"You will have remarked the blunt way we state our 
relative truths for sales

purposes," Piaget said. "Conditional thought rejects 
any other approach.

Mutual respect is implicit, then, in conditional 
thought. Contrast the market

approach of those who sent you to spy upon us. They 
have . . ."

"How fast can you think?" Dasein asked.

"Fast?" Piaget shrugged. "As fast as necessary."

As fast as necessary, Dasein thought.

"May I continue?" Piaget asked.

Again, Dasein nodded.

"It has been noted," Piaget said, "that sewer-peak-load 
times tend to match

station breaks on TV -- an elementary fact you can 
recognize with only the

briefest reﬂection. But it's only a short step from this 
elementary fact to

the placement of ﬂow meters in the sewers as a quite 
accurate check on the

available listening units at any given moment. I've no 
doubt this already is

being done; it's so obvious. Now, reﬂect a moment on 
the basic attitudes

toward their fellowmen of people who would do this 
sort of thing, as opposed

to those who could not ﬁnd it in themselves to do it."

Dasein cleared his throat. Here was the core of 
Santaroga's indictment

against the outside. How did you use people? With 
dignity? Or did you tap

their most basic functions for your own purposes? 
The outside began to appear

more and more as a place of irritating emptiness and 
contrived blandishments.

I'm really beginning to see things as a Santarogan, 
Dasein thought. There was

a sense of victory in the thought. It was what he had 
set out to do as part

of his job.

"It isn't surprising," Piaget said, "to ﬁnd the 'N-square' 
law from warfare

being applied to advertising and politics -- other kinds 
of warfare, you see

-- with no real conversion problem from one ﬁeld to 
the other. Each has its

concepts of concentration and exposure. The 
mathematics of differentials and

predictions apply equally well, no matter the ﬁeld of 
battle."

Armies, Dasein thought. He focused on Piaget's 
moving lips, wondering

suddenly how the subject had been changed to such a 
different ﬁeld. Had

Piaget done it deliberately? They'd been talking about 
Santaroga's blind

side, its fears . . .

"You've given me food for speculation," Piaget said.
"I'm going to leave you

 alone for a while and see if I can come up with 
something constructive.

There's a call bell at the head of your bed. The nurses 
are not on this

ﬂoor, but one can be here quite rapidly in an 
emergency. They'll look in on

you from time to time. Would you like something to 
read? May I send you

anything?"

Something constructive? Dasein wondered. What 
does he mean?

"How about some copies of our valley newspaper?" 
Piaget asked.

"Some writing paper and a pen," Dasein said. He 
hesitated, then: "And the

papers -- yes."

"Very well. Try to rest. You appear to be regaining 
some of your strength,

but don't overdo it."

Piaget turned, strode out of the room.

-- red-baked

Presently, a red-baked nurse bustled in with a stack of 
newspapers, a ruled

said: "Do you want your bed straightened?"

"No, thanks."

Dasein found his attention caught by her striking 
resemblance to Al Marden.

"You're a Marden," he said.

"So what else is new?" she asked and left him.

Well, get her! Dasein thought.

He glanced at the stack of newspapers, remembering 
his search through

Santaroga for the paper's oﬃce. They had come to 
him so easily they'd lost

some of their allure. He slipped out of bed, found his 
knees had lost some of

their weakness.

The canned food caught his eye.

Dasein rummaged in the box, found an applesauce, 
ate it swiftly while the food

still was redolent with Jaspers. Even as he ate, he 
hoped this would return

him to that level of clarity and speed of thought he'd 
experienced at the

bridge and, brieﬂy, with Piaget.

The applesauce eased his hunger, left him vaguely 
restless -- nothing else.

Was it losing its kick? he wondered. Did it require 
more and more of the

stuff each time? Or was he merely becoming 
acclimated?

Hooked?

He thought of Jenny pleading with him, cajoling. A 
consciousness fuel. What

in the name of God had Santaroga discovered?

Dasein stared out the window at the path of 
boundary hills visible through the

trees. A ﬁre somewhere beneath his ﬁeld of view sent 
smoke spiraling above

the ridge. Dasein stared at the smoke, feeling an oddly 
compulsive mysticism,

a deeply primitive sensation about that unseen ﬁre. 
There was a spirit

signature written in the smoke, something out of his 
own genetic past. No

fear accompanied the sensation. It was, instead, as 
though he had been

 reunited with some part of himself cut off since 
childhood.

Pushing back at the surface of childhood, he thought.

He realized then that a Santarogan did not cut off his 
primitive past; he

contained it within a membranous understanding.

How far do I go in becoming a Santarogan before I 
turn back? he wondered. I

have a duty to Selador and the ones who hired me. 
When do I make my break?

The thought ﬁlled him with a deep revulsion against 
returning to the outside.

But he had to do it. There was a thick feeling of 
nausea in his throat, a

pounding ache at his temples. He thought of the 
irritant emptiness of the

outside -- piecemeal debris of lives, egos with sham 
patches, a world almost

devoid of anything to make the soul rise and soar.

There was no substructure to life outside, he thought, 
no underlying sequence

to tie it all together. There was only a shallow, 
glittering roadway

signposted with ﬂashy, hypnotic diversions. And 
behind the glitter -- only

the bare board structure of props . . . and desolation.

I can't go back, he thought. He turned to his bed, 
threw himself across it.

My duty -- I must go back. What's happening to me? 
Have I waited too long?

Had Piaget lied about the Jaspers effect?

Dasein turned onto his back, threw an arm across his 
eyes. What was the

chemical essence of Jaspers? Selador could be no help 
there; the stuff didn't

travel.

I knew that, Dasein thought. I knew it all along.

He took his arm away from his eyes. No doubt of 
what he'd been doing:

avoiding his own responsibility. Dasein looked at the 
doors in the wall

facing him -- kitchen, lab . . .

A sigh lifted his chest.

Cheese would be the best carrier, he knew. It held the 
Jaspers essence

longest. The lab . . . and some cheese.

Dasein rang the bell at the head of his bed.

A voice startled him, coming from directly behind his 
head: "Do you wish a

nurse immediately?"

Dasein turned, saw a speaker grill in the wall. "I'd . . . 
like some Jaspers

cheese," he said.

"Oh . . . Right away, sir." There was delight in that 
feminine voice no

electronic reproduction could conceal.

Presently, the red-haired nurse with the stamp of the 
Marden genes on her face

shouldered her way into the room carrying a tray. She 
placed the tray atop

the papers on Dasein's nightstand.

"There you are, doctor," she said. "I brought you some 
crackers, too."

"Thanks," Dasein said.

 She turned at the doorway before leaving: "Jenny will 
be delighted to hear

this."

"Jenny's awake?"

"Oh, yes. Most of her problem was an allergenic 
reaction to the aconite.

We've purged the poison from her system and she's 
making a very rapid

recovery. She wants to get up. That's always a good 
sign."

"How'd the poison get in the food?" Dasein asked.

"One of the student nurses mistook it for a container 
of MSG. She . . ."

"But how'd it get in the kitchen?"

"We haven't determined yet. No doubt it was some 
silly accident."

"No doubt," Dasein muttered.

"Well, you eat your cheese and get some rest," she 
said. "Ring if you need

anything."

The door closed briskly behind her.

Dasein looked at the golden block of cheese. Its 
Jaspers odor clamored at his

nostrils. He broke off a small corner of the cheese in 
his ﬁngers, touched

it to his tongue. Dasein's senses jumped to attention. 
Without conscious

volition, he took the cheese into his mouth, swallowed 
it: smooth, soothing

ﬂavor. A clear-headed alertness surged through him.

Whatever else happens, Dasein thought, the world 
has to ﬁnd out about this

stuff.

He swung his feet out of bed, stood up. A pulsing ache 
throbbed through his

forehead. He closed his eyes, felt the world spin, 
steadied himself against

the bed.

The vertigo passed.

Dasein found a cheese knife on the tray, cut a slice off 
the golden brick,

stopped his hand from conveying the food to his 
mouth.

The body does it, he thought. He felt the strength of 
the physical demand,

promised himself more of the cheese . . . later. First -- 
the lab.

It was pretty much as he'd expected: sparse, but 
suﬃcient. There was a

good centrifuge, a microtome, a binocular microscope 
with controlled

illumination, gas burner, ranks of clean test tubes -- 
all the instruments and

esoteria of the trade.

Dasein found a container of sterile water, another of 
alcohol, put bits of the

cheese into solution. He started a culture ﬂask, made 
a control slide and

examined it under the microscope.

A threadlike binding structure within the cheese 
leaped into vision. As he

raised magniﬁcation, the threads resolved into spirals 
of elongated structure

that resembled cells which had been blocked from 
normal division.

Dasein sat back, puzzled. The thread pattern bore a 
resemblance to fungoid

mycelium spawn. This agreed with his early surmise; 
he was dealing with a

 type of fungus growth.

What was the active agent, though?

He closed his eyes to think, realized he was trembling 
with fatigue.

Easy does it, he thought. You're not a well man.

Some of the experiments required time to mature, he 
told himself. They could

wait. He made his way back to bed, stretched out on 
the blankets. His left

hand reached out to the cheese, broke off a chunk.

Dasein became aware of his own action as he 
swallowed the cheese. He looked

at the crumbled specks on his ﬁngers, rubbed them, 
felt the oily smoothness.

A delicious sense of well-being spread through his 
body.

The body does it, Dasein thought. Of itself, the body 
does it. Could the

body go out and kill a man? Very likely.

He felt sleep winding about his consciousness. The 
body needed sleep. The

body would have sleep.

The mind, though, built a dream -- of trees growing to 
gigantic size as he

watched them. They leaped up with swift vitality. 
Their branches swept out,

leafed, fruited. All basked under a sun the color of 
golden cheese.

Chapter 12

Sunset was burning orange in the west when Dasein 
awoke. He lay, his head

turned toward the windows, looking out at the 
blazing sky, his attention

caught in a spell akin to ancient sun worship. The 
ship of life was headed

down to its daily rest. Soon, steel darkness would 
claim the land.

A click sounded behind Dasein. Artiﬁcial light ﬂooded 
the room. He turned,

the spell broken.

Jenny stood just inside the door. She wore a long 
green robe that reached

almost to her ankles. Green slippers covered her feet.

"It's about time you woke up," she said.

Dasein stared at her as at a stranger. He could see it 
was the same Jenny he

loved -- her long black hair caught in a red ribbon, 
full lips slightly

parted, dimple showing in her cheek -- but furtive 
smoke drifted in her blue

eyes. There was the calm of a goddess about her.

Something eternally of the past moved her body as 
Jenny stepped farther into

the room.

 have experienced before a priestess at Delphi. She 
was beautiful . . . and

deadly.

"Aren't you going to ask how I am?" she asked.

"I can see you're all right," he said.

She took another step toward him, said: "Clara 
brought Jersey Hofstedder's

car over and left it for you. It's down in the garage."

Dasein thought of that beautifully machined 
automobile -- another bauble to

attract him.

"And what have you brought -- this time?" he asked.

"Gil!"

"There's no food in your hands," he said. "Is it a 
poisoned hatpin, perhaps?"

Tears ﬂooded her eyes.

"Stay away from me," he said. "I love you."

She nodded. "I do love you. And . . . I've felt how 
dangerous I could be . .

. to you. There've been . . ." She shook her head. "I 
knew I had to stay

away from you. But not any more. Not now."

"So it's all over," he said. "Let bygones be bygones.
Wouldn't a gun be

quicker?"

She stamped a foot. "Gil, you're impossible!"

"I'm impossible?"

"Have you changed?" she whispered. "Don't you feel 
any . . ."

"I still love you," he said. "Stay away from me. I love 
you."

She bit her lip.

"Wouldn't it be kindest to do it while I'm asleep?" he 
asked. "Never let me

know who . . ."

"Stop it!"

Abruptly, she ripped off the green robe, revealing a 
white, lace-edged

nightgown beneath. She dropped the robe, pulled the 
gown over her head, threw

it on the ﬂoor, stood there naked, glaring at him.

"See?" she said. "Nothing here but a woman! Nothing 
here but the woman who

loves you." Tears ran down her cheeks. "No poison in 
my hands . . . Oh, Gil

. . ." His name came out as a wail.

Dasein forced his gaze away from her. He knew he 
couldn't look at her --

lovely, lithe, desirable -- and retain any coolness of 
judgment. She was

beautiful and deadly -- the ultimate bait Santaroga 
offered.

There was a rustling of cloth near the door.

He whirled.

 She stood once more clothed in the green robe. Her 
cheeks were scarlet, lips

trembling, eyes downcast. Slowly, she raised her eyes, 
met his stare.

"I have no shame with you, Gil," she said. "I love you. I 
want no secrets

between us at all -- no secrets of the ﬂesh . . . no 
secrets of any kind."

Dasein tried to swallow past a lump in his throat. The 
goddess was

vulnerable. It was a discovery that caused an ache in 
his chest.

"I feel the same way," he said. "Jen . . . you'd better 
leave now. If you

don't . . . I might just grab you and rape you."

She tried to smile, failed, whirled away and ran out of 
the room.

The door slammed. There was a moment's silence. 
The door opened. Piaget

stood in the opening looking back into the foyer. The 
sound of the elevator

doors closing came clearly to Dasein. Piaget came in, 
closed the door.

"What happened with you two?" he asked.

"I think we just had a ﬁght and made up," Dasein said.    
"I'm not sure."

Piaget cleared his throat. There was a look of 
conﬁdence in his round face,

Dasein thought. It was not a judgment he could be 
sure of, however, in the

unmapped land of concentration. At any rate, the look
was gone now, replaced

by a wide-eyed stare of interest in Dasein.

"You're looking vastly improved," Piaget said. "You've 
a better color in your

face. Feeling stronger?"

"As a matter of fact I am."

Piaget glanced at the remains of the cheese on the 
nightstand, crossed and

sniffed at it. "Bit stale," he said, "I'll have a fresh block 
sent up."

"You do that," Dasein said.

"Care to let me look at your bandages?" Piaget asked.

"I thought we were going to let Burdeaux work on my 
bandages."

"Win had a small emergency at home. His daughter's 
getting married tomorrow,

you know. He'll be along later."

"I didn't know."

delay because we decided to build four at once in the 
same area. Good

location -- you and Jenny might like one of them."

"That's nice," Dasein said. "You all get together and 
build a house for the

newlyweds."

"We take care of our own," Piaget said. "Let's look at 
those bandages, shall

we?"

"Let's."

"Glad to see you're being more reasonable," Piaget 
said. "Be right back." He

 went out the lab door, returned in a moment with a 
supply cart, stationed the

cart beside Dasein's bed, began cutting away the head 
bandages.

"See you've been puttering around the lab," Piaget 
said.

Dasein winced as air hit the burn on his cheek. "Is 
that what I've been

doing, puttering?"

"What have you been doing?" Piaget asked. He bent, 
examined Dasein's cheek.

"This is coming along ﬁne. Won't even leave a scar, I 
do believe."

"I'm looking for the active agent in Jaspers," Dasein 
said.

"Been several attempts along that line," Piaget said.
"Trouble is we all get

too busy with more immediate problems."

"You've had a try at it?" Dasein asked.

"When I was younger."

Dasein waited for the head bandage to be tied off 
before asking: "Do you have

notes, any summary of . . ."

"No notes. Never had time."

Piaget began working on Dasein's right arm.

"But what did you ﬁnd out?"

"Got a broth rich in amino acids," Piaget said. 
"Yeastlike. You're going to

have a scar on this arm, nothing alarming, and you're 
healing rapidly. You

can thank Jaspers for that."

"What?" Dasein looked up at him, puzzled.

"Nature gives; nature takes away. The Jaspers change 
in body chemistry makes

you more susceptible to allergenic reactions, but your 
body will heal ﬁve to

ten times faster than it would outside."

Dasein looked down at his exposed arm. Pink new 
ﬂesh already covered the

burned area. He could see the scar puckering Piaget 
had noted. "What change

in body chemistry?" Dasein asked. "Well, mostly a 
better hormone balance,"

Piaget said. "Closer to what you ﬁnd in an embryo."

"That doesn't square with the allergy reactions," 
Dasein protested.

"I'm not saying it's a simple thing," Piaget said. "Hold 
your arm out here.

Steady now."

Dasein waited for the bandage to be completed, then:
"What about structure

and . . ."

"Something between a virus and a bacteria," Piaget 
said. "Fungusoid in some

respects, but . . ."

"I saw cell structure in a sample under the 
microscope."

"Yes, but no nucleus. Some nuclear material, 
certainly, but it can be induced

to form virusoid crystals."

 "Do the crystals have the Jaspers effect?"

"No. They can, however, be introduced into the 
proper environment and after

suitable development they will produce the desired 
effect."

"What environment?"

"You know what environment, Gilbert."

"The Co-op's cave?"

"Yes." Piaget ﬁnished exposing Dasein's left arm.
"Don't think you'll have

as much scar tissue on this side."

"What's unique about the cave environment?" Dasein 
asked.

"We're not certain."

"Hasn't anybody ever tried to . . ."

"We do have a great many immediate problems just 
to maintain ourselves,

Gilbert," Piaget said.

Dasein looked down, watched Piaget ﬁnish the 
bandage on the left arm.

Maintain themselves? he wondered.

"Is there any objection to my looking into it?" Dasein 
asked.

"When you ﬁnd time -- certainly not." Piaget restored 
instruments and

material to the cart, pushed it aside. "There. I think 
we'll be able to take

the bandages off tomorrow. You're progressing 
beautifully."

"Am I really?"

Piaget smiled at him. "Insurance from the garage will 
take care of paying for

your new car," he said. "I presume Jenny told you 
about the car."

"She told me."

"We're also replacing your clothing. Is there anything 
else?"

"How about replacing my freedom of choice?"

"You have freedom of choice, Gilbert, and a broader 
area from which to choose.

Now, I have some . . ."

"Keep your advice," Dasein said.

"Advice? I was about to say I have some rather 
interesting information for

you. Your suggestion that I look into the people you 
accuse of trying to kill

you has borne some . . ."

"My suggestion that you look?"

"I took the liberty of going ahead with your 
suggestion."

"So you hypnotized some of them," Dasein said. "Did 
you prepare a Davis chart

on their suscept . . ."

"I did not hypnotize them," Piaget snapped. "Will you 
be silent and listen?"

 Dasein sighed, looked at the ceiling.

"I've interviewed several of these people," Piaget said. 
"The boy, Petey

Jorick, ﬁrst because he's a primary concern of mine, 
having just been

released from . . . school. An extremely interesting 
fact emerges."

"Oh?"

"Each of these persons has a strong unconscious 
reason to fear and hate the

outside."

"What?" Dasein turned a puzzled frown on Piaget.

"They weren't attacking you as Gilbert Dasein," Piaget 
said. "You were the

outsider. There's a strong unresolved . . ."

"You mean you consider this good and suﬃcient . . ."

"The reasons are unconscious, as you suspected," 
Piaget said. "The structure

of motivation, however . . ."

"So Jenny both loves me and hates me . . . as an 
outsider?"

"Get one thing straight, Gilbert. Jenny did not try to 
harm you. It was a

student nurse who . . ."

"Jenny told me herself she prepared . . ."

"Only in the broadest sense is that true," Piaget said. 
"She did go to the

diet kitchen and order your food and watch while it 
was prepared. However,

she couldn't keep an eye on every . . ."

"And this . . . this hate of outsiders," Dasein said, "you 
think this is why

some of your people tried to get me?"

"It's clearly indicated, Gilbert."

Dasein stared at him. Piaget believed this -- no doubt 
of it.

"So all I have to watch out for as long as I live in 
Santaroga is people who

hate outsiders?" Dasein asked.

"You have nothing to fear now at all," Piaget said. 
"You're no longer an

outsider. You're one of us. And when you and Jenny 
marry . . ."

"Of all the nonsense I've ever heard," Dasein said. 
"This takes all the

honors! This . . . this kid, Petey, he just wanted to put 
an arrow through me

because . . ."

"He has a pathological fear of leaving the valley for 
college outside," Piaget

said. "He'll overcome this, of course, but the emotions 
of childhood have

more . . ."

"The roach powder in the coffee," Dasein said. "That 
was just . . ."

"That's a very unhappy case," Piaget said. "She fell in 
love with an outsider

at college -- much as Jenny did, I might add. The 
difference is that her

friend seduced her and left her. She has a daughter 
who . . ."

 "My god! You really believe this crap," Dasein said. He 
pushed himself

against the head of the bed, sat glaring at Piaget.

"Gilbert, I ﬁnd this far easier to believe than I do your 
wild theory that

Santaroga has mounted a concerted attack against 
you. After all, you yourself

must see . . . "

"Sure," Dasein said. "I want you to explain the 
accident at the bridge. I

want to see how that . . ."

"Easiest of all," Piaget said. "The young man in 
question was enamored of

Jenny before you came on the scene."

"So he just waited for the moment when . . ."

"It was entirely on the unconscious level, that I assure 
you, Gilbert."

Dasein merely stared at him. The structure of 
rationalization Piaget had

built up assumed for Dasein the shape of a tree. It 
was like the tree of his

dream. There was the strong trunk protruding into 
daylight-consciousness.

The roots were down there growing in darkness. The 
limbs came out and dangled

prettily distracting leaves and fruit. It was a 
consistent structure despite

its falsity.

There'd be no cutting it down, Dasein saw. The thing 
was too substantial.

There were too many like it in the forest that was 
Santaroga. "This is a

tree, see? Doesn't it look like all the others?"

"I think when you've had time to reﬂect," Piaget said, 
"you'll come to

realize the truth of what . . ."

"Oh, no doubt," Dasein said.

"I'll, uh . . . I'll send you up some more fresh cheese," 
Piaget said.

"Special stock."

"You do that," Dasein said.

"I quite understand," Piaget said. "You think you're 
being very cynical and

wise right now. But you'll come around." He strode 
from the room.

Dasein continued to stare at the closed door long after 
Piaget had gone. The

man couldn't see it, would never be capable of seeing 
it. No Santarogan

could. Not even Jenny despite her love-sharpened 
awareness. Piaget's

explanation was too easy to take. It'd be the oﬃcial 
line.

I've got to get out of this crazy valley, Dasein thought.

He slipped out of bed just as the door opened and a 
hatless, chubby young

student nurse entered with a tray.

"Oh, you're out of bed," she said. "Good."

She took the old tray off the nightstand, put the new 
one in its place, set

the old one on a chair.

"I'll just straighten up your bed while you're out of it," 
she said.

Dasein stood to one side while she bustled about the 
bed. Presently, she

left, taking the old tray with her.

 He looked at what she had brought -- a golden wedge 
of cheese, crackers, a

glass and a bottle of Jaspers beer.

In a surge of anger, Dasein hurled the cheese against 
the wall. He was

standing there staring at the mess when a soothing 
sensation on his tongue

made him realize he was licking the crumbs off his 
ﬁngers.

Dasein stared at his own hand as though it belonged 
to another person. He

consciously forced himself not to bend and recover 
the cheese from the ﬂoor,

turned to the beer. There was an opener behind the 
bottle. He poured it into

the glass, drank in swift gulps. Only when the glass 
was drained did he grow

aware of the rich bouquet of Jaspers in the remaining 
drops of beer.

Fighting down a ﬁt of trembling, Dasein put the glass 
on the nightstand,

crawled into the bed as though seeking sanctuary.

His body refused to be denied. People didn't take 
Jaspers, he thought.

Jaspers took people. He felt the expanding effect 
within his consciousness,

sensed the thunder of a host jarring across the inner 
landscape of his psyche.

Time lost its normal ﬂow, became compressed and 
explosive.

Somewhere in a hospital room there were purposeful 
footsteps. The toggles of

a switch slammed away from their connections to 
create darkness. A door

closed.

Dasein opened his eyes to a window and starshine. In 
its illumination he saw

a fresh wedge of cheese on his night-stand. The mess 
had been cleaned from

wall and ﬂoor. He remembered Jenny's voice -- soft, 
musical, rippling like

dark water over rocks, a plaintive tremor in it.

Had Jenny been here in the dark?

He sensed no answer.

Dasein groped for the call buzzer at the head of his 
bed, pressed it.

A voice sounded from the speaker: "Do you wish a 
nurse?"

"What time is it?" Dasein asked.

"Three twenty-four a.m. Do you want a sleeping pill?"

"No . . . thanks."

He sat up, slid his feet to the ﬂoor, stared at the 
cheese.

"Did you just want the time?" the speaker asked.

"What does a full round of Jaspers cheese weigh?" he 
asked.

"The weight?" There was a pause, then: "They vary.
The smaller ones weigh

about thirty pounds. Why?"

"Send me a full round," he said.

"A full . . . Don't you have some now?"

"I want it for lab tests," he said, and he thought:
There! Lets see if

Piaget was being honest with me.

 "You want it when you get up in the morning?"

"I'm up now. And get me a robe and some slippers if 
you can."

"Hadn't you better wait, doctor. If . . ."

"Check with Piaget if you must," Dasein said. "I want 
that round now."

"Very well." She sounded disapproving.

Dasein waited sitting on the edge of the bed. He 
stared out the window at the

night. Absently, he broke off a chunk of the cheese on 
his nightstand, chewed

it and swallowed.

Presently, the foyer door produced a wedge of light. A 
tall, gray-haired

nurse entered, turned on the room's lights. She 
carried a large wheel of

golden cheese still glistening in its wax sealer.

"This is thirty-six pounds of prime Jaspers cheese," 
she said. "Where shall I

put it?" There were overtones of outrage and protest 
in her voice.

"Find a place for it on one of the lab benches," he said.     
"Where are the robe

and slippers?"

"If you'll be patient, I'll get them for you," she said. 
She shouldered her

way through the lab door, returned in a moment and 
crossed to a narrow door at

the far end of the room, opened it to reveal a closet. 
From the closet she

removed a green robe and a pair of black slippers 
which she dumped on the foot

of Dasein's bed.

"Will that be all -- sir?"

"That'll be all, for now."

"Hmmmph." She strode from the room, shut the foyer 
door with a ﬁnal-comment

thump.

Dasein took another bite of the cheese from his night-
stand, put on the robe

of cheese lay on an open metal bench at his right.

Alcohol won't kill it, he thought. Otherwise, it couldn't 
be incorporated in

the local beer. What does destroy it? Sunlight?

He recalled the dim red light of the Co-op's cave.

Well, there were ways of ﬁnding out. He rolled back 
the sleeves of his gown,

set to work.

Within an hour he had three-fourths of the round 
reduced to a milky solution

in a carboy, set about feeding it through the 
centrifuge.

The ﬁrst test tubes came out with their contents 
layered in a manner

reminiscent of a chromatograph. Near the top lay a 
thin silver-gray band of

material.

Dasein poured off the liquid, burned a hole in the 
bottom of a test tube and

removed the solids intact by blowing into the hole 
he'd created. A bit of the

gray material went on a slide and he examined it 
under the microscope.

 There was the mycelium structure, distorted but 
recognizable. He smelled the

slide. It was redolent of Jaspers. He put a hand to the 
microscope's

variable light control, watched the specimen while 
rotating the control.

Abruptly, the specimen began to shrivel and 
crystallize before his eyes.

Dasein looked at the light control. It was the 
spectrum-window type and, at

this moment, was passing light in the Angstrom range 
4000-5800. It was

cutting off the red end, Dasein noted.

Another look through the microscope showed the 
specimen reduced to a white

crystalline mass.

Sunlight, then.

What would do the job? he wondered. A bomb to 
open the cave? A portable

sunlamp?

As he thought this, Dasein felt that the darkness 
outside the hospital parted

to reveal a shape, a monster rising out of a black lake.

He shuddered, turned to the carboy of milky solution. 
Working mechanically,

he put the rest of the solution through the centrifuge, 
separated the

silver-gray band, collected the material in a dark 
brown bottle. The solution

produced almost a pint of the Jaspers essence.

Dasein smelled the bottle -- sharp and deﬁnite odor of 
Jaspers. He emptied

the bottle into a shallow dish, caught a bit of the 
substance on a spatula,

touched it to his tongue.

An electrifying sensation of distant ﬁreworks 
exploded from his tastebuds

through his spine. He felt he could see with the tip of 
his tongue or the tip

of a ﬁnger. Dasein sensed his core of awareness 
becoming a steely kernel

surrounded by desolation. He concentrated his 
energy, forced himself to look

at the dish of Jaspers essence.

Empty!

What had destroyed it? How could it be empty.

He looked at the palm of his right hand. How close it 
was to his face! There

were specks of silver-gray against the pink ﬂesh.

Tingling pulses of awareness began surging out from 
his throat and stomach,

along his arms and legs. He felt that his entire skin 
came alight. There was

a remote feeling of a body slipping to the ﬂoor, but he 
felt that the ﬂoor

glowed wherever the body touched it.

I ate the entire dish of essence, he thought.

What would it do -- the active agent from more than 
thirty pounds of Jaspers

cheese? What would it do? What was it doing? Dasein 
felt this to be an even

more interesting question.

What was it doing?

As he asked the question of himself, he experienced 
anguish. It wasn't fear,

but pure anguish, a sense of losing his grip on reality.

The steely kernel of selfdom! Where was it?

 Upon what fundament of reality did his selfdom sit? 
Frantically, Dasein tried

to extend his awareness, experienced the direct 
sensation that he was

projecting his own reality upon the universe. But 
there was a projection of

the universe simultaneously. He followed the lines of 
this projection, felt

them sweep through him as though through a 
shadow.

In this instant, he was lost, tumbling.

I was just a shadow, he thought.

The thought fascinated him. He remembered the 
shadow game of his childhood,

wondered what forms of shadows he could project by 
distorting the core of

self. The wondering produced the effect of shapes. 
Dasein sensed a screen of

awareness, a shapeless outline upon it. He willed the 
shape to change.

A muscled, breast-beating hero took form there.
Dasein shifted his emphasis.

The shadow became a bent-shouldered, myopic 
scientist in a long gown. Another

shift: It was naked Apollo racing over a landscape of 
feminine ﬁgures.

And again -- a plodder bent beneath a shapeless load.

With a gulping sensation of deitgrasp Dasein realized 
he was projecting the

only limits his ﬁnite being could know. It was an act 
of self-discovery that

gave birth to a feeling of hope. It was an odd sort of 
hope, unﬁxed,

disoriented, but deﬁnite in its existence -- not a hope 
of discernment, but

pure hope without boundaries, direction or 
attachments.

Hope itself.

It was a profound instant permitting him to grasp for 
a ﬂeeting instant the

structure of his own existence, his possibilities as a 
being.

A twisted, dented and distorted something crossed 
the ﬁeld of Dasein's

awareness. He recognized the kernel of selfdom. The 
thing had lost all

useful shape. He discarded it, chuckling.

Who discarded it? Dasein wondered.

Who chuckles?

There was a pounding sound -- feet upon a ﬂoor.

Voices.

He recognized the tones of the gray-haired nurse, but 
there was a tingling of

panic in the sounds she made.

Piaget.

"Let's get him on the bed," Piaget said. The words 
were clear and distinct.

What was not distinct was the shape of a universe 
become blurred rainbows, nor

the pressures of hands which blotted out the glowing 
sensation of his skin.

"It's diﬃcult to become conscious about 
consciousness," Dasein muttered.

"Did he say something?" That was the nurse.

 "I couldn't make it out." Piaget.

"Did you smell the Jaspers in there?" The nurse.

"I think he separated the essence out and took it."

"Oh, my god! What can we do?"

"Wait and pray. Bring me a straight-jacket and the 
emergency cart."

A straight-jacket? Dasein wondered. What an odd 
request.

He heard running footsteps. How loud they were! A 
door slammed. More

voices. Such a rushing around!

His skin felt as though it were growing dark.
Everything was being blotted

out.

With an abrupt, jerking sensation, Dasein felt himself 
shrivel downward into

an infant shape kicking, squalling, reaching outward, 
outward, ﬁngers

grasping.

"Give me a hand with him!" That was Piaget.

"What a mess!" Another male voice.

But Dasein already felt himself becoming a mouth, 
just a mouth. It blew out,

out, out -- such a wind. Surely, the entire world must 
collapse before this

hurricane.

He was a board, rocking. A teeter-totter. Down and up 
-- up and down.

A good run is better than a bad stand, he thought.

And he was running, running -- breathless, gasping.

A bench loomed out of swirling clouds. He threw 
himself down on it, became

the bench -- another board. This one dipped down 
and down into a boiling

green sea.

Life in a sea of unconsciousness, Dasein thought.

It grew darker and darker.

Death, he thought. Here's the background against 
which I can know myself.

The darkness dissolved. He was shooting upward, 
rebounding into a bunding

glare.

Dark shapes moved in the glare.

"His eyes are open." That was the nurse.

A shadow reduced the glare. "Gilbert?" That was 
Piaget. "Gilbert, can you

hear me? How much Jaspers did you take?"

Dasein tried to speak. His lips refused to obey.

The glare came back.

 "We'll just have to guess." Piaget. "How much did that 
cheese weigh?"

"Thirty-six pounds." The nurse.

"The physical breakdown is massive." Piaget. "Have a 
respirator standing

by."

"Doctor, what if he . . ." The nurse apparently couldn't 
complete the

statement of her fear. "I'm . . . ready." Piaget.

Ready for what? Dasein wondered.

By concentrating, he found he could make the glare 
recede. It resolved

momentarily into a tunnel of clarity with Piaget at the 
far end of it. Dasein

lay helplessly staring, unable to move as Piaget 
advanced on him carrying a

carboy that fumed and smoked.

Acid, Dasein thought, interpreting the nurse's words. 
If I die, they'll

dissolve me and wash me away down a drain. No 
body, no evidence.

The tunnel collapsed.

The sensation of glare expanded, contracted.

Perhaps, I can no longer be, Dasein thought.

It grew darker.

Perhaps, I cannot do, he thought.

Darker yet.

Perhaps, I cannot have, he thought.

Nothing.

Chapter 13

"It was kill or cure," the yellow god said.

"I wash my hands of you," said the white god.

"What I offered, you did not want," the red god 
accused.

"You make me laugh," said the black god.

"There is no tree that's you," the green god said.

"We are going now and only one of us will return," 
the gods chorused.

 There was a sound of a clearing throat.

"Why don't you have faces?" Dasein asked. "You have 
color but no faces."

"What?" It was a rumbling, vibrant voice.

"You're a funny sounding god," Dasein said. He 
opened his eyes, looked up

into Burdeaux's features, caught a puzzled scowl on 
the dark face.

"I'm no sort of god at all," Burdeaux said. "What're 
you saying, Doctor Gil?

You having another nightmare?"

Dasein blinked, tried to move his arms. Nothing 
happened. He lifted his

head, looked down at his body. He was bound tightly 
in a restraining jacket.

There was a stink of disinfectants, of Jaspers and of 
something repellent and

sour in the room. He looked around. It was still the 
isolation suite. His

head fell back to the pillow.

"Why'm I tied down like this?" Dasein whispered.

"What did you say, sir?"

Dasein repeated his question.

"Well, Doctor Gil, we didn't want you to hurt 
yourself."

"When . . . when can I be released?"

"Doctor Larry said to free you as soon as you woke 
up."

"I'm . . . awake."

"I know that, sir. I was just . . ." He shrugged, began 
unfastening the

bindings on the sleeves of the jacket.

"How long?" Dasein whispered.

"How long you been here like this?"

Dasein nodded.

"Three whole days now, and a little more. It's almost 
noon."

The bindings were untied. Burdeaux helped Dasein to 
a sitting position,

unlaced the back, slipped the jacket off.

Dasein's back felt raw and sensitive. His muscles 
responded as though they

belonged to a stranger. This was an entirely new 
body, Dasein thought.

Burdeaux came up with a white hospital gown, 
slipped it onto Dasein, tied the

back.

"You want the nurse to come rub your back?" he 
asked. "You've a couple of red

places there don't look too good."

"No . . . no thanks."

Dasein moved one of the stranger's arms. A familiar 
hand came up in front of

his face. It was his own hand. How could it be his own 
hand, he wondered,

when the muscles of the arm belonged to a stranger?

 "Doctor Larry said no one ever took that much 
Jaspers ever before all at

once," Burdeaux said. "Jaspers is a good thing, sir, but 
everybody knows you

can get too much."

"Does . . . is Jenny . . ."

"She's ﬁne, Doctor Gil. She's been worried sick about 
you. We all have."

Dasein moved one of the stranger's legs, then the 
other until they hung over

the edge of the bed. He looked down at his own knees. 
It was very odd.

"Here, now," Burdeaux said. "Best you stay in bed."

"I've . . . I . . ."

"You want to go to the bathroom? Best I bring you the 
bedpan."

"No . . . I . . ." Dasein shook his head. Abruptly, he 
realized what was

wrong. The body was hungry.

"Hungry," he said.

"Well, why didn't you say so? Got food right here 
waiting."

Burdeaux lifted a bowl, held it in front of Dasein. The 
rich aroma of Jaspers

enveloped him. Dasein reached toward the bowl, but 
Burdeaux said, "Best let

me feed you, Doctor Gil. You don't look too steady."

Dasein sat patiently, allowed himself to be fed. He 
could feel strength

gathering in the body. It was a bad ﬁt, this body, he 
decided. It had been

draped loosely on his psyche.

It occurred to him to wonder what the body was 
eating -- in addition to the

Jaspers, which surrounded him and pervaded him 
with its presence. Oatmeal,

the tongue said. Jaspers honey and Jaspers cream.

"There's a visitor waiting to see you," Burdeaux said 
when the bowl was empty.

"Jenny?"

"No . . . a Doctor Selador."

Selador! The name exploded on Dasein's conscience.
Selador had trusted him,

depended on him.

Selador had sent a gun through the mails.

"You feel up to seeing him?" Burdeaux asked.

"You . . . don't mind if I see him?" Dasein asked.

"Mind? Why should I mind, sir?"

Burdeaux's not the you I meant, Dasein thought.

There arose in Dasein then an urge to send Selador 
away. Such an easy thing

to do. Santaroga would insulate him from the 
Seladors of the world. A simple

request to Burdeaux was all it would take.

 "I'll . . . uh, see him," Dasein said. He looked around 
the room. "Could you

help me into a robe and . . . is there a chair I could . . ."

"Why don't I put you in a wheelchair, sir? Doctor 
Larry had one sent up for

when you awakened. He didn't want you exerting 
yourself. You're not to get

tired, understand?"

"Yes . . . yes, I understand. A wheelchair."

Presently, Dasein's bad-ﬁt body was in the 
wheelchair. Burdeaux had gone to

bring Selador, leaving the chair at the far end of the 
room from the foyer

door. Dasein found himself facing a pair of French 
doors that opened onto a

sundeck.

He felt he had been left alone in a brutally exposed 
position, his soul naked,

wretched with fear. There was a heavy load on him, 
he thought. He felt

embarrassment at the prospect of meeting Selador, 
and a special order of

fright. Selador saw through pretense and sham. You 
could wear no mask before

Selador. He was the psychoanalysts' psychoanalyst.

Selador will humiliate me, Dasein thought. Why did I 
agree to see him? He

will prod me and I will react. My reaction will tell him 
everything he wants

to know about me . . . about my failure.

Dasein felt then his sanity had been corroded into a 
pitted shell, a thing of

tinsel and fantasy. Selador would stamp upon it with 
the harsh, jolting

dynamics of his aliveness.

The foyer door opened.

Slowly, forcing himself to it, Dasein turned his head 
toward the door.

Selador stood in the opening, tall, hawk-featured, the 
dark skin and wildness

of India encased in a silver-gray tweed suit, a touch of 
the same silver at

the temples. Dasein had the sudden blurred sensation 
of having seen this face

in another life, the lancet eyes peering from beneath 
a turban. It had been a

turban with a red jewel in it.

Dasein shook his head. Madness.

"Gilbert," Selador said, striding across the room. "In 
the name of heaven,

what have you done to yourself now?" The precise 
accents of Oxford hammered

each word into Dasein's ears. "They said you were 
badly burned."

And thus it starts, Dasein thought.

"I . . . my arms and hands," Dasein said. "And a bit 
about the face."

"I arrived only this morning," Selador said. "We were 
quite worried about

you, you know. No word from you for days."

He stopped in front of Dasein, blocking off part of the 
view of the sundeck.

"I must say you look a fright, Gilbert. There don't 
appear to be any scars on

your face, though."

Dasein put a hand to his cheek. It was his cheek 
suddenly, not a stranger's.

The skin felt smooth, new.

"There's the damnedest musky smell about this 
place," Selador said. "Mind if

 I open these doors?"

"No . . . no, go right ahead."

Dasein found himself wrestling with the feeling that 
Selador was not Selador.

There was a shallowness to the man's speech and 
mannerisms all out of

character with the Selador of Dasein's memory. Had 
Selador changed in some

way?

"Lovely sunny day," Selador said. "Why don't I wheel 
you out on this deck for

a bit of air. Do you good."

Panic seized Dasein's throat. That deck -- it was a 
place of menace. He

tried to speak, to object. They couldn't go out there. 
No words came.

Selador took the silence for agreement, wheeled 
Dasein's chair out the door.

There was a slight jolt at the sill and they were on the 
deck.

Sunlight warmed Dasein's head. A breeze almost 
devoid of Jaspers washed his

skin, cleared his head. He said: "Don't you . . . "

"Doesn't this air feel invigorating?" Selador asked. He 
stopped at a shallow

parapet, the edge of the roof. "There. You can admire 
the view and I can sit

on this ledge."

Selador sat down, put a hand on the back of Dasein's 
chair. "I would imagine

that ward is wired for sound," Selador said. "I do not 
believe they can have

listening devices out here, however."

Dasein gripped the wheels of his chair, afraid it might 
lurch forward, propel

him off the roof. He stared down at a paved parking 
area, parked cars, lawn,

strips of ﬂowers, trees. The sense of Selador's words 
came to him slowly.

"Wired . . . for . . ." He turned, met amused inquiry in 
the dark eyes.

"Obviously, you're not quite yourself yet," Selador 
said. "Understandable.

You've been through a terrible ordeal. That's obvious. 
I'll have you out of

this place, though, as soon as you're able to travel. Set 
your mind at rest.

You'll be safe in a normal hospital at Berkeley before 
the week's out."

Dasein's emotions boiled, an arena of dispute. Safe! 
What a reassuring word.

Leave? He couldn't leave! But he had to leave. 
Outside? Go to that hideous

place?

"Have you been drugged, Gilbert?" Selador asked.
"You appear . . . so . . .

so . . ."

"I've . . . I'm all right."

"Really, you're behaving rather oddly. You haven't 
asked me once what we

found on the leads you provided."

"What . . ."

"The source of their petrol proved to be a dud. All 
quite normal . . .

provided you appreciate their economic motives. 
Cash deal with an independent

producer. The State Department of Agriculture gives 
their cheese and the

other products of their Cooperative a clean bill of 
health. The real estate

board, however, is interested that no one but 
Santarogans can buy property in

the valley. It may be they've violated 
antidiscriminatory legislation with .

 . ."

"No," Dasein said. "They . . . nothing that obvious."

"Ah, ha! You speak in the fashion of a man who has 
discovered the closeted

skeleton. Well, Gilbert, what is it?"

Dasein felt he'd been seized by a vampire of duty. It 
would drain the blood

from him. Selador would feed on it. He shook his 
head from side to side.

"Are you ill, Gilbert? Am I wearying you?"

"No. As long as I take it slowly . . . Doctor, you must 
understand, I've . .

."

"Do you have notes, Gilbert? Perhaps I could read 
your report and . . . "

"No . . . ﬁre."

"Oh, yes. The doctor, this Piaget, said something about 
your truck burning.

Everything up in smoke, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, Gilbert, we'll have to get it from your lips.     
Is there an

opening we can use to break these people?"

Dasein thought of the greenhouses -- child labor. He 
thought of the

statistical few Santarogans Jaspers had destroyed. He 
thought of the narcotic

implications in the Jaspers products. It was all there -- 
destruction for

Santaroga.

"There must be something," Selador said. "You've 
lasted much longer than the

others. Apparently, you've been given the freedom of 
the region. I'm sure

you must have discovered something."

Lasted much longer than the others, Dasein thought. 
There was naked

revelation in the phrase. As though he had 
participated in them, Dasein saw

the discussions which had gone into choosing him for 
this project. "Dasein

has connections in the valley -- a girl. That may be the 
edge we need.

Certainly, it gives us reason to hope he'll last longer 
than the others."

It had been something like that, Dasein knew. There 
was a callousness in it

that repelled him.

"Were there more than two?" he asked.

"Two? Two what, Gilbert?"

"Two other investigators . . . before me?"

"I don't see where that . . ."

"Were there?"

"Well . . . that's very discerning of you, Gilbert. Yes, 
there were more than

two. Eight or nine, I suspect."

"Why . . ."

 "Why weren't you told? We wanted to imbue you with 
caution, but we saw no

need to terrify you."

"But you thought they were murdered here . . . by 
Santarogans?"

"It was all exceedingly mysterious, Gilbert. We were 
not at all sure." He

studied Dasein, eyes open wide and probing. "That's 
it, eh? Murder. Are we

in peril right now? Do you have the weapon I . . ."

"If it were only that simple," Dasein said.

"In heaven's name, Gilbert, what is it? You must have 
found something. I had

such high hopes for you."

High hopes for me, Dasein thought. Again, it was a 
phrase that opened a door

on secret conversations. How could Selador be that 
transparent? Dasein found

himself shocked by the shallowness of the man. 
Where was the omnipotent

psychoanalyst? How could he have changed so 
profoundly?

"You . . . you people were just using me," Dasein said. 
As he spoke, he

recalled Al Marden's accusation. Marden had seen 
this . . . yes.

"Now, Gilbert, that's no attitude to take. Why, just 
before I left to come

here, Meyer Davidson was inquiring after you. You 
recall Davidson, the agent

for the investment corporation behind the chain 
stores? He was very much

taken with you, Gilbert. He told me he was thinking of 
making a place for you

on his staff."

Dasein stared at Selador. The man couldn't be serious.

"That would be quite a step up in the world for you, 
Gilbert."

Dasein suppressed an urge to laugh. He had the odd 
sensation of being

detached from his past and able to study a 
pseudoperson, a might-have-been

creature who was himself. The other Dasein would 
have leaped at this offer.

The new Dasein saw through the offer to the true 
opinion Selador and his

cronies held for "that useful, but not very bright 
person, Gilbert Dasein."

"Have you had a look at Santaroga?" Dasein asked. He 
wondered if Selador had

seen Clara Scheler's used car lot or the 
advertisements in the store windows.

"This morning, while I was waiting for visiting hours 
with you, I drove around

a bit," Selador said.

"What did you think of the place?"

"My candid opinion? An odd sort of village. When I 
inquired directions of a

native -- their language is so brusque and . . . odd. Not 
at all like . . .

well, it's not English, of course, full of Americanisms, 
but . . ."

"They have a language like their cheese," Dasein said.
"Sharp and full of

tang."

"Sharp! A very good choice of word."

"A community of individuals, wouldn't you say?" 
Dasein asked.

"Perhaps . . . but with a certain sameness to them. Tell 
me, Gilbert, does

this have something to do with why you were sent 
here?"

 "This?"

"These questions. I must say, you're talking like . . . 
well, damned if you

don't sound like a native." A forced laugh escaped his 
dark lips. "Have you

gone native?"

The question, coming from that darkly eastern face, 
couched in that Oxford

accent, struck Dasein as supremely amusing. Selador, 
of all people! To ask

such a question.

Laughter bubbled from Dasein.

Selador misinterpreted the response. "Well," he said, 
"I should hope you

hadn't."

"Humanity ought to be the ﬁrst order of interest for 
humans," Dasein said.

Again, Selador misinterpreted. "Ah, and you studied 
the Santarogans like the

excellent psychologist you are. Good. Well, then -- tell 
it in your own

way."

"I'll put it another way," Dasein said. "To have 
freedom, you must know how

to use it. There's a distinct possibility some people 
hunt freedom in such a

way they become the slaves of freedom."

"That's all very philosophical, I'm sure," Selador said.
"How does it apply

to ﬁnding justice for our sponsors?"

"Justice?"

"Certainly, justice. They were lured into this valley 
and cheated. They

spent large sums of money here and got no return on 
it whatsoever. They're

not people to take such treatment lightly."

"Lured?" Dasein said. "No one would sell to them, that 
I'm sure. How were

they lured? For that matter, how did they acquire a 
lease on . . ."

"This isn't pertinent, Gilbert."

"Yes, it is. How'd they get a lease on Santaroga land?"

Selador sighed. "Very well. If you insist. They forced a 
competitive bid on

some excess State property and put in a bid . . . "

"One they were sure no one else would match," 
Dasein said. He chuckled. "Did

they have a market survey?"

"They had a good idea how many people live here."

"But what kind of people?"

"What're you trying to say, Gilbert?"

"Santaroga's very like a Greek polis," Dasein said. 
"This is a community of

individuals, not a collectivity. Santarogans are not 
anthill slaves to grubs

and grubbing. This is a polis, small enough to meet 
human needs. Their ﬁrst

interest is in human beings. Now, as to justice for . . ."

"Gilbert, you're talking very strangely."

 "Hear me, please, doctor."

"Very well, but I hope you'll make some sense out of 
this . . . this . . ."

control, are less interested in justice than they are in 
public order. They

have stunted imaginations from too-long and too-
intimate association with an

ingrown system of self-perpetuating precedents. Do 
you want to know how they

and their machinations appear to a Santarogan?"

"Let me remind you, Gilbert, this is one of the reasons 
you were sent here."

Dasein smiled. Selador's accusatory tone brought not 
a twinge of guilt.

"Raw power," Dasein said. "That's how the outside 
appears to a Santarogan.

"A place of raw power. Money and raw power have 
taken over there."

"Outside," Selador said. "What an interesting 
emphasis you give to that

interesting word."

"Raw power is movement without a governor," 
Dasein said. "It'll run wild and

destroy itself with all about it. That's a civilization of 
battleﬁelds out

there. They have special names: market area, trade 
area, court, election,

senate, auction, strike -- but they're still battleﬁelds. 
There's no denying

it because every one can invoke the full gamut of 
weaponry from words to

guns."

"I do believe you're defending these Santaroga 
rascals," Selador said.

"Of course I'm defending them! I've had my eyes 
opened here, I tell you. I

lasted much longer, did I? You had such high hopes 
for me! How can you be so

damn' transparent?"

"Now you see here, Gilbert!" Selador stood up, glared 
down at Dasein.

"You know what gets to me, really gets to me?" Dasein 
asked. "Justice!

You're all so damned interested in putting a cloak of 
justice and legality on

your frauds! You give me a . . .

"Doctor Gil?"

It was Burdeaux's voice calling from the doorway 
behind him. Dasein yanked

back on his chair's left wheel, pushed on the right 
wheel. The chair whirled.

All in the same instant, Dasein saw Burdeaux 
standing in the French doors,

felt his chair hit something. He turned his head 
toward Selador in time to

see a pair of feet disappear over the edge of the roof. 
There was a long,

despairing cry terminated by the most sickening, wet 
thud Dasein had ever

heard.

Burdeaux was suddenly beside him, leaning on the 
parapet to peer down at the

parking area.

"Oh my goodness," Burdeaux said. "Oh, my goodness, 
what a terrible accident."

Dasein lifted his hands, looked at them -- his hands. 
I'm not strong enough

to've done that, he thought. I've been ill. I'm not 
strong enough.

 Chapter 14

"A major contributing factor to the accident," Piaget 
said, "was the victim's

own foolishness in standing that close to the edge of 
the roof."

The inquest had been convened in Dasein's hospital 
room -- "Because it is at

the scene of the accident and as a convenience to 
Doctor Dasein, who is not

fully recovered from injuries and shock."

A special investigator had been sent from the State 
Attorney General's oﬃce,

arriving just before the inquest convened at ten a.m. 
The investigator, a

William Garrity, obviously was known to Piaget. They 
had greeted each other

an appearance of fragility about him, sandy hair, a 
narrow face immersed in a

mask of diﬃdence.

Presiding was Santaroga's Coroner, a Negro Dasein 
had not seen before this

morning -- Leroy Cos: kinky gray hair and a square, 
blocky face of remote

dignity. He wore a black suit, had held himself apart 
from the preinquest

bustle until the tick of ten o'clock when he had seated 
himself at a table

provided for him, rapped once with a pencil and said: 
"We will now come to

order."

Spectators and witnesses had seated themselves in 
folding chairs brought in

for the occasion. Garrity shared a table with an 
Assistant District Attorney

who, it developed, was a Nis, Swarthout Nis, a man 
with the family's heavy

eyelids, wide mouth and sandy hair, but without the 
deeply cleft chin.

In the two days since the tragedy, Dasein had found 
his emotions embroiled

with a growing anger against Selador -- the fool, the 
damned fool, getting

himself killed that way.

Piaget, seated in the witness chair, summed it up for 
Dasein.

"In the ﬁrst place," Piaget said, a look of stern 
indignation on his round

face, "he had no business taking Doctor Dasein 
outside. I had explained

Doctor Dasein's physical condition quite clearly."

Garrity, the State's investigator, was permitted a 
question: "You saw the

accident, Doctor Piaget?"

"Yes. Mr. Burdeaux, having noted Doctor Selador 
wheel my patient onto the

sundeck and knowing I considered this a physical 
strain on my patient, had

summoned me. I arrived just in time to see Doctor 
Selador stumble and fall."

"You saw him stumble?" Swarthout Nis asked.

"Deﬁnitely. He appeared to be reaching for the back 
of Doctor Dasein's

wheelchair. I consider it fortunate he did not manage 
to grab the chair. He

could have taken both of them over the edge."

Selador stumbled? Dasein thought. A sense of opening 
relief pervaded him.

Selador stumbled! I didn't bump him. I knew I wasn't 
strong enough. But

 what did I bump? A loose board on the deck, 
perhaps? For an instant, Dasein

recalled his hands on the wheels of the chair, the 
ﬁrm, sure grip, the soft

bump. A board could feel soft, he told himself.

Burdeaux was in the witness chair now corroborating 
Piaget's testimony.

It must be true then.

Dasein felt strength ﬂow through his body. He began 
to see his Santaroga

experience as a series of plunges down precipitous 
rapids. Each plunge had

left him weaker until the ﬁnal plunge had, through a 
mystic fusion, put him

in contact with a source of inﬁnite strength. It was 
that strength he felt

now.

His life before Santaroga took on the aspects of a 
delicate myth held

ﬂeetingly in the mind. It was a tree in a Chinese 
landscape seen dimly

through pastel mists. He sensed he had fallen 
somehow into a sequel, which by

its existence had changed the past. But the present, 
here-and-now, surrounded

him like the trunk of a sturdy redwood, ﬁrmly rooted, 
supporting strong

branches of sanity and reason.

Garrity with his sleepy questions was a futile 
incompetent. "You ran

immediately to Dr. Dasein's side?"

"Yes, sir. He was quite ill and weak. I was afraid he 
might try to get out

of the wheelchair and fall himself."

"And Dr. Piaget?"

"He ran downstairs, sir, to see what he could do for 
the man who fell."

Only the Santarogans in this room were fully 
conscious, Dasein thought. It

occurred to him then that the more consciousness he 
acquired, the greater must

be his unconscious content -- a natural matter of 
balance. That would be the

source of Santaroga's mutual strength, of course -- a 
shared foundation into

which each part must ﬁt.

"Doctor Dasein," the Coroner said.

They swore Dasein in then. The eyes in the room 
turned toward him. Only

Garrity's eyes bothered Dasein -- hooded, remote, 
concealing, outsider eyes.

"Did you see Dr. Selador fall?"

"I . . . Mr. Bordeaux called me. I turned toward him 
and I heard a cry.

When I turned back . . . Doctor Selador's feet were 
going over the edge."

"His feet?"

"That's all I saw."

Dasein closed his eyes, remembering that moment of 
electric terror. He felt

he was using a tunnel-vision effect in his memory, 
focusing just on those

feet. An accident -- a terrible accident. He opened his 
eyes, shut off the

vision before memory reproduced that descending 
wail, the ﬁnal punctuating

thud.

"Had you known Dr. Selador for a long time?"

"He was . . . yes." What was Garrity driving at from 
behind those hooded

 eyes?

Garrity produced a sheet of paper from a briefcase on 
his table, glanced at

it, said: "I have here a page from Dr. Selador's journal. 
It was forwarded

to me by his wife. One passage interests me. I'll read it 
to . . ."

"Is this pertinent?" Coroner Cos asked.

"Perhaps not, sir," Garrity said. "Again, perhaps it is. I 
would like Dr.

Dasein's views. We are, after all, merely trying to 
arrive at the truth in a

terrible tragedy."

"May I see the passage?" That was Swarthout Nis, the 
Assistant District

Attorney, his voice suavely questioning.

"Certainly."

Nis took the paper, read it.

What is it? Dasein asked himself. What did Selador 
write that his wife would

send to a State investigator? Is this why Garrity came?

Nis returned the paper to Garrity. "Keeping in mind 
that Dr. Selador was a

psychiatrist, this passage could have many 
interpretations. I see no reason

why Dr. Dasein shouldn't have the opportunity to 
throw light upon it, however

-- if he can."

"May I see this?" the Coroner asked.

Garrity stood, took the paper to Cos, waited while the 
Coroner read it.

"Very well," Cos said, returning the paper to Garrity. 
"The passage you've

marked in red pencil presumably is what concerns 
you. You may question the

witness about that passage if you wish."

Garrity turned, the paper held stiﬄy before him, 
faced Dasein. With

occasional glances at the page, he read: "Dasein -- a 
dangerous instrument

for this project. They should be warned."

He lowered the paper. "What project, Dr. Dasein?"

There was a hush in the room as thick as fog.

"I . . . when did he write this?"

"According to his wife, it's dated approximately a 
month ago. I repeat: what

project?"

Dasein groped in his memory. Project . . . dangerous?

"The . . . only project . . ." He shook his head. The 
passage made no sense.

"Why did you come to Santaroga, Dr. Dasein?"

"Why? My ﬁancee lives here."

"Your ﬁancee . . ."

"My niece, Jenny Sorge," Piaget interposed.

 Garrity glanced at Piaget, who sat now in the front 
row of chairs, looked back

to Dasein. "Didn't you come here to make a market 
survey?"

"Oh, that -- yes. But I don't see how I could be 
dangerous to that . . ."

Dasein hesitated, weighing the time nicely. ". . . unless 
he was afraid I'd

have my mind too much on other things."

A soft rustle of laughter whispered through the room. 
The Coroner rapped his

pencil, said: "I remind you this is a serious occasion. A 
man has died."

Silence.

Garrity looked once more to the page in his hand. The 
paper seemed to have

gained weight, pulling down.

"What else is on that page from his journal?" Dasein 
asked. "Doesn't it

explain what . . ."

"Who are the they who should be warned?" Garrity 
asked.

Dasein shook his head. "I don't know -- unless it could 
be the people who

hired us for the market study."

"You have prepared such a study?"

"I'll complete it as soon as I'm well enough to be 
released from the

hospital."

"Your injuries," Garrity said, a note of anger in his 
voice. "Something was

said about burns. I'm not at all clear about . . ."

"Just a moment, please," the Coroner said. "Dr. 
Dasein's injuries are not at

issue here in any way other than how they bear on 
his being in a particular

place at a particular time. We have had testimony 
that he was very weak and

that Dr. Selador had wheeled Dr. Dasein's wheelchair 
out onto the sundeck."

"How weak?" Garrity asked. "And how dangerous?"

The Coroner sighed, glanced at Piaget, at Dasein, back 
to Garrity. "The facts

surrounding Dr. Dasein's injuries are common 
knowledge in Santaroga, Mr.

Garrity. There were more than a dozen witnesses. He 
was severely burned

while saving a man's life. Dr. Dasein is somewhat of a 
hero in Santaroga."

"Oh." Garrity returned to his seat at the table, put the 
page from Selador's

journal on the briefcase. He obviously was angry, 
confused.

"I permit a considerable degree of informality in an 
inquiry such as this,"

Cos said. "Dr. Dasein has asked a question about the 
surrounding contents of

that page. I confess the entries make no sense to me, 
but perhaps . . ." The

Coroner left his question hanging there, his attention 
on Garrity.

"My oﬃce can add little," Garrity said. "There's an 
entry which obviously

is a population ﬁgure; it's so labeled. There's a line . . 
." He lifted the

page. "'Oil company checked out. Negative.' There's a 
rather cryptic: 'No

mental illness.' Except for the one entry referring to 
Dr. Dasein . . ."

"What about the rest of the journal?" the Coroner 
asked. "Has your oﬃce

investigated it?"

"Unfortunately, Mrs. Selador says she obeyed her 
husband's testamentary wishes

 and burned his journal. It contained, she said, 
conﬁdential data on medical

cases. This one entry she preserved and sent to us . . ." 
Garrity shrugged.

"I'm afraid the only man who could explain it is no 
longer living," the

Coroner said. "If this was, however, a journal of 
medical data with reference

to Dr. Selador's psychiatric practice, then it would 
seem the entry in

question might be explained easily in rather harmless 
terms. The word

dangerous can have many interpretations in a 
psychiatric context. It may even

be that Dr. Dasein's interpretation is the correct one."

Garrity nodded.

"Do you have any more questions?" the Coroner 
asked.

"Yes. One more." Garrity looked at Dasein, a veiled, 
uncertain look. "Were

you and Dr. Selador on friendly terms?"

Dasein swallowed. "He was . . . my teacher . . . my 
friend. Ask anyone at

Berkeley."

A blank look of frustration came over Garrity's face.

He knows, Dasein thought. And immediately he 
wondered what it was Garrity

could know. There was nothing to know. An accident. 
Perhaps he knew

Selador's suspicions about Santaroga. But that was 
foolishness . . . unless

Garrity were another of the investigators looking into 
things that were none

of his business.

Dasein felt his vision blur and, staring at Garrity, saw 
the man's face become

a death's-head skull. The illusion vanished as Garrity 
shook his head, jammed

Selador's journal page into the briefcase. A rueful 
smile appeared on his

face. He glanced at the Coroner, shrugged.

"Something amuses you, Mr. Garrity?" the Coroner 
asked.

The smile vanished.

"No, sir. Well . . . my own thought processes 
sometimes. I've obviously

allowed an unhappy woman, Mrs. Selador, to send 
me on a wild goose chase."

The investigator sat down, said: "I've no more 
questions, sir."

Abruptly, Dasein experienced a moment of insight; 
Garrity's thoughts had

frightened the man! He'd suspected a vast conspiracy 
here in Santaroga. But

that was too fantastic; thus, the smile.

were in . . . an allusion to the pathologist's gory details 
-- "massive head

injuries, death instantaneous" -- a notation that a 
formal inquest would be

held at a date to be announced. Would Mr. Garrity 
wish to return for it? Mr.

Garrity thought not.

It dawned on Dasein then that this had been a show 
for Garrity, something to

set his mind at ease. Tiny bits of Piaget's preinquest 
conversation with

Garrity returned to Dasein, ﬁtted into a larger 
pattern. They'd been in

school together -- outside! Of course: old friends, 
Larry and Bill. One

didn't suspect old friends of conspiracy. Reasonable.

It was over then -- death by misadventure, an 
accident.

 Garrity was shaking hands with Coroner Cos, with 
Piaget. Would Piaget be

coming out to their class reunion? If his practice 
permitted . . . but

Garrity certainly must know how it was with country 
doctors. Garrity

understood.

"This was a terrible thing," Garrity said.

Piaget sighed. "Yes, a terrible tragedy."

Garrity was pausing at the foyer door now. There 
were knots of people behind

him waiting for the elevator, a buzz of conversation. 
He turned, and Dasein

thought he saw a look of angry speculation on the 
man's face.

Piaget bent over Dasein then, shutting off the view of 
the door. "This has

been a strain on you and I want you to get some rest 
now," Piaget said.

"Jenny's coming in for a minute, but I don't want her 
staying too long."

He moved aside.

The foyer doorway stood open and empty.

"Understand?" Piaget asked.

"Yes . . . Jenny's coming."

What was that look in Garrity's eyes? Dasein asked 
himself. A black savage in

Africa might have peered that way into a white man's 
shiny city. Strange . .

. angry . . . frustrated man. If Meyer Davidson and his 
crew chose Garrity

for an investigator -- there'd be a dangerous one. 
That'd be a bridge to

cross in its own time, though . . . if at all. Many things 
could happen to a

man out there in the wide-wide world. Dasein could 
feel it -- Santaroga was

preparing itself to reach out there.

whoever they are. The only good defense is a good 
offense.

This was a disturbing thought that sent trembling 
agitation through Dasein's

stomach and legs.

Why am I trembling? he wondered.

He tried to recapture the thought that had disturbed 
him, failed. It was

brief unimportant disturbance, a momentary ripple 
on a lake that otherwise was

growing calmer and calmer. Dasein allowed the 
sensation of calm green waters

to ﬂow over and around him. He grew aware he was 
alone in the room with

Jenny.

There was calmness personiﬁed: blue eyes with laugh 
wrinkles at their edges,

full lips smiling at him. She wore an orange dress, an 
orange ribbon in her

dark hair.

Jenny put a package on his nightstand, bent over and 
kissed him -- warm lips,

a deep sense of peace and sharing. She pulled away, 
sat down beside him, held

his hand.

Dasein thought she had never looked more beautiful.

"Uncle Larry says you're to rest this afternoon, but 
you can be released from

the hospital by Saturday," she said.

 Dasein reached out, ran his ﬁngers through her hair -- 
silky-smooth, sensuous

hair. "Why don't we get married Sunday?" he asked.

"Oh, darling . . ."

Again, she kissed him, pulled back, looked prim. "I 
better not do that

anymore today. We don't want to weaken you." The 
dimple ﬂickered in her

cheek. "You want to be fully recovered and strong by 
Sunday."

Dasein pulled her head down against his neck, 
stroked her hair.

"We can have one of the houses in the new section," 
she whispered. "We'll be

near Cal and Willa. Darling, darling, I'm so happy."

"So am I."

She began describing the house to him, the garden 
space, the view . . .

"You've chosen one of them already?"

"I was out there -- dreaming, hoping. . . ."

The house was everything she'd ever longed for -- it 
was important for a woman

to have the right house in which to begin life with the 
man she loved. There

was even a big garage with room for a shop . . . and a 
lab.

Dasein thought of Jersey Hofstedder's car sitting in 
the garage she described.

There was a sense of continuity in the thought, a 
peasant complacency

involving "good things" and "vintage crops."

His attention focused on the package Jenny had put 
on his nightstand.

"What's in the package?"

"Package?"

She lifted her head, turned to follow the direction of 
his gaze. "Oh, that.

The gang at the Co-op -- they put together a 'get-well' 
package for you."

"Jaspers?"

"Of course." She sat back, straightened her hair.

Dasein had a sudden vision of himself working in the 
wrapping line at the

Co-op.

"Where will I work?" he asked.

"Uncle Larry wants you in the clinic, but we'll both 
get a month of honeymoon

leave. Darling -- it's going to be so long until Sunday."

In the clinic, Dasein thought. Not as a patient, thank 
God. He wondered then

which god he was thanking. It was an odd thought, 
without beginning and

without end, a bit of string hanging in the green lake 
of his mind.

Jenny began unwrapping the package on the night-
stand -- a wedge of golden

cheese, two bottles of beer, dark wheat crackers, a 
white container that

sloshed when she moved it. He wondered when they 
had been exposed.

Dasein had the sudden feeling that he was a moth in a 
glass cage, a frantic

 thing ﬂuttering against his barriers, lost, confused.

"Darling, I'm tiring you." Jenny put her hand on his 
forehead. It soothed

him, calmed him. The moth of his emotions settled on 
a strong green limb.

The limb was attached to a tree. He felt the trunk of 
the tree as though it

were himself -- strong, an inﬁnite source of strength.

"When will I see you?" he asked.

"I'll come by in the morning."

She blew him a kiss, hesitated, bent over him -- the 
sweet fragrance of

Jaspers about her breath, a touch of lips.

Dasein stared after her until the foyer door closed.

A momentary anguish touched him, a ﬂeeting sense 
that he'd lost his grip on

reality, that this room was unreal without Jenny in it. 
Dasein grabbed a

chunk of the golden cheese, stuffed it in his mouth, 
felt the soothing Jaspers

presence, his awareness expanding, becoming ﬁrm 
and manageable.

What's reality, anyway? he asked himself. It's as ﬁnite 
as a bit of cheese,

as tainted by error as anything else with limits.

He settled his mind ﬁrmly then onto thoughts of the 
home Jenny had described,

pictured himself carrying her across the threshold -- 
his wife. There'd be

presents: Jaspers from 'the gang,' furniture . . . 
Santaroga took care of

its own.

It'll be a beautiful life, he thought. Beautiful . . . 
beautiful . . .

beautiful . . .

