Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster

eBook.

Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content

and other great books from Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at

eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

About this eBook

This  eBook  contains  special  symbols  that  are  important
for  reading  and  understanding  the  text.  In  order  to  view
them  correctly,  please  activate  your  device’s  “Publisher
Font” or “Original” font setting; use of optional fonts on
your  device  may  result  in  missing,  or  incorrect,  special
symbols.

Also,  please  keep  in  mind  that  Shakespeare  wrote  his

plays  and  poems  over  four  hundred  years  ago,  during  a
time  when  the  English  language  was  in  many  ways
different than it is today. Because the built-in dictionary
on  many  devices  is  designed  for  modern  English,  be
advised  that  the  definitions  it  provides  may  not  apply  to
the words as Shakespeare uses them. Whenever available,
always  check  the  glosses  linked  to  the  text  for  a  proper
definition before consulting the built-in dictionary.

THE NEW FOLGER LIBRARY

SHAKESPEARE

Designed  to  make  Shakespeare’s  great  plays  available  to
all 
readers, 
the 
New 
Folger 
Library 
edition 
of

Shakespeare’s  plays  provides  accurate  texts  in  modern
spelling and punctuation, as well as scene-by-scene action
summaries, 
full 
explanatory 
notes, 
many 
pictures

clarifying Shakespeare’s language, and notes recording all
significant  departures  from  the  early  printed  versions.
Each play is prefaced by a brief introduction, by a guide to
reading  Shakespeare’s  language,  and  by  accounts  of  his
life and theater. Each play is followed by an annotated list
of further readings and by a “Modern Perspective” written
by an expert on that particular play.

Barbara A. Mowat is Director of Research emerita  at  the
Folger 
Shakespeare 
Library, 
Consulting 
Editor 
of

Shakespeare  Quarterly,  and  author  of  The  Dramaturgy  of
Shakespeare’s  Romances  and  of  essays  on  Shakespeare’s
plays and their editing.

Paul  Werstine  is  Professor  of  English  at  the  Graduate
School  and  at  King’s  University  College  at  Western
University.  He  is  a  general  editor  of  the  New  Variorum
Shakespeare  and  author  of  Early  Modern  Playhouse
Manuscripts  and  the  Editing  of  Shakespeare  and  of  many
papers  and  articles  on  the  printing  and  editing  of
Shakespeare’s plays.

Folger Shakespeare Library

The Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, D.C., is a
privately funded research library dedicated to Shakespeare
and  the  civilization  of  early  modern  Europe.  It  was
founded in 1932 by Henry Clay and Emily Jordan Folger,
and incorporated as part of Amherst College in Amherst,
Massachusetts,  one  of  the  nation’s  oldest  liberal  arts
colleges, from which Henry Folger had graduated in 1879.
In  addition  to  its  role  as  the  world’s  preeminent
Shakespeare  collection  and  its  emergence  as  a  leading
center  for  Renaissance  studies,  the  Folger  Shakespeare
Library  offers  a  wide  array  of  cultural  and  educational
programs and services for the general public.

EDITORS

BARBARA A. MOWAT

Director of Research emerita
Folger Shakespeare Library

PAUL WERSTINE
Professor of English

King’s University College at Western University, Canada

From the Director of the Folger

Shakespeare Library

It is hard to imagine a world without Shakespeare. Since
their  composition  more  than  four  hundred  years  ago,
Shakespeare’s  plays  and  poems  have  traveled  the  globe,
inviting those who see and read his works to make them
their own.

Readers  of  the  New  Folger  Editions  are  part  of  this

ongoing  process  of  “taking  up  Shakespeare,”  finding  our
own thoughts and feelings in language that strikes us as
old  or  unusual  and,  for  that  very  reason,  new.  We  still
struggle to keep up with a writer who could think a mile a
minute, whose words paint pictures that shift like clouds.
These expertly edited texts are presented as a resource for
study,  artistic  exploration,  and  enjoyment.  As  a  new
generation of readers engages Shakespeare in eBook form,
they  will  encounter  the  classic  texts  of  the  New  Folger
Editions, with trusted notes and up-to-date critical essays
available  at  their  fingertips.  Now  readers  can  enjoy
expertly edited, modern editions of Shakespeare anywhere
they  bring  their  e-reading  devices,  allowing  readers  not
simply  to  keep  up,  but  to  engage  deeply  with  a  writer
whose works invite us to think, and think again.

The New Folger Editions of Shakespeare’s plays, which

are the basis for the texts realized here in digital form, are
special  because  of  their  origin.  The  Folger  Shakespeare
Library  in  Washington,  D.C.,  is  the  single  greatest
documentary 
source 
of 
Shakespeare’s 
works. 
An

unparalleled 
collection 
of 
early 
modern 
books,

manuscripts,  and  artwork  connected  to  Shakespeare,  the

Folger’s  holdings  have  been  consulted  extensively  in  the
preparation  of  these  texts.  The  Editions  also  reflect  the
expertise  gained  through  the  regular  performance  of
Shakespeare’s works in the Folger’s Elizabethan Theater.

I  want  to  express  my  deep  thanks  to  editors  Barbara

Mowat and Paul Werstine for creating these indispensable
editions  of  Shakespeare’s  works,  which  incorporate  the
best of textual scholarship with a richness of commentary
that is both inspired and engaging. Readers who want to
know  more  about  Shakespeare  and  his  plays  can  follow
the  paths  these  distinguished  scholars  have  tread  by
visiting  the  Folger  either  in  person  or  online,  where  a
range of physical and digital resources exist to supplement
the material in these texts. I commend to you these words,
and hope that they inspire.

Michael Witmore

Director, Folger Shakespeare Library

Contents

Editors’ Preface
Shakespeare’s The Winter’s Tale
Reading Shakespeare’s Language: The Winter’s Tale
Shakespeare’s Life
Shakespeare’s Theater
The Publication of Shakespeare’s Plays
An Introduction to This Text
Characters in the Play

The Winter’s Tale
Text of the Play with Commentary

Act 1
Scene 1
Scene 2
Act 2
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Act 3
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Act 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Act 5
Scene 1
Scene 2

Scene 3

Longer Notes
Textual Notes
The Winter’s Tale: A Modern Perspective by Stephen Orgel
Further Reading
Key to Famous Lines and Phrases
Commentary

Act 1
Scene 1
Scene 2
Act 2
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Act 3
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Act 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Act 5
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3

Editors’ Preface

In recent years, ways of dealing with Shakespeare’s texts
and  with  the  interpretation  of  his  plays  have  been
undergoing  significant  change.  This  edition,  while
retaining many of the features that have always made the
Folger Shakespeare so attractive to the general reader, at
the  same  time  reflects  these  current  ways  of  thinking
about Shakespeare. For example, modern readers, actors,
and  teachers  have  become  interested  in  the  differences
between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  early  forms  in  which
Shakespeare’s plays were first published and, on the other
hand,  the  forms  in  which  editors  through  the  centuries
have presented them. In response to this interest, we have
based  our  edition  on  what  we  consider  the  best  early
printed  version  of  a  particular  play  (explaining  our
rationale  in  a  section  called  “An  Introduction  to  This
Text”)  and  have  marked  our  changes  in  the  text—
unobtrusively, we hope, but in such a way that the curious
reader can be aware that a change has been made and can
consult the “Textual Notes” to discover what appeared in
the early printed version.

Current ways of looking at the plays are reflected in our

brief introductions, in many of the commentary notes, in
the annotated lists of “Further Reading,” and especially in
each play’s “Modern Perspective,” an essay written by an
outstanding  scholar  who  brings  to  the  reader  his  or  her
fresh assessment of the play in the light of today’s interests
and concerns.

As in the Folger Library General Reader’s Shakespeare,

which  the  New  Folger  Library  Shakespeare  replaces,  we
include  explanatory  notes  designed  to  help  make

Shakespeare’s  language  clearer  to  a  modern  reader,  and
we hyperlink notes to the lines that they explain. We also
follow  the  earlier  edition  in  including  illustrations—of
objects, of clothing, of mythological figures—from books
and  manuscripts  in  the  Folger  Shakespeare  Library
collection.  We  provide  fresh  accounts  of  the  life  of
Shakespeare,  of  the  publishing  of  his  plays,  and  of  the
theaters in which his plays were performed, as well as an
introduction  to  the  text  itself.  We  also  include  a  section
called “Reading Shakespeare’s Language,” in which we try
to  help  readers  learn  to  “break  the  code”  of  Elizabethan
poetic language.

For each section of each volume, we are indebted to a

host  of  generous  experts  and  fellow  scholars.  The
“Reading Shakespeare’s Language” sections, for example,
could  not  have  been  written  had  not  Arthur  King,  of
Brigham Young University, and Randal Robinson, author
of  Unlocking  Shakespeare’s  Language,  led  the  way  in
untangling  Shakespearean  language  puzzles  and  shared
their  insights  and  methodologies  generously  with  us.
“Shakespeare’s Life” profited by the careful reading given
it by the late S. Schoenbaum, “Shakespeare’s Theater” was
read  and  strengthened  by  Andrew  Gurr  and  John
Astington, and “The Publication of Shakespeare’s Plays” is
indebted to the comments of Peter W. M. Blayney. Among
the texts we consulted, we found Stephen Orgel’s edition
in the Oxford series especially helpful. We are immensely
grateful to Robert K. Turner for allowing us to consult in
manuscript the commentary to his New Variorum edition.
We,  as  editors,  take  sole  responsibility  for  any  errors  in
our editions.

We  are  grateful  to  the  authors  of  the  “Modern

Perspectives”;  to  Leeds  Barroll  and  David  Bevington  for
their  generous  encouragement;  to  the  Huntington  and
Newberry  Libraries  for  fellowship  support;  to  King’s

College for the grants it has provided to Paul Werstine; to
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada,  which  provided  him  with  a  Research  Time
Stipend for 1990–91; to R. J. Shroyer of the University of
Western  Ontario  for  essential  computer  support;  to  the
Folger  Institute’s  Center  for  Shakespeare  Studies  for  its
fortuitous  sponsorship  of  a  workshop  on  “Shakespeare’s
Texts for Students and Teachers” (funded by the National
Endowment  for  the  Humanities  and  led  by  Richard
Knowles of the University of Wisconsin), a workshop from
which  we  learned  an  enormous  amount  about  what  is
wanted 
by 
college 
and 
high-school 
teachers 
of

Shakespeare  today;  and  especially  to  Steve  Llano,  our
production  editor  at  Pocket  Books,  whose  expertise  and
attention to detail are essential to this project.

Our biggest debt is to the Folger Shakespeare Library:

to  Michael  Witmore,  Director  of  the  Folger  Shakespeare
Library, who brings to our work a gratifying enthusiasm
and  vision;  to  Gail  Kern  Paster,  Director  of  the  Library
from  2002  until  July  2011,  whose  interest  and  support
have  been  unfailing  and  whose  scholarly  expertise
continues  to  be  an  invaluable  resource;  and  Werner
Gundersheimer, the Library’s Director from 1984 to 2002,
who  made  possible  our  edition;  to  Deborah  Curren-
Aquino,  who  provides  extensive  editorial  and  production
support;  to  Jean  Miller,  the  Library’s  Art  Curator,  who
combs the Library holdings for illustrations, and to Julie
Ainsworth,  Head  of  the  Photography  Department,  who
carefully  photographs  them;  to  Peggy  O’Brien,  former
Director of Education at the Folger and now Director of
Education  Programs  at  the  Corporation  for  Public
Broadcasting, who gave us expert advice about the needs
being  expressed  by  Shakespeare  teachers  and  students
(and to Martha Christian and other “master teachers” who
used  our  texts  in  manuscript  in  their  classrooms);  to

Jessica  Hymowitz  and  Wazir  Shpoon  for  their  expert
computer support; to the staff of the Academic Programs
Division, especially Amy Adler, Mary Tonkinson, Kathleen
Lynch,  Keira  Roberts,  Carol  Brobeck,  Kelleen  Zubick,
Toni  Krieger,  and  Martha  Fay;  and,  finally,  to  the
generously  supportive  staff  of  the  Library’s  Reading
Room.

Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine

Shakespeare’s The Winter’s Tale

The  Winter’s  Tale,  one  of  Shakespeare’s  very  late  plays,
puts onstage a story so filled with improbabilities that the
play occasionally seems amused at its own audacity. Near
the  story’s  end,  for  example,  as  incredible  details
accumulate, one character says “This news which is called
true is so like an old tale that the verity [i.e., the truth] of it
is in strong suspicion”; he has just exclaimed “Such a deal
of  wonder  is  broken  out  within  this  hour  that  ballad
makers [the tabloid writers of Shakespeare’s day] cannot
be  able  to  express  it.”  As  the  “old  tale”  spins  to  its
remarkable  conclusion,  another  character  tells  us  that
what we are about to see, “Were it but told you, should be
hooted at / like an old tale.”

The  sense  of  the  incredible  and  the  wonderful  seems

built  into  the  design  of  the  play,  as  the  play’s  title
indicates.  And  the  play’s  dialogue  forces  upon  us  an
awareness of the title’s significance. “Pray you sit by us /
And tell ’s a tale,” Queen Hermione says early in the play
to her young son Mamillius, who replies, “A sad tale’s best
for winter. I have one / Of sprites and goblins.” The tale
that  the  play  tells,  like  that  promised  by  Mamillius,  is
indeed  of  “sprites  and  goblins”—of  ferocious  and
murderous passions, of man-eating bears, of princes and
princesses in disguise, of death by drowning and by grief,
of Greek oracles, of betrayal, and of unexpected joy. And
the  play  draws  much  of  its  power  from  its  heavy
dependence on Greek myths of loss and of transformation.

Yet  the  story  the  play  tells  is  at  the  same  time  solidly

grounded  in  the  everyday,  while  the  play  itself  is  closely
tied  to  Shakespeare’s  earlier,  more  straightforward,

tragedies  and  comedies.  The  monstrous  jealousy  that
descends  upon  Leontes,  for  example,  is  mythlike  in  its
resemblance  to  the  madness  sent  by  the  gods  to  punish
Hercules in classical drama, but it seems not unfamiliar as
an  emotional  state  that  can  threaten  anyone  who  loves
someone  else  and  who  is  thus  vulnerable  to  loss  and
betrayal. Leontes’ actions are so extreme that one at first
discounts them as rather un-Shakespearean, yet his story
is recognizably a retelling of Othello’s (with the Iago-figure
here incorporated into the hero’s own psyche), as well as
being  a  retelling  of  the  Claudio-Hero  plot  in  Much  Ado
About Nothing.

A “winter’s tale” is a story to be told or read in front of a

fire  on  a  long  winter’s  night.  Paradoxically,  this  Winter’s
Tale is ideally seen rather than read. Its sudden shift from
tragedy to comedy, its playing with disguise, its startling
exits  and  transformations  seem  addressed  to  theater
audiences, not readers. But the imagination can do much
to  transform  words  into  living  characters  and  stage
directions into vivid action, and thus to turn this play that
is quintessentially for the stage back into a tale of wonder,
a tale “of sprites and goblins.”

After  you  have  read  the  play,  we  invite  you  to  turn  to

the  essay  “The  Winter’s  Tale:  A  Modern  Perspective,”  by
Professor Stephen Orgel of Stanford University, contained
within this eBook.

Reading Shakespeare’s Language: The

Winter’s Tale

For  many  people  today,  reading  Shakespeare’s  language
can be a problem—but it is a problem that can be solved.
Those who have studied Latin (or even French or German
or  Spanish),  and  those  who  are  used  to  reading  poetry,
will  have  little  difficulty  understanding  the  language  of
Shakespeare’s  poetic  drama.  Others,  though,  need  to
develop  the  skills  of  untangling  unusual  sentence
structures  and  of  recognizing  and  understanding  poetic
compressions,  omissions,  and  wordplay.  And  even  those
skilled  in  reading  unusual  sentence  structures  may  have
occasional  trouble  with  Shakespeare’s  words.  More  than
four  hundred  years  of  “static”  intervene  between  his
speaking  and  our  hearing.  Most  of  his  immense
vocabulary is still in use, but a few of his words are not,
and, worse, some of his words now have meanings quite
different  from  those  they  had  in  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries.  In  the  theater,  most  of  these
difficulties  are  solved  for  us  by  actors  who  study  the
language  and  articulate  it  for  us  so  that  the  essential
meaning is heard—or, when combined with stage action,
is at least felt. When reading on one’s own, one must do
what  each  actor  does:  go  over  the  lines  (often  with  a
dictionary close at hand) until the puzzles are solved and
the lines yield up their poetry and the characters speak in
words  and  phrases  that  are,  suddenly,  rewarding  and
wonderfully memorable.

Shakespeare’s Words

As  you  begin  to  read  the  opening  scenes  of  a  play  by
Shakespeare, you may notice occasional unfamiliar words.
Some  are  unfamiliar  simply  because  we  no  longer  use
them.  In  the  opening  scenes  of  The  Winter’s  Tale,  for
example, you will find the words sneaping (i.e.,  nipping),
bawcock (i.e., fellow), pash (i.e., head), and hoxes (i.e., cuts
the hamstring muscles). Words of this kind are explained
in notes to the text and will become familiar the more of
Shakespeare’s plays you read.

In The Winter’s Tale, as in all of Shakespeare’s writing,

more problematic are the words that we still use but that
we use with a different meaning. In the opening scenes of
The Winter’s Tale, for example, the word embassies has the
meaning  of  “messages,”  subject  is  used  where  we  would
say “people,” jar o’ th’ clock  is  used  where  we  would  say
“tick  of  the  clock,”  and  fabric  where  we  would  say
“edifice.” Such words will be explained in the notes to the
text, but they, too, will become familiar as you continue to
read Shakespeare’s language.

Some  words  are  strange  not  because  of  the  “static”

introduced by changes in language over the past centuries
but because these are words that Shakespeare is using to
build a dramatic world that has its own space, time, and
history.  In  the  opening  scenes  of  The  Winter’s  Tale,  for
example,  Shakespeare  conjures  up  the  “magnificence”
(meaning  “splendid  ceremony,  liberal  expenditure,  and
good taste”)  with  which  “Sicilia”  (i.e.,  King  Leontes)  has
been entertaining his lifelong friend “Bohemia” (i.e., King
Polixenes)  for  “nine  changes  of  the  wat’ry  star,”  or  nine
months. (“Sicilia” and “Bohemia” are used to name both
the  kingdoms  and,  on  occasion,  their  kings.)  The
conversation  among  Leontes,  his  queen,  Hermione,  and
the couple’s friend Polixenes recalls the kings’ “unfledged
days,”  when  they  were  “pretty  lordings.”  Then  suddenly
for  no  good  reason  Leontes  suspects  an  affair  between

Hermione  and  his  friend  Polixenes;  he  drops  out  of  the
three-way  conversation,  heaps  abuse  on  Hermione  as  a
“slippery” wife, a “hobby-horse,” and a “bed-swerver,” and
describes  the  covert  sexual  activity  of  the  couple
—“paddling  palms,”  “meeting  noses,”  “horsing  foot  on
foot.” Leontes’ queen and court suffer intolerably as they
are subjected to his “dangerous unsafe lunes,” “tyrannous
passion,” “humor,” and “weak-hinged fancy.”

Then  as  suddenly  as  Leontes’  court  is  transformed  by

his insane jealousy, the world of the play is transformed
again  when  the  scene  shifts  from  Sicilia  to  the  fictional
seacoast  and  countryside  of  Bohemia.  First,  Bohemia  is
created  as  the  site  of  terrifying  natural  disasters  with
terms such as “grimly” skies, “blusters,” and “creatures of
prey.” Shortly thereafter, the play’s language constructs it
as  beautiful  and  desirable,  a  place  where  “gillyvors,”  the
“crown imperial,” and the “flower-de-luce” grow, and the
people perform in “Whitsun pastorals.”

Shakespeare’s Sentences

In an English sentence, meaning is quite dependent on the
place given each word. “The dog bit the boy” and “The boy
bit the dog” mean very different things, even though the
individual  words  are  the  same.  Because  English  places
such  importance  on  the  positions  of  words  in  sentences,
on the way words are arranged, unusual arrangements can
puzzle  a  reader.  Shakespeare  frequently  shifts  his
sentences  away  from  “normal”  English  arrangements—
often  to  create  the  rhythm  he  seeks,  sometimes  to  use  a
line’s  poetic  rhythm  to  emphasize  a  particular  word,
sometimes  to  give  a  character  his  or  her  own  speech
patterns  or  to  allow  the  character  to  speak  in  a  special
way. When we attend a good performance of the play, the
actors  will  have  worked  out  the  sentence  structures  and
will articulate the sentences so that the meaning is clear.

(Sometimes  the  language  of  The  Winter’s  Tale  steadfastly
resists being reduced to any clear meaning. But the actors
will, nonetheless, clarify as far as the words and sentence
structure allow.) When reading the play, we need to do as
the  actor  does:  that  is,  when  puzzled  by  a  character’s
speech,  check  to  see  if  words  are  being  presented  in  an
unusual sequence.

Title page of the novel dramatized in The Winter’s Tale.
From Robert Greene, Pandosto; The Triumph of Time . . .

(1592).

Father Time. (4.1)

From Jean de Serres, A generall historie of France . . .(1611).

Shakespeare often, for example, rearranges subjects and

verbs (e.g., instead of “He goes” we find “Goes he”). In The
Winter’s  Tale,  when  Leontes  says  “So  stands  this  squire”
(1.2.214–15), he is using such a construction. Shakespeare
also  frequently  places  the  object  before  the  subject  and
verb  (e.g.,  instead  of  “I  hit  him,”  we  might  find  “Him  I
hit”).  Hermione’s  “This  satisfaction  the  bygone  day
proclaimed”  (1.2.40–41)  is  an  example  of  such  an
inversion,  as  is  her  “Th’  offenses  we  have  made  you  do
we’ll  answer”  (1.2.105).  (The  “normal”  order  would  be

“The bygone day proclaimed this satisfaction” and “We’ll
answer the offenses we have made you do.”)

Inversions are not the only unusual sentence structures

in  Shakespeare’s  language.  Often  in  his  sentences  words
that  would  normally  appear  together  are  separated  from
each other. Again, this is often done to create a particular
rhythm or to stress a particular word. Take, for example,
Hermione’s “But I, though you would seek t’ unsphere the
stars  with  oaths,  should  yet  say  ‘Sir,  no  going’ ”  (1.2.60–
63). Here, the clause “though you would seek t’ unsphere
the  stars  with  oaths”  separates  subject  (“I”)  from  verb
(“should . . . say”), while the adverb “yet” divides the two
parts  of  the  verb  “should  say.”  Or  take  Leontes’  lines  to
Camillo:

                                                   Ay, and thou,
His cupbearer—whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees Earth and Earth sees heaven
How I am galled—mightst bespice a cup
To give mine enemy a lasting wink.

(1.2.379–84)

Here,  the  subject  and  verb  “thou  mightst  bespice”  are
interrupted  by  the  insertion  of  the  appositive  “His
cupbearer” and by two extensive clauses that emphasize,
first,  Leontes’  past  promotion  of  Camillo  and,  second,
what  Leontes  believes  is  the  obviousness  of  the  offense
against him. In order to create for yourself sentences that
seem more like the English of everyday speech, you may
wish  to  rearrange  the  words,  putting  together  the  word
clusters  (“I  should  say  ‘Sir,  no  going’ ”;  “Thou  mightst
bespice  a  cup”).  You  will  usually  find  that  the  sentence
will  gain  in  clarity  but  will  lose  its  rhythm  or  shift  its
emphasis.

Locating  and  then  rearranging  words  that  “belong

together”  is  especially  necessary  in  passages  that
repeatedly  separate  basic  sentence  elements  by  long
delaying or expanding interruptions, a common feature of
dialogue  in  The  Winter’s  Tale.  One  prominent  example  is
Leontes’ question to Camillo (“Ha’ not you seen or heard
or  thought  my  wife  is  slippery?”),  which  becomes  rather
difficult  to  grasp  because  Leontes  keeps  interrupting
himself  to  insist  that  it  is  impossible  for  Camillo  not  to
have noticed:

LEONTES                Ha’ not you seen, Camillo—

But that’s past doubt; you have, or your eyeglass
Is thicker than a cuckold’s horn—or heard—
For to a vision so apparent, rumor
Cannot be mute—or thought—for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think—
My wife is slippery?

(1.2.329–35)

Often in The Winter’s Tale, rather than separating basic

sentence elements, Shakespeare simply holds them back,
delaying  them  until  other  material  to  which  he  wants  to
give  greater  emphasis  has  been  presented.  Shakespeare
uses a version of this construction more than once in the
speech  in  which  Camillo  attempts  to  answer  Leontes’
accusation  that  he  has  been  negligent,  foolish,  and
cowardly:

CAMILLO                                  In your affairs, my lord,

If ever I were willful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I played the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out

Against the non-performance, ’twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest.

(1.2.315–23)

Because Camillo does not know what he has failed to do,
he is not about to confess to the accusation that Leontes
has leveled against him, but Camillo is too accomplished a
courtier to suggest in any way that his monarch is making
a  false  accusation.  Camillo’s  solution  is  to  admit  the
possibility that he has failed his king in all kinds of ways,
but  to  admit  his  failure  only  as  a  possibility,  not  as  a
demonstrated  fact.  He  emphasizes  the  as  yet  only
provisional  status  of  the  king’s  accusations  by  beginning
each part of his excuse with a conditional clause (“If ever I
were willful-negligent”; “if industriously I played the fool”;
“if  ever  fearful  to  do  a  thing  where  I  the  issue  doubted,
whereof  the  execution  did  cry  out  against  the  non-
performance”).

Finally,  in  many  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  sentences  are

sometimes complicated not because of unusual structures
or  interruptions  but  because  Shakespeare  omits  words
and  parts  of  words  that  English  sentences  normally
require. (In  conversation,  we,  too,  often  omit  words.  We
say,  “Heard  from  him  yet?”  and  our  hearer  supplies  the
missing  “Have  you.”)  Even  among  Shakespeare’s  later
plays,  in  all  of  which  words  are  frequently  omitted,  The
Winter’s Tale stands out for the frequency of its omissions.
Ellipsis  (omission  of  words)  is  particularly  evident  in
many  of  the  rapid  conversational  exchanges  that  take
place  between  characters.  The  following  is  just  one
example:

LEONTES                 Didst note it?
CAMILLO

He would not stay at your petitions, made
His business more material.

LEONTES                                     Didst perceive it?

(1.2.265–68)

To fill in these ellipses, making Leontes say “Didst [thou]
note  it?”  and  “Didst  [thou]  perceive  it?”  and  having
Camillo say “[He] made his business more material,” not
only would destroy the rhythm of the verse but would also
purge  the  dialogue  of  its  conversational  flavor.  To  an
extraordinary  extent  throughout  The 
Winter’s 
Tale,

Shakespeare depends on the omission of explicit subjects
before verbs to achieve an informal tone.

But he also employs ellipsis to create rising excitement

in speeches. Leontes’ description of what he believes has
transpired  between  Hermione  and  Polixenes  becomes
increasingly elliptical as it proceeds:

LEONTES                                  Is whispering nothing?

Is leaning cheek to cheek? Is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
Of laughter with a sigh?—a note infallible
Of breaking honesty. Horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? Wishing clocks more swift?
Hours minutes? Noon midnight?

(1.2.347–53)

This  speech  begins  with  a  complete  sentence  (“Is
whispering  nothing?”),  and  this  sentence  provides  the
model  for  the  rest  of  the  sentences  in  the  speech  even
though  no  other  sentence  fully  embodies  the  model.
Instead,  as  the  speech  goes  on,  its  sentences  become
progressively more elliptical. The first sentence element to
disappear  is  the  word  “nothing”:  “Is  leaning  cheek  to
cheek  [nothing]?  Is  meeting  noses  [nothing]?”  Then  the
verb  “is”  drops  out  so  that  the  sentences  consist  only  of
their subjects: “[Is] kissing with inside lip [nothing]? . . .
[Is]  skulking  in  corners  [nothing]?  [Is]  wishing  clocks

more  swift  [nothing]?”  Finally,  words  are  omitted  from
the  subjects  of  the  sentences  as  well:  “[Is  wishing  that]
hours  [were]  minutes  [nothing]?  [Is  wishing  that]  noon
[were]  midnight  [nothing]?”  But  the  progression  toward
greater  and  greater  ellipsis  is  so  brilliantly  controlled  by
the  dramatist  that  the  meaning  is  always  clear,  and  the
force  of  the  (purely  imaginary)  intimate  details  that
Leontes  is  itemizing  is  all  the  more  powerful  when  they
are  unencumbered  by  needless  repetition  of  other
sentence elements.

Shakespearean Wordplay

Shakespeare plays with language so often and so variously
that  entire  books  are  written  on  the  topic.  Here  we  will
mention only two kinds of wordplay, puns and metaphors.
Puns  in  The  Winter’s  Tale  usually  play  on  the  multiple
meanings  of  a  single  word.  While  puns  can  convey  a
speaker’s sense of superiority or delight in language, they
can  also  appear  in  quite  different  contexts.  When,  for
example, Leontes puns early in the play, shortly after he
has been overtaken by delusions about his wife’s infidelity,
his  wordplay  conveys  bitter  irony.  He  addresses  these
words to his young son: “Go play, boy, play. Thy mother
plays, and I / Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
/ Will hiss me to my grave” (1.2.234–36). The meaning of
the word play in this speech repeatedly shifts as Leontes
puns  on  it.  In  “play,  boy,  play,”  it  means  only  “amuse
yourself”;  but  in  “thy  mother  plays,”  plays  means
“amorously plays” or “has sexual intercourse,” referring to
the  adultery  of  which  Leontes  mistakenly  thinks  his
queen, Hermione, is guilty. Finally, when Leontes says “I
play . . . so disgraced a part,” the meaning of play changes
once  again  in  another  pun,  for  now  Leontes  uses  it  to
mean  “play  or  act  a  part  or  role  onstage.”  More
challenging to reader and editor alike than these puns on

play  is  Leontes’  possible  pun  on  issue  when  he  says  that
the  “issue  [of  the  part  I  play]  will  hiss  me  to  my  grave.”
Three  meanings  of  issue  are  at  work  in  this  speech:  (1)
outcome; (2) offspring; (3) exit. As a consequence, Leontes
says three somewhat different things all at the same time:
(1)  “The  outcome  of  my  playing  the  part  of  the  betrayed
husband  will  be  that  I  am  hissed  to  my  grave”;  (2)  “My
offspring or descendants will hiss me to my grave because
of the part I’ve played”; (3) “My exit (from the imaginary
stage on which I have played my part) will be that I am
hissed  to  my  grave.”  Such  complex  linguistic  play
illustrates  both  the  difficulty  and  the  richness  of  The
Winter’s Tale’s language.

When Autolycus puns, his tone, in contrast to Leontes’,

is delight at his own superiority over those not as clever as
he.  In  one  case,  for  example,  he  steals  the  purses  of  the
Shepherd’s  Son  and  his  friends,  who  were  so  busy
learning  a  song  that  they  were  unaware  of  the  theft.  He
speaks  of  his  victims  as  “my  choughs”  at  “the  chaff,”
punning on the two meanings of choughs: “easily captured
birds” and “rustics” or “simple country people.” Autolycus
also puns when he is directly addressing those he regards
as  his  inferiors.  Identifying  himself  as  a  courtier,
Autolycus  directs  the  attention  of  the  Shepherd  and  the
Shepherd’s Son to his clothes: “Seest thou not the air of
the court in these enfoldings? . . . Receives not thy  nose
court odor from me?” (4.4.858–60). At first his phrase “air
of  the  court”  seems  to  mean  simply  “style  of  the  court,”
but when he goes on to mention “court odor,” then “air of
the  court”  also  comes  to  acquire  the  additional  meaning
“smell of the court.”

A metaphor is a play on words in which one object or

idea is expressed as if it were something else, something
with which it shares common features. For instance, when
Camillo  says  of  the  young  Prince  Mamillius  that  he

“physics  the  subject,”  Camillo  is  using  metaphorical
language to describe Mamillius as, by his very existence,
providing  restorative  medicine  (then  called  “physic”)  to
the subjects of Leontes’ kingdom. Leontes too employs a
metaphor  when  he  says  to  Hermione  “Three  crabbèd
months had soured themselves to death / Ere I could make
thee  open  thy  white  hand  /  And  clap  thyself  my  love”
(1.2.130–33).  In  this  wordplay  Leontes  expresses  the
harshness  of  months  of  anxious  waiting  by,  in  effect,
turning them into sour-tasting crabapples.

While  there  are  many  metaphors  in  The  Winter’s  Tale

and  while  many  of  them  can  be  understood  as  easily  as
the  two  just  analyzed,  not  all  of  them  can  be  so  readily
grasped.  The  Winter’s  Tale  contains  some  metaphorical
passages  that  have  successfully  withstood  efforts  by
centuries  of  editors  and  commentators  to  explain  them.
One  such  famous  passage  is  Leontes’  metaphorical
representation of “affection”:

Affection, thy intention stabs the center.
Thou dost make possible things not so held [i.e., things

thought impossible],

Communicat’st with dreams—how can this be?
With what’s unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow’st [i.e., share in] nothing.

(1.2.175–79)

All  interpreters  agree  that  Leontes  is  using  a  metaphor
when he speaks of “affection” having both an “intention”
and the power to stab. This metaphor is a personification
because  it  endows  the  abstraction  “affection”  with
capacities  that  are  unique  to  human  beings.  “Center,”  in
the first line, is also a metaphor, but it is not at all clear
what this “center” is. Nor is it clear what meanings are to
be  attached  to  either  “affection”  or  “intention.”  Some
commentators  understand  Leontes  to  be  commenting

abstractly  in  this  speech  on  the  power  of  emotion  (one
possible meaning of “affection”) to find out the truth, or to
be  commenting,  again  abstractly,  on  the  power  of
passionate love (another meaning of “affection”) to pierce
the  soul  and  “make  possible  things  not  so  held.”  Others
think that Leontes is addressing his own “affection”—his
emotions,  or  passions:  more  specifically,  his  jealousy  of
Hermione. On this interpretation, “intention” may refer to
the intensity of his feeling, and “center,” according to this
way  of  reading  the  passage,  could  mean  Leontes’  center,
his heart, which is wounded by his jealousy—or it could
even  mean  the  center  of  the  Earth,  which  is  shaken,  for
him,  by  his  belief  in  Hermione’s  adultery.  These
suggestions about how to read this passage by no means
exhaust the readings to which it is susceptible. (For more,
see  our  longer  note.)  Irreducible  uncertainty  about  the
meaning  of  this  passage  and  a  number  of  others  in  The
Winter’s Tale has led Stephen Orgel to locate in this play a
“poetics of incomprehensibility.”

Implied Stage Action

Finally, in reading Shakespeare’s plays we should always
remember  that  what  we  are  reading  is  a  performance
script. The dialogue is written to be spoken by actors who,
at  the  same  time,  are  moving,  gesturing,  picking  up
objects, weeping, shaking their fists. Some stage action is
described  in  what  are  called  “stage  directions”;  some  is
suggested within the dialogue itself. We must learn to be
alert  to  such  signals  as  we  stage  the  play  in  our
imaginations.  When,  in  The  Winter’s  Tale  2.3.208–10,
Leontes orders Antigonus to “Swear by this sword / Thou
wilt perform my bidding” and Antigonus replies “I will, my
lord,”  it  is  clear  that  a  sword  is  placed  before  Antigonus
and that he places his hand on the sword’s hilt (which is in
the  form  of  a  cross)  as  he  obeys  Leontes’  command  to

swear. When, a few lines later at 2.3.226, Antigonus says
“Come on, poor babe,” it is equally clear that he then picks
up a prop representing the infant Perdita.

Occasionally in The Winter’s Tale, signals to the reader

are not quite so clear. Earlier in the same scene in which
Antigonus  picks  up  Perdita,  for  example,  Leontes
repeatedly  orders  his  attendants,  and  Antigonus  in
particular, to remove Paulina. “Away with that audacious
lady”  (2.3.50),  Leontes  commands.  Paulina  remains.
“Force her hence” (76) says Leontes, and Paulina tells his
attendants:  “Let  him  that  makes  but  trifles  of  his  eyes  /
First hand me. On mine own accord I’ll off, / But first I’ll
do  my  errand”  (77–79).  And  so  she  does,  in  spite  of
Leontes’  exclamations:  “Out!  /  A  mankind  witch!  Hence
with her, out o’ door” (83–84). Finally, Leontes is obeyed.
When  he  says,  “Away  with  her!”  (159),  Paulina’s  words
indicate that his lords are moving to eject her: “I pray you
do not push me; . . . What needs these hands?” (160–62). It
is possible to stage this scene in several ways either in a
theater  or  in  one’s  imagination:  perhaps  Leontes’  lords
repeatedly  lay  hands  on  her  in  response  to  the  king’s
orders  and  a  physically  powerful  Paulina  resolutely,  or
even violently, resists their efforts until she has done her
“errand.” Or perhaps her words combined with her looks
freeze Leontes’ attendants in their places, and they never
presume  to  approach  her  until  just  before  she  takes  her
leave. And there are a number of other possible stagings of
the action. We as editors have inserted (bracketed)  stage
directions at what seemed to us the most probable places,
but these are ultimately matters that directors and actors
—and  readers  in  their  imaginations—must  decide.
Learning to read the language of stage action repays one
many times over when one reaches a crucial scene like the
statue  scene  in  5.3,  in  which  implied  stage  action  vitally
affects our response to the play.

It  is  immensely  rewarding  to  work  carefully  with

Shakespeare’s  language—with  the  words,  the  sentences,
the wordplay, and the implied stage action—as readers for
the  past  four  centuries  have  discovered.  It  may  be  more
pleasurable  to  attend  a  good  performance  of  a  play—
though not everyone has thought so. But the joy of being
able  to  stage  one  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  in  one’s
imagination,  to  return  to  passages  that  continue  to  yield
further  meanings  (or  further  questions)  the  more  one
reads them—these are pleasures that, for many, rival (or
at  least  augment)  those  of  the  performed  text,  and
certainly make it worth considerable effort to “break  the
code”  of  Elizabethan  poetic  drama  and  let  free  the
remarkable language that makes up a Shakespeare text.

Shakespeare’s Life

Surviving documents that give us glimpses into the life of
William  Shakespeare  show  us  a  playwright,  poet,  and
actor who grew up in the market town of Stratford-upon-
Avon, spent his professional life in London, and returned
to  Stratford  a  wealthy  landowner.  He  was  born  in  April
1564, died in April 1616, and is buried inside the chancel
of Holy Trinity Church in Stratford.

We  wish  we  could  know  more  about  the  life  of  the

world’s  greatest  dramatist.  His  plays  and  poems  are
testaments  to  his  wide  reading—especially  to  his
knowledge 
of 
Virgil, 
Ovid, 
Plutarch, 
Holinshed’s

Chronicles,  and  the  Bible—and  to  his  mastery  of  the
English  language,  but  we  can  only  speculate  about  his
education.  We  know  that  the  King’s  New  School  in
Stratford-upon-Avon was considered excellent. The school
was one of the English “grammar schools” established to
educate  young  men,  primarily  in  Latin  grammar  and
literature. As in other schools of the time, students began
their  studies  at  the  age  of  four  or  five  in  the  attached
“petty  school,”  and  there  learned  to  read  and  write  in
English, studying primarily the catechism from the Book
of  Common  Prayer.  After  two  years  in  the  petty  school,
students  entered  the  lower  form  (grade)  of  the  grammar
school,  where  they  began  the  serious  study  of  Latin
grammar and Latin texts that would occupy most of the
remainder  of  their  school  days.  (Several  Latin  texts  that
Shakespeare  used  repeatedly  in  writing  his  plays  and
poems were texts that schoolboys memorized and recited.)
Latin comedies were introduced early in the lower form;
in  the  upper  form,  which  the  boys  entered  at  age  ten  or

eleven,  students  wrote  their  own  Latin  orations  and
declamations,  studied  Latin  historians  and  rhetoricians,
and  began  the  study  of  Greek  using  the  Greek  New
Testament.

Title page of a 1573 Latin and Greek catechism for

children.

From Alexander Nowell, Catechismus paruus pueris primum Latine . . . (1573).

Since the records of the Stratford “grammar school” do

not  survive,  we  cannot  prove  that  William  Shakespeare
attended the school; however, every indication (his father’s
position  as  an  alderman  and  bailiff  of  Stratford,  the
playwright’s  own  knowledge  of  the  Latin  classics,  scenes
in  the  plays  that  recall  grammar-school  experiences—for
example, The Merry Wives of Windsor, 4.1) suggests that he

did. We also lack generally accepted documentation about
Shakespeare’s  life  after  his  schooling  ended  and  his
professional  life  in  London  began.  His  marriage  in  1582
(at  age  eighteen)  to  Anne  Hathaway  and  the  subsequent
births  of  his  daughter  Susanna  (1583)  and  the  twins
Judith  and  Hamnet  (1585)  are  recorded,  but  how  he
supported himself and where he lived are not known. Nor
do  we  know  when  and  why  he  left  Stratford  for  the
London  theatrical  world,  nor  how  he  rose  to  be  the
important figure in that world that he had become by the
early 1590s.

We  do  know  that  by  1592  he  had  achieved  some

prominence in London as both an actor and a playwright.
In  that  year  was  published  a  book  by  the  playwright
Robert Greene attacking an actor who had the audacity to
write blank-verse drama and who was “in his own conceit
[i.e.,  opinion]  the  only  Shake-scene  in  a  country.”  Since
Greene’s  attack  includes  a  parody  of  a  line  from  one  of
Shakespeare’s  early  plays,  there  is  little  doubt  that  it  is
Shakespeare to whom he refers, a “Shake-scene” who had
aroused  Greene’s  fury  by  successfully  competing  with
university-educated dramatists like Greene himself. It was
in 1593 that Shakespeare became a published poet. In that
year  he  published  his  long  narrative  poem  Venus  and
Adonis; in 1594, he followed it with The Rape of Lucrece.
Both  poems  were  dedicated  to  the  young  earl  of
Southampton (Henry Wriothesley), who may have become
Shakespeare’s patron.

It  seems  no  coincidence  that  Shakespeare  wrote  these

narrative poems at a time when the theaters were closed
because of the plague, a contagious epidemic disease that
devastated  the  population  of  London.  When  the  theaters
reopened  in  1594,  Shakespeare  apparently  resumed  his
double career of actor and playwright and began his long
(and  seemingly  profitable)  service  as  an  acting-company

shareholder. Records for December of 1594 show him to
be  a  leading  member  of  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  Men.  It
was this company of actors, later named the King’s Men,
for  whom  he  would  be  a  principal  actor,  dramatist,  and
shareholder for the rest of his career.

So far as we can tell, that career spanned about twenty

years. In the 1590s, he wrote his plays on English history
as  well  as  several  comedies  and  at  least  two  tragedies
(Titus Andronicus and Romeo and Juliet). These histories,
comedies,  and  tragedies  are  the  plays  credited  to  him  in
1598  in  a  work,  Palladis  Tamia,  that  in  one  chapter
compares English writers with “Greek, Latin, and Italian
Poets.”  There  the  author,  Francis  Meres,  claims  that
Shakespeare is comparable to the Latin dramatists Seneca
for  tragedy  and  Plautus  for  comedy,  and  calls  him  “the
most excellent in both kinds for the stage.” He also names
him  “Mellifluous  and  honey-tongued  Shakespeare”:  “I
say,”  writes  Meres,  “that  the  Muses  would  speak  with
Shakespeare’s  fine  filed  phrase,  if  they  would  speak
English.”  Since  Meres  also  mentions  Shakespeare’s
“sugared sonnets among his private friends,” it is assumed
that  many  of  Shakespeare’s  sonnets  (not  published  until
1609) were also written in the 1590s.

In  1599,  Shakespeare’s  company  built  a  theater  for

themselves  across  the  river  from  London,  naming  it  the
Globe.  The  plays  that  are  considered  by  many  to  be
Shakespeare’s major tragedies (Hamlet, Othello, King Lear,
and  Macbeth)  were  written  while  the  company  was
resident in this theater, as were such comedies as Twelfth
Night  and  Measure  for  Measure.  Many  of  Shakespeare’s
plays were performed at court (both for Queen Elizabeth I
and, after her death in 1603, for King James I), some were
presented at the Inns of Court (the residences of London’s
legal  societies),  and  some  were  doubtless  performed  in
other towns, at the universities, and at great houses when

the  King’s  Men  went  on  tour;  otherwise,  his  plays  from
1599 to 1608 were, so far as we know, performed only at
the  Globe.  Between  1608  and  1612,  Shakespeare  wrote
several  plays—among  them  The  Winter’s  Tale  and  The
Tempest—presumably  for  the  company’s  new  indoor
Blackfriars theater, though the plays were performed also
at the Globe and at court. Surviving documents describe a
performance of The Winter’s Tale in 1611 at the Globe, for
example,  and  performances  of  The  Tempest  in  1611  and
1613 at the royal palace of Whitehall.

Shakespeare seems to have written very little after 1612,

the year in which he probably wrote King Henry VIII. (It
was at a performance of Henry VIII in 1613 that the Globe
caught fire and burned to the ground.) Sometime between
1610  and  1613,  according  to  many  biographers,  he
returned to live in Stratford-upon-Avon, where he owned a
large house and considerable property, and where his wife
and his two daughters lived. (His son Hamnet had died in
1596.) 
However, 
other 
biographers 
suggest 
that

Shakespeare  did  not  leave  London  for  good  until  much
closer  to  the  time  of  his  death.  During  his  professional
years  in  London,  Shakespeare  had  presumably  derived
income from the acting company’s profits as well as from
his  own  career  as  an  actor,  from  the  sale  of  his  play
manuscripts to the acting company, and, after 1599, from
his  shares  as  an  owner  of  the  Globe.  It  was  presumably
that income, carefully invested in land and other property,
that made him the wealthy man that surviving documents
show him to have become. It is also assumed that William
Shakespeare’s growing wealth and reputation played some
part  in  inclining  the  Crown,  in  1596,  to  grant  John
Shakespeare,  William’s  father,  the  coat  of  arms  that  he
had so long sought. William Shakespeare died in Stratford
on April 23, 1616 (according to the epitaph carved under
his bust in Holy Trinity Church) and was buried on April

25.  Seven  years  after  his  death,  his  collected  plays  were
published 
as 
Mr. 
William 
Shakespeares 
Comedies,

Histories,  &  Tragedies (the  work  now  known  as  the  First
Folio).

Ptolemaic universe.

From Marcus Manilius, The sphere of . . . (1675).

The years in which Shakespeare wrote were among the

most  exciting  in  English  history.  Intellectually,  the
discovery, translation, and printing of Greek and Roman
classics  were  making  available  a  set  of  works  and
worldviews that interacted complexly with Christian texts
and  beliefs.  The  result  was  a  questioning,  a  vital
intellectual ferment, that provided energy for the period’s

amazing dramatic and literary output and that fed directly
into  Shakespeare’s  plays.  The  Ghost  in  Hamlet,  for
example, is wonderfully complicated in part because he is
a  figure  from  Roman  tragedy—the  spirit  of  the  dead
returning to seek revenge—who at the same time inhabits
a  Christian  hell  (or  purgatory);  Hamlet’s  description  of
humankind  reflects  at  one  moment  the  Neoplatonic
wonderment  at  mankind  (“What  a  piece  of  work  is  a
man!”)  and,  at  the  next,  the  Christian  attitude  toward
sinful  humanity  (“And  yet,  to  me,  what  is  this
quintessence of dust?”).

As 
intellectual 
horizons 
expanded, 
so 
also 
did

geographical  and  cosmological  horizons.  New  worlds—
both  North  and  South  America—were  explored,  and  in
them were found human beings who lived and worshiped
in  ways  radically  different  from  those  of  Renaissance
Europeans  and  Englishmen.  The  universe  during  these
years  also  seemed  to  shift  and  expand.  Copernicus  had
earlier theorized that the earth was not the center of the
cosmos but revolved as a planet around the sun. Galileo’s
telescope,  created  in  1609,  allowed  scientists  to  see  that
Copernicus  had  been  correct:  the  universe  was  not
organized with the earth at the center, nor was it so nicely
circumscribed as people had, until that time, thought. In
terms  of  expanding  horizons,  the  impact  of  these
discoveries  on  people’s  beliefs—religious,  scientific,  and
philosophical—cannot be overstated.

London, too, rapidly expanded and changed during the

years  (from  the  early  1590s  to  around  1610)  that
Shakespeare lived there. London—the center of England’s
government,  its  economy,  its  royal  court,  its  overseas
trade—was,  during  these  years,  becoming  an  exciting
metropolis, drawing to it thousands of new citizens every
year. Troubled by overcrowding, by poverty, by recurring
epidemics of the plague, London was also a mecca for the

wealthy  and  the  aristocratic,  and  for  those  who  sought
advancement at court, or power in government or finance
or  trade.  One  hears  in  Shakespeare’s  plays  the  voices  of
London—the  struggles  for  power,  the  fear  of  venereal
disease, the language of buying and selling. One hears as
well the voices of Stratford-upon-Avon—references to the
nearby  Forest  of  Arden,  to  sheepherding,  to  small-town
gossip, to village fairs and markets. Part of the richness of
Shakespeare’s  work  is  the  influence  felt  there  of  the
various  worlds  in  which  he  lived:  the  world  of
metropolitan  London,  the  world  of  small-town  and  rural
England,  the  world  of  the  theater,  and  the  worlds  of
craftsmen and shepherds.

That Shakespeare inhabited such worlds we know from

surviving  London  and  Stratford  documents,  as  well  as
from  the  evidence  of  the  plays  and  poems  themselves.
From such records we can sketch the dramatist’s life. We
know from his works that he was a voracious reader. We
know  from  legal  and  business  documents  that  he  was  a
multifaceted  theater  man  who  became  a  wealthy
landowner. We know a bit about his family life and a fair
amount  about  his  legal  and  financial  dealings.  Most
scholars  today  depend  upon  such  evidence  as  they  draw
their  picture  of  the  world’s  greatest  playwright.  Such,
however,  has  not  always  been  the  case.  Until  the  late
eighteenth century, the William Shakespeare who lived in
most biographies was the creation of legend and tradition.
This  was  the  Shakespeare  who  was  supposedly  caught
poaching  deer  at  Charlecote,  the  estate  of  Sir  Thomas
Lucy close by Stratford; this was the Shakespeare who fled
from  Sir  Thomas’s  vengeance  and  made  his  way  in
London by taking care of horses outside a playhouse; this
was  the  Shakespeare  who  reportedly  could  barely  read,
but whose natural gifts were extraordinary, whose father
was  a  butcher  who  allowed  his  gifted  son  sometimes  to

help in the butcher shop, where William supposedly killed
calves “in a high style,” making a speech for the occasion.
It was this legendary William Shakespeare whose Falstaff
(in 1 and 2 Henry IV) so pleased Queen Elizabeth that she
demanded  a  play  about  Falstaff  in  love,  and  demanded
that it be written in fourteen days (hence the existence of
The  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor).  It  was  this  legendary
Shakespeare who reached the top of his acting career in
the roles of the Ghost in Hamlet and old Adam in As You
Like  It—and  who  died  of  a  fever  contracted  by  drinking
too  hard  at  “a  merry  meeting”  with  the  poets  Michael
Drayton and Ben Jonson. This legendary Shakespeare is a
rambunctious, undisciplined man, as attractively “wild” as
his  plays  were  seen  by  earlier  generations  to  be.
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  trace  of  evidence  to  support
these wonderful stories.

Perhaps in response to the disreputable Shakespeare of

legend—or  perhaps  in  response  to  the  fragmentary  and,
for  some,  all-too-ordinary  Shakespeare  documented  by
surviving records—some people since the mid-nineteenth
century have argued that William Shakespeare could not
have written the plays that bear his name. These persons
have  put  forward  some  dozen  names  as  more  likely
authors, among them Queen Elizabeth, Sir Francis Bacon,
Edward  de  Vere  (earl  of  Oxford),  and  Christopher
Marlowe. Such attempts to find what for these people is a
more  believable  author  of  the  plays  is  a  tribute  to  the
regard in which the plays are held. Unfortunately for their
claims, the documents that exist that provide evidence for
the facts of Shakespeare’s life tie him inextricably to the
body of plays and poems that bear his name. Unlikely as it
seems to those who want the works to have been written
by an aristocrat, a university graduate, or an “important”
person,  the  plays  and  poems  seem  clearly  to  have  been
produced by a man from Stratford-upon-Avon with a very

good “grammar-school” education and a life of experience
in London and in the world of the London theater. How
this particular man produced the works that dominate the
cultures  of  much  of  the  world  four  centuries  after  his
death is one of life’s mysteries—and one that will continue
to tease our imaginations as we continue to delight in his
plays and poems.

Shakespeare’s Theater

The  actors  of  Shakespeare’s  time  are  known  to  have
performed  plays  in  a  great  variety  of  locations.  They
played  at  court  (that  is,  in  the  great  halls  of  such  royal
residences as Whitehall, Hampton Court, and Greenwich);
they  played  in  halls  at  the  universities  of  Oxford  and
Cambridge,  and  at  the  Inns  of  Court  (the  residences  in
London of the legal societies); and they also played in the
private houses of great lords and civic officials. Sometimes
acting  companies  went  on  tour  from  London  into  the
provinces, often (but not only) when outbreaks of bubonic
plague  in  the  capital  forced  the  closing  of  theaters  to
reduce the possibility of contagion in crowded audiences.
In  the  provinces  the  actors  usually  staged  their  plays  in
churches  (until  around  1600)  or  in  guildhalls.  While
surviving records show only a handful of occasions when
actors  played  at  inns  while  on  tour,  London  inns  were
important playing places up until the 1590s.

The  building  of  theaters  in  London  had  begun  only

shortly  before  Shakespeare  wrote  his  first  plays  in  the
1590s. These theaters were of two kinds: outdoor or public
playhouses  that  could  accommodate  large  numbers  of
playgoers, and indoor or private theaters for much smaller
audiences.  What  is  usually  regarded  as  the  first  London
outdoor  public  playhouse  was  called  simply  the  Theatre.
James Burbage—the father of Richard Burbage, who was
perhaps the most famous actor in Shakespeare’s company
—built it in 1576 in an area north of the city of London
called  Shoreditch.  Among  the  more  famous  of  the  other
public  playhouses  that  capitalized  on  the  new  fashion
were the Curtain and the Fortune (both also built north of

the city), the Rose, the Swan, the Globe, and the Hope (all
located on the Bankside, a region just across the Thames
south of the city of London). All these playhouses had to
be  built  outside  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  London
because  many  civic  officials  were  hostile  to  the
performance of drama and repeatedly petitioned the royal
council to abolish it.

A stylized representation of the Globe theater.

From Claes Jansz Visscher, Londinum florentissima Britanniae urbs . . . [c. 1625].

The  theaters  erected  on  the  Bankside  (a  region  under

the authority of the Church of England, whose head was

the  monarch)  shared  the  neighborhood  with  houses  of
prostitution  and  with  the  Paris  Garden,  where  the  blood
sports  of  bearbaiting  and  bullbaiting  were  carried  on.
There  may  have  been  no  clear  distinction  between
playhouses  and  buildings  for  such  sports,  for  we  know
that the Hope was used for both plays and baiting and that
Philip Henslowe, owner of the Rose and, later, partner in
the  ownership  of  the  Fortune,  was  also  a  partner  in  a
monopoly  on  baiting.  All  these  forms  of  entertainment
were  easily  accessible  to  Londoners  by  boat  across  the
Thames or over London Bridge.

Evidently  Shakespeare’s  company  prospered  on  the

Bankside.  They  moved  there  in  1599.  Threatened  by
difficulties in renewing the lease on the land where their
first  theater  (the  Theatre)  had  been  built,  Shakespeare’s
company took advantage of the Christmas holiday in 1598
to dismantle the Theatre and transport its timbers across
the Thames to the Bankside, where, in 1599, these timbers
were used in the building of the Globe. The weather in late
December  1598  is  recorded  as  having  been  especially
harsh. It was so cold that the Thames was “nigh [nearly]
frozen,” and there was heavy snow. Perhaps the weather
aided  Shakespeare’s  company  in  eluding  their  landlord,
the  snow  hiding  their  activity  and  the  freezing  of  the
Thames allowing them to slide the timbers across to the
Bankside  without  paying  tolls  for  repeated  trips  over
London Bridge. Attractive as this narrative is, it remains
just as likely that the heavy snow hampered transport of
the timbers in wagons through the London streets to the
river. It also must be remembered that the Thames was,
according to report, only “nigh frozen,” and therefore did
not necessarily provide solid footing. Whatever the precise
circumstances of this fascinating event in English theater
history, Shakespeare’s company was able to begin playing
at their new Globe theater on the Bankside in 1599. After

this  theater  burned  down  in  1613  during  the  staging  of
Shakespeare’s Henry VIII (its thatch roof was set alight by
cannon  fire  called  for  in  performance),  Shakespeare’s
company  immediately  rebuilt  on  the  same  location.  The
second Globe seems to have been a grander structure than
its predecessor. It remained in use until the beginning of
the English Civil War in 1642, when Parliament officially
closed the theaters. Soon thereafter it was pulled down.

The  public  theaters  of  Shakespeare’s  time  were  very

different  buildings  from  our  theaters  today.  First  of  all,
they  were  open-air  playhouses.  As  recent  excavations  of
the Rose and the Globe confirm, some were polygonal or
roughly  circular  in  shape;  the  Fortune,  however,  was
square.  The  most  recent  estimates  of  their  size  put  the
diameter  of  these  buildings  at  72  feet  (the  Rose)  to  100
feet  (the  Globe),  but  we  know  that  they  held  vast
audiences of two or three thousand, who must have been
squeezed together quite tightly. Some of these spectators
paid  extra  to  sit  or  stand  in  the  two  or  three  levels  of
roofed galleries that extended, on the upper levels, all the
way around the theater and surrounded an open space. In
this  space  were  the  stage  and,  perhaps,  the  tiring  house
(what  we  would  call  dressing  rooms),  as  well  as  the  so-
called yard. In the yard stood the spectators who chose to
pay  less,  the  ones  whom  Hamlet  contemptuously  called
“groundlings.”  For  a  roof  they  had  only  the  sky,  and  so
they were exposed to all kinds of weather. They stood on a
floor that was sometimes made of mortar and sometimes
of  ash  mixed  with  the  shells  of  hazelnuts,  which,  it  has
recently been discovered, were standard flooring material
in the period.

Unlike the yard, the stage itself was covered by a roof.

Its  ceiling,  called  “the  heavens,”  is  thought  to  have  been
elaborately  painted  to  depict  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  and
planets.  The  exact  size  of  the  stage  remains  hard  to

determine. We have a single sketch of part of the interior
of the Swan. A Dutchman named Johannes de Witt visited
this theater around 1596 and sent a sketch of it back to his
friend,  Arend  van  Buchel.  Because  van  Buchel  found  de
Witt’s letter and sketch of interest, he copied both into a
book.  It  is  van  Buchel’s  copy,  adapted,  it  seems,  to  the
shape  and  size  of  the  page  in  his  book,  that  survives.  In
this  sketch,  the  stage  appears  to  be  a  large  rectangular
platform that thrusts far out into the yard, perhaps even as
far as the center of the circle formed by the surrounding
galleries. This drawing, combined with the specifications
for  the  size  of  the  stage  in  the  building  contract  for  the
Fortune, has led scholars to conjecture that the stage on
which  Shakespeare’s  plays  were  performed  must  have
measured  approximately  43  feet  in  width  and  27  feet  in
depth, a vast acting area. But the digging up of a large part
of  the  Rose  by  late-twentieth-century  archaeologists  has
provided  evidence  of  a  quite  different  stage  design.  The
Rose  stage  was  a  platform  tapered  at  the  corners  and
much shallower than what seems to be depicted in the van
Buchel sketch. Indeed, its measurements seem to be about
37.5 feet across at its widest point and only 15.5 feet deep.
Because the surviving indications of stage size and design
differ  from  each  other  so  much,  it  is  possible  that  the
stages in other theaters, like the Theatre, the Curtain, and
the  Globe  (the  outdoor  playhouses  where  we  know  that
Shakespeare’s plays were performed), were different from
those at both the Swan and the Rose.

After  about  1608  Shakespeare’s  plays  were  staged  not

only  at  the  Globe  but  also  at  an  indoor  or  private
playhouse 
in 
Blackfriars. 
This 
theater 
had 
been

constructed in 1596 by James Burbage in an upper hall of
a former Dominican priory or monastic house. Although
Henry  VIII  had  dissolved  all  English  monasteries  in  the
1530s  (shortly  after  he  had  founded  the  Church  of

England),  the  area  remained  under  church,  rather  than
hostile civic, control. The hall that Burbage had purchased
and  renovated  was  a  large  one  in  which  Parliament  had
once  met.  In  the  private  theater  that  he  constructed,  the
stage,  lit  by  candles,  was  built  across  the  narrow  end  of
the hall, with boxes flanking it. The rest of the hall offered
seating  room  only.  Because  there  was  no  provision  for
standing room, the largest audience it could hold was less
than  a  thousand,  or  about  a  quarter  of  what  the  Globe
could  accommodate.  Admission  to  Blackfriars  was
correspondingly  more  expensive.  Instead  of  a  penny  to
stand  in  the  yard  at  the  Globe,  it  cost  a  minimum  of
sixpence  to  get  into  Blackfriars.  The  best  seats  at  the
Globe (in the Lords’ Room in the gallery above and behind
the stage) cost sixpence; but the boxes flanking the stage
at  Blackfriars  were  half  a  crown,  or  five  times  sixpence.
Some  spectators  who  were  particularly  interested  in
displaying themselves paid even more to sit on stools on
the Blackfriars stage.

Whether in the outdoor or indoor playhouses, the stages

of Shakespeare’s time were different from ours. They were
not  separated  from  the  audience  by  the  dropping  of  a
curtain 
between 
acts 
and 
scenes. 
Therefore 
the

playwrights of the time had to find other ways of signaling
to  the  audience  that  one  scene  (to  be  imagined  as
occurring in one location at a given time) had ended and
the next (to be imagined at perhaps a different location at
a  later  time)  had  begun.  The  customary  way  used  by
Shakespeare and many of his contemporaries was to have
everyone  on  stage  exit  at  the  end  of  one  scene  and  have
one or more different characters enter to begin the next.
In a few cases, where characters remain onstage from one
scene to another, the dialogue or stage action makes the
change of location clear, and the characters are generally
to  be  imagined  as  having  moved  from  one  place  to

another. For example, in Romeo and Juliet, Romeo and his
friends remain onstage in Act 1 from scene 4 to scene 5,
but they are represented as having moved between scenes
from the street that leads to Capulet’s house into Capulet’s
house  itself.  The  new  location  is  signaled  in  part  by  the
appearance onstage of Capulet’s servingmen carrying table
napkins,  something  they  would  not  take  into  the  streets.
Playwrights had to be quite resourceful in the use of hand
properties,  like  the  napkin,  or  in  the  use  of  dialogue  to
specify  where  the  action  was  taking  place  in  their  plays
because,  in  contrast  to  most  of  today’s  theaters,  the
playhouses  of  Shakespeare’s  time  did  not  fill  the  stage
with scenery to make the setting precise. A consequence of
this difference was that the playwrights of Shakespeare’s
time  did  not  have  to  specify  exactly  where  the  action  of
their plays was set when they did not choose to do so, and
much  of  the  action  of  their  plays  is  tied  to  no  specific
place.

Usually  Shakespeare’s  stage  is  referred  to  as  a  “bare

stage,” to distinguish it from the stages of the last two or
three centuries with their elaborate sets. But the stage in
Shakespeare’s  time  was  not  completely  bare.  Philip
Henslowe,  owner  of  the  Rose,  lists  in  his  inventory  of
stage  properties  a  rock,  three  tombs,  and  two  mossy
banks.  Stage  directions  in  plays  of  the  time  also  call  for
such things as thrones (or “states”), banquets (presumably
tables with plaster replicas of food on them), and beds and
tombs to be pushed onto the stage. Thus the stage often
held more than the actors.

The  actors  did  not  limit  their  performing  to  the  stage

alone.  Occasionally  they  went  beneath  the  stage,  as  the
Ghost appears to do in the first act of Hamlet. From there
they  could  emerge  onto  the  stage  through  a  trapdoor.
They could retire behind the hangings across the back of
the stage, as, for example, the actor playing Polonius does

when he hides behind the arras. Sometimes the hangings
could be drawn back during a performance to “discover”
one  or  more  actors  behind  them.  When  performance
required  that  an  actor  appear  “above,”  as  when  Juliet  is
imagined  to  stand  at  the  window  of  her  chamber  in  the
famous  and  misnamed  “balcony  scene,”  then  the  actor
probably climbed the stairs to the gallery over the back of
the  stage  and  temporarily  shared  it  with  some  of  the
spectators.  The  stage  was  also  provided  with  ropes  and
winches so that actors could descend from, and reascend
to, the “heavens.”

Perhaps  the  greatest  difference  between  dramatic

performances in Shakespeare’s time and ours was that in
Shakespeare’s England the roles of women were played by
boys. (Some of these boys grew up to take male roles in
their  maturity.)  There  were  no  women  in  the  acting
companies. It was not so in Europe, and had not always
been  so  in  the  history  of  the  English  stage.  There  are
records of women on English stages in the thirteenth and
fourteenth 
centuries, 
two 
hundred 
years 
before

Shakespeare’s  plays  were  performed.  After  the  accession
of James I in 1603, the queen of England and her ladies
took part in entertainments at court called masques, and
with  the  reopening  of  the  theaters  in  1660  at  the
restoration of Charles II, women again took their place on
the public stage.

The chief competitors of such acting companies as the

one  to  which  Shakespeare  belonged  and  for  which  he
wrote  were  companies  of  exclusively  boy  actors.  The
competition  was  most  intense  in  the  early  1600s.  There
were  then  two  principal  children’s  companies:  the
Children  of  Paul’s  (the  choirboys  from  St.  Paul’s
Cathedral,  whose  private  playhouse  was  near  the
cathedral);  and  the  Children  of  the  Chapel  Royal  (the
choirboys  from  the  monarch’s  private  chapel,  who

performed  at  the  Blackfriars  theater  built  by  Burbage  in
1596). In Hamlet Shakespeare writes of “an aerie [nest] of
children, little eyases [hawks], that cry out on the top of
question  and  are  most  tyrannically  clapped  for  ’t.  These
are now the fashion and . . . berattle the common stages
[attack  the  public  theaters].”  In  the  long  run,  the  adult
actors prevailed. The Children of Paul’s dissolved around
1606. By about 1608 the Children of the Chapel Royal had
been  forced  to  stop  playing  at  the  Blackfriars  theater,
which  was  then  taken  over  by  the  King’s  Men,
Shakespeare’s own troupe.

Acting  companies  and  theaters  of  Shakespeare’s  time

seem  to  have  been  organized  in  various  ways.  For
example,  with  the  building  of  the  Globe,  Shakespeare’s
company  apparently  managed  itself,  with  the  principal
actors,  Shakespeare  among  them,  having  the  status  of
“sharers” and the right to a share in the takings, as well as
the  responsibility  for  a  part  of  the  expenses.  Five  of  the
sharers,  including  Shakespeare,  owned  the  Globe.  As
actor, as sharer in an acting company and in ownership of
theaters,  and  as  playwright,  Shakespeare  was  about  as
involved  in  the  theatrical  industry  as  one  could  imagine.
Although  Shakespeare  and  his  fellows  prospered,  their
status under the law was conditional upon the protection
of  powerful  patrons.  “Common  players”—those  who  did
not have patrons or masters—were classed in the language
of  the  law  with  “vagabonds  and  sturdy  beggars.”  So  the
actors  had  to  secure  for  themselves  the  official  rank  of
servants  of  patrons.  Among  the  patrons  under  whose
protection  Shakespeare’s  company  worked  were  the  lord
chamberlain  and,  after  the  accession  of  King  James  in
1603, the king himself.

In the early 1990s we began to learn a great deal more

about  the  theaters  in  which  Shakespeare  and  his
contemporaries performed—or, at least, began to open up

new questions about them. At that time about 70 percent
of the Rose had been excavated, as had about 10 percent
of the second Globe, the one built in 1614. Excavation was
halted  at  that  point,  but  London  has  come  to  value  the
sites of its early playhouses, and takes what opportunities
it can to explore them more deeply, both on the Bankside
and  in  Shoreditch.  Information  about  the  playhouses  of
Shakespeare’s  London  is  therefore  a  constantly  changing
resource.

The Publication of Shakespeare’s

Plays

Eighteen of Shakespeare’s plays found their way into print
during  the  playwright’s  lifetime,  but  there  is  nothing  to
suggest  that  he  took  any  interest  in  their  publication.
These  eighteen  appeared  separately  in  editions  in  quarto
or,  in  the  case  of  Henry  VI,  Part  3,  octavo  format.  The
quarto  pages  are  not  much  larger  than  a  modern  mass-
market  paperback  book,  and  the  octavo  pages  are  even
smaller;  these  little  books  were  sold  unbound  for  a  few
pence.  The  earliest  of  the  quartos  that  still  survive  were
printed in 1594, the year that both Titus Andronicus and a
version  of  the  play  now  called  Henry  VI,  Part  2  became
available.  While  almost  every  one  of  these  early  quartos
displays on its title page the name of the acting company
that performed the play, only about half provide the name
of the playwright, Shakespeare. The first quarto edition to
bear  the  name  Shakespeare  on  its  title  page  is  Love’s
Labor’s Lost  of  1598.  A  few  of  the  quartos  were  popular
with the book-buying public of Shakespeare’s lifetime; for
example,  quarto  Richard  II  went  through  five  editions
between 1597 and 1615. But most of the quartos were far
from best sellers; Love’s Labor’s Lost (1598), for instance,
was 
not 
reprinted 
in 
quarto 
until 
1631. 
After

Shakespeare’s  death,  two  more  of  his  plays  appeared  in
quarto  format:  Othello  in  1622  and  The  Two  Noble
Kinsmen, coauthored with John Fletcher, in 1634.

In  1623,  seven  years  after  Shakespeare’s  death,  Mr.

William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies was
published.  This  printing  offered  readers  in  a  single  book
thirty-six  of  the  thirty-eight  plays  now  thought  to  have

been written by Shakespeare, including eighteen that had
never been printed before. And it offered them in a style
that  was  then  reserved  for  serious  literature  and
scholarship.  The  plays  were  arranged  in  double  columns
on pages nearly a foot high. This large page size is called
“folio,” as opposed to the smaller “quarto,” and the 1623
volume is usually called the Shakespeare First Folio. It is
reputed to have sold for the lordly price of a pound. (One
copy at the Folger Shakespeare Library is marked fifteen
shillings—that is, three-quarters of a pound.)

In  a  preface  to  the  First  Folio  entitled  “To  the  great

Variety  of  Readers,”  two  of  Shakespeare’s  former  fellow
actors  in  the  King’s  Men,  John  Heminge  and  Henry
Condell,  wrote  that  they  themselves  had  collected  their
dead  companion’s  plays.  They  suggested  that  they  had
seen his own papers: “we have scarce received from him a
blot  in  his  papers.”  The  title  page  of  the  Folio  declared
that the plays within it had been printed “according to the
True  Original  Copies.”  Comparing  the  Folio  to  the
quartos,  Heminge  and  Condell  disparaged  the  quartos,
advising their readers that “before you were abused with
divers  stolen  and  surreptitious  copies,  maimed,  and
deformed  by  the  frauds  and  stealths  of  injurious
impostors.”  Many  Shakespeareans  of  the  eighteenth  and
nineteenth  centuries  believed  Heminge  and  Condell  and
regarded  the  Folio  plays  as  superior  to  anything  in  the
quartos.

Once  we  begin  to  examine  the  Folio  plays  in  detail,  it

becomes  less  easy  to  take  at  face  value  the  word  of
Heminge  and  Condell  about  the  superiority  of  the  Folio
texts. For example, of the first nine plays in the Folio (one-
quarter  of  the  entire  collection),  four  were  essentially
reprinted from earlier quarto printings that Heminge and
Condell  had  disparaged,  and  four  have  now  been
identified as printed from copies written in the hand of a

professional scribe of the 1620s named Ralph Crane; the
ninth, The Comedy of Errors, was apparently also printed
from  a  manuscript,  but  one  whose  origin  cannot  be
readily  identified.  Evidently,  then,  eight  of  the  first  nine
plays in the First Folio were not printed, in spite of what
the  Folio  title  page  announces,  “according  to  the  True
Original  Copies,”  or  Shakespeare’s  own  papers,  and  the
source of the ninth is unknown. Since today’s editors have
been 
forced 
to 
treat 
Heminge 
and 
Condell’s

pronouncements  with  skepticism,  they  must  choose
whether  to  base  their  own  editions  upon  quartos  or  the
Folio on grounds other than Heminge and Condell’s story
of where the quarto and Folio versions originated.

Editors  have  often  fashioned  their  own  narratives  to

explain what lies behind the quartos and Folio. They have
said  that  Heminge  and  Condell  meant  to  criticize  only  a
few of the early quartos, the ones that offer much shorter
and  sometimes  quite  different,  often  garbled,  versions  of
plays. Among the examples of these are the 1600 quarto of
Henry  V  (the  Folio  offers  a  much  fuller  version)  or  the
1603  Hamlet  quarto.  (In  1604  a  different,  much  longer
form  of  the  play  got  into  print  as  a  quarto.)  Early
twentieth-century 
editors 
speculated 
that 
these

questionable  texts  were  produced  when  someone  in  the
audience  took  notes  from  the  plays’  dialogue  during
performances and then employed “hack poets” to fill out
the notes. The poor results were then sold to a publisher
and  presented  in  print  as  Shakespeare’s  plays.  More
recently this story has given way to another in which the
shorter versions are said to be re-creations from memory
of  Shakespeare’s  plays  by  actors  who  wanted  to  stage
them in the provinces but lacked manuscript copies. Most
of the quartos offer much better texts than these so-called
bad quartos. Indeed, in most of the quartos we find texts
that are at least equal to or better than what is printed in

the  Folio.  Many  Shakespeare  enthusiasts  persuaded
themselves  that  most  of  the  quartos  were  set  into  type
directly from Shakespeare’s own papers, although there is
nothing on which to base this conclusion except the desire
for it to be true. Thus speculation continues about how the
Shakespeare plays got to be printed. All that we have are
the printed texts.

The book collector who was most successful in bringing

together  copies  of  the  quartos  and  the  First  Folio  was
Henry  Clay  Folger,  founder  of  the  Folger  Shakespeare
Library  in  Washington,  D.C.  While  it  is  estimated  that
there  survive  around  the  world  only  about  230  copies  of
the First Folio, Mr. Folger was able to acquire more than
seventy-five  copies,  as  well  as  a  large  number  of
fragments,  for  the  library  that  bears  his  name.  He  also
amassed  a  substantial  number  of  quartos.  For  example,
only fourteen copies of the First Quarto of Love’s Labor’s
Lost  are  known  to  exist,  and  three  are  at  the  Folger
Shakespeare  Library.  As  a  consequence  of  Mr.  Folger’s
labors,  scholars  visiting  the  Folger  Shakespeare  Library
have been able to learn a great deal about sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century  printing  and,  particularly,  about  the
printing  of  Shakespeare’s  plays.  And  Mr.  Folger  did  not
stop at the First Folio, but collected many copies of later
editions of Shakespeare, beginning with the Second Folio
(1632), the Third (1663–64), and the Fourth (1685). Each
of  these  later  folios  was  based  on  its  immediate
predecessor and was edited anonymously. The first editor
of Shakespeare whose name we know was Nicholas Rowe,
whose first edition came out in 1709. Mr. Folger collected
this edition and many, many more by Rowe’s successors,
and the collecting and scholarship continue.

An Introduction to This Text

The Winter’s Tale was first printed in the 1623 collection of
Shakespeare’s  plays  now  known  as  the  First  Folio.  The
present  edition  is  based  directly  upon  that  printing.I  For
the  convenience  of  the  reader,  we  have  modernized  the
punctuation and the spelling of the Folio. Sometimes we
go so far as to modernize certain old forms of words; for
example,  when  a  means  “he,”  we  change  it  to  he;  we
change  mo  to  more,  and  ye  to  you.  But  it  is  not  our
practice  in  editing  any  of  the  plays  to  modernize  words
that  sound  distinctly  different  from  modern  forms.  For
example,  when  the  early  printed  texts  read  sith  or
apricocks or porpentine, we have not modernized to since,
apricots,  porcupine.  When  the  forms  an,  and,  or  and  if
appear  instead  of  the  modern  form  if,  we  have  reduced
and to an but have not changed any of these forms to their
modern  equivalent,  if.  We  also  modernize  and,  where
necessary, correct passages in foreign languages, unless an
error in the early printed text can be reasonably explained
as a joke.

Whenever we change the wording of the First Folio or

add anything to its stage directions, we mark the change
by enclosing it in superior half-brackets (< >). We want our
readers  to  be  immediately  aware  when  we  have
intervened. 
(Only 
when 
we 
correct 
an 
obvious

typographical error in the First Folio does the change not
get marked.) Whenever we change either the First Folio’s
wording or its punctuation so that meaning changes, we
list the change in the textual notes at the back of the book,
even if all we have done is fix an obvious error.

We  regularize  spellings  of  a  number  of  the  proper

names, as is the usual practice in editions of the play. For
example,  the  Folio  once  calls  Florizell  “Florizel,”  but  we
use the Folio’s standard spelling “Florizell” throughout the
text.  The  Folio  employs  the  spellings  “Cleomines”  and
“Autolicus,”  which  we  normalize  to  their  standard
spellings 
in 
classical 
literature: 
“Cleomenes” 
and

“Autolycus.”

This edition differs from many earlier ones in its efforts

to aid the reader in imagining the play as a performance
rather  than  as  a  series  of  actual  events.  Thus  stage
directions  are  written  with  reference  to  the  stage.  For
example, when in 4.3 the Shepherd’s Son names the items
that he has been sent to buy for the sheepshearing feast,
he  appears  to  be  reading  a  written  list:  “Three  pound  of
sugar, five pound of currants, rice—what will this sister of
mine  do  with  rice?”  (39–41).  However,  many  editors  are
reluctant to include a stage direction to indicate that he is
reading because, as is well known, it is most unlikely that
an actual early-seventeenth-century shepherd would have
been  literate.  We  add  the  direction  “He  reads  a  paper”
because  the  dialogue  signals  that  he  is,  in  fact,  reading,
and we want to present him as the stage shepherd that he
is,  not  as  an  actual  shepherd.  Whenever  it  is  reasonably
certain,  in  our  view,  that  a  speech  is  accompanied  by  a
particular action, we provide a stage direction describing
the action. (Occasional exceptions to this rule occur when
the action is so obvious that to add a stage direction would
insult  the  reader.)  Stage  directions  for  the  entrance  of  a
character in midscene are, with rare exceptions, placed so
that 
they 
immediately 
precede 
the 
character’s

participation  in  the  scene,  even  though  these  entrances
may  appear  somewhat  earlier  in  the  early  printed  texts.
Whenever  we  move  a  stage  direction,  we  record  this

change  in  the  textual  notes.  Latin  stage  directions  (e.g.,
Exeunt) are translated into English (e.g., They exit).

We  expand  the  often  severely  abbreviated  forms  of

names used as speech headings in early printed texts into
the  full  names  of  the  characters.  We  also  regularize  the
speakers’  names  in  speech  headings,  using  only  a  single
designation  for  each  character,  even  though  the  early
printed  texts  sometimes  use  a  variety  of  designations.
Variations in the speech headings of the early printed texts
are recorded in the textual notes.

In the present edition, as well, we mark with a dash any

change of address within a speech, unless a stage direction
intervenes.  When  the  -ed  ending  of  a  word  is  to  be
pronounced,  we  mark  it  with  an  accent.  Like  editors  for
the past two centuries, we print metrically linked lines in
the following way:

HERMIONE

He’ll stay, my lord.

LEONTES                     At my request he would not.

(1.2.110–11)

However,  when  there  are  a  number  of  short  verse-lines
that can be linked in more than one way, we do not, with
rare exceptions, indent any of them.

The Explanatory Notes

The  notes  that  appear  in  the  commentary  linked  to  the
text  are  designed  to  provide  readers  with  the  help  that
they may need to enjoy the play. Whenever the meaning of
a  word  in  the  text  is  not  readily  accessible  in  a  good
contemporary dictionary, we offer the meaning in a note.
Sometimes  we  provide  a  note  even  when  the  relevant
meaning  is  to  be  found  in  the  dictionary  but  when  the
word  has  acquired  since  Shakespeare’s  time  other

potentially  confusing  meanings.  In  our  notes,  we  try  to
offer modern synonyms for Shakespeare’s words. We also
try  to  indicate  to  the  reader  the  connection  between  the
word in the play and the modern synonym. For example,
Shakespeare  sometimes  uses  the  word  head  to  mean
“source,”  but,  for  modern  readers,  there  may  be  no
connection evident between these two words. We provide
the  connection  by  explaining  Shakespeare’s  usage  as
follows: “head: fountainhead, source.” On some occasions,
a  whole  phrase  or  clause  needs  explanation.  Then  we
rephrase in our own words the difficult passage, and add
at the end synonyms for individual words in the passage.
When  scholars  have  been  unable  to  determine  the
meaning  of  a  word  or  phrase,  we  acknowledge  the
uncertainty.

I. We have also consulted the computerized text of the First Folio provided by the Text
Archive of the Oxford University Computing Centre, to which we are grateful.

THE

WINTER’S TALE

From the 1623 First Folio

Characters in the Play

LEONTES, King Of SICILIA

HERMIONE, Queen of Sicilia

MAMILLIUS, their son

PERDITA, their daughter

POLIXENES, King of BOHEMIA

FLORIZELL, his son

CAMILLO, a courtier, friend to Leontes and then to Polixenes

ANTIGONUS, a Sicilian courtier

PAULINA, his wife and lady-in-waiting to Hermione
CLEOMENES
 
courtiers in Sicilia
DION

EMILIA, a lady-in-waiting to Hermione

SHEPHERD, foster father to Perdita
SHEPHERD’S SON

AUTOLYCUS, former servant to Florizell, now a rogue

ARCHIDAMUS, a Bohemian courtier

TIME, as Chorus

TWO LADIES attending on Hermione

LORDS, SERVANTS, and GENTLEMEN attending on Leontes
An OFFICER of the court
A MARINER
A JAILER
MOPSA
 
shepherdesses in Bohemia
DORCAS

SERVANT to the Shepherd

SHEPHERDS and SHEPHERDESSES
Twelve COUNTRYMEN disguised as satyrs

Enter Camillo and Archidamus.

ARCHIDAMUS  If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bo-
1

hemia on the like occasion whereon my services
2

are now on foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
3

difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.
4

CAMILLO  I think this coming summer the King of
5

Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the visitation which
6

he justly owes him.
7

ARCHIDAMUS  Wherein our entertainment shall shame
8

us; we will be justified in our loves. For indeed—
9

CAMILLO  Beseech you—
10

ARCHIDAMUS  Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my
11

knowledge. We cannot with such magnificence—in
12

so rare—I know not what to say. We will give you
13

sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our
14

insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as
15

little accuse us.
16

CAMILLO  You pay a great deal too dear for what’s given
17

freely.
18

ARCHIDAMUS  Believe me, I speak as my understanding
19

instructs me and as mine honesty puts it to utter-
20

ance.
21

CAMILLO  Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bo-
22

hemia. They were trained together in their child-
23

hoods, and there rooted betwixt them then such an
24

affection which cannot choose but branch now.
25

Since their more mature dignities and royal neces-
26

sities made separation of their society, their en-
27

counters, though not personal, hath been royally
28

attorneyed with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
29

embassies, that they have seemed to be together
30

though absent, shook hands as over a vast, and
31

embraced as it were from the ends of opposed
32

winds. The heavens continue their loves.
33

ARCHIDAMUS  I think there is not in the world either
34

malice or matter to alter it. You have an unspeak-
35

able comfort of your young Prince Mamillius. It is a
36

gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
37

into my note.
38

CAMILLO  I very well agree with you in the hopes of
39

him. It is a gallant child—one that indeed physics
40

the subject, makes old hearts fresh. They that went
41

on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
42

see him a man.
43

ARCHIDAMUS  Would they else be content to die?
44

CAMILLO  Yes, if there were no other excuse why they
45

should desire to live.
46

ARCHIDAMUS  If the King had no son, they would desire
47

to live on crutches till he had one.
48

They exit.

Scene 2

Enter Leontes, Hermione, Mamillius, Polixenes, Camillo, <and

Attendants.>

POLIXENES
 

Nine changes of the wat’ry star hath been
1

The shepherd’s note since we have left our throne
2

Without a burden. Time as long again
3

Would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks,
4

And yet we should for perpetuity
5

Go hence in debt. And therefore, like a cipher,
6

Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
7

With one “We thank you” many thousands more
8

That go before it.
9

LEONTES                    Stay your thanks awhile,
10

And pay them when you part.
11

POLIXENES                                    Sir, that’s tomorrow.
12

I am questioned by my fears of what may chance
13

Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
14

No sneaping winds at home to make us say
15

“This is put forth too truly.” Besides, I have stayed
16

To tire your Royalty.
17

LEONTES                       We are tougher, brother,
18

Than you can put us to ’t.
19

POLIXENES                            No longer stay.
20

LEONTES
 

One sev’nnight longer.
21

POLIXENES                       Very sooth, tomorrow.
22

LEONTES
 

We’ll part the time between ’s, then, and in that
23

I’ll no gainsaying.
24

POLIXENES               Press me not, beseech you, so.
25

There is no tongue that moves, none, none i’ th’
26

world,
27

So soon as yours could win me. So it should now,
28

Were there necessity in your request, although
29

’Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
30

Do even drag me homeward, which to hinder
31

Were in your love a whip to me, my stay
32

To you a charge and trouble. To save both,
33

Farewell, our brother.
34

LEONTES                          Tongue-tied, our queen?
35

Speak you.
36

HERMIONE
 

I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
37

You had drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
38

Charge him too coldly. Tell him you are sure
39

All in Bohemia’s well. This satisfaction
40

The bygone day proclaimed. Say this to him,
41

He’s beat from his best ward.
42

LEONTES                                      Well said, Hermione.
43

HERMIONE
 

To tell he longs to see his son were strong.
44

But let him say so then, and let him go.
45

But let him swear so and he shall not stay;
46

We’ll thwack him hence with distaffs.
47

<To Polixenes.> Yet of your royal presence I’ll
48

adventure
49

The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
50

You take my lord, I’ll give him my commission
51

To let him there a month behind the gest
52

Prefixed for ’s parting.—Yet, good deed, Leontes,
53

I love thee not a jar o’ th’ clock behind
54

What lady she her lord.—You’ll stay?
55

POLIXENES                                               No, madam.
56

HERMIONE
 

Nay, but you will?
57

POLIXENES                I may not, verily.
58

HERMIONE                                             Verily?
59

You put me off with limber vows. But I,
60

Though you would seek t’ unsphere the stars with
61

oaths,
62

Should yet say “Sir, no going.” Verily,
63

You shall not go. A lady’s “verily” is
64

As potent as a lord’s. Will you go yet?
65

Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
66

Not like a guest, so you shall pay your fees
67

When you depart and save your thanks. How say you?
68

My prisoner or my guest? By your dread “verily,”
69

One of them you shall be.
70

POLIXENES                            Your guest, then, madam.
71

To be your prisoner should import offending,
72

Which is for me less easy to commit
73

Than you to punish.
74

HERMIONE                    Not your jailer, then,
75

But your kind hostess. Come, I’ll question you
76

Of my lord’s tricks and yours when you were boys.
77

You were pretty lordings then?
78

POLIXENES                                     We were, fair queen,
79

Two lads that thought there was no more behind
80

But such a day tomorrow as today,
81

And to be boy eternal.
82

HERMIONE                       Was not my lord
83

The verier wag o’ th’ two?
84

POLIXENES
 

We were as twinned lambs that did frisk i’ th’ sun
85

And bleat the one at th’ other. What we changed
86

Was innocence for innocence. We knew not
87

The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
88

That any did. Had we pursued that life,
89

And our weak spirits ne’er been higher reared
90

With stronger blood, we should have answered
91

heaven
92

Boldly “Not guilty,” the imposition cleared
93

Hereditary ours.
94

HERMIONE              By this we gather
95

You have tripped since.
96

POLIXENES                         O my most sacred lady,
97

Temptations have since then been born to ’s, for
98

In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
99

Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes
100

Of my young playfellow.
101

HERMIONE                           Grace to boot!
102

Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
103

Your queen and I are devils. Yet go on.
104

Th’ offenses we have made you do we’ll answer,
105

If you first sinned with us, and that with us
106

You did continue fault, and that you slipped not
107

With any but with us.
108

LEONTES                         Is he won yet?
109

HERMIONE
 

He’ll stay, my lord.
110

LEONTES                   At my request he would not.
111

Hermione, my dearest, thou never spok’st
112

To better purpose.
113

HERMIONE                Never?
114

LEONTES                            Never but once.
115

HERMIONE
 

What, have I twice said well? When was ’t before?
116

I prithee tell me. Cram ’s with praise, and make ’s
117

As fat as tame things. One good deed dying
118

tongueless
119

Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
120

Our praises are our wages. You may ride ’s
121

With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
122

With spur we heat an acre. But to th’ goal:
123

My last good deed was to entreat his stay.
124

What was my first? It has an elder sister,
125

Or I mistake you. O, would her name were Grace!
126

But once before I spoke to th’ purpose? When?
127

Nay, let me have ’t; I long.
128

LEONTES                                 Why, that was when
129

Three crabbèd months had soured themselves to
130

death
131

Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
132

<And> clap thyself my love; then didst thou utter
133

“I am yours forever.”
134

HERMIONE                  ’Tis grace indeed.
135

Why, lo you now, I have spoke to th’ purpose twice.
136

The one forever earned a royal husband,
137

Th’ other for some while a friend.
138

<She gives Polixenes her hand.>

LEONTES, <aside>                                Too hot, too hot!
139

To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
140

I have tremor cordis on me. My heart dances,
141

But not for joy, not joy. This entertainment
142

May a free face put on, derive a liberty
143

From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
144

And well become the agent. ’T may, I grant.
145

But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
146

As now they are, and making practiced smiles
147

As in a looking glass, and then to sigh, as ’twere
148

The mort o’ th’ deer—O, that is entertainment
149

My bosom likes not, nor my brows.—Mamillius,
150

Art thou my boy?
151

MAMILLIUS              Ay, my good lord.
152

LEONTES                                               I’ fecks!
153

Why, that’s my bawcock. What, hast smutched thy
154

nose?
155

They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
156

We must be neat—not neat, but cleanly, captain.
157

And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf
158

Are all called neat.—Still virginalling
159

Upon his palm?—How now, you wanton calf?
160

Art thou my calf?
161

MAMILLIUS              Yes, if you will, my lord.
162

LEONTES
 

Thou want’st a rough pash and the shoots that I
163

have
164

To be full like me; yet they say we are
165

Almost as like as eggs. Women say so,
166

That will say anything. But were they false
167

As o’erdyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
168

As dice are to be wished by one that fixes
169

No bourn ’twixt his and mine, yet were it true
170

To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
171

Look on me with your welkin eye. Sweet villain,
172

Most dear’st, my collop! Can thy dam?—may ’t
173

be?—
174

Affection, thy intention stabs the center.
175

Thou dost make possible things not so held,
176

Communicat’st with dreams—how can this be?
177

With what’s unreal thou coactive art,
178

And fellow’st nothing. Then ’tis very credent
179

Thou may’st co-join with something; and thou dost,
180

And that beyond commission, and I find it,
181

And that to the infection of my brains
182

And hard’ning of my brows.
183

POLIXENES                                What means Sicilia?
184

HERMIONE
 

He something seems unsettled.
185

POLIXENES                                    How, my lord?
186

LEONTES
 

What cheer? How is ’t with you, best brother?
187

HERMIONE                                                              You look
188

As if you held a brow of much distraction.
189

Are you moved, my lord?
190

LEONTES                               No, in good earnest.
191

How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
192

Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
193

To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
194

Of my boy’s face, methoughts I did recoil
195

Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreeched,
196

In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled
197

Lest it should bite its master and so prove,
198

As ornaments oft <do,> too dangerous.
199

How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
200

This squash, this gentleman.—Mine honest friend,
201

Will you take eggs for money?
202

MAMILLIUS                                    No, my lord, I’ll fight.
203

LEONTES
 

You will? Why, happy man be ’s dole!—My brother,
204

Are you so fond of your young prince as we
205

Do seem to be of ours?
206

POLIXENES                        If at home, sir,
207

He’s all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
208

Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
209

My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all.
210

He makes a July’s day short as December,
211

And with his varying childness cures in me
212

Thoughts that would thick my blood.
213

LEONTES                                                   So stands this
214

squire
215

Officed with me. We two will walk, my lord,
216

And leave you to your graver steps.—Hermione,
217

How thou lov’st us show in our brother’s welcome.
218

Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap.
219

Next to thyself and my young rover, he’s
220

Apparent to my heart.
221

HERMIONE                       If you would seek us,
222

We are yours i’ th’ garden. Shall ’s attend you there?
223

LEONTES
 

To your own bents dispose you. You’ll be found,
224

Be you beneath the sky. <Aside.> I am angling now,
225

Though you perceive me not how I give line.
226

Go to, go to!
227

How she holds up the neb, the bill to him,
228

And arms her with the boldness of a wife
229

To her allowing husband!
230

<Exit Hermione, Polixenes, and Attendants.>

                                      Gone already.
231

Inch thick, knee-deep, o’er head and ears a forked
232

one!—
233

Go play, boy, play. Thy mother plays, and I
234

Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
235

Will hiss me to my grave. Contempt and clamor
236

Will be my knell. Go play, boy, play.—There have
237

been,
238

Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
239

And many a man there is, even at this present,
240

Now while I speak this, holds his wife by th’ arm,
241

That little thinks she has been sluiced in ’s absence,
242

And his pond fished by his next neighbor, by
243

Sir Smile, his neighbor. Nay, there’s comfort in ’t
244

Whiles other men have gates and those gates
245

opened,
246

As mine, against their will. Should all despair
247

That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
248

Would hang themselves. Physic for ’t there’s none.
249

It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
250

Where ’tis predominant; and ’tis powerful, think it,
251

From east, west, north, and south. Be it concluded,
252

No barricado for a belly. Know ’t,
253

It will let in and out the enemy
254

With bag and baggage. Many thousand on ’s
255

Have the disease and feel ’t not.—How now, boy?
256

MAMILLIUS
 

I am like you, <they> say.
257

LEONTES                             Why, that’s some comfort.—
258

What, Camillo there?
259

CAMILLO, <coming forward>  Ay, my good lord.
260

LEONTES
 

Go play, Mamillius. Thou ’rt an honest man.
261

<Mamillius exits.>

Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
262

CAMILLO
 

You had much ado to make his anchor hold.
263

When you cast out, it still came home.
264

LEONTES                                                      Didst note it?
265

CAMILLO
 

He would not stay at your petitions, made
266

His business more material.
267

LEONTES                                    Didst perceive it?
268

<Aside.> They’re here with me already, whisp’ring,
269

rounding:
270

“Sicilia is a so-forth.” ’Tis far gone
271

When I shall gust it last.—How came ’t, Camillo,
272

That he did stay?
273

CAMILLO                  At the good queen’s entreaty.
274

LEONTES
 

“At the queen’s” be ’t. “Good” should be pertinent,
275

But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
276

By any understanding pate but thine?
277

For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
278

More than the common blocks. Not noted, is ’t,
279

But of the finer natures, by some severals
280

Of headpiece extraordinary? Lower messes
281

Perchance are to this business purblind? Say.
282

CAMILLO
 

Business, my lord? I think most understand
283

Bohemia stays here longer.
284

LEONTES
 

Ha?
285

CAMILLO  Stays here longer.
286

LEONTES                                  Ay, but why?
287

CAMILLO
 

To satisfy your Highness and the entreaties
288

Of our most gracious mistress.
289

LEONTES                                         Satisfy?
290

Th’ entreaties of your mistress? Satisfy?
291

Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
292

With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
293

My chamber-counsels, wherein, priestlike, thou
294

Hast cleansed my bosom; I from thee departed
295

Thy penitent reformed. But we have been
296

Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
297

In that which seems so.
298

CAMILLO                             Be it forbid, my lord!
299

LEONTES
 

To bide upon ’t: thou art not honest; or,
300

If thou inclin’st that way, thou art a coward,
301

Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
302

From course required; or else thou must be
303

counted
304

A servant grafted in my serious trust
305

And therein negligent; or else a fool
306

That seest a game played home, the rich stake
307

drawn,
308

And tak’st it all for jest.
309

CAMILLO                            My gracious lord,
310

I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful.
311

In every one of these no man is free,
312

But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
313

Among the infinite doings of the world,
314

Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
315

If ever I were willful-negligent,
316

It was my folly; if industriously
317

I played the fool, it was my negligence,
318

Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
319

To do a thing where I the issue doubted
320

Whereof the execution did cry out
321

Against the non-performance, ’twas a fear
322

Which oft infects the wisest. These, my lord,
323

Are such allowed infirmities that honesty
324

Is never free of. But, beseech your Grace,
325

Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
326

By its own visage. If I then deny it,
327

’Tis none of mine.
328

LEONTES                   Ha’ not you seen, Camillo—
329

But that’s past doubt; you have, or your eyeglass
330

Is thicker than a cuckold’s horn—or heard—
331

For to a vision so apparent, rumor
332

Cannot be mute—or thought—for cogitation
333

Resides not in that man that does not think—
334

My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess—
335

Or else be impudently negative
336

To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought—then say

My wife’s a <hobby-horse,> deserves a name
338

As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
339

Before her troth-plight. Say ’t, and justify ’t.
340

CAMILLO
 

I would not be a stander-by to hear
341

My sovereign mistress clouded so without
342

My present vengeance taken. ’Shrew my heart,
343

You never spoke what did become you less
344

Than this, which to reiterate were sin
345

As deep as that, though true.
346

LEONTES                                     Is whispering nothing?
347

Is leaning cheek to cheek? Is meeting noses?
348

Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
349

Of laughter with a sigh?—a note infallible
350

Of breaking honesty. Horsing foot on foot?
351

Skulking in corners? Wishing clocks more swift?
352

Hours minutes? Noon midnight? And all eyes
353

Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
354

That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
355

Why, then the world and all that’s in ’t is nothing,
356

The covering sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
357

My wife is nothing, nor nothing have these nothings,
358

If this be nothing.
359

CAMILLO                    Good my lord, be cured
360

Of this diseased opinion, and betimes,
361

For ’tis most dangerous.
362

LEONTES                             Say it be, ’tis true.
363

CAMILLO
 

No, no, my lord.
364

LEONTES                 It is. You lie, you lie.
365

I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
366

Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
367

Or else a hovering temporizer that
368

Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
369

Inclining to them both. Were my wife’s liver
370

Infected as her life, she would not live
371

The running of one glass.
372

CAMILLO                                Who does infect her?
373

LEONTES
 

Why, he that wears her like her medal, hanging
374

About his neck—Bohemia, who, if I
375

Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
376

To see alike mine honor as their profits,
377

Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
378

Which should undo more doing. Ay, and thou,
379

His cupbearer—whom I from meaner form
380

Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
381

Plainly as heaven sees Earth and Earth sees heaven
382

How I am galled—mightst bespice a cup
383

To give mine enemy a lasting wink,
384

Which draft to me were cordial.
385

CAMILLO                                           Sir, my lord,
386

I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
387

But with a ling’ring dram that should not work
388

Maliciously like poison. But I cannot
389

Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
390

So sovereignly being honorable. I have loved thee—
391

LEONTES  Make that thy question, and go rot!
392

To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
394

The purity and whiteness of my sheets—
395

Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
396

Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps—
397

Give scandal to the blood o’ th’ Prince, my son,
398

Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
399

Without ripe moving to ’t? Would I do this?
400

Could man so blench?
401

CAMILLO                           I must believe you, sir.
402

I do, and will fetch off Bohemia for ’t—
403

Provided that, when he’s removed, your Highness
404

Will take again your queen as yours at first,
405

Even for your son’s sake, and thereby for sealing
406

The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
407

Known and allied to yours.
408

LEONTES                                   Thou dost advise me
409

Even so as I mine own course have set down.
410

I’ll give no blemish to her honor, none.
411

CAMILLO                                                       My lord,
412

Go then, and with a countenance as clear
413

As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
414

And with your queen. I am his cupbearer.
415

If from me he have wholesome beverage,
416

Account me not your servant.
417

LEONTES                                       This is all.
418

Do ’t and thou hast the one half of my heart;
419

Do ’t not, thou splitt’st thine own.
420

CAMILLO                                             I’ll do ’t, my lord.
421

LEONTES
 

I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
422

He exits.

CAMILLO
 

O miserable lady! But, for me,
423

What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
424

Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do ’t
425

Is the obedience to a master, one
426

Who in rebellion with himself will have
427

All that are his so too. To do this deed,
428

Promotion follows. If I could find example
429

Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
430

And flourished after, I’d not do ’t. But since
431

Nor brass, nor stone, nor parchment bears not one,
432

Let villainy itself forswear ’t. I must
433

Forsake the court. To do ’t or no is certain
434

To me a breakneck. Happy star reign now!
435

Here comes Bohemia.
436

Enter Polixenes.

POLIXENES, <aside>         This is strange. Methinks
437

My favor here begins to warp. Not speak?—
438

Good day, Camillo.
439

CAMILLO                     Hail, most royal sir.
440

POLIXENES
 

What is the news i’ th’ court?
441

CAMILLO                                      None rare, my lord.
442

POLIXENES
 

The King hath on him such a countenance
443

As he had lost some province and a region
444

Loved as he loves himself. Even now I met him
445

With customary compliment, when he,
446

Wafting his eyes to th’ contrary and falling
447

A lip of much contempt, speeds from me, and
448

So leaves me to consider what is breeding
449

That changes thus his manners.
450

CAMILLO                                           I dare not know, my
451

lord.
452

POLIXENES
 

How, dare not? Do not? Do you know and dare not?
453

Be intelligent to me—’tis thereabouts;
454

For to yourself what you do know, you must,
455

And cannot say you dare not. Good Camillo,
456

Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
457

Which shows me mine changed too, for I must be
458

A party in this alteration, finding
459

Myself thus altered with ’t.
460

CAMILLO                                  There is a sickness
461

Which puts some of us in distemper, but
462

I cannot name the disease, and it is caught
463

Of you that yet are well.
464

POLIXENES                          How caught of me?
465

Make me not sighted like the basilisk.
466

I have looked on thousands who have sped the
467

better
468

By my regard, but killed none so. Camillo,
469

As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
470

Clerklike experienced, which no less adorns
471

Our gentry than our parents’ noble names,
472

In whose success we are gentle, I beseech you,
473

If you know aught which does behoove my
474

knowledge
475

Thereof to be informed, imprison ’t not
476

In ignorant concealment.
477

CAMILLO                                I may not answer.
478

POLIXENES
 

A sickness caught of me, and yet I well?
479

I must be answered. Dost thou hear, Camillo?
480

I conjure thee by all the parts of man
481

Which honor does acknowledge, whereof the least
482

Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
483

What incidency thou dost guess of harm
484

Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
485

Which way to be prevented, if to be;
486

If not, how best to bear it.
487

CAMILLO                                 Sir, I will tell you,
488

Since I am charged in honor and by him
489

That I think honorable. Therefore mark my counsel,
490

Which must be e’en as swiftly followed as

I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
492

Cry lost, and so goodnight.
493

POLIXENES                               On, good Camillo.
494

CAMILLO
 

I am appointed him to murder you.
495

POLIXENES
 

By whom, Camillo?
496

CAMILLO                        By the King.
497

POLIXENES                                         For what?
498

CAMILLO
 

He thinks, nay with all confidence he swears,
499

As he had seen ’t or been an instrument
500

To vice you to ’t, that you have touched his queen
501

Forbiddenly.
502

POLIXENES         O, then my best blood turn
503

To an infected jelly, and my name
504

Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
505

Turn then my freshest reputation to
506

A savor that may strike the dullest nostril
507

Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
508

Nay, hated too, worse than the great’st infection
509

That e’er was heard or read.
510

CAMILLO                                    Swear his thought over
511

By each particular star in heaven and
512

By all their influences, you may as well
513

Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
514

As or by oath remove or counsel shake
515

The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
516

The standing of his body.
518

POLIXENES                            How should this grow?
519

CAMILLO
 

I know not. But I am sure ’tis safer to
520

Avoid what’s grown than question how ’tis born.
521

If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
522

That lies enclosèd in this trunk which you
523

Shall bear along impawned, away tonight!
524

Your followers I will whisper to the business,
525

And will by twos and threes at several posterns
526

Clear them o’ th’ city. For myself, I’ll put
527

My fortunes to your service, which are here
528

By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain,
529

For, by the honor of my parents, I
530

Have uttered truth—which if you seek to prove,
531

I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
532

Than one condemned by the King’s own mouth,
533

thereon
534

His execution sworn.
535

POLIXENES                     I do believe thee.
536

I saw his heart in ’s face. Give me thy hand.
537

Be pilot to me and thy places shall
538

Still neighbor mine. My ships are ready and
539

My people did expect my hence departure
540

Two days ago. This jealousy
541

Is for a precious creature. As she’s rare,
542

Must it be great; and as his person’s mighty,
543

Must it be violent; and as he does conceive
544

He is dishonored by a man which ever
545

Professed to him, why, his revenges must
546

In that be made more bitter. Fear o’ershades me.
547

Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
548

The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
549

Of his ill-ta’en suspicion. Come, Camillo,
550

I will respect thee as a father if
551

Thou bear’st my life off hence. Let us avoid.
552

CAMILLO
 

It is in mine authority to command
553

The keys of all the posterns. Please your Highness
554

To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
555

They exit.

Enter Hermione, Mamillius, <and> Ladies.

HERMIONE
 

Take the boy to you. He so troubles me
1

’Tis past enduring.
2

FIRST LADY                  Come, my gracious lord,
3

Shall I be your playfellow?
4

MAMILLIUS
 

No, I’ll none of you.
5

FIRST LADY                   Why, my sweet lord?
6

MAMILLIUS
 

You’ll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
7

I were a baby still.—I love you better.
8

SECOND LADY
 

And why so, my lord?
9

MAMILLIUS                      Not for because
10

Your brows are blacker—yet black brows, they say,
11

Become some women best, so that there be not
12

Too much hair there, but in a semicircle,
13

Or a half-moon made with a pen.
14

SECOND LADY                                      Who taught this?
15

MAMILLIUS
 

I learned it out of women’s faces.—Pray now,
16

What color are your eyebrows?
17

FIRST LADY                                      Blue, my lord.
18

MAMILLIUS
 

Nay, that’s a mock. I have seen a lady’s nose
19

That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
20

FIRST LADY                                                         Hark ye,
21

The Queen your mother rounds apace. We shall
22

Present our services to a fine new prince
23

One of these days, and then you’d wanton with us
24

If we would have you.
25

SECOND LADY                  She is spread of late
26

Into a goodly bulk. Good time encounter her!
27

HERMIONE
 

What wisdom stirs amongst you?—Come, sir, now
28

I am for you again. Pray you sit by us,
29

And tell ’s a tale.
30

MAMILLIUS             Merry or sad shall ’t be?
31

HERMIONE  As merry as you will.
32

MAMILLIUS
 

A sad tale’s best for winter. I have one
33

Of sprites and goblins.
34

HERMIONE                       Let’s have that, good sir.
35

Come on, sit down. Come on, and do your best
36

To fright me with your sprites. You’re powerful at it.
37

MAMILLIUS
 

There was a man—
38

HERMIONE                Nay, come sit down, then on.
39

MAMILLIUS
 

Dwelt by a churchyard. I will tell it softly,
40

Yond crickets shall not hear it.
41

HERMIONE
 

Come on then, and give ’t me in mine ear.
42

<They talk privately.>

<Enter> Leontes, Antigonus, <and> Lords.

LEONTES
 

Was he met there? His train? Camillo with him?
43

LORD
 

Behind the tuft of pines I met them. Never
44

Saw I men scour so on their way. I eyed them

Even to their ships.
46

LEONTES                      How blest am I
47

In my just censure, in my true opinion!
48

Alack, for lesser knowledge! How accursed
49

In being so blest! There may be in the cup
50

A spider steeped, and one may drink, depart,
51

And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
52

Is not infected; but if one present
53

Th’ abhorred ingredient to his eye, make known
54

How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
55

With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider.
56

Camillo was his help in this, his pander.
57

There is a plot against my life, my crown.
58

All’s true that is mistrusted. That false villain
59

Whom I employed was pre-employed by him.
60

He has discovered my design, and I
61

Remain a pinched thing, yea, a very trick
62

For them to play at will. How came the posterns
63

So easily open?
64

LORD                   By his great authority,
65

Which often hath no less prevailed than so
66

On your command.
67

LEONTES  I know ’t too well.
68

<To Hermione.> Give me the boy. I am glad you did
69

not nurse him.
70

Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
71

Have too much blood in him.
72

HERMIONE                                   What is this? Sport?
73

LEONTES,  <to the Ladies>
 

Bear the boy hence. He shall not come about her.
74

Away with him, and let her sport herself
75

With that she’s big with, (<to Hermione>) for ’tis
76

Polixenes
77

Has made thee swell thus.
78

<A Lady exits with Mamillius.>

HERMIONE                             But I’d say he had not,
79

And I’ll be sworn you would believe my saying,
80

Howe’er you lean to th’ nayward.
81

LEONTES                                            You, my lords,
82

Look on her, mark her well. Be but about
83

To say “She is a goodly lady,” and
84

The justice of your hearts will thereto add
85

“ ’Tis pity she’s not honest, honorable.”
86

Praise her but for this her without-door form,
87

Which on my faith deserves high speech, and
88

straight
89

The shrug, the “hum,” or “ha,” these petty brands
90

That calumny doth use—O, I am out,
91

That mercy does, for calumny will sear
92

Virtue itself—these shrugs, these “hum”s and “ha”s,
93

When you have said she’s goodly, come between
94

Ere you can say she’s honest. But be ’t known,
95

From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
96

She’s an adult’ress.
97

HERMIONE                  Should a villain say so,
98

The most replenished villain in the world,
99

He were as much more villain. You, my lord,

Do but mistake.
101

LEONTES                 You have mistook, my lady,
102

Polixenes for Leontes. O thou thing,
103

Which I’ll not call a creature of thy place
104

Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
105

Should a like language use to all degrees,
106

And mannerly distinguishment leave out
107

Betwixt the prince and beggar.—I have said
108

She’s an adult’ress; I have said with whom.
109

More, she’s a traitor, and Camillo is
110

A federary with her, and one that knows
111

What she should shame to know herself
112

But with her most vile principal: that she’s
113

A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
114

That vulgars give bold’st titles; ay, and privy
115

To this their late escape.
116

HERMIONE                           No, by my life,
117

Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
118

When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
119

You thus have published me! Gentle my lord,
120

You scarce can right me throughly then to say
121

You did mistake.
122

LEONTES                  No. If I mistake
123

In those foundations which I build upon,
124

The center is not big enough to bear
125

A schoolboy’s top.—Away with her to prison.
126

He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
127

But that he speaks.
128

HERMIONE                  There’s some ill planet reigns.
129

I must be patient till the heavens look
130

With an aspect more favorable. Good my lords,
131

I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
132

Commonly are, the want of which vain dew
133

Perchance shall dry your pities. But I have
134

That honorable grief lodged here which burns
135

Worse than tears drown. Beseech you all, my lords,
136

With thoughts so qualified as your charities
137

Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
138

The King’s will be performed.
139

LEONTES                                       Shall I be heard?
140

HERMIONE
 

Who is ’t that goes with me? Beseech your Highness
141

My women may be with me, for you see
142

My plight requires it.—Do not weep, good fools;
143

There is no cause. When you shall know your
144

mistress
145

As I come out. This action I now go on
147

I never wished to see you sorry; now
149

I trust I shall.—My women, come; you have leave.
150

LEONTES  Go, do our bidding. Hence!
151

<Hermione exits, under guard, with her Ladies.>

LORD
 

Beseech your Highness, call the Queen again.
152

ANTIGONUS
 

Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
153

Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer:
154

Yourself, your queen, your son.
155

LORD                                               For her, my lord,
156

I dare my life lay down—and will do ’t, sir,
157

Please you t’ accept it—that the Queen is spotless
158

I’ th’ eyes of heaven, and to you—I mean
159

In this which you accuse her.
160

ANTIGONUS                                  If it prove
161

She’s otherwise, I’ll keep my stables where
162

I lodge my wife. I’ll go in couples with her;
163

Than when I feel and see her, no farther trust her.
164

For every inch of woman in the world,
165

Ay, every dram of woman’s flesh, is false,
166

If she be.
167

LEONTES    Hold your peaces.
168

LORD                                         Good my lord—
169

ANTIGONUS
 

It is for you we speak, not for ourselves.
170

You are abused, and by some putter-on
171

That will be damned for ’t. Would I knew the
172

villain!
173

I would land-damn him. Be she honor-flawed,
174

I have three daughters—the eldest is eleven;
175

If this prove true, they’ll pay for ’t. By mine honor,
177

I’ll geld ’em all; fourteen they shall not see
178

To bring false generations. They are co-heirs,
179

And I had rather glib myself than they
180

Should not produce fair issue.
181

LEONTES                                        Cease. No more.
182

You smell this business with a sense as cold
183

As is a dead man’s nose. But I do see ’t and feel ’t,
184

As you feel doing thus, and see withal
185

The instruments that feel.
186

ANTIGONUS                            If it be so,
187

We need no grave to bury honesty.
188

There’s not a grain of it the face to sweeten
189

Of the whole dungy Earth.
190

LEONTES                                 What? Lack I credit?
191

LORD
 

I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
192

Upon this ground. And more it would content me
193

To have her honor true than your suspicion,
194

Be blamed for ’t how you might.
195

LEONTES                                           Why, what need we
196

Commune with you of this, but rather follow
197

Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
198

Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
199

Imparts this, which if you—or stupefied
200

Or seeming so in skill—cannot or will not
201

Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
202

We need no more of your advice. The matter,
203

The loss, the gain, the ord’ring on ’t is all
204

Properly ours.
205

ANTIGONUS         And I wish, my liege,
206

You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
207

Without more overture.
208

LEONTES                             How could that be?
209

Either thou art most ignorant by age,
210

Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo’s flight,
211

Added to their familiarity—
212

Which was as gross as ever touched conjecture,
213

That lacked sight only, naught for approbation
214

But only seeing, all other circumstances
215

Made up to th’ deed—doth push on this
216

proceeding.
217

Yet, for a greater confirmation—
218

For in an act of this importance ’twere
219

Most piteous to be wild—I have dispatched in post
220

To sacred Delphos, to Apollo’s temple,
221

Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
222

Of stuffed sufficiency. Now from the oracle
223

They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had
224

Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
225

LORD                                                             Well done,
226

my lord.
227

LEONTES
 

Though I am satisfied and need no more
228

Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
229

Give rest to th’ minds of others, such as he
230

Whose ignorant credulity will not
231

Come up to th’ truth. So have we thought it good
232

From our free person she should be confined,
233

Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
234

Be left her to perform. Come, follow us.
235

We are to speak in public, for this business
236

Will raise us all.
237

ANTIGONUS, <aside> To laughter, as I take it,
238

If the good truth were known.
239

They exit.

Scene 2

Enter Paulina, a Gentleman, <and Paulina’s Attendants.>

PAULINA,  <to Gentleman>
 

The keeper of the prison, call to him.
1

Let him have knowledge who I am.
2

<Gentleman exits.>

                                                        Good lady,
3

No court in Europe is too good for thee.
4

What dost thou then in prison?
5

<Enter> Jailer, <with the Gentleman.>

                                               Now, good sir,
6

You know me, do you not?
7

JAILER                                    For a worthy lady
8

And one who much I honor.
9

PAULINA                                     Pray you then,
10

Conduct me to the Queen.
11

JAILER                                     I may not, madam.
12

To the contrary I have express commandment.
13

PAULINA
 

Here’s ado, to lock up honesty and honor from
14

Th’ access of gentle visitors. Is ’t lawful, pray you,
15

To see her women? Any of them? Emilia?
16

JAILER  So please you, madam,
17

To put apart these your attendants, I
18

Shall bring Emilia forth.
19

PAULINA                               I pray now, call her.—
20

Withdraw yourselves.
21

<Attendants and Gentleman exit.>

JAILER
 

And, madam, I must be present at your conference.
22

PAULINA  Well, be ’t so, prithee.
23

<Jailer exits.>

Here’s such ado to make no stain a stain
24

As passes coloring.
25

<Enter> Emilia <with Jailer.>

                          Dear gentlewoman,
26

How fares our gracious lady?
27

EMILIA
 

As well as one so great and so forlorn
28

May hold together. On her frights and griefs,
29

Which never tender lady hath borne greater,
30

She is something before her time delivered.
31

PAULINA
 

A boy?
32

EMILIA  A daughter, and a goodly babe,
33

Lusty and like to live. The Queen receives
34

Much comfort in ’t, says “My poor prisoner,
35

I am innocent as you.”
36

PAULINA                            I dare be sworn.
37

These dangerous unsafe lunes i’ th’ King, beshrew
38

them!
39

He must be told on ’t, and he shall. The office
40

Becomes a woman best. I’ll take ’t upon me.
41

If I prove honey-mouthed, let my tongue blister
42

And never to my red-looked anger be
43

The trumpet anymore. Pray you, Emilia,
44

Commend my best obedience to the Queen.
45

If she dares trust me with her little babe,
46

I’ll show ’t the King and undertake to be
47

Her advocate to th’ loud’st We do not know
48

How he may soften at the sight o’ th’ child.
49

The silence often of pure innocence
50

Persuades when speaking fails.
51

EMILIA                                             Most worthy madam,
52

Your honor and your goodness is so evident
53

That your free undertaking cannot miss
54

A thriving issue. There is no lady living
55

So meet for this great errand. Please your Ladyship
56

To visit the next room, I’ll presently
57

Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
58

Who but today hammered of this design,
59

But durst not tempt a minister of honor
60

Lest she should be denied.
61

PAULINA                                  Tell her, Emilia,
62

I’ll use that tongue I have. If wit flow from ’t
63

As boldness from my bosom, let ’t not be doubted
64

I shall do good.
65

EMILIA                   Now be you blest for it!
66

I’ll to the Queen. Please you come something
67

nearer.
68

JAILER,  <to Paulina>
 

Madam, if ’t please the Queen to send the babe,
69

I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
70

Having no warrant.
71

PAULINA                       You need not fear it, sir.
72

This child was prisoner to the womb, and is
73

By law and process of great nature thence
74

Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
75

The anger of the King, nor guilty of,
76

If any be, the trespass of the Queen.
77

JAILER  I do believe it.
78

PAULINA
 

Do not you fear. Upon mine honor, I
79

Will stand betwixt you and danger.
80

They exit.

Scene 3

Enter Leontes.

LEONTES
 

Nor night nor day no rest. It is but weakness
1

To bear the matter thus, mere weakness. If

The cause were not in being—part o’ th’ cause,
3

She th’ adult’ress, for the harlot king
4

Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
5

And level of my brain, plot-proof. But she
6

I can hook to me. Say that she were gone,
7

Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
8

Might come to me again.—Who’s there?
9

<Enter a> Servant.

SERVANT                                                        My lord.
10

LEONTES  How does the boy?
11

SERVANT  He took good rest tonight. ’Tis hoped
12

His sickness is discharged.
13

LEONTES                                  To see his nobleness,
14

Conceiving the dishonor of his mother.
15

He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
16

Fastened and fixed the shame on ’t in himself,
17

Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
18

And downright languished. Leave me solely. Go,
19

See how he fares.
20

<Servant exits.>

                           Fie, fie, no thought of him.
21

The very thought of my revenges that way
22

Recoil upon me—in himself too mighty,
23

And in his parties, his alliance. Let him be
24

Until a time may serve. For present vengeance,
25

Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
26

Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow.
27

They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
28

Shall she within my power.
29

Enter Paulina, <carrying the baby, with> Servants, Antigonus,

and Lords.

LORD                                        You must not enter.

PAULINA
 

Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me.
31

Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
32

Than the Queen’s life? A gracious innocent soul,
33

More free than he is jealous.
34

ANTIGONUS                                That’s enough.
35

SERVANT
 

Madam, he hath not slept tonight, commanded
36

None should come at him.
37

PAULINA                                  Not so hot, good sir.
38

I come to bring him sleep. ’Tis such as you
39

That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
40

At each his needless heavings, such as you
41

Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
42

Do come with words as medicinal as true,
43

Honest as either, to purge him of that humor
44

That presses him from sleep.
45

LEONTES                                     <What> noise there, ho?
46

PAULINA
 

No noise, my lord, but needful conference
47

About some gossips for your Highness.
48

LEONTES                                                      How?—
49

Away with that audacious lady. Antigonus,
50

I charged thee that she should not come about me.
51

I knew she would.
52

ANTIGONUS                I told her so, my lord,
53

On your displeasure’s peril and on mine,
54

She should not visit you.
55

LEONTES                              What, canst not rule her?
56

PAULINA
 

From all dishonesty he can. In this,
57

Unless he take the course that you have done—
58

Commit me for committing honor—trust it,
59

He shall not rule me.
60

ANTIGONUS                    La you now, you hear.
61

But she’ll not stumble.
63

PAULINA                            Good my liege, I come—
64

Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
66

Your most obedient counselor, yet that dares
67

Less appear so in comforting your evils
68

Than such as most seem yours—I say I come
69

From your good queen.
70

LEONTES  Good queen?
71

PAULINA
 

Good queen, my lord, good queen, I say “good
72

queen,”
73

And would by combat make her good, so were I
74

A man, the worst about you.
75

LEONTES                                     Force her hence.
76

PAULINA
 

Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
77

First hand me. On mine own accord I’ll off,
78

But first I’ll do my errand.—The good queen,
79

For she is good, hath brought you forth a
80

daughter—
81

Here ’tis—commends it to your blessing.
82

<She lays down the baby.>

LEONTES                                                         Out!
83

A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o’ door.
84

A most intelligencing bawd.
85

PAULINA                                     Not so.
86

I am as ignorant in that as you
87

In so entitling me, and no less honest
88

Than you are mad—which is enough, I’ll warrant,
89

As this world goes, to pass for honest.
90

LEONTES                                                    Traitors,
91

Will you not push her out? <To Antigonus.> Give her

the bastard,
93

Thou dotard; thou art woman-tired, unroosted
94

By thy Dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard,
95

PAULINA, <to Antigonus>                         Forever
97

Unvenerable be thy hands if thou
98

Tak’st up the Princess by that forced baseness
99

Which he has put upon ’t.
100

LEONTES                                He dreads his wife.
101

PAULINA
 

So I would you did. Then ’twere past all doubt
102

You’d call your children yours.
103

LEONTES                                        A nest of traitors!
104

ANTIGONUS
 

I am none, by this good light.
105

PAULINA                                       Nor I, nor any
106

But one that’s here, and that’s himself. For he
107

The sacred honor of himself, his queen’s,
108

His hopeful son’s, his babe’s, betrays to slander,
109

Whose sting is sharper than the sword’s; and will
110

not—
111

For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
112

He cannot be compelled to ’t—once remove
113

The root of his opinion, which is rotten
114

As ever oak or stone was sound.
115

LEONTES                                          A callet
116

Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her
117

husband
118

And now baits me! This brat is none of mine.
119

It is the issue of Polixenes.
120

Hence with it, and together with the dam
121

Commit them to the fire.
122

PAULINA                                It is yours,
123

And, might we lay th’ old proverb to your charge,
124

Although the print be little, the whole matter
126

And copy of the father—eye, nose, lip,
127

The trick of ’s frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
128

The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, his
129

smiles,
130

The very mold and frame of hand, nail, finger.
131

And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
132

So like to him that got it, if thou hast
133

The ordering of the mind too, ’mongst all colors
134

No yellow in ’t, lest she suspect, as he does,
135

Her children not her husband’s.
136

LEONTES                                          A gross hag!—
137

And, losel, thou art worthy to be hanged
138

That wilt not stay her tongue.
139

ANTIGONUS                                   Hang all the husbands
140

That cannot do that feat, you’ll leave yourself
141

Hardly one subject.
142

LEONTES                     Once more, take her hence.
143

PAULINA
 

A most unworthy and unnatural lord
144

Can do no more.
145

LEONTES                   I’ll ha’ thee burnt.
146

PAULINA                                                   I care not.
147

It is an heretic that makes the fire,
148

Not she which burns in ’t. I’ll not call you tyrant;
149

But this most cruel usage of your queen,
150

Not able to produce more accusation
151

Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something
152

savors
153

Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
154

Yea, scandalous to the world.
155

LEONTES, <to Antigonus>            On your allegiance,
156

Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
157

If she did know me one. Away with her!
159

PAULINA,  <to Lords>
 

I pray you do not push me; I’ll be gone.—
160

Look to your babe, my lord; ’tis yours. Jove send her
161

A better guiding spirit.—What needs these hands?
162

You that are thus so tender o’er his follies
163

Will never do him good, not one of you.
164

So, so. Farewell, we are gone.
165

She exits.

LEONTES,  <to Antigonus>
 

Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
166

My child? Away with ’t! Even thou, that hast
167

A heart so tender o’er it, take it hence,
168

And see it instantly consumed with fire.
169

Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight.
170

Within this hour bring me word ’tis done,
171

And by good testimony, or I’ll seize thy life,
172

With what thou else call’st thine. If thou refuse
173

And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so.
174

The bastard brains with these my proper hands
175

Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
176

For thou sett’st on thy wife.
177

ANTIGONUS                               I did not, sir.
178

These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
179

Can clear me in ’t.
180

LORDS                      We can, my royal liege.
181

He is not guilty of her coming hither.
182

LEONTES  You’re liars all.
183

LORD
 

Beseech your Highness, give us better credit.
184

We have always truly served you, and beseech
185

So to esteem of us. And on our knees we beg,
186

As recompense of our dear services
187

Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
188

Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
189

Lead on to some foul issue. We all kneel.
190

LEONTES
 

I am a feather for each wind that blows.
191

Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
192

And call me father? Better burn it now
193

Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
194

It shall not neither. <To Antigonus.> You, sir, come
195

you hither,
196

You that have been so tenderly officious
197

With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
198

To save this bastard’s life—for ’tis a bastard,
199

So sure as this beard’s gray. What will you
200

adventure
201

To save this brat’s life?
202

ANTIGONUS                       Anything, my lord,
203

That my ability may undergo
204

And nobleness impose. At least thus much:
205

I’ll pawn the little blood which I have left
206

To save the innocent. Anything possible.
207

LEONTES
 

It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
208

Thou wilt perform my bidding.
209

ANTIGONUS, <his hand on the hilt>  I will, my lord.
210

LEONTES
 

Mark, and perform it, seest thou; for the fail
211

Of any point in ’t shall not only be
212

Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
213

Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
214

As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry
215

This female bastard hence, and that thou bear it
216

To some remote and desert place quite out
217

Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
218

Without more mercy, to it own protection
219

And favor of the climate. As by strange fortune
220

It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
221

On thy soul’s peril and thy body’s torture,
222

That thou commend it strangely to some place
223

Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
224

ANTIGONUS
 

I swear to do this, though a present death
225

Had been more merciful.—Come on, poor babe.
226

<He picks up the baby.>

Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
227

To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say,
228

Casting their savageness aside, have done
229

Like offices of pity. <To Leontes.> Sir, be prosperous
230

In more than this deed does require.—And blessing
231

Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
232

Poor thing, condemned to loss.
233

He exits, <carrying the baby.>

LEONTES                                          No, I’ll not rear
234

Another’s issue.
235

Enter a Servant.

SERVANT                Please your Highness, posts
236

From those you sent to th’ oracle are come
237

An hour since. Cleomenes and Dion,
238

Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
239

Hasting to th’ court.
240

LORD, <to Leontes>       So please you, sir, their speed
241

Hath been beyond account.
242

LEONTES                                   Twenty-three days
243

They have been absent. ’Tis good speed, foretells
244

The great Apollo suddenly will have
245

The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords.
246

Summon a session, that we may arraign
247

Our most disloyal lady; for, as she hath
248

Been publicly accused, so shall she have
249

A just and open trial. While she lives,
250

My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
251

And think upon my bidding.
252

They exit.

Enter Cleomenes and Dion.

CLEOMENES
 

The climate’s delicate, the air most sweet,
1

Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
2

The common praise it bears.
3

DION                                          I shall report,
4

For most it caught me, the celestial habits—
5

Methinks I so should term them—and the reverence
6

Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice,
7

How ceremonious, solemn, and unearthly
8

It was i’ th’ off’ring!
9

CLEOMENES                 But of all, the burst
10

And the ear-deaf’ning voice o’ th’ oracle,
11

Kin to Jove’s thunder, so surprised my sense
12

That I was nothing.
13

DION                           If th’ event o’ th’ journey
14

Prove as successful to the Queen—O, be ’t so!—
15

As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
16

The time is worth the use on ’t.
17

CLEOMENES                                    Great Apollo
18

Turn all to th’ best! These proclamations,
19

So forcing faults upon Hermione,
20

I little like.
21

DION             The violent carriage of it
22

Will clear or end the business when the oracle
23

Thus by Apollo’s great divine sealed up,
24

Shall the contents discover. Something rare
25

Even then will rush to knowledge. Go. Fresh horses;
26

And gracious be the issue.
27

They exit.

Scene 2

Enter Leontes, Lords, <and> Officers.

LEONTES
 

This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
1

Even pushes ’gainst our heart: the party tried
2

The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
3

Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleared
4

Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
5

Proceed in justice, which shall have due course
6

Even to the guilt or the purgation.
7

Produce the prisoner.
8

OFFICER
 

It is his Highness’ pleasure that the Queen
9

Appear in person here in court.
10

<Enter> Hermione, as to her trial, <Paulina, and> Ladies.

                                                  Silence!
11

LEONTES  Read the indictment.
12

OFFICER <reads>  Hermione, queen to the worthy Leontes,
13

King of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned
14

of high treason, in committing adultery with Polix-
15

enes, King of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo
16

to take away the life of our sovereign lord the King, thy
17

royal husband; the pretense whereof being by circum-

stances partly laid open, thou, Hermione, contrary to
19

the faith and allegiance of a true subject, didst coun-
20

sel and aid them, for their better safety, to fly away by
21

night.
22

HERMIONE
 

Since what I am to say must be but that
23

Which contradicts my accusation, and
24

The testimony on my part no other
25

But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
26

To say “Not guilty.” Mine integrity,
27

Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
28

Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
29

Behold our human actions, as they do,
30

I doubt not then but innocence shall make
31

False accusation blush and tyranny
32

Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
33

Whom least will seem to do so, my past life
34

Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
35

As I am now unhappy; which is more
36

Than history can pattern, though devised
37

And played to take spectators. For behold me,
38

A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
39

A moiety of the throne, a great king’s daughter,
40

The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing

To prate and talk for life and honor fore
42

Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
43

As I weigh grief, which I would spare. For honor,
44

’Tis a derivative from me to mine,
45

And only that I stand for. I appeal
46

To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
47

Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
48

How merited to be so; since he came,
49

With what encounter so uncurrent I
50

Have strained t’ appear thus; if one jot beyond
51

The bound of honor, or in act or will
52

That way inclining, hardened be the hearts
53

Of all that hear me, and my near’st of kin
54

Cry fie upon my grave.
55

LEONTES                           I ne’er heard yet
56

That any of these bolder vices wanted
57

Less impudence to gainsay what they did
58

Than to perform it first.
59

HERMIONE                          That’s true enough,
60

Though ’tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
61

LEONTES
 

You will not own it.
62

HERMIONE                   More than mistress of
63

Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
64

At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
65

With whom I am accused, I do confess
66

I loved him as in honor he required,
67

With such a kind of love as might become
68

A lady like me, with a love even such,
69

So and no other, as yourself commanded,
70

Which not to have done, I think, had been in me
71

Both disobedience and ingratitude
72

To you and toward your friend, whose love had
73

spoke,
74

Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
75

That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
76

I know not how it tastes, though it be dished
77

For me to try how. All I know of it
78

Is that Camillo was an honest man;
79

And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
80

Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
81

LEONTES
 

You knew of his departure, as you know
82

What you have underta’en to do in ’s absence.
83

HERMIONE  Sir,
84

You speak a language that I understand not.
85

My life stands in the level of your dreams,
86

Which I’ll lay down.
87
88

LEONTES                      Your actions are my dreams.

You had a bastard by Polixenes,
89

And I but dreamed it. As you were past all shame—
90

Those of your fact are so—so past all truth,
91

Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
92

Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
93

No father owning it—which is indeed
94

More criminal in thee than it—so thou
95

Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
96

Look for no less than death.
97

HERMIONE                                Sir, spare your threats.
98

The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
99

To me can life be no commodity.
100

The crown and comfort of my life, your favor,
101

I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
102

But know not how it went. My second joy
103

And first fruits of my body, from his presence
104

I am barred like one infectious. My third comfort,
105

Starred most unluckily, is from my breast,
106

The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth,
107

Haled out to murder; myself on every post
108

Proclaimed a strumpet; with immodest hatred
109

The childbed privilege denied, which longs

To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
111

Here to this place, i’ th’ open air, before
112

I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
113

Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
114

That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
115

But yet hear this (mistake me not: no life,
116

I prize it not a straw, but for mine honor,
117

Which I would free), if I shall be condemned
118

Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
119

But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
120

’Tis rigor, and not law. Your Honors all,
121

I do refer me to the oracle.
122

Apollo be my judge.
123

LORD                             This your request
124

Is altogether just. Therefore bring forth,
125

And in Apollo’s name, his oracle.
126

<Officers exit.>

HERMIONE
 

The Emperor of Russia was my father.
127

O, that he were alive and here beholding
128

His daughter’s trial, that he did but see
129

The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
130

Of pity, not revenge.
131

<Enter> Cleomenes, Dion, <with Officers.>

OFFICER,  <presenting a sword>
 

You here shall swear upon this sword of justice
132

That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
133

Been both at Delphos, and from thence have
134

brought
135

This sealed-up oracle, by the hand delivered
136

Of great Apollo’s priest, and that since then
137

You have not dared to break the holy seal
138

Nor read the secrets in ’t.
139

CLEOMENES, DION  All this we swear.
140

LEONTES  Break up the seals and read.
141

OFFICER <reads>  Hermione is chaste, Polixenes blame-
142

less, Camillo a true subject, Leontes a jealous tyrant,
143

his innocent babe truly begotten; and the King shall
144

live without an heir if that which is lost be not

found.
146

LORDS
 

Now blessèd be the great Apollo!
147

HERMIONE                                         Praised!
148

LEONTES    Hast thou read truth?
149

OFFICER
 

Ay, my lord, even so as it is here set down.
150

LEONTES
 

There is no truth at all i’ th’ oracle.
151

The sessions shall proceed. This is mere falsehood.
152

<Enter a Servant.>

SERVANT
 

My lord the King, the King!
153

LEONTES                                    What is the business?
154

SERVANT
 

O sir, I shall be hated to report it.
155

The Prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
156

Of the Queen’s speed, is gone.
157

LEONTES                                        How? Gone?
158

SERVANT                                                               Is dead.
159

LEONTES
 

Apollo’s angry, and the heavens themselves
160

Do strike at my injustice.
161

<Hermione falls.>

                                      How now there?
162

PAULINA
 

This news is mortal to the Queen. Look down
163

And see what death is doing.
164

LEONTES                                     Take her hence.
165

Her heart is but o’ercharged. She will recover.
166

I have too much believed mine own suspicion.
167

Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
168

Some remedies for life.
169

<Paulina exits with Officers carrying Hermione.>

                                   Apollo, pardon
170

My great profaneness ’gainst thine oracle.
171

I’ll reconcile me to Polixenes,
172

New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
173

Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
174

For, being transported by my jealousies
175

To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
176

Camillo for the minister to poison
177

My friend Polixenes, which had been done
178

But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
179

My swift command, though I with death and with
180

Reward did threaten and encourage him,
181

Not doing it and being done. He, most humane
182

And filled with honor, to my kingly guest
183

Unclasped my practice, quit his fortunes here,
184

Which you knew great, and to the hazard
185

Of all incertainties himself commended,
186

No richer than his honor. How he glisters
187

Through my rust, and how his piety
188

Does my deeds make the blacker!
189

<Enter Paulina.>

PAULINA                                              Woe the while!
190

O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
191

Break too!
192

LORD           What fit is this, good lady?
193

PAULINA,  <to Leontes>
 

What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
194

What wheels, racks, fires? What flaying? Boiling
195

In leads or oils? What old or newer torture
196

Must I receive, whose every word deserves
197

To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny,
198

Together working with thy jealousies,
199

Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
200

For girls of nine, O, think what they have done,
201

And then run mad indeed, stark mad, for all
202

Thy bygone fooleries were but spices of it.
203

That thou betrayedst Polixenes, ’twas nothing;
204

That did but show thee of a fool, inconstant
205

And damnable ingrateful. Nor was ’t much
206

Thou wouldst have poisoned good Camillo’s honor,
207

More monstrous standing by, whereof I reckon
209

The casting forth to crows thy baby daughter
210

To be or none or little, though a devil
211

Would have shed water out of fire ere done ’t.
212

Nor is ’t directly laid to thee the death
213

Of the young prince, whose honorable thoughts,
214

Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
215

That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
216

Blemished his gracious dam. This is not, no,
217

Laid to thy answer. But the last—O lords,
218

When I have said, cry woe!—the Queen, the Queen,
219

The sweet’st, dear’st creature’s dead, and vengeance
220

for ’t
221

Not dropped down yet.
222

LORD                                The higher powers forbid!
223

PAULINA
 

I say she’s dead. I’ll swear ’t. If word nor oath
224

Prevail not, go and see. If you can bring
225

Tincture or luster in her lip, her eye,
226

Heat outwardly or breath within, I’ll serve you
227

As I would do the gods.—But, O thou tyrant,
228

Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
229

Than all thy woes can stir. Therefore betake thee
230

To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
231

Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
232

Upon a barren mountain, and still winter
233

In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
234

To look that way thou wert.
235

LEONTES                                   Go on, go on.
236

Thou canst not speak too much. I have deserved
237

All tongues to talk their bitt’rest.
238

LORD, <to Paulina>                           Say no more.
239

Howe’er the business goes, you have made fault
240

I’ th’ boldness of your speech.
241

PAULINA                                        I am sorry for ’t.
242

All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
243

I do repent. Alas, I have showed too much
244

The rashness of a woman. He is touched
245

To th’ noble heart.—What’s gone and what’s past
246

help
247

Should be past grief. Do not receive affliction
248

At my petition. I beseech you, rather
249

Let me be punished, that have minded you
250

Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege,
251

Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman.
252

The love I bore your queen—lo, fool again!—
253

I’ll speak of her no more, nor of your children.
254

I’ll not remember you of my own lord,
255

Who is lost too. Take your patience to you,
256

And I’ll say nothing.
257

LEONTES                      Thou didst speak but well
258

When most the truth, which I receive much better
259

Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
260

To the dead bodies of my queen and son.
261

One grave shall be for both. Upon them shall
262

The causes of their death appear, unto
263

Our shame perpetual. Once a day I’ll visit
264

The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
265

Shall be my recreation. So long as nature
266

Will bear up with this exercise, so long
267

I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
268

To these sorrows.
269

They exit.

Scene 3

Enter Antigonus <carrying the> babe, <and> a Mariner.

ANTIGONUS
 

Thou art perfect, then, our ship hath touched upon
1

The deserts of Bohemia?
2

MARINER                              Ay, my lord, and fear
3

We have landed in ill time. The skies look grimly
4

And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
5

The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
6

And frown upon ’s.
7

ANTIGONUS
 

Their sacred wills be done. Go, get aboard.
8

Look to thy bark. I’ll not be long before
9

I call upon thee.
10

MARINER                 Make your best haste, and go not
11

Too far i’ th’ land. ’Tis like to be loud weather.
12

Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
13

Of prey that keep upon ’t.
14

ANTIGONUS                            Go thou away.
15

I’ll follow instantly.
16

MARINER                      I am glad at heart
17

To be so rid o’ th’ business.
18

He exits.

ANTIGONUS                              Come, poor babe.
19

I have heard, but not believed, the spirits o’ th’ dead
20

May walk again. If such thing be, thy mother
21

Appeared to me last night, for ne’er was dream
22

So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
23

Sometimes her head on one side, some another.
24

I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
25

So filled and so becoming. In pure white robes,

Like very sanctity, she did approach
27

My cabin where I lay, thrice bowed before me,
28

And, gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
29

Became two spouts. The fury spent, anon
30

Since fate, against thy better disposition,
32

Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
33

Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
34

Places remote enough are in Bohemia.
35

There weep, and leave it crying. And, for the babe
36

Is counted lost forever, Perdita
37

I prithee call ’t. For this ungentle business
38

Put on thee by my lord, thou ne’er shalt see
39

Thy wife Paulina more.” And so, with shrieks,
40

She melted into air. Affrighted much,
41

I did in time collect myself and thought
42

This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys,
43

Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
44

I will be squared by this. I do believe
45

Hermione hath suffered death, and that
46

Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
47

Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
48

Either for life or death, upon the earth
49

Of its right father.—Blossom, speed thee well.
50

There lie, and there thy character; there these,
51

<He lays down the baby, a bundle, and a box.>

Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
52

And still rest thine. <Thunder.> The storm begins.
53

Poor wretch,
54

That for thy mother’s fault art thus exposed
55

To loss and what may follow. Weep I cannot,
56

But my heart bleeds, and most accurst am I
57

To be by oath enjoined to this. Farewell.
58

The day frowns more and more. Thou ’rt like to have
59

A lullaby too rough. I never saw
60

The heavens so dim by day.
61

<Thunder, and sounds of hunting.>

                                          A savage clamor!

I am gone forever!
64

He exits, pursued by a bear.

<Enter> Shepherd.

SHEPHERD  I would there were no age between ten and
65

three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
66

rest, for there is nothing in the between but getting
67

wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, steal-
68

ing, fighting—Hark you now. Would any but these
69

boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty hunt
70

this weather? They have scared away two of my best
71

sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find than
72

the master. If anywhere I have them, ’tis by the
73

seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an ’t be thy will,
74

what have we here? Mercy on ’s, a bairn! A very
75

pretty bairn. A boy or a child, I wonder? A pretty
76

one, a very pretty one. Sure some scape. Though I
77

am not bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentle-
78

woman in the scape. This has been some stair-work,
79

some trunk-work, some behind-door work. They
80

were warmer that got this than the poor thing is

here. I’ll take it up for pity. Yet I’ll tarry till my son
82

come. He halloed but even now.—Whoa-ho-ho!
83

Enter <Shepherd’s Son.>

SHEPHERD’S SON  Hilloa, loa!
84

SHEPHERD  What, art so near? If thou ’lt see a thing to
85

talk on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither.
86

What ail’st thou, man?
87

SHEPHERD’S SON  I have seen two such sights, by sea
88

and by land—but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is
89

now the sky; betwixt the firmament and it, you
90

cannot thrust a bodkin’s point.
91

SHEPHERD  Why, boy, how is it?
92

SHEPHERD’S SON  I would you did but see how it chafes,
93

how it rages, how it takes up the shore. But that’s
94

not to the point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor
95

souls! Sometimes to see ’em, and not to see ’em.
96

Now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast,
97

and anon swallowed with yeast and froth, as you’d
98

thrust a cork into a hogshead. And then for the land
99

service, to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-
100

bone, how he cried to me for help, and said his
101

name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
102

end of the ship: to see how the sea flap-dragoned it.
103

But, first, how the poor souls roared and the sea
104

mocked them, and how the poor gentleman roared
105

and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
106

the sea or weather.
107

SHEPHERD  Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
108

SHEPHERD’S SON  Now, now. I have not winked since I

saw these sights. The men are not yet cold under
110

water, nor the bear half dined on the gentleman.
111

He’s at it now.
112

SHEPHERD  Would I had been by to have helped the old
113

man.
114

SHEPHERD’S SON  I would you had been by the ship side,
115

to have helped her. There your charity would have
116

lacked footing.
117

SHEPHERD  Heavy matters, heavy matters. But look
118

thee here, boy. Now bless thyself. Thou met’st with
119

things dying, I with things newborn. Here’s a sight
120

for thee. Look thee, a bearing cloth for a squire’s
121

child. Look thee here. Take up, take up, boy. Open
122

’t. So, let’s see. It was told me I should be rich by
123

the fairies. This is some changeling. Open ’t. What’s
124

within, boy?
125

SHEPHERD’S SON, <opening the box>  You’re a made old
126

man. If the sins of your youth are forgiven you,
127

you’re well to live. Gold, all gold.
128

SHEPHERD  This is fairy gold, boy, and ’twill prove so.
129

Up with ’t, keep it close. Home, home, the next way.
130

We are lucky, boy, and to be so still requires
131

nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go. Come, good
132

boy, the next way home.
133

SHEPHERD’S SON  Go you the next way with your
134

findings. I’ll go see if the bear be gone from the
135

gentleman and how much he hath eaten. They are
136

never curst but when they are hungry. If there be
137

any of him left, I’ll bury it.
138

SHEPHERD  That’s a good deed. If thou mayest discern
139

by that which is left of him what he is, fetch me to
140

th’ sight of him.
141

SHEPHERD’S SON  Marry, will I, and you shall help to
142

put him i’ th’ ground.
143

SHEPHERD  ’Tis a lucky day, boy, and we’ll do good
144

deeds on ’t.
145

They exit.

Enter Time, the Chorus.

TIME
 

I, that please some, try all—both joy and terror
1

Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error—
2

Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
3

To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
4

To me or my swift passage that I slide
5

O’er sixteen years, and leave the growth untried
6

Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
7

To o’erthrow law and in one self-born hour
8

To plant and o’erwhelm custom. Let me pass
9

The same I am ere ancient’st order was
10

Or what is now received. I witness to
11

The times that brought them in. So shall I do
12

To th’ freshest things now reigning, and make stale
13

The glistering of this present, as my tale
14

Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
15

I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
16

As you had slept between. Leontes leaving,
17

Th’ effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
18

That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
19

Gentle spectators, that I now may be
20

In fair Bohemia. And remember well
21

I mentioned a son o’ th’ King’s, which Florizell
22

I now name to you, and with speed so pace
23

To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
24

Equal with wond’ring. What of her ensues
25

I list not prophesy; but let Time’s news
26

Be known when ’tis brought forth. A shepherd’s
27

daughter
28

And what to her adheres, which follows after,
29

Is th’ argument of Time. Of this allow,
30

If ever you have spent time worse ere now.
31

If never, yet that Time himself doth say
32

He wishes earnestly you never may.
33

He exits.

Scene 2

Enter Polixenes and Camillo.

POLIXENES  I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more
1

importunate. ’Tis a sickness denying thee anything,
2

a death to grant this.
3

CAMILLO  It is fifteen years since I saw my country.
4

Though I have for the most part been aired abroad,
5

I desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
6

king, my master, hath sent for me, to whose feeling
7

sorrows I might be some allay—or I o’erween to
8

think so—which is another spur to my departure.
9

POLIXENES  As thou lov’st me, Camillo, wipe not out the
10

rest of thy services by leaving me now. The need I
11

have of thee thine own goodness hath made. Better

not to have had thee than thus to want thee. Thou,
13

having made me businesses which none without
14

thee can sufficiently manage, must either stay to
15

execute them thyself or take away with thee the very
16

services thou hast done, which if I have not enough
17

considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
18

thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
19

therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal coun-
20

try Sicilia, prithee speak no more, whose very
21

naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
22

penitent, as thou call’st him, and reconciled king
23

my brother, whose loss of his most precious queen
24

and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
25

Say to me, when sawst thou the Prince Florizell, my
26

son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
27

being gracious, than they are in losing them when
28

they have approved their virtues.
29

CAMILLO  Sir, it is three days since I saw the Prince.
30

What his happier affairs may be are to me un-
31

known, but I have missingly noted he is of late
32

much retired from court and is less frequent to his
33

princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared.
34

POLIXENES  I have considered so much, Camillo, and
35

with some care, so far that I have eyes under my
36

service which look upon his removedness, from
37

whom I have this intelligence: that he is seldom
38

from the house of a most homely shepherd, a man,
39

they say, that from very nothing, and beyond the
40

imagination of his neighbors, is grown into an
41

unspeakable estate.
42

CAMILLO  I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
43

daughter of most rare note. The report of her is
44

extended more than can be thought to begin from
45

such a cottage.
46

POLIXENES  That’s likewise part of my intelligence, but,
47

I fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
48

shalt accompany us to the place, where we will, not
49

appearing what we are, have some question with
50

the shepherd, from whose simplicity I think it not
51

uneasy to get the cause of my son’s resort thither.
52

Prithee be my present partner in this business, and
53

lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
54

CAMILLO  I willingly obey your command.
55

POLIXENES  My best Camillo. We must disguise our-
56

selves.
57

<They> exit.

Scene 3

Enter Autolycus singing.

<AUTOLYCUS>
 

  When daffodils begin to peer,
1

         With heigh, the doxy over the dale,
2

  Why, then comes in the sweet o’ the year,
3

         For the red blood reigns in the winter’s pale.
4

  The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
5

         With heigh, the sweet birds, O how they sing!
6

  Doth set my pugging tooth an edge,
7

         For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
8

  The lark, that tirralirra chants,
9

         With heigh, <with heigh,> the thrush and the jay,
10

  Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
11

         While we lie tumbling in the hay.
12

I have served Prince Florizell and in my time wore
13

three-pile, but now I am out of service.
14

       But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
15

          The pale moon shines by night,
16

       And when I wander here and there,
17

              I then do most go right.
18

       If tinkers may have leave to live,
19

          And bear the sow-skin budget,
20

       Then my account I well may give,
21

My traffic is sheets. When the kite builds, look to
23

lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus, who,
24

being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
25

a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
26

drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
27

the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
28

on the highway. Beating and hanging are terrors to
29

me. For the life to come, I sleep out the thought of
30

it. A prize, a prize!
31

Enter <Shepherd’s Son.>

SHEPHERD’S SON  Let me see, every ’leven wether tods,
32

every tod yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen
33

hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?
34

AUTOLYCUS, <aside>  If the springe hold, the cock’s
35

mine.
36

<He lies down.>

SHEPHERD’S SON  I cannot do ’t without counters. Let
37

me see, what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing
38

feast? (<He reads a paper.>) Three pound of sugar,
39

five pound of currants, rice—what will this sister of
40

mine do with rice? But my father hath made her
41

mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath
42

made me four-and-twenty nosegays for the shear-
43

ers, three-man song men all, and very good ones;
44

but they are most of them means and basses, but

one Puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
46

hornpipes. I must have saffron to color the warden
47

pies; mace; dates, none, that’s out of my note;
48

nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
49

may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
50

raisins o’ th’ sun.
51

AUTOLYCUS, <writhing as if in pain>  O, that ever I was
52

born!
53

SHEPHERD’S SON  I’ th’ name of me!
54

AUTOLYCUS  O, help me, help me! Pluck but off these
55

rags, and then death, death.
56

SHEPHERD’S SON  Alack, poor soul, thou hast need of
57

more rags to lay on thee rather than have these off.
58

AUTOLYCUS  O sir, the loathsomeness of them <offends>
59

me more than the stripes I have received, which are
60

mighty ones and millions.
61

SHEPHERD’S SON  Alas, poor man, a million of beating
62

may come to a great matter.
63

AUTOLYCUS  I am robbed, sir, and beaten, my money
64

and apparel ta’en from me, and these detestable
65

things put upon me.
66

SHEPHERD’S SON  What, by a horseman, or a footman?
67

AUTOLYCUS  A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
68

SHEPHERD’S SON  Indeed, he should be a footman by
69

the garments he has left with thee. If this be a
70

horseman’s coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend
71

me thy hand; I’ll help thee. Come, lend me thy
72

hand.
73

AUTOLYCUS  O, good sir, tenderly, O!
74

SHEPHERD’S SON  Alas, poor soul.
75

AUTOLYCUS  O, good sir, softly, good sir. I fear, sir, my
76

shoulder blade is out.
77

SHEPHERD’S SON  How now? Canst stand?
78

AUTOLYCUS, <stealing the Shepherd’s Son’s purse>  Softly,
79

dear sir, good sir, softly. You ha’ done me a chari-
80

table office.
81

SHEPHERD’S SON  Dost lack any money? I have a little
82

money for thee.
83

AUTOLYCUS  No, good sweet sir, no, I beseech you, sir. I
84

have a kinsman not past three-quarters of a mile
85

hence, unto whom I was going. I shall there have
86

money or anything I want. Offer me no money, I
87

pray you; that kills my heart.
88

SHEPHERD’S SON  What manner of fellow was he that
89

robbed you?
90

AUTOLYCUS  A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about
91

with troll-my-dames. I knew him once a servant of
92

the Prince. I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
93

virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of
94

the court.
95

SHEPHERD’S SON  His vices, you would say. There’s no
96

virtue whipped out of the court. They cherish it to
97

make it stay there, and yet it will no more but abide.
98

AUTOLYCUS  Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man
99

well. He hath been since an ape-bearer, then a
100

process-server, a bailiff. Then he compassed a mo-
101

tion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker’s wife
102

within a mile where my land and living lies, and,
103

having flown over many knavish professions, he
104

settled only in rogue. Some call him Autolycus.
105

SHEPHERD’S SON  Out upon him! Prig, for my life, prig!
106

He haunts wakes, fairs, and bearbaitings.
107

AUTOLYCUS  Very true, sir: he, sir, he. That’s the rogue
108

that put me into this apparel.
109

SHEPHERD’S SON  Not a more cowardly rogue in all
110

Bohemia. If you had but looked big and spit at him,
111

he’d have run.
112

AUTOLYCUS  I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter. I
113

am false of heart that way, and that he knew, I
114

warrant him.
115

SHEPHERD’S SON  How do you now?
116

AUTOLYCUS  Sweet sir, much better than I was. I can
117

stand and walk. I will even take my leave of you and
118

pace softly towards my kinsman’s.
119

SHEPHERD’S SON  Shall I bring thee on the way?
120

AUTOLYCUS  No, good-faced sir, no, sweet sir.
121

SHEPHERD’S SON  Then fare thee well. I must go buy
122

spices for our sheep-shearing.
123

AUTOLYCUS  Prosper you, sweet sir.
124

<Shepherd’s Son> exits.

Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your
125

spice. I’ll be with you at your sheep-shearing too. If
126

I make not this cheat bring out another, and the
127

shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my
128

name put in the book of virtue.
129

<Sings.>         Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
130

                   And merrily hent the stile-a.
131

               A merry heart goes all the day,
132

                   Your sad tires in a mile-a.
133

He exits.

Scene 4

Enter Florizell <and> Perdita.

FLORIZELL
 

These your unusual weeds to each part of you
1

Does give a life—no shepherdess, but Flora
2

Peering in April’s front. This your sheep-shearing
3

Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
4

And you the queen on ’t.
5

PERDITA                               Sir, my gracious lord,
6

To chide at your extremes it not becomes me;
7

O, pardon that I name them! Your high self,
8

The gracious mark o’ th’ land, you have obscured
9

With a swain’s wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
10

Most goddesslike pranked up. But that our feasts
11

In every mess have folly, and the feeders
12

Digest <it> with a custom, I should blush
13

To see you so attired, <swoon,> I think,
14

To show myself a glass.
15

FLORIZELL                         I bless the time
16

When my good falcon made her flight across
17

Thy father’s ground.
18

PERDITA                        Now Jove afford you cause.
19

To me the difference forges dread. Your greatness

Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
21

To think your father by some accident
22

Should pass this way as you did. O the Fates,
23

How would he look to see his work, so noble,
24

Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
25

Should I, in these my borrowed flaunts, behold
26

The sternness of his presence?
27

FLORIZELL                                    Apprehend
28

The shapes of beasts upon them. Jupiter
31

Became a bull, and bellowed; the green Neptune
32

A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
33

Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
34

As I seem now. Their transformations
35

Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
36

Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
37

Run not before mine honor, nor my lusts
38

Burn hotter than my faith.
39

PERDITA                                   O, but sir,
40

Your resolution cannot hold when ’tis
41

Opposed, as it must be, by th’ power of the King.
42

One of these two must be necessities,
43

Which then will speak: that you must change this
44

purpose
45

Or I my life.
46

FLORIZELL       Thou dear’st Perdita,
47

With these forced thoughts I prithee darken not
48

The mirth o’ th’ feast. Or I’ll be thine, my fair,
49

Or not my father’s. For I cannot be
50

Mine own, nor anything to any, if
51

I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
52

Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle.
53

Strangle such thoughts as these with anything
54

That you behold the while. Your guests are coming.
55

Lift up your countenance as it were the day
56

Of celebration of that nuptial which
57

We two have sworn shall come.
58

PERDITA                                           O Lady Fortune,
59

Stand you auspicious!
60

FLORIZELL                       See, your guests approach.
61

Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
62

And let’s be red with mirth.
63

<Enter> Shepherd, <Shepherd’s Son,> Mopsa, Dorcas, <Shepherds
and Shepherdesses,> Servants, <Musicians, and> Polixenes <and>

Camillo <in disguise.>

SHEPHERD
 

Fie, daughter, when my old wife lived, upon
64

This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
65

Both dame and servant; welcomed all; served all;
66

Would sing her song and dance her turn, now here
67

At upper end o’ th’ table, now i’ th’ middle;
68

On his shoulder, and his; her face afire
69

With labor, and the thing she took to quench it
70

She would to each one sip. You are retired
71

As if you were a feasted one and not
72

The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
73

These unknown friends to ’s welcome, for it is
74

A way to make us better friends, more known.
75

Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
76

That which you are, mistress o’ th’ feast. Come on,
77

And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
78

As your good flock shall prosper.
79

PERDITA,  <to Polixenes>                    Sir, welcome.
80

It is my father’s will I should take on me
81

The hostess-ship o’ th’ day. <To Camillo.> You’re
82

welcome, sir.—
83

Give me those flowers there, Dorcas.—Reverend
84

sirs,
85

For you there’s rosemary and rue. These keep
86

Seeming and savor all the winter long.
87

Grace and remembrance be to you both,
88

And welcome to our shearing.
89

POLIXENES                                    Shepherdess—
90

A fair one are you—well you fit our ages
91

With flowers of winter.
92

PERDITA                             Sir, the year growing ancient,
93

Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o’ th’ season
95

Are our carnations and streaked gillyvors,
96

Which some call nature’s bastards. Of that kind
97

Our rustic garden’s barren, and I care not
98

To get slips of them.
99

POLIXENES                    Wherefore, gentle maiden,
100

Do you neglect them?
101

PERDITA                           For I have heard it said
102

There is an art which in their piedness shares
103

With great creating nature.
104

POLIXENES                               Say there be;
105

Yet nature is made better by no mean
106

But nature makes that mean. So, over that art
107

Which you say adds to nature is an art
108

That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
109

A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
110

And make conceive a bark of baser kind
111

By bud of nobler race. This is an art
112

Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
113

The art itself is nature.
114

PERDITA                             So it is.
115

POLIXENES
 

Then make <your> garden rich in gillyvors,
116

And do not call them bastards.
117

PERDITA                                           I’ll not put
118

The dibble in earth to set one slip of them,
119

No more than, were I painted, I would wish
120

This youth should say ’twere well, and only
121

therefore
122

Desire to breed by me. Here’s flowers for you:
123

Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram,
124

The marigold, that goes to bed wi’ th’ sun
125

Of middle summer, and I think they are given
127

To men of middle age. You’re very welcome.
128

CAMILLO
 

I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
129

And only live by gazing.
130

PERDITA                               Out, alas!
131

You’d be so lean that blasts of January
132

Would blow you through and through. (<To
133

Florizell.>) Now, my fair’st friend,
134

I would I had some flowers o’ th’ spring, that might
135

Become your time of day, (<to the Shepherdesses>)
136

and yours, and yours,
137

That wear upon your virgin branches yet
138

Your maidenheads growing. O Proserpina,
139

For the flowers now that, frighted, thou let’st fall
140

From Dis’s wagon! Daffodils,
141

That come before the swallow dares, and take
142

The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
143

But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes
144

Or Cytherea’s breath; pale primroses,
145

That die unmarried ere they can behold
146

Bright Phoebus in his strength—a malady
147

Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
148

The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
149

The flower-de-luce being one—O, these I lack
150

To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
151

To strew him o’er and o’er.
152

FLORIZELL                               What, like a corse?
153

PERDITA
 

No, like a bank for love to lie and play on,
154

Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
155

But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your
156

flowers.
157

Methinks I play as I have seen them do
158

In Whitsun pastorals. Sure this robe of mine
159

Does change my disposition.
160

FLORIZELL                                  What you do
161

Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet,
162

I’d have you do it ever. When you sing,
163

I’d have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
164

Pray so; and for the ord’ring your affairs,
165

To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
166

A wave o’ th’ sea, that you might ever do
167

Nothing but that, move still, still so,
168

And own no other function. Each your doing,
169

So singular in each particular,
170

Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
171

That all your acts are queens.
172

PERDITA                                        O Doricles,
173

Your praises are too large. But that your youth
174

And the true blood which peeps fairly through ’t
175

Do plainly give you out an unstained shepherd,
176

With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
177

You wooed me the false way.
178

FLORIZELL                                   I think you have
179

As little skill to fear as I have purpose
180

To put you to ’t. But come, our dance, I pray.
181

Your hand, my Perdita. So turtles pair
182

That never mean to part.
183

PERDITA                                I’ll swear for ’em.
184

POLIXENES,  <to Camillo>
 

This is the prettiest lowborn lass that ever
185

Ran on the greensward. Nothing she does or seems
186

But smacks of something greater than herself,
187

Too noble for this place.
188

CAMILLO                               He tells her something
189

That makes her blood look <out.> Good sooth, she is
190

The queen of curds and cream.
191

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Musicians>  Come on, strike up.
192

DORCAS
 

Mopsa must be your mistress? Marry, garlic
193

To mend her kissing with.
194

MOPSA                                     Now, in good time!
195

SHEPHERD’S SON
 

Not a word, a word. We stand upon our manners.—
196

Come, strike up.  <Music begins.>
197

Here a Dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses.

POLIXENES
 

Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
198

Which dances with your daughter?
199

SHEPHERD
 

They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
200

To have a worthy feeding. But I have it
201

Upon his own report, and I believe it.
202

He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter.
203

I think so too, for never gazed the moon
204

Upon the water as he’ll stand and read,
205

As ’twere, my daughter’s eyes. And, to be plain,
206

I think there is not half a kiss to choose
207

Who loves another best.
208

POLIXENES                          She dances featly.
209

SHEPHERD
 

So she does anything, though I report it
210

That should be silent. If young Doricles
211

Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
212

Which he not dreams of.
213

Enter <a> Servant.

SERVANT  O, master, if you did but hear the peddler at
214

the door, you would never dance again after a tabor
215

and pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you. He
216

sings several tunes faster than you’ll tell money. He
217

utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men’s
218

ears grew to his tunes.
219

SHEPHERD’S SON  He could never come better. He shall
220

come in. I love a ballad but even too well if it be
221

doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant
222

thing indeed and sung lamentably.
223

SERVANT  He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes.
224

No milliner can so fit his customers with gloves. He
225

has the prettiest love songs for maids, so without
226

bawdry, which is strange, with such delicate bur-
227

dens of dildos and fadings, “Jump her and thump
228

her.” And where some stretch-mouthed rascal
229

would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul
230

gap into the matter, he makes the maid to answer
231

“Whoop, do me no harm, good man”; puts him off,
232

slights him, with “Whoop, do me no harm, good
233

man.”
234

POLIXENES  This is a brave fellow.
235

SHEPHERD’S SON  Believe me, thou talkest of an admi-
236

rable conceited fellow. Has he any unbraided

wares?
238

SERVANT  He hath ribbons of all the colors i’ th’ rain-
239

bow; points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia
240

can learnedly handle, though they come to him by
241

th’ gross; inkles, caddises, cambrics, lawns—why,
242

he sings ’em over as they were gods or goddesses.
243

You would think a smock were a she-angel, he so
244

chants to the sleeve-hand and the work about the
245

square on ’t.
246

SHEPHERD’S SON  Prithee bring him in, and let him
247

approach singing.
248

PERDITA  Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words
249

in ’s tunes.
250

<Servant exits.>

SHEPHERD’S SON  You have of these peddlers that have
251

more in them than you’d think, sister.
252

PERDITA  Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
253

Enter Autolycus, <wearing a false beard,> singing.

<AUTOLYCUS>
 

            Lawn as white as driven snow,
254

            Cypress black as e’er was crow,
255

            Gloves as sweet as damask roses,
256

            Masks for faces and for noses,
257

            Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
258

            Perfume for a lady’s chamber,
259

            Golden coifs and stomachers
260

            For my lads to give their dears,
261

            Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
262

            What maids lack from head to heel,
263

            Come buy of me, come. Come buy, come buy.
264

            Buy, lads, or else your lasses cry.
265

            Come buy.
266

SHEPHERD’S SON  If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou
267

shouldst take no money of me; but being enthralled
268

as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain
269

ribbons and gloves.
270

MOPSA  I was promised them against the feast, but they
271

come not too late now.
272

DORCAS  He hath promised you more than that, or there
273

be liars.
274

MOPSA  He hath paid you all he promised you. Maybe
275

he has paid you more, which will shame you to give
276

him again.
277

SHEPHERD’S SON  Is there no manners left among
278

maids? Will they wear their plackets where they
279

should bear their faces? Is there not milking time,
280

when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle
281

of these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling
282

before all our guests? ’Tis well they are whisp’ring.
283

Clamor your tongues, and not a word more.
284

MOPSA  I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry
285

lace and a pair of sweet gloves.
286

SHEPHERD’S SON  Have I not told thee how I was coz-
287

ened by the way and lost all my money?
288

AUTOLYCUS  And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
289

therefore it behooves men to be wary.
290

SHEPHERD’S SON  Fear not thou, man. Thou shalt lose
291

nothing here.
292

AUTOLYCUS  I hope so, sir, for I have about me many
293

parcels of charge.
294

SHEPHERD’S SON  What hast here? Ballads?
295

MOPSA  Pray now, buy some. I love a ballad in print
296

alife, for then we are sure they are true.
297

AUTOLYCUS  Here’s one to a very doleful tune, how a
298

usurer’s wife was brought to bed of twenty money-
299

bags at a burden, and how she longed to eat adders’
300

heads and toads carbonadoed.
301

MOPSA  Is it true, think you?
302

AUTOLYCUS  Very true, and but a month old.
303

DORCAS  Bless me from marrying a usurer!
304

AUTOLYCUS  Here’s the midwife’s name to ’t, one Mis-
305

tress Taleporter, and five or six honest wives that
306

were present. Why should I carry lies abroad?
307

MOPSA, <to Shepherd’s Son>  Pray you now, buy it.
308

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Autolycus>  Come on, lay it by, and
309

let’s first see more ballads. We’ll buy the other
310

things anon.
311

AUTOLYCUS  Here’s another ballad, of a fish that ap-
312

peared upon the coast on Wednesday the fourscore
313

of April, forty thousand fathom above water, and
314

sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids. It
315

was thought she was a woman, and was turned into
316

a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with
317

one that loved her. The ballad is very pitiful, and as
318

true.
319

DORCAS  Is it true too, think you?
320

AUTOLYCUS  Five justices’ hands at it, and witnesses
321

more than my pack will hold.
322

SHEPHERD’S SON  Lay it by too. Another.
323

AUTOLYCUS  This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty
324

one.
325

MOPSA  Let’s have some merry ones.
326

AUTOLYCUS  Why, this is a passing merry one and goes
327

to the tune of “Two Maids Wooing a Man.” There’s
328

scarce a maid westward but she sings it. ’Tis in
329

request, I can tell you.
330

MOPSA  We can both sing it. If thou ’lt bear a part, thou
331

shalt hear; ’tis in three parts.
332

DORCAS  We had the tune on ’t a month ago.
333

AUTOLYCUS  I can bear my part. You must know ’tis my
334

occupation. Have at it with you.
335

Song.

AUTOLYCUS     Get you hence, for I must go
336

               Where it fits not you to know.
337

DORCAS                Whither?
338

MOPSA                                O, whither?
339

DORCAS                                                Whither?
340

MOPSA               It becomes thy oath full well
341

                 Thou to me thy secrets tell.
342

DORCAS                 Me too. Let me go thither.
343

MOPSA               Or thou goest to th’ grange or mill.
344

DORCAS             If to either, thou dost ill.
345

AUTOLYCUS          Neither.
346

DORCAS                              What, neither?
347

AUTOLYCUS                                              Neither.
348

DORCAS             Thou hast sworn my love to be.
349

MOPSA               Thou hast sworn it more to me.
350

                           Then whither goest? Say whither.
351

SHEPHERD’S SON  We’ll have this song out anon by
352

ourselves. My father and the gentlemen are in sad
353

talk, and we’ll not trouble them. Come, bring away
354

thy pack after me.—Wenches, I’ll buy for you
355

both.—Peddler, let’s have the first choice.—Follow
356

me, girls.
357

<He exits with Mopsa, Dorcas, Shepherds and Shepherdesses.>

AUTOLYCUS  And you shall pay well for ’em.
358

Song.

                    Will you buy any tape,
359

                    Or lace for your cape,
360

                 My dainty duck, my dear-a?
361

                    Any silk, any thread,
362

                    Any toys for your head,
363

                 Of the new’st and fin’st, fin’st wear-a?
364

                    Come to the peddler.
365

                    Money’s a meddler
366

                 That doth utter all men’s ware-a.
367

He exits.

<Enter a Servant.>

SERVANT,  <to Shepherd>  Master, there is three carters,
368

three shepherds, three neatherds, three swine-
369

herds, that have made themselves all men of hair.
370

They call themselves saultiers, and they have a
371

dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of
372

gambols, because they are not in ’t, but they them-
373

selves are o’ th’ mind, if it be not too rough for

some that know little but bowling, it will please
375

plentifully.
376

SHEPHERD  Away! We’ll none on ’t. Here has been too
377

much homely foolery already.—I know, sir, we
378

weary you.
379

POLIXENES  You weary those that refresh us. Pray, let’s
380

see these four threes of herdsmen.
381

SERVANT  One three of them, by their own report, sir,
382

hath danced before the King, and not the worst of
383

the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by th’
384

square.
385

SHEPHERD  Leave your prating. Since these good men
386

are pleased, let them come in—but quickly now.
387

SERVANT  Why, they stay at door, sir.
388

<He admits the herdsmen.>

Here a Dance of twelve <herdsmen, dressed as> Satyrs.

<Herdsmen, Musicians, and Servants exit.>

POLIXENES, <to Shepherd>
 

O father, you’ll know more of that hereafter.
389

<Aside to Camillo.> Is it not too far gone? ’Tis time to
390

part them.
391

He’s simple, and tells much. <To Florizell.> How now,
392

fair shepherd?
393

Your heart is full of something that does take
394

Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
395

And handed love, as you do, I was wont
396

To load my she with knacks. I would have ransacked
397

The peddler’s silken treasury and have poured it
398

To her acceptance. You have let him go
399

And nothing marted with him. If your lass
400

Interpretation should abuse and call this
401

Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
402

For a reply, at least if you make a care
403

Of happy holding her.
404

FLORIZELL                       Old sir, I know
405

She prizes not such trifles as these are.
406

The gifts she looks from me are packed and locked
407

Up in my heart, which I have given already,
408

But not delivered. <To Perdita.> O, hear me breathe
409

my life
410

Before this ancient sir, <who,> it should seem,
411

Hath sometime loved. I take thy hand, this hand
412

As soft as dove’s down and as white as it,
413

Or Ethiopian’s tooth, or the fanned snow that’s
414

bolted
415

By th’ northern blasts twice o’er.
416

POLIXENES                                        What follows this?—
417

How prettily th’ young swain seems to wash
418

The hand was fair before.—I have put you out.
419

But to your protestation. Let me hear
420

What you profess.
421

FLORIZELL                Do, and be witness to ’t.
422

POLIXENES
 

And this my neighbor too?
423

FLORIZELL                              And he, and more

Than he, and men—the Earth, the heavens, and
425

all—
426

That were I crowned the most imperial monarch,
427

Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
428

That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
429

More than was ever man’s, I would not prize them
430

Without her love; for her employ them all,
431

Commend them and condemn them to her service
432

Or to their own perdition.
433

POLIXENES                             Fairly offered.
434

CAMILLO
 

This shows a sound affection.
435

SHEPHERD                                    But my daughter,
436

Say you the like to him?
437

PERDITA                                I cannot speak
438

So well, nothing so well, no, nor mean better.
439

By th’ pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
440

The purity of his.
441

SHEPHERD               Take hands, a bargain.—
442

And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to ’t:
443

Her portion equal his.
445

FLORIZELL                       O, that must be
446

I’ th’ virtue of your daughter. One being dead,
447

I shall have more than you can dream of yet,
448

Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
449

Contract us fore these witnesses.
450

SHEPHERD                                          Come, your hand—
451

And daughter, yours.
452

POLIXENES, <To Florizell>  Soft, swain, awhile, beseech
453

you.
454

Have you a father?
455

FLORIZELL                  I have, but what of him?
456

POLIXENES
 

Knows he of this?
457

FLORIZELL                 He neither does nor shall.
458

POLIXENES  Methinks a father
459

Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
460

That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
461

Is not your father grown incapable
462

Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
463

With age and alt’ring rheums? Can he speak? Hear?
464

Know man from man? Dispute his own estate?
465

Lies he not bedrid, and again does nothing
466

But what he did being childish?
467

FLORIZELL                                       No, good sir.
468

He has his health and ampler strength indeed
469

Than most have of his age.
470

POLIXENES                               By my white beard,
471

You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
472

Something unfilial. Reason my son
473

Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
474

But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
476

In such a business.
477

FLORIZELL                   I yield all this;
478

But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
479

Which ’tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
480

My father of this business.
481

POLIXENES                               Let him know ’t.
482

FLORIZELL
 

He shall not.
483

POLIXENES         Prithee let him.
484

FLORIZELL                                    No, he must not.
485

SHEPHERD
 

Let him, my son. He shall not need to grieve
486

At knowing of thy choice.
487

FLORIZELL                             Come, come, he must not.
488

Mark our contract.
489

POLIXENES, <removing his disguise>  Mark your divorce,
490

young sir,
491

Whom son I dare not call. Thou art too base

To be <acknowledged.> Thou a scepter’s heir
493

That thus affects a sheep-hook!—Thou, old traitor,
494

I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
495

But shorten thy life one week.—And thou, fresh
496

piece
497

Of excellent witchcraft, whom of force must know
498

The royal fool thou cop’st with—
499

SHEPHERD                                          O, my heart!
500

POLIXENES
 

I’ll have thy beauty scratched with briers and made
501

More homely than thy state.—For thee, fond boy,
502

If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
503

That thou no more shalt see this knack—as never
504

I mean thou shalt—we’ll bar thee from succession,
505

Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
506

<Far’r> than Deucalion off. Mark thou my words.
507

Follow us to the court. <To Shepherd.> Thou, churl,
508

for this time,
509

Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
510

From the dead blow of it.—And you, enchantment,
511

Worthy enough a herdsman—yea, him too,
512

That makes himself, but for our honor therein,

Unworthy thee—if ever henceforth thou
514

These rural latches to his entrance open,
515

Or <hoop> his body more with thy embraces,
516

I will devise a death as cruel for thee
517

As thou art tender to ’t.
518

He exits.

PERDITA                             Even here undone.
519

I was not much afeard, for once or twice
520

I was about to speak and tell him plainly
521

The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
522

Hides not his visage from our cottage but
523

Looks on alike. <To Florizell.> Will ’t please you, sir,
524

be gone?
525

I told you what would come of this. Beseech you,
526

Of your own state take care. This dream of mine—
527

Being now awake, I’ll queen it no inch farther,
528

But milk my ewes and weep.
529

CAMILLO,  <to Shepherd>            Why, how now, father?
530

Speak ere thou diest.
531

SHEPHERD                     I cannot speak, nor think,
532

Nor dare to know that which I know. <To Florizell.>
533

O sir,
534

You have undone a man of fourscore three,
535

That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
536

To die upon the bed my father died,
537

Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
539

Where no priest shovels in dust. <To Perdita.> O
540

cursèd wretch,
541

That knew’st this was the Prince, and wouldst
542

adventure
543

To mingle faith with him!—Undone, undone!
544

If I might die within this hour, I have lived
545

To die when I desire.
546

He exits.

FLORIZELL, <to Perdita>  Why look you so upon me?
547

I am but sorry, not afeard; delayed,
548

But nothing altered. What I was, I am,
549

More straining on for plucking back, not following
550

My leash unwillingly.
551

CAMILLO                         Gracious my lord,
552

You know <your> father’s temper. At this time
553

He will allow no speech, which I do guess
554

You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
555

Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear.
556

Then, till the fury of his Highness settle,
557

Come not before him.
558

FLORIZELL                       I not purpose it.
559

I think Camillo?
560

CAMILLO, <removing his disguise>  Even he, my lord.
561

PERDITA, <to Florizell>
 

How often have I told you ’twould be thus?
562

How often said my dignity would last
563

But till ’twere known?
564

FLORIZELL                       It cannot fail but by
565

The violation of my faith; and then
566

Let nature crush the sides o’ th’ Earth together
567

And mar the seeds within. Lift up thy looks.
568

From my succession wipe me, father. I
569

Am heir to my affection.
570

CAMILLO                              Be advised.
571

FLORIZELL
 

I am, and by my fancy. If my reason
572

Will thereto be obedient, I have reason.
573

If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
574

Do bid it welcome.
575

CAMILLO                      This is desperate, sir.
576

FLORIZELL
 

So call it; but it does fulfill my vow.
577

I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
578

Not for Bohemia nor the pomp that may
579

Be thereat gleaned, for all the sun sees or
580

The close earth wombs or the profound seas hides
581

In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
582

To this my fair beloved. Therefore, I pray you,
583

As you have ever been my father’s honored friend,
584

When he shall miss me, as in faith I mean not
585

To see him anymore, cast your good counsels
586

Upon his passion. Let myself and fortune
587

Tug for the time to come. This you may know
588

And so deliver: I am put to sea
589

With her who here I cannot hold on shore.
590

And most opportune to <our> need I have
591

A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
592

For this design. What course I mean to hold
593

Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
594

Concern me the reporting.
595

CAMILLO                                   O my lord,
596

I would your spirit were easier for advice
597

Or stronger for your need.
598

FLORIZELL                              Hark, Perdita.—
599

I’ll hear you by and by.
600

<Florizell and Perdita walk aside.>

CAMILLO                             He’s irremovable,
601

Resolved for flight. Now were I happy if
602

His going I could frame to serve my turn,
603

Save him from danger, do him love and honor,
604

Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
605

And that unhappy king, my master, whom
606

I so much thirst to see.
607

FLORIZELL, <coming forward>  Now, good Camillo,
608

I am so fraught with curious business that
609

I leave out ceremony.
610

CAMILLO                          Sir, I think
611

You have heard of my poor services i’ th’ love
612

That I have borne your father?
613

FLORIZELL                                      Very nobly
614

Have you deserved. It is my father’s music
615

To speak your deeds, not little of his care
616

To have them recompensed as thought on.
617

CAMILLO                                                             Well, my
618

lord,
619

If you may please to think I love the King
620

And, through him, what’s nearest to him, which is
621

Your gracious self, embrace but my direction,
622

If your more ponderous and settled project
623

May suffer alteration. On mine honor,
624

I’ll point you where you shall have such receiving
625

As shall become your Highness, where you may
626

Enjoy your mistress—from the whom I see
627

There’s no disjunction to be made but by,
628

As heavens forfend, your ruin—marry her,
629

And with my best endeavors in your absence,
630

Your discontenting father strive to qualify
631

And bring him up to liking.
632

FLORIZELL                                How, Camillo,
633

May this, almost a miracle, be done,
634

And after that trust to thee?
636

CAMILLO                                    Have you thought on
637

A place whereto you’ll go?
638

FLORIZELL                              Not any yet.
639

But as th’ unthought-on accident is guilty
640

To what we wildly do, so we profess
641

Ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
642

Of every wind that blows.
643

CAMILLO                                 Then list to me.
644

This follows: if you will not change your purpose
645

But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
646

And there present yourself and your fair princess,
647

For so I see she must be, ’fore Leontes.
648

She shall be habited as it becomes
649

The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
650

Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
651

His welcomes forth, asks thee, <the> son, forgiveness,
652

As ’twere i’ th’ father’s person; kisses the hands
653

Of your fresh princess; o’er and o’er divides him
654

’Twixt his unkindness and his kindness. Th’ one
655

He chides to hell and bids the other grow
656

Faster than thought or time.
657

FLORIZELL                                  Worthy Camillo,
658

What color for my visitation shall I
659

Hold up before him?
660

CAMILLO                        Sent by the King your father
661

To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
662

The manner of your bearing towards him, with
663

What you, as from your father, shall deliver,
664

Things known betwixt us three, I’ll write you down,
665

The which shall point you forth at every sitting
666

What you must say, that he shall not perceive
667

But that you have your father’s bosom there
668

And speak his very heart.
669

FLORIZELL                             I am bound to you.
670

There is some sap in this.
671

CAMILLO                                 A course more promising
672

Than a wild dedication of yourselves
673

To unpathed waters, undreamed shores, most
674

certain
675

To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
676

But as you shake off one to take another;
677

Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
678

Do their best office if they can but stay you
679

Where you’ll be loath to be. Besides, you know
680

Prosperity’s the very bond of love,
681

Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
682

Affliction alters.
683

PERDITA                  One of these is true.
684

I think affliction may subdue the cheek
685

But not take in the mind.
686

CAMILLO                                Yea, say you so?
687

There shall not at your father’s house these seven
688

years
689

Be born another such.
690

FLORIZELL                        My good Camillo,
691

She’s as forward of her breeding as she is
692

I’ th’ rear our birth.
693

CAMILLO                      I cannot say ’tis pity
694

She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
695

To most that teach.
696

PERDITA                        Your pardon, sir. For this
697

I’ll blush you thanks.
698

FLORIZELL                     My prettiest Perdita.
699

But O, the thorns we stand upon!—Camillo,
700

Preserver of my father, now of me,
701

The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
702

Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
704

CAMILLO                                   My lord,
705

Fear none of this. I think you know my fortunes
706

Do all lie there. It shall be so my care
707

To have you royally appointed as if
708

The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
709

That you may know you shall not want, one word.
710

<They step aside and talk.>

Enter Autolycus.

AUTOLYCUS  Ha, ha, what a fool Honesty is! And Trust,
711

his sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have
712

sold all my trumpery. Not a counterfeit stone, not a
713

ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table book, bal-
714

lad, knife, tape, glove, shoe tie, bracelet, horn ring,
715

to keep my pack from fasting. They throng who
716

should buy first, as if my trinkets had been hallowed
717

and brought a benediction to the buyer; by which
718

means I saw whose purse was best in picture, and
719

what I saw, to my good use I remembered. My
720

clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable
721

man, grew so in love with the wenches’ song that he
722

would not stir his pettitoes till he had both tune and
723

words, which so drew the rest of the herd to me that
724

all their other senses stuck in ears. You might have
725

pinched a placket, it was senseless; ’twas nothing to
726

geld a codpiece of a purse. I <could> have <filed>
727

keys off that hung in chains. No hearing, no feeling,
728

but my sir’s song and admiring the nothing of it. So
729

that in this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of
730

their festival purses. And had not the old man come
731

in with a hubbub against his daughter and the
732

King’s son, and scared my choughs from the chaff, I
733

had not left a purse alive in the whole army.
734

<Camillo, Florizell, and Perdita come forward.>

CAMILLO,  <to Florizell>
 

Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
735

So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
736

FLORIZELL
 

And those that you’ll procure from King Leontes—
737

CAMILLO
 

Shall satisfy your father.
738

PERDITA                               Happy be you!
739

All that you speak shows fair.
740

CAMILLO, <noticing Autolycus>   Who have we here?
741

We’ll make an instrument of this, omit
742

Nothing may give us aid.
743

AUTOLYCUS,  <aside>
 

If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
744

CAMILLO  How now, good fellow? Why shak’st thou so?
745

Fear not, man. Here’s no harm intended to thee.
746

AUTOLYCUS  I am a poor fellow, sir.
747

CAMILLO  Why, be so still. Here’s nobody will steal that
748

from thee. Yet for the outside of thy poverty we
749

must make an exchange. Therefore discase thee
750

instantly—thou must think there’s a necessity in
751

’t—and change garments with this gentleman.
752

Though the pennyworth on his side be the worst,

yet hold thee, there’s some boot.
754

<He hands Autolycus money.>

AUTOLYCUS  I am a poor fellow, sir. <Aside.> I know you
755

well enough.
756

CAMILLO  Nay, prithee, dispatch. The gentleman is half
757

flayed already.
758

AUTOLYCUS  Are you in earnest, sir? <Aside.> I smell the
759

trick on ’t.
760

FLORIZELL  Dispatch, I prithee.
761

AUTOLYCUS  Indeed, I have had earnest, but I cannot
762

with conscience take it.
763

CAMILLO  Unbuckle, unbuckle.
764

<Florizell and Autolycus exchange garments.>

Fortunate mistress—let my prophecy
765

Come home to you!—you must retire yourself
766

Into some covert. Take your sweetheart’s hat
767

And pluck it o’er your brows, muffle your face,
768

Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
769

The truth of your own seeming, that you may—
770

For I do fear eyes over—to shipboard
771

Get undescried.
772

PERDITA                 I see the play so lies
773

That I must bear a part.
774

CAMILLO                              No remedy.—
775

Have you done there?
776

FLORIZELL                       Should I now meet my father,
777

He would not call me son.
778

CAMILLO                                  Nay, you shall have no hat.
779

<He gives Florizell’s hat to Perdita.>

Come, lady, come.—Farewell, my friend.
780

AUTOLYCUS                                                     Adieu, sir.
781

FLORIZELL
 

O Perdita, what have we twain forgot?
782

Pray you, a word.
783

<They talk aside.>

CAMILLO,  <aside>
 

What I do next shall be to tell the King
784

Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
785

Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
786

To force him after, in whose company
787

I shall re-view Sicilia, for whose sight
788

I have a woman’s longing.
789

FLORIZELL                              Fortune speed us!—
790

Thus we set on, Camillo, to th’ seaside.
791

CAMILLO  The swifter speed the better.
792

<Camillo, Florizell, and Perdita> exit.

AUTOLYCUS  I understand the business; I hear it. To have
793

an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand is
794

necessary for a cutpurse; a good nose is requisite
795

also, to smell out work for th’ other senses. I see this
796

is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an
797

exchange had this been without boot! What a boot
798

is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do this
799

year connive at us, and we may do anything extem-
800

pore. The Prince himself is about a piece of iniqui-
801

ty, stealing away from his father with his clog at his
802

heels. If I thought it were a piece of honesty to
803

acquaint the King withal, I would not do ’t. I hold it
804

the more knavery to conceal it, and therein am I
805

constant to my profession.
806

Enter <Shepherd’s Son> and Shepherd, <carrying the bundle and

the box.>

Aside, aside! Here is more matter for a hot brain.
807

Every lane’s end, every shop, church, session, hang-
808

ing, yields a careful man work.
809

<He moves aside.>

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Shepherd>  See, see, what a man
810

you are now! There is no other way but to tell the
811

King she’s a changeling and none of your flesh and
812

blood.
813

SHEPHERD  Nay, but hear me.
814

SHEPHERD’S SON  Nay, but hear me!
815

SHEPHERD  Go to, then.
816

SHEPHERD’S SON  She being none of your flesh and
817

blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the

King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be
819

punished by him. Show those things you found
820

about her, those secret things, all but what she has
821

with her. This being done, let the law go whistle, I
822

warrant you.
823

SHEPHERD  I will tell the King all, every word, yea, and
824

his son’s pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest
825

man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to
826

make me the King’s brother-in-law.
827

SHEPHERD’S SON  Indeed, brother-in-law was the far-
828

thest off you could have been to him, and then your
829

blood had been the dearer by I know how much an
830

ounce.
831

AUTOLYCUS, <aside>  Very wisely, puppies.
832

SHEPHERD  Well, let us to the King. There is that in this
833

fardel will make him scratch his beard.
834

AUTOLYCUS, <aside>  I know not what impediment this
835

complaint may be to the flight of my master.
836

SHEPHERD’S SON  Pray heartily he be at’ palace.
837

AUTOLYCUS, <aside>  Though I am not naturally honest,
838

I am so sometimes by chance. Let me pocket up my
839

peddler’s excrement.
840

(<He removes his false beard.>)

How now, rustics, whither are you bound?
841

SHEPHERD  To th’ palace, an it like your Worship.
842

AUTOLYCUS  Your affairs there? What, with whom, the
843

condition of that fardel, the place of your dwelling,
844

your names, your ages, of what having, breeding,
845

and anything that is fitting to be known, discover!
846

SHEPHERD’S SON  We are but plain fellows, sir.
847

AUTOLYCUS  A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have

no lying. It becomes none but tradesmen, and they
849

often give us soldiers the lie, but we pay them for it
850

with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
851

they do not give us the lie.
852

SHEPHERD’S SON  Your Worship had like to have given
853

us one, if you had not taken yourself with the
854

manner.
855

SHEPHERD  Are you a courtier, an ’t like you, sir?
856

AUTOLYCUS  Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier.
857

Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfold-
858

ings? Hath not my gait in it the measure of the
859

court? Receives not thy nose court odor from me?
860

Reflect I not on thy baseness court contempt?
861

Think’st thou, for that I insinuate <and> toze from
862

thee thy business, I am therefore no courtier? I am
863

courtier cap-a-pie; and one that will either push on
864

or pluck back thy business there. Whereupon I
865

command thee to open thy affair.
866

SHEPHERD  My business, sir, is to the King.
867

AUTOLYCUS  What advocate hast thou to him?
868

SHEPHERD  I know not, an ’t like you.
869

SHEPHERD’S SON, <aside to Shepherd>  Advocate’s the
870

court word for a pheasant. Say you have none.
871

SHEPHERD, <to Autolycus>  None, sir. I have no pheas-
872

ant, cock nor hen.
873

AUTOLYCUS
 

How blest are we that are not simple men!
874

Yet Nature might have made me as these are.
875

Therefore I will not disdain.
876

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Shepherd>  This cannot be but a
877

great courtier.
878

SHEPHERD  His garments are rich, but he wears them
879

not handsomely.
880

SHEPHERD’S SON  He seems to be the more noble in
881

being fantastical. A great man, I’ll warrant. I know
882

by the picking on ’s teeth.
883

AUTOLYCUS  The fardel there. What’s i’ th’ fardel?
884

Wherefore that box?
885

SHEPHERD  Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and
886

box which none must know but the King, and
887

which he shall know within this hour if I may come
888

to th’ speech of him.
889

AUTOLYCUS  Age, thou hast lost thy labor.
890

SHEPHERD  Why, sir?
891

AUTOLYCUS  The King is not at the palace. He is gone
892

aboard a new ship to purge melancholy and air
893

himself, for, if thou beest capable of things serious,
894

thou must know the King is full of grief.
895

SHEPHERD  So ’tis said, sir—about his son, that should
896

have married a shepherd’s daughter.
897

AUTOLYCUS  If that shepherd be not in handfast, let him
898

fly. The curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
899

feel, will break the back of man, the heart of
900

monster.
901

SHEPHERD’S SON  Think you so, sir?
902

AUTOLYCUS  Not he alone shall suffer what wit can
903

make heavy and vengeance bitter; but those that are
904

germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall
905

all come under the hangman—which, though it be
906

great pity, yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling
907

rogue, a ram tender, to offer to have his daughter
908

come into grace! Some say he shall be stoned, but
909

that death is too soft for him, say I. Draw our throne
910

into a sheepcote? All deaths are too few, the sharp-
911

est too easy.
912

SHEPHERD’S SON  Has the old man e’er a son, sir, do you
913

hear, an ’t like you, sir?
914

AUTOLYCUS  He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
915

’nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
916

wasps’-nest; then stand till he be three-quarters and
917

a dram dead, then recovered again with aqua vitae
918

or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is, and
919

in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall
920

he be set against a brick wall, the sun looking with a
921

southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him
922

with flies blown to death. But what talk we of these
923

traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at,
924

their offenses being so capital? Tell me—for you
925

seem to be honest plain men—what you have to the
926

King. Being something gently considered, I’ll bring
927

you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his
928

presence, whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be
929

in man besides the King to effect your suits, here is
930

man shall do it.
931

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Shepherd>  He seems to be of
932

great authority. Close with him, give him gold; and
933

though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft
934

led by the nose with gold. Show the inside of your
935

purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado.
936

Remember: “stoned,” and “flayed alive.”
937

SHEPHERD, <to Autolycus>  An ’t please you, sir, to
938

undertake the business for us, here is that gold I
939

have. I’ll make it as much more, and leave this
940

young man in pawn till I bring it you.
941

AUTOLYCUS  After I have done what I promised?
942

SHEPHERD  Ay, sir.
943

AUTOLYCUS  Well, give me the moiety. <Shepherd hands
944

him money.> Are you a party in this business?
945

SHEPHERD’S SON  In some sort, sir; but though my case
946

be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
947

AUTOLYCUS  O, that’s the case of the shepherd’s son!
948

Hang him, he’ll be made an example.
949

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Shepherd>  Comfort, good com-
950

fort. We must to the King, and show our strange

sights. He must know ’tis none of your daughter nor
952

my sister. We are gone else.—Sir, I will give you as
953

much as this old man does when the business is
954

performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it
955

be brought you.
956

AUTOLYCUS  I will trust you. Walk before toward the
957

seaside. Go on the right hand. I will but look upon
958

the hedge, and follow you.
959

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Shepherd>  We are blessed in this
960

man, as I may say, even blessed.
961

SHEPHERD  Let’s before, as he bids us. He was provided
962

to do us good.
963

<Shepherd and his son exit.>

AUTOLYCUS  If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune
964

would not suffer me. She drops booties in my
965

mouth. I am courted now with a double occasion:
966

gold, and a means to do the Prince my master good;
967

which who knows how that may turn back to my
968

advancement? I will bring these two moles, these
969

blind ones, aboard him. If he think it fit to shore
970

them again and that the complaint they have to the
971

King concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue
972

for being so far officious, for I am proof against that
973

title and what shame else belongs to ’t. To him will I
974

present them. There may be matter in it.
975

<He exits.>

Enter Leontes, Cleomenes, Dion, Paulina, <and> Servants.

CLEOMENES
 

Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
1

A saintlike sorrow. No fault could you make
2

Which you have not redeemed—indeed, paid down
3

More penitence than done trespass. At the last,
4

Do as the heavens have done: forget your evil;
5

With them forgive yourself.
6

LEONTES                                   Whilst I remember
7

Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
8

My blemishes in them, and so still think of
9

The wrong I did myself, which was so much
10

That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
11

Destroyed the sweet’st companion that e’er man
12

Bred his hopes out of.
13

PAULINA                            True, too true, my lord.
14

If one by one you wedded all the world,
15

Or from the all that are took something good
16

To make a perfect woman, she you killed
17

Would be unparalleled.
18

LEONTES                            I think so. Killed?
19

She I killed? I did so, but thou strik’st me
20

Sorely to say I did. It is as bitter
21

Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now,
22

Say so but seldom.
23

CLEOMENES               Not at all, good lady.
24

You might have spoken a thousand things that
25

would
26

Have done the time more benefit and graced
27

Your kindness better.
28

PAULINA                          You are one of those
29

Would have him wed again.
30

DION                                           If you would not so,
31

You pity not the state nor the remembrance
32

Of his most sovereign name, consider little
33

What dangers by his Highness’ fail of issue
34

May drop upon his kingdom and devour
35

Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy
36

Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
37

What holier than, for royalty’s repair,
38

For present comfort, and for future good,
39

To bless the bed of majesty again
40

With a sweet fellow to ’t?
41

PAULINA                                There is none worthy,

Respecting her that’s gone. Besides, the gods
43

Will have fulfilled their secret purposes.
44

For has not the divine Apollo said,
45

Is ’t not the tenor of his oracle,
46

That King Leontes shall not have an heir
47

Till his lost child be found? Which that it shall
48

Is all as monstrous to our human reason
49

As my Antigonus to break his grave
50

And come again to me—who, on my life,
51

Did perish with the infant. ’Tis your counsel
52

My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
53

Oppose against their wills. Care not for issue.
54

The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander
55

Left his to th’ worthiest; so his successor
56

Was like to be the best.
57

LEONTES                           Good Paulina,
58

Who hast the memory of Hermione,
59

I know, in honor, O, that ever I
60

Had squared me to thy counsel! Then even now
61

I might have looked upon my queen’s full eyes,
62

Have taken treasure from her lips—
63

PAULINA                                                  And left them
64

More rich for what they yielded.
65

LEONTES                                           Thou speak’st truth.
66

No more such wives, therefore no wife. One worse,

And better used, would make her sainted spirit
68

Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
69

Where we offenders now appear, soul-vexed,
70

And begin “Why to me?”
71

PAULINA                               Had she such power,
72

She had just cause.
73

LEONTES                     She had, and would incense me
74

To murder her I married.
75

PAULINA                                 I should so.
76

Were I the ghost that walked, I’d bid you mark
77

Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in ’t
78

You chose her. Then I’d shriek, that even your ears
79

Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed
80

Should be “Remember mine.”
81

LEONTES                                       Stars, stars,
82

And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
83

I’ll have no wife, Paulina.
84

PAULINA                                 Will you swear
85

Never to marry but by my free leave?
86

LEONTES
 

Never, Paulina, so be blest my spirit.
87

PAULINA
 

Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
88

CLEOMENES
 

You tempt him over-much.
89

PAULINA                                    Unless another
90

As like Hermione as is her picture
91

Affront his eye.
92

CLEOMENES            Good madam—
93

PAULINA                                               I have done.
94

Yet if my lord will marry—if you will, sir,
95

No remedy but you will—give me the office
96

To choose you a queen. She shall not be so young
97

As was your former, but she shall be such
98

As, walked your first queen’s ghost, it should take
99

joy
100

To see her in your arms.
101

LEONTES                              My true Paulina,
102

We shall not marry till thou bid’st us.
103

PAULINA                                                     That
104

Shall be when your first queen’s again in breath,
105

Never till then.
106

Enter a Servant.

SERVANT
 

One that gives out himself Prince Florizell,
107

Son of Polixenes, with his princess—she
108

The fairest I have yet beheld—desires access
109

To your high presence.
110

LEONTES                           What with him? He comes not
111

Like to his father’s greatness. His approach,
112

So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
113

’Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
114

By need and accident. What train?
115

SERVANT                                              But few,
116

And those but mean.
117

LEONTES                        His princess, say you, with him?
118

SERVANT
 

Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
119

That e’er the sun shone bright on.
120

PAULINA                                               O Hermione,
121

As every present time doth boast itself
122

Above a better gone, so must thy grave
123

Give way to what’s seen now. <To Servant.> Sir, you
124

yourself
125

Have said and writ so—but your writing now
126

Is colder than that theme—she had not been
127

Nor was not to be equalled. Thus your verse
128

Flowed with her beauty once. ’Tis shrewdly ebbed
129

To say you have seen a better.
130

SERVANT                                       Pardon, madam.
131

The one I have almost forgot—your pardon;
132

The other, when she has obtained your eye,
133

Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
134

Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
135

Of all professors else, make proselytes
136

Of who she but bid follow.
137

PAULINA                                   How, not women?
138

SERVANT
 

Women will love her that she is a woman
139

More worth than any man; men, that she is
140

The rarest of all women.
141

LEONTES                              Go, Cleomenes.
142

Yourself, assisted with your honored friends,
143

Bring them to our embracement.
144

<Cleomenes and others> exit.

                                                     Still, ’tis strange
145

He thus should steal upon us.
146

PAULINA                                        Had our prince,
147

Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had paired
148

Well with this lord. There was not full a month
149

Between their births.
150

LEONTES                        Prithee, no more; cease. Thou
151

know’st
152

When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
154

Will bring me to consider that which may
155

Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
156

Enter Florizell, Perdita, Cleomenes, and others.

Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince,
157

For she did print your royal father off,
158

Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one,
159

Your father’s image is so hit in you,
160

His very air, that I should call you brother,
161

As I did him, and speak of something wildly
162

By us performed before. Most dearly welcome,
163

And your fair princess—goddess! O, alas,
164

I lost a couple that ’twixt heaven and Earth
165

Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
166

You, gracious couple, do. And then I lost—
167

All mine own folly—the society,
168

Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
169

Though bearing misery, I desire my life
170

Once more to look on him.
171

FLORIZELL                                By his command
172

Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
173

Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
174

Can send his brother. And but infirmity,

Which waits upon worn times, hath something
176

seized
177

His wished ability, he had himself
178

The lands and waters ’twixt your throne and his
179

Measured to look upon you, whom he loves—
180

He bade me say so—more than all the scepters
181

And those that bear them living.
182

LEONTES                                           O my brother,
183

Good gentleman, the wrongs I have done thee stir
184

So rarely kind, are as interpreters
186

Of my behindhand slackness. Welcome hither,
187

As is the spring to th’ earth. And hath he too
188

Exposed this paragon to th’ fearful usage,
189

At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
190

To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
191

Th’ adventure of her person?
192

FLORIZELL                                  Good my lord,
193

She came from Libya.
194

LEONTES                          Where the warlike Smalus,
195

That noble honored lord, is feared and loved?
196

FLORIZELL
 

Most royal sir, from thence, from him, whose

daughter
198

His tears proclaimed his, parting with her. Thence,
199

A prosperous south wind friendly, we have crossed
200

To execute the charge my father gave me
201

For visiting your Highness. My best train
202

I have from your Sicilian shores dismissed,
203

Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
204

Not only my success in Libya, sir,
205

But my arrival and my wife’s in safety
206

Here where we are.
207

LEONTES  The blessèd gods
208

Purge all infection from our air whilst you
209

Do climate here! You have a holy father,
210

A graceful gentleman, against whose person,
211

So sacred as it is, I have done sin,
212

For which the heavens, taking angry note,
213

Have left me issueless. And your father’s blest,
214

As he from heaven merits it, with you,
215

Worthy his goodness. What might I have been
216

Might I a son and daughter now have looked on,
217

Such goodly things as you?
218

Enter a Lord.

LORD                                        Most noble sir,
219

That which I shall report will bear no credit,
220

Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
221

Bohemia greets you from himself by me,
222

Desires you to attach his son, who has—
223

His dignity and duty both cast off—
224

Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
225

A shepherd’s daughter.
226

LEONTES                           Where’s Bohemia? Speak.
227

LORD
 

Here in your city. I now came from him.
228

I speak amazedly, and it becomes
229

My marvel and my message. To your court
230

Whiles he was hast’ning—in the chase, it seems,
231

Of this fair couple—meets he on the way
232

The father of this seeming lady and
233

Her brother, having both their country quitted
234

With this young prince.
235

FLORIZELL                          Camillo has betrayed me,
236

Whose honor and whose honesty till now
237

Endured all weathers.
238

LORD                                 Lay ’t so to his charge.
239

He’s with the King your father.
240

LEONTES                                        Who? Camillo?
241

LORD
 

Camillo, sir. I spake with him, who now
242

Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
243

Wretches so quake. They kneel, they kiss the earth,
244

Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
245

Bohemia stops his ears and threatens them
246

With divers deaths in death.
247

PERDITA                                     O my poor father!
248

The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
249

Our contract celebrated.
250

LEONTES                              You are married?
251

FLORIZELL
 

We are not, sir, nor are we like to be.
252

The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.
253

The odds for high and low’s alike.
254

LEONTES                                             My lord,
255

Is this the daughter of a king?
256

FLORIZELL                                    She is
257

When once she is my wife.
258

LEONTES
 

That “once,” I see, by your good father’s speed
259

Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
260

Most sorry, you have broken from his liking,
261

Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
262

Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
263

That you might well enjoy her.
264

FLORIZELL,  <to Perdita>                Dear, look up.
265

Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
266

Should chase us with my father, power no jot
267

Hath she to change our loves.—Beseech you, sir,
268

Remember since you owed no more to time
269

Than I do now. With thought of such affections,
270

Step forth mine advocate. At your request,
271

My father will grant precious things as trifles.
272

LEONTES
 

Would he do so, I’d beg your precious mistress,
273

Which he counts but a trifle.
274

PAULINA                                      Sir, my liege,
275

Your eye hath too much youth in ’t. Not a month
276

’Fore your queen died, she was more worth such
277

gazes
278

Than what you look on now.
279

LEONTES                                     I thought of her
280

Even in these looks I made. <To Florizell.> But your

petition
282

Is yet unanswered. I will to your father.
283

Your honor not o’erthrown by your desires,
284

I am friend to them and you. Upon which errand
285

I now go toward him. Therefore follow me,
286

And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.
287

They exit.

Scene 2

Enter Autolycus and a Gentleman.

AUTOLYCUS  Beseech you, sir, were you present at this
1

relation?
2

FIRST GENTLEMAN  I was by at the opening of the fardel,
3

heard the old shepherd deliver the manner how he
4

found it, whereupon, after a little amazedness, we
5

were all commanded out of the chamber. Only this,
6

methought, I heard the shepherd say: he found the
7

child.
8

AUTOLYCUS  I would most gladly know the issue of it.
9

FIRST GENTLEMAN  I make a broken delivery of the
10

business, but the changes I perceived in the King
11

and Camillo were very notes of admiration. They
12

seemed almost, with staring on one another, to tear
13

the cases of their eyes. There was speech in their
14

dumbness, language in their very gesture. They
15

looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or
16

one destroyed. A notable passion of wonder ap-
17

peared in them, but the wisest beholder that knew
18

no more but seeing could not say if th’ importance
19

were joy or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one it
20

must needs be.
21

Enter another Gentleman.

Here comes a gentleman that happily knows more.—
22

The news, Rogero?
23

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Nothing but bonfires. The oracle
24

is fulfilled: the King’s daughter is found! Such a
25

deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that
26

ballad makers cannot be able to express it.
27

Enter another Gentleman.

Here comes the Lady Paulina’s steward. He can
28

deliver you more.—How goes it now, sir? This news
29

which is called true is so like an old tale that the
30

verity of it is in strong suspicion. Has the King
31

found his heir?
32

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Most true, if ever truth were preg-
33

nant by circumstance. That which you hear you’ll
34

swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The
35

mantle of Queen Hermione’s, her jewel about the
36

neck of it, the letters of Antigonus found with it,
37

which they know to be his character, the majesty of
38

the creature in resemblance of the mother, the
39

affection of nobleness which nature shows above
40

her breeding, and many other evidences proclaim
41

her with all certainty to be the King’s daughter. Did

you see the meeting of the two kings?
43

SECOND GENTLEMAN  No.
44

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Then have you lost a sight which
45

was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There might
46

you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in
47

such manner that it seemed sorrow wept to take
48

leave of them, for their joy waded in tears. There
49

was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with
50

countenance of such distraction that they were to
51

be known by garment, not by favor. Our king, being
52

ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found
53

daughter, as if that joy were now become a loss,
54

cries “O, thy mother, thy mother!” then asks Bohe-
55

mia forgiveness, then embraces his son-in-law, then
56

again worries he his daughter with clipping her.
57

Now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by
58

like a weather-bitten conduit of many kings’ reigns.
59

I never heard of such another encounter, which
60

lames report to follow it and undoes description to
61

do it.
62

SECOND GENTLEMAN  What, pray you, became of Antigo-
63

nus, that carried hence the child?
64

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Like an old tale still, which will
65

have matter to rehearse though credit be asleep and
66

not an ear open: he was torn to pieces with a bear.
67

This avouches the shepherd’s son, who has not only
68

his innocence, which seems much, to justify him,
69

but a handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina
70

knows.
71

FIRST GENTLEMAN  What became of his bark and his
72

followers?
73

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Wracked the same instant of their
74

master’s death and in the view of the shepherd, so
75

that all the instruments which aided to expose the
76

child were even then lost when it was found. But O,
77

the noble combat that ’twixt joy and sorrow was
78

fought in Paulina. She had one eye declined for the
79

loss of her husband, another elevated that the
80

oracle was fulfilled. She lifted the Princess from the
81

earth, and so locks her in embracing as if she would
82

pin her to her heart that she might no more be in
83

danger of losing.
84

FIRST GENTLEMAN  The dignity of this act was worth the
85

audience of kings and princes, for by such was it
86

acted.
87

THIRD GENTLEMAN  One of the prettiest touches of all,
88

and that which angled for mine eyes—caught the
89

water, though not the fish—was when at the rela-
90

tion of the Queen’s death—with the manner how
91

she came to ’t bravely confessed and lamented by
92

the King—how attentiveness wounded his daugh-
93

ter, till, from one sign of dolor to another, she did,
94

with an “Alas,” I would fain say bleed tears, for I am
95

sure my heart wept blood. Who was most marble
96

there changed color; some swooned, all sorrowed.
97

If all the world could have seen ’t, the woe had been
98

universal.
99

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Are they returned to the court?
100

THIRD GENTLEMAN  No. The Princess hearing of her
101

mother’s statue, which is in the keeping of
102

Paulina—a piece many years in doing and now
103

newly performed by that rare Italian master, Julio
104

Romano, who, had he himself eternity and could
105

put breath into his work, would beguile Nature of
106

her custom, so perfectly he is her ape; he so near to
107

Hermione hath done Hermione that they say one
108

would speak to her and stand in hope of answer.
109

Thither with all greediness of affection are they
110

gone, and there they intend to sup.
111

SECOND GENTLEMAN  I thought she had some great
112

matter there in hand, for she hath privately twice or
113

thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione,
114

visited that removed house. Shall we thither and
115

with our company piece the rejoicing?
116

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Who would be thence that has the
117

benefit of access? Every wink of an eye some new
118

grace will be born. Our absence makes us unthrifty
119

to our knowledge. Let’s along.
120

<The Three Gentlemen> exit.

AUTOLYCUS  Now, had I not the dash of my former life
121

in me, would preferment drop on my head. I
122

brought the old man and his son aboard the Prince,
123

told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know
124

not what. But he at that time, overfond of the
125

shepherd’s daughter—so he then took her to be—
126

who began to be much seasick, and himself little
127

better, extremity of weather continuing, this mys-
128

tery remained undiscovered. But ’tis all one to
129

me, for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it
130

would not have relished among my other dis-
131

credits.
132

Enter Shepherd and <Shepherd’s Son, both dressed in rich

clothing.>

Here come those I have done good to against my
133

will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their
134

fortune.
135

SHEPHERD  Come, boy, I am past more children, but thy
136

sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born.
137

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Autolycus>  You are well met, sir.
138

You denied to fight with me this other day because I
139

was no gentleman born. See you these clothes? Say
140

you see them not and think me still no gentleman
141

born. You were best say these robes are not gentle-
142

men born. Give me the lie, do, and try whether I am
143

not now a gentleman born.
144

AUTOLYCUS  I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
145

SHEPHERD’S SON  Ay, and have been so any time these
146

four hours.
147

SHEPHERD  And so have I, boy.
148

SHEPHERD’S SON  So you have—but I was a gentleman
149

born before my father. For the King’s son took me
150

by the hand and called me brother, and then the
151

two kings called my father brother, and then the
152

Prince my brother and the Princess my sister called
153

my father father; and so we wept, and there was the
154

first gentlemanlike tears that ever we shed.
155

SHEPHERD  We may live, son, to shed many more.
156

SHEPHERD’S SON  Ay, or else ’twere hard luck, being in
157

so preposterous estate as we are.
158

AUTOLYCUS  I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all
159

the faults I have committed to your Worship and to
160

give me your good report to the Prince my master.
161

SHEPHERD  Prithee, son, do, for we must be gentle now
162

we are gentlemen.
163

SHEPHERD’S SON, <to Autolycus>  Thou wilt amend thy
164

life?
165

AUTOLYCUS  Ay, an it like your good Worship.
166

SHEPHERD’S SON  Give me thy hand. I will swear to the
167

Prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in
168

Bohemia.
169

SHEPHERD  You may say it, but not swear it.
170

SHEPHERD’S SON  Not swear it, now I am a gentleman?
171

Let boors and franklins say it; I’ll swear it.
172

SHEPHERD  How if it be false, son?
173

SHEPHERD’S SON  If it be ne’er so false, a true gentle-
174

man may swear it in the behalf of his friend.—And
175

I’ll swear to the Prince thou art a tall fellow of thy
176

hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know
177

thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou
178

wilt be drunk. But I’ll swear it, and I would thou
179

wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.
180

AUTOLYCUS  I will prove so, sir, to my power.
181

SHEPHERD’S SON  Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow. If
182

I do not wonder how thou dar’st venture to be
183

drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark,
184

the Kings and Princes, our kindred, are going to see

the Queen’s picture. Come, follow us. We’ll be thy
186

good masters.
187

They exit.

Scene 3

Enter Leontes, Polixenes, Florizell, Perdita, Camillo, Paulina,

<and> Lords.

LEONTES
 

O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
1

That I have had of thee!
2

PAULINA                              What, sovereign sir,
3

I did not well, I meant well. All my services
4

You have paid home. But that you have vouchsafed,
5

With your crowned brother and these your contracted
6

Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
7

It is a surplus of your grace which never
8

My life may last to answer.
9

LEONTES                                  O Paulina,
10

We honor you with trouble. But we came
11

To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery
12

Have we passed through, not without much content
13

In many singularities; but we saw not
14

That which my daughter came to look upon,
15

The statue of her mother.
16

PAULINA                                 As she lived peerless,
17

So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
18

Excels whatever yet you looked upon
19

Or hand of man hath done. Therefore I keep it
20

<Lonely,> apart. But here it is. Prepare
21

To see the life as lively mocked as ever
22

Still sleep mocked death. Behold, and say ’tis well.
23

<She draws a curtain to reveal> Hermione (like a statue).

I like your silence. It the more shows off
24

Your wonder. But yet speak. First you, my liege.
25

Comes it not something near?
26

LEONTES                                       Her natural posture!—
27

Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
28

Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
29

In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
30

As infancy and grace.—But yet, Paulina,
31

Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
32

So agèd as this seems.
33

POLIXENES                       O, not by much!
34

PAULINA
 

So much the more our carver’s excellence,
35

Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
36

As she lived now.
37

LEONTES                  As now she might have done,
38

So much to my good comfort as it is
39

Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
40

Even with such life of majesty—warm life,
41

As now it coldly stands—when first I wooed her.
42

I am ashamed. Does not the stone rebuke me
43

For being more stone than it?—O royal piece,
44

There’s magic in thy majesty, which has
45

My evils conjured to remembrance and
46

From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
47

Standing like stone with thee.
48

PERDITA                                        And give me leave,
49

And do not say ’tis superstition, that
50

I kneel, and then implore her blessing.
51

<She kneels.>

                                                           Lady,
52

Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
53

Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
54

PAULINA                                                O, patience!
55

The statue is but newly fixed; the color’s
56

Not dry.
57

CAMILLO, <to Leontes, who weeps>
 

My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
58

Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
59

So many summers dry. Scarce any joy
60

Did ever so long live; no sorrow
61

But killed itself much sooner.
62

POLIXENES                                   Dear my brother,
63

Let him that was the cause of this have power
64

To take off so much grief from you as he
65

Will piece up in himself.
66

PAULINA                               Indeed, my lord,
67

If I had thought the sight of my poor image
68

Would thus have wrought you—for the stone is
69

mine—
70

I’d not have showed it.
71

LEONTES                           Do not draw the curtain.
72

PAULINA
 

No longer shall you gaze on ’t, lest your fancy
73

May think anon it moves.
74

LEONTES                                Let be, let be.
75

Would I were dead but that methinks already—
76

What was he that did make it?—See, my lord,
77

Would you not deem it breathed? And that those
78

veins
79

Did verily bear blood?
80

POLIXENES                      Masterly done.
81

The very life seems warm upon her lip.
82

LEONTES
 

The fixture of her eye has motion in ’t,
83

As we are mocked with art.
84

PAULINA                                    I’ll draw the curtain.
85

My lord’s almost so far transported that
86

He’ll think anon it lives.
87

LEONTES                             O sweet Paulina,
88

No settled senses of the world can match
90

The pleasure of that madness. Let ’t alone.
91

PAULINA
 

I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirred you, but
92

I could afflict you farther.
93

LEONTES                                Do, Paulina,
94

For this affliction has a taste as sweet
95

As any cordial comfort. Still methinks
96

There is an air comes from her. What fine chisel
97

Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
98

For I will kiss her.
99

PAULINA                     Good my lord, forbear.
100

The ruddiness upon her lip is wet.
101

You’ll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
102

With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
103

LEONTES
 

No, not these twenty years.
104

PERDITA, <rising>                      So long could I
105

Stand by, a looker-on.
106

PAULINA                           Either forbear,
107

Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
108

For more amazement. If you can behold it,
109

I’ll make the statue move indeed, descend
110

And take you by the hand. But then you’ll think—
111

Which I protest against—I am assisted
112

By wicked powers.
113

LEONTES                    What you can make her do
114

I am content to look on; what to speak,
115

I am content to hear, for ’tis as easy
116

To make her speak as move.
117

PAULINA                                      It is required
118

You do awake your faith. Then all stand still—
119

<Or> those that think it is unlawful business
120

I am about, let them depart.
121

LEONTES                                    Proceed.
122

No foot shall stir.
123

PAULINA                   Music, awake her! Strike!
124

<Music sounds.>

’Tis time. Descend. Be stone no more. Approach.
125

Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
126

I’ll fill your grave up. Stir, nay, come away.
127

Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
128

Dear life redeems you.—You perceive she stirs.
129

<Hermione descends.>

Start not. Her actions shall be holy as
130

You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her
131

Until you see her die again, for then
132

You kill her double. Nay, present your hand.
133

When she was young, you wooed her; now in age
134

Is she become the suitor?
135

LEONTES                               O, she’s warm!
136

If this be magic, let it be an art
137

Lawful as eating.
138

POLIXENES              She embraces him.
139

CAMILLO  She hangs about his neck.
140

If she pertain to life, let her speak too.
141

POLIXENES
 

Ay, and make it manifest where she has lived,
142

Or how stol’n from the dead.
143

PAULINA                                       That she is living,
144

Were it but told you, should be hooted at
145

Like an old tale, but it appears she lives,
146

Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
147

<To Perdita.> Please you to interpose, fair madam.
148

Kneel
149

And pray your mother’s blessing. <To Hermione.>
150

Turn, good lady.
151

Our Perdita is found.
152

HERMIONE                     You gods, look down,
153

And from your sacred vials pour your graces
154

Upon my daughter’s head! Tell me, mine own,
155

Where hast thou been preserved? Where lived? How
156

found
157

Thy father’s court? For thou shalt hear that I,
158

Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
159

Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
160

Myself to see the issue.
161

PAULINA                            There’s time enough for that,
162

Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
163

Your joys with like relation. Go together,
164

You precious winners all. Your exultation
165

Partake to everyone. I, an old turtle,
166

Will wing me to some withered bough and there
167

My mate, that’s never to be found again,

Lament till I am lost.
169

LEONTES                        O peace, Paulina.
170

Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
171

As I by thine a wife. This is a match,
172

And made between ’s by vows. Thou hast found
173

mine—
174

But how is to be questioned, for I saw her,
175

As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
176

A prayer upon her grave. I’ll not seek far—
177

For him, I partly know his mind—to find thee
178

An honorable husband.—Come, Camillo,
179

And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
180

Is richly noted and here justified
181

By us, a pair of kings. Let’s from this place.
182

<To Hermione.> What, look upon my brother! Both
183

your pardons
184

That e’er I put between your holy looks
185

My ill suspicion. This your son-in-law
186

And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,
187

Is troth-plight to your daughter.—Good Paulina,
188

Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
189

Each one demand and answer to his part
190

Performed in this wide gap of time since first

We were dissevered. Hastily lead away.
192

They exit.

Longer Notes

1.2.0  SD.  Camillo:  The  immediate  re-entry  of  this

character (unusual in Shakespearean drama) has led some
editors to believe that even though the Folio marks a new
scene  here,  the  action  may  be  continuous,  with
Archidamus and Camillo simply stepping aside while the
two kings, the queen, and Mamillius enter.

There  is  general  agreement  that  this  play  was  printed

from  a  transcript  made  by  the  professional  scribe  Ralph
Crane.  It  is  possible  that  Crane  introduced  the  scene
break, along with Camillo’s exit and re-entry. Some editors
have Camillo wait to re-enter until well along in 1.2, but
there  are  strong  indications  in  the  dialogue  that  he
overhears  much  of  what  happens  from  the  beginning  of
the scene.

1.2.13–16. I am . . . truly: Polixenes’ lines have defied

editorial  attempts  to  provide  convincing  explanations  of
their  meaning.  There  is  agreement  that  Polixenes
compares  his  kingdom  to  a  garden  where  plants  may
breed,  and  that  he  fears  his  garden-kingdom  may  be
threatened  by  cold  sneaping  winds.  However,  it  is  not
clear why the blowing of the winds “make us [i.e., me] say,
/ ‘This is put forth too truly,’ ” and the meaning of This is
particularly unclear. Our paraphrase of “I am questioned”
as  “I  am  tormented”  depends  on  a  legal  meaning  of  the
noun “question” as “the application of torture as part of a
judicial examination.”

1.2.56–108. No, madam . . . with us: From line 56 to

line  108,  Leontes  takes  no  part  in  the  conversation
between  Hermione  and  Polixenes.  Some  critics  who  are

intent upon finding in the play a rational explanation for
Leontes’  sudden  fit  of  jealousy  (first  evident  at  line  139)
imagine  him  eavesdropping  or  inadvertently  overhearing
parts  of  the  dialogue  between  Hermione  and  Polixenes
and  interpreting  their  words  as  evidence  of  a  sexual
liaison.  Most  critics  find  this  way  of  reading  the  play
problematic  and  think  that  the  play  offers  no  rational
explanation for Leontes’ jealousy.

1.2.168. blacks: Black fabric could be false or unstable

for a number of reasons. The process of dyeing the wool
black  could  in  itself  weaken  the  cloth.  Further,  since
legislation required that wool first be dyed red or blue, all
black fabric was overdyed with additional dye and hence
could  be  considered  “false.”  Funeral  clothing  and
hangings were called blacks, and Leontes may be calling
into doubt the sincerity of mourners, especially the widow
who  has  buried  more  than  one  husband  and  hence  has
“overdyed” her mourning wear. It has also been suggested
that  the  phrase  “false  as  o’erdyed  blacks”  may  refer  to
contemporary  attitudes  toward  black  people,  who  were
considered licentious and who were thought by some to be
dyed black by the sun.

1.2.175.  Affection  .  .  .  center:  This  line  contains  two

abstract  nouns  (affection,  intention)  and  the  figurative
term  the  center.  The  history  of  commentary  includes  a
variety  of  reasonable  interpretations  of  the  line.  Some
trace  affection  to  the  Latin  affectio  and  see  Leontes  as
commenting abstractly on the power of emotion (or  of  a
disturbed mind) to find out the truth, or (again abstractly)
on  the  power  of  passionate  love  to  pierce  the  soul  and
“make possible things not so held” (line 176).

Others  think  that  Leontes  is  addressing  his  own

affection—his  emotions,  or  passions;  more  specifically,
his  jealousy  of  Hermione.  On  this  interpretation,

intention could refer to the “intensity” of his feeling, or to
the  “attentive  observation”  (of  Hermione  and  Polixenes)
that  his  feeling  has  provoked,  or  to  the  “meaning”  (his
notion  of  an  affair  between  Hermione  and  Polixenes)  to
which  his  feeling  has  led  him.  The  figurative  term  the
center,  according  to  this  way  of  reading  the  passage,
could  mean  the  “truth”  about  his  wife  and  friend,  or  it
could mean Leontes’ center (his heart, which is wounded
by his jealousy), or it could even mean the center of the
universe,  which  is  shaken,  for  him,  by  his  belief  in
Hermione’s adultery.

Still  others  think  that  Leontes  addresses  what  he

believes to be Hermione’s lust (affection). In this case the
sense  of  intention  is  probably  limited;  it  would  mean
“purpose,” or “import.” The center, in this reading of the
line, probably refers to Leontes’ heart, but possibly means
the center of the universe.

Almost all readings of this difficult speech agree that its

obscurity  reflects  Leontes’  disturbed  mind,  and  that  its
central point is that the impossible (things not so held,
dreams, what’s unreal, nothing [lines 176–79]) has been
made possible.

1.2.269. They’re here with me: A similar expression is

to  be  found  in  May  Day,  a  play  by  Shakespeare’s
contemporary George Chapman: “As often as he turns his
back  to  me,  I  shall  be  here  [makes  V]  with  him;  that’s
certain.” The “V” stands for two fingers held up to make
the V shape of the pair of horns that the cuckold is said to
wear. Thus Leontes’ words “They’re here with me already”
may mean he thinks that people in his court already know
he is a cuckold and that they are already making mocking
gestures behind his back.

1.2.511–12.  Swear  his  thought  over  /  By  each

particular star: Though the general sense is fairly clear—

i.e., “even if you swear by every star in heaven”—there is
no agreement about the meaning of the phrase “swear his
thought over.” Suggestions about “swear over” range from
“overswear”  (i.e.,  “persuade  by  the  superior  power  of
oaths”  or  “swear  so  as  to  overcome”)  to  “outswear”  (i.e.,
“be  more  vehement  in  denial  than  he  is  in  accusation”).
There  is  general  agreement  that  “his  thought”  refers  to
lines 499–502: “He thinks . . . that you have touched his
queen / Forbiddenly.”

2.1.161–63.  If  .  .  .  her:  This  passage  presents  several

puzzles. Editors have been unable to agree, for example,
on  what  Antigonus  means  by  his  allusion  to  keeping  his
stables  where  he  lodges  his  wife.  Suggested  meanings
include “I’ll guard my wife as carefully as my horses” and
“I’ll separate my wife from all other men, just as I keep my
mares apart from my stallions.” Another puzzle is his “I’ll
go  in  couples  with  her.”  One  possible  meaning  is  “I’ll
harness  or  leash  myself  to  her  as  if  we  were  horses  or
dogs,”  a  reading  that  depends  on  couples  meaning
“pairs.” “Couple” could, however, also mean “leash.”

2.1.221.  Delphos:  Delos,  the  legendary  birthplace  of

Apollo,  was  famous  in  classical  culture  and  one  of  the
places that the wandering Aeneas visits in Virgil’s Aeneid.
By the sixteenth century, the already deserted island had
come  to  be  called  Delphos  by  analogy  with  Delphi,  the
mainland site of Apollo’s more celebrated oracle.

2.3.112. as . . . stands: As Stephen Orgel points out (in

a note to the Oxford edition), were Leontes not the king,
Hermione  (under  English  law  of  Shakespeare’s  time)
could sue him for slander: “To defame a woman’s honour
was actionable in both civil and ecclesiastical courts. . . .
‘As  the  case  now  stands’  Leontes  cannot  be  sued  for

slander  only  because  no  court  has  jurisdiction  over  the
King” (p. 136).

2.3.198. midwife: Stephen Orgel points out (in a note to

the  Oxford  edition)  that  Leontes’  use  of  this  term  for
Paulina “implicates [her] in both the birth of the child and
the concealment of its true paternity.” He quotes from the
midwife’s  oath,  part  of  the  sixteenth-century  licensing
process,  the  midwife’s  “promise  not  to  ‘permit  or  suffer
that  woman  being  in  labour  or  travail  shall  name  any
other to be the father of her child, than only he who is the
right true father thereof’ ” (p. 139).

3.2.11. Silence: This word is printed in the First Folio

in  italic  as  if  it  were  a  stage  direction,  but  there  is  no
precedent for such a stage direction in other Shakespeare
plays  and  no  certain  precedent  in  any  other  play  of  the
period.  (The  only  possible  precedent  may  be  in  George
Chapman’s Monsieur d’Olive.) Ralph Crane, the scribe who
is  widely  thought  to  have  prepared  the  manuscript  from
which The Winter’s Tale was set into type, used the italic
hand in order to emphasize particular words. Although we
are  far  from  certain  about  whether  “Silence”  should  be
printed as part of the dialogue or as a stage direction, the
combination of Crane’s habit of using italic for emphasis
and  the  absence  of  any  such  stage  directions  in
Shakespeare’s  other  plays  has  led  us  to  incorporate  the
word into the dialogue.

4.1.0  SD.  Time,  the  Chorus:  In  Robert  Greene’s

Pandosto,  a  novel  that  The  Winter’s  Tale  in  part
dramatizes,  the  subtitle  reads:  “The  Triumph  of  Time.
Wherein is discovered . . . that although by the means of
sinister fortune truth may be concealed, yet by time . . . it
is most manifestly revealed.” (See picture.)

4.1.8–9. law . . . custom: The speaker, Time, may here

be understood to refer to all laws and customs, since both
are the products of time and are subject to change in time;
but Time has been understood to refer particularly to one
of  the  West’s  dramatic  conventions,  the  “unity  of  time.”
This convention may be traced back to Aristode’s Poetics,
although  there  it  was  not  yet  the  law  or  custom  that  it
later  came  to  be.  Aristotle  simply  described  a  particular
Greek  tragedy  as  having  a  plot  duration  of  only  a  single
day and observed that tragedy was set in a more limited
time 
span 
than 
epic. 
Some 
of 
Shakespeare’s

contemporaries—neoclassical 
critics, 
like 
Sir 
Philip

Sidney  in  his  Apology  for  Poetry  or  like  Ben  Jonson,  a
dramatist who criticized Shakespeare’s use of time in plot
construction—represented Aristotle as prescribing, rather
than  merely  describing,  that  a  tragic  plot  not  exceed
twenty-four  hours’  duration.  As  a  prescription,  the
requirement  became  known  later  as  the  “unity  of  time.”
The speaker Time may here be addressing this emerging
dramatic  convention,  announcing  that  he  may  violate  it
because all law and custom are under his control.

4.1.22. I mentioned a son o’ th’ King’s: The reference

here  is  to  the  discussion  of  Polixenes’  son  in  1.2.205–13.
Time  as  Chorus  here  presents  all  of  the  previous  stage
action as his own narrative.

4.2.20.  the  heaping  friendships:  When  Polixenes

assures Camillo that he will be more thankful to Camillo,
and  then  speaks  of  the  profit  to  be  expected  from  this
increase  in  gratitude,  it  seems  that  Polixenes  is  thinking
that Camillo owes him something in return—an increase
in friendly services—as we have explained. But the play’s
language  is,  as  so  often,  irreducibly  ambiguous.  The
heaping friendships could also mean an increase in the
friendship between Camillo and Polixenes; or an increase

in the friendships, or alliances, that Camillo, as Polixenes’
agent,  will  make  for  the  king  with  others;  or  even  an
increase  in  the  friendship  of  Polixenes  for  Camillo—
friendship  that  puts  Camillo  under  a  still  greater
obligation to serve Polixenes.

4.3.24.  Autolycus:  The  name  comes  from  Greek

mythology,  in  which  Autolycus  is  the  son  of  the  god
Hermes—or,  in  Roman  mythology,  Mercury.  In  Ovid’s
Metamorphoses (book 11)  one  reads  (in  Arthur  Golding’s
1567 translation)  that  Chione  bears  Mercury  “a  son  that
hight  [was  called]  Awtolychus,  who  proved  a  wily  pie
[magpie, a thieving bird], / And such a fellow as in theft
and  filching  had  no  peer.  /  He  was  his  father’s  own  son
right [truly]; he could men’s eyes so blear [deceive] / As for
to  make  the  black  things  white,  and  white  things  black
appear” (lines 360–63, spelling modernized).

4.3.31  SD.  Shepherd’s  Son:  In  the  Folio  text,  this

character  is  throughout  designated  as  “Clown.”  Such  a
designation probably means both that the role was played
by  the  theatrical  company’s  comic  actor  and  that  the
character is to be viewed as a rustic simpleton.

4.3.36 SD. He lies down: At this point Autolycus begins

to  enact  a  version  of  the  story  of  the  Good  Samaritan
(Luke  10.30–37),  a  parable  about  a  man  beaten  and
robbed  who  is  helped  by  a  passing  stranger.  Here
Autolycus pretends to be beaten and robbed, and uses the
stranger’s  charity  as  an  opportunity  to  pick  his  purse.
Robert  Greene,  in  one  of  his  late-sixteenth-century
pamphlets  about  the  tricks  of  thieves  and  con  men  (the
“Conny-catching  Pamphlets”),  tells  of  a  similar  trick
played on a wealthy visitor to St. Paul’s Cathedral.

4.3.48. out  of  my  note:  While  it  is  extremely  unlikely

that  a  shepherd  in  Shakespeare’s  England  would  have
been  able  to  read,  we  have  included  at  line 39  the  stage
direction  “He  reads  a  paper”  and  have  given  as  one
meaning  of  “out  of  my  note”  “i.e.,  not  on  my  list.”  Our
reasons  for  doing  this  are  twofold.  First,  the  Shepherd’s
Son  responds  to  the  list  of  ingredients  given  him  by  his
sister  to  purchase  as  if  he  is  reading  rather  than
remembering (“five pound of currants, rice—what will this
sister  of  mine  do  with  rice?”).  Second,  there  are  several
indications  in  4.4  that  not  only  the  Shepherd’s  Son  but
also  Mopsa  and  Dorcas  (rural  serving  girls)  are  literate.
(Mopsa,  for  example,  loves  “a  ballad  in  print,”  and  both
girls are shown reading the words to “Two Maids Wooing
a Man.”) The shepherds in this play, in other words, seem
to  participate  in  the  tradition  of  the  literary  pastoral  in
which shepherds are often portrayed as literate.

4.3.105. rogue:  While  Shakespeare  had  used  the  word

rogue in earlier plays in some of its looser senses, here it
seems to carry a rather specific meaning, as if it were one
of  the  “knavish  professions”  practiced  by  Autolycus.  The
word  came  into  English  in  1561  as  the  name  given  a
beggar who uses as his excuse for being on the road the
tale that he has come to seek a kinsman. It then was used
as well to describe beggars who got money by pretending
to be sick. By 1572 it had become the term used in legal
statutes  to  refer  to  those  who,  though  healthy,  were
unemployed and who had no other source of income. To
be a rogue—i.e., to be unemployed and destitute—was to
be  a  criminal  liable  to  severe  punishment.  In  1604  King
James’  first  parliament  specified,  in  addition  to  such
punishments  as  whippings,  that  “rogues  .  .  .  shall  be
branded in the left shoulder with a great Roman R . . . [so]
that the letter R be seen and remain for a perpetual mark
upon such rogue during his or her life.” (See  Barbara  A.

Mowat, 
“Rogues, 
Shepherds, 
and 
the 
Counterfeit

Distressed,” in Further Reading.)

4.4.31–34.  Jupiter  .  .  .  swain:  Although  Apollo  is  not

recorded  in  classical  mythology  as  having  transformed
himself into a country laborer (swain) in order to pursue a
woman,  he  is  represented  (in  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses)  as
having  done  so  in  the  tapestry  woven  by  Arachne:  “In
likeness of a country clown was Phebus [Apollo] pictured
there.  .  .  .  And  how  he  in  a  shepherd’s  shape  was
practising a wile / The daughter of one Macarie dame Issa
to beguile” (6.152–55, Arthur Golding’s translation [1567],
spelling modernized).

4.4.48. forced: In the period in which Shakespeare was

writing,  the  word  forced  was  strongly  associated  with
violence and torture, including pressing, the most violent
coercion  of  the  subject  by  the  monarch  to  bring  the
subject to conform to royal will.

4.4.80 SD. to Polixenes: In adding this direction (and

that at line 82) for Perdita’s speeches of welcome, we are
assuming that though in disguise, the king’s costume will
indicate that he is socially superior to Camillo.

4.4.97. bastards: Streaked gillyflowers were, according

to Sir Francis Bacon, a kind of natural hybrid, appearing
in different colors and with different stripes depending on
the  soil  in  which  the  seeds  were  planted.  In  lines 102–4,
Perdita  seems  to  question  the  naturalness  of  the  process
that produces “streaked gillyvors” (line 96), claiming that
she has “heard it said” that their “piedness” is the result of
horticultural “art.”

4.4.218.  ballads:  The  reference  here  is  to  what  are

called  “broadside  ballads,”  sensational  stories  told  in

rough  verse  and  printed  on  one  side  of  a  large  sheet  of
paper. These ballads were often sung to popular tunes.

4.4.442.  Take  .  .  .  bargain:  In  Shakespeare’s  time,

couples  who  clasped  hands  and  exchanged  vows  before
witnesses  performed  a  ceremony  called  “handfasting,”
after which they were regarded as legally married. Hence
Polixenes refers to what appears about to happen in this
scene as his son’s nuptial (line 460).

4.4.540 Where no priest shovels in dust: According to

the  1549  Book  of  Common  Prayer  of  the  Church  of
England, the priest was to cast earth on the corpse during
a proper burial service; here the play slips for a moment
from pagan Bohemia to Shakespeare’s England.

4.4.727.  geld  a  codpiece  of  a  purse:  Like  the  word

placket (line 726), the words geld, purse, and codpiece
all  had  sexual  connotations.  A  codpiece  was  a  showy
appendage  to  the  front  of  a  man’s  breeches  (and,  by
extension,  a  man’s  private  parts);  a  purse  was  both  a
wallet and a name for the scrotum. In line 728, the word
keys continues the sexual wordplay, since the word “key”
was slang for the penis.

4.4.752.  change  garments:  Editors  have  puzzled  over

just  what  garments  are  exchanged  between  Florizell  and
Autolycus.  Perdita  describes  Florizell’s  garments  as  “a
swain’s  wearing”  (4.4.10).  A  “swain”  was  usually  a  rustic
laborer,  often  a  shepherd,  and  Perdita’s  concern  that
Florizell has “obscured” himself (line 9) in the clothes he
wears would support the idea that he is dressed humbly.
However,  Autolycus  is  greatly  delighted  at  being  given
these very clothes in exchange for his own—“What a boot
[profit]  is  here  with  this  exchange!”  (lines  798–99).
Furthermore, the Shepherd later says of Autolycus in the

same  clothes  “His  garments  are  rich”  (line  879).  This
discrepancy  is  for  directors  to  resolve;  one  possible
expedient  is  to  have  Florizell  wear  his  “swain’s  wearing”
over  his  royal  attire  and  then  strip  off  the  disguise  once
Polixenes  has  left,  so  that  the  garments  Florizell  gives
Autolycus are a prince’s suit.

There is also some question about what kind of clothes

Autolycus gives Florizell; at least in terms of the standards
of  realism  in  force  in  the  modern  theater,  Autolycus
cannot appear at the sheepshearing in the rags he wore in
4.3  without  being  identified  by  the  Shepherd’s  Son.
Autolycus’  peddler’s  costume  is  therefore  entirely  at  the
modern director’s discretion.

4.4.770. The truth of your own seeming: Critics have

noted that Camillo is here given a rather awkward phrase,
which  they  read  as  dramatic  irony.  This  irony  arises
because the characters on stage cannot know that Perdita
is  royal  by  birth,  but  the  audience  can  and  does.  At  this
point Perdita is still dressed up, as she was for the feast, in
the  costume  of  a  queen  (4.4.5  and  528).  Her  royal
appearance (seeming) thus reveals the truth of her birth—
the truth of [her] own seeming.

5.1.69–70.  and  on  .  .  .  soul-vexed:  The  Folio  reads:

“and  on  this  Stage  /  (Where  we  Offendors  now  appeare)
Soule-vext.”  The  lines  have  been  variously  emended  by
editors  through  the  centuries.  Among  the  proposed
emendations  of  line  70  are  “(Were  we  offenders  now)
appear  soul-vexed”;  “(Where  we  offend  her  now),  .  .  .”;
“Where  we’re  offenders  now,  .  .  .”;  “Where  we  offenders
move, . . .”; and “(Where we offenders mourn).”

5.2.104–5. Julio Romano: This Italian artist (who lived

c. 1499–1546)  was  best  known  in  Shakespeare’s  England
for  his  painting  and  his  architecture,  but  his  epitaph,

quoted in Vasari’s Lives of the Artists, reads “Jupiter saw
sculpted  and  painted  bodies  breathe  .  .  .  by  the  skill  of
Giulio  Romano.”  There  is  no  agreement  among  scholars
about why Shakespeare included Romano’s name in a play
set in an age when kings turned to the Delphic oracle for
answers.

5.2.137.  gentlemen  born:  In  Elizabethan  usage,  a

“gentleman born” was one “descended from three degrees
of gentry, both on the mother’s and father’s side” (William
Segar,  The  Booke  of  Honor  and  Armes  [1590],  p.  36).
Technically, then, the Shepherd misuses the term. His son
comically misuses it in every possible way.

5.2.158. preposterous estate: The word preposterous

is  the  Shepherd’s  Son’s  comic  error.  Derived  from  the
Latin word meaning “reversed,” cart-before-the-horse, the
word  preposterous  is  even  more  comic:  when  the
Shepherd’s Son said “I was a gentleman born before  my
father” (lines 149–50), he defined his condition as literally
preposterous  by  putting  a  necessarily  earlier  event—his
father’s birth—after a necessarily later one—his own. (See
Patricia 
Parker, 
“Preposterous 
Events,” 
Shakespeare

Quarterly 43 [1992], 186–213.)

5.3.56.  The  statue  is  but  newly  fixed:  Many  editors

interpret this line as meaning “the color has only recently
been made fast.” If so, Shakespeare uses the word “fixed”
in  this  sense  some  fifty  years  before  the  earliest  usage
recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary.

Textual Notes

The reading of the present text appears to the left of the
square bracket. Unless otherwise noted, the reading to the
left  of  the  bracket  is  from  F,  the  First  Folio  text  (upon
which  this  edition  is  based).  The  earliest  sources  of
readings  not  in  F  are  indicated  as  follows:  F2  is  the
Second Folio of 1632; F3 is the Third Folio of 1663–64; F4
is  the  Fourth  Folio  of  1685;  Ed.  is  an  earlier  editor  of
Shakespeare,  beginning  with  Rowe  in  1709.  No  sources
are  given  for  emendations  of  punctuation  or  for
corrections  of  obvious  typographical  errors,  like  turned
letters  that  produce  no  known  word.  SD  means  stage
direction; SP means speech prefix; uncorr. means the first
or  uncorrected  state  of  the  First  Folio;  corr.  means  the
second  or  corrected  state  of  the  First  Folio;  ~  stands  in
place of a word already quoted before the square bracket;
^ indicates the omission of a punctuation mark.

1.1
10.
Beseech] F (’Beseech)

 
19.
Believe] F (’Beleeue)

1.2
21.
sev’nnight] F (Seue’night)

 
25.
beseech] F (’beseech)

 
41.
proclaimed.] ~, F

 
64.
“verily”] F (Verely’)

 
85.
twinned] F (twyn’d)

 
133.
And] F2; A F

 
133.
thyself^] ~, F

 
165.
full^] ~, F

 
174.
be?—] ~^ F

 
175.
Affection,] ~? F

 
178.
unreal^] ~: F

 
199.
do] Ed.; do’s F

 
257.
they] F2; omit F

 
315.
forth. . . . lord,] ~^ . . . ~. F

 
338.
hobby-horse] Ed.; Holy-Horse F

 
370.
wife’s] F (Wiues)

 
430.
thousands] F (thousand’s)

 
474.
aught] F (ought)

 
474.
behoove] F (behoue)

 
552.
off^] ~, F

2.1
0.
SD Enter Hermione, Mamillius, Ladies:

Leontes, Antigonus, Lords. F

 
3, 6, 18, 21.
SP FIRST LADY] Ed.; Lady F

 
15.
this] F (’this)

 
29.
Pray] F (’Pray)

 
52.
venom,] ~: F

 
53.
infected;] ~) F

 
136, 141.
Beseech] F (’beseech)

 
194.
true^ . . . suspicion,] ~, . . . ~^ F

 
220.
have] hane F

2.2
0.
SD Enter Paulina, a Gentleman, Gaoler,

Emilia. F

 
27.
gracious] gtacious F

 
57.
presently] presenrly F

 
64.
let ’t] F (le’t)

2.3
0.
SD Enter Leontes, Seruants, Paulina,

Antigonus, and Lords. F

 
2.
thus, . . . weakness.] ~: . . . ~, F

 
46.
What] F2; Who F

 
74.
good, SO^] ~^ ~, F

 
94.
dotard;] ~, F

 
181.
can, . . . liege.] ~: . . . ~, F

 
185.
beseech] F (beseech’)

 
236.
Please] F (Please’)

3.2
0.
SD Enter Leontes, Lords, Officers: Hermione

(as to her Triall) Ladies: Cleomines, Dion. F

 
11.
Silence] printed in F as SD at end of line 10.

 
161.
strike] strike F

 
168.
Beseech] F (’Beseech)

 
212.
done ’t] F (don’t)

 
220.
sweet’st,] ~. F

 
263–64.
appear, . . . perpetual.] ~( . . . ~) F

3.3
0.
SD Enter Antigonus, a Marriner, Babe,

Sheepeheard, and Clowne. F

 
8.
wills] F (wil’s)

 
33.
thrower-out] Thower-out F

 
83
and hereafter. SD Shepherd’s Son] This ed.;

Clowne F

 
84
and hereafter. SP SHEPHERD’S SON] This ed.; Clo.,

Clow, Clowne F

 
90.
sky;] ~, F

 
126.
made] F (mad)

 
142.
Marry] F (’Marry)

4.1
19.
himself,] ~. F

4.2
53.
Prithee] F (’Prethe)

 
57.
SD They exit] Ed.; Exit F

4.3
1.
SP AUTOLYCUS] Ed.; omit F

 
5.
bleaching] bleachiug F

 
10.
With heigh, with heigh] F2; With heigh F

 
37.
counters] F (Compters)

 
40.
currants] F (Currence)

 
59.
offends] F2; offend F

 
65.
detestable] derestable F

 
124.
SD One line earlier in F

 
130.
Sings] Ed.; Song. F

4.4
0.
SD Enter Florizell, Perdita, Shepherd, Clowne,

Polixenes, Camillo, Mopsa, Dorcas,
Seruants, Autolicus. F

 
13.
it] F2; omit F

 
14.
swoon] Ed.; sworne F

 
69.
afire] F (o’fire)

 
116.
your] F2; you F

 
125.
wi’ th’] F (with’)

 
176.
shepherd] Sphepherd F

 
190.
out] Ed.; on’t F

 
225.
customers] cnstomers F

 
236.
Believe] Beleeee F

 
254.
SP AUTOLYCUS] Ed.; omit F

 
273.
than] rhen F

 
275.
Maybe] F (’May be)

 
281.
kiln-hole] F (kill-hole)

 
285.
promised] ptomis’d F

 
305.
midwife’s] F (Midwiues)

 
305–6.
Mistress] F (Mist.)

 
308.
Pray] F (’Pray)

 
311.
things] rhings F

 
335–37.
you. | Song | AUTOLYCUS Get . . . go | Where] Ed;

you: | Song Get . . . goe | Aut. Where F

 
353.
gentlemen] F (Gent.)

 
355.
me.—Wenches,] ~, ~^ F

 
360.
cape] Crpe F

 
411.
who] F2; whom F

 
439.
better.] ~^ F

 
493.
acknowledged] F2; acknowledge F

 
504.
shalt] Ed.; shalt neuer F

 
507.
Far’r] Ed.; Faire F

 
514.
thee—] ~. F

 
516.
hoop] Ed.; hope F

 
553.
your] F2; my F

 
572.
am, . . . fancy.] ~: . . . ~, F

 
573.
obedient,] ~: F

 
591.
our] Ed.; her F

 
599.
Perdita.—] ~, F

 
652.
the son] F3; there Sonne F

 
693.
rear] F (reare’)

 
727.
could] Ed.; would F

 
727.
filed] F3; fill’d F

 
728.
off] F (of)

 
758.
flayed] F (fled)

 
783.
Pray] F (’Pray)

 
792.
SD Camillo . . . exit.] Ed.; Exit. F

 
837.
Pray] F (’Pray)

 
857.
like] lke F

 
862.
and] Ed.; at F

 
907.
sheep-whistling] Sheepe-whistiing F

 
918.
aqua vitae] F (Aquavite)

 
975.
He exits.] Ed.; Exeunt. F

5.1
0.
SD Enter Leontes, Cleomines, Dion, Paulina,

Seruants: Florizel, Perdita. F

 
13–14.
of. | PAULINA True, too true] Ed.; of, true. | Paul.

Too true F

 
49.
human] F (humane)

 
73.
just cause] F3; just such cause F

 
93–95.
madam— | PAULINA I have done. | Yet] Ed.;

Madame, I haue done. | Paul. Yet F

 
151.
Prithee] F (’Prethee)

 
181.
bade] F (bad)

 
199.
his,] ~^ F

5.2
97.
swooned] F (swownded)

 
120.
SD The . . . exit.] Ed.; Exit. F

 
162.
Prithee] F (’Prethee)

5.3
0.
SD Enter Leontes, Polixenes, Florizell, Perdita,

Camillo, Paulina: Hermione (like a Statue:)
Lords, &c. F

 
21.
Lonely] Ed.; Louely F

 
76.
already—] ~. F

 
81.
Masterly] F (’Masterly)

 
120.
Or] Ed.; On F

 
159.
the] rhe F

 
162.
time] ttme F

The Winter’s Tale:

A Modern Perspective

Stephen Orgel

For  modern  audiences  and  critics  The  Winter’s  Tale  is  a
strangely  discordant  play.  The  title  declares  it  a  fable—a
winter’s tale is a trifle, a fairy tale to enliven long winter
nights.  Yet  the  first  half  presents,  in  the  depiction  of
Leontes’ jealousy, one of Shakespeare’s most brilliant and
deeply felt studies of human psychology, uncompromising
in  its  intensity  and  realism.  It  is  also  a  pointed  and
powerful dramatization of the dangers and responsibilities
of  monarchy,  a  logical  corollary  to  King  Lear.  But  why,
then,  the  change  of  direction  for  the  conclusion?  Why
does Shakespeare set up the tragic momentum of the first
three acts, only to disarm it with fantasy and magic? And
if the tragedy is to be disarmed, why is the happy ending
so  partial—why  is  Mamillius  not  restored  along  with
Hermione  and  Perdita?  Why,  indeed,  is  the  death  of
Leontes’ young son, the heir to the throne, so much less of
an issue dramatically than the loss of his infant daughter?
Most  puzzling  of  all,  why  does  Shakespeare—quite
uncharacteristically,  if  one  thinks  of  his  earlier  plays
about bad kings—preserve and finally exonerate Leontes?
Why not let him atone for his crimes by dying, and resolve
the  tragic  issues  through  the  succession  of  a  new  and
innocent generation, on the models of Henry IV, Macbeth,
King Lear? Reconciliations are the stuff of Shakespearean
comedy; but why does Shakespeare want this play to be a
comedy?

These questions may express modern critical concerns,

but for the history of the play on the stage, they are not at
all new. From the time The Winter’s Tale was first revived
in  the  mid-eighteenth  century,  revisers  and  performers
have set to work to diminish the play’s tragic aspects, to
soften and rationalize Leontes’ jealousy, to focus the play
more clearly on the pastoral scenes and the young lovers
(Garrick’s adaptation was even called Florizel and Perdita).
At  the  same  time,  the  statue  scene  has  always  been  the
play’s  emotional  center:  however  illogical  or  frankly
incredible,  the  conclusion  has  always  been  theatrically
foolproof.

Though  the  play  has  a  family  setting,  its  issues  are

deeply  informed  by  the  political  and  legal  history  of
Jacobean  England—by  questions  of  the  perquisites  and
responsibilities of the monarch, the relation between royal
authority and the will of the people, the limits of protocol,
and what sanctions may be brought to bear on the actions
of  a  criminal  king.  All  these  issues  were  being  actively
debated  throughout  the  first  decade  of  King  James  I’s
reign,  and  the  play’s  focus  on  the  king  is  certainly  a
reflection  of  the  world  of  contemporary  politics.  At  the
same time, however, the play’s political issues were ones
that  had  concerned  Shakespeare  in  his  deepest  tragedies
throughout his career, and even overtly political tragedy,
for  Shakespeare,  invariably  starts  in  the  family.  It  is
Richard II’s behavior toward his uncles and cousins that
prompts  the  rebellion  that  deposes  him;  the  tragedy  of
Hamlet begins with fratricide and incest, and takes shape
around  the  complex  relations  of  parents  and  children;
Macbeth, assassinating Duncan at the urging of his wife,
is murdering his cousin; Lear’s tragedy is from beginning
to end a family matter. It is to the point that when James I
came  to  the  English  throne  in  1603,  there  was  a  fully

constituted royal family at the center of English society for
the first time since the death of Henry VIII.

Leontes’  jealousy  of  his  wife’s  affection  for  his  oldest

friend  seems  to  appear,  dramatically,  out  of  nowhere.  It
springs, paradoxically, from his wife’s ability to persuade
Polixenes to extend his stay in Sicily, when Leontes’ own
pleas  had  failed.  In  doing  so,  she  is  fulfilling  his  wishes,
acting  as  his  agent—being  a  good  wife—and  Leontes’
response 
obviously 
includes 
a 
large 
measure 
of

ambivalence toward both his marriage and his best friend.
Criticism  has  widely  regarded  Leontes’  jealous  rage  as
unmotivated, and critics and editors have often attempted
to provide the play with a rational basis for his delusion,
arguing  that  Hermione,  though  certainly  innocent,  must
have presented the appearance of impropriety. Directors,
similarly,  often  give  Hermione  and  Polixenes  some
suspiciously  intimate  stage  business  to  justify  Leontes’
outburst. But in Shakespeare’s text, the motivation comes
from  within—the  play’s  psychology,  indeed,  is  strikingly
modern in its recognition of the self-generating nature of
Leontes’  passion  and  the  compulsiveness  of  paranoid
behavior.

Shakespeare’s  explanation  for  Leontes’  behavior  is

rooted in childhood and in the complex tensions between
male bonding and heterosexual love. The king turns from
his  wife  and  friend  to  his  child,  and  this  provides  the
rationale for his evident dismay:

             Looking on the lines
Of my boy’s face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreeched,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled
Lest it should bite its master and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous.

(1.2.194–99)

He finds himself in the seven-year-old Mamillius, and the
return  to  childhood  is  a  retreat  from  sexuality  and  the
dangers of masculinity represented by unmuzzled daggers.
He  sees  himself  “unbreeched,”  not  yet  in  breeches—
Renaissance children of both sexes were dressed in skirts
until the age of seven or so, and the “breeching” of boys
was the formal move out of the world of women and into
manhood.  Polixenes,  questioned  by  Hermione,  describes
his childhood with Leontes as both Edenic and pre-sexual:

            What we changed
Was innocence for innocence. We knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
 . . . we should have answered heaven
Boldly “Not guilty,” the imposition cleared
Hereditary ours.

(1.2.86–94)

The  world  of  their  childhood  was  without  vice  or
temptation,  innocent  even  of  original  sin,  of  whose
“imposition”  we  are  guilty  by  heredity.  Hermione
pointedly observes, “By this we gather / You have tripped
since.” Polixenes concurs; the fall from grace was the fall
into sexuality—the entrance of women, and thereby of sin,
into the garden: “Temptations have since then been born
to ’s, for / In those unfledged days was my wife a girl” (98–
99). The temptations are the prelude to marriage. But this
is  not  a  happy  ending:  Hermione  draws  the  logical
inference,  that  “Your  queen  and  I  are  devils”  (104).  The
banter is lighthearted, but her teasing account of wedlock
as  a  continuing  state  of  sin  with  diabolical  women
confirms  the  view  of  sexuality  implied  in  the  men’s
fantasy.

The entry of women into the childhood Eden is also, of

course,  a  disruptive  element  in  the  perfection  of  male

friendship. The tension between friendship and marriage
is  a  recurrent  Shakespearean  theme:  think  of  Portia’s
elaborate  strategy  to  undo  Bassanio’s  allegiance  to
Antonio, or Othello’s automatic assumption of his friend’s
honesty  as  against  his  wife’s.  Leontes’  sudden,  violent
spasm  of  jealousy  is  triggered  by  nothing—“nothing,”
indeed,  becomes  a  key  word  in  his  litany  of  evidence
against his wife (“Is whispering nothing?,” etc.)—but  the
transformation  of  the  best  friend  into  a  rival  and  the
faithful wife into a whore is part of the same fantasy, its
worst-case scenario. Marriage is a dangerous condition in
Shakespeare,  and  in  agonizing  over  whether  his  wife  is
chaste,  his  children  legitimate,  Leontes  is  articulating  a
critical subtext that resonates throughout the patriarchal
culture of early modern Europe.

The  women  in  this  world  have  their  own  society  too.

Hermione’s prison is also the birth chamber, and she has
as her champion not some heroic knight of romance but
the fearless Paulina, whose challenge to Leontes’ authority
provides some of the most thrilling moments of the play.
Her  shrewish  tongue  is  the  agent  of  reconciliation  and
restoration, but she is also a half-comic figure, one whom
the  play  refuses  to  take  entirely  seriously:  what  she
restores, after all, is the culpable Leontes’ equanimity and
some—not all—of his losses.

Hermione’s  trial  is  not  really  a  trial,  since  there  is  no

evidence;  or  more  precisely,  no  agreement  about  what
constitutes  evidence.  What  for  Leontes  is  empirical  is  to
Hermione merely “surmises, all proofs sleeping else / But
what  your  jealousies  awake”  (3.2.119–20).  The  appeal  to
the  oracle  itself  acknowledges  the  radical  fallibility  of
human  justice,  the  impossibility  of  determining  truth
through  the  processes  of  reason.  The  play  certainly
assumes  the  oracle’s  infallibility,  though  this,  for  a
Renaissance  audience,  may  have  constituted  one  of  its

many improbabilities. There was, by Shakespeare’s time, a
considerable  literature  denying  any  divine  inspiration  to
the  ancient  oracles,  and  Leontes’  rejection  of  Apollo’s
word  is  entirely  consistent  with  orthodox  Christian
opinion. 
For 
Shakespeare’s 
audience, 
the 
crucial

testimony, the word of the oracle, would have been rather
like the word of the ghost in Hamlet—something the play
requires  you  to  believe  but  that  you  knew,  as  a  good
Reformation Christian, you were supposed to reject.

The oracle minces no words, but neither does Leontes

in his reaction; nor is any evidence necessary in declaring
the oracle false. What brings Leontes to his senses is not
Apollo’s  word  but  the  sudden  report  of  the  death  of
Mamillius:

The Prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the Queen’s speed, is gone.

.   .   .

                                                   Is dead.

LEONTES

Apollo’s angry, and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.

(3.2.156–61)

There is no reason for Leontes to realize he is mistaken at
this  point.  He  takes  Mamillius’  death  as  a  judgment  of
Apollo, but he need not give it this interpretation. Indeed,
the  messenger  has  offered  a  perfectly  satisfactory
physiological explanation: the boy died from fear and grief
over his mother’s situation. It is Leontes who supplies an
alternative  explanation  that  gives  Mamillius’  death  a
metaphysical 
meaning, 
that 
implies 
a 
providential

universe,  a  world  of  rewards  and  punishments,  and
perhaps  most  important,  a  world  that  contains  a
mechanism  enabling  you  to  determine  whether  you  are
actually  right  or  wrong,  that  solves  the  problem  of  your

skepticism. Leontes sees this particular event as part of a
larger scheme. But the process by which he arrives at this
conviction  is  no  different  from  that  by  which  he  had
convinced  himself  of  Hermione’s  guilt.  Being  released
from  one’s  delusions  and  restored  to  one’s  senses  has
nothing to do with a return to rationality.

Leontes’  reaction  to  all  this  is  worth  pausing  over.  To

Hermione’s  swoon  at  the  announcement  of  the  death  of
Mamillius, his response is remarkably casual: “Her heart
is but o’ercharged.” Mamillius has been represented as the
joy of his life, and also as his twin (they are “almost as like
as [two] eggs”) and the hope of the kingdom. His reaction
to the boy’s death produces not a recognition of the limits
of 
human 
physiology 
under 
grief, 
and 
the

acknowledgment  of  his  responsibility  for  the  most
profound  of  losses,  but  the  conviction  that  “Apollo’s
angry”—and 
therefore 
can 
be 
appeased. 
He

accommodates himself to his losses very easily. Hermione
is to be revived, heaven is squared with an apology, and all
past errors are assumed to be easily rectifiable:

            Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness ’gainst thine oracle.
I’ll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy.

(3.2.170–74)

It is significant that nothing here is said about Mamillius.
This is, in a sense, Leontes’ ultimate salvation: his ability
both to ignore what it does not suit him to recognize and
to make metaphysical leaps of faith, to move beyond the
immediacies  of  facts  and  evidence.  It  is  an  ability  that
Paulina  will  invoke  in  the  final  scene  as  an  essential
element  in  the  restoration  of  Hermione:  “It  is  required  /
You do awake your faith” (5.3.118–19).

To  call  Leontes’  accommodation  to  the  death  of  his

child (and  later  that  of  his  wife)  easy  is  not  to  deny  the
realities  of  the  feeling  involved,  but  it  is  to  see  it  as  a
psychological  strategy  that,  morally,  leaves  the  king
unpleasantly intact. Even in coming to his senses, Leontes’
ego  remains  relentlessly  unbruised:  “I  have  too  much
believed mine own suspicion” (3.2.167)—as if there were
some difference between the belief and the suspicion, and
some  lesser  degree  of  credulity  would  have  been
warranted. The death of his son and wife, the loss of his
daughter, are to be lessons for him—terrible lessons—but
that is all they will be. It is Antigonus who suffers death
for  the  abandonment  of  Perdita;  Leontes  remains  at  the
center  of  the  play’s  moral  universe.  The  restored
Hermione  accepts  him  back  at  the  play’s  end;  Perdita
reappears  to  provide  him  with  the  heir  his  actions  have
destroyed;  Mamillius,  the  twin/rival/successor,  remains
safely dead: the preservation and continuance of the king
is throughout the critical issue.

We  can,  if  we  wish,  describe  Leontes’  transformation,

with its recognition of the reality of divine intervention, as
the affirmation of a religious vision (critics often account
for  the  miraculous  endings  of  the  late  plays  by  invoking
Shakespeare’s  supposed  belief,  in  his  old  age,  in  a
transcendent Christianity—his age, remember, was forty-
six  in  1611),  but  I  doubt  that  there  is  much  about  it  to
comfort the religious sensibility. What Leontes constructs
is a version of events in which God has killed his innocent
child in order to teach him a terrible lesson; the child was
in  no  way  at  fault,  but  the  sins  of  the  father  are  here
visited on the son in the worst possible way. It may well be
true that Shakespeare is expressing a religious doctrine in
this, but if so, it should serve to remind us that religion in
Shakespeare’s age was not at all a comforting matter. The
church was not the infinitely welcoming mother you could

always  return  to,  but  a  fierce  and  angry  father—people
were still being burned alive for heresy, for believing the
wrong version of Christianity, in Shakespeare’s time.

For  all  the  ultimate  restorations,  Mamillius  is  really

dead,  and  nothing  restores  that  loss.  To  stress  the
effectiveness of the fantastic reconciliations at the end of
Shakespeare’s  career  is  surely  to  ignore  Mamillius.  The
play itself is curiously compliant about the matter: Paulina
is as hard as the severest moralist could wish in recalling
to Leontes’ attention his responsibility for the loss of his
wife and daughter, but Mamillius is scarcely mentioned. It
is  as  if  the  death  of  the  son,  the  heir—the  rival—really
solves  all  the  play’s  problems,  leaving  the  transcendent
resolution to the unthreatening, infinitely accommodating
daughter and wife.

Indeed,  in  Leontes’  quick  speech  of  repentance  at

3.2.170–74,  nothing  is  said  about  Antigonus  and  Perdita
either.  Out  of  sight,  for  this  hero,  is  out  of  mind.  It  is
Paulina  who  expresses  the  realities  that  Leontes  is
unaware of—that everything does not take place inside his
head, that losses cannot be restored simply by apologizing,
that feelings have no effect on facts:

                O thou tyrant,
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir. Therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair.

(3.2.228–31)

But  even  she,  at  his  merest  gesture  of  repentance,
withdraws the charge, declares herself “a foolish woman”
(line  252),  and  asks  forgiveness.  Even  for  the  best  of
women, speaking the truth to the king is going too far.

Paulina  is  presented  in  one  sense  as  a  heroic  figure,

intensely serious, the one person who is utterly unafraid of
Leontes, willing to say, and keep saying, the hardest truths

to his face. But she is also, obviously, a figure of fun, the
butt of a series of jokes about women who talk too much
and do not know their place, and about men who cannot
control  their  wives—about  women  who  behave,  in  the
deepest  sense,  inappropriately.  Leontes,  in  the  height  of
his  exasperation,  sums  it  up  by  calling  her  “a  mankind
witch”  (2.3.84).  “Mankind”  means  mannish,  masculine:
witches  are  traditionally  female,  but  Paulina  violates  the
gender boundaries as well.

In  a  patriarchal  society,  the  position  of  women  is  a

basic  issue;  Leontes’  charge  against  Paulina  is  obviously
related to his sense of his inability to control his own wife,
his power within his family as a microcosm of his power
over his kingdom, his potency in the largest sense. Paulina
in this scene sums up everything this patriarchal culture
finds  dangerous  in  women:  she  is  shrewish,  refuses  to
obey her husband, meddles in the affairs of men, has no
respect  for  the  king’s  authority.  Leontes  charges  her  in
addition  with  the  female  vice  that  is  predicated  on  the
notion of women who do not know their place: she is “a
most  intelligencing  bawd”  (2.3.85)—a  spying  whore.
Unbridled  language  is  a  sure  sign  of  both  lechery  and
sedition. If we put this together with the assertion that she
is a “mankind witch,” one who behaves like a man, we can
see  the  gender  confusions  at  the  heart  of  the  play  and,
indeed,  of  the  culture:  what  is  most  quintessentially
female about women, their sexuality, is most masculine—
or perhaps more precisely, is most clearly a projection of
masculine fears about women. Sex is something that men
do; anything that forces men to acknowledge a specifically
female  sexuality  (the  fact,  for  example,  that  Hamlet’s
mother  likes  to  sleep  with  her  husband)  is  profoundly
disturbing.

So far, we would say, Paulina is a recognizable and even

commonplace figure for the Renaissance, descending from

the  view  of  women  Shakespeare  dramatized  at  the
beginning of his career in The  Taming  of  the  Shrew.  The
trouble is, however, that to call a woman masculine in the
period, while it is the worst thing that can be said about
her, is also the best. When Ben Jonson wants to idealize
his patron the Countess of Bedford, he gives her “a manly
soul”  (Epigrams  76);  Queen  Elizabeth  addressing  her
troops  before  the  engagement  with  the  Spanish  Armada
told  them  that  though  she  had  the  body  of  a  weak  and
feeble woman, she had the heart and stomach of a king;
and after all the jokes about Paulina, by the end of Act 3
Leontes is deferring to her. Even the charge of witchcraft
gets  turned  around:  Leontes  says  at  the  revelation  of
Hermione’s  statue,  “If  this  be  magic,  let  it  be  an  art  /
Lawful  as  eating.”  To  see  Paulina  as  masculine,  then,  is
ultimately a way of idealizing her; and her masculinity is
the essential, enabling agent of Hermione’s female virtues
of  obedience  and  humility—her  willingness  to  lay  down
her  life  because  of  her  husband’s  displeasure,  however
unmerited.  These  are  the  two  sides  of  Shakespeare’s
women,  and  together  they  epitomize  the  culture’s  deep
ambivalence about both gender and patriarchy.

But  the  other  side  of  Paulina,  the  side  that  somehow

gets  forgotten,  is  her  relation  to  her  husband.  Where  is
Antigonus in this world of heroic female masculinity? In
fact,  Antigonus  is  disposed  of  quite  as  coldbloodedly  as
Mamillius,  and  his  death  is  another  of  the  play’s
unrestored  losses.  He  is  the  faithful  servant  to  an
irrational and vindictive master. He has been criticized for
obeying Leontes, but however barbarous the king’s orders
may be, the alternative to obeying them is to see Perdita
burned.  He  commits  himself  and  the  infant  to  the
protection  of  Providence—naively,  no  doubt,  but  that  is
the point. Paulina essentially writes him off as soon as he
leaves  (see  3.2.255–56),  and  when,  at  the  play’s  end,

Camillo is offered as a replacement, there is no question of
her remaining true to her husband’s memory, as Leontes
has remained true to his wife’s. Antigonus is, in the play’s
terms, a total loss.

Hermione’s death is one of Shakespeare’s most daring

pieces of stagecraft. There is no question that, at the end
of  Act  3,  the  queen  is  dead—as  dead  as  Mamillius.  The
evidence  for  both  deaths  is  the  same,  the  report  of  an
eyewitness;  but  Shakespeare  does  not  leave  the  matter
there.  Leontes  not  only  demands  to  view  the  bodies  but
says he will see them buried together in the same grave.
Shakespeare  could  have  left  Leontes  in  silence,  or  sent
him  into  seclusion,  unable  to  face  the  evidence  of  his
crimes; but we are allowed no doubt about the reality of
the  deaths.  What  this  means  is  that  if  at  the  play’s  end
Leontes is being deceived by Paulina about the reality of
death,  so  by  the  same  token  are  we  being  deceived  by
Shakespeare.

The  move  to  pastoral  and  the  young  lovers,  and  that

geographical figment the seacoast of Bohemia, comes via
the most notorious of Shakespearean gimmicks, the bear
that  devours  Antigonus—an  impossible  problem  for
directors, a tragic moment that always gets a laugh. The
tragedy becomes comedy—black comedy initially, though
as Act 4 continues, it is clear that even within the world of
shepherds  and  romance  there  is  a  great  deal  that  is
threatening. Indeed, the very presence of aristocrats in the
world  of  pastoral  is  ominous  and  disruptive.  Florizell
woos  Perdita  by  comparing  himself  to  a  series  of  divine
lovers bent on the rape of their mortal mistresses; Perdita
invokes the flowers that fell from Proserpina’s arms as the
god  of  the  Underworld  carried  her  off  to  an  enforced
marriage  in  Hades.  Polixenes’  fury  at  his  son’s  wish  to
choose his own bride would have seemed less irrational to
Shakespeare’s  audience  than  it  does  to  us—princes’

marriages were matters of state—but even so, the play has
little  to  say  in  favor  of  romance.  The  only  reason  the
elopement constitutes a happy ending is that Perdita is not
only  not  a  shepherdess,  but  the  very  princess  Polixenes
would  have  chosen  as  his  son’s  wife,  the  one  bride  who
can heal the wounds of the previous generation.

Proserpina being abducted in “Dis’s wagon.” (4.4.139–41)
From Claude François Menestrier, L’art des emblemes . . . (1684).

It is to the point, too, that the happy ending depends on

the manipulations of both Autolycus and Paulina, and on
an  egregious  piece  of  theatrical  artistry.  In  this  case  the
line between the artist and the con-artist is a very fine one.
The  faith  that  Paulina  demands  from  Leontes  for  her
tableau  vivant  is  only  a  courtly  version  of  the  gullibility
Autolycus’s  ballads  exact  from  his  rural  clientele.
Hermione’s statue itself is invented out of old tales, out of
Vasari’s  Life  of  Giulio  Romano  (which  seems  to  imply,
erroneously,  that  this  painter,  renowned  for  the  lifelike

quality of his work, was also a sculptor), and out of Ovid’s
account  of  the  sculptor  Pygmalion,  whose  statue  of  the
perfect wife answered his prayers by coming to life. The
catharsis engineered by Paulina depends on sixteen years
of suffering and penance on Leontes’ part. Nothing is said,
however,  of  what  Hermione  has  undergone  during  the
sixteen years; and indeed, the play’s stagecraft renders the
question  irrelevant:  she  has  been  dead.  For  modern
audiences, the reunion of husband and wife is an essential
element  in  what  is,  theatrically,  an  overwhelming
conclusion, but this is probably an anachronistic reaction:
Leontes’  courtiers  continually  urge  him  to  remarry,  and
Paulina  prevents  him  from  doing  so  precisely  because
Hermione could have been produced at any time, the royal
family reconstituted, new heirs born. The oracle would not
thereby  have  been  fulfilled,  but  clearly  no  one  at  court
except  Paulina  believes  that  it  needs  to  be.  For
Shakespeare’s age, the restoration of Perdita, the finding
of the heir, the continuance of the royal line, is the crucial
element; even Hermione says she has preserved herself to
see Perdita, not Leontes. And once the losses are restored,
Paulina returns to her proper status of obedient wife—to
somebody,  to  anybody,  to  whomever  the  king  chooses.
Grace  and  wonder  inhere  only  in  kingship.  The  Winter’s
Tale  is  very  much  a  royalist,  patriarchal  vision,  and  the
extent  to  which  it  succeeds  for  modern  audiences  and
readers  is  a  measure  of  the  extent  to  which  we  are  still
willing to buy into that ideology.

Further Reading

In  addition  to  the  following  books  and  articles,  see
www.folger.edu/shakespeare  and  www.folger.edu/online-
resources.

The Winter’s Tale

Adelman,  Janet.  “Masculine  Authority  and  the  Maternal
Body:  The  Return  to  Origins  in  the  Romances.”  In
Suffocating  Mothers:  Fantasies  of  Maternal  Origin  in
Shakespeare’s  Plays,  Hamlet  to  the  Tempest,  pp.  193–238,
esp. pp. 219–38. New York and London: Roudedge, 1991.

In  her  feminist  psychoanalytic  study  of  The  Winter’s

Tale (WT),  Adelman  traces  the  movement  from  “a  sterile
court in which the maternal body and the progeny which
bear its signs” must be exorcised to a court in which that
body  is  radically  recuperated,  “its  regenerative  sanctity
recognized and embraced.” The shift from a male pastoral
(static  and  nostalgic)  to  a  female  pastoral  (creative  and
full  of  hope),  with  the  corresponding  shift  in  presiding
deities from Apollo to the goddess Nature, epitomizes the
turn  from  tragedy  to  romance.  Where  Leontes  and
Polixenes base their masculine identity on separation from
the  female  (1.2.85–101),  Florizell  finds  his  in  the  fertile
promise  of  Perdita  (4.4.49–53,  134–56,  and  569–70).
Patriarchy  is  affirmed  in  the  final  scene,  but  it  is
“grounded  in  a  benignly  generative  maternal  presence”:
Leontes’  power  remains  contingent  on  the  return  of
Hermione.

Bartholomeusz, Dennis. The  Winter’s  Tale  in  Performance
in England and America, 1611–1976. Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

In  addition  to  analyzing  the  earliest  performances  of

WT  at  the  Globe  and  Whitehall  in  the  first  part  of  the
seventeenth century and David Garrick’s adaptation in the
eighteenth, this examination of sixty-two productions pays
special  attention  to  revivals  by  J.  P.  Kemble,  William
Charles Macready, Samuel Phelps, Charles Kean, Herbert
Beerbohm  Tree,  Harley  Granville-Barker,  Peter  Brook,
and Trevor Nunn. Bartholomeusz observes the interactive
influence of critics and actors/directors in interpreting the
play,  particularly  its  mix  of  diverse  elements  and  its
treatment  of  Leontes’  jealousy  and  the  “resurrection”  of
Hermione.  While  modern  productions  have  achieved  a
certain brilliance in their emphasis on symbolism, “there
has  been  no  automatic  rising  curve  of  progress”  since
Granville-Barker’s 
effort 
in 
1912 
to 
recover 
“the

Elizabethan principles at work in Shakespeare’s theatrical
art.”

Barton,  Anne.  “Leontes  and  the  Spider:  Language  and
Speaker  in  Shakespeare’s  Last  Plays.”  In  Shakespeare’s
Styles: Essays in Honour of Kenneth Muir, edited by Philip
Edwards, Inga-Stina Ewbank, and G. K. Hunter, pp. 131–
50.  Cambridge  and  New  York:  Cambridge  University
Press,  1980.  Reprinted  in  Barton’s  Essays,  Mainly
Shakespearean, 
pp. 
161–81. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge

University Press, 1994.

Barton finds in Leontes’ spider passage (2.1.47–63) the

stylistic key to Shakespeare’s late plays in general and WT
in  particular.  In  these  plays  Shakespeare  subordinates
character  to  plot,  deliberately  destroying  the  “close
relationship between language and dramatic character” he
had  so  successfully  forged  in  the  tragedies.  Language  is
used  no  longer  to  reveal  a  character’s  nature  and

intentions  but  to  emphasize  the  “impersonal  quality”  of
the  dramatic  occasion;  as  a  result  of  this  gap  between
language and speaker, characters remain unaware of what
is clear to the audience—the primary, but to the speakers
“involuntary,”  meaning  of  their  words.  “The  involuntary
plays a significantly new part in the Last Plays.”

Bethell,  Samuel  L.  The  Winter’s  Tale:  A  Study.  London:
Staples Press, 1947.

In this first book-length study of the play, Bethell reads

WT  as  a  dramatic  illustration  of  Christian  humanism.
Numerous  anachronisms  combine  with  the  pervasive
presence  of  such  concepts  as  grace,  sin,  penance,
conscience,  redemption,  and  the  Pauline  view  of  a
“resurrected life” to result in “a timeless Christian story in
no  place  and  every  place.”  The  dramatic  synthesis  of
natural  and  supernatural,  medieval  and  classical,  sacred
and  secular,  and  symbolic  and  realistic  makes  WT  “the
supreme  literary  expression  of  the  Baroque.”  The
playwright’s  great  achievement  is  his  fusion  of  Hellenic-
medieval  romance  (the  Florizell-Perdita  story)  and  the
“unromantic  otherworldliness  of  orthodox  medieval
religion” (the Leontes-Hermione story) to reveal “the work
of Providence in individual and national history.”

Biggins, Dennis. “ ‘Exit pursued by a Beare’: A Problem in
The Winter’s Tale.” Shakespeare Quarterly 13 (1962): 3–13.

After  agreeing  with  those  who  claim  that  the  beast  in

the stage direction at 3.3.64 was first impersonated by an
actor rather than played by a real bear, Biggins turns his
attention  to  the  structural,  tonal,  thematic,  and,  most
important, symbolic significance of Antigonus’ “disposal.”
By pursuing the agent of tyranny and sparing the innocent
baby,  the  bear  functions  as  the  symbol  of  “destruction,
broken  integrity,  and  Heavenly  vengeance”  and  thus

makes possible a more serious than comic response to this
“atmospherically ticklish moment.”

Cavell,  Stanley.  “Recounting  Gains,  Showing  Losses  (A
Reading of The Winter’s Tale).” In Disowning Knowledge in
Six Plays of Shakespeare, pp. 196–206. Cambridge and New
York:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1987.  Reprinted  in
Cavel’s  In  Quest  of  the  Ordinary  Lines  of  Skepticism  and
Romanticism, pp. 76–101. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1988.

Cavell  examines  WT  in  the  context  of  philosophical

skepticism, finding in Leontes “a portrait of the skeptic as
fanatic.” What interests the author is the “intersection of
the epistemologist’s questioning of [the]  existence  .  .  .  of
the  external  world  .  .  .  with  Leontes’  perplexity  about
knowing  whether  his  son  is  his.”  Neither  knowing  by
telling (language) nor knowing by observing (empiricism)
can  confirm  or  deny  his  paternity.  Cavell  considers  the
complex  relationship  between  Leontes  and  Mamillius  to
be  a  variation  on  the  Oedipal  conflict:  instead  of  being
initiated by the son’s wish to remove or replace the father,
the  conflict  in  WT  “seems  primarily  generated  by  the
father’s  wish  to  replace  or  remove  the  son.”  The  son’s
death  functions  as  wish  fulfillment,  thereby  enabling
Leontes  to  disown  his  role  in  the  procreative  act,  free
himself of the responsibilities of fatherhood, and cling to
fantasies  of  childhood  innocence.  The  first  half  of  WT
constitutes  a  study  of  skepticism;  the  second,  a  study  of
the search for recovery from it. The final scene is one of
“issuing”  in  which  Leontes  and  Hermione  each  awaken
and create one another, thus showing “what it may be to
find in oneself the life of the world.”

Clubb,  Louise  G.  “The  Tragicomic  Bear.”  Comparative
Literature Studies 9 (1972): 17–30.

Clubb  shows  how  Shakespeare’s  use  of  a  man-eating

bear in the stage direction at 3.3.64 to effect the transition
from  tragedy  to  comedy  “accords  with  the  ambiguity
attached  to  the  bear  and  distinguishing  it  from  other
beasts in sixteenth-century Italian pastoral tragicomedy.”
The animal traditionally thought of as unformed at birth
and licked into shape is “both more and less terrible” than
other  wild  beasts;  savage  and  yet  tamable,  potentially
tragic  or  comic,  the  bear  served  as  an  “emblematically
appropriate”  figure  for  playwrights  experimenting  with
mixed  genres.  “For  transitions,  especially,  the  bear  is  a
tragicomic beast par excellence,”  ensuring  “the  tempering
of pain or laughter.”

Greene, Robert. Pandosto. The Triumph of Time (1588). In
Narrative and Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, edited by
Geoffrey Bullough, vol. 8, pp. 156–99. London: Routledge
&  Kegan  Paul;  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,
1975.

This  prose  romance,  first  published  in  1588,  was  the

primary  source  for  Shakespeare’s  WT.  While  clearly
indebted to its plot, especially in the first three acts of his
play,  Shakespeare  changed  names,  reversed  locales
(Leontes’  counterpart  presides  over  Bohemia,  while
Polixenes’  rules  Sicilia),  introduced  new  characters  (e.g.,
Paulina,  Antigonus,  and  Autolycus),  treated  Leontes’
jealousy as a surprising explosion rather than something
building  over  time,  quickly  passed  over  the  interval  of
sixteen  years,  and  developed  the  sheepshearing  festival
from 
a 
brief 
allusion 
into 
a 
full-blown 
scene.

Shakespeare’s decision to “resurrect” Hermione, eliminate
attempted incest by Leontes, and forgo his suicide resulted
in multiple reunions and a tonal atmosphere far different
from  that  of  Greene’s  conclusion.  Minor  sources  include
Greene’s 
“Conny-Catching” 
pamphlets, 
which 
carry

significance for the creation of Autolycus, and book 10 of

Ovid’s  Metamorphoses,  which  deals  with  the  Pygmalion
story of a statue come to life.

Hunt, Maurice, ed. The Winter’s Tale: Critical Essays. New
York: Garland Publishing, 1995.

The  first  part  of  this  anthology  (following  an

introductory overview of the scholarship and performance
history 
related 
to 
WT) 
provides 
nineteen 
critical

commentaries  spanning  the  years  1817  to  1995;  the
second  part  is  devoted  to  theater  reviews  covering
productions 
between 
1802 
and 
1988. 
Along 
with

observations by William Hazlitt, Samuel Taylor Coleridge,
Harley  Granville-Barker,  and  Sir  Arthur  Quiller-Couch,
the  critical  essays  contain  F.  David  Hoeniger’s  “The
Meaning 
of 
The 
Winter’s 
Tale,” 
Northrop 
Frye’s

“Recognition  in  The  Winter’s  Tale,”  Edward  W.  Tayler’s
“Shakespeare’s The Winter’s Tale” (from Nature and Art in
Renaissance 
Literature), 
Inga-Stina 
Ewbank’s 
“The

Triumph of Time in The Winter’s Tale,” Robert G. Hunter’s
“The  Winter’s  Tale” (from Shakespeare  and  the  Comedy  of
Forgiveness), Joan Hartwig’s “The Tragicomic Perspective
of  The  Winter’s  Tale,”  Peter  Lindenbaum’s  “Time,  Sexual
Love,  and  the  Uses  of  Pastoral  in  The  Winter’s  Tale,”
Howard Felperin’s “Our Carver’s Excellence: The Winter’s
Tale”  (from  Shakespearean  Romance),  Carol  Thomas
Neely’s  “The  Winter’s  Tale:  The  Triumph  of  Speech,”
Patricia  Southard  Gourlay’s  “ ‘O  my  most  sacred  lady’:
Female 
Metaphor 
in 
The 
Winter’s 
Tale,” 
Richard

Proudfoot’s  “Verbal  Reminiscence  and  the  Two-Part
Structure of The Winter’s Tale,” Russ McDonald’s “Poetry
and  Plot  in  The  Winter’s  Tale,”  Kay  Stockholder’s  “From
Matter  to  Magic:  The  Winter’s  Tale”  (from  Dream  Works:
Lovers  and  Families  in  Shakespeare’s  Plays),  Maurice
Hunt’s  “The  Labor  of  The  Winter’s  Tale,”  and  David
Bergeron’s  “The  Apollo  Mission  in  The  Winter’s  Tale.”  In
addition  to  nineteenth-century  productions  by  J.  P.

Kemble,  Samuel  Phelps,  and  Charles  Kean,  the  theater
reviews relate to revivals by Granville-Barker (1912), Peter
Brook  (1951),  Trevor  Nunn  (1969),  John  Barton  and
Trevor Nunn (1976), Jane  Howell  (for  the  BBC  in  1981),
Terry Hands (1986), David William (1986), and Peter Hall
(1988).

Morse,  William  R.  “Metacriticism  and  Materiality:  The
Case of Shakespeare’s The Winter’s Tale.” English Literary
History 58 (1991): 283–304.

This materialist-metacritical approach to WT questions

the  New  Historicist  claim  of  an  absolute  cultural
hegemony 
in 
Shakespeare’s 
time 
that 
completely

contained 
subversive 
tendencies. 
Morse 
views 
the

“seemingly  apolitical”  WT  as  a  site  of  conflict  between
dominant 
and 
emergent 
ideologies. 
Whatever 
the

commitment  of  James  I’s  court  to  the  ideology  of
absolutism  in  1610,  WT  shows  that  the  emergent  anti-
absolutist  ideology  “is  already  passing  into  a  kind  of
cultural  dominance,  consigning  the  absolutist  culture  of
the court to a residual status thirty years before political
events  confirm  the  shift.”  Shakespeare’s  self-conscious
appropriation  of  the  genre  of  romance  disengages  the
audience 
and 
demystifies 
authority 
“through 
the

deconstruction  of  the  transcendent  conceptions  of
metaphysics and rationality that privilege and sustain it.”
WT’s  conflicting  modes  of  representation,  its  equal
criticism  of  medieval  analogical  discourse  and  modern
analytical-referential  discourse,  and  its  “incomplete”
containment  of  subversive  elements  reveal  a  play  of
“radical  political  openness”  and,  by  extension,  a  world
“teeter[ing] in the gap” between contending ideologies.

Mowat, 
Barbara 
A. 
“Rogues, 
Shepherds, 
and 
the

Counterfeit  Distressed:  Texts  and  Infracontexts  in  The
Winter’s Tale.” Shakespeare Studies 22 (1994): 58–76.

Mowat  analyzes  the  matrix  of  printed  discourse

stratifying  and  complicating  the  surface  meaning  of  WT
4.3 (Autolycus’  encounter  with  the  Shepherd’s  Son).  One
set  of  contexts—the  Greek  myth  of  the  “master  thief”
Autolycus  (the  son  of  Mercury),  Greene’s  Second  Part  of
Conny-Catching,  vagabond  songs,  and  picaresque  tales
—“makes  of  the  dramatic  moment  a  variously  nuanced
celebration of the cunning of the trickster.” Another set—a
vast  body  of  “rogue”  literature  that  contributed  to  a
century-long  socioeconomic  debate  on  the  issue  of
vagrancy  and  the  need  to  distinguish  between  the
genuinely  distressed  and  the  counterfeit  distressed
—“makes the moment instead an enactment of frightening
social conflict.” An intertextual reading of 4.3 allows one
to  recover  the  scene’s  embedded  complexity  and  “to
exchange  [its]  amusing  surface  context  .  .  .  for  a
supercharged contextual world.” Mowat calls attention to
the  darker  and  more  specific  (even  legal)  semantics  in
Shakespeare’s time of the word “rogue,” the term used to
characterize Autolycus in the list of dramatis personae.

Orgel,  Stephen.  “The  Poetics  of  Incomprehensibility.”
Shakespeare Quarterly 42 (1991): 431–37.

Orgel considers four obscure passages from WT (1.2.13–

16  and  175–83,  3.2.46–51  and  111–13)  to  argue  that
“linguistic  opacity”  is  a  basic  feature  of  the  play.  He
cautions against imposing an arbitrary clarity where, even
for  Shakespeare’s  audience,  ambiguity  was  the  desired
end.  Some  lines,  while  definitely  intended  to  mean
something, 
are 
nevertheless 
meant 
to 
resist

“paraphrasable meaning.” WT speaks “incomprehensibly.”

Schalkwyk,  David.  “ ‘A  Lady’s  “Verily”  Is  as  Potent  as  a
Lord’s’:  Women,  Word,  and  Witchcraft  in  The  Winter’s
Tale.” English Literary Renaissance 22 (1992): 242–72.

Schalkwyk views the exchange between Hermione and

Polixenes at 1.2.50–70 as a microcosm of WT’s exploration
of  “the  radical  instability,  for  patriarchy,  of  [the  female]
word.”  Informing  both  Sicilian  and  Bohemian  society  is
the recognition that legitimacy of the bloodline, so crucial
to  patriarchal  authority,  depended  on  the  woman’s  word
concerning  paternity—a  word,  however,  that  was  less
trustworthy  than  man’s  because  “women  .  .  .  will  say
anything” (1.2.166–67). Accusations of witchcraft directed
at  women  who  “transgress  the  patriarchal  order”  further
devalue  female  speech  and  erotic  power.  Rather  than
offering a regenerated world that recognizes the dignity of
women,  the  final  scene  “rehearses  the  political  need  for
men  to  escape  their  ideological  impasse  through  the
[containment  and]  appropriation  of  the  potency  of  the
female word and the concomitant silencing of women.” By
justifying female virtue (i.e., asserting a woman’s chastity),
“a  pair  of  kings”  (5.3.182)  guarantees  the  honesty  and
worth  of  Hermione  and  Paulina,  thus  fulfilling  male
desires and furthering the ends of patriarchy.

Traub, 
Valerie. 
“Jewels, 
Statues, 
and 
Corpses:

Containment  of  Female  Erotic  Power.”  In  Desire  and
Anxiety: Circulations of Sexuality in Shakespearean Drama,
pp.  25–49,  esp.  pp.  42–49.  London  and  New  York:
Routledge,  1992.  [An  earlier  version  of  this  chapter
appeared in Shakespeare Studies 20 (1988): 215–38.]

Traub  explores  the  meaning  of  masculine  anxiety

toward  female  power  within  the  context  of  recent
feminist,  psychoanalytic,  and  New  Historicist  criticism.
Focusing  on  female  chastity  in  Hamlet, Othello,  and  WT,
she maintains that male anxiety toward female eroticism
“is  channeled  into  a  strategy  of  containment;  the  erotic
threat  of  the  female  body  is  psychically  contained  by
means  of  a  metaphoric  and  dramatic  transformation  of
women  into  jewels,  statues,  and  corpses.”  Instead  of

privileging feminist values (see Adelman above), the final
scene  presents  the  return  of  Hermione,  her  sexuality
“monumentally”  displaced  into  a  statue,  as  “wish-
fulfillment” for Leontes, who recovers a virtuous wife and
patriarchal  authority  over  “all  social  relations.”  Traub’s
reading 
challenges 
the 
prevailing 
psychoanalytic

interpretation  of  the  romances  as  “reconstituting  the
broken families” of the tragedies: “the restraints of genre
do not contain the erotic anxieties of gender.”

Shakespeare’s Language

Abbott,  E.  A.  A  Shakespearian  Grammar.  New  York:
Haskell House, 1972.

This  compact  reference  book,  first  published  in  1870,

helps with many difficulties in Shakespeare’s language. It
systematically accounts for a host of differences between
Shakespeare’s usage and sentence structure and our own.

Blake, Norman. Shakespeare’s Language: An Introduction.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983.

This  general  introduction  to  Elizabethan  English

discusses various aspects of the language of Shakespeare
and  his  contemporaries,  offering  possible  meanings  for
hundreds of ambiguous constructions.

Dobson,  E.  J.  English  Pronunciation,  1500–1700.  2  vols.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968.

This  long  and  technical  work  includes  chapters  on

spelling (and its reformation), phonetics, stressed vowels,
and consonants in early modern English.

Hope,  Jonathan.  Shakespeare’s  Grammar.  London:  Arden
Shakespeare, 2003.

Commissioned 
as 
a 
replacement 
for 
Abbott’s

Shakespearian  Grammar,  Hope’s  book  is  organized  in

terms of the two basic parts of speech, the noun and the
verb. After extensive analysis of the noun phrase and the
verb  phrase  come  briefer  discussions  of  subjects  and
agents, objects, complements, and adverbials.

Houston, John. Shakespearean Sentences: A Study in Style
and  Syntax.  Baton  Rouge:  Louisiana  State  University
Press, 1988.

Houston 
studies 
Shakespeare’s 
stylistic 
choices,

considering  matters  such  as  sentence  length  and  the
relative  positions  of  subject,  verb,  and  direct  object.
Examining  plays  throughout  the  canon  in  a  roughly
chronological,  developmental  order,  he  analyzes  how
sentence 
structure 
is 
used 
in 
setting 
tone, 
in

characterization, and for other dramatic purposes.

Onions, C. T. A  Shakespeare  Glossary.  Oxford:  Clarendon
Press, 1986.

This 
revised 
edition 
updates 
Onions’s 
standard,

selective  glossary  of  words  and  phrases  in  Shakespeare’s
plays that are now obsolete, archaic, or obscure.

Robinson, Randal. Unlocking Shakespeare’s Language: Help
for the Teacher and Student. Urbana, Ill.: National Council
of  Teachers  of  English  and  the  ERIC  Clearinghouse  on
Reading and Communication Skills, 1989.

Specifically 
designed 
for 
the 
high-school 
and

undergraduate  college  teacher  and  student,  Robinson’s
book  addresses  the  problems  that  most  often  hinder
present-day  readers  of  Shakespeare.  Through  work  with
his  own  students,  Robinson  found  that  many  readers
today 
are 
particularly 
puzzled 
by 
such 
stylistic

characteristics  as  subject-verb  inversion,  interrupted
structures,  and  compression.  He  shows  how  our  own
colloquial  language  contains  comparable  structures,  and
thus  helps  students  recognize  such  structures  when  they

find  them  in  Shakespeare’s  plays.  This  book  supplies
worksheets—with 
examples 
from 
major 
plays—to

illuminate  and  remedy  such  problems  as  unusual
sequences of words and the separation of related parts of
sentences.

Williams,  Gordon.  A  Dictionary  of  Sexual  Language  and
Imagery  in  Shakespearean  and  Stuart  Literature.  3  vols.
London: Athlone Press, 1994.

Williams  provides  a  comprehensive  list  of  words  to

which  Shakespeare,  his  contemporaries,  and  later  Stuart
writers 
gave 
sexual 
meanings. 
He 
supports 
his

identification of these meanings by extensive quotations.

Shakespeare’s Life

Baldwin, T. W. William Shakspere’s Petty School. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1943.

Baldwin here investigates the theory and practice of the

petty  school,  the  first  level  of  education  in  Elizabethan
England. He focuses on that educational system primarily
as it is reflected in Shakespeare’s art.

Baldwin, T. W. William Shakspere’s Small Latine and Lesse
Greeke. 2 vols. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1944.

Baldwin  attacks  the  view  that  Shakespeare  was  an

uneducated  genius—a  view  that  had  been  dominant
among  Shakespeareans  since  the  eighteenth  century.
Instead,  Baldwin  shows,  the  educational  system  of
Shakespeare’s  time  would  have  given  the  playwright  a
strong  background  in  the  classics,  and  there  is  much  in
the  plays  that  shows  how  Shakespeare  benefited  from
such an education.

Beier,  A.  L.,  and  Roger  Finlay,  eds.  London  1500–1700:
The Making of the Metropolis. New York: Longman, 1986.

Focusing  on  the  economic  and  social  history  of  early

modern  London,  these  collected  essays  probe  aspects  of
metropolitan  life,  including  “Population  and  Disease,”
“Commerce and Manufacture,” and “Society and Change.”

Chambers, E. K. William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and
Problems. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930.

Analyzing  in  great  detail  the  scant  historical  data,

Chambers’s complex, scholarly study considers the nature
of the texts in which Shakespeare’s work is preserved.

Cressy,  David.  Education  in  Tudor  and  Stuart  England.
London: Edward Arnold, 1975.

This volume collects sixteenth-, seventeenth-, and early

eighteenth-century documents detailing aspects of formal
education in England, such as the curriculum, the control
and  organization  of  education,  and  the  education  of
women.

Duncan-Jones,  Katherine.  Shakespeare:  An  Ungentle  Life.
London: Arden Shakespeare, 2010.

This  biography,  first  published  in  2001  under  the  title

Ungentle Shakespeare: Scenes from His Life, sets out to look
into  the  documents  from  Shakespeare’s  personal  life—
especially legal and financial records—and it finds there a
man  very  different  from  the  one  portrayed  in  more
traditional biographies. He is “ungentle” in being born to a
lower  social  class  and  in  being  a  bit  ruthless  and  more
than a bit stingy. As the author notes, “three topics were
formerly 
taboo 
both 
in 
polite 
society 
and 
in

Shakespearean  biography:  social  class,  sex  and  money.  I
have  been  indelicate  enough  to  give  a  good  deal  of
attention to all three.” She examines “Shakespeare’s uphill
struggle to achieve, or purchase, ‘gentle’ status.” She finds
that  “Shakespeare  was  strongly  interested  in  intense
relationships with well-born young men.” And she shows

that  he  was  “reluctant  to  divert  much,  if  any,  of  his
considerable  wealth  towards  charitable,  neighbourly,  or
altruistic ends.” She insists that his plays and poems are
“great, and enduring,” and that it is in them “that the best
of him is to be found.”

Dutton, Richard. William Shakespeare: A Literary Life. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989.

Not a biography in the traditional sense, Dutton’s very

readable  work  nevertheless  “follows  the  contours  of
Shakespeare’s life” as it examines Shakespeare’s career as
playwright  and  poet,  with  consideration  of  his  patrons,
theatrical associations, and audience.

Honan,  Park.  Shakespeare:  A  Life.  New  York:  Oxford
University Press, 1998.

Honan’s  accessible  biography  focuses  on  the  various

contexts  of  Shakespeare’s  life—physical,  social,  political,
and  cultural—to  place  the  dramatist  within  a  lucidly
described 
world. 
The 
biography 
includes 
detailed

examinations  of,  for  example,  Stratford  schooling,
theatrical  politics  of  1590s  London,  and  the  careers  of
Shakespeare’s associates. The author draws on a wealth of
established  knowledge  and  on  interesting  new  research
into  local  records  and  documents;  he  also  engages  in
speculation  about,  for  example,  the  possibilities  that
Shakespeare  was  a  tutor  in  a  Catholic  household  in  the
north of England in the 1580s and that he acted particular
roles  in  his  own  plays,  areas  that  reflect  new,  but
unproven  and  debatable,  data—though  Honan  is  usually
careful to note where a particular narrative “has not been
capable of proof or disproof.”

Potter,  Lois.  The  Life  of  William  Shakespeare:  A  Critical
Biography. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.

This  critical  biography  of  Shakespeare  takes  the

playwright from cradle to grave, paying primary attention
to his literary and theatrical milieu. The chapters “follow a
chronological  sequence,”  each  focusing  on  a  handful  of
years in the playwright’s life. In the chapters that cover his
playwriting years (5–17), each chapter focuses on events in
Stratford-upon-Avon  and  in  London  (especially  in  the
commercial  theaters)  while  giving  equal  space  to
discussions of the plays and/or poems Shakespeare wrote
during  those  years.  Filled  with  information  from
Shakespeare’s literary and theatrical worlds, the biography
also 
shares 
frequent 
insights 
into 
how 
modern

productions  of  a  given  play  can  shed  light  on  the  play,
especially  in  scenes  that  Shakespeare’s  text  presents
ambiguously.

Schoenbaum, 
S. 
William 
Shakespeare: 
A 
Compact

Documentary  Life.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,
1977.

Schoenbaum’s 
evidence-based 
biography 
of

Shakespeare is a compact version of his magisterial folio-
size Shakespeare: A Documentary Life (New  York:  Oxford
University  Press,  1975).  Schoenbaum  structures  his
readable “compact” narrative around the documents that
still 
exist 
which 
chronicle 
Shakespeare’s 
familial,

theatrical, legal, and financial existence. These documents,
along  with  those  discovered  since  the  1970s,  form  the
basis of almost all Shakespeare biographies written since
Schoenbaum’s books appeared.

Shakespeare’s Theater

Bentley,  G.  E.  The  Profession  of  Player  in  Shakespeare’s
Time,  1590–1642.  Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,
1984.

Bentley readably sets forth a wealth of evidence about

performance in Shakespeare’s time, with special attention
to  the  relations  between  player  and  company,  and  the
business of casting, managing, and touring.

Berry, Herbert. Shakespeare’s Playhouses. New York: AMS
Press, 1987.

Berry’s 
six 
essays 
collected 
here 
discuss 
(with

illustrations)  varying  aspects  of  the  four  playhouses  in
which  Shakespeare  had  a  financial  stake:  the  Theatre  in
Shoreditch,  the  Blackfriars,  and  the  first  and  second
Globe.

Berry,  Herbert,  William  Ingram,  and  Glynne  Wickham,
eds.  English  Professional  Theatre,  1530–1660.  Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Wickham presents the government documents designed

to  control  professional  players,  their  plays,  and  playing
places.  Ingram  handles  the  professional  actors,  giving  as
representative  a  life  of  the  actor  Augustine  Phillips,  and
discussing, 
among 
other 
topics, 
patrons, 
acting

companies, 
costumes, 
props, 
playbooks, 
provincial

playing,  and  child  actors.  Berry  treats  the  twenty-three
different London playhouses from 1560 to 1660 for which
there are records, including four inns.

Cook, 
Ann 
Jennalie. 
The 
Privileged 
Playgoers 
of

Shakespeare’s  London.  Princeton:  Princeton  University
Press, 1981.

Cook’s  work  argues,  on  the  basis  of  sociological,

economic, and documentary evidence, that Shakespeare’s
audience—and  the  audience  for  English  Renaissance
drama generally—consisted mainly of the “privileged.”

Dutton,  Richard,  ed.  The  Oxford  Handbook  of  Early
Modern Theatre. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.

Dutton  divides  his  study  of  the  theatrical  industry  of

Shakespeare’s  time  into  the  following  sections:  “Theatre
Companies,” 
“London 
Playhouses,” 
“Other 
Playing

Spaces,”  “Social  Practices,”  and  “Evidence  of  Theatrical
Practices.”  Each  of  these  sections  is  further  subdivided,
with  subdivisions  assigned  to  individual  experts.  W.  R.
Streitberger treats the “Adult Playing Companies to 1583”;
Sally-Beth  MacLean  those  from  1583  to  1593;  Roslyn  L.
Knutson,  1593–1603;  Tom  Rutter,  1603–1613;  James  J.
Marino, 1613–1625; and Martin Butler, the “Adult and Boy
Playing  Companies  1625–1642.”  Michael  Shapiro  is
responsible for the “Early (Pre-1590) Boy Companies and
Their Acting Venues,” while Mary Bly writes of “The Boy
Companies  1599–1613.”  David  Kathman  handles  “Inn-
Yard  Playhouses”;  Gabriel  Egan,  “The  Theatre  in
Shoreditch 1576–1599”; Andrew Gurr, “Why the Globe Is
Famous”; Ralph Alan Cohen, “The Most Convenient Place:
The  Second  Blackfriars  Theater  and  Its  Appeal”;  Mark
Bayer,  “The  Red  Bull  Playhouse”;  and  Frances  Teague,
“The  Phoenix  and  the  Cockpit-in-Court  Playhouses.”
Turning  to  “Other  Playing  Spaces,”  Suzanne  Westfall
describes  how  “ ‘He  who  pays  the  piper  calls  the  tune’:
Household  Entertainments”;  Alan  H.  Nelson,  “The
Universities  and  the  Inns  of  Court”;  Peter  Greenfield,
“Touring”; John H. Astington, “Court Theatre”; and Anne
Lancashire, 
“London 
Street 
Theater.” 
For 
“Social

Practices,”  Alan  Somerset  writes  of  “Not  Just  Sir  Oliver
Owlet:  From  Patrons  to  ‘Patronage’  of  Early  Modern
Theatre,” Dutton himself of “The Court, the Master of the
Revels,  and  the  Players,”  S.  P.  Cerasano  of  “Theater
Entrepreneurs and Theatrical Economics,” Ian W. Archer
of “The City of London and the Theatre,” David Kathman
of “Players, Livery Companies, and Apprentices,” Kathleen
E.  McLuskie  of  “Materiality  and  the  Market:  The  Lady
Elizabeth’s  Men  and  the  Challenge  of  Theatre  History,”

Heather Hirschfield of “ ‘For the author’s credit’: Issues of
Authorship in English Renaissance Drama,” and Natasha
Korda  of  “Women  in  the  Theater.”  On  “Theatrical
Practices,”  Jacalyn  Royce  discusses  “Early  Modern
Naturalistic  Acting:  The  Role  of  the  Globe  in  the
Development  of  Personation”;  Tiffany  Stern,  “Actors’
Parts”;  Alan  Dessen,  “Stage  Directions  and  the  Theater
Historian”; R. B. Graves, “Lighting”; Lucy Munro, “Music
and  Sound”;  Dutton  himself,  “Properties”;  Thomas
Postlewait, “Eyewitnesses to History: Visual Evidence for
Theater  in  Early  Modern  England”;  and  Eva  Griffith,
“Christopher Beeston: His Property and Properties.”

Greg,  W.  W.  Dramatic  Documents  from  the  Elizabethan
Playhouses. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1931.

Greg itemizes and briefly describes almost all the play

manuscripts that survive from the period 1590 to around
1660,  including,  among  other  things,  players’  parts.  His
second volume offers facsimiles of selected manuscripts.

Harbage,  Alfred.  Shakespeare’s  Audience.  New  York:
Columbia University Press, 1941.

Harbage 
investigates 
the 
fragmentary 
surviving

evidence to interpret the size, composition, and behavior
of Shakespeare’s audience.

Keenan,  Siobhan.  Acting  Companies  and  Their  Plays  in
Shakespeare’s 
London. 
London: 
Bloomsbury 
Arden

Shakespeare, 2014.

Keenan  “explores  how  the  needs,  practices,  resources

and  pressures  on  acting  companies  and  playwrights
informed  not  only  the  performance  and  publication  of
contemporary dramas but playwrights’ writing practices.”
Each  chapter  focuses  on  one  important  factor  that
influenced  Renaissance  playwrights  and  players.  The
initial focus is on how “the nature and composition of the

acting  companies”  influenced  the  playwrights  who  wrote
for them. Then, using “the Diary of theatre manager Philip
Henslowe  and  manuscript  playbooks  showing  signs  of
theatrical  use,”  Keenan  examines  the  relations  between
acting  companies  and  playwrights.  Other  influences
include  “the  physical  design  and  facilities  of  London’s
outdoor  and  indoor  theatrical  spaces”  and  the  diverse
audiences for plays, including royal and noble patrons.

Shapiro,  Michael.  Children  of  the  Revels:  The  Boy
Companies  of  Shakespeare’s  Time  and  Their  Plays.  New
York: Columbia University Press, 1977.

Shapiro  chronicles  the  history  of  the  amateur  and

quasi-professional  child  companies  that  flourished  in
London at the end of Elizabeth’s reign and the beginning
of James’s.

The Publication of Shakespeare’s Plays

Blayney,  Peter  W.  M.  The  First  Folio  of  Shakespeare.
Hanover, Md.: Folger, 1991.

Blayney’s  accessible  account  of  the  printing  and  later

life of the First Folio—an amply illustrated catalogue to a
1991 Folger Shakespeare Library exhibition—analyzes the
mechanical production of the First Folio, describing how
the Folio was made, by whom and for whom, how much it
cost,  and  its  ups  and  downs  (or,  rather,  downs  and  ups)
since its printing in 1623.

Hinman, Charlton. The Norton Facsimile: The First Folio of
Shakespeare. 2nd ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 1996.

This facsimile presents a photographic reproduction of

an “ideal” copy of the First Folio of Shakespeare; Hinman
attempts to represent each page in its most fully corrected
state.  This  second  edition  includes  an  important  new
introduction by Peter W. M. Blayney.

Hinman,  Charlton.  The  Printing  and  Proof-Reading  of  the
First Folio of Shakespeare. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1963.

In  the  most  arduous  study  of  a  single  book  ever

undertaken,  Hinman  attempts  to  reconstruct  how  the
Shakespeare First Folio of 1623 was set into type and run
off the press, sheet by sheet. He also provides almost all
the known variations in readings from copy to copy.

Werstine,  Paul.  Early  Modern  Playhouse  Manuscripts  and
the  Editing  of  Shakespeare. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge

University Press, 2012.

Werstine  examines  in  detail  nearly  two  dozen  texts

associated 
with 
the 
playhouses 
in 
and 
around

Shakespeare’s  time,  conducting  the  examination  against
the background of the two idealized forms of manuscript
that  have  governed  the  editing  of  Shakespeare  from  the
twentieth into the twenty-first century—Shakespeare’s so-
called  foul  papers  and  the  so-called  promptbooks  of  his
plays.  By  comparing  the  two  extant  texts  of  John
Fletcher’s  Bonduca,  one  in  manuscript  and  the  other
printed  in  1647,  Werstine  shows  that  the  term  “foul
papers” that is found in a note in the Bonduca manuscript
does  not  refer,  as  editors  have  believed,  to  a  species  of
messy  authorial  manuscript  but  is  instead  simply  a
designation  for  a  manuscript,  whatever  its  features,  that
has  served  as  the  copy  from  which  another  manuscript
has  been  made.  By  surveying  twenty-one  texts  with
theatrical  markup,  he  demonstrates  that  the  playhouses
used a wide variety of different kinds of manuscripts and
printed  texts  but  did  not  use  the  highly  regularized
promptbooks of the eighteenth-century theaters and later.
His  presentation  of  the  peculiarities  of  playhouse  texts
provides an empirical basis for inferring the nature of the
manuscripts that lie behind printed Shakespeare plays.

Key to Famous Lines and Phrases

A sad tale’s best for winter.

[Mamillius—2.1.33]

I am a feather for each wind that blows.

[Leontes—2.3.191]

When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh, the doxy over the dale . . .

[Song—4.3.1–12 ]

 . . . a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.

[Autolycus—4.3.26]

Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
And merrily hent the stile-a . . .

[Song—4.3.130–33 ]

 . . . Flora
Peering in April’s front.

[Florizell—4.4.2–3 ]

 . . . nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean.

[Polixenes—4.4.106–7 ]

                                     Daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes . . .

[Perdita—4.4.141–52 ]

                               When you do dance, I wish you
A wave o’ th’ sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that . . .

[Florizell—4.4.166–68 ]

 . . . she is
The queen of curds and cream.

[Camillo—4.4.190–91 ]

Commentary

ACT 1

Scene 1

1.1 Archidamus,  a  Bohemian  courtier,  exclaims  about  the
magnificent  hospitality  he  has  found  in  Sicilia.  Camillo  explains
about the long friendship between the kings of the two countries.
Both  noblemen  agree  that  Mamillius,  Sicilia’s  prince,  shows
promise of greatness.

1. shall: i.e., should

2–3. on  the  .  .  .  foot:  i.e.,  on  an  occasion  similar  to  the  one  in
which I am now employed

6. Bohemia:  i.e.,  Polixenes,  king  of  Bohemia;  visitation: friendly
visit

8. Wherein: i.e., during which; entertainment: hospitality

10. Beseech: i.e., I beseech

12. magnificence: 
splendid 
ceremony; 
liberal 
expenditure

combined with good taste

14. sleepy  drinks:  i.e.,  drinks  that  will  put  you  to  sleep;
unintelligent of: i.e., unable to perceive

15. insufficience: i.e., insufficiency

17. dear: i.e., dearly

22–23. Sicilia . . . Bohemia: i.e., Leontes . . . Polixenes  over-kind:
too kind

23. trained: (1) brought up; (2) made to grow in a particular way,
like  plants  (The  gardening  metaphor  introduced  by  this  second
meaning is picked up in rooted [line 24] and in branch [line 25].)

25. cannot choose: i.e., cannot help

26–27. their  more  mature  dignities  and  royal  necessities:  i.e.,
the positions and duties that come with maturity and kingship

27. made . . . society: severed their companionship

28. personal: in person; hath: i.e., have

29. attorneyed: performed by agents

30. embassies:  messages;  that  they:  i.e.,  so  that  Leontes  and
Polixenes

31. as . . . vast: i.e., as if over an ocean

32–33. ends . . . winds: i.e., widely distant regions (For “Opposed
winds,” see picture.)

“Opposed winds.” (1.1.32–33)
From Giulio Cesare Capaccio, Delle imprese trattato . . . (1592).

33. The heavens: i.e., “May the heavens . . .”; or, perhaps, “Thus
the heavens . . .”

35. matter: cause, reason

35–36. unspeakable: inexpressible

36. of your: i.e., in your; It: i.e., he

38. into my note: to my notice or knowledge

40. gallant:  a  general  term  of  praise;  physics:  i.e.,  relieves
(literally, provides medicine to)

41. subject: subjects, people

ACT 1

Scene 2

1.2 Leontes  suddenly  grows  insanely  jealous  of  the  friendship
between  his  queen,  Hermione,  and  his  visiting  friend  Polixenes.
Leontes  forces  Camillo  to  promise  to  murder  Polixenes.  Camillo
informs Polixenes of the murder threat and the two plan a hasty
departure for Bohemia.

0 SD. Camillo: See longer note.

1. wat’ry star i.e., the moon, called “wat’ry” because it controls the
tides (See picture.)

“The wat’ry star.” (1.2.1)
From Laurentius Wolffgang Woyt, . . . Emblematischer Parnassus . . . (1728–30).

2. note:  sign  (of  nine  months  passing);  we,  our:  i.e.,  I,  my
(Polixenes,  Leontes,  and  Hermione  all  vary  between  referring  to
themselves in the singular [“I,” “my”] and using the “royal we.”)

3. Without a burden: i.e., empty

6–9. like . . . before it:  In  this  complicated  metaphor,  Polixenes
(or  his  one  “We  thank  you”)  is  likened  to  the  numerical  zero.
Valueless  when  standing  alone,  a  zero  at  the  end  of  a  number
multiplies the value of that which goes before it.

10. Stay: hold back

13–16. I am . . . truly: i.e., I am tormented by anxiety about affairs
in my kingdom during my absence  sneaping: nipping (See longer
note.)

16. stayed: i.e., stayed so long as

17. your Royalty: perhaps, your Majesty (i.e., you)

19. you . . . to ’t: i.e., any trial you can make of me

21. sev’nnight: week

22. Very sooth: i.e., in truth (a very mild oath)

23. part: i.e., divide equally; ’s: i.e., us

24. I’ll: i.e., I’ll endure; gainsaying: contradiction

26–28. There . . . me: i.e., no one could persuade me more readily
than you

32. whip: blow (as from a whip)

33. charge: burden

39. Charge: exhort, urge

40. satisfaction: assurance

41. The  bygone  day:  the  past  day  (perhaps,  yesterday);
proclaimed: made known

42. beat . . . ward: i.e., soundly defeated  beat: i.e., beaten  ward:
defensive position

44. To tell: i.e., for him to say that; strong: i.e., a strong reason for
going

47. distaffs:  staffs  used  in  spinning  thread  (hence  symbolic  of
female authority) See picture.

Woman with a distaff. (1.2.47)
From Johann Engel, Astrolabium . . . (1488).

49. adventure: risk

50. borrow: borrowing

50–51. When  .  .  .  lord:  i.e.,  when  you  have  Leontes  visit  you  in
Bohemia  take: receive

52. let him: i.e., stay, remain

52–53. behind . . . parting: beyond the date arranged in advance
for his departure

53. good deed: indeed

54. jar: tick

54–55. behind . . . lord: i.e., less than any lady whatsoever loves
her lord

56–108. No, madam . . . with us: See longer note.

58. verily: i.e., truly (a very mild oath)

60. limber: soft, weak; vows: oaths

61. unsphere  the  stars:  i.e.,  dislodge  the  stars  and  the  planets
from  the  crystalline  spheres  that,  according  to  Ptolemaic
astronomy, carried them around the Earth (See picture.)

66. Force: i.e., if you force

67. so you shall: i.e., you shall; pay your fees: As a prisoner, he
would be expected to pay fees to the jailer when released.

72. import offending: i.e., imply I was guilty of an offense

74. Than you: i.e., than it is for you

78. pretty lordings: fine little lords

80. behind: i.e., in the future

84. verier wag: more mischievous boy

86. changed: exchanged

87–88. knew . . . ill-doing: i.e., had no knowledge of evil

90. spirits:  invisible,  barely  material  entities  carried  throughout
the  body  in  the  veins,  arteries,  and  nerves;  higher  reared:  i.e.,
made more active

91. stronger  blood:  i.e.,  the  hotter  and  thicker  blood  of  the
mature male

91–92. we  .  .  .  heaven:  i.e.,  we  would  have  been  able  to  answer
God (The reference is to the Christian concept of a judgment after
death of our actions on Earth.)

93–94. the imposition . . . ours: i.e., innocent even of original sin;
or,  innocent  except  for  original  sin    the  imposition  cleared:  (1)
freed  from  the  accusation  or  charge,  or  (2)  except  for  the
accusation or charge  Hereditary ours: i.e., inherited from Adam
and Eve by all humans (See Romans 5.12–21.)

96. tripped:  i.e.,  sinned  (“Trip”  could  also  mean,  specifically,
“copulate.”)

97. sacred: i.e., royal, noble

98. ’s: i.e., us

101. playfellow: playmate

102. Grace to boot: i.e., Heaven help us

103. this: i.e., this line of reasoning

105. answer: i.e., answer for

106–7. that . . . that: i.e., if . . . if  continue fault: i.e., continue to
offend

119. tongueless: not spoken of

120. waiting upon that: i.e., accompanying it

121. ride ’s: perhaps, ride me, or, perhaps, ride women (The sexual
implications of ride may continue in kiss, spur, and heat.)

123. heat . . . acre: perhaps, race one furlong

126. would:  i.e.,  I  wish;  Grace:  (1)  a  name  for  a  woman;  (2)  a
gracious deed worthy of praise

127. But: only

130. crabbèd: harsh (alluding to the sour taste of the crab apple)

132–33. open . . . love: a reference to the custom of handfasting,
in  which  a  couple  clasped  hands  and  declared  their  intention  to
marry

136. lo: look

137. one: i.e., first

138. friend: In line 140, Leontes plays with the secondary meaning
of friend as “lover.”

139. hot: lustful

140. mingling  bloods:  According  to  Aristotle,  sexual  intercourse
was the mingling of bloods.

141. tremor cordis: agitation of the heart

142. entertainment:  i.e.,  manner  of  social  behavior  (The  word
could  also  mean  “hospitality,”  “manner  of  reception,”  and
“spending  of  time,”  all  of  which  may  be  present  here  and  in  line
149.)

143. free: innocent; a liberty: i.e., permission

144. heartiness: genuine friendliness; fertile bosom: i.e., from a
generous heart

145. well become: do credit to

146. paddling: playfully or fondly fingering

149. mort . . . deer: note sounded on a hunter’s horn at the death
of the deer

150. brows: In popular thought, the cuckold (the man whose wife
is unfaithful) sprouts horns on his forehead. (See picture.)

A cuckold. (1.2.150, 232–33, 239)
From Bagford Ballads (printed in 1878).

153. I’ fecks: i.e., in faith

154. bawcock: fellow (French beau coq, “fine bird”)

156. out of: taken from

157. neat: Leontes rejects the adjective neat, because, as he makes
clear in line 159, the noun neat refers to cattle and the word thus
reminds him of horns. (See line 150.)

158. the steer, the heifer, and the calf: young cattle that have yet
to grow horns  steer: young ox

159. virginalling:  tapping  as  on  a  virginal  (a  small  keyboard
instrument)

160. wanton: playful; calf: a term of endearment

163. Thou want’st:  i.e.,  you  lack;  pash:  head;  shoots:  branches,
i.e., horns (of the cuckold)

165. full: entirely

166. as like as eggs: Proverbial: “as like as one egg is to another.”

167. false: inconstant, unstable (Proverbial: “as false as water,” “as
inconstant as the wind.”)

168. blacks:  perhaps,  funeral  clothing  or  hangings  (See  longer
note.)

170. bourn: boundary

172. welkin: heavenly, or blue; villain: here, a term of endearment

173. collop: i.e., child (literally, a piece of flesh); dam: mother (a
term usually reserved for animals)

175. Affection  .  .  .  center:  Perhaps:  Feeling  (affection),  your
meaning (intention) hits the truth (center). (But see longer note.)

176. not so held: i.e., thought to be impossible

179. fellow’st: i.e., share in; credent: credible

180. co-join: i.e., conjoin

181. beyond commission: i.e., illicitly

183. hard’ning . . . brows: i.e., growing horns

185. something seems: i.e., seems somewhat

186. How: i.e., how is it

190. moved: angry, disturbed

193. pastime: diversion, amusement

194. bosoms: i.e., hearts; lines: contours

196. unbreeched:  not  yet  dressed  in  breeches,  but  in  the  coat
worn by little children

201. squash: unripened pea pod

202. take  eggs  for  money:  i.e.,  buy  something  worthless
(proverbial)

204. happy  .  .  .  dole:  a  proverbial  expression  for  wishing  good
luck  ’s: his

207. If at home: i.e., when I am at home

208. all  .  .  .  matter:  i.e.,  my  constant  companion    exercise:
habitual  employment  (Mirth  and  matter  were  often  opposed  to
indicate the whole range of human concerns.)

209–10. Now . . . all: i.e., he plays every courtly role

212. varying childness: i.e., childlike ways

213. thick:  i.e.,  thicken  (Thickening  of  the  blood  was  associated
with melancholy.)

214–16. So . . . me: i.e., such is the role of Mamillius in my life

216. We two: i.e., Mamillius and I

217. graver: more solemn or serious

219. dear: expensive; cheap: inexpensive

221. Apparent: heir apparent

223. We are yours: i.e., you will find us; Shall ’s attend: i.e., shall
we await

226. give line: i.e., give scope or latitude (as in “playing” a hooked
fish)

227. Go to: an expression of disapproval

228. neb: mouth (but usually meaning a bird’s bill)

229. arms her: i.e., gives her arm (to Polixenes, as if he were her
husband [line 230])

230. allowing: approving

232–33. forked one: i.e., cuckold (See picture.)

234. plays: (1) pretends, acts; (2) has sexual intercourse

235. issue: (1) outcome; (2) offspring; (3) exit from a stage

236. hiss:  perhaps,  cause  me  to  be  hissed  (by  the  displeased
audience)

240. present: i.e., present moment

242. sluiced:  The  metaphor  that  begins  here  and  continues
through line 247 compares an unfaithful wife to a pond fished by
a poaching neighbor. (The words “sluice,” pond, and gates were
all used to refer to female genitalia.)

243. pond: private fishpond; next: nearest

245. gates: floodgates of the private fishpond (but also gates of a
city, opened to the enemy of line 254)

248. revolted: i.e., faithless

249. Physic: medicine, remedy

250–51. It  .  .  .  predominant:  Perhaps:  “Lust  is  like  a  bawdy
planet  that  influences  everyone  when  in  the  ascendant.”  strike:
blast, destroy as a superhuman power (The word could also mean
“to copulate.”)

253. barricado: barricade; belly: womb

255. on ’s: i.e., of us

256. Have the disease: i.e., are cuckolds

259. What: an interjection introducing a question

262. great sir: i.e., Polixenes

264. cast out: i.e., dropped the anchor; still came home: i.e., kept
being dragged from its hold

267. material: important

269. They’re . . . me: i.e., they know I am a cuckold (See longer
note.)

270. rounding: whispering, muttering

271. so-forth: i.e., you-know-what

271–72. ’Tis  .  .  .  last:  Proverbial:  “The  cuckold  is  the  last  to
know.” gust: taste

272. came ’t: i.e., did it come about

276. so  it  is:  i.e.,  as  the  case  stands;  taken:  understood,
apprehended

278. conceit: understanding; soaking: i.e., absorbent

279. blocks: i.e., minds (usually slang for “heads”)

280. of: i.e., by; severals: individuals

281. headpiece:  intellect;  Lower  messes:  i.e.,  those  of  inferior
rank

282. purblind: totally blind; or, perhaps, mentally dull

294. chamber-counsels: i.e., private affairs

294–96. priestlike  .  .  .  reformed:  Camillo  is  figured  here  as  a
priest who has heard the confession of Leontes, the penitent, given
him  absolution  (cleansed  [his]  bosom),  and  counseled  him  to
amend or “reform” his life.

297. in: i.e., regarding

300. bide: dwell

301. that way: i.e., toward honesty

302. Which:  i.e.,  which  cowardice;  hoxes  honesty  behind:
hamstrings honesty

303. From . . . required:  i.e.,  from  the  direction  honesty  should
take

305. grafted . . . trust: i.e., completely in my confidence

307. home: i.e., to the end

307–8. stake drawn: i.e., bet won

315. Sometime  puts  forth:  i.e.,  (he)  sometimes  displays;  or,
perhaps, (these weaknesses) sometimes appear

316. willful-negligent: i.e., willfully or perversely negligent

317. industriously: intentionally, designedly

320. the issue doubted: i.e., mistrusted or feared the outcome

321–22. execution . . . non-performance: i.e., accomplishment of
the act was a reproach to my hesitation

324. allowed: permitted

325. free of: exempt from

329. Ha’: i.e., have

330. eyeglass: crystalline lens of the eye

331. horn: See note on 1.2.150. (There is also perhaps wordplay on
the thin horn used as a transparent protective covering.)

332. to: i.e., in response to; vision: object of sight

335. slippery: unchaste

336–37. else . . . thought: i.e., otherwise insolently deny that you
have either eyes, ears, or thought

338. hobby-horse: unchaste woman, prostitute

339. rank: indecent, coarse; flax-wench: i.e., a girl who is a flax-
worker  (hence,  lower  class,  and  represented  as  therefore  low  in
morals); puts to: begins (to be sexually active)

340. troth-plight: solemn promise to marry

343. present:  immediate;  ’Shrew  my  heart:  literally,  may  my
heart be cursed (a mild oath)

344. did become you less: i.e., was less appropriate to you

346. deep:  heinous;  that:  perhaps,  her  supposed  adultery;  or,
perhaps, your accusation; though true: i.e., even if it were true

348. meeting noses: i.e., in the act of kissing

349. career: course

350. note: sign

351. honesty: chastity; Horsing foot on foot: setting his foot on
hers, hers on his

354. the pin and web: i.e., cataracts

357. Bohemia: i.e., the king of Bohemia, Polixenes

361. betimes: soon; before it is too late

363. Say it be: i.e., suppose it is (dangerous)

367. gross: stupid, dull

368. hovering temporizer: i.e., wavering opportunist

369. at once: i.e., at the same time

371. Infected: i.e., as infected

372. running . . . glass: i.e., an hour (measured by an hourglass)
See picture.

An hourglass. (1.2.372; 4.1.16)
From August Casimir Redel, Apophtegmata symbolica . . . [n.d.].

374. like her medal: perhaps, as if he were wearing a medal with
her figure on it

375–79. Bohemia,  who  .  .  .  doing:  The  structure  of  Leontes’
sentence is broken, with the subject who (i.e., Bohemia) shifting to
they (i.e., servants) so that who is never given a predicate. bare:
bore  alike . . . as: i.e., my honor as well as  thrifts: gains  undo:
cancel, destroy  doing: action (perhaps, with wordplay on doing as
sexual intercourse)

380–81. from meaner . . . worship:  i.e.,  from  humble  condition
have elevated to honor

383. bespice: i.e., season as with a spice

384. lasting wink: i.e., perpetual sleep

385. draft: drink

387. rash potion: i.e., quick-acting dose of poison (Rash may refer
at the same time to the ill-considered hastiness of the perpetrator.)

389. Maliciously: violently

390. crack: flaw, failing

392. Make . . . rot: i.e., if you doubt the queen’s misconduct, you
can go rot

393. muddy: muddled, confused; unsettled: mentally affected

394. appoint: nominate (in a legal sense), assign, devote; in: i.e.,
to; vexation: distress, affliction

397. 

Stinging nettles. (1.2.397)
From John Gerard, The herball or generall historie of plantes . . . (1597).

398. Give . . . blood: i.e., cast doubt on the legitimacy

400. ripe moving to ’t: i.e., having been moved to do it by careful
considerations

401. blench: swerve (as to embrace affliction groundlessly)

403. fetch off: kill

405. at first: i.e., when you first married her

406. thereby: in addition to that; for sealing: i.e., for the sake of
silencing

407. injury: calumny

410. set down: resolved

413. clear: innocent

414. keep with: keep company with

423. for: i.e., as for

425. to do ’t: i.e., for doing it

427. with: i.e., against

428. To do: i.e., if I do

432. Nor: i.e., neither; not one: i.e., a single one

434–35. To . . . breakneck: i.e., whether I poison Polixenes or not,
I certainly face ruin  breakneck: ruin, destruction

435. Happy  .  .  .  now:  i.e.,  may  a  fortunate  planet  now  be
predominant

438. warp: shrink, shrivel

444. As: i.e., as if

447. Wafting . . . contrary: turning his eyes aside disdainfully

447–48. falling  .  .  .  contempt:  expressing  contempt  by  a
movement of his lip

454. intelligent: communicative; intelligible; ’tis thereabouts: i.e.,
the meaning of your statement that you dare not know is that you
know and dare not tell me

455–56. to yourself . . . dare not: i.e., as far as you yourself are
concerned, you must know what you do know; you cannot say
you dare not know it

457. complexions: looks

464. Of: i.e., from

466. basilisk:  a  mythical  serpent  whose  look  could  kill  (See
picture.)

A basilisk. (1.2.466)
From Edward Topsell, The history of four-footed beasts and serpents . . . (1658).

467. sped: succeeded

469. By: as a result of

470–73. As  .  .  .  gentle:  i.e.,  you  as  a  gentleman  are  adorned  by
your learning as I am ennobled by my ancestry  thereto: moreover,
besides  Clerklike experienced: experienced as a scholar  gentry:
class below the nobility; gentlemen  In whose . . . gentle: i.e., as
whose successors we are noble

474–76. which 
. 
. 
. 
informed: 
i.e., 
that 
I 
need 
to

know  knowledge: understanding

476–77. imprison  .  .  .  concealment:  i.e.,  do  not  keep  me  in
ignorance by concealing it  ignorant: i.e., causing ignorance

481. conjure: solemnly appeal to, implore; parts: duties

482–83. whereof . . . mine: i.e., not the least of which is your duty
to respond to my petition

484. incidency: circumstance, incident; harm: evil

486. if to be: i.e., if it is to be prevented

490. mark: pay attention to

491. e’en as: even as, just as

492–93. both . . . goodnight: i.e., we are both finished

495. him: perhaps, the one; or, perhaps, by him

500. As: i.e., as if

501. vice: force (with an echo of the word’s meaning as a noun)

505. his . . . the Best: i.e., Judas Iscariot, the apostle in the New
Testament who betrayed Jesus

506. freshest: absolutely untainted

507. strike: affect

510. read: i.e., read of

511–12. Swear . . . By: i.e., even if you outswear . . . by (See longer
note.)

513. their influences: i.e., their astrological power

514. for to: i.e., to

515. or . . . or: i.e., either . . . or

516. fabric: edifice

517. faith: firm belief

518. The standing . . . body: as long as his body exists

519. How should this grow: i.e., how did this start

523. trunk: body (with wordplay on trunk as luggage)

524. impawned: i.e., as security, as a pledge or guarantee

525. whisper to: i.e., secretly instruct them to assist in

527. Clear them o’: i.e., get them out of; For: i.e., as for

528. to: i.e., at

529. discovery: disclosure

534–35. thereon . . . sworn: i.e., just after the king has imposed
the death penalty

538. places: (1) dwellings; (2) positions in my court

539. Still: always

540. hence departure: i.e., departure hence

542. As: i.e., to the same extent as

544. as: i.e., since, inasmuch as

545. which: i.e., who

546. Professed: i.e., professed friendship

547. In: on account of; o’ershades: overshadows

548. expedition: (1) voyage; (2) haste, promptness

549–50. nothing  .  .  .  suspicion:  i.e.,  who  has  done  nothing  to
provoke his unreasonable suspicion

552. avoid: depart

554. Please: i.e., may it please

ACT 2

Scene 1

2.1 Leontes learns of the departure of Polixenes and Camillo and
has  Hermione  arrested  for  adultery  and  treason.  He  announces
that he has sent couriers to the shrine of Apollo to obtain the god’s
advice about what action he should take.

5. I’ll none of: i.e., I do not want

10. for because: i.e., because

11. brows: i.e., eyebrows

12. Become  some  women  best:  i.e.,  best  suit  some  women;  so:
i.e., provided

15. taught: i.e., taught you

19. mock: joke, jest

24. wanton: play

27. Good . . . her: i.e., good luck to her

30. tell ’s: i.e., tell me

31. sad: calamitous, distressing

34. sprites: terrifying, hostile supernatural beings

41. Yond crickets: i.e., the ladies

42. give . . . ear: i.e., whisper it to me

43. he: i.e., Polixenes

45. scour so: go in such haste

49. Alack . . . knowledge: i.e., I wish there had been less for me to
know

50–56. There . . . hefts: This metaphor alludes to the belief that a
spider placed in a drink made the drink poisonous. Leontes claims
that the venom does not work unless one sees the spider. hefts:
heavings (in an effort to vomit)

57. his: i.e., Polixenes’

59. mistrusted: suspected

60. pre-employed: i.e., already employed

61. discovered my design: i.e., disclosed my plan

62. pinched: (1) tortured; (2) diminished; trick: toy, trifle

65. his: i.e., Camillo’s

66. so: i.e., in this case

74. about: i.e., in contact with

75. sport: amuse

76. that: i.e., that which

79. I’d say: i.e., I would (simply) say

81. Howe’er  .  .  .  nayward:  i.e.,  however  much  you  are  inclined
toward disbelief

83. mark her well: i.e., observe her closely

83–95. Be . . . honest: In these lines, Leontes imagines his lords as
unable  to  speak  in  praise  of  Hermione  without  also  immediately
expressing  their  doubts  about  her  chastity.  honest:  chaste    but:
only  without-door: outward  high speech: i.e., praise in a lofty or
exalted  style    straight:  straightaway,  immediately    hum,  ha:
expressions  of  hesitation    brands: (1)  stigmas;  (2)  marks  burned
into flesh (See sear in line 92.)  out: confused  come between: i.e.,
intervene

96. grieve . . . be: i.e., grieve that it is true

99. replenished: perfect

100. as  much  more  villain:  i.e.,  that  much  more  the  villain  for
having said it

102. mistook: mistaken

104. Which  .  .  .  place:  i.e.,  whom  I’ll  not  address  by  the  title  of
your position (as queen)

105. barbarism: rude and unpolished language

106. a like language: i.e., the same terms; degrees: ranks

107. distinguishment: distinction (according to social rank)

111. federary: confederate, accomplice

112. shame: i.e., be ashamed

113. But:  except;  principal: (1)  person  directly  responsible  for  a
crime; (2) prince

114. bed-swerver: i.e., adulteress

115. vulgars: common people

116. late: recent

120. published: proclaimed, denounced; Gentle my lord: i.e., my
noble lord

121. scarce: i.e., scarcely; right: vindicate; throughly: thoroughly

124. foundations: (1) lowest parts of a building; (2) principles

125. center:  (1)  i.e.,  the  Earth  (as  the  center  of  the  Ptolemaic
universe); (2) the support for an arch or dome under construction

127. afar off guilty: i.e., indirectly guilty

128. But . . . speaks: i.e., merely for speaking

129. ill: pernicious, dangerous; reigns: i.e., is exerting its influence
or power

131. aspect: configuration of planets (pronounced aspéct)

133. want: lack

135. here: perhaps with a gesture toward her heart or bosom

137. qualified:  moderated,  mitigated;  charities:  dispositions  to
judge leniently

138. measure: judge

143. My plight:  a  reference  to  her  advanced  pregnancy;  fools:  a
term of endearment

147. As  I  come  out:  i.e.,  when  I  am  released  from  prison;
action . . . go on: i.e., course I now embark on (The word action

carries  overtones  of  legal  suits,  military  engagements,  and
theatrical roles.)

148. grace:  credit,  honor  (but  with  the  strong  sense  of  spiritual
grace gained through suffering)

156. For: i.e., as for

158. Please: i.e., if it please

160. which: i.e., of which

161–63. If  .  .  .  her:  i.e.,  if  Hermione  is  unchaste,  then  I  can  no
longer trust even my wife (See longer note.)

167. she be: i.e., Hermione is

170. for you: i.e., for your sake

171. abused: deceived; putter-on: instigator

174. land-damn: 
perhaps, 
curse 
energetically 
(The 
precise

meaning is uncertain because the word is not recorded elsewhere.);
honor-flawed: i.e., unchaste

176. some: about

178. geld: spay

178–79. fourteen . . . generations: i.e., they will be spayed by age
fourteen so that they cannot produce illegitimate offspring

179. co-heirs: joint heirs

180. glib: castrate

181. fair: i.e., legitimate

185. doing thus: Leontes may here pull Antigonus’ nose or hair or
strike himself. withal: in addition

188. honesty:  chastity  (When  applied  to  women,  the  word
“honest” in Shakespeare generally means “chaste.”)

190. dungy: abounding in dung, and therefore vile

191. credit: i.e., credibility

193. Upon this ground: i.e., in this matter

195. Be  .  .  .  might:  i.e.,  however  you  might  be  blamed  for
suspecting her unjustly

197. Commune: confer, consult; but rather follow: i.e., instead of
following

198. instigation: incentive (to act)

199. Calls not: does not require

199–200. our . . . this: i.e., I tell you this out of my own natural
goodness

200–201. or  .  .  .  skill:  either  stunned  or  pretending  to  be  so    in
skill: using discretion

202. Relish: appreciate; like us: i.e., as I do

204. ord’ring on ’t: management or treatment of it

205. Properly ours: entirely mine

207. tried: examined, tested

208. overture: i.e., public disclosure

210. by age: i.e., as a consequence of old age

212. their  familiarity:  i.e.,  the  intimacy  between  Hermione  and
Polixenes

213. touched conjecture: was apprehended by reason

214. approbation: proof, confirmation

216. Made  .  .  .  deed:  approached  or  added  up  to  the  act  (of
adultery); push on: press forward, urge on

220. piteous: deplorable; wild: reckless; in post: in haste

221. Delphos:  i.e.,  the  island  Delos  (See  longer  note.)  Apollo’s
temple:  i.e.,  temple  of  the  sun  god  of  Greco-Roman  mythology,

one of whose functions was to prophesy through oracles

223. Of stuffed sufficiency: i.e., to be more than capable

224. had: i.e., once I have received it

230. he: i.e., anyone

232. Come up to: rise to the level of

234. the treachery: i.e., the plot against his life and crown (line
58)

237. raise: rouse

ACT 2

Scene 2

2.2 Paulina attempts to visit Hermione in prison. Learning that the
queen  has  given  birth  to  a  baby  girl,  Paulina  decides  to  take  the
baby to Leontes in the hope that the sight of his infant daughter
will alter his state of mind.

3. Good lady: Paulina addresses Hermione as if she were present.

9. who: i.e., whom

10. Pray: i.e., I pray

15. access: pronounced accéss; gentle: noble

18. put apart: send away

22. conference: conversation

24–25. such . . . coloring: i.e., so much effort to make innocence
look like undeniable guilt  no stain: i.e., innocence  a stain / As
passes  coloring: i.e., a discoloration that surpasses the dyer’s skill

29. hold  together:  i.e.,  maintain  control  of  herself;  On:  as  a
consequence of

30. Which: i.e., than which

31. something: somewhat

A baby being delivered. (2.2.31)
From Jakob Rüff, De conceptu et generatione hominis . . . (1580).

34. Lusty: vigorous; like: i.e., likely

35. in ’t: i.e., from the baby

38. lunes: fits of lunacy; beshrew: curse

40. on ’t: i.e., of it; office: business, function

41. Becomes: suits

43. red-looked: i.e., red-faced

45. Commend: present

53. is: i.e., are

54. free: generous

55. thriving issue: successful outcome

56. meet: suitable

57. presently: immediately

59. hammered of: earnestly debated; design: scheme, plan

60. tempt: try; venture to solicit; minister of honor: high-ranking
agent

63. wit: wisdom, good judgment

64. bosom: heart

67. I’ll: i.e., I’ll go

67–68. Please  .  .  .  nearer:  presumably  a  restatement  of  the
invitation (lines 56–57) to Paulina to go into the next room

70. pass: allow

74. process:  with  wordplay  on  “legal  proceeding,”  wordplay  that
begins earlier in the line with law and continues in the next line
with freed and enfranchised—the doubling of synonymous words
being a reflection of legal language (Possibly, law and process can
be read to mean “legal process,” an example of the figure of speech
called hendiadys.)

ACT 2

Scene 3

2.3 Paulina  brings  the  baby  to  the  tormented  Leontes,  who  first
orders the baby burned, then orders Antigonus to take the baby to
a  deserted  place  and  abandon  it.  News  comes  that  the  couriers
have returned with the oracle from Apollo.

1. Nor: i.e., neither; no rest: i.e., any rest

2. mere: pure, sheer

3. The cause: i.e., those to blame; in being: i.e., alive

4. harlot: fornicator; villain

5. arm: power

5–6. out . . . brain: i.e., beyond the range of anything my brain can
devise  blank: in archery or gunnery, the target’s white center (See
picture.)  level: aim

Aiming at “the blank.” (2.3.5)
From Gilles Corrozet, Hecatongraphie . . . (1543).

6. plot-proof: i.e., impervious to any plot against him

7. hook: grapple (as with a ship’s grappling hook)

8. Given  .  .  .  fire:  Burning  was  the  punishment  for  women
convicted of treason.

11. the boy: i.e., Mamillius

12. tonight: i.e., last night

16. straight: immediately; deeply: profoundly

17. on ’t: i.e., of it

19. solely: alone

21. him: i.e., Polixenes

24. parties: confederates; alliance: kindred, allies

25. For: i.e., as for; present: immediate

26. Take: i.e., let me take

27. pastime: amusement

31. second: helpful

32–33. Fear . . . life?: i.e., do you fear his tyrannous anger more
than you fear for the queen’s life?

34. free: noble; he: i.e., Leontes

35. That’s  enough:  i.e.,  she  is  gracious,  innocent,  and  noble
enough

37. come at: approach

38. hot: zealous

41. each: i.e., each of; heavings: groans

44. either:  i.e.,  either  healing  or  truth;  purge  .  .  .  humor:  i.e.,
cleanse  him  of  that  mental  state  (Both  purge  and  humor  had
specific medical meanings. The word purge referred to laxatives or
bleedings; the word humor referred either to the fluids that were
thought  to  determine  one’s  mental  states  or  to  the  mental  states
themselves.)

47. conference: conversation

48. gossips . . . Highness: godparents for your Highness (needed
at your daughter’s christening)

54. On  .  .  .  mine:  i.e.,  that  at  risk  of  incurring  your  Highness’
displeasure and mine

59. Commit  .  .  .  committing:  i.e.,  send  me  to  prison  for
perpetrating

61. La you: an exclamation for emphasis

62. take  the  rein:  i.e.,  take  the  bit  between  her  teeth  (as  if  she
were a horse freeing herself from her rider-husband’s control)

65. professes: i.e., profess

67. dares: i.e., dare

69. Than . . . yours: i.e., than those who merely appear most loyal

74. by  .  .  .  good:  i.e.,  prove  her  to  be  good  through  a  trial  by
combat (See picture.); so were I: i.e., if I were

A combat in a list. (2.3.74)
From [Sir William Segar,] The booke of honor and armes . . . (1590).

75. worst: lowliest in rank

78. hand: lay hands on; off: i.e., leave

84. mankind: masculine, virago-like

85. intelligencing bawd: i.e., spy and go-between

94. woman-tired: hen-pecked

94–95. unroosted . . . Partlet i.e., dislodged (from your perch) by
your  hen    Dame  Parlet:  Pertilote  (or  Partlet)  is  Chauntecleer’s
favorite (but nagging) hen in Chaucer’s “Nun’s Priest’s Tale.”

99. forced baseness: i.e., enforced bastardy

100. put upon ’t: imposed on the princess

101. dreads:  fears  (Paulina’s  response  plays  on  another  sense  of
“dread” as “respect.”)

105. by . . . light: a conventional oath

112. as . . . stands: See longer note.

113. to ’t: i.e., to change his opinion

116. callet: (1) lewd woman; (2) scold

117. late: i.e., lately, recently

121. dam: mother (usually only in reference to animals)

124. might  .  .  .  charge:  i.e.,  if  we  may  accuse  you  with  th’  old
proverb

125. So . . . worse: Proverbial: “They are so like that they are the
worse for it.”

125–31. Behold  .  .  .  finger:  Paulina  compares  the  biological
reproduction of Leontes in his child to the reproduction of a text
through the art of printing.  print: image  matter: subject matter,
contents

132. which: i.e., who; it: i.e., the baby

133. got: begot, fathered

135. No . . . in ’t: i.e., don’t include the color yellow, which is the
color of jealousy

135–36. she . . . husband’s: This suggestion that the female baby
when grown into a woman could have doubts about the legitimacy
of her children is, of course, absurd—just as absurd, Paulina may
be saying, as Leontes’ suspicions of his baby’s legitimacy.

137. gross: rude

138. losel: worthless fellow

139. stay her tongue: i.e., prevent her talking

140. Hang: i.e., if you hang

148. heretic . . . fire: Heretics were punished by being burned at
the stake.

151. Not able: i.e., you being unable; more accusation: i.e., more
evidence for your accusation

152. weak-hinged  fancy:  i.e.,  unfounded  imagining  (Weak-
hinged, a word whose only recorded use is in this play, probably
refers  to  the  hook-and-eye  hinge  then  in  use  and  indicates  that
Leontes’ imagining is not firmly hooked or attached to any event.);
something: somewhat

161. Look  to:  attend  to,  take  care  of;  Jove:  king  of  the  Greco-
Roman gods

162. better guiding spirit: perhaps, a better temper or disposition
than  yours;  these hands:  i.e.,  the  hands  of  those  who,  following
Leontes’ command, are trying to push her out

163. tender 
o’er: 
considerate 
of; 
follies: 
weaknesses 
or

derangements of mind

166. set: urged

170. straight: straightaway, immediately

173. what . . . thine: i.e., whatever else you call yours

175. proper: own

185. beseech: i.e., beseech you

186. So  .  .  .  us:  i.e.,  to  have  the  opinion  of  us  that  we  thereby
deserve

187. dear: (1) loving; (2) valuable

190. issue:  outcome;  We  all  kneel:  The  stage  action  is  clear  in
these words. It is not so clear when the courtiers again stand.

191. I . . . blows: Proverbial: “As wavering as feathers in the wind.”

194. be it: perhaps, so be it

198. Margery:  a  margery-prater  was  a  slang  term  for  a  hen  (See
note  to  lines 94–95.); midwife:  perhaps  because  she  brought  the
baby to him, as a midwife would do after a birth (But see longer
note.)

200. So: i.e., as

204. my . . . undergo: i.e., I am capable of performing  undergo:
undertake

211. Mark: pay attention; seest thou: perhaps, “see to it”

211–12. the fail / Of: i.e., your failure to perform  fail: failure

213. lewd-: vulgar-, wicked-, foolish-

214. this time: i.e., the time being

217. desert: uninhabited; out: outside

219. it own: i.e., its own

222. On . . . torture: i.e., if you are to avoid the destruction of your
soul and the torture of your body

223. strangely: perhaps, as a stranger; perhaps, coldly

225. a present: an immediate

227. kites: birds of prey, hawks (See picture.)

A kite. (2.3.227)
From Konrad Gesner, . . . Historiae animalium . . . (1585–1604).

230. Like:  similar;  offices  of  pity:  compassionate  duties  (The
allusion may be to the familiar story of the mythical Romulus and
Remus, raised by a she-wolf. See picture.)

Wolf nursing Romulus and Remus. (2.3.227–30)
From Guillaume Du Choul, Los discursos de la religion . . . (1579).

231. In more: perhaps, to a greater extent; perhaps, in more ways;
this deed does require: i.e., your cruelty calls for or deserves

233. loss: destruction

236. Please: i.e., if it please; posts: couriers

238. since: ago

239. well: successfully, without harm or accident

241. So  please  you:  i.e.,  if  it  please  (a  deferential  phrase  of
address)

242. account: explanation

245. suddenly: immediately

247. session: sitting of a court

ACT 3

Scene 1

3.1 The couriers, en route from Delphos with the oracle’s response,
discuss  the  ceremony  they  observed  and  express  their  hopes  for
Hermione’s good fortune.

2. the isle: Delphos (See longer note to 2.1.221.)

3. common: usual

5. caught: captivated, charmed; habits: garments

6. Methinks: it seems to me

7. grave: dignified, respected

12. Jove’s  thunder:  Jove  was  the  mythological  god  of  thunder.
(See picture.) my sense: i.e., all my senses

Jove throwing a thunderbolt. (3.1.12)
From Vincenzo Cartari, Le vere e noue imagini de gli dei delli antichi . . . (1615).

14. event: result

17. is . . . on ’t: i.e., was well spent

18–19. Great . . . best: Proverbial: “God turn all to good.”

22. violent carriage: rapid, impetuous management

23–25. the  oracle  .  .  .  discover:  i.e.,  the  oracle,  sealed  up  by
Apollo’s  eminent  priest,  will  reveal  its  own  contents  by  being
opened  divine: priest  discover: reveal

26. Go . . . horses: If this is a command to provide fresh horses, it
may be delivered to onstage or offstage attendants. It may, though,

be shorthand for “let’s go; let’s get fresh horses.”

27. gracious: prosperous, fortunate, happy; issue: outcome

ACT 3

Scene 2

3.2 As Hermione tries to defend herself in open court, the oracle is
read  and  she  is  declared  chaste  and  Polixenes  innocent.  Leontes
pronounces the oracle false, and a messenger rushes in with news
that  Mamillius  has  died.  Hermione  swoons  and  is  carried  off  by
Paulina  and  others,  while,  at  the  same  time,  Leontes  repents.
Paulina enters with news that Hermione is dead. Leontes vows to
spend the rest of his life grieving for the deaths of his wife and son.

1. sessions: i.e., session, sitting of a court

4. Of us: i.e., by me

7. purgation: i.e., acquittal

11. Silence: See longer note.

18–19. pretense:  design,  scheme,  plot;  circumstances:  i.e.,
circumstantial evidence

19. laid open: revealed

23. but: only

25. on my part: i.e., in my support

26. scarce boot: hardly help

28. counted: accounted, considered

31. but: i.e., that

33. patience: suffering endured with calmness

34. Whom: i.e., who

35. continent: marked by self-restraint

36. unhappy: unfortunate; which is more: i.e., which misfortune
is greater

37. history: narrative or drama; pattern: equal

38. take: captivate, charm

39. which owe: i.e., who owns, possesses

41. hopeful: promising

42. fore: in the presence of

43. Who please: i.e., whoever chooses; For: i.e., as for

44. weigh: value; spare: avoid

44–46. For honor . . . stand for: i.e., as for (my) honor, I defend it
only 
because 
it 
is 
a 
thing 
flowing 
from 
me 
to 
my

children    derivative:  thing  flowing  or  originating    stand  for:
defend, uphold

48. grace: favor

49. merited: i.e., I merited, deserved

50–51. With  .  .  .  thus:  This  obscure  and  much-debated  passage
may  mean  “with  what  unacceptable  behavior  I  have  so
transgressed 
that 
I 
must 
stand 
here.” 
encounter:

behavior 
 
uncurrent: 
unacceptable 
 
strained: 
perhaps,

transgressed (though the usual meaning was “endeavored, tried my
hardest”)

52. or . . . or: either . . . or

57–58. wanted / Less impudence: i.e., lacked any less shameless
effrontery or insolence

61. due: appropriate (Leontes’ reply in the next line plays on the
sense of due as payable.)

62. own:  admit  to,  acknowledge  (with  wordplay  on  the  sense  of
own as “possess” something paid one)

63–65. More . . . acknowledge: i.e., I must not admit to any faults
that are not mine  mistress of: in my possession

65. For: i.e., as for

67. he required: was his right

68. become: be appropriate to

74. spoke: i.e., spoken

81. Wotting: knowing

83. in ’s: i.e., in his

86. level: line of fire

87. Which: i.e., my life; lay down: sacrifice; or, wager

91. of your fact: guilty of your crime

92. to deny: i.e., for you to deny; concerns . . . avails: i.e., is of
more concern than of help to you

93. like to itself: i.e., as is appropriate to it

94. owning: i.e., acknowledging as his own

96. easiest passage: least painful proceeding

99. bug: bugbear

100. commodity: benefit

102. give: i.e., give up as

106. Starred most unluckily: born under a most unlucky star

107. it: i.e., its

“The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth.” (3.2.107)
From Desiderius Erasmus, Morias enkomion [transl.] Stultitiae laus . . . (1676).

108. Haled . . . murder: dragged out to be murdered; post: It was
the custom to fix proclamations to posts in front of sheriffs’ offices.

109. immodest: excessive, arrogant

110. childbed  privilege:  i.e.,  the  privilege  of  bed  rest  after
childbirth; longs: i.e., belongs

111. fashion: sorts

113. of  limit:  perhaps,  through  the  prescribed  period  of  repose
after child-bearing (a much-debated passage, since the phrase does
not appear elsewhere)

116. no life: i.e., it is not to preserve my life that I speak

118. free: clear from blame or stain

119. all . . . else: i.e., all other proofs left sleeping

122. refer me: submit myself

130. flatness: absoluteness

132. 

Justice. (3.2.132)
From Thomas Peyton, The glasse of time . . . (1620).

144. truly: legitimately

152. mere: sheer, absolute

154. business: errand on which you come

155. to report: i.e., for reporting

156. conceit: thought, imaginings

157. Of: concerning; speed: success

166. but o’ercharged: i.e., simply overburdened

172. me: i.e., myself

173. New: i.e., newly

177. minister: agent

179. tardied: delayed (in carrying out)

180. swift  command:  i.e.,  order  that  Polixenes  be  immediately
killed

180–82. though . . . done: i.e., though I threatened him with death
if he did not do it, and encouraged him with reward if he did it

184. Unclasped:  opened  up,  displayed;  practice:  scheming,
treachery; fortunes: success, wealth, position

185. you knew great: i.e., you know were great

186. incertainties: uncertainties

187. No richer . . . honor: i.e., with his integrity as his only wealth

188. rust: moral corrosion, corruption

191. lace:  cord  that  draws  closed  the  bodice  of  her  dress;
cracking: splitting, breaking

195. wheels, racks: instruments of torture (See picture.)

Victims tortured on a rack. (3.2.195)
From Girolamo Maggi, . . . De tintinnabulis liber . . . (1689).

196. old: long-used

200. green: simple-minded; idle: silly

203. spices  of  it:  i.e.,  traces  or  slight  touches  of  what  you  have
now done

205. of a fool: i.e., a fool

206. damnable ingrateful: i.e., damnably ungrateful

207. Thou: i.e., that thou

211. or . . . or: i.e., either . . . or

212. water: i.e., tears of pity; done ’t: i.e., he had done it

213. Nor . . . death: i.e., neither are you entirely (or immediately)
at fault in the death

215. high: noble

216. conceive:  imagine  or  understand  that;  gross  and  foolish:
perhaps, grossly foolish

217. Blemished: i.e., stained the reputation of

218. Laid . . . answer: brought as a charge against which you must
defend yourself

224–25. If  .  .  .  /  Prevail:  i.e.,  if  neither  my  word  nor  my  oath
persuades you

226. Tincture . . . eye: i.e., color to her lip or brightness to her
eye

227. Heat outwardly: external heat

229. heavier: (1) weightier; (2) more oppressive

230. woes  can  stir:  lamentations  can  move;  betake  thee:  i.e.,
deliver yourself

231. knees: i.e., supplicants offering prayers on their knees

232. together: without intermission

233. still: always

234. move: persuade

240. business: matter; made fault: done wrong

245. touched: moved or stirred (emotionally)

246–48. What’s gone . . . grief: Proverbial: “Past cure past care.”

248–49. Do . . . petition: At lines 230–31 Paulina had committed
Leontes  to  perpetual  affliction:  “Therefore  betake  thee  /  To  .  .  .
despair.”

250. that have minded: i.e., who have reminded

253. fool: addressed to herself in (real or feigned) anger at having
mentioned Hermione

255. remember: remind

256. patience: capacity to bear suffering

258. but: only

262. them: i.e., their gravestones

266. nature: i.e., my physical strength

267. bear up with: withstand; exercise: spiritual exercise, act of
devotion

268. daily . . . it: i.e., vow to observe or perform it daily

ACT 3

Scene 3

3.3 Antigonus leaves the baby in Bohemia, where Polixenes is king.
In  a  sudden  storm,  the  ship  sinks  and  Antigonus  is  chased  by  a
bear, who then eats him. The baby, along with the gold left with
her, is found by a shepherd and his son.

A shepherd: (3.3; 4.4)
From Hortus sanitatis . . . (1536).

1. perfect, then: i.e., certain then that

2. deserts: wilderness; Bohemia: The fact that Shakespeare gives
his  Bohemia  a  seacoast  has  occasioned  much  comment.  Some
think it an error; others think it a deliberate strategy to make the
setting clearly fictional.

4. grimly: forbidding

5. present: immediate; blusters: stormy blasts; In my conscience:
i.e., truly

6. that . . . hand: what we are doing

9. bark: ship

12. i’ th’ land: i.e., inland; like: likely

14. keep: dwell

23. waking: i.e., waking experience

24. some another: i.e., sometimes on the other

26. So . . . becoming: i.e., so full of becoming sorrow

27. very sanctity: holiness itself

28. cabin: berth

30. fury: fierce passion; anon: soon

33. for: i.e., to be

36. for: because

37. counted:  accounted,  considered;  Perdita:  she  who  is  lost
(Latin)

38. For: because of; ungentle: violent, harsh

39. Put: imposed

43. was so: i.e., was real; toys: trifles

45. squared: directed

47. would: wishes; issue: offspring

49. for . . . death: i.e., either to live or to die; earth: land

50. right: true; speed: prosper

51. thy character: i.e., letters containing, among other things, her
name (Literally, character means simply “writing.”)

52. breed thee: i.e., pay for upbringing and/or education

53. rest thine: remain yours (The gold and treasure left with her
will, he hopes, exceed the costs of her rearing.)

“The storm begins.” (3.3.53)
From Lodovico Dolce, Imprese nobili . . . (1583).

56. loss: ruin and separation from family

63. the chase: the hunt; or, perhaps, the hunted animal (here, the
bear)

65. would: wish

67. rest: i.e., years between

68. ancientry: elders, old people

74. ivy: perhaps, sea holly or seaweed

76. child: baby girl

77. scape: sexual transgression

78–79. waiting-gentlewoman:  a  gentlewoman  who  serves  a  lady
of higher rank

79–80. stair-work  .  .  .  behind-door  work:  perhaps,  furtive
lovemaking in stairwells, on trunks, behind doors

81. got: begot, conceived

90. and it: i.e., and the sea

93. chafes: frets, fumes

94. takes up: begins to occupy

98. anon: immediately; yeast: foam

99. thrust  .  .  .  hogshead:  i.e.,  drive  a  cork  stopper  into  a  large
cask (in order to draw out the beer)

99–100. land service: i.e., action on land (Service could be either
military action or the serving of food.)

102–3. to make an end: to finish the story (with wordplay on “to
destroy”)

103. flap-dragoned  it:  i.e.,  swallowed  it  the  way  revelers  would
catch raisins out of flaming brandy and swallow them

105. mocked: i.e., by imitating

109. winked: blinked

113. by: i.e., nearby

115. ship: i.e., ship’s

117. footing: a secure place to stand (with wordplay on charitable
“foundation”)

118. Heavy: sad

119–120. 

“Thou met’st with things dying, I with things newborn.” (3.3.119–
20)
From Andrea Alciati, . . . Emblemata . . . (1661).

121. bearing  cloth:  (ornamental)  christening  robe;  squire’s:  A
squire was the rank just below knight and perhaps the highest rank
with which the shepherd is familiar.

124. changeling: child left by the fairies

126–27. made  old  man:  an  old  man  whose  fortune  has  been
made

128. you’re . . . live: perhaps, you’ll live well; or, you’re well-to-do

129. fairy  gold:  gold  given  by  fairies  (Folklore  about  fairy  gold
includes the belief that to tell about the gold brings bad luck.)

130. close: secret; next: nearest (i.e., fastest)

131. to be so still: i.e., to continue to be so

137. curst: savage

Bears “are never curst but when they are hungry.” (3.3.136–37)
From Henry Peacham, Minerua Britanna . . . (1612).

142. Marry:  i.e.,  indeed  (formerly  an  oath  on  the  name  of  the
Virgin Mary)

ACT 4

Scene 1

4.1 Father  Time  appears  and  bridges  the  sixteen-year  gap
following the abandonment of Perdita in Bohemia.

Father Time. (4.1)
From Jean de Serres, A generall historie of France . . . (1611).

0 SD. Time, the Chorus: This character, probably appearing as an
old man, carries an hourglass and wears wings (proverbially, “Time
has wings”).  As  Chorus,  he  comments  on  the  action.  See  longer
note, and picture.

1. that: i.e., who; try all: i.e., test everyone

2. unfolds: reveals; error: mistaken idea

6. growth untried: i.e., developments unexamined

8–9. law . . . custom: See longer note. one  self-born  hour:  one
and the same hour

9. pass: (1) proceed; (2) elapse; (3) be allowed to go uncensured

10. The  .  .  .  was:  i.e.,  as  I  was  before  laws  and  customs  were
established

11. received: generally accepted

14–15. as  my  tale  .  .  .  it:  i.e.,  just  as  my  tale  (the  play  you  are
viewing)  seems  stale  in  comparison  to  the  shining  (glistering)
present

16. glass: hourglass (See picture.)

16–17. give . . . between: i.e., advance the action of the play as if
you  had  slept  between  acts    scene:  play    growing:  advance,
progress

17. Leontes leaving: i.e., as we now leave Leontes

18. fond: foolish

22. th’ King’s: Polixenes’; which: whom (See longer note.)

23. pace: proceed or advance

25. wond’ring: i.e., the wonder she inspires in others

26. list not: choose not to

30. argument: subject, theme; Of this allow: accept this

ACT 4

Scene 2

4.2 Camillo asks permission to return to Sicilia. Polixenes refuses
his request and asks Camillo instead to go with him in disguise to
the shepherd’s home where Polixenes’ son is spending his time.

5. been aired: i.e., lived (literally, exposed to the open air)

7. feeling: deeply felt, heartfelt

8. be  some  allay:  i.e.,  provide  some  relief:  o’erween:  i.e.,  am
presumptuous enough

13. want: lack

14. made me businesses: i.e., created projects for me

18. considered: recompensed

19. study: pursuit, concern

20. the heaping friendships: perhaps, an increase in your friendly
services (But see longer note.)

23. reconciled:  alluding  presumably  to  a  restoration  of  good,  if
distant, relations between Leontes and Polixenes

25. are: i.e., is

29. approved: proved

31. are: i.e., is

32. missingly noted: i.e., observed with a sense of loss that

33. retired: withdrawn, removed; frequent to: frequently at

34. princely  exercises:  aristocratic  activities,  e.g.,  athletics,
hunting, military training

35. considered so much: i.e., noticed the same thing

36–37. so far . . . service: i.e., so much so that I have spies

37. his removedness: i.e., him in his absence

39. homely: simple

40–41. the  imagination  .  .  .  neighbors:  i.e.,  what  his  neighbors
could have imagined

41–42. an unspeakable estate: a fortune beyond description

44. note: distinction

44–46. The report . . . cottage: i.e., her reputation is more widely
known 
than 
one 
would 
expect 
from 
her 
low 
social

condition  cottage: small, humble dwelling

48. angle:  fishhook;  our  son:  Polixenes  here  shifts  to  the  “royal
we,” which he uses through line 50.

49–50. not appearing what we are: i.e., in disguise

50. question: talk

52. uneasy: difficult

ACT 4

Scene 3

4.3 Autolycus, a con man, steals the shepherd’s son’s money and
decides  to  use  the  upcoming  sheep-shearing  feast  as  an  occasion
for yet more thievery.

1. peer: (1) peep out; (2) appear

2. doxy: beggar’s woman

3. sweet: pleasant part

4. winter’s pale: Winter is being pictured as an enclosed area (a
pale);  there  is  also  wordplay  on  paleness  of  skin  occasioned  by
winter.

7. pugging:  perhaps,  thieving  (a  word  not  recorded  elsewhere);
“To  set  the  tooth  on  edge”  was  proverbial  for  “to  whet  the
appetite.” an: i.e., on

11. aunts: i.e., whores

14. three-pile: i.e., rich velvet with a deep pile

20. sow-skin budget: bag made of pigskin

21. account: explanation for one’s behavior

22. in the stocks: i.e., for vagrancy (See picture.)

A man in the stocks. (4.3.22)
From August Casimir Redel, Apophtegmata symbolica . . . [n.d.].

23. traffic: goods or merchandise

23–24. When  .  .  .  linen:  i.e.,  when  the  hawk  is  nest-building,
protect your small linens (The kite steals lesser linen,  while  the
white sheet bleaching on the hedge [line 5] is Autolycus’ prey.)

24. Autolycus: See longer note.

25. littered under Mercury: born when the planet Mercury was in
the  ascendant    Mercury:  in  classical  mythology,  the  winged
messenger  god  who  sometimes  stole  from  the  other  gods  (See
longer note to Autolycus, line 24.)

26. snapper-up: thief

26–27. With . . . caparison: i.e., through gambling and whoring I
acquired this outfit (namely, the rags he is wearing)  die: one of a
pair of dice  drab: slut, prostitute

28. the silly cheat: petty theft

28–29. Gallows . . . highway: perhaps, fear of the gallows and of
being beaten deter me from committing highway robbery

30. For: i.e., as for

31. prize: booty (or someone from whom it may be taken)

31 SD. Shepherd’s Son: See longer note.

32–33. every  .  .  .  shilling:  i.e.,  the  fleeces  from  eleven  wethers
(gelded  sheep)  weigh  a  tod  (twenty-eight  pounds);  every  tod  of
wool will bring in a pound and one shilling

33–34. fifteen hundred: i.e., sheep

34. what . . . to?: i.e., what is the total value of the wool?

35. springe: snare (to catch woodcocks, proverbially stupid birds)
See longer note to 4.3.36 SD, and picture.

Woodcocks caught in a springe. (4.3.35–36)
From Henry Parrot, Laquei ridiculosi . . . (1613).

37. counters:  round  pieces  of  metal  (or  some  other  substance)
used to do arithmetic

42. lays it on: is lavish in expense

43. made me: i.e., made

44. three-man song men: singers of songs written for three voices
(countertenor or alto, tenor, and bass)

45. means: i.e., tenors

45–47. but . . . hornpipes: i.e., except for one Puritan, who sings
psalms even to dance tunes

47. warden: i.e., warden pear

48. out of my note: i.e., not on my list; or, not something I need to
take note of (See longer note.)

49. race: root

51. o’ th’ sun: i.e., sun-dried

67. footman: i.e., a man on foot

68. footman: attendant (as Autolycus once was)

69–71. should . . . service: The shepherd’s son here plays with yet
another meaning of footman—i.e., a foot soldier, whose clothing
would be inferior to that of a horseman—i.e., a mounted soldier—
unless the horseman had been in furious combat

76. softly: gently

77. out: dislocated

80–81. charitable office: i.e., act of kindness

85. past: more than

89. manner: kind

92. troll-my-dames: i.e., troll-madams, literally a board game, but
here probably meaning whores (“Troll” could mean “pass around”;
it  was  also  sometimes  spelled  “trull,”  which,  as  a  noun,  meant
“strumpet.”); once: i.e., to have once been

96. would: i.e., should

98. no . . . abide: i.e., only pause before going away

100. ape-bearer: an itinerant entertainer with a trained monkey

101. process-server:  sheriff’s  officer  who  serves  summonses;
compassed: obtained; devised

101–2. motion: puppet show

102. Prodigal Son: For the parable of the Prodigal Son, see Luke
15.11–32 ; wife: perhaps, woman; or, perhaps, widow

103. living: property

105. in rogue: i.e., on rogue (See longer note.)

106. Out upon him: an expression of abhorrence; Prig: thief

107. wakes: rural feasts

111. big: haughty, pretentious

119. softly: i.e., slowly

120. bring: accompany

124. Prosper you: i.e., may you prosper

125. not  hot  enough:  i.e.,  too  cold  because  it  is  empty  (with
wordplay on the hot flavor of spices)

127. cheat: theft; bring out: produce

128. sheep: i.e., to be fleeced or robbed; let . . . unrolled: i.e., let
my name be deleted (presumably, from the roll of thieves)

130. Jog on: trudge

131. hent: lay hold of; stile-a: A stile is a set of steps for crossing a
fence.  The  suffix  -a  merely  adds  a  syllable  needed  for  the  song’s
rhythm.

133. Your sad: i.e., any sad (heart)

ACT 4

Scene 4

4.4 At the sheepshearing feast, Florizell and Perdita declare their
love  before  the  disguised  Polixenes  and  Camillo.  When  Polixenes
orders Florizell never to see Perdita again, the two decide to flee.
Camillo,  for  his  own  ends,  advises  them  to  go  to  Sicilia.  The
shepherd and his son, seeking the king to protest their innocence,
are steered by Autolycus to Florizell’s ship.

Shearing sheep. (4.4.3)
From Pietro de Crescenzi, [Ruralia commoda, 1561].

1. weeds: garments

2. a  life:  an  animation,  vitality;  no  .  .  .  Flora:  i.e.,  you  are  no
shepherdess, but instead the Roman goddess of flowers and spring

3. Peering  .  .  .  front:  showing  herself  in  the  beginning  of
April  front: literally, brow or forehead

4. petty gods: lesser deities of classical mythology

5. on ’t: i.e., of it

7. extremes:  extravagances  (in  praise);  not  becomes:  is  not
appropriate for

9. mark . . . land: object of attention throughout the country

10. swain’s wearing: garments of a country youth

12. In . . . folly: i.e., in every group of diners there are some who
act foolishly; feeders: i.e., those who feed on folly

13. with a custom: i.e., because they are used to it

15. show . . . glass: i.e., see myself in a mirror

17. her:  i.e.,  its  (Shakespeare  uses  her  because  the  falcon  is
female; the male of the species is called a “tercel.”)

19. afford you cause: give you reason (to bless the time)

20. difference: i.e., in rank

23. Fates: In Greek mythology, the three Fates wove one’s life and
brought about one’s death by cutting life’s thread.

24. work: i.e., son

26. flaunts: finery

28. Apprehend: anticipate; fear, dread

31–34. Jupiter . . . swain: In classical mythology, Jupiter (or Jove)
assumed the shape of a bull in order to carry off Europa; Neptune,
god of the sea, became a ram to carry off Theophane; Apollo, the
sun god, became a shepherd in an effort to seduce Issa. (See longer
note and picture.)

“Jupiter became a bull.” (4.4.31–32)
From Gabriele Simeoni, La vita . . . d’Ouidio . . . (1559).

36. piece: masterpiece

37. way: (1) manner; (2) course of action

38. honor: sense of what is right

39. faith: duty to fulfill your trust in me

43. necessities: i.e., unavoidable

46. Or I my life: i.e., I must change my life (a line much debated
by editors and critics, many of whom suggest that it means “I must
exchange my life for death”)

48. forced: strained, distorted (See longer note.)

49. Or: i.e., either; fair: beautiful one

51. any: i.e., anyone

54–55. anything . . . while: i.e., whatever you see around you in
the meantime

56. Lift . . . countenance: look up; as: i.e., as if

59. Lady Fortune: i.e., the goddess Fortuna, who distributes one’s
good and bad luck as she chooses (See picture.)

“Lady Fortune.” (4.4.59; 5.1.266)
From [John Lydgate,] The hystorye sege and dystruccyon of Troye . . . [1513].

63. red: i.e., red-faced, flushed

65. pantler, butler: servants who supplied bread (the pantler) and
liquor (the butler)

69. On: i.e., at

71. She . . . sip: i.e., she would offer as a toast to each guest in
turn; retired: withdrawn into yourself

72. a feasted one: i.e., one of the guests being entertained

73. meeting: party

74. unknown  .  .  .  welcome:  i.e.,  welcome  these  friends  yet
unknown to us

75. more known: better acquainted

76. yourself: i.e., yourself as

79. As: i.e., so (that)

80. SD. to Polixenes: See longer note.

86–88. rosemary . . . both: Compare Ophelia’s speeches in Hamlet
4.5.199–206:  “There’s  rosemary,  that’s  for  remembrance.  .  .  .
There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me; we may call it herb of
grace o’ Sundays.” Seeming: appearance  savor: fragrance  Grace
and remembrance: i.e., God’s grace and remembrance (after your
deaths) See picture.

Rosemary. (4.4.86)
From The grete herball . . . (1529).

93. the year growing ancient: perhaps, “when fall arrives” (with
the suggestion that autumn rather than winter flowers would suit
the men’s age)

96. gillyvors: i.e., gillyflowers

A carnation. (4.4.96)
From John Gerard, The herball or generall historie of plantes . . . (1597).

97. bastards:  a  word  used  to  refer  to  hybrids  and  to  things
spurious or counterfeit (See longer note.)

103. art: human skill (here, horticultural skill in altering flowers’
colors); piedness: variegation

106. mean: i.e., means (to effect a purpose)

107. But: unless; over that art: i.e., above the human skill

108–9. an  art  .  .  .  makes:  perhaps  a  reference  to  the  idea  that
human skills are themselves a product of nature

109–12. we marry . . . race:  i.e.,  we  graft  a  twig  (scion)  from  a
cultivated  plant  onto  a  wild  stock  to  produce,  from  this  “base
bark,”  a  nobler  flower    marry:  permanently  join    gentler:  i.e.,
more cultivated, domesticated

120. painted: i.e., wearing cosmetics

122. therefore: i.e., because of my artificial beauty

125–26. marigold  .  .  .  weeping:  The  marigold  was  called  “the
spouse of the sun” because it closes its petals at the end of the day
and opens them at dawn. weeping: i.e., wet with dew

127. given: i.e., customarily given

131. Out: an exclamation expressing reproach

135. would: wish

136. Become: suit; day: i.e., life

139–41. O  Proserpina  .  .  .  wagon:  According  to  Ovid’s
Metamorphoses (5.391–99), when the maid Proserpina, daughter of
Ceres, was gathering flowers in a grove, the king of the underworld,
Dis  or  Pluto,  carried  her  off  in  his  wagon  (i.e.,  chariot).  See
picture.

142. take: captivate, charm

144. Juno’s eyes: the eyes of the mythological queen of the gods

145. Cytherea’s breath: the breath of Venus, goddess of love (born
from the waves near the island of Cythera)

147. Phoebus: i.e., the sun (literally, Phoebus Apollo, the sun god
of mythology)

147–48. a malady . . . maids: a reference to the parallel perceived
between  the  pale-green  primrose,  which  dies  before  spring  fully
arrives, and the disease of “green-sickness” (perhaps, anemia) that
was fatal to young girls

149. crown imperial: a showy plant whose flowers (according to
Gerard’s  Herbal  [1597])  encompass  the  stalk  “in  form  of  an
imperial crown”

150. flower-de-luce: i.e., fleur-de-lis, or iris

153. corse: i.e., corpse

154. bank: i.e., bank of flowers

155. or if: i.e., or if you are a body (the more general meaning of
corse)

156. quick: alive

158. Methinks: i.e., it seems to me

159. Whitsun  pastorals:  i.e.,  May  games  and  morris  dances
associated  with  the  late  spring  feast  of  Pentecost  (see  picture);
Sure: i.e., surely

“Methinks I play as . . . in Whitsun pastorals.” (4.4.158–59)
From Charles Grignion, Morris dancers . . . [n.d.].

162. Still . . . done: i.e., always raises in value the thing you are
doing

165. for: i.e., as for; ord’ring: giving orders about

168. still: always (but with wordplay on the stillness of the wave as
it crests)

169. own . . . function: i.e., have nothing else to do; Each your
doing: i.e., your performance of each thing you do

171. what . . . deeds: i.e., whatever you are doing at the moment

172. That: i.e., so that

173. Doricles: the name Florizell has assumed in disguise

174. large: extravagant; But that: i.e., if it were not that

175. blood: disposition; peeps: shows itself

176. give  you  out:  proclaim  you;  unstained:  pure,  morally
unsullied

180. skill: reason

181. put: i.e., force

182. turtles: turtledoves; pair: mate

184. I’ll . . . ’em: a general term of agreement

187. greater: of higher social rank

190. look out: appear; Good sooth: a mild oath

193. mistress: sweetheart; garlic: i.e., give her some garlic

195. in good time: i.e., indeed!

196. stand upon: i.e., must mind

200–201. boasts  .  .  .  feeding:  i.e.,  (they  say  he)  brags  about
owning good pasture land

203. like sooth: i.e., truthful

208. another: i.e., the other

209. featly: nimbly, gracefully

211. That: i.e., who

214. 

A peddler with his wares. (4.4.214–66)
From Hartmann Schopper, Panoplia omnium illiberalium . . . (1568).

215. after a tabor: i.e., to the music of a drum (See picture.)

Playing “a tabor and pipe.” (4.4.215–16)
From William Kemp, . . . Kempes nine daies wonder . . . (1600; 1884 facs.).

217. several: different; you’ll tell: i.e., you can count

218. as: i.e., as if; ballads: See longer note.

220. come better: i.e., be more welcome

222. pleasant: amusing

223. lamentably: 
mournfully 
(the 
word 
can 
also 
mean

“deplorably”)

225. milliner: seller of ribbons, gloves, and other fancy apparel

227. bawdry:  indecency  (The  servant’s  claim  seems  contradicted
by his examples in lines 227–29.)

227–28. delicate burdens: fastidious refrains

228. dildos and fadings: nonsense words used in ballad refrains
(but the word “dildo” means an artificial phallus, and the refrain
“With a fading” occurred in an indecent popular song)

230–31. break  .  .  .  matter:  perhaps,  insert  indecent  words  or
gestures into the song

232. puts: i.e., she puts

235. brave: excellent

236–37. admirable  conceited:  i.e.,  admirably  ingenious  or
amusing

237. unbraided: perhaps, untarnished or undamaged

240. points: tagged laces used instead of buttons to fasten clothing
(with wordplay on “items or clauses in legal documents”)

241–42. by th’ gross: in great numbers (literally twelve dozen at a
time)

242. inkles: linen tapes; caddises: i.e., caddis ribbon (worsted tape
or binding, used for garters)

243. sings ’em over: describes them in song

244. smock: woman’s shirtlike undergarment

245. chants to: i.e., sings the praises of; sleeve-hand: sleeve’s cuff

245–46. work  .  .  .  on  ’t:  embroidery  around  the  smock’s  breast-
piece

250. in ’s: i.e., in his

251. You have of: i.e., there are some

253. go about: i.e., have any desire

255. Cypress: a light transparent fabric (often used for mourning)

256. sweet: scented, perfumed

257. Masks  .  .  .  noses:  worn  by  upper-class  women  to  protect
themselves from the sun or to conceal their identity

258. Bugle bracelet: a bracelet of glass beads

260. coifs: tight-fitting caps

262. poking-sticks: rods used to stiffen the pleats of ruffs

263. lack: need

268. enthralled:  captivated  (with  wordplay  on  “enslaved,”  “put
into bondage”)

269. it: i.e., my love for Mopsa (and my enslavement)

271. against: in time for

277. again: i.e., back again

279–80. Will . . . faces: i.e., will they announce what they should
keep hidden? plackets: openings in petticoats or in skirts (and, by
extension, women’s private parts)

281. kiln-hole: i.e., fireplace (literally, fire-hole of a kiln); whistle:
whisper

284. Clamor: perhaps, silence (though the word usually means just
the opposite)

285–86. tawdry lace: silk neckerchief

291. Fear not thou: don’t be afraid

294. parcels of charge: i.e., expensive items

296. ballad in print: See longer note to 4.4.218.

297. alife: dearly

299. brought to bed: delivered

300. at a burden: at a single birth

305. to ’t: i.e., as a witness to it

306. Taleporter: The name means “tale bearer” or “gossip.” wives:
women

311. anon: soon

313–14. the fourscore of April: i.e., the 80th of April

317. for: because; exchange flesh: i.e., have sexual intercourse

321. Five . . . at it: i.e., its truth is attested by the signatures of five
justices; witnesses: testimony

327. passing: exceedingly

327–28. goes to: i.e., is set to

329. westward: i.e., in the west country

333. on ’t: i.e., of it

337. fits not: is not fitting for

344. Or thou goest: i.e., you are going either; grange: barn

345. ill: evil

352. have this song out: finish this song

353. sad: serious

361. duck: a term of endearment; dear-a: i.e., dear

363. toys: trifles, knickknacks

367. utter: put on the market, put into circulation

370. made . . . hair: i.e., dressed up in animal skins

371. saultiers: leapers, dancers (The Servant may be confusing the
word with Satyrs—mythological woodland gods with animal forms
and covered all in hair. See 388 SD, which uses the word Satyrs to
describe them, and picture.)

A satyr. (4.4.388 SD)
From Vincenzo Cartari, Le vere e noue imagini . . . (1615).

372–73. gallimaufry of gambols: confused jumble of leaps

377. on ’t: i.e., of it

381. threes of: i.e., groups of three

384–85. by th’ square: exactly, precisely

388. door: i.e., the door

389. O father . . . hereafter: Polixenes is presented as answering
some question put to him by the shepherd. father: term of address
to an old man

391. them: i.e., Florizell and Perdita

392. simple:  honest  and  straightforward  (referring  to  the
Shepherd)

395. Sooth: i.e., in truth

396. handed: dealt with; wont: accustomed

397. she: ladylove; knacks: trinkets

400. nothing marted with: i.e., bought nothing from

401. Interpretation  should  abuse:  i.e.,  should  misunderstand,
interpret wrongly

402. were straited: would be at a loss

403–4. make a care / Of: i.e., are seriously concerned with

404. happy  holding  her:  (1)  keeping  her  happy;  (2)  happily
keeping her

407. looks: i.e., looks for

409. delivered: (1)  uttered,  spoken;  (2)  formally  transferred  into
her possession (legal term)

417. What follows this: i.e., what is this speech leading to

418. swain: here perhaps meaning “lover” as well as “shepherd”

418–19. to . . . before: i.e., to make whiter (through his words) the
hand that was already fair

419. put you out: disconcerted you, confused you

427. most imperial: supreme, most exalted

428. Thereof most worthy: i.e., and most deserving of being so

429. force: power

432–33. Commend . . . perdition: i.e., either commend them . . .
to her service or condemn them to destruction

442. Take . . . bargain: proverbial (See longer note and picture.)

A handfasting. (4.4.412–52)
From George Wither, A collection of emblemes . . . (1635).

445. portion: dowry

450. Contract us: i.e., bind us, perhaps, in a contract of marriage,
or, perhaps, to a promise to marry (betrothal); fore: i.e., before

453. Soft: an exclamation meaning “wait”; beseech: i.e., I beseech

459. Methinks: i.e., it seems to me

461. That  best  becomes:  i.e.,  who  is  most  appropriate  to  be
present at

462–63. incapable . . . affairs: i.e., unable to attend to concerns
requiring the use of reason

A man “grown incapable” through “age and alt’ring rheums.”
(4.4.462–64)
From August Casimir Redel, Apophtegmata symbolica . . . [n.d.].

463. stupid: in a stupor

464. alt’ring  rheums:  perhaps,  abnormal  or  diseased  secretions;
or perhaps, inflammations of the nose or throat that have altered
his health

465. Know  man  from  man:  i.e.,  distinguish  one  man  from
another;  Dispute  .  .  .  estate:  i.e.,  reason  concerning  his  own
condition

467. being childish: i.e., when he was a child

473. Something: somewhat; unfilial: i.e., unbecoming to a dutiful
son; Reason my son: i.e., it is reasonable that the son

474. as good reason: i.e., equally reasonable that

475. all whose: i.e., all of whose

476. fair posterity: i.e., descendants who give promise of success,
who are reputable

478. yield: grant

480. I not: i.e., I cannot or will not

489. Mark: observe, attend to; contract: probably accented on the
second syllable

494. That: who; affects: i.e., desires, aspires to (Sheep-hook is set
in  opposition  to  royal  scepter  and  may  signify  Perdita,  the
shepherd’s life, or an actual shepherd’s crook.)

496. fresh: young, vigorous

497. piece: masterpiece

498. whom of force: i.e., who necessarily, unavoidably

499. thou cop’st: you have to do

502. homely: ugly (but with the meaning “lacking refinement” in
reference  to  her  state,  or  social  condition); fond:  (1)  foolish;  (2)
immoderately affectionate

503. may: should

504. knack: trifle; choice dish; crafty device

505. we’ll: Polixenes here uses the royal “we.”

506. hold thee: i.e., regard you as

507. Far’r . . . off: i.e., further removed from any relation to me
than  Deucalion  (a  Noah-like  figure  who,  in  mythology,  was  the
only  man  to  survive  when  Zeus  flooded  the  Earth,  and  who
repeopled  the  Earth  by  casting  stones  over  his  shoulder;  see
picture); Mark thou: pay attention to

Deucalion and Pyrrha repopulating the Earth. (4.4.507)
From Lodovico Dolce, Le trasformationi . . . (1570).

511. dead: deadly

512. yea, him too: i.e., and worthy to marry Florizell

513–14. That . . . thee: i.e., who, were it not for his royal blood,
has made himself unworthy of you

518. tender to ’t: i.e., vulnerable to such cruelty (The word tender
could refer to her youth, her fragility, or perhaps her sensitivity to
pain.)

519. undone: ruined

522–24. The selfsame . . . alike: Proverbial: “The sun shines upon
all alike.”

527. state: (1) rank (as heir to the throne); (2) condition; This: i.e.,
as for this

535. fourscore three: eighty-three

536. thought: expected

537. bed: i.e., bed on which

540. Where . . . dust: i.e., in unconsecrated ground, because he is
a felon (See longer note.)

543. adventure: dare

544. mingle faith: exchange vows

550–51. More  .  .  .  unwillingly:  Florizell  pictures  himself  as  a
hunting  dog  straining  at  its  leash  to  move  forward,  not  being
dragged unwillingly along by its leash. plucking: i.e., being plucked

552. Gracious my lord: i.e., my gracious lord

555. purpose:  i.e.,  intend  to  offer;  as  hardly:  i.e.,  with  as  great
difficulty, as painfully

560. think: i.e., think you are

563. dignity: high position (as the prince’s beloved)

565. but by: except through

566. faith: vow (of love); then: i.e., when that happens

568. seeds: i.e., sources of all life and growth; Lift . . . looks: look
up

571. advised:  cautious  (Florizell  replies  as  if  advised  had  its
meaning “counseled.”)

572. fancy: (1) imagination; (2) love

573. thereto: i.e., to my fancy

578. needs must: i.e., am obliged to

580. thereat gleaned: i.e., got by ruling Bohemia

581. close: closed, shut; wombs: encloses as if in a womb

587–88. Let  .  .  .  come:  i.e.,  let  me  contend  with  fortune  to
determine my own future

589. deliver: report, communicate

590. who: i.e., whom

591. opportune: accent on second syllable

592. rides: lies at anchor; fast by: nearby

593. this design: i.e., my present plan to depart

594. benefit: improve

595. Concern . . . reporting: i.e., am I interested in telling you

597. would: wish; easier for: i.e., readier to take

598. for: i.e., considering

601. irremovable: immovable, inflexible

603. serve my turn: i.e., serve my purpose

604. do: i.e., show

605. Purchase: obtain; win

606. unhappy: unfortunate

609. curious business: i.e., matters that cause me anxiety and care

610. leave out ceremony: i.e., neglect the courtesy (I owe you)

615. music: i.e., delight

617. as thought on: i.e., as he thinks of them

620. If . . . think: a courteous way of saying “if you think”

623. more  ponderous:  weightier,  more  serious;  settled:  fixed,
firmly embraced

624. suffer: allow, permit

625. receiving: reception, welcome

626. shall become: is appropriate to

627. the whom: i.e., whom

629. As . . . forfend: i.e., may heaven forbid

631. discontenting: discontented; strive: i.e., I will strive; qualify:
pacify, moderate

632. bring  .  .  .  liking:  i.e.,  raise  (his  opinion)  to  the  point  of
approval

640. unthought-on accident: i.e., unexpected discovery (of us by
Polixenes)

640–41. guilty / To: responsible for

641. wildly: in confusion

644. list: listen

646. undergo: undertake

648. ’fore: i.e., before

649. habited: dressed

651. free: noble, magnanimous

653. As  ’twere  .  .  .  person:  i.e.,  as  though  he  were  asking
forgiveness of your father

654. him: i.e., himself

659. color: pretext

660. Hold up before: present to

661. Sent: i.e., say that you were sent

664. as: i.e., as if; deliver: speak

665. betwixt  us  three:  i.e.,  only  among  Polixenes,  Leontes,  and
Camillo

666. point you forth: i.e., guide; sitting: conference

668. bosom: thoughts, counsel, secrets

671. sap: life, vitality

673. wild dedication: rash giving-up

674. unpathed: pathless, trackless; undreamed: unimagined

675. certain: i.e., certainly

677. one: i.e., one misery; take: contract (as if a disease)

678. Nothing: i.e., in no way; your anchors, who: i.e., anchors (in
general), which (The anchor is the traditional symbol of hope.)

679. Do . . . can: i.e., at best

679–80. but . . . be: i.e., merely hold you where you hate to be

681. bond: cementing force

682. fresh: blooming and youthful; together: simultaneously

686. take in: conquer

688–89. these seven years: i.e., in a long time

690. another such: i.e., such a one (as Perdita)

692–93. as  forward  .  .  .  birth:  i.e.,  as  far  ahead  of  her  (lowly)
upbringing as she lags behind my (royal) birth

695. instructions:  schooling;  mistress:  woman  of  mastery  (in
learning)

696. To: i.e., in comparison to

700. the  thorns  .  .  .  upon:  “To  sit  or  stand  on  thorns”  was
proverbial for “to be impatient.”

704. appear: i.e., appear as such

708. royally appointed: furnished like a prince

710. want: lack (anything)

712. simple: (1) innocent; (2) stupid

714. glass: looking glass, mirror; table book: memorandum book,
pocket notebook

A pomander. (4.4.714)
From Walther Hermann Ryff, Confect Bu̇ch . . . [1563].

715. shoe tie:  shoelace;  horn ring:  cheap  ring  made  of  animals’
horn

719. best in picture: perhaps, best looking

720–21. My clown: i.e., the Shepherd’s Son (The word clown here
has  its  meaning  of  “rustic  simpleton.”  See  longer  note  to  4.3.31
SD.)

723. pettitoes: i.e., feet (literally, pig’s feet, usually as an article of
food); had: i.e., had mastered

725. all . . . ears: i.e., they became all ears

726. placket: See note to 4.4.279–80. senseless: without sense or
feeling

727. geld . . . purse: i.e., cut a purse from a codpiece (See longer
note.)

729. my sir’s: i.e., the Shepherd’s Son’s; nothing: (1) nothingness;
(2) noting

730. lethargy: i.e., unconsciousness of all senses but hearing

733. choughs: (1) easily captured birds; (2) chuffs or rustics

735. letters: i.e., letter (Latin litterae)

736. So: i.e., as

739. Happy be you: i.e., may you have good fortune

740. shows fair: seems plausible, gives promise of success

744. hanging:  the  punishment  for  all  felonies,  except  thefts  of
goods valued at less than twelve pence

748. that: i.e., your poverty

749. outside . . . poverty: i.e., your clothes

750. discase thee: undress

751. think: realize

752. change garments: exchange clothes (See longer note.)

753. pennyworth: bargain

754. some boot: something in addition

755–56. I know . . . enough: proverbial for “I see your villainy”

757. dispatch: be quick

758. flayed: stripped

760. on ’t: i.e., of it

762. earnest:  a  small  payment  to  seal  a  bargain  (i.e.,  the  money
given him by Camillo)

765–66. let . . . to you: i.e., may you indeed be fortunate

766. retire yourself: withdraw

767. covert: thicket

769. Dismantle: remove your mantle or cloak; disliken: disguise

770. The truth of your own seeming: i.e., how you actually look
(See longer note.)

771. eyes over: possibly, spies

772. Get undescried: i.e., arrive undiscovered

789. a . . . longing: proverbial for an intense longing

790. speed: bring success to

798. without boot:  i.e.,  without  the  money  thrown  in;  a boot:  a
profit

800. connive: shut their eyes

801. about: engaged in

802. clog:  hindrance,  impediment  (a  reference  to  Perdita,  but
literally a block of wood attached to the leg or neck of a man to
prevent escape)

804. withal: with this information

807. matter: business; hot: eager; keen

808. session: i.e., of a court

809. careful: attentive, watchful

812. changeling: child left by the fairies

812–13. none  .  .  .  blood:  i.e.,  not  your  child  (By  line  819,  the
phrase your flesh and blood has acquired its more literal sense as
well.)

816. Go to: i.e., go on

822. let . . . go whistle: an expression of contemptuous dismissal

826. go about: set to work

827. the King’s brother-in-law:  a  humorous  misuse  of  brother-
in-law to mean the father of the king’s daughter-in-law

830. dearer:  more  valuable;  I  know  how  much:  The  usual
expression is “I know not how much.”

834. fardel: bundle

836. my master: i.e., Florizell, his former master

837. at’ palace: i.e., at the palace

840. excrement: (false) beard

841. 

A courtier and a countryman. (4.4.841–963)
From [Robert Greene,] A quip for an vpstart courtier . . . (1592).

842. an it like: i.e., if it please

843. Your  affairs:  In  addressing  the  shepherd  and  his  son,
Autolycus  affects  a  grand  style  of  speech  that  might  have  been
almost as difficult for the ordinary person to understand then as it
is now.

844. condition: nature

845. having:  property;  breeding:  perhaps,  descent;  perhaps,
upbringing

846. fitting: appropriate; discover: reveal

847. plain: ordinary (but Autolycus plays on plain in the sense of
“smooth”)

849. becomes: is appropriate to

850. give . . . the lie: i.e., cheat us soldiers with inferior goods (“To
give  [someone]  the  lie”  usually  meant  “to  accuse  [someone]  of
lying,” an insult to which a soldier’s response would be stabbing
steel [line 851].)

852. they . . . lie: i.e., they do not give it; instead, they are paid
for it (line 850)

853–55. Your . . . manner: i.e., you were likely to have lied to us if
you had not caught yourself in the act

858. air: (1) style; (2) odor

858–59. enfoldings: garments

859–60. measure  of  the  court:  the  grave  and  stately  step  of  a
court dance called the measure

861. baseness: low social status

862. for that: because; insinuate and toze: cajole and tease

864. cap-a-pie: from head to toe

865. Whereupon: on which account

866. open thy affair: disclose your business

871. pheasant: perhaps, a satiric allusion to the use of game to pay
country lawyers’ fees

874. simple: ignorant, uneducated

882. fantastical: extraordinarily odd in behavior; or, eccentric in
clothing

883. the . . . teeth: i.e., the fact that he picks his teeth (Toothpicks
were then a new fashion imported from the Continent.)

885. Wherefore: i.e., for what purpose is

889. to th’ speech of: i.e., where I may speak to

894. beest capable of: i.e., can comprehend

898. in handfast: i.e., imprisoned

903. wit: ingenuity

904. heavy: hard to endure, grievous

905. germane: related, akin

908. offer: attempt

909. grace: favor (by marrying Prince Florizell)

911. sheepcote: a shelter for sheep (See picture.)

A sheepcote. (4.4.911)
From August Casimir Redel, Annus symbolicus . . . [c. 1695].

911–12. sharpest: severest

913. e’er a son: i.e., by any chance a son

916. ’nointed: anointed; head: top

917. stand: i.e., made to stand

918. a dram: a bit more; aqua vitae: strong drink, usually brandy

920. prognostication: i.e., the almanac

921–22. with . . . eye: i.e., from the south

922. he: perhaps, the sun; perhaps, his father

923. with flies blown: i.e., infected and swollen with the eggs of
flies; what: i.e., for what, why

924. traitorly: treacherous

925. capital: serious (with wordplay on “punishable by death”)

926. what: i.e., what business

927. Being  .  .  .  considered:  i.e.,  given  a  somewhat  gentlemanly
consideration (a bribe)  something: somewhat

928–29. tender . . . presence: i.e., present you to him

929. whisper him: i.e., speak secretly to him

930. in  man:  i.e.,  in  any  man’s  power;  effect  your  suits:  i.e.,
achieve success for your petitions

931. man: i.e., the man who

933. Close: come to terms

934–35. authority . . . nose: i.e., authority can be made a fool of
(Tame bears were literally led by the nose.)

938. An ’t: i.e., if it

941. in pawn: as your hostage

944. the moiety: half

946. In some sort: i.e., in a way; case: (1) situation; (2) hide

950. Comfort: i.e., take comfort

951. must: i.e., must go

952. ’tis none of: i.e., Perdita is not

953. gone: undone, lost, ruined; else: otherwise

957. before: ahead of me

958. look upon: i.e., urinate by

962. Let’s before: i.e., let’s go on ahead

965. suffer: allow; booties: spoils, gains

966. courted: enticed; occasion: opportunity

968. that: i.e., doing Florizell a good turn; turn back: return, recoil

970. blind: Proverbial: “As blind as a mole.” aboard him: i.e., on
board Florizell’s ship; fit: appropriate

970–71. shore them: put them ashore

972. concerns him nothing: i.e., is of no concern to him

973. proof against: impervious to

975. matter in it: i.e., some importance to it

ACT 5

Scene 1

5.1 Paulina  insists  that  Leontes  must  not  remarry,  despite  the
urgings  of  his  courtiers.  Florizell  and  Perdita  arrive,  and  are
greeted warmly. Then news comes that Polixenes and Camillo are
in  Sicilia.  Leontes  agrees  to  speak  to  Polixenes  on  the  young
couple’s behalf.

2. No  .  .  .  make:  i.e.,  there  is  no  offence  that  you  might  have
committed

2–6. 

A penitent at prayer. (5.1.2–6)
From August Casimir Redel, Apophtegmata symbolica . . . [n.d.].

3. redeemed: (1) made up for; (2) paid off

4. At the last: i.e., now at last

6. them: i.e., the gods

8. Her: i.e., Hermione

9. still: always

16. from . . . good: i.e., from each woman took one good quality

17. To make: i.e., and combined them to make

21. Sorely: severely

22. good now: an expression of entreaty

30. Would have him: i.e., want him to

32. remembrance: i.e., the future memory

34. fail of issue: lack of an heir

36. Incertain: uncertain

37. well: dead (“She is well” was a phrase used for one who had
died.)

38. royalty’s repair: i.e., the restoration of the royal dynasty

43. Respecting: i.e., in comparison to

44. Will have fulfilled: i.e., demand the fulfillment of

48. Which: i.e., and

49. all as monstrous to: altogether as unnatural from the point of
view of

50. As: i.e., as for

54. Care not for: do not worry about

55–56. Great  Alexander  .  .  .  worthiest:  According  to  classical
historians,  Alexander  the  Great,  the  Macedonian  conqueror  of
Asia, on his deathbed named as his heir “the worthiest.”

“Great Alexander.” (5.1.55)
From Valentin Thilo, Icones heroum . . . (1589).

57. like: i.e., likely

61. squared me to: i.e., governed myself according to

62. full: large

69–70. and  on  .  .  .  soul-vexed:  See  longer  note  for  a  variety  of
editorial attempts to cope with these difficult lines. If one follows
the  Folio  (as  we  do),  it  is  helpful  to  read  “on  this  stage”  as
meaning “appear on this stage.”

71. Why  to  me:  presumably,  an  expression  of  remonstrance
against Leontes for remarrying

74. incense: incite

77. mark: observe

80. rift: split

83. eyes else: i.e., other eyes

86. but by . . . leave: i.e., unless I freely give you permission

91. like: similar to

92. Affront: meet

94. I  have  done:  In  the  Folio,  these  words  complete  Cleomenes’
speech.

96. No remedy: i.e., if there is no other way

96–97. office / To choose: i.e., duty or function of choosing

99. walked . . . ghost: i.e., if the ghost of your first queen were to
appear; it should: i.e., that ghost would

103. We: i.e., I (the royal “we”)

107. gives out himself: claims to be

111. What with him: i.e., what retinue accompanies him

112. Like: in a manner appropriate

113. out of circumstance: unceremonious

114. forced: enforced

115. What train: i.e., what retinue

117. mean: low in social status

119. piece of earth: i.e., person (Earth could refer to the human
body.)

123. Above  .  .  .  gone:  i.e.,  as  superior  to  a  time  past  that  was
actually better; grave: i.e., your beauty now in the grave

127. that theme: i.e., Hermione’s beauty, now cold in the grave

129. shrewdly: grievously

132. The one: i.e., Hermione

134. tongue: voice, vote (as the more beautiful)

135. Would she: i.e., who, if she chose to; sect: religion (devoted
to herself as its goddess)

136. all professors else: all those who affirmed a belief in other
religions

143. assisted with: attended by

148. paired: matched (so as to form a pair)

156. Unfurnish: deprive

158. print your royal father off: exactly reproduce the image of
your father

160. hit: exactly represented

166. begetting wonder: i.e., producing admiration (in onlookers)

169. brave: worthy

170. Though . . . life: i.e., even though I am miserable, I desire to
live

174. at friend: as a friend

175. but: i.e., except for the fact that

176. waits . . . times: attends on old age

176–78. something . . . ability: i.e., somewhat taken prisoner the
ability he wishes he still had

180. Measured: traveled

185. offices: kindnesses

186. rarely: exceptionally

189–90. fearful . . . ungentle: i.e., terrible, or at least rough, usage

190. Neptune: in Roman mythology, god of the sea

192. adventure: risk

195. Smalus: No historical source has been found for this name.

200. friendly: i.e., being friendly or favorable

201. charge: command

202. My best train:  perhaps,  the  greatest  part  of  my  retinue;  or,
perhaps, the most noble members of my retinue

204. for Bohemia bend: i.e., proceed to Bohemia

210. climate: i.e., visit; holy: i.e., of high and reverend excellence
(The emphasis on Polixenes’ sanctity as a monarch continues in the
next  lines  with  graceful [literally  meaning  “full  of  divine  grace”]
and sacred.)

216. Worthy his goodness: i.e., who are worthy of him and his
goodness

220. will bear no credit: i.e., would not be believed

221. Please: i.e., if it please (a deferential phrase)

222. Bohemia: Polixenes, king of Bohemia

223. attach: arrest, seize

224. dignity: rank

229. amazedly:  in  a  state  of  bewilderment,  as  if  in  a  maze;
becomes: is appropriate to

239. Lay . . . charge: i.e., rightly blame it on him

243. in question: under judicial examination

245. Forswear  .  .  .  speak:  i.e.,  deny  under  oath  everything  that
they assert

250. contract: betrothal; celebrated: i.e., completed or ratified in
the celebration of our wedding

254. The  odds  .  .  .  alike:  perhaps,  the  chances  (of  success  or
happiness)  are  the  same  for  people  of  all  social  conditions,  high
and low

256. daughter:  Florizell  replies  (line 258)  as  if  daughter  had  its
sense of “daughter-in-law.”

261. broken . . . liking: i.e., displeased him

263. worth: rank

265. look up: cheer up

266. visible: i.e., visibly

269–70. since . . . now: i.e., when you were as young as I

270. thought . . . affections: i.e., recalling what your feelings then
were

284. Your honor: i.e., since your honor is

287. mark  .  .  .  make:  i.e.,  observe  how  I  remove  obstacles  to
(your) progress

ACT 5

Scene 2

5.2 Autolycus learns from courtiers that Leontes’ lost daughter has
been  found;  he  then  meets  the  newly  elevated  shepherd  and
shepherd’s son, who promise to recommend Autolycus to Florizell.

1–2. this relation: the telling of this story

4. deliver: tell

5. amazedness: overwhelming astonishment

9. issue: outcome

10. a broken delivery: an incomplete statement

12. notes of admiration: exclamation marks

13. staring on: i.e., staring at

14. cases: i.e., lids

16. as: i.e., as if

19. seeing: i.e., what could be seen; importance: import

20. of the one: i.e., of one or the other

21. must needs: i.e., must

22. happily: perhaps

24. bonfires: outdoor fires lit on festive occasions

27. ballad makers: i.e., even writers of ballads (See longer note to
4.4.218.); cannot: i.e., will not

29. deliver: tell

33–34. pregnant by circumstance: compelling in its details

35. unity: agreement; proofs: items of physical evidence (listed in
the lines that follow)

36. jewel: costly ornament of gold, silver, or precious stones

37. letters: i.e., letter

38. character: handwriting

39. creature: i.e., Perdita

40–41. affection  .  .  .  breeding:  i.e.,  her  naturally  noble
disposition, which surpasses her upbringing

46. was to: i.e., needed to

47. crown: add the finishing touch to

52. known  by  garment:  i.e.,  recognizable  only  through  their
clothing; favor: face

57. worries . . . clipping her: i.e., vehemently kisses and hugs his
daughter 
(Literally, 
worries 
means 
“attacks” 
or

“strangles.”)  clipping: embracing

58. which: i.e., who

59. weather-bitten:  weather-corroded;  conduit:  fountain  (with
reference to his tears); of many: i.e., who has lived through many

61–62. undoes . . . do it: ruins description’s attempt to describe it

65. Like: i.e., as in

66. matter:  subject  matter;  rehearse:  recount,  narrate;  credit:
belief (in the tale)

67. with a bear: i.e., by a bear

69. innocence: simplicity, guilelessness

70. his: i.e., Antigonus’

72. bark: ship

74. Wracked: i.e., shipwrecked at

76. instruments: agents

83–84. she  .  .  .  losing:  i.e.,  Perdita  .  .  .  being  lost  (or,  perhaps,
Paulina might not again be in danger of losing Perdita)

85. dignity: excellence; act: performance

89. angled for: (1) artfully caught; (2) fished for

90. water: i.e., tears

94. from  one  sign  .  .  .  another:  i.e.,  passing  from  one  visible
indication of sorrow to another

96. marble: hard-hearted, unfeeling

103. piece: work of art; in doing: i.e., in the course of its creation

104. performed: completed

104–5. Julio Romano: a famous Italian artist (See longer note.)

106–7. beguile . . . custom: i.e., deprive the goddess Nature of her
customers

107. ape: imitator

108–9. one would: i.e., an observer of his statue (line 102) would
be likely to

110. greediness of affection: eager love (If sup [line 111] means
“feed their eyes” rather than “have supper,” the word greediness
would also carry its meaning of “gluttony.”)

112. she: i.e., Paulina

116. piece: join

117. be thence: i.e., stay away from there

118. benefit of access: advantage of being admitted; wink: blink

119. unthrifty: harmful

121. dash: touch, tinge

123. Prince: i.e., Prince’s ship

129. remained undiscovered: i.e., was not then revealed

129–30. all one to me: i.e., all the same to me

131. relished: found acceptance or favor

136. past: i.e., past fathering

137. gentlemen  born:  i.e.,  born  gentlemen,  but  with  continuing
comedy about the phrase “gentleman born” (See longer note.)

142. were best: i.e., might as well

143. Give me the lie: i.e., call me a liar (a provocation that would,
according  to  those  who  prescribed  rules  for  duelling,  require  a
gentleman to fight)

146–47. any time . . . hours: i.e., for at least four hours (“Four”
was often used to denote an indefinite number.)

158. preposterous  estate:  i.e.,  prosperous  condition  (See  longer
note.)

161. me: i.e., on my behalf

162. gentle: generous; mild or forgiving

172. boors: peasants; franklins: landowners lower in status than
gentlemen

174. If . . . false: i.e., no matter how false it is

176–77. tall  .  .  .  hands:  a  strong  fellow  who  is  formidable  with
weapons

179. would: wish

181. to my power: i.e., to the best of my power

185. Princes: i.e., Perdita and Florizell

186. picture: statue

ACT 5

Scene 3

5.3 Leontes,  Polixenes,  Perdita,  Florizell,  and  Camillo  go  with
Paulina to view the statue of Hermione. Leontes grieves over her
death, and Perdita kneels to entreat her blessing. Paulina tells the
Hermione statue that the oracle has been fulfilled and instructs her
to come down.

3. What: i.e., that which

5. home: in full

9. answer: return in kind

11. with trouble: i.e., only by imposing on you pains and exertion

13. content: pleasure

14. singularities: special excellences; rarities

22. lively mocked: vividly imitated

24. shows off: displays

26. near: i.e., close to lifelikeness

30. tender: kind, loving, gentle

32. nothing: not at all

36. lets go by: i.e., indicates the passage of

37. As she: i.e., as if she

44. more  stone:  i.e.,  more  unfeeling;  piece:  work  of  art;
masterpiece

46. conjured: magically invoked

47. admiring:  astonished;  spirits:  i.e.,  “animal  spirits”  that  were
thought to mediate between mind and body and to be the source of
motion

50. superstition:  an  idolatrous  religious  observance  (Perdita’s
kneeling  before  a  statue  to  ask  for  a  blessing  might  well  have
reminded  audiences  in  Shakespeare’s  day  that  the  Church  of
England attacked as superstition the Roman Catholic practice of
kneeling in prayer before statues of Christ or of saints.)

55. patience: wait a little

56. fixed: put in place (See longer note.)  the color’s: i.e., the paint
is  (Greek  statues,  as  well  as  effigies  in  Shakespeare’s  day,  were
painted so as to look lifelike.)

58. sore:  intensely;  laid on:  inflicted,  imposed  (“Laid  on”  could
also mean “applied as a coat of paint.” This meaning—along with
the words “blow away” and “dry” in the following lines—may pick
up on the reference to the paint on the statue.)

60. So . . . dry: i.e., nor can sixteen summers dry up your sorrow
(line 58)

64–66. Let . . . himself: Polixenes refers to himself as the cause of
Leontes’ pain.  piece up: perhaps, repair or patch up

69. wrought: agitated

72. draw: i.e., close

73. fancy: imagination

83. fixture: fixed position

84. mocked with: deceived by

89. together: i.e., in a row

90. No . . . world: i.e., no calm mind in the world

96. cordial: restorative

97. an air: a breath

103. painting: paint

108. presently: at once

108–9. resolve you / For: i.e., make up your minds (to experience)

114. What: i.e., whatever

120. unlawful business: i.e., witchcraft, which was outlawed and
punishable by death

124. Strike: i.e., strike up

127. come away: i.e., come

128. Bequeath: assign, hand over; him: i.e., it (death)

130. Start not: i.e., don’t shy away; holy: sinless

133. double: i.e., a second time

138. Lawful: i.e., as lawful

147. Mark: observe

150. pray: entreat, ask for

160. in being: alive

161. issue: outcome

163. push: provocation

164. like relation: i.e., stories like the one you have just requested
from Perdita

165. precious winners: i.e., winners of what you value as precious

166. Partake: communicate; turtle: turtledove, symbolic of fidelity
in love (See picture.)

A turtledove on a “withered bough.” (5.3.166–67)
From Konrad Gesner, . . . Historiae animalium . . . (1585–1604).

167. wing me: fly

168. My mate: i.e., Antigonus

169. lost: destroyed, dead

171–73. Thou . . . vows: Although the audience has heard Leontes
agree to marry only at Paulina’s direction, these lines are the first

mention  of  Paulina’s  agreeing  to  marry  a  husband  of  Leontes’
choosing.

178. For him: i.e., as for him

181. Is: i.e., are; richly: fully; justified: maintained as true

182. Let’s: i.e., let’s go

185. holy: sinless

186. ill: evil

187. whom heavens directing: i.e., who, as directed by heaven

188. troth-plight: betrothed, engaged

190–91. demand . . . Performed: i.e., ask questions and provide
answers about the parts we have performed

Folger Shakespeare Library presents the ultimate

Shakespeare listening experience with fully dramatized
audio productions, expertly produced by Folger Theatre

and performed by leading Shakespearean actors.

Hamlet (Audio CD)

Hamlet

CLICK HERE TO ORDER

Macbeth (Audio CD)

Macbeth

CLICK HERE TO ORDER

Midsummer Night's Dream (Audio CD)

A Midsummer Night's Dream

CLICK HERE TO ORDER

Othello (Audio CD)

Othello

CLICK HERE TO ORDER

Romeo and Juliet (Audio CD)

Romeo and Juliet

CLICK HERE TO ORDER

ORDER YOUR COPIES TODAY!

We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon &

Schuster eBook.

Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content

and other great books from Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at

eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

A WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS Original Publication
Washington Square Press 1230 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com

Copyright © 1998 by The Folger Shakespeare Library

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any
form whatsoever.
For information address Washington Square Press, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New
York, NY 10020

ISBN 13:978-0-7434-8489-3
ISBN 10: 0-7434-8489-4

ISBN 13:978-1-5011-3689-4 (eBook)

Washington Square Press New Folger Edition November 1998, January 2005
This eBook Edition March 2016

WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon &
Schuster, Inc.

For information regarding special sales for bulk purchases, please contact Simon &
Schuster Special Sales at 1-800-456-6798 or business@simonandschuster.com.

