•Goodbye, you horrid little beasts. 
I shall like you so 
much 

better when you're skins 
instead 
o f p u p s : 

Eg*ne«t 
titles 

National Velvet 

The Animals of Farthing Wood 

The Apprentices 

Shakespeare — The Animated Tales 

The Wind in the Willows 

The Wool-Pack 

The Load of Unicorn 

The Midnight 
Folk 

The Box of Delights 

Complete Poems for 
Children 

The Yearling 

Little House in the Big Woods 

Little House on the Prairie 

On the Banks of Plum Creek 

Enid Bagnold 
Colin Dann 

Leon Garfield 
Leon Garfield 

Kenneth Grahame 

Cynthia Harnett 
Cynthia Harnett 

John Masefield 

John Masefield 

James Reeves 

Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings 

Laura Ingalls Wilder 

Laura Ingalls Wilder 

Laura Ingalls Wilder 

Illustrated by Janet and Anne 
Grahame-Johnstone 

Dodie Smith 

EGMONT 

First published in Great Britain 1956 

ISBN 1 4052 2767 2 

This edition distributed in 2006 by Euro Books, 

a division of EuroKlds International Private Limited, India, 

by arrangement with Egmont UK Limited. 

Text © 1956 The Estate of Dodie Smith 

Cover illustration copyright © 2000 Karin Littlewood 

The moral right of the cover illustrator has been asserted 

This paperback is sold subject to the condition 

that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 

be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 

without the publisher's prior consent in any form 

of binding or cover other than that in which 

it is published and without a similar condition 

including this condition being imposed 

on the subsequent purchaser. 

Printed in India 

C O N T E N T S 

page 

I 
THE HAPPY COUPLES 
I 

Z 
THE PUPPIES ARRIVE 
I I 

3 
PERDITA 
20 

4 
CRUELLA DE VIL PAYS TWO CALLS 
32 

5 
HARK, HARK, THE DOGS DO BARK! 
39 

6 
TO THE RESCUE! 
5° 

7 
AT THE OLD INN 

OO 

8 
CROSS COUNTRY 
64 

9 
HOT BUTTERED TOAST 
73 

IO 
WHAT THEY SAW FROM THE FOLLY 

OO 

11 
IN THE ENEMY'S CAMP 
98 

12 
SUDDEN DANGER 
112 

x3 
THE LITTLE BLUE CART 
126 

T-4 CHRRSTMAS EVE 
x33 

x5 
MIRACLE NEEDED 
148 

16 
THE WHITE CAT'S REVENGE 
163 

17 
WHO ARE THESE STRANGE BLACK DOGS? 
173 

18 
THE HUNDREDTH AND ONETH DALMATIAN 
184 

i. THE HAPPY COUPLES 

R OT long ago, there lived in London a young 
; married couple of Dalmatian dogs named 
Pongo and Missis Pongo. 
(Missis had 
added Pongo's name to her own on their 
marriage, but was still called Missis by most 
people.) They were lucky enough to own a young married 
couple of humans named Mr. and Mrs. Dearly, who 
were gentle, obedient and unusually intelligent—almost 
canine at times. 
They understood quite a number of 
barks: the barks for 'Out, please!', 'In, please!', 'Hurry 
up with my dinner!' and 'What about a walk?' And even 
when they could not understand, they could often guess 
—if looked at soulfully or scratched by an eager paw. 
Like many other much-loved humans, they believed that 
they owned their dogs, instead of realising that their dogs 
owned them. Pongo and Missis found this touching and 
amusing and let their pets think it was true. 

i 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Air. Dearly, who had an office in the City, was par-
ticularly good at arithmetic. 
Many people called him a 
wizard of finance—which is not the same thing as a 
wizard of magic, though sometimes fairly similar. 
At 
the time when this story starts he was rather unusually 
rich for a rather unusual reason. 
He had done the 
Government a great service (something to do with 
getting rid of the National Debt) and, as a reward, had 
been let off his Income Tax for life. Also the Govern-
ment had lent him a small house on the Outer Circle of 
Regent's Park—just the right house for a man with a 
wife and dogs. 

Before their marriages, Mr. Dearly and Pongo had 
lived in a bachelor flat, where they were looked after by 
Mr. Dearly's old nurse, Nanny Butler. Mrs. Dearly and 
Missis had also lived in a bachelor flat (there are no such 
things as spinster flats) where they were looked after by 
Mrs. Dearly's old nurse, Nanny Cook. The dogs and 
their pets met at the same time and shared a wonderfully 
happy double engagement, but they were all a little 
worried about what was to happen to Nanny Cook and 
Nanny Butler. It would be all right when the Dearlys 
started a family, particularly if it could be twins, with one 
twin for each Nanny, but until then, what were the 
Nannies going to do? For though they could cook 
breakfast and provide meals on trays (meals called 'A 
nice egg by the fire') neither of them was capable of 
running a smart little house in Regent's Park, where 
the Dearlys hoped to invite their friends to dinner. 

And then something happened. 
Nanny Cook and 
Nanny Butler met and, after a few minutes of deep 
suspicion, took a great liking to each other. And they 
had a good laugh about their names. 

The Happy Couples 

"What a pity we're not a real cook and butler," said 
Nanny Cook. 

"Yes, that's what's needed now," said Nanny Butler. 
And then they both together had the Great Idea: 
Nanny Cook would train to be a real cook and Nanny 
Butler would train to be a real butler. They would start 
the very next day and be fully trained by the wedding. 

"But you'll have to be a parlour maid, really," said 
Nanny Cook. 

"Certainly not," said Nanny Butler. 
"I haven't the 
figure for it. 
I shall be a real butler—and I shall valet 
Mr. Dearly, which will need no training as I've done it 
since the day he was born." 

And so when the Dearlys and the Pongos got back 
from their joint honeymoon, there were Nanny Cook 
and Nanny Butler, fully trained, ready to welcome them 
into the little house facing Regent's Park. 

It came as something of a shock that Nanny Butler was 
wearing trousers. 

"Wouldn't a black dress, with a nice, frilly apron be 
better?" 
suggested 
Mrs. 
Dearly—rather 
nervously, 
because Nanny Butler had never been her Nanny. 

"You can't be a butler without trousers," said Nanny 
Butler, firmly. "But I'll get a frilly apron tomorrow. It 
will add a note of originality." It did. 

The Nannies said they no longer expected to be called 
Nanny, and were now prepared to be called by their 
surnames, in the correct way. But though you can call a 
cook 'Cook', the one thing you cannot call a butler is 
'Butler', so in the end both Nannies were just called 
'Nanny, darling', as they always had been. 

After the dogs and the Dearlys had been back from 
their honeymoons for several happy weeks, something 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

even happier happened. 
Mrs. Dearly took Pongo and 
Missis across the park to St. John's Wood, where they 
called on their good friend, the Splendid Veterinary 
Surgeon. She came back with the wonderful news that 
the Pongos were shortly to become parents. 
Puppies 
were due in a month. 

The Nannies gave Missis a big lunch to keep her 
strength up, and Pongo a big lunch in case he should feel 
neglected (as the fathers of expected puppies sometimes 
do), and then both dogs had a long-afternoon nap on the 
best sofa. By the time Mr. Dearly came home from 
business they were wide awake and asking for a walk. 

"Let us all go for a walk, to celebrate," said Mr. 
Dearly, after hearing the good news. Nanny Cook said 
the dinner was well ahead and Nanny Butler said she 
could do with a bit of exercise, so off they all set along 
the Outer Circle. 

The Dearlys led the way, Mrs. Dearly very pretty in 
the green going-away suit from her trousseau and Mr. 
Dearly in his old tweed jacket which was known as his 
dog-walker. (Mr. Dearly wasn't exactly handsome but 
he had the kind of face you don't get tired of.) Then 
came the Pongos, looking noble; they could both have 
become Champions if Mr. Dearly had not felt that dog-
shows would bore them—and him. They had splendid 
heads, fine shoulders, strong legs and straight tails. The 
spots on their bodies were jet-black and mostly the size 
of a two-shilling piece; they had smaller spots on their 
heads, legs and tails. Their noses and eye-rims were black. 
Missis had a most winning expression. Pongo, though 
a dog born to command, had a twinkle in his eye. They 
walked side by side with great dignity, only putting the 
Dearlys on the leash to lead them over crossings. Nanny 

The Happy Couples 

Cook (plump) in her white overall, and Nanny Butler 
(plumper) in a well-cut tail coat and trousers, plus dainty 
apron, completed the procession. 

It was a beautiful September evening, windless, very 
peaceful. The park and the old, cream-painted houses 
facing it basked in the golden light of sunset. There 
were many sounds but no noises. The cries of playing 
children and the whirr of London's traffic seemed quieter 
than usual, as if softened by the evening's gentleness. 
Birds were singing their last song of the day, and further 
along the Circle, at the house where a great composer 
lived, someone was playing the piano. 

"I shall always remember this happy walk," said Mr. 
Dearly. 

At that moment, the peace was shattered by an ex-
tremely strident motor horn. A large car was coming 
towards them. 
It drew up at a big house just ahead of 
them and a tall woman came out on to the front-door 
steps. She was wearing a tight-fitting emerald satin dress, 
several ropes of rubies, and an absolutely simple white 
mink cloak, which reached to the high heels of her ruby-
red shoes. She had a dark skin, black eyes with a tinge 
of red in them, and a very pointed nose. Her hair was 
parted severely down the middle and one half of it was 
black and the other white—rather unusual. 

"Why, that's Cruella de Vil," said Mrs. Dearly. "We 
were at school together. She was expelled for drinking 
ink." 

"Isn't she a bit showy?" said Mr. Dearly, and would 
have turned back. But the tall woman had seen Mrs. 
Dearly and come down the steps to meet her. So Mrs. 
Dearly had to introduce Mr. Dearly. 

"Come in and meet my husband," said the tall woman. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"But you were going out," said Mrs. Dearly, looking 
at the chauffeur who was waiting at the open door of the 
large car. 
It was painted black and white, in stripes— 
rather noticeable. 

"No hurry at all. I insist on your coming." 
The Nannies said they would get back and see about 
dinner, and take the dogs with them, but the tall woman 
said the dogs must come in, too. "They are so beautiful. 
I want my husband to see them," she said. 

"What is your married name, Cruella?" asked Mrs. 
Dearly, as they walked through a green marble hall into 
a red marble drawing-room. 

"My name is still de Vil," said Cruella. "I am the last 
of my family so I made my husband change his name to 
mine." 

Just then the absolutely simple white mink cloak 
slipped from her shoulders to the floor. Mr. Dearly 
picked it up. 

"What a beautiful cloak," he said. "But you'll find it 
too warm for this evening." 

"I never find anything too warm," said Cruella. 
"I 
wear furs all the year round. 
I sleep between ermine 
sheets." 

"How nice," said Mrs. Dearly, politely. 
"Do they 
wash well?" 

Cruella did not seem to hear this. 
She went on: "I 
worship furs, I live for furs! 
That's why I married a 
furrier." 

Then Mr. de Vil came in. 
He was a small, worried-
looking man who didn't seem to be anything besides a 
furrier. Cruella introduced him and then said: 

"Where are those two delightful dogs ?" 
Pongo and Missis were sitting under the grand piano 

The Happy Couples 

feeling hungry. The red marble walls had made them 
think of slabs of raw meat. 

"They're 
expecting 
puppies," 
said Mrs. 
Dearly, 
happily. 

"Oh, are they? 
Good!" said Cruella. 
"Come here, 
dogs!" 

Pongo and Missis came forward politely. 
"Wouldn't they make enchanting fur coats?" said 
Cruella to her husband. "For spring wear, over a black 
suit. We've never thought of making coats out of dogs' 
skins." 

Pongo gave a sharp, menacing bark. 
"It was only a joke, dear Pongo," said Mrs. Dearly, 
patting him. 
Then she said to Cruella: "I sometimes 
think they understand every word we say." 

But she did not really think it. And it was true. 
That is, it was true of Pongo. Missis did not under-
stand quite so many human words as he did. 
But she 
understood Cruella's joke and thought it a very bad one. 
As for Pongo, he was furious. What a thing to say in 
front of his wife when she was expecting her first puppies! 
He was glad to see Missis was not upset. 

"You must dine with us—next Saturday," said Cruella 
to Mrs. Dearly. 

And as Mrs. Dearly could not think of a good excuse 
(she was very truthful) she accepted. Then she said they 
must not keep the de Vils any longer. 

As they went through the hall, a most beautiful white 
Persian cat dashed past them and ran upstairs. 
Mrs. 
Dearly admired it. 

"I don't like her much," said Cruella. "I'd drown her 
if she wasn't so valuable." 

The cat turned on the stairs and made an angry, 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

spitting noise. It might have been at Pongo and Missis 
—but then again, it might not. 

"I want you to hear my new motor horn," said Cruella, 
as they all went down the front-door steps. "It's the 
loudest horn in England." 

She pushed past the chauffeur and sounded the horn 
herself, making it last a long time. 
Pongo and Missis 
were nearly deafened. 

"Lovely, lovely dogs," Cruella said to them, as she got 
into the striped black-and-white car. "You'd go so well 
with my car—and my black-and-white hair." 

Then the chauffeur spread a sable rug over the de Vils' 
knees and drove the striped car away. 

"That car looks like a moving Zebra Crossing," said 
Mr. Dearly. 
"Was your friend's hair black and white 
when she was at school ?" 

"She was no friend of mine, I was scared of her," said 

The Happy Couples 

Mrs. Dearly. "Yes, her hair was just the same. She had 
one white plait and one black." 

Mr. Dearly thought how lucky he was to be married 
to Mrs. Dearly and not to Cruella de Vil. He felt sorry 
for her husband. 
Pongo and Missis felt sorry for her 
white cat. 

The golden sunset had gone now and the blue twilight 
had come. 
The park was nearly empty and a park-
keeper was calling "All out, all out!" in a far away voice. 
There was a faint scent of hay from the sun-scorched 
lawns, and a weedy, watery smell from the lake. All the 
houses on the Outer Circle that had been turned into 
Government Offices were now closed for the night. 
N o 
light shone in their windows. But the Dearlys could see 
welcoming lights in their own windows. 
And soon 
Pongo and Missis sniffed an exquisite smell of dinner. 
The Dearlys liked it, too. 

They all paused to look down through the iron railings 
at the kitchen. Although it was in the basement, this was 
not at all a dark kitchen. It had a door and two large 
windows opening on to one of the narrow paved yards 
which are so often found in front of old London houses. 
The correct name for these little basement yards is 'the 
area'. A narrow flight of steps led up from the area to 
the street. 

The Dearlys and the dogs thought how very nice their 
brightly-lit kitchen looked. 
It had white walls, red 
linoleum, and a dresser on which was blue-spotted china. 
There was a new-fashioned electric stove for the cooking, 
and an old-fashioned kitchen fire to keep the Nannies 
happy. Nanny Cook was basting something in the oven, 
while Nanny Butler stacked plates on the lift which would 
take them up through the dining-room floor as if deliver-

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

ing the Demon King in a pantomime. Near the fire were 
two cushioned dog-baskets. And already two superb 
dinners, in shining bowls, were waiting for Pongo and 
Missis. 

"I hope we haven't tired Missis," said Mr. Dearly, as 
he opened the front door with his latch-key. 

Missis would have liked to say she had never felt better 
in her life. As she could not speak, she tried to show how 
well she felt, and rushed down to the kitchen lashing her 
tail. So did Pongo, looking forward to his dinner and a 
long, fire-lit snooze beside his dear Missis. 

"I wish we had tails to wag," said Mr. Dearly. 

2. THE PUPPIES ARRIVE 

The fish was bright green. And what did it taste of? 
Pepper I 

The meat was pale blue. And what did that taste of? 
Pepper I 

Everything tasted of pepper, even the ice-cream—which 
was black. 

There were no other guests. After dinner, Mr. and 
Mrs. Dearly sat panting in the red marble drawing-room, 
where an enormous fire was now burning. Mr. de Vil 
panted quite a bit, too. Cruella, who was wearing a ruby 

RUELLA DE VIL'S dinner party took place in 
a room with black marble walls, on a white 
marble table. The food was rather unusual. 
The soup was dark purple. And what 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

satin dress with ropes of emeralds, got as close to the fire 
as she could. 
"Make it blaze for me," she said, to Mr. de Vil. 
Mr. de Vil made such a blaze that the Dearlys thought 
the chimney would catch fire. 

"Lovely, lovely 1" said Cruella, clapping her hands with 
delight. "Ah, but the flames never last long enough 1' 
The minute they died down a little, she shivered and 
huddled herself in her absolutely simple white mink 
cloak. 

Mr. and Mrs. Dearly left as early as they felt was polite, 
and walked along the Outer Circle trying to get cool. 

"What a strange name 'de Vil' is," said Mr. Dearly. 
"If you put the two words together, they make 'devil'. 
Perhaps Cruella's a lady-devil! Perhaps that's why she 
likes things so hot!" 

Mrs. Dearly smiled, for she knew he was only joking. 
Then she said: "Oh, dear! As we've dined with them, we 
must ask them to dine with us. And there are some other 
people we ought to ask. We'd better get it over before 
Missis has her puppies. Good gracious, what's that?" 
Something soft was rubbing against her ankles. 
"It's Cruella's cat," said Mr. Dearly. "Go home, cat. 
You'll get lost." 
But the cat followed them all the way to their house. 
"Perhaps she hungry," said Mrs. Dearly. 
"Very probably, unless she likes pepper," said Mr. 
Dearly. 
He was still gulping the night air to cool his 
throat. 

"You stroke her while I get her some food," said Mrs. 
Dearly. And she went down the area steps and into the 
kitchen on tiptoe, so as not to wake Pongo and Missis 
who were asleep in their baskets. Soon she came up with 

The Yuppies Arrive 

some milk and half a tin of sardines. The white cat 
accepted both, then began to walk down the area 
steps. 

"Does she want to live with us ?" said Mrs. Dearly. 
It seemed as if the white cat did. But just then Pongo 
woke up and barked loudly. The white cat turned and 
walked away into the night. 

"Just as well," said Mr. Dearly. "Cruella would have 
the law on us if we took her valuable cat." 

Then they went down into the. kitchen to receive the 
full force of Pongo's welcome. Missis, though sleepy, 
was fairly formidable, too. There was a whirling mass of 
humans and dogs on the kitchen hearthrug—until Mrs. 
Dearly remembered, far too late, that Mr. Dearly's dress 
suit would be covered with white hairs. 

It must have been about three weeks later that Missis 
began to behave in a very peculiar manner. She explored 
every inch of the house, paying particular attention to 
cupboards and boxes. And the place that interested her 
most was a large cupboard just outside the Dearlys' bed-
room. The Nannies kept various buckets and brooms in 
this cupboard and there wasn't a spare inch of space. 
Every time Missis managed to get in, she knocked some-
thing over with a clatter and then looked very ill-treated. 

"Bless me, she wants to have her puppies there," said 
Nanny Cook. 

"Not in that dark, stuffy cupboard, Missis, love," said 
Nanny Butler. "You need light and air." 

But 
when 
Mrs. 
Dearly 
consulted 
the 
Splendid 
Veterinary Surgeon, he said what Missis needed most 
was a small, enclosed place where she would feel safe, 
and if she fancied the broom cupboard, the broom 
cupboard she'd better have. And she'd better have it at 

*3 

once and get used to it—even though the puppies were 
not expected for some days. 

So out came the brooms and buckets and in went 
Missis, to her great satisfaction. Pongo was a little hurt 
that he was not allowed to go with her, but Missis 
explained to him that mother dogs like to be by them-
selves when puppies are expected, so he licked his wife's 
ear tenderly, and said he quite understood. 

"I hope the dinner party won't upset Missis," said Mr. 
Dearly, when he came home and found Missis settled in 
the cupboard. "I shall be glad when it's over." 

It was to be that very night. As there were quite a lot 
of guests the food had to be normal, but Mrs. Dearly 
kindly put tall pepper grinders in front of the de Vils. 
Cruella ground so much pepper that most of the guests 
were sneezing, but Mr. de Vil used no pepper at all. And 
he ate much more than in his own house. 

*4 

The Hundred and One Dalmatians 

The Puppies Arrive 

Cruella was busy peppering her fruit salad when 
Nanny Butler came in and whispered to Mrs. Dearly. 
Mrs. Dearly looked startled, asked the guests to excuse 
her, and hurried out. A few minutes later, Nanny Butler 
came in again and whispered to Mr. Dearly. He looked 
startled, excused himself and hurried out. Those guests 
who were not sneezing made polite conversation. Then 
Nanny Butler came in again. 

"Ladies 
and gentlemen," 
she 
said, 
dramatically, 
"puppies are arriving earlier than expected. 
Mr. and 
Mrs. Dearly ask you to remember that Missis has never 
before been a mother. She needs absolute quiet." 

There was an instant silence, broken only by a stifled 
sneeze. Then the guests rose, drank a whispered toast to 
the young mother and tiptoed from the house. 

All except Cruella de Vil. When she reached the hall 
she went straight to Nanny Butlet, who was seeing the 
guests out, and demanded: 

"Where are those puppies ?" 
Nanny Buder had no intention of telling, but Cruella 
heard the Dearlys' voices and ran upstairs. This time she 
was wearing a black satin dress with ropes of pearls, but 
the same absolutely simple white mink cloak. 
She had 
kept it round her all through dinner, although the room 
was very warm (and the pepper very hot). 

"I must, I must see the darling puppies," she cried. 
The cupboard door was a little open. The Dearlys 
were inside, soothing Missis. 
Three puppies 
had 
been born before Nanny Butler, on bringing Missis a 
nourishing chicken dinner, had discovered what was 
happening. 

Cruella flung open the door and stared down at the 
three puppies. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"But they're mongrels—all white, no spots at all!" she 
cried. "You must drown them at once." 

"Dalmatians are always born white," said Mr. Dearly, 
glaring at Cruella. "The spots come later." 

"And we wouldn't drown them even if they were 
mongrels," said Mrs. Dearly, indignandy. 

"It'd be quite easy," said Cruella. 
"I've drowned 
dozens and dozens of my cat's kittens. 
She always 
chooses some wretched alley-cat for their father so they're 
never worth keeping." 

"Surely you leave her one kitten?" said Mrs. Dearly. 
"If I'd done that, I'd be overrun with cats," said 
Cruella. "Are you sure those horrid little white rats are 
pure Dalmatian puppies ?" 

"Quite sure," snapped Mr. Dearly. 
"Now please go 
away. You're upsetting Missis." 

And indeed Missis was upset. Even with the Dearlys 
there to protect her and her puppies, she was a little 
afraid of this tall woman with black-and-white hair who 
stared so hard. And that poor cat who had lost all those 
kittens! Never, never, would Missis forget that! 
(And 
one day she was to be glad that she remembered it.) 

"How long will it be before the puppies are old enough 
to leave their mother ?" asked Cruella. "In case I want to 
buy some." 

"Seven or eight weeks," said Mr. Dearly. 
"But there 
won't be any for sale." Then he shut the cupboard door 
in Cruella's face and Nanny Butler firmly showed her out 
of the house. 

Nanny Cook was busy telephoning the Splendid Vet 
but he was out on another case. His wife said she would 
tell him as soon as he came home and there was no need to 
worry—it sounded as if Missis was getting on very well. 

The Puppies Arrive 

She certainly was. There was now a fourth puppy. 
Missis washed it and then Mr. Dearly dried it, while Mrs. 
Dearly gave Missis a drink of warm milk. Then the pup 
was put with the other three, in a basket placed where 
Missis could see it. Soon she had a fifth puppy. Then a 
sixth—and a seventh. 

The night wore on. 
Eight puppies, nine puppies! 
Surely that would be all ? Dalmatians do not often have 
more in their first family. Ten puppies! Eleven puppies! 

Then the twelfth arrived and it did not look like its 
brothers and sisters. The flesh showing through its white 
hair was not a healthy pink but a sickly yellow. And 
instead of kicking its little legs, it lay quite still. The 
Nannies, who were sitting just outside the cupboard, told 
Mr. and Mrs. Dearly that it had been born dead. 

"But with so many, its mother will never miss it," said 
Nanny Cook, comfortingly. 

Mr. Dearly held the tiny creature in the palm of his 
hand and looked at it sorrowfully. 

"It isn't fair it should have no life at all," said Mrs. 
Dearly, with tears in her eyes. 

Something he had once read came back to Mr. Dearly. 
He began to massage the puppy; then he tousled it 
gently in a towel. And suddenly there was a faint hint 

i7 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

of pink around its nose—and then its whole little body 
was flushed with pink, beneath its "snowy hair. Its legs 
moved! Its mouth opened! It was alive! 

Mr. Dearly quickly put it close to Missis so that she 
could give it some milk at once, and it stayed there, 
feeding, until the next puppy arrived—for arrive it did. 
That made thirteen! 

Shortly before dawn, the front door-bell rang. It was 
the Splendid Vet, who had been up all night saving the 
life of a dog that had been run over. 
By then, all the 
puppies had been born and Missis was giving breakfast 
to eight of them—all she could manage at one time. 

"Excellent!" said the Splendid Vet. "A really mag-
nificent family. And how is the father bearing up ?" 

The Dearlys felt guilty. They had not given Pongo a 
thought since the puppies had begun to arrive. He had 
been shut up in the kitchen. All night long he had paced 
backwards and forwards and only once had he heard any 
news—when Nanny Cook had come down to make 
coffee and sandwiches. She had told him that Missis was 
doing well—but only as a joke, for she had no idea he 
would understand. 

"Poor Pongo, we must have him up," said Mrs. Dearly. 
But the Splendid Vet said mother dogs did not usually 
like to have father dogs around when puppies had just 
been born. At that moment there was a clatter of toe-
nails on the polished floor of the hall—and upstairs, four 
at a time, came Pongo. Nanny Cook had just gone down 
to make some tea for the Splendid Vet, and the anxious 
father had streaked past her the minute she opened the 
kitchen door. 

"Careful, Pongo!" said the Splendid Vet. 
"She may 
not want you." 

1 8 

The Puppies Arrive 

But Missis was weakly thumping her tail. "Go down 
and have your breakfast and a good sleep," she said—but 
nobody except Pongo heard a sound. 
His eyes and his 
wildly wagging tail told her all he was feeling, his love 
for her and those eight fine pups enjoying their first 
breakfast. And those others, in the basket, waiting their 
turn—how many were there ? 

"It's a pity dogs can't count," said Mrs. Dearly. 
But Pongo could count, perfectly. 
He went down-
stairs with his head high and a new light in his fine, dark 
eyes. 
For he knew himself to be the proud father of 
fifteen. 

PERDITA 

* m 

ND now," said the Splendid Vet to the 
Dearlys, "y° u must get a foster mother." 

He explained that though Missis would 
do her best to feed fifteen puppies, doing 
so would make her terribly thin and tired. 
And the strong puppies would get more milk than the 
weak ones. The puppy Mr. Dearly had brought to life 
was very small and would need special care. 

The largest pup of all had a black patch all over its ear 
and one side of its face. This is a bad fault in a Dalmatian 
—which should be born pure white, as Mr. Dearly had 
told Cruella de Vil. 
Some people would have drowned 
this patched pup, because it would never be valuable. 
But the Dearlys felt particularly fond of it because it had 
started life with a bit of bad luck. (And they liked being 
able to recognise it. 
Until the spots started to come 
through, some weeks later, the big puppy with the patch 

2 0 

Perdita 

and the small, delicate puppy were the only ones who 
could be told apart from the others.) 

The Splendid Vet said the foster mother would have to 
be some poor dog who had lost her own puppies but still 
had milk to givs. He thought he could get such a dog. 
But as he wasn't sure, the Dearlys had better telephone 
all the Lost Dogs' Homes. And until the foster mother 
was found, they could help Missis by feeding the pups 
with a doll's feeding bottle or an old-fashioned fountain-
pen filler. 

Then the Splendid Vet went home for an hour's sleep 
before starting his day's work. 

Nanny Cook got breakfast and Nanny Butler took 
Pongo for a run. And Missis was persuaded to leave her 
family for a few minutes' walk. When she came back, 
Mrs. Dearly had tidied the cupboard. 
Missis gave the 
second lot of pups a meal and then she and her family of 
fifteen had a glorious sleep. And Pongo, down in the 
kitchen, had a glorious sleep, too, knowing that all was 
well. 

As soon as the shops opened, Mrs. Dearly went out 
and bought a doll's feeding bottle and a fountain-pen 
filler. And then Mr. Dearly and the Nannies took turns 
at feeding puppies. Mrs. Dearly fancied this job herself 
but was busy telephoning, trying to find a foster mother. 
The Nannies were too fat to be comfortable in the cup-
board, so soon Mr. Dearly got the feeding job all to 
himself and became very good at it and just a bit bossy. 
Of course he couldn't go to business, which was awkward 
as he had an important business deal on. 

Luckily there was a telephone in the Dearlys' bedroom 
and it had a long cord to it. 
So Mr. Dearly was able to 
telephone while he was feeding the pups. There he was, 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

in a dark cupboard with Missis, fifteen puppies and the 
telephone. 
He nearly upset his important business deal 
by holding a pup to his ear and giving the telephone a 
drink of milk. 

No sooner had Mr. Dearly put the telephone down 
than the Splendid Vet rang up to say he had not been able 
to find a foster mother. 
Neither had Mrs. Dearly, any-
where in London. She now started to ring up Lost Dogs' 
Homes outside London. It was late afternoon before she 
heard of a mother dog with some milk to give, nearly 
thirty miles from London. 
And this dog had only just 
been brought in and would have to be kept some days 
in case she was claimed. 

Mr. Dearly put his head out of the cupboard. 
After 
being up all night and feeding pups all day he was 
beginning to feel pretty tired, but he was determined to 
go on helping Missis until the foster mother arrived. 
"Why not go and see if you can borrow that dog ?" he said. 
"Say we'll give it back if its owner turns up." 

So Mrs. Dearly got the car from the old stable at the 
back of the house and drove off hopefully. But when she 
got to the Dogs' Home she found that the mother dog 
had already been claimed. 
She was glad for the dog's 
sake, but terribly disappointed. 
She thought of poor 
Missis getting exhausted by too many puppies, and of 
Mr. Dearly, who might easily refuse to come out of the 
cupboard for a good night's sleep, and she began to think 
she never would find a foster mother. 

It was now almost dark, a gloomy, wet October 
evening. 
It had been raining all afternoon, but Mrs. 
Dearly hadn't minded when she was feeling hopeful. 
Now, as she started back for London, the weather made 
her feel more and more depressed. And the rain got so 

Perdita 

heavy that the windscreen wiper could hardly keep pace 
with it. 

She was driving across a lonely stretch of common 
when she saw what looked like a bundle lying in the road 
ahead of her. She slowed down and as she drew closer 
she saw that it was not a bundle but a dog. Instantly, she 
thought it must have been run over. Dreading what she 
might find, she stopped the car and got out. 

At first she thought the dog was dead, but as she bent 
down it struggled to its feet showing no signs of injury. 
It was so plastered with mud that she could not see what 
kind of dog it was. What she could see, by the light from 
the car's headlights, was the poor creature's pitiful thin-
ness. 
She spoke to it gently. 
Its drooping tail gave a 
feeble flick, then dropped again. 

'I can't leave it here,' thought Mrs. Dearly. 'Even if it 
hasn't been run over, it must be near starvation. 
Oh, 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

dear!' With seventeen dogs at home already she had no 
wish to take back a stray, but she knew she would never 
bring herself just to hand this poor thing in at a police 
station. 

She patted it and tried to get it to follow her. It was 
willing to, but its legs were so wobbly that she picked it 
up and carried it. It felt like a sack of bones. And as she 
noticed this, she also noticed something else. Hurriedly, 
she laid the dog on the seat of the car, on a rug, and 
turned on the light. Then she saw that this was a mother 
dog and that in spite of its starving condition it still had 
some milk to give. 

She sprang into the car and drove as fast as she safely 
could. Quite soon she was in the London suburbs. She 
knew it would still take her some time to get home, 
because of the traffic, so she stopped at a little restaurant. 
Here the owner let her buy some milk and some cold 
meat and lent her his own dog's dishes. The starving dog 
ate and drank ravenously, then at once settled to sleep. 
The nice owner of the restaurant took back his dishes 
and wished Mrs. Dearly luck as she drove away. 

She got home just as the Splendid Vet was arriving to 
see Missis and the puppies. 
He carried the stray dog in 
and down to the warm kitchen. After a careful examin-
ation he said he thought her thinness was due more to 
having had puppies than to long starvation and that, if 
she was fed well, the milk intended for her own puppies 
might continue. 
He guessed they had been taken away 
from her and she had got lost looking for them. 

"She ought to have a bath," said Nanny Cook, "or 
she'll give our puppies fleas." 

The Splendid Vet said a bath was a good idea, so the 
dog was carried into a little room which had been fitted 

Perdita 

up as a laundry. Nanny Cook got on with the bath as fast 
as she could because she was afraid Mr. Dearly might want 
to do the job himself. Mrs. Dearly had gone upstairs to 
tell him what was happening. 

The stray seemed delighted with the warm water. She 
had just been covered with soap when Pongo came back 
from a walk with Nanny Butler and ran through the open 
door of the laundry. 

"He won't hurt a lady," said the Splendid Vet. 
"I should hope not, when she's going to help nurse his 
puppies," said Nanny Cook. 

Pongo stood on his hind legs and kissed the wet dog 
on the nose, telling her how glad he was to see her and 
how grateful his wife would be. 
(But no human heard 
him.) The stray said: "Well, I'll do my best, but I can't 
promise anything." (No human heard that, either.) 

Just then Mr. Dearly came hurrying in, to see the new 
arrival. 

"What kind of a dog is she ?" he asked. 
At that moment, Nanny Cook began to rinse off the 
soap—and everyone gave a gasp. 
This dog was a 
Dalmatian, too! 
But her spots, instead of being black, 
were brown—which in Dalmatians is called not 'brown' 
but 'liver'. 

"Eighteen Dalmatians under one roof," said Mr. 
Dearly, gloatingly. "Couldn't be better." (But it could, 
as he was one day to learn.) 

Wet, the poor liver-spotted dog looked thinner than 
ever. 

"We'll call her Perdita," said Mrs. Dearly, and ex-
plained to the Nannies that this was after a character in 
Shakespeare. "She was lost. And the Latin word for lost 
is 'perditus'." Then she patted Pongo, who was looking 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

particularly intelligent, and said anyone would think he 
understood. And indeed he did. For though he had very 
little Latin beyond 'Cave canem', he had, as a young dog, 
devoured Shakespeare (in a tasty leather binding). 

Perdita was dried in front of the kitchen fire and given 
another meal. The Splendid Vet said she ought to start 
mothering puppies as soon as possible to encourage her 
to provide more milk, so after she was quite dry and had 
taken a nap, two puppies were removed from the cup-
board while Missis went out for a little air. The Splendid 
Vet said she would not know they had gone—which is 
possible, as she could not count as well as Pongo could. 
But she knew all about those puppies going because 
Pongo had told her and she had sent polite messages to 
Perdita. 
Missis felt a bit unhappy about giving any 
puppies up but she knew it was for their good. 

Before leaving, the Splendid Vet warned the Dearlys 
that if Perdita could not feed the puppies, they must not 
be returned to Missis, for her sense of smell would tell 
her that they had been with some other dog and she 
might turn against them. 
And this does happen with 
some dogs. It would never have happened with Missis, 
but it will already have been seen that she and Pongo 
were rather unusual dogs. 
And so was Perdita. 
And 
so, if people only realised it, are many dogs. 
In fact, 
usual dogs are really more unusual than unusual dogs. 

Anyway, Perdita was able to feed the two puppies. 
Pongo went upstairs and told Missis so (though to the 
Dearlys it only sounded like the thumping of his tail). 
Then he said good-night and went back to the kitchen, 
where his basket was ready for him. 
Perdita had the 
basket Missis usually slept in. 
She had fed and washed 
the two puppies and was now having a light supper. 

Perdita 

(The Splendid Vet had said she must eat all she possibly 
could, to get her strength back.) 
Pongo had a snack 
himself, to encourage her. 
Then the Nannies went to 
bed and the kitchen was left in darkness except for the 
glow from the fire. And when the two puppies were 
asleep, Perdita told Pongo her story. 

She had been born in a large country house, not far 
from the common where Mrs. Dearly had found her. 
Although very pretty, she had been less valuable than 
her brothers and sisters; her spots were rather small and 
her tail inclined to curl (it had straightened as she grew 
older). 
As no one rich or important wanted to be her 
pet, she was given to a farmer, who, though not cruel to 
her, never gave her the love all Dalmatians need. And 
he let her run wild, which is not good for any kind of dog. 

A time came when she felt a great desire to marry. 
But no marriage was arranged for her and, as the farm 
was over a mile from any village, no dog had come 
courting her. So one day, she set out to find a husband 
for herself. 

Her way to the village lay across the common, where 
she saw a large, handsome car which had been driven on 
to the grass. A group of people were having a picnic— 
and with them was a superb liver-spotted Dalmatian. 
Now, liver-spotted Dalmatians are unusual. Perdita had 
been the only one in her family, and always thought 
herself a freak. She instantly knew that the dog on the 
common was no freak but a most valuable animal, for 
he wore a magnificent collar and was being offered a piece 
of chicken by a richly-dressed lady. At that moment, he 
saw Perdita. 

It was love at first sight. Without even bothering to 
eat the chicken, he came bounding to her and they were 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

away into a wood together before anyone could stop 
them. 
Here they made swift arrangements for their 
marriage, promising to love each other always. 
Then 
the happy husband told his wife she must, of course, 

come and live with him, and led her back to the common. 
But as they reached it, along came the farmer Perdita 
lived with, in his rattling old car. He dragged her into 
it—and the picnic party bundled her husband into their 
car. Both dogs struggled and howled but it was useless. 
The cars drove off in opposite directions. 

Nine weeks after her marriage, Perdita had eight 
puppies. The farmer did not give her extra food, or help 
to feed the puppies himself so she got thinner and thinner; 
by the time her family was a month old, she was just skin 
and bone. Then the farmer put down some food for the 
puppies to eat and they quickly learnt how to, but they 
still went on taking all the milk Perdita could give them, 
so she never had a chance to regain her weight. She was 
such a very young mother, barely full-grown herself, but 
she loved her babies dearly and did all she could for 
them. And as she got thinner, they got fatter. 

Perdita 

The spots on Dalmatians begin to come through after 
two weeks. By the time Perdita's family were six weeks 
old it was obvious that they were going to be beautifully 
marked and very valuable—Perdita heard the farmer say 
so, to a stranger who came to the farm one morning. She 
was still helping to feed them; they would eat all the 
farmer offered and then come to her for milk. Then she 
and they would all have a happy sleep in the old box 
she had been given for a bed. 

One afternoon, she woke to find not one puppy in bed 
with her. She searched the farm-house, she searched the 
farmyard. N o puppies anywhere. She ran on to the road, 
fearing they might have been run over. On and on she 
went, pausing every few minutes to bark. N o answering 
puppy-bark came to her. 
Soon it began to rain. 
She 
thought of the puppies all getting wet, and barked more 
and more desperately. A car nearly ran over her; she only 
saved herself by jumping into a muddy ditch, where the 
mud even got into her eyes and ears. By the time she 
reached the common where she had met her husband, 
she was shivering and weak on her legs. The thought of 
her lost husband added to her misery at the loss of the 
puppies. She had eaten nothing since the previous after-
noon—the farmer only gave her one meal a day. At last, 
faint with hunger and utterly broken-spirited, she col-
lapsed. And there, not long after, Mrs. Dearly found her. 

That was Perdita's whole story; except that she never 
told Pongo that the farmer had named her 'Spotty'— 
because she liked 'Perdita' so much better. 

Pongo sympathised with all his heart and did his best 
to comfort her. 
He said he did not think the puppies 
were lost. It was more likely that they had been sold— 
perhaps to the stranger who came to see them. And this 

z9 

Tie Hundred and One Dalmatians 

might be the best thing that could have happened to 
them—for if they were valuable, they were sure to be 
well taken care of. There would never have been enough 
food at the farm for them when they got really big. 
Perdita knew all this was true. And the two tiny puppies 
in the basket with her were wonderfully comforting—so 
were the kind things Pongo said about being grateful to 
her for feeding them. 
Soon she felt much happier and 
slid into a warm, well-fed sleep. 

Pongo lay awake for a long time, wishing Missis and 
all the puppies could have been with him in the firelit 
kitchen. He strolled over and looked at the two puppies 
asleep with Perdita, and felt proud and protective—and 
extremely sorry for Perdita. Really, she was a very pretty 
girl—if not a patch on his Missis. 

Then he went back to his basket, had a last wash, and 
settled down. The fire sank lower; soon the kitchen was 
lit only by a faint light from a street lamp on the Outer 
Circle. Pongo slept. Perdita slept. And the two puppies, 
who had come successfully through their first day in the 
world, slept as peacefully as if they had been with their 
own mother. 

Up in the cupboard, Missis had just served supper for 
eight and was a trifle tired. Mr. Dearly had just served 
supper for five and was so exhausted by his day of puppy-
feeding that he had to crawl out of the cupboard on his 
hands and knees. 
Mrs. Dearly got him to bed and fed 
him with hot milk from a Thermos. 
They slept with 
their door open, in case Missis needed anything, but she 
was very peaceful—though just before she fell asleep, 
she did wonder a little about the strange female down in 
the kitchen with Pongo. 
She didn't worry, exacdy; she 
just wondered. 

7° 

Perdita 

On the top floor, Nanny Cook slept dreaming of 
Dalmatian puppies dressed as babies, and Nanny Butler 
slept dreaming of babies dressed as Dalmatian puppies. 

What with four humans, three dogs and fifteen puppies, 
it really was a very sleep-full house. 

4. CRUELLA D E VIL PAYS TWO 
CALLS 

1 HE next day, five more puppies were 
brought down to Perdita and she fed them 
splendidly. 
So Mr. Dearly went to his 
business. He hurried back early to do some 
pup-feeding and found that Mrs. Dearly 
was feeding the upstairs puppies and the Nannies were 
taking it in turns to feed the kitchen puppies. He was a 
little jealous but soon got over it—for he knew that what 
really mattered was that pups should get plenty of milk 
without exhausting Missis and poor, thin Perdita too 
much. 

Perdita now had her bed in the dresser cupboard where 
there would not be too much light for the puppies' eyes. 
These began to open in eight days. And a week after 
that, the puppies' spots began to show. 

What a day it was when Mr. Dearly sighted the first 
spot! After that, spots came thick and fast, though they 
would not all be through for some months. 
In a very 
few days it was possible to recognise every pup by its 
spots. 
There were seven girls and eight boys. 
The 
prettiest of all the girls was the tiny pup whose life Mr. 
Dearly had saved at birth, but she was very small and 
delicate. When pigs have families, the smallest, weakest 
piglet is often called the cadpig. Mr. Dearly always called 

Cruella de Vil Pays Two Calls 

the tiny puppy 'Cadpig', which can be a nice little name 
when spoken with love. 

Patch, the pup born with a black ear, was still the 
biggest and strongest puppy. 
He always seemed to be 
next to the Cadpig, as if these two already knew they 
were going to be special friends. There was a fat, funny, 
boy-puppy called Roly Poly, who was always getting into 
mischief. And the most striking pup of all was one who 
had a perfect horse-shoe of spots on his back—and had 
therefore been named 'Lucky'. 
He was terrifically 
energetic and showed from the beginning that he was 
going to be the ring-leader of all his brothers and sisters. 

A few days after the first spots came through, some-
thing very upsetting happened: Perdita's milk supply 
failed. She was miserable about it because she loved the 
seven pups she had been feeding as much as if they were 
her own. And she was very, very frightened. Now that 
she was no longer useful, why should the Dearlys keep 
her in this warm, comfortable house where—for the first 
time in her life—she had been given enough to eat ? But 
it was not the food and warmth that mattered most to 
her. It was the love. She had been treated as one of the 
family. The thought of leaving it all was more than she 
could bear. 

And what happened to dogs nobody wanted ? All sorts 
of fears awoke in her heart. 

The morning she found she had no milk to offer at all, 
she crept unhappily out of the dresser cupboard and saw 
Mrs. Dearly having a mid-morning cup of tea with the 
Nannies. Mrs. Dearly held out a biscuit. Perdita did not 
take it. She just laid her head against Mrs. Dearly's knee 
and gave a little moan. 

Mrs. Dearly stroked her and said: "Poor Perdita! 
I 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

wish we could explain to her that we are helping to feed 
her seven puppies, so she doesn't need to worry. Darling 
Perdita, you are washing them beautifully and keeping 
them warm at night. 
We couldn't possibly do without 
you." 

She had no hope of being understood; she just thought 
her soothing tone would be comforting. But Perdita was 
picking up more and more human words every day and 
understood perfectly. She was wild with relief. For the 
first time, she showed really high spirits, jumping up and 
kissing Mrs. Dearly, then dashing back to wash the 
puppies all over again. 

Not many days after this, all pups began learning to 
lap milk for themselves and could soon eat milk puddings 
and bread soaked in gravy. 
They were now much too 
big to go on living in cupboards. 
Missis and her eight 
were moved down to the laundry, while Perdita's seven 
had the run of the kitchen—where they got terribly under 
the Nannies' feet. 

"What a pity they can't be in the laundry with their 
brothers and sisters," said Nanny Cook, one morning. 

"Missis might hurt them—she wouldn't know them 
for her own now," said Nanny Butler. 
"And she and 
Perdita would fight." 

Pongo heard this and decided something must be done. 
For he knew that, whatever usual dogs would do, Missis 
would know her own puppies and she and Perdita would 
not fight. So he had a word with Missis, under the 
laundry door, and that afternoon, when the Nannies 
were upstairs, he took a flying leap at the door and 
managed to burst it open. Out hurtled Missis and eight 
puppies and when the Nannies came downstairs they 
found Pongo, Missis and Perdita all playing happily with 

Cruella de Vil Pays Two Calls 

fifteen puppies—who were now so mixed up that it took 
the Nannies all their time to decide which pups had been 
brought up by which mother. 

After that, all pups lived in the laundry. The door was 
kept open and a piece of wood was put across it high 
enough to keep all puppies in—but low enough to be 
jumped by Missis and Perdita when they wanted to come 
into the kitchen. 

By now it was December but the days were fine and 
surprisingly warm so the puppies were able to play in the 
area several times a day. They were quite safe there for 
the gate at the top of the steps which led to the street 
now had a strong spring to keep it closed. One morning, 
when the three dogs and the fifteen puppies were taking 
the air, Pongo saw a tall woman looking down over the 
area railings. 

He recognised her at once. It was Cruella de Vil. 
As usual, she was wearing her absolutely simple white 
mink cloak, but she now had a brown mink coat under 
it. Her hat was made of fur, her boots were lined with 
fur, and she wore big fur gloves. 

'What will she wear when it's really cold?' thought 
Nanny Butler, coming out into the area. 

Cruella opened the gate and walked down the steps, 
saying how pretty the puppies were. Lucky, always the 
ring-leader, came running towards her and nibbled at the 
fur round the tops of her boots. She picked him up and 
placed him against her cloak, as if he were something to 
be worn. 

"Such a pretty horse-shoe," she said, looking at the 
spots on his back. "But they all have pretty markings. 
Are they old enough to leave their mother yet?" 

"Very nearly," said Nanny Butler. 
"But they won't 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

have to. 
Mr. and Mrs. Dearly are going to keep them 
all." 
(Sometimes the Nannies wondered just how this 
was going to be managed.) 

"How nice!" said Cruella, and began going up the 
steps still holding Lucky against her cloak. 
Pongo, 
Missis and Perdita all barked sharply and Lucky reached 
up and nipped Cruella's ear. 
She gave a scream and 
dropped him. Nanny Butler was quick enough to catch 
him in her apron. 

"That woman!" said Nanny Cook, who had just come 
out into the area. "She's enough to frighten the spots off 
a pup. What's the matter, Lucky ?" 

For Lucky had dashed into the laundry and was gulp-
ing down water. 
Cruella's ear had tasted of pepper. 

Every day now, the puppies grew stronger and more 
independent. They now fed themselves entirely, eating 
shredded meat as well as soaked bread and milk puddings. 
Missis and Perdita were quite happy to leave them now 
for an hour or more at a time, so the three grown-up 
dogs took Mrs. Dearly and Nanny Butler for a good 
walk in the park every morning, while Nanny Cook got 
the lunch and kept an eye on the puppies. One morning, 
when she had just let them out into the area, the front 
door-bell rang. 

It was Cruella de Vil and when she heard Mrs. Dearly 
was out she said she would come in and wait. She asked 
many questions about the Dearlys and the puppies and 
went on talking so long that at last Nanny Cook said she 
really must go down and let the puppies in, as a cold wind 
was blowing. 
Cruella then said she would walk in the 
park and hope to meet Mrs. Dearly. "Perhaps I can see 
her from here," she said, strolling to the window. 

Nanny Cook also went to the window, intending to 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

point out the nearest way into the park. As she did so, 
she noticed a small black van standing in front of the 
house. At that very moment, it drove off at a great pace. 

Cruella suddenly seemed in a hurry. She almost ran 
out of the house and down the front-door steps. 

'Can't think how she can move so fast, huddled in all 
those furs,' thought Nanny Cook, closing the front door. 
'And those poor pups, in only their own thin little skins, 
catching their death of cold!' 

She hurried down to the kitchen and opened the door 
to the area. 

Not a pup was in sight. 
'They're playing me a trick. They're hiding,' Nanny 
Cook told herself. But she knew there was nowhere for 
fifteen puppies to hide. All the same, she looked behind 
every tub of shrubs—where not even a mouse could have 
hidden. The gate at the top of the steps was firmly closed 
—and no pup could possibly have opened it. Still, she 
ran up to the street and searched wildly. 

"They've been stolen, I know they have!" she moaned, 
bursting into tears. "They must have been in that black 
van I saw driving away." 

Cruella de Vil seemed to have changed her mind about 
going into the park. 
She was already half-way back to 
her own house, walking very fast indeed. 

j. HARK, HARK, T H E D O G S D O 
BARK! 

be strolling along so happily, when every step brought 
them nearer to such dreadful news. 

As they came across the Outer Circle, Nanny Cook ran 
to meet them—crying so much that Mrs. Dearly found 
it hard to understand what had happened. 
The dogs 
heard the words 'puppies', saw Nanny Cook's tears, and 
rushed down to the area. Then they went dashing over 
the whole house, searching, searching. 
Every few 
minutes, Missis and Perdita howled, and Pongo barked 
furiously. 

While the dogs searched and the Nannies cried on each 
other's shoulder, Mrs. Dearly telephoned Mr. Dearly. 
He came home at once, bringing with him one of the 
Top Men from Scotland Yard. 
The Top Man found a 
bit of sacking on the area railings and said the puppies 
must have been dropped into sacks and driven away in 
the black van. 
He promised to Comb the Underworld, 
but warned the Dearlys that stolen dogs were seldom 

Dearly, Nanny Butler and the three dogs, 
who had just turned for home. It seemed a 

HROUGH her tears, Nanny Cook stared 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

recovered unless a reward was offered. A reward seemed 
an unreasonable thing to offer a thief, but Mr. Dearly 
was willing to offer it. 

He rushed to Fleet Street and had large advertisements 
put on the front pages of the evening papers (this was 
rather expensive) and arranged for even larger advertise-
ments to be on the front pages of the next day's morning 
papers (this was even more expensive). 
Beyond this, 
there seemed nothing he or Mrs. Dearly could do except 
try to comfort each other and comfort the Nannies and 
the dogs. 
Soon the Nannies stopped crying and joined 
in the comforting, and prepared beautiful meals which 
nobody felt like eating. 
And at last, night fell on the 
stricken household. 

Worn out, the three dogs lay in their baskets in front 
of the kitchen fire. 

"Think of my baby Cadpig in a sack," said Missis, with 
a sob. 

"Her big brother, Patch, will take care of her," said 
Pongo, soothingly—though he felt most unsoothed 
himself. 

"Lucky is so brave, he will bite the thieves," wailed 
Perdita. "And then they will kill him." 

"No, they won't," said Pongo. "The pups were stolen 
because they are valuable. No one will kill them. 
They 
are only valuable while they are alive." 

But even as he said this, a terrible suspicion was form-
ing in his mind. And it grew and grew as the night wore 
on. Long after Missis and Perdita, utterly exhausted, had 
fallen asleep, he lay awake staring at the fire, chewing the 
wicker of his basket as a man might have smoked a 

pipe-

Anyone who did not know Pongo well would have 

Hark, Hark, the Dogs do Bark! 

thought him handsome, amusing and charming, but not 
particularly clever. 
Even the Dearlys did not quite 
realise the depths of his mind. 
He was often still so 
puppyish. He would run after balls and sticks, climb into 
laps far too small to hold him, roll over on his back to 
have his stomach scratched. How was anyone to guess 
that this playful creature owned one of the keenest brains 
in Dogdom ? 

It was at work now. All through the long December 
night he put two and two together and made four. Once 
or twice he almost made five. 

He had no intention of alarming Missis and Perdita 
with his suspicions. Poor Pongo! He not only suffered 
on his own account, as a father; he also suffered on the 
account of two mothers. 
(For he had come to feel the 
puppies had two mothers, though he never felt he had 
two wives—he looked on Perdita as a much-loved young 
sister.) He would say nothing about his worst fears until 
he was quite sure. 
Meanwhile, there was an important 

4i 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

task ahead of him. 
He was still planning it when the 
Nannies came down to start another day. 

As a rule, this was a splendid time—with the fire 
freshly made, plenty of food around and the puppies at 
their most playful. 
This morning—well, as Nanny 
Butler said, it just didn't bear thinking about. 
But she 
thought about it, and so did everybody else in that pup-
less house. 

No good news came during the day, but the Dearlys 
were surprised and relieved to find that the dogs ate well. 
(Pongo had been firm: "You girls have got to keep your 
strength up.") And there was an even greater surprise in 
the afternoon. 
Pongo and Missis showed very plainly 
that they wanted to take the Dearlys for a walk. Perdita 
did not. She was determined to stay at home in case any 
pup returned and was in need of a wash. 

Cold weather had come at last—Christmas was only a 
week away. 

"Missis must wear her coat," said Mrs. Dearly. 
It was a beautiful blue coat with a white binding; 
Missis was very proud of it. Coats had been bought for 
Pongo and Perdita, too. But Pongo had made it clear he 
disliked wearing his. 

So the coat was put on Missis, and both dogs were 
dressed in their handsome chain collars. And then they 
put the Dearlys on their leashes and led them into the 
park. 

From the first, it was quite clear the dogs knew just 
where they wanted to go. Very firmly, they led the way 
right across the park, across the road, and to the open 
space which is called Primrose Hill. This did not surprise 
the Dearlys as it had always been a favourite walk. What 
did surprise them was the way Pongo and Missis behaved 

Hark, Hark, the Dogs do Bark! 

when they got to the top of the hill. They stood side by 
side and they barked. 

They barked to the north, they barked to the south, 
they barked to the east and west. 
And each time they 
changed their positions, they began the barking with 
three very strange, short, sharp barks. 

"Anyone would think they were signalling," said Mr. 
Dearly. 

But he did not really mean it. And they were signalling. 
Many people must have noticed how dogs like to bark 
in the early evening. 
Indeed, twilight has sometimes 
been called 'Dogs' Barking Time'. Busy town dogs bark 
less than country dogs, but all dogs know all about the 
Twilight Barking. 
It is their way of keeping in touch 
with distant friends, passing on important news, enjoy-
ing a good gossip. But none of the dogs who answered 
Pongo and Missis expected to enjoy a gossip, for the 
three short, sharp barks meant: "Help! Help! Help!" 

N o dog sends that signal unless the need is desperate. 
And no dog who hears it ever fails to respond. 

Within a few minutes, the news of the stolen puppies 
was travelling across England, and every dog who heard 
at once turned detective. 
Dogs living in London's 
Underworld (hard-bitten characters; also hard-biting) 
set out to explore sinister alleys where dog thieves lurk. 
Dogs in Pet Shops hastened to make quite sure all 
puppies offered for sale were not Dalmatians in disguise. 
And dogs who could do nothing else swifdy handed on 
the news, spreading it through London and on through 
the suburbs, and on, on to the open country: "Help! 
Help! Help! 
Fifteen Dalmatian puppies stolen. 
Send 
news to Pongo and Missis Pongo, of Regent's Park, 
London. 
End of Message." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Pongo and Missis hoped all this would be happening. 
But all they really knew was that they had made contact 
with the dogs near enough to- answer them, and that 
those dogs would be standing by, at twilight the next 
evening, to relay any news that had come along. 

One Great Dane, over towards Hampstead, was par-
ticularly encouraging. 

"I have a chain of friends all over England," he said, in 
his great, booming bark. "And I will be on duty day and 
night. 
Courage, courage, O Dogs of Regent's Park!" 

It was almost dark now. 
And the Dearlys were sug-
gesting—very gently—that they should be taken home. 
So after a few last words with the Great Dane, Pongo and 
Missis led the way down Primrose Hill. 
The dogs who 
had answered them were silent now, but the Twilight 
Barking was spreading in an ever-widening circle. And 
tonight it would not end with twilight. It would go on 
and on as the moon rose high over England. 

The next day, a great many people who had read Mr. 
Dearly's advertisements rang up to sympathise. (Cruella 
de Vil did, and seemed most upset when she was told the 
puppies had been stolen while she was talking to Nanny 
Cook.) 
But no one had anything helpful to say. 
And 
Scotland Yard was Frankly Baffled. So it was another 
sad, sad day for the Dearlys, the Nannies and the dogs. 

Just before dusk, Pongo and Missis again showed that 
they wished to take the Dearlys for a walk. 
So off they 
started and again the dogs led the way to the top of 
Primrose Hill. 
And again they stood side by side and 
gave three sharp barks. But this time, though no human 
ear could have detected it, they were slightly different 
barks. And they meant, not "Help! Help! Help!" but 
"Ready! Ready! Ready!" 

Hark, Hark, the Dogs do Bark! 

The dogs who had collected news from all over 
London replied first. Reports had come in from the 
West End and the East End and South of the Thames. 
And all these reports were the same: 

"Calling Pongo and Missis Pongo of Regent's Park. No 
news of your puppies. Deepest regrets. End of Message." 

Poor Missis! 
She had hoped so much that her pups 
were still in London. 
Pongo's secret suspicion had led 
him to pin his hopes to news from the country. And soon 
it was pouring in—some of it relayed across London. 
But it was always the same: 

"Calling Pongo and Missis Pongo of Regent's Park. 
No news of your puppies. 
Deepest regrets. 
End of 
Message." 

Again and again Pongo and Missis barked the "Ready!" 
signal, each time with fresh hope. Again and again came 
bitter disappointment. At last only the Great Dane over 
towards Hampstead remained to be heard from. 
They 
signalled to him—their last hope! 

Back came his booming bark: 
"Calling Pongo and Missis Pongo of Regent's Park. 
No news of your puppies. Deepest regrets. End of 
" 

The Great Dane stopped in mid-bark. A second later 
he barked again: "Wait! Wait! 
Wait!" 

Dead still, their hearts thumping, Pongo and Missis 
waited. 
They waited so long that Mr. Dearly put his 
hand on Pongo's head and said: "What about coming 
home, boy ?" For the first time in his life, Pongo jerked 
his head from Mr. Dearly's hand, then went on standing 
stock still. 
And at last the Great Dane spoke again, 
booming triumphantly through the gathering dusk. 

"Calling Pongo and Missis Pongo. News! 
News at 
last! Stand by to receive details." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

A most wonderful thing had happened. 
Just as the 
Great Dane had been about to sign off, a Pomeranian with 
a piercing yap had got a message through to him. 
She 
had heard it from a Poodle who had heard it from a 
Boxer who had heard it from a Pekinese. Dogs of almost 
every known breed had helped to carry the news—and a 
great many dogs of unknown breed (none the worse for 
that and all of them bright as buttons). In all, four hun-
dred and eighty dogs had relayed the message, which had 
travelled over sixty miles as the dog barks. Each dog had 
given the 'Urgent' signal, which had silenced all gossip-
ing dogs. 
Not that many dogs were merely gossiping 
that night; almost all the Twilight Barking had been 
about the missing puppies. 

This was the strange story that now came through to 
Pongo and Missis: Some hours earlier, an elderly English 
Sheepdog, living on a farm in a remote Suffolk village, 
had gone for an afternoon amble. He knew all about the 
missing puppies and had just been discussing them with 
the tabby cat at the farm. She was a great friend of his. 

Some little way from the village, on a lonely heath, 
was an old house completely surrounded by an unusually 
high wall. Two brothers, named Saul and Jasper Baddun 
lived there, but were merely caretakers for the real owner. 
The place had an evil reputation—no local dog would 
have dreamed of putting its nose inside the tall iron gates. 
In any case, these gates were always kept locked. 

It so happened that the Sheepdog's walk took him past 
this house. 
He quickened his pace, having no wish to 
meet either of the Badduns. And at that moment, some-
thing came sailing out over the high wall. 

It was a bone, the Sheepdog saw with pleasure; but 
not a bone with meat on it, he noted with disgust. It was 

Hark, Hark, the Dogs do Bark! 

an old, dry bone, and on it were some peculiar scratches. 
The scratches formed letters. And the letters were S.O.S. 

Someone was asking for help! Someone behind the 
tall wall and the high, chained gates! The Sheepdog 
barked a low, cautious bark. He was answered by a high, 
shrill bark. Then he heard a yelp, as if some dog had 
been cuffed. The Sheepdog barked again, saying: "I'll 
do all I can." Then he picked up the bone in his teeth 
and raced back to the farm. 

Once home, he showed the bone to the tabby cat and 
asked her help. 
Then, together, they hurried to the 
lonely house. 
At the back, they found a tree whose 
branches reached over the wall. 
The cat climbed the 
tree, went along its branches, and then leapt to a tree the 
other side of the wall. 

"Take care of yourself," barked the 
Sheepdog. 
"Remember those Baddun brothers are villains." 

The cat clawed her way down, backwards, to the 
ground, then hurried through the overgrown shrubbery. 
Soon she came to an old brick wall which enclosed a 
stable-yard. 
From behind the wall came whimperings 
and snufflings. 
She leapt to the top of the wall and 
looked down. 

The next second, one of the Baddun brothers saw her 
and threw a stone at her. 
She dodged it, jumped from 
the wall and ran for her life. 
In two minutes she was 
safely back with the Sheepdog. 

" They're there!" she said, triumphantly. "The place 
is seething with Dalmatian puppies!" 

The Sheepdog was a formidable Twilight Barker. 
Tonight, with the most important news in Dogdom to 
send out, he surpassed himself. 
And so the message 
travelled, by way of fatm dogs and house dogs, great 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

dogs and small dogs. Sometimes a bark would carry half 
a mile or more, sometimes it would only need to carry a 
few yards. 
One sharp-eared Cairn saved the chain from 
breaking by picking up a bark from nearly a mile away, 
and then almost bursting herself getting it on to the dog 
next door. 
Across miles and miles of country, across 
miles and miles of suburbs, across a network of London 
streets the chain held firm; from the depths of Suffolk to 
the top of Primrose Hill—where Pongo and Missis, still 
as statues, stood listening, listening. 

Hark, Hark, the Dogs do Bark! 

"Puppies found in lonely house. 
S.O.S. on old 

bone 
" Missis could not take it all in. But Pongo 

missed nothing. 
There were instructions for reaching 
the village, suggestions for the journey, offers of 
hospitality on the way. And the dog chain was standing 
by to take a message back to the pups—the Sheepdog 
would bark it over the wall in the dead of night. 

At first Missis was too excited to think of anything to 
say, but Pongo barked clearly: "Tell them we're coming! 
Tell them we start tonight! Tell them to be brave!" 

Then Missis found her voice: " Give them all our love! 
Tell Patch to take care of the Cadpig! Tell Lucky not to 
be too daring! Tell Roly Poly to keep out of mischief!" 
She would have sent a message to every one of the 
fifteen pups if Pongo had not whispered: "That's enough, 
dear. 
We mustn't make it too complicated. 
Let the 
Great Dane start work now." 

So they signed off and there was a sudden silence. And 
then, though not quite so loudly, they heard the Great 
Dane again. 
But this time he was not barking towards 
them. 
What they heard was their message, starting on 
its way to Suffolk. 

6. T O T H E 
RESCUE 

missed many things the Great Dane barked." 

"I will tell you everything later," said Pongo. 
He was faced with a problem. 
He now knew that his 
terrible suspicions were justified and it was time Missis 
learned the truth. But if he told her before dinner, she 
might lose her appetite, and if he told her afterwards, she 
might lose her dinner. So still he said nothing. And he 
made her eat every crumb of dinner and then join him in 
asking for more—which the Nannies gave with delight. 

"It may be a long time before we get another meal," he 
explained. 

While the Nannies fed the Dearlys, the dogs made their 
plans. 
Perdita at once offered to come to Suffolk with 
them. 

"But you are still much too delicate for the journey, 

5° 

s they walked the Dearlys home, Pongo 
said to Missis: 

"Did you hear who owns the house 
where the puppies are imprisoned ?" 

To the Rescue! 

dear Perdita," said Missis. "Besides, what could you do ?" 

"I could wash the puppies," said Perdita. 
Both Pongo and Missis then said they knew Perdita 
was a beautiful puppy-washer but her job must be to 
comfort the Dearlys. And she felt that herself. 

"If only we could make them understand why we are 
leaving them!" said Missis, sadly. 

"If we could do that, we shouldn't have to leave 
them," said Pongo. 
"They would drive us to Suffolk in 
the car. And send the police." 

"Oh, let us have one more try to speak their language," 
said Missis. 

The Dearlys were sitting by the fire in the big white 
drawing-room. 
They welcomed the two dogs and 
offered them the sofa. But Pongo and Missis had no wish 
for a comfortable nap. 
They stood together, looking 
imploringly at the Dearlys. 

Then Pongo barked gently: "Wuff, wuff, wuffolk!" 
Mr. Dearly patted him but understood nothing. 
Then Missis tried: "Wuff, wuff, wuffolk!" 
"Are you telling us the puppies are in Suffolk?" said 
Mrs. Dearly. 

The dogs wagged their tails wildly. 
But Mrs. Dearly 
was only joking. 
It was hopeless and the dogs knew it 
always would be. 

Dogs can never speak the language of humans and 
humans can never speak the language of dogs. But many 
dogs can understand almost every word humans say, 
while humans seldom learn to recognise more than half 
a dozen barks, if that. And barks are only a small part of 
the dog language. 
A wagging tail can mean so many 
things. Humans knows that it means a dog is pleased, but 
not what a dog is saying about his pleasedness. (Really, 

Ji 

The Hundred and One Dalmatians 

it is very clever of humans to understand a wagging tail 
at all, as they have no tails of their- own.) Then there are 
the snufflings and sniffings, the pricking of ears—all 
meaning different things. 
And many, many words are 
expressed by a dog's eyes. 

It was with their eyes that Pongo and Missis spoke 
most that evening, for they knew the Dearlys could at 
least understand one eye-word. 
That word was 'love' 
and the dogs said it again and again, leaning their heads 
against the Dearlys' knees. And the Dearlys said "Dear 
Pongo", "Dear Missis", again and again. 

"They're asking us to find their puppies, I know they 
are," said Mrs. Dearly, never guessing that, as well as 
declaring their love, the dogs were saying: 

"We are going to find the puppies. Please forgive us 
for leaving you. 
Please have faith in our safe return." 

At eleven o'clock the dogs gave Mrs. Dearly's hand 
one last kiss and took Mr. Dearly out for his last run. 
Perdita joined them for this. She had spent the evening 
with the Nannies, feeling that Pongo and Missis might 
wish to be alone with their pets. Then all three dogs went 
to their baskets in the warm kitchen and the house settled 
for the night. 

But it did not settle for long. Shortly before midnight, 
Pongo and Missis got up, ate some biscuits they had 
hidden, and took long drinks of water. Then they said a 
loving good-bye to Perdita, who was in tears, nosed open 
a window at the back of the house, and got out into the 
mews. (They knew they could not open the gate at the 
top of the area steps.) Carefully, they nosed the window 
shut, so that Perdita would not get a chill, and then went 
round to the area railings to give her one last smile. 
(Dogs smile in various ways; Pongo and Missis smiled 

5* 

To the Rescue! 

by wrinkling their noses.) She was there at the kitchen 
window, bravely trying to wag her tail. 

Beyond Perdita, Missis could see the three cushioned 
baskets in the rosy glow from the fire. 
She thought of 
the many peaceful nights she had spent in hers, in the 
happy days when a dog could fall asleep looking forward 
to breakfast. Poor Missis! Of course she loved Pongo, 
the puppies, the Dearlys and the Nannies—and dear, kind 
Perdita—best of every thing in the world. 
But she also 
loved her creature comforts. Never had her home seemed 
so dear to her as now when she was leaving it for a 
dangerous, unknown world. 

And it was such a cold world. The night was fine, the 
stars were brilliant, but the wind was keen. 
If only she 
could have brought her beautiful blue coat, now hanging 
on a peg in the warm kitchen! 

Pongo saw her shiver. 
It is a hard thing for a loving 
husband to see his wife shiver. 

"Are you cold, Missis ?" he asked, anxiously. 
"No, Pongo," said Missis, still shivering. 
"I am," said Pongo, untruthfully. 
"But I shall soon 
warm up." 

He tail-wagged good-bye to Perdita, then started off 
briskly along the Outer Circle, looking very spirited. 
Missis kept pace with him; but after its last wag to 
Perdita, her tail went down. 

After a few minutes, Pongo said: "Are you warmer 
now, Missis ?" 

"Yes, Pongo," said Missis, still shivering. 
And still 
her tail was down. 

Pongo knew that if he could not cheer her up she 
would never be able to face the hardships that lay ahead. 
And he thought he could do with some cheering up him-

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

self. 
So he began a little speech, intended to give them 
both courage. 

"I sometimes think," he said, "that you and I have 
become a bit pampered. Well, pampering does good dogs 
no harm, provided they don't come to depend on it. If 
they do, they become old before their time. We should 
never lose our liking for adventure, never forget our wild 
ancestry." (They were then passing the Zoo.) 
"Oh, I 
know we are worried about the puppies but the more we 
worry, the less we shall be able to help them. We must 
be brave, we must even be gay, we must know we cannot 
fail. Are you warmer now, Missis ?" 

"Yes, Pongo," said Missis. 
But still she shivered and 
still her tail drooped. 

They were now nearly at the bridge which leads from 
the Outer Circle towards Camden Town. 

"Stop for a moment," said Pongo. And he turned and 
looked back along the curve of the Circle. N o car was in 
sight, no light was in any window. The lamp-posts were 
like sentinels guarding the sleeping park. 

"Think of the day when we come back with fifteen 
puppies running behind us," said Pongo. 

"Oh, Pongo, are you sure ?" 
"Absolutely sure," said Pongo. 
"Are you a little 
warmer now, dear Missis ?" 

"Yes, Pongo," said Missis. "And this time it is true." 
"Then onwards to Suffolk!" said Pongo. 
And as they ran towards the bridge, Missis carried her 
tail as high as his. 

"Not too high, Missis dear," said Pongo. 
"Let our 
hearts be gay, but not our tails." For when a Dalmatian's 
tail is curled high over the back it is called a 'gay' tail and 
is a bad fault. 

To the Rescue! 

Missis was still laughing at this little joke, when her 
heart gave a wild flutter. Coming towards them was a 
policeman. 

Instantly, Pongo led the way into a back street, and 
they were soon safely out of the policeman's sight. But 
seeing him had reminded Missis of something, 

"Oh, Pongo!" she wailed. "We are illegal. We are out 
without our collars." 

"And a good thing, too," said Pongo, "for a dog can 
be grabbed by the collar. 
But I do wish we could have 
brought your coat." He had noticed that she was shiver-
ing again—though this time it was because she had been 
scared by the policeman. 

"I don't," said Missis, bravely. "For if I wore a coat, 
how should I know how cold the puppies were ? They 
have no coats. 
Oh, Pongo, how can they make the 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

journey from Suffolk in such wintry weather? Suppose 
it snows ?" 

"They may not have to make the journey yet" 
said 
Pongo. 

Missis stared in astonishment. "But we must get them 
back quickly or the dog thieves will sell them." 

"Nothing will happen to them yet" 
said Pongo. And 
now he knew it was time to tell his wife the truth. "Let's 
rest a moment," he said, and led Missis into the shelter 
of a doorway. 
Then he went on gently: 

"Dear Missis, our puppies were not stolen by ordinary 
dog thieves. 
Try not to be too frightened. 
Remember 
we are going to rescue them. 
Our puppies were stolen 
by Cruella de Vil's orders—so that she can have their 
skins made into a fur coat. Oh, Missis, be brave!" 

Missis had collapsed. She lay on the doorstep, panting, 
her eyes full of horror. 

"But it will be all right, dear Missis! They will be safe 
for months yet. They are much too small to be—to be 
used for a fur coat yet." 

Missis shuddered. 
Then she struggled to her feet. 

"I will go back!" she cried. 
"I will go back and tear 
Cruella de Vil to pieces." 

"That would do no good at all," said Pongo, firmly. 
"We must rescue the puppies first and think of our 
revenge later. On to Suffolk!" 

"On to Suffolk, then!" said Missis, staggering along 
on shaky legs. "But we shall come back, Cruella de Vil!" 

Soon Missis began to feel better, for Pongo made her 
see that puppies whose skins were wanted for a fur coat 
would be well fed and well taken care of, and kept 
together. 
Ordinary dog thieves might have sold them 
already, and to different people. 
She asked many 

To the Rescue! 

questions and he told of his early suspicions—how he 
had suddenly recalled the evening they had first seen 
Cruella and sat under the piano in the red drawing-room. 

"She said we would make enchanting fur coats, 
Missis." 

"For spring wear, over a black suit," said Missis, 
remembering. "And she did take a lot of interest in the 
puppies." 

"And she kept Nanny Cook talking while they were 
stolen," said Pongo. 
"But I wasn't quite sure until this 
evening, at the Twilight Barking. 
You didn't hear as 
much as I did, Missis. Our puppies are at Hell Hall, the 
ancestral home of the de Vils." 

And he knew, though he kept this from Missis, that 
the S.O.S. on the old bone meant 'Save Our Skins'. 

7. AT THE OLD INN 

ONGO had no difficulty in taking the right 
road out of London, for he and Mr. Dearly 
had done much motoring in their bachelor 
days and often driven to Suffolk. 
Mile 
after mile the two dogs ran through the 
deserted streets, as the December night grew colder. At 
last London was left behind and, just before dawn, they 
reached a village in Epping Forest where they hoped to 
spend the day. 

They had decided they must always travel by night 
and rest during daylight. 
For they felt sure Mr. Dearly 
would advertise their loss and the police would be on the 
look-out for them. 
There was far less chance of their 
being seen and caught by night. 

At 
the Old Inn 

They had barely entered the sleeping village when they 
heard a quiet bark. 
The next moment, a burly Golden 
Retriever was greeting them. 

"Pongo and Missis Pongo, I presume? All arrange-
ments were made for you by Late Twilight Barking. 
Please follow me." 

He led them to an old, gabled inn and then under an 
archway to a cobbled yard. 

"Please drink here, at my own bowl," he said. "Food 
awaits you in your sleeping quarters but water could not 
be arranged." 

(For no dog can carry a full water-bowl.) 
Pongo and Missis had only had one drink since they 
left home, at an old drinking trough for horses, which 
had a lower trough for dogs. They now gulped thirstily 
and gratefully. 

"My pride as an innkeeper tempts me to offer you one 
of our best bedrooms," said the Golden 
Retriever. 
"They combine old world charm with all modern con-
veniences—and no charge for breakfast in bed. 
But it 
wouldn't be wise." 

"No, indeed," said Pongo. "We might be discovered." 
"Exactly. 
We are putting you in the safest place any 
of us could think of. Naturally every dog in the village 
came to the meeting after the Late Barking—when we 
heard this village was to have the honour of receiving 
you. 
Step this way." 

A t the far end of the yard were some old stables, and 
in the last stable of all was a broken-down stage coach. 

"Just the right place for Dalmatians," said Pongo, 
smiling, "for our ancestors were trained to run behind 
coaches and carriages. 
Some people still call us Coach 
Dogs or Carriage Dogs." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"And your run from London has shown you are 
worthy of your ancestors," said the Golden Retriever. 
"When I was a pup we sometimes took this old coach 
out for the school picnic, but no one has bothered with it 
for years now. You should be quite safe, and some dogs 
will always be on guard. 
In case of sudden alarm, you 
can go out by the back door of the stable and escape 
across the fields." 

There was a deep bed of straw on the floor of the coach 
and neatly laid out on the seat were two magnificent 
chops, half a dozen iced cakes, and a box of peppermint 
creams. 

"From the butcher's dog, the baker's dog and the dog 
at the sweet-shop," said the Retriever. "I shall arrange 
your dinner. 
Will steak be satisfactory ?" 

Pongo and Missis said it would indeed, and tried to 
thank him for everything, but he waved their thanks 
away, saying: "It's a very great honour. We are planning 
a small plaque—to be concealed from human eyes, of 
course—saying: 
PONGO 
A N D 
MISSIS 
SLEPT 
HEBE." 

Then he took them to the cob-webbed window and 
pointed out a smaller edition of himself, who was 
patrolling the inn courtyard. 

"My youngest lad, already on guard. 
He's hoping to 
see you for a moment, when you're rested, and ask for 
your paw-marks—to start his collection. A small guard 
of honour will see you out of the village, but I shan't let 
them waste too much of your time. Good-night—though 
it's really good-morning. 
Pleasant dreams." 

As soon as he had gone, Pongo and Missis ate 
ravenously. 

"Though perhaps we should not eat too heavily before 

At 
the Old Inn 

sleeping," said Pongo, so they left a couple of pepper-
mint creams. (Missis, later, ate them in her sleep.) Then 
they settled down in the straw, close together, and got 
warmer and warmer. 

Missis said: "Do you feel sure our puppies will be well 
fed and well taken care of?" 

"Quite sure. 
And they will be safe for a long time, 
because their spots are nowhere near big enough for a 
striking fur coat yet. Oh, Missis, how pleasant it is to be 
on our own like this!" 

Missis thumped her tail with joy—and with relief. For 
there had been moments when she had felt—not jealous, 
exactly, but just a bit wistful about Pongo's affection for 
Perdita. She loved Perdita, was grateful to her and sorry 
for her; still—well, it was nice to have her own husband 
to herself, thought Missis. 
But she made herself say: 

"Poor Perdita! 
N o husband, no puppies! 
We must 
never let her feel we want to be on our own." 

"I do hope she can comfort the Dearlys," said Pongo. 
"She will wash them," said Missis—and fell asleep. 
How gloriously they slept! It was their first really deep 
sleep since the loss of the puppies. 
Even the Twilight 
Barking did not disturb them. 
It brought good news, 
which the Retriever told them when he woke them, as 
soon as it was dark. 
All was well with the pups, and 
Lucky sent a message that they were getting more food 
than they could eat. 
This gave Pongo and Missis a 
wonderful appetite for the steaks that were waiting for 
them. 

While they ate, they chatted to the Retriever and his 
wife and their family, who lived at various houses in the 
village. And the Retriever told Pongo how to reach the 
village where the next day was to be spent—this had 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

been arranged by the Twilight Barking. The steaks were 
finished and a nice piece of cheese was going down well 
when the Corgi from the Post Office arrived with an 
evening paper in her mouth. Mr. Dearly had put in his 
largest advertisement yet—with a photograph of Pongo 
and Missis (taken during the joint honeymoon). 

Pongo's heart sank; for he felt the route planned for 
them was no longer safe. It led through many villages, 
where even by night they might be noticed—unless they 
waited till all humans had gone to bed, which would waste 
too much time. 
He said: 

"We must travel across country." 
"But you'll get lost," said the Retriever's wife. 
"Pongo never loses his way," said Missis, proudly. 
"And the moon will be nearly full," said the Retriever. 
"You should manage. But it will be hard to pick up food. 
I had arranged for it to await you in several villages." 

Pongo said they had eaten so much that they could do 
without food until the morning, but he hated to think 
dogs might be waiting up for them during the night. 

"I will cancel it by the Nine o'clock Barking," said the 
Retriever. 

There was a snuffling at the back door of the stable. 
All the dogs of the village had arrived to see Pongo and 
Missis off. 

"We should start at once," said Pongo. 
"Where's our 
young friend who wants paw-marks ?" 

The Retriever's youngest lad stepped forward shyly, 
carrying an old menu. Pongo and Missis put their paw-
tographs on the back of it for him, then thanked the 
Retriever and his family for all they had done. 

Outside, two rows of dogs were waiting to cheer. But 
no human ear could have heard the cheers, for every dog 

At 
the Old Inn 

had now seen the photograph in the evening paper and 
knew an escape must be made in absolute silence. 

Pongo and Missis bowed right arid left, gratefully 
sniffing their thanks to all. Then, after a last good-bye to 
the Retriever, they were off across the moonlit fields. 
"On to Suffolk!" said Pongo. 

8. CROSS COUNTRY 

again; too many humans were now about.) 
And their 
spirits were far higher than when they had left the house 
in Regent's Park. 
How far away it already seemed, 
although it was less than twenty-four hours since they 
had been in their baskets by the kitchen fire. Of course 
they were still anxious about their puppies, and sorry for 
the poor Dearlys. But Lucky's message had been cheer-
ing, and they hoped to make it all up to the Dearlys one 
day. And anyway, as Pongo said, worrying would help 
nobody, while enjoying their freedom to race across the 
fields would do them a power of good. 

He was relieved to see how well Missis ran and what 
good condition she was in. 
So much food had been 
given to her while she was feeding the puppies that she 
had never got pitifully thin—as Perdita had, when she 

HEY were well rested and well fed and they 
soon reached a pond where they could 
drink—the Retriever had told them to be 
on the look out for it. (It would not have 
been safe for them to drink from his bowl 

Cross Country 

had fed her own puppies without being given extra food. 

"You are a beautiful dog, Missis," said Pongo. 
"I am 
very proud of you." 

At this, Missis looked even more beautiful and Pongo 
felt even prouder of her. After a minute or so, he said: 

"Do you think I'm looking pretty fit ?" 
Missis told him he looked magnificent, and wished she 
had said so without being asked. He was not a vain dog, 
but every husband likes to know that his wife admires him. 

They ran on, shoulder to shoulder, a perfectly matched 
couple. 
The night was windless and therefore seemed 
warmer than the night before, but Pongo knew there 
was a heavy frost; and when, after a couple of hours 
across the fields, they came to another pond, there was a 
film of ice over it. They broke this easily and drank, but 
Pongo began to be a little anxious about where they 
would be by daybreak, for they would need good shelter 
in such cold weather. As they were now travelling across 
country, he thought it unlikely they would find the 
village that had been expecting them, but he felt sure 
most dogs would by now have heard of them and would 
be willing to help. 
'Only we must be near some village 
by dawn, or we shall meet no dogs,' he thought. 

Soon after that a lane crossed the fields and, as they had 
just heard a church clock strike midnight, Pongo felt 
there was now little chance of their meeting any humans 
on the road. He wanted to find a signpost and make sure 
they were travelling in the right direction. 
So they went 
along the lane for a mile until they came to a sleeping 
village. There was a signpost on the green, which Pongo 
read by the light of the moon. 
(He was very good at 
reading—as a pup he had played with alphabet blocks.) 
All was well. Their journey across the fields had saved 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

them many miles and they were now deep in Essex. (The 
village where they might have stayed was already behind 
them.) 
By going north, they would reach Suffolk. 

The only depressing thing was that the wonderful steak 
dinner seemed such a long time ago. And there was no 
hope of getting food as late as this. They just had to go 
on and on through the night, getting hungrier and 
hungrier. 

And by the time it began to get light, they were also 
extremely chilly—partly because they were hungry and 
tired and partly because it was getting colder and colder. 
The ice on the ponds they passed was thicker and thicker 
—at last they came to a pond where they could not break 
through to drink. 

And now Pongo was really anxious, for they had 
reached a part of the country where there seemed to be 
very few villages. 
Where could they get food and 
shelter? 
Where could they hide and sleep during the 
bitterly cold day ahead of them ? 

He did not tell Missis of his fears and she would not 
even admit that she was hungry. 
But her tail drooped 
and her pace got slower and slower. 
He felt terrible: 
tired, hungry, anxious, and deeply ashamed that he was 
letting his beautiful wife suffer hardship. 
Surely there 
would be a village soon, or a fair-sized farm ? 

"Should we rest a little, Pongo?" said Missis, at last. 
"Not until we've found some dogs to help us, Missis," 
said Pongo. Then his heart gave a glad leap. Ahead of 
them were some thatched cottages! It was full daylight 
now and he could see smoke twisting up from several 
chimneys. 
Surely some dog would be about? 

"If anyone tries to catch us, we must take to the fields 
and run," said Pongo. 

Cross Country 

"Yes, Pongo," said Missis, though she did not now 
feel she could run very far. 

They reached the first cottage. Pongo gave a low bark. 
No dog answered it. 

They went on and soon saw that this was not a real 
village but just a short row of cottages, some of them 
empty and almost in ruins. Except for smoke rising from 
a few chimneys there was no sign of life until they came 
to the very last cottage. As they reached it, a little boy 
looked out of a window. 

He saw them and quickly opened the cottage door. 
In his hand was a thick slab of bread and butter. 
He 
appeared to be holding it out to them. 

"Gently, Pongo," said Missis, "or we shall frighten 
him." 

They went through the open gate and up the cobbled 
path, wagging their tails and looking with love at the 
little boy—and the bread and butter. The child smiled 
at them fearlessly and waved the bread and butter. And 
then, when they were only three or four yards away, he 
stooped, picked up a stone and slung it with all his force. 
He gave a squeal of laughter when he saw the stone strike 
Pongo, then went in and slammed the door. 

At that moment, the dogs heard a man's voice inside 
the cottage. 
They turned and ran as fast as they could, 
along the road and then into a field. 

"Are you hurt, Pongo ?" cried Missis, as they ran. Then 
she saw that he was limping. 
They stopped behind a 
haystack. 
Pongo's leg was bleeding—the stone must 
have had a very sharp edge. 
But what hurt him most 
was the bruise on the bone. He was trembling with pain 
and rage. 

Missis was terrified, but she did not let him see this. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

She licked his wound and said there was nothing a good 
rest would not cure. 

"Rest? Where?" said Pongo 
Missis saw that the haystack was very loosely made. 
She scrabbled at it fiercely, saying: "Look, Pongo, you 
can creep in and get warm. 
Then sleep for a while. 
I 
will find us some food—I will, I will! 
The first dog I 
meet will help me." 

By now she had made a large hole in the haystack. 
Pongo looked at it longingly. But no! He could not let 
her go alone. 
He struggled to his feet, wincing with 
pain, and said: 

"I must come with you to find food. And I will bite 
that child." 

"No, Pongo, no!" cried Missis, horrified. "Remember 
he is only a very young human. All very young creatures 
are ignorantly cruel—often our dear puppies hurt me 
badly, not knowing they were doing so. To bite a human 
is the greatest crime a dog can commit. You shall not let 
that cruel, thoughtless child put such a sin on your con-
science. 
Your pain and anger will pass, but the guilt 
would remain with you for always." 

Pongo knew she was right and already the desire to 
bite the child was passing. 
"But I won't let you go 
alone," he said. 

"Then let us both rest a while first," said crafty Missis. 
"Come on, there's room for two." And she crept into 
the haystack. 

"We should find food first, or we shall be too weak to 
find it when we wake up," said Pongo. But he followed 
her into the haystack. 

"Just sleep for a few minutes, Pongo—while I keep 
guard," said Missis, coaxingly. 

Cross Country 

Pongo could fight on no longer. 
Sleep came to him 
while he thought he was still arguing. 

Missis waited a few minutes, then crept out and pulled 
hay round Pongo to hide him. She no longer felt sleepy; 
she was far too anxious. Even her appetite had gone for 
the moment. Still, she knew she must find food for them 
both—and she had no idea how to, for she was almost 
sure there was no dog anywhere near to help her. 
But 
pretending to Pongo that she felt brave had made her 
really feel a little braver and her tail was no longer down. 

She could still see the thatched cottages and she 
noticed some hens at the back of them. Perhaps the hens 
would have some stale crusts that she could—well, 
borrow. 
She went back. 

The first cottage she reached was the one where the 
little boy lived. And now he was at the back, staring at 
her! This time, he had an even larger slab of bread and 
butter, with some jam on it. He ran towards her, holding 
it out. 

'Perhaps he really means it now,' thought Missis. 
'Perhaps he's sorry he hurt Pongo.' 
And she went 
forward 
hopefully—though 
well prepared 
to 
dodge 
stones. 

6 9 

Tie Hundred and One Dalmatians 

The child waited until she was quite close. Then again 
he stooped for a stone. But he was on a patch of grass, 
with no stones handy. So, instead, he threw the slab of 
bread and butter. 
He threw it with rage, not love, but 
that made it no less valuable. Missis caught it neatly and 
bolted. 

'Bless me,' she thought, 'he's just a small human who 
likes throwing things. 
His parents should buy him a 
ball.' 

She took the bread and butter back to the haystack and 
laid it down by her sleeping husband's nose. So far, she 
had not even licked it, but now she let herself nibble off 
one very small corner. 
It tasted so glorious that her 
appetite came back with a rush, but she left all the rest 
for Pongo to find when he woke. 
Again she pulled the 
hay round him, and then ran to the road. 
But she saw 
a man outside the cottage where the little boy lived so 
she did not dare to go back to visit the hens. 
She ran in 
the opposite direction. 

It was now a very beautiful winter morning. 
Every 
blade of grass was silvered with hoar frost and glittering 
in the newly-risen sun. 
But Missis was far too worried 
to enjoy the beauty. 
The triumph of getting the bread 
was wearing off and all sorts of fears were rushing at 
her. 

Suppose Pongo was seriously injured ? Suppose he was 
too lame to go on ? Suppose she could find no food close 
at hand? 
If she had to go far, she knew she would 
get lost. 
She even got lost in Regent's Park, almost 
every time the Dearlys were off the leash. 
They often 
laughed at the way she would stand still, wildly staring 
round for them. 
Suppose she never found her way 
back to Pongo and he searched and searched and never 

7° 

Cross Country 

found her? 
Lost dog! 
The very words were terrible! 

And was she, even now, quite sure of her way back to 
the haystack ? 

'It isn't fair,' thought Missis. 
'No one as worried as I 
am ought to feel hungry, too.' For she was ravenous--
and thirsty. She tried licking the ice in a ditch but it hurt 
her tongue without quenching her thirst. 

She was beginning to think she must go back and make 
sure where the haystack was, when she came to an old 
red-brick archway leading to a long gravel drive. 
Her 
spirits rose. 
Surely this must be the entrance to some 
big country house, such as she had stayed at several times 
when she and Mrs. Dearly were both bachelors? Such 
houses had many dogs, large kitchens, plenty of food. 
Joyfully she ran through the archway. 

She could see no house ahead of her because the drive 
twisted. 
It was overgrown with weeds, and it went on 
so long that she began to wonder if it really did lead to a 
house. 
Indeed, it was now so wild and neglected that 
it seemed more like a path through a wood than the 
approach to a house. 
And it was so strangely silent; 
never in her life had Missis felt quite so alone. 

More and more frightened, she ran round one more 
bend—and suddenly she was out in the open, with the 
house in front of her. 

It was very old, built of mellow red brick like the arch-
way, with many little diamond-paned windows and one 
great window that reached almost to the roof. 
The 
windows twinkling in the early morning sunshine looked 
cheerful and welcoming, but there was no sign of life 
anywhere. And there was grass growing in the cracks of 
the wide stone steps which led to the massive oak door. 

'It's empty!' thought Missis, in despair. 

7* 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

But it was not empty. Looking out of an open window 
was a Spaniel, black except for his jnuzzle, which was 
grey with age. 

"Good-morning," he said, most courteously, 
"Can I 
be of any help to you, my dear?" 

9. HOT BUTTERED 
TOAST 

J 

took in the story Missis poured out to 
him, for he had not heard any news by way 
of the Twilight Barking. 

"Haven't listened to it for years," he 

now. There isn't another dog for miles. Anyway, Sir 
Charles needs me at twilight—he needs me almost all 
the time. 
I'm only off duty now because he's in his 
bath." 

They were now in a large, stone-floored kitchen, where 
the Spaniel had led Missis after inviting her to jump in 
through the window. 
He went on: 

"Breakfast before you tell me any more, young lady," 
and led her to a large plate of meat. 

"But it's your breakfast," said Missis, trying not to look 
as hungry as she felt. 

"No, it isn't. 
It's my supper, if you really want to 
know. I'd no appetite—and I shan't have any for break-
fast, which will be served to me any minute. Tea's my 
meal. Hurry up, my dear. It will be thrown away if you 
don't eat it." 

Missis took one delicious gulp. 
Then she stopped. 

"My husband 
" 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

The Spaniel interrupted her. 
"We'll see about his 
breakfast later. 
Finish it all, my child." 

So Missis ate and ate and then had a long drink from a 
white pottery bowl. She had never seen a bowl like it. 

"That's an eighteenth-century dog's drinking bowl," 
said the Spaniel, "handed down from dog to dog in this 
family. And now, before you get too sleepy, you'd better 
bring your husband here." 

"Oh, yes!" said Missis, eagerly. "Please tell me how to 
get back to the haystack." 

"Just go to the end of the drive and turn left." 
"I'm not very good at right and left," said Missis, 
"especially left." 

The Spaniel smiled; then looked at her paws. 
"This 
will help you," he said. "That paw with the pretty spot 
—that is your right paw." 

"Then which is my left paw ?" 
"Why, the other paw, of course." 
"Back or front ?" asked Missis. 
"Just forget your back paws." 
Missis was puzzled. 
Could she forget her back paws ? 
And if she could, would it be safe ? 

The Spaniel went on: "Look at your front paws and 
remember: Right paw, spot. 
Left paw, no spot." 

Missis stared hard at her paws. 
"I will practise," she 
said, earnestly. 
"But please tell me how to turn left." 

"Turn on the side of the paw which does not have a 
spot." 

"Whichever way I am going?" 
"Certainly," said the Spaniel. "The paw with the spot 
will always be your right paw. You can depend on that." 

"If I turned towards you now, would I be turning 
left?" asked Missis, after thinking very hard. 

Hot Buttered Toast 

"Yes, yes. 
Splendid!" said the Spaniel. 

Missis then turned round and faced the other way. 
"But now you are on the side of the paw with the spot," 
she said worriedly, "so my right paw has turned into my 
left." 

The Spaniel gave it up. "I will show you the haystack," 
he said, and led her out through what once must have 
been a fine kitchen-garden but was now a mass of weeds. 
Beyond it were the 
fields. 
Missis could just see the 
thatched cottages and the haystack. 

"It's the only haystack," said the Spaniel. 
"All the 
same, keep your eyes on it all the time you run. I would 
come with you but my rheumatism prevents me—and 
Sir Charles will need me to carry his spectacle-case down-
stairs. We are an old, old couple, my dear. He is ninety 
and I—according to a foolish human reckoning that one 
year of a dog's life represents seven years of human life— 
I am a hundred and five." 

"I should never have guessed it," said Missis, politely 
—and truthfully. 

"Anyway, I'm still young enough to know a pretty 
dog when I see one," said the Spaniel, gallantly. 
"Now 
off you go for your husband. 
You'll have no difficulty 
in finding your way back because you will see our 
chimneys from the haystack." 

"Right or left ?" asked Missis, brightly. 
"In front of your delightful nose. If I'm not here, just 
take your husband into the kitchen and I'll join you as 
soon as I can." 

Missis raced off happily across the frosty fields, never 
taking her eyes off the haystack and feeling very proud 
when she reached it without getting lost. Pongo was still 
heavily asleep, with the bread and butter by his nose. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Poor Pongo! 
Waking up was awful, what with his 
sleepiness, the pain in his leg and his horror at learning 
Missis had been dashing about the countryside alone. 
But he felt better when she had told him the news, which 
she did while he ate the bread and butter. And though 
his leg hurt, he found he could run without limping. 

"Which way do we go?" he asked, as they came out of 
the haystack. 

Missis looked worried. There were no chimneys ahead 
of her nose—because she was facing in exactly the 
opposite direction. 
But Pongo saw the chimneys and 
took her towards them. 
Just before they reached the 
kitchen-garden, Missis said: 

"Pongo, do dogs have spots on their right paws or on 
their left paws ?" 

"That depends on the dog," said Pongo. 
Missis shook her head. 
'It's hopeless,' she thought. 
'How can I depend on a thing that depends ?' 

The Spaniel was waiting for them. 
"I've settled Sir Charles by the fire," he said, "so I've 
an hour or so to spare. 
Come to breakfast, my dear 
fellow." 

He led Pongo to the kitchen, where there was now 
another plate of food. 

"Surely, it's your breakfast, sir?" said Pongo. 
"Had mine with Sir Charles. 
Don't as a rule take 
breakfast, but meeting your pretty wife gave me an 
appetite, so I accepted a couple of slices of bacon. 
Sir 
Charles was so pleased. 
Go ahead, my dear chap, I 
couldn't eat another bite." 

So Pongo ate and ate and drank and drank. 
"And now for a long sleep," said the Spaniel. 
He led them up a back staircase and along many 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

passages till they came to a large, sunny bedroom in 
which was a four-poster bed. 
Beside it' was a round 
basket. 
"Mine," said the Spaniel, "but I never use it. 
Sir Charles likes me on the bed. 
Luckily that's made 
already because John—he's our valet—is already off for 
his day out. 
Jump up, both of you." 

Pongo and Missis jumped on to the four-poster and 
relaxed in bliss. 

"No one will come up here until this evening," said 
the Spaniel, "because Sir Charles can't manage the stairs 
until John gets back. 
The fire should last some hours 
yet—we always light it for Sir Charles to have his bath 
in front of it. No new-fangled plumbing in this house. 
Sleep well, my children." 

The sunlight, the firelight, the tapestried walls were 
all so beautiful that it seemed a waste not to stay awake 
and enjoy them. So they did—for nearly a whole minute. 
The next thing they knew was that the Spaniel was gently 
waking them. The sun was already down, the fire dead, 
the room a little chilly. 
Pongo and Missis stretched 
sleepily. 

"What you need is tea," said the Spaniel. 
"But first, 
a breath of air. Follow me." 

There was still a faint glow from the sunset as they 
wandered round the wintry, tangled garden. 
As Pongo 
looked back towards the beautiful old red-brick house, 
the Spaniel told them it was four hundred years old and 
that nobody now lived there but himself, Sir Charles and 
the valet, John. 
Most of the rooms were shut up. 

"But we dust them, sometimes," he said. 
" That's a 
very long walk for me." 

The great window was lit by the flicker of firelight. 
"It's in there we sit, mostly," the Spaniel told them. "We 

Hot Buttered Toast 

should be warmer in one of the smaller rooms but Sir 
Charles likes to be in the Great Hall." 
A silvery bell 
tinkled. 
"There! 
He's ringing for me. 
Tea's ready. 
Now, do just as I tell you." 

He led them indoors and then into a large high room 
at the far end of which was an enormous fire. In front 
of it sat an old gentleman, but they could not yet see him 
very well because there was a screen round the back of 
his chair. 

"Please lie down at the back of the screen," whispered 
the Spaniel. 
"Later, Sir Charles will fall asleep and you 
can come closer to the fire." 

As Pongo and Missis tiptoed to the back of the screen, 
they noticed that there was a large table beside Sir Charles 
on which was his luncheon tray—finished with now, and 
neatlv covered by a table-napkin—and everything neces-
sary for tea. Water was already boiling in a silver kettle 
over a spirit lamp. 
Sir Charles filled the teapot and put 
the tea-cosy on. 
Then he lifted a silver cover from a 
plate on which there were a number of slices of bread. 
By now the Spaniel had joined him and was thumping 
his tail. 

"Hungry, are you?" said Sir Charles. 
"Well, we've a 
good fire for our toast." 

Then he put a slice of bread on a toasting fork. It was 
no ordinary toasting fork for it was made of iron and 
nearly four feet long. It was really meant for pushing 
logs into position. 
But it was just what Sir Charles 
needed, and he handled it with great skill, avoiding the 
flaming logs and toasting the bread where the wood 
glowed red hot. A slice of toast was ready in no time. 
Sir Charles buttered it thickly and offered a piece to the 
Spaniel, who ate it while Sir Charles watched. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Missis was a little surprised that the courteous Spaniel 
had not offered her the first piece. 
She was even more 
surprised when he received a second piece and ate that, 
too, while Sir Charles watched. 
She began to feel very 
hungry—and very anxious. Surely the kind Spaniel had 
not invited them to tea just to watch him eat? 
Then a 
third piece of toast was offered—and this time Sir Charles 
happened to turn away. 
Instantly the Spaniel dropped 
the toast behind the screen. 
Piece after piece travelled 
this way to Pongo and Missis, with the Spaniel only 
eating one now and then—when Sir Charles happened to 
be looking. Missis felt ashamed of her hungry suspicions. 

"Never known you with such a good appetite, my 
boy," said the old gentleman, delightedly. And he made 
slice after slice of toast until all the bread was gone. Then 
cakes were handed on in the same way. 
And then Sir 
Charles offered the Spaniel a silver bowl of tea. This was 
put down so close to the edge of the screen that Pongo 
and Missis were able to drink some while Sir Charles was 
looking the other way. When he saw the bowl empty, he 
filled it again and again so everyone had enough. Pongo 
and Missis had always had splendid food, but they had 
never before had hot buttered toast and sweet milky tea. 
It was a meal they always remembered. 

At last Sir Charles rose stiffly, put another log on the 
fire, and then settled back in his chair and closed his eyes. 
Soon he was asleep and the Spaniel beckoned Pongo and 
Missis to the fire. They sat on the warm hearth and 
looked up at the old gentleman. 
His face was deeply 
lined and all the lines drooped and somehow he had a 
look of the Spaniel—or the Spaniel had a look of Sir 
Charles. Both of them were lit by the firelight and beyond 
them was the great window, now blue with evening. 

Hot Buttered Toast 

"We ought to be on our way," whispered Pongo to 
Missis. But it was so warm, so quiet, and they were both 
so full of buttered toast that they drifted into a light and 
delightful sleep. 

Pongo awoke with a start. Surely someone had spoken 
his name? 

The fire was no longer blazing brightly but there was 
still enough light to see that the old gentleman was awake 
and leaning forward. 

"Well, if that isn't Pongo and his missis," he mur-
mured, smilingly. "Well, well! What a pleasure! What a 
pleasure!" 

Missis had opened her eyes now. 
The Spaniel whispered: "Don't move, either of you." 
"Canyou see them?" said the old gentleman, putting 
his hand on the Spaniel's head. 
"If you can, don't be 
frightened. 
They won't hurt you. 
You'd have liked 
them. 
Let's see, they must have died fifty years before 
you were born—more than that. They were the first dogs 
I ever knew. I used to ask my mother to stop the carriage 
and let them get inside—I couldn't bear to see them 
running behind. 
So in the end, they just became house 
dogs. 
How often they sat there in the 
firelight. 
Hey, 
you two! If dogs can come back, why haven't you come 
back before?" 

Then Pongo knew that Sir Charles thought they were 
ghost dogs. 
And he remembered that Mr. Dearly had 
named him 'Pongo' because it was a name given to many 
Dalmatians of those earlier days when they ran behind 
carriages. 
Sir Charles had taken him and Missis for 
Dalmatians he had known in his childhood. 

"Probably my fault," the old gentleman went on. 
"I've never been what they call 'psychic' nowadays. This 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

house is supposed to be full of ghosts but I've never seen 
any. 
I dare say I'm only seeing you because I'm pretty 
close to the edge now—and quite time, too. 
I'm more 

than ready. Well, what a joy to know that dogs go on, 
too—I've always hoped it. Good news for you, too, my 
boy." He fondled the Spaniel's ears. "Well, Pongo and 
his pretty wife, after all these years! 
Can't see you so 
well, now, but I shall remember!" 

Hot Buttered Toast 

The fire was sinking lower and lower. They could no 
longer see the old gentleman's face, but soon his even 
breathing told them he was asleep again. The Spaniel 
rose quietly. 

"Come with me now," he whispered, "for John will 
be back soon to get supper. You have given my dear old 
pet a great pleasure. 
I am deeply grateful." 

They tiptoed out of the vast, dark hall and made their 
way to the kitchen, where the Spaniel pressed more food 
on them. 

"Just a few substantial biscuits—my tin is always left 
open for me when John is away." 

Then they had a last drink of water and the Spaniel 
gave Pongo directions for reaching Suffolk. It was full of 
'rights' and 'lefts' and Missis did not take in one word. 
The Spaniel noticed her dazed look and said playfully: 

"Now which is your right paw?" 
"One of the front ones," said Missis, brightly. 
At 
which Pongo and the Spaniel laughed in a very masculine 
way. 

Then they thanked the Spaniel and said good-bye. 
Missis said she would always remember that day. 

"So shall I," said the Spaniel, smiling at her. 
"Ah, 
Pongo, what a lucky dog you are!" 

"I know it," said Pongo, looking proudly at Missis. 
Then they were off. 
After they had been running across the fields for some 
minutes, Missis said anxiously: 

"How's your leg, Pongo?" 
"Much, much better. 
Oh, Missis, I am ashamed of 
myself. I made such a fuss this morning. It was partly 
rage. 
Pain hurts more when one is angry. 
You were 
such a comfort to me—and so brave." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"And you were a comfort to me, the night we left 
London," said Missis. "It will be all right as long as we 
never lose courage both together." 

"I'm glad you did not let me bite that small human." 
"Nothing should ever make a dog bite a human," said 
Missis, in a virtuous voice. 

Pongo remembered something. 
"You said only the 
night before last that you were going to tear Cruella de 
Vil to pieces." 

"That is different," said Missis, grimly. 
"I do not 
consider Cruella de Vil is human." 

Thinking of Cruella made them anxious for the puppies 
and they ran on faster, without talking any more for a 
long time. 
Then Missis said: 

"Pongo, how far away from the puppies are we now ?" 
"With good luck we should reach them tomorrow 
morning," said Pongo. 

Just before midnight they came to the market town of 
Sudbury. Pongo paused as they crossed the bridge over 
the River Stour. 

"Here we enter Suffolk," he said, triumphantly. 
They ran on through the quiet streets of old houses 
and into the market square. They had hoped they might 
meet some dog and hear if any news of the puppies had 
come at the Twilight Barking, but not so much as a cat 
was stirring. While they were drinking at the fountain, 
church clocks began to strike midnight. 

Missis said gladly: "Oh, Pongo, it's tomorrow! 
Now 
we shall be with our puppies today!" 

8 4 

IO. W H A T T H E Y SAW F R O M T H E 
F O L L Y 

the night wore on, they travelled through 
many pretty villages 
to a countryside 
| wilder than any they had yet seen. There 
i were more woods and heaths, fewer farms. 
So wild was it that Pongo would risk no 
short cuts and stuck cautiously to the roads, which were 
narrow and twisted. The moon was behind clouds so he 
could not read what few signposts there were. 

"I'm so afraid we may go through our village without 
knowing it," he said. "For as we have not been able to 
send any news by the Twilight Barking, nobody will be 
on the look out for us." 

But he was wrong. 
Suddenly, out of the darkness, 
came a loud "Miaow". 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

They stopped instantly. Just ahead of them, up a tree, 
was a tabby cat. 
She said: 

"Pongo and Missis ? I suppose you are friendly ?" 
"Yes, indeed, Madam," said Pongo. "Are you, by any 
chance, the cat who helped to find our puppies ?" 

"That's me," said the cat. 
"Oh, thank you, thank you!" cried Missis. 
The cat jumped down. "Sorry to seem suspicious of 
you, but some dogs just can't control themselves when 
they see a cat—not that I've ever had any trouble. Well, 
here you are." 

"How very kind of you to keep watch for us, Madam," 
said Pongo. 

"No hardship, I'm usually out at night. You can call 
me Tib. My real name's Pussy Willow but that's too long 
for most people—a pity, really, as it's a name I could 
fancy." 

"It suits you so well," said Pongo, in a courtly tone 
he had picked up from the Spaniel, "with your slender 
figure and soft grey paws." He was taking a chance in 
saying this for it was too dark for him to see her figure, 
let alone her paws. 

The cat was delighted. "Well, I have kept my figure— 
and it was my paws got me the name Pussy Willow. N o w 
you'll be wanting a bite of food and a good long rest." 

"Please tell us if all is still well with our puppies," said 
Missis. 

"It was, yesterday afternoon—when I last saw them. 
Lively as crickets and fat as butter, they were." 

"Could we see them—just a glimpse—before we eat 
or sleep?" asked Missis. 

"We can't climb trees, as Mrs. Willow can," said 
Pongo. 

What They Sau> from the Folly 

"You won't need to," said the cat. 
"The Colonel's 
made other arrangements. But you can't see the puppies 
before they are let out for exercise and that'll be hours 
yet. 
Those Badduns are late risers. 
Well, come along 
and meet the Colonel." 

"A human Colonel ?" asked Missis, puzzled. 
"Bless me, no. The Colonel's our Sheepdog. A perfect 
master of strategy—you ask the sheep. He calls me his 
lieutenant." 

The cat was now leading them along the road. Pongo 
asked how far it was to the farm. 

"Oh, we're not going to the farm now. The Colonel's 
spending the night at the Folly. 
Crazy place, but it's 
coming in very useful." 

The darkness was thinning. Soon the road ran across 
a stretch of heath on which, still some way ahead of 
them, a dark mass stood out against the gradually 
lightening sky. 
After a few moments, Pongo saw that 
the dark mass was a great stone wall. 

"There you are," said the cat. 
"Your puppies are 
behind that." 

"It looks like the wall of a prison," said Pongo. 
"Nasty place," said the cat. "The Colonel will tell you 
its history." 

She led them from the road over the rough grass of 
the heath. As they drew nearer, Pongo saw that the wall 
curved—as the wall of a round tower curves. Above it 
rose the trunks of tall trees, their bare branches black 
against the sky. 

"You'd think there would be a castle, at least, inside 
that huge wall," said the cat. "And they do say there was 
going to be, only something went wrong. 
All that's 
there now—well, you can see for yourself." 

»7 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

She led the way to the rusty iron gates, and Pongo and 
Missis peered through the bars. There was now enough 
light for them to see some distance. Beyond a stretch of 
grass as wild as the surrounding heath, they saw the glint 
of water—but, strangely, it seemed to be black water. 
Then they saw the reason why. 
Reflected in it was a 
black house. 

It was the most frightening house Pongo and Missis 
had ever seen. Many of the windows in its large, fl:it face 
had been bricked up and those that were left looked like 
eyes and a nose, with the front door for a mouth. Only 
there were too many eyes, and the nose and the mouth 
were not quite in the right placcs, so that the whole face 
looked distorted. 

"It's seen us!" gasped Missis—and it really did seem 
as if the eyes of the house were staring at them fiom its 
cracked and peeling black facc. 

"Well, that's Hell Hall for you," said the cat. 
She moved on and they followed her, round the 
curving wall. 
After a few minutes they saw a tower 
rising high above the tree-tops. 
It was built of rough 
grey stone, like the wall, and was rather like a church 
tower. 
But there was no church. 
The tower simply 
jutted out of the wall. 
Some of the narrow windows 
were broken and their stonework was crumbling. 
The 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

place was not yet a ruin but looked as if it quite soon 
might be one. 

"Well may they call it a Folly!" said the cat. 
Missis did not know what the word meant but Pongo 
had seen a Folly before and was able to explain. 
The 
name is often given to expensive, odd buildings built for 
no sensible reason, buildings that it was a foolishness to 
build. 

The cat miaowed three times and there were three 
answering barks from inside the tower. A moment later 
came the sound of a bolt being drawn back. 

"The Colonel's the only dog I ever knew who could 
manage bolts with his teeth," said the cat, proudly. 

Pongo instantly decided he would learn to manage bolts. 
"Come in, come in," said a rumbling voice, "but let 
me have a look at you first. There's not much light inside 
yet." 

An enormous Sheepdog came out. Pongo saw at once 
that this was none of your dapper military men but a 
lumbering old soldier man, possibly a slow thinker but 
widely experienced. 
His eyes glittered shrewdly and 
kindly through his masses of grey-and-white woolly hair. 

"Glad to see you're large Dalmatians," he said, approv-
ingly. "I've nothing against small dogs but the size of 
all breeds should be kept up. 
Well, now, what's been 
happening to you? 
There was a rare to-do on the 
Twilight Barking last night, when no one had any news 
of you." 

He led the way into the Folly, while Pongo told of 
their day with the Spaniel. 
\ 

"Sounds a splendid fellow," said the Colonel. "Sorry 
he's not on the Barking. 
Now, tuck in, you two. 
I 
provided breakfast just in case you turned up." 

What They Saw from the Folly 

There was plenty of good, farm-house food and a deep, 
round tin full of water. 

"How 
did you get it all here?" asked 
Pongo, 
astonished. 

"I rolled the round tin from the farm—with the food 
inside it," said the Colonel. "I stuffed the tin with straw 
so that the food wouldn't fall out. And then I borrowed 
a small, seaside bucket from my young pet, Tommy—the 
dear little chap would lend me anything. I can carry that 
bucket by its handle. Six trips to the pond on the heath 
got the water here—lucky it thawed yesterday. 
Drink 
up! 
Plenty more where that came from." 

The cat acted as hostess during the meal. 
Pongo was 
careful always to address her as 'Mrs. Willow'. 

"What's this Mrs. Willow business ?" said the Colonel 
suddenly. 

"Pussy Willow happens to be my given name," said 
the cat. 
"And I'm certainly a Mrs." 

"You've got too many names," said the Colonel. 
"You're 'Puss' because all cats are 'Puss'. You're 'Pussy 
Willow' because it's your given name. 
You're 'Tib' 
because most people call you that. I call you 'Lieutenant' 
or 'Lieutenant Tib'. 
I thought you liked it." 

"I like 'Lieutenant' but not 'Lieutenant Tib'." 
"Well, you can't be 'Mrs. Willow' on top of every-
thing else. You can't have six names." 

"I'm entitled to nine names as I've nine lives," said the 
cat. "But I'll settle for 'Lieutenant Willow'—with 'Puss' 
for playful moments." 

"Right," said the Colonel. "And now we'll show our 
guests their sleeping quarters." 

"Oh, please," begged Missis. 
"Couldn't we get just 
a glimpse of the puppies before we sleep ?" 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

The cat shot a quick look at the Colonel and said: 
"I've told them the pups won't be out for hours yet." 
"Besides, you'd get too excited to sleep," said the 
Colonel. 
"You must both have a good rest before you 
start worrying." 

"Worrying?" said Pongo, sharply. 
"Is something 
wrong?" 

"I give you my word there is nothing wrong with 
your puppies," said the Colonel. 

Pongo and Missis believed him—and yet, they both 
thought there was something odd about his voice, and 
about the look the cat had given him. 

"Now up we go," the Colonel went on, briskly. 
"You're sleeping on the top floor because that's the only 
floor where the windows aren't broken. 
Want a ride, 
Lieutenant Wib—I mean Lieutenant Tillow—oh, good 
heavens, cat!" 

"If there's one thing I object to being called, it's plain 
cat," said the cat. 

"Quite right. I don't like being called plain dog," said 
the Colonel. 
"I apologise, Lieutenant Willow. 
N o w 
jump on my back unless you want to walk." 

The cat jumped on the Colonel's back and held on by 
his long hair. Pongo had never before seen a cat jump 
on a dog's back with friendly intentions. He was deeply 
impressed—both by the Colonel's trustfulness and the 
cat's trustworthiness. 

The narrow, twisting stairs went up through five floors 
of the Folly, most of them full of broken furniture, old 
trunks and all manner of rubbish. On the top floor was 
a deep bed of straw, brought up by the Colonel in a sack. 
But what interested Missis far more was the narrow 
window—surely it must look towards Hell Hall ? 

9 2 

What They Saw from the Folly 

She ran to see. 
Yes, beyond the tree-tops and a 
neglected orchard was the back of the black house— 
which was as ugly as the front, though it did not have 
such a frightening expression. At one side was a large 
stable yard. 

"Is that where the puppies will come out ?" she asked. 
"Yes, yes," said the Colonel, "but it won't be for— 
well, for some time, yet." 

"I shall never sleep until I've seen them," said Missis. 
"Yes, you will, because I shall talk you to sleep," said 
the Colonel. "Your husband has asked me to tell him the 
history of Hell Hall. 
N o w come and lie down." 

Pongo was as anxious to see the puppies as Missis was 
but he knew they should sleep first, so he coaxed her to 
lie down. The Colonel pulled the straw round both of 
them. 

"It's chilly in here—not that I feel it," he said. Then 
he sent the cat to start collecting food for the next meal, 
and began to talk, in his rumbling voice. This was the 
story he told. 

Hell Hall had once been an ordinary farm-house named 
Hill Hall—it had been built by a farmer named Hill. It 
was about two hundred years old, the same age as the 
farm where the Sheepdog and the cat lived. 

"The two houses are quite a bit alike," said the Colonel, 
"only our place is painted white and well cared for. I 
remember Hell Hall before it was painted black and it 
really wasn't bad at all." 

The farmer named Hill had got into debt and sold Hill 
Hall to an ancestor of Cruella de Vil's, who liked its 
lonely position on the wild heath. He intended to pull 
the farm-house down and build himself a fantastic house 
which was to be a mixture of a castle and a cathedral, and 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

had begun by building the surrounding wall and the 
Folly. (The Colonel had heard all this while visiting the 
Vicarage.) 

Once the wall, with its heavy iron gates, was finished, 
strange rumours began to spread. Villagers crossing the 
heath at night heard screams and wild laughter. 
Were 
there prisoners behind the prison-like wall ? People began 
to count their children carefully. 

"Some of the stories—well, I shan't tell you just as 
you're falling asleep," said the Colonel. 
"I didn't hear 
them at the Vicarage. 
But I will tell you something— 
because it won't upset you as it, naturally, upset the 
villagers. It was said that this de Vil fellow had a long 
tail. I didn't hear that at the Vicarage, either." 

Missis had taken in very little of this and was now fast 
asleep, but Pongo was keenly interested. 

"By this time," the Colonel went on, "people were 
calling the place Hell Hall, and the de Vil chap plain devil. 
The end came when the men from several villages arrived 
one night with lighted torches, prepared to break open 
the gates and burn the farm-house down. 
But as they 
approached the gates, a terrific thunderstorm began and 
put the torches out. Then the gates burst open—seem-
ingly of their own accord—and out came de Vil, driving 
a coach and four. And the story is that lightning was 
coming not from the skies but from de Vil—blue forked-
lightning. All the men ran away screaming, and never 
came back. 
And neither did de Vil. 
The house stood 
empty for thirty years. 
Then someone rented it. 
It's 
been rented again and again, but no one ever stays." 

"And it still belongs to the de Vil family?" asked 
Pongo. 

"There's only Cruella de Vil left of the family now. 

What They Saw from the Folly 

Yes, she owns it. She came down here some years ago 
and had the house painted black. It's red inside, I'm told. 
But she never lived here. She lets the Baddun brothers 
have it rent free, as caretakers. I wouldn't let them take 
care of any kennel of mine." 

Those were the last words Pongo heard, for as the 
story ended, sleep wrapped him round. The Sheepdog 
stood looking down at the peaceful couple. 

'Well, they're in for a shock,' he thought, and then 
lumbered his way downstairs. 

It was less than an hour later when Missis opened her 
eyes. 
She had been dreaming of the puppies, she had 
heard them barking—and they were barking! She sprang 
out of the straw and dashed to the window. No pup was 
to be seen but she could hear the barking clearly—it was 
coming from inside the black house. Then the barking 
grew louder, the door to the stable yard opened, and out 
came a stream of puppies. 

Missis blinked. 
Surely her puppies could not have 
grown so much in less than a week ? And surely she had 
not had so many puppies ? More and more were hurrying 
out, the whole yard was filling up with fine, large, healthy 
Dalmatian puppies, but 

Missis raised her head in a wail of despair. 
These 
puppies were not hers at all! 
The whole thing was a 
mistake! 
Her puppies were still lost, perhaps starving, 
perhaps even dead. 
Again and again she howled in 
anguish. 

Her first howl had wakened Pongo. He was beside her 
in a couple of seconds and staring at the yard full of 
milling, tumbling puppies. And they were still coming 
out of the house, rather smaller puppies now 

And then they saw him—smaller, even, than they had 

What They Saw from the Folly 

remembered. Lucky! There was no mistaking that horse-
.shoe of spots on his back. And after him came Roly Poly, 
falling over his feet as usual. Then Patch and the tiny 
Cadpig and all the others. All well, all lashing their tails, 
all eager to drink at the low troughs of water that stood 
about in the yard. 

"Look, Patch is helping the Cadpig to find a place," 
said Missis, delightedly. "But what does it mean ? Where 
have all those other puppies come from ?" 

Dazed as he was with sleep, Pongo's keen brain had 
gone into instant action. He saw it all. Cruella must have 
begun stealing puppies months before—soon after that 
evening when she had said she would like a Dalmatian 
fur coat. The largest pups in the yard looked at least five 
months old. 
Then they went down and down in size. 
Smallest and youngest of all were his own puppies, which 
must obviously have been the last to be stolen. 

He had barely finished explaining this to Missis when 
the Sheepdog reached the top of the stairs—he had been 
downstairs getting in fresh water and had heard Missis 
howl. 

"Well, now you know," he said. 
"I was hoping you 
could have had your sleep out first." 

"But why are you both looking so worried?" asked 
Missis. 
"Our puppies are safe and well." 

"Yes, my dear. 
You go on watching them," said 
Pongo, gently. 
Then he turned to the Colonel. 

"You come downstairs and have a drink, my boy," 
said the Colonel. 

ii. IN THE ENEMY'S CAMP 

H, how Pongo needed that drink! 

"And now stroll down to the pond with 
me," said the Colonel, gripping the handle 
of a little tin bucket in his teeth. 
"You 
won't feel like trying to sleep any more 
just at present." 

Pongo felt he would never be able to sleep again. 
"I blame myself for letting you in for this shock," said 
the Colonel, as they went out into the early morning sun-
light. "Because you can't blame the Lieutenant. 
She's 
not a trained observer. When she told me the place was 
'seething with Dalmatian puppies' I naturally thought 
she meant your puppies only. After all, fifteen puppies 
can do quite a bit of seething. It was only yesterday, after 
I'd made the Folly my headquarters and could see over 
the wall, that I found out the true facts. Of course I sent 
the news over yesterday's Twilight Barking but couldn't 
reach you." 

9 8 

In the Enemy's Camp 

"How many puppies are there ?" asked Pongo. 
"Can't tell, exactly, because they never keep still. But 
I'd say—counting yours—getting on for a hundred." 

"A hundred?" 
They had reached the pond. 
"Have another drink," 
suggested the Colonel. 

Pongo gulped down some more water, then stared 
hopelessly at the Sheepdog. 

"Colonel, what am I going to do ?" 
"Will your lady wife want just to rescue her own 
puppies ?" 

"She may at first," said Pongo. 
"But not when she 
realises it would mean leaving all the others to certain 
death." 

"Anyway, your pups aren't old enough for the 
journey," said the Colonel. 
"I suppose you 
know 
that?" 

Pongo did know it. His plan had been to let his puppies 
stay at Hell Hall until they were a little bigger, while he 
and Missis kept watch over them, ready to rescue them 
if danger threatened. 
He told the Colonel this. 

"And that's exactly what you must do," said the 
Colonel. 

"But what about the other puppies ?" 
"I shall spread the news of them throughout England. 
Other parents may come to the rescue." 

"I doubt it, after all this time," said Pongo. 
"If the worst comes to the worst, would your pets give 
them a home?" 

Pongo couldn't imagine the Dearlys refusing to help 
any dog. But getting on for a hundred! Still, the drawing-
room was very large. 

"I don't believe they'd turn them away," he said. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"But, Colonel, I could never get the whole lot of them 
to London." 

"Not as they are, of course. Every dog jack of them 
has to be trained. 
They must learn to march, to obey 
orders—I may teach the bigger ones how to forage." 

"I wouldn't mind learning that myself," said Pongo. 
"Splendid! 
N o w how about trying your mouth at 
carrying this pail ? That's a trick you ought to learn. No, 
no—hold your head further out. 
Then the pail won't 
bang into your chest. 
Excellent!" 

Pongo found he could carry the bucket of water quite 
easily. His spirits were rising now. With this wonderful 
old Colonel to help him he would rescue every puppy. He 
set the bucket down in the Folly. 

"You're looking better," said the Colonel. "You may 
be able to sleep now. There's nothing more you and your 
lady can do until it's dark. 
Then you shall meet your 
family. Meanwhile, I'll send in word that you've arrived." 

Something was puzzling Pongo. 
"Colonel, why did 
Cruella steal so many Dalmatians ? She can't want more 
than one Dalmatian fur coat ?" 

The Sheepdog looked astonished. 
"Surely you know 
her husband's a furrier? I understand she only married 
him for his furs." 

So that was it! 
Pongo had forgotten. 
But if the de 
Vils planned to sell Dalmatian coats to the public, then 
Hell Hall was nothing less than a Dalmatian fur farm and 
no Dalmatian would ever be safe again unless Cruella's 
career came to an end. 
'I must cope with that when I 
get back to London,' thought Pongo, grimly, as he 
mounted the stairs. 

He found Missis stretched out on the bare boards by 
the window. She had watched until the puppies had all 

In the Enemy's Camp 

gone in, then toppled into sleep. He pulled straw around 
her and lay down very close, to keep her warm. She did 
not stir. 
His last waking thoughts were humble ones. 
He had expected the Sheepdog to be some doddering old 
country gaffer. How much now depended on this shrewd, 
kind old soldier! 

It was dark when the Colonel woke them. 
"All still well with the pups, but no news of any other 
parents over the Twilight Barking. I sent word of your 
safe arrival and good wishes to you came pouring in. All 
Dogdom awaits news from this quiet village. 
I've said 
you'll bark a few words yourself when you're fully 
rested." 

"Willingly," said Pongo. 
"Now down we go to dinner," said the Colonel. 
They went down and had an excellent meal of sausages 
which the cat had collected during the day. She was away 
at the farm—the Colonel said there would be hurt feelings 
if she did not join her pets at tea, to drink a saucer of milk. 
"And I must go back later, because my young pet, 
Tommy, likes me there while he has his bath. 
So let's 
be moving." 

He rose and pushed open a window. "The defences of 
Hell Hall are childish," he said. "What's the use of pad-
locked gates at the front when one can get in at the back, 
through this Folly ?" 

Pongo then saw that the Folly had a door and a window 
opening on to the grounds of Hell Hall as well as the 
door and window opening on to the heath and was, 
indeed, a sort of gate-house. The Colonel had originally 
entered through the window on the heath side. The door 
into the grounds was bolted on the Hell Hall side, so the 
Colonel led Pongo and Missis through the window. 

I O I 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Now we'll be cautious," he said. 
"That window 
might blow shut and there's no handle on the outside. 
And it might take some time to unbolt this door." He 
drew back the bolt on the door into the Folly, pushed the 
door open and rolled a heavy stone against it. "Now, if 
you should want to get out in a hurry 
But I don't 

think you will. Shouldn't wonder if you couldn't spend 
the night with your pups." 

Missis gasped with delight and began to ask questions. 
"I'll explain as we go," said the Colonel, starting 
towards Hell Hall. 

A full moon was rising above the black house. 
"Colonel, what's that on the roof?" said Pongo. 
"Surely it isn't Television—here ?" 

"Oh, yes, it is," said the Colonel. 
"And there's 
scarcely a cottage in the village hasn't got it since the 
electricity came. 
Mostly on the Hire Purchase—though 
there won't be much Purchase here. I'm told the Badduns 
haven't paid anything for months," 

He then outlined his plans, and it soon appeared that 
Television played an important part in them. 
The 
Baddun brothers were so fond of it that they could not 
bear any puppy to bark while it was on. And unless the 
puppies were warm, they barked like mad. The warmest 
room in the house was the kitchen—which was where 
the Television set was—so that was where the pups now 
lived (unless they were taking exercise in the stable yard). 
Some pups liked watching the Television, some just slept; 
anyway, none of them barked, so the Badduns could 
enjoy themselves in peace. All this the Colonel had heard 
from Lucky, during long, barked conversations. 

"That lad of yours is as bright as a button," said the 
Colonel. 
"He's months ahead of his age." 

I02 

In the Enemy's Camp 

Pongo and Missis swelled with pride. 
The plan was that Lucky should bring his brothers and 
sisters out to the stable yard while the Badduns were 
watching Television. 

"But it will be too cold for them to stay out long," said 
the Colonel, "and I don't see why you shouldn't go back 
into the kitchen with them. Lucky tells me there's no 
light except from the T.V. screen, so if you crouch down 
you should be quite safe. Even if the Badduns do see 
you, they'll just think you're two of the larger pups. But 
there's hardly any chance you will be seen because Lucky 
tells me the Badduns stay glued to the T.V. until it ends 
and then roll over and go to sleep—they've got mattresses 
on the kitchen floor. I see no reason why you shouldn't 
spend the night there. I'll call you at dawn and you can 
get out before the Badduns wake." 

Pongo and Missis thought this was a wonderful idea. 
"Can we sleep there every night?" asked Missis. 
The Colonel said he hoped so and that it was at night 
that the pups would have to be drilled and trained for 
their march to London. 

"Lucky says nothing wakes the Badduns, so I plan to 
come into the kitchen. I shall hold classes there and drill 
ten pups at a time in the stable yard. But you two must 
spend a quiet night there first and report conditions to 

jj 

me. 

By now they were almost at the stable yard. 
"Don't tell me any more now, Colonel," said Pongo. 
"I'm too excited to take it in. Are you all right, Missis ?" 

For Missis was trembling. 
"I can't believe I'm really 
going to see them," she said. 

The Colonel opened the gate to the stable yard. Missis 
gave a soft moan and hurled herself across the yard. She 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

had seen Lucky. 
There he stood, at the back door, 
waiting for them. 

And behind him, in the long dark passage leading to 
the kitchen, were all his brothers and sisters. Who could 
describe what the mother and father felt during the next 
few minutes, as they tried to cuddle fifteen wagging, 
wriggling, licking puppies all at once? 
Everyone tried 
to be quiet but there were so many whimpers of bliss, so 
much happy snuffling, that the Sheepdog got nervous. 

"Will they hear in there?" he asked Lucky. 
"What, the Badduns?" said Lucky—rather 
indis-
tinctly, because he had his mother's ear in his mouth. 
"No, they've got their precious Television on extra 
loud." 

Still, the Colonel was relieved when the first joy of the 
meeting was over. 

"Quiet, now!" said Pongo. 
"Quiet as mice!" said Missis. 
But they were pleasantly surprised at how quiet the 

In the Enemy's Camp 

pups instantly were. 
The only sound came from some 
dead leaves stirred by fifteen lashing little tails. 

"Now, still!" said Lucky. 
All the tails stopped wagging. 
"I'm teaching them to obey orders," said Lucky to the 
Colonel. 

"Good boy, good boy. 
Let's see, I made you a 
Corporal this afternoon, didn't I? 
I now make you a 
Sergeant. 
If all goes well, you shall have your Com-
mission next week. 
Now I'm off to see my little pet, 
Tommy, have his bath." 

He told Pongo he would be back in a couple of hours. 
"Slip out and tell me what you think of things—or send 
the Sergeant with a message." 

"Won't you come in and see the T.V., sir ?" said Lucky. 
"Not while the Badduns are awake," said the Colonel. 
"Even they couldn't mistake me for a Dalmatian." 

As soon as he had gone, Lucky sent the other puppies 
to the kitchen, then took his father and mother in. 

"You must stay at the back until your eyes get used to 
the dark," he said. 

And, indeed, it was dark! 
The only light came from 
the Television screen and the kitchen fire, which were at 
opposite ends of the very large kitchen. And as the walls 
and ceiling were painted dark red, they reflected no light. 
It was extremely warm—much warmer than one fire 
could have made it. This was because there was central 
heating. Cruella de Vil had put it in when she planned to 
live in the house. 

At last Pongo and Missis found they could see fairly 
well, and it was a strange sight they saw. Only a few feet 
away from the Television, two men lay sprawled on old 
mattresses, their eyes fixed on the screen. 
Behind them 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

were ranged row after row of puppies, small pups at the 
front, large pups at the back. 
Those who did nc care 
for Television were asleep round the kitchen fire. The 
hot, red room was curiously cosy, though Pongo felt it 
was a bit like being inside a giant's mouth. 

Lucky whispered: "I thought we could settle Mother 
with the family and then I could show you round a bit. 
All the pups want to get a glimpse of you. 
Father, you 
are going to rescue them all?" 

"I hope so," said Pongo, earnestly—wondering more 
and more how he was going to manage it. 

"I told them you would, but they've been pretty 
nervous. 
I'll just send the word round that they can 
count on you." He whispered to a pup at the end of a 
row and the word travelled like wind over a cornfield. 
There was barely a sound that a human ear could have 

In the Enemy's Camp 

heard, except a couple of tail thumps, instantly repressed. 
All knew they must not give away the fact that Pongo 
was in their midst, and when he went silently along the 
rows there was scarcely a movement. But he could feel 
great waves of love and trust rolling towards him. And 
suddenly all the pups were real and living for him, not 
just a problem he had to face. He felt as if he were the 
father of them all. And he knew that he could never 
desert them. 

He felt a special sympathy for the big pups in the two 
back rows. Some of them were fully half-grown—young 
dogs rather than puppies, lollopy creatures with clumsy 
feet. 
They made him remember his own, not very far 
away, youth. He wondered how long their skins would 
be safe from Cruella—would she have the patience to 
wait much longer? Did the big pups know that danger 

1 0 7 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

drew closer every day ? Something in their eyes told him 
they did. And many of them had been in this horrible 
place for months, without hope until Lucky had spread 
the news that his father and mother were coming. Proud 
Lucky now, taking his father along the rows of hero-
worshipping pups! 

Blissfully happy, Missis sat with her children clustered 
about her. 
She had eyes only for them but they were 
determined she should not miss the Television. She had 
never seen it before (Mr. and Mrs. Dearly did not care 
for it) and found it difficult to follow. The pups did not 
follow it completely as they had not yet learned enough 
human words; but they liked the little moving figures, 
and watched in the perpetual hope of seeing dogs on the 
screen. 

"Can we have it when we get back home?" said the 
Cadpig. 

"Indeed,, you shall, my darling," said Missis. 
Some-
how, somehow, the Dearlys must be made to buy a set. 

Pongo had now silendy 'met' all the pups. 
He told 
Lucky he would like to have a good look at the Badduns. 
So Lucky took him a little way up the back staircase, 
where they could see without being noticed. 

No one would have guessed that Saul and Jasper 
Baddun were brothers. Saul was heavy and dark, with a 
forehead so low that his bushy eyebrows often got 
tangled with his matted hair. Jasper was thin and fair, 
with a chin so sharp and pointed that it had worn holes in 
all his shirts—not that he had many. 
Both brothers 
looked very dirty. 

"They never change their awful old clothes," whispered 
Lucky, "and they never wash. I don't think they are real 
humans, Father. Is there such a thing as a half-human ?" 

In the Enemy's Camp 

Pongo could well believe it after seeing the Badduns, 
but he couldn't imagine what their non-human half was. 
It was no animal he had ever seen. 

"Have they ill-treated any of you ?" he asked, anxiously. 
"No, they're too frightened of being bitten," said 
Lucky. "They're terrible cowards. Some of the big pups 
did think of attacking them—but there seemed no way of 
getting out. 
And if they'd killed the Badduns, there 
would have been no one to feed us. 
Oh, Father, how 
glad I am you've come!" 

Pongo licked his son's ear. Pups, like boys, do not like 
fathers to be too sentimental (mothers are different), but 
this was a very private moment. 

Then they went and sat with Missis and the family. It 
seemed strange that they could all be so peaceful right in 
the enemy's camp. 
Gradually the Pongos' puppies fell 
asleep—all except Lucky, Patch and the Cadpig. 
Lucky 
was not sleepy. 
Patch was—but stayed awake because 
the Cadpig was awake. 
And the Cadpig stayed awake 
because she was crazy about Television. 

Many of the big pups, too, were lying down to sleep, 
stretching luxuriously, feeling—for the first time since 
they had been imprisoned in Hell Hall—that there was 
someone they could rely on. 
Pongo had come! 
And 
Missis, too. They had looked at her shyly, quite under-
standing that she must care for her own children first, but 
hoping she would have a little time for them later. Some 
of them could hardly remember their mothers. 
But the 
younger pups could remember theirs and they were not 
sleeping. 
Slowly, silently, they were inching their way 
towards Missis. 

She had been watching the Television, beginning to 
get the hang of it, with the Cadpig's help. Then some 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

tiny sound, close at hand, brought her attention back to 
her family. But the sound had not come from her family. 
There were now nearly thirty puppies, not so very much 
bigger than her own, just a few feet away, all staring at 
her hopefully. 

'Goodness, they're grubby,' was her first thought. 
'Didn't their mothers teach them to wash themselves ?' 

Then she felt a pang of pity. What mother had any of 
them now? She smiled at them all—and they wrinkled 
their little noses in a return smile. 
Then she looked 
beyond them, to the larger pups. Some of the half-grown 
girls reminded her of herself at their age—so slim, so 
silly, They knew how to wash themselves but there were 
many things they didn't know, many ways in which they 
needed a mother's advice. And suddenly all the puppies 
were her puppies, she was their mother—just as Pongo 
had felt he was their father. 
And, indeed, the younger 
ones creeping closer and closer to her were now so 
mingled with her own that she could scarcely tell where 
her little family ended and her larger family began. 

Drowsiness spread throughout the warm, red room. 
Even the Baddun brothers dozed. 
They did not much 
like the programme that was on the Television and wanted 
to be fresh for their very favourite programme, which 
was due later. 
Even Missis slept a little, knowing that 
Pongo would keep watch. At last only three pairs of eyes 
were open. 
Pongo was wide awake, thinking, thinking. 
Lucky was wide awake, for he thought of himself as a 
sentry, who must not sleep on duty. And the Cadpig was 
wide awake, watching her lovely, lovely Television. 

Suddenly there was a thunder of thumps on the front 
door. The sleeping pups awoke in alarm. The Baddun 
brothers lumbered to their feet and stumbled towards the 

i xo 

In the Enemy's Camp 

door. But before they got there, it had been flung open. 

Outside, against the moonlit sky, stood a figure in a 
long white cloak. 
It was Cruella de Vil. 

1 2 . 
S U D D E N 
D A N G E R 

we've no electric bulbs left," said Saul Baddun. 
"When 
the Telly finishes, we go to bed." 

"And if we turn the Telly off, there'll be no light at 
all," said Jasper Baddun. 

"Well, turn the sound off, anyway," said Cruella, 
angrily. 

Jasper did as he was told, and the little figures moving 
on the screen were suddenly voiceless. 
The Cadpig 
yapped indignantly. 
Missis, who was crouching low in 

1X2 

Sudden Danger 

the midst of her family, instantly hushed her. 
Pongo, 
also crouched low, got ready to spring at Cruella if she 
attacked any pup. But she seemed scarcely to notice any 
of them. Those near her shrank back as she strode into 
the room. 

"I've got a job for you, my lads," she said to the 
Badduns. "The pups must be killed tonight—every.single 
one of them." 

The Badduns gaped at her. 
"But they're not big 
enough to be made into fur coats yet," said Saul. 

"The largest ones are, and the little ones can be made 
into gloves. Anyway, they've got to die—before some-
one finds them. There's been so much in the papers about 
the Dearlys' dogs. 
All England's on the hunt for 
Dalmatians." 

"But how could anyone find them here?" said Jasper 
Baddun. 
"Why can't they just stay on, growing bigger 
and bigger?" 

"It's too risky," said Cruella. 
"Someone might hear 
them yapping and tell the police. 
My husband's going 
to ship the skins abroad—except the ones I keep for my 
own coat. 
I shall have it reversible—Persian lamb one 
side and Dalmatian dog the other—and wear the dog 
inside until people forget about the Dearlys' pups. When 
that happens, I'll collect another lot and we'll start our 
Dalmatian fur farm again. But this lot must be got rid of 
—quickly." 

"How?" said the Badduns, both together, 
"Any way you like. 
Poison them, drown them, hit 
them on the head. 
Have you any chloroform in the 
larder?" 

"Not a drop," said Saul Baddun. 
"And no ether, 
either." 

I3 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"We can't afford luxuries," growled Jasper Baddun. 
"Drown them, then." 
"Dogs can swim," said Saul Baddun. 
"Anyway, the 
pond's less than a foot deep." 

"Then you must hit them on the head," said Cruella. 
Saul Baddun had gone pale. "What, hit ninety-seven 
pups on the head ?" he said, shakily. "We couldn't do it. 
Have pity, Mrs. de Vil. 
We'd be wore out." 

"Listen," said Cruella de Vil. 
"7 don't care how you 
kill the little beasts. 
Hang them, suffocate them, drop 
them off the roof—good gracious, there are dozens of 
lovely ways. I only wish I'd time to do the job myself." 

"Couldn't you make time, Mrs. de Vil ?" said Jasper. 
"You'd do it so beautifully—it'd be a pleasure to watch 
you." 

Cruella shook her head. 
"I've got to get back to 
London." 
Then a fiendish look came into her eyes. 
"Here's an idea for you. Shut them up without food and 
then they'll kill each other." 

"But they'd make such a horrible noise about it," said 
Saul Baddun. 
"We'd never be able to hear the Telly." 

"Besides, they'd damage each other's skins," said 
Cruella. 
"That would ruin their value. 
You must kill 
them carefully. Then you can start the skinning." 

"But we can't skin them!" wailed Jasper. "We don't 
know how." 

"My husband will show you," said Cruella. 
"We'll 
both drive down tomorrow night. And we shall count 
the bodies—just remember that, will you? If you've let 
even one pup escape, I'll turn you out of Hell Hall, Now 
you'd better get busy. 
Good-night." 

Fortunately, few of the pups knew enough Human to 
understand Cruella's words fully, but they all felt she was 

Sudden Danger 

evil. And as she made her way to the door she aimed a 
kick at a small pup who was dangerously close to her. It 
was more frightened than hurt but it gave a loud wail of 
anguish. Several of the bigger pups snarled indignantly 
at Cruella. Lucky, remembering the time he had nibbled 
her ear, barked out hastily: 

"Don't bite her, chaps! She tastes hot!" 
So Cruella got to the door unhurt. She flung it open 
and the moonlight shone on her black-and-white hair and 
her absolutely simple white mink cloak. Then she looked 
back at the roomful of puppies. 

"Good-bye, you horrid little beasts," she said. "I shall 
like you so much better when you're skins instead of pups. 
And I shall simply love the ones who are made into my 
own coat. How I'm looking forward to it!" 

They saw her walk out past the pond which reflected 
the black house, and on to the great iron gates, which 
she unlocked and locked again, behind her. 
Then, 
through the silent winter night, came the sound of a 
powerful car driving away, followed by one strident 
blast from the loudest motor-horn in England. 

How well Pongo and Missis remembered that terrify-
ing sound! It took them back to the happy evening when 
they had stood beside the striped black-and-white car on 
the Outer Circle. How safe and contented they had been 
then, little guessing what dangers lay ahead! 

Jasper Baddun hurriedly shut the front door, saying: 
"If we've got to do the pups in, we'd better keep them all 
<n one place." 

Pongo felt stunned. If only he could think! If only the 
Sheepdog were there to advise him! 

Missis whispered: "If you wish to attack those villains, 
I will help you, Pongo." 

I5 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Lucky said quickly: "They always carry knives." 
Pongo's brain was beginning to work. 
"If we attack 
them, they may kill us," he whispered to Missis. 
"And 
then there will be no one to help the pups. Quiet! Let 
me think." 

The Badduns were talking together in low grunts. 
"One thing's certain," said Jasper. 
"We can't do it 
tonight or we shall miss 'What's My Crime?'." 

It was their very favourite Television programme. 
Two ladies and two gentlemen, in faultless evening dress, 
had to guess the crime committed by a lady or gentleman 
in equally faultless evening dress. 
Stern moralists said 
this programme was causing a crime wave and filling the 
prisons, because people committed crimes in the hope of 
being chosen as contestants. But crime is usually waving 
and the prisons are usually full, so probably 'What's My 
Crime?' had not made much difference. Both the Bad-
duns longed to appear as contestants, but they knew they 
would never be chosen unless they committed a really 
original crime, and they had never been able to think of 
one. 

"We could kill the pups after 'What's My Crime?', 
Jasper," said Saul. 
"We ought to do it tonight, while 
they're sleepy. They'll be more dangerous when they're 
wide awake." 

"It's a nuisance, that's what it is," said Jasper. "And 
whatever way we do it, we shall be exhausted. First the 
killing and then the skinning!" 

"Maybe we'll get the knack of the skinning," said Saul. 
"Then we can skin while we watch the Telly." 

"Still, ninety-seven pups!" said Jasper. 
Then a wild 
gleam came into his eyes. 
"Saul, I bet no one else has 
ever murdered ninety-seven Dalmatians. It might do the 

Sudden Danger 

trick for us! It might get us on to 'What's My Crime ?'." 

"Now you're talking!" said Saul Baddun. 
"You and 
me, in evening dress with carnations in our button-holes 
—and all England watching us. But we must think out 
some really striking way of doing our crime. Could we 
skin them alive ?" 

"They'd never keep still," said Jasper. 
"What about 
boiling them ?" 

Pongo whispered to Missis: "We shall have to attack. 
It's our only hope." 

"I'll get the biggest pups to help you," said Lucky, 
quietly. 
"We'll all help. I can bite quite well." 

And then—something happened! The Cadpig, whose 
eyes were fixed on the silent Television screen, gave three 
short, sharp barks. 
No human ear would have known 
that those barks meant 'What's My Crime?', but the 
Baddun brothers, startled by the noise, looked towards 

I7 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

the Cadpig and, in doing so, noticed the Television 
screcn. Saul Baddun let out a roar of rage, Jasper Baddun 
gave a howl of misery. It was on! 'What's My Crime?' 
-—but without any sound, of course. They were missing 
it, their favourite of all programmes, and just when for 
the first time they had hopes of appearing on it! 
They 
hurled themselves at the Television set. Saul turned the 
sound on full blast. Jasper adjusted the picture. Then 
they flung themselves down on their mattresses, grunting 
with delight. 

""They won't stir for the next half-hour," whispered 
Lucky. 

Ai last Pongo's brain sprang into full action! Instantly 
he whispered to Lucky: 

"March the pups out to the stable yard! Your mother 
and I will mount guard over the Badduns." 

Lucky whispered: "If we could go out through the 
larder, we could eat tomorrow's breakfast on our way. 
That's the door—by the fireplace. It's bolted, but I 
expect you can unbolt it, can't you, Father ?" 

Pongo had never even tried to unbolt a door, but he 
had seen the Sheepdog do it. 
"Yes, Lucky," he said 
firmly. 
"I can unbolt it." 

They tiptoed across the kitchen. 
Then Pongo stood 
on his hind legs and took the bolt in his teeth. It would 
not budge. He rested his teeth and took a good look at 
the bolt, in the light from the fire. He saw the knob was 
turned down and would have to be raised before the bolt 
would slide. 

"Now we shan't be long," he said to Lucky, and again 
took the knob in his teeth. He raised it, tried to slide it. 
Still it would not slide. 
He thought: 'Lucky will lose 
confidence in me,' and he dragged and dragged until he 

Sudden Danger 

thought his teeth would break. Then he began to fear 
that if the bolt did shoot back, it would make a loud 
noise. Just then there was a burst of applause from the 
Television—someone had guessed a contestant. (He had 
stolen two hundred bath plugs from hotels.) Pongo made 
a desperate effort. The bolt shot back. The larder door 
swung open. 

"I knew you'd do it, Father," said Lucky, proudly. 
"Just a matter of knowing how," said Pongo, running 
his tongue round his teeth to make sure they were all still 
there. 

A cold draught came from the larder. It had been the 
dairy when Hell Hall was a farm and there were wooden 
slats instead of windows. 
The moonlight, shining in 
through the slats, made bright stripes on the stone floor. 
Meat for the puppies' breakfast was already set out in 
long troughs—because the Badduns hated working in the 
early morning. 
There were small troughs for the little 
pups and big ones for the larger pups. 

Pongo said to Lucky: "Wait until I get back to your 
mother. Then, while she and I stand ready to attack the 
Badduns, march all the pups in here. Tell them no pup 
is to eat until the last pup has a place at a trough. I will 
join you then and give the word to start eating." 

It was remarkable how quickly the pups left the 
kitchen, under Sergeant Lucky's whispered directions. 
Row after row marched out, like children leaving a 
school hall after prayers, except that the big pups left 
first, as they were nearest the door. 
Pongo and Missis 
watched the Badduns anxiously, for the hundreds of little 
toenails made a clitter-clatter on the kitchen floor and 
there were a few scuffles, snuffles and snorts—though 
never even the smallest bark, for the pups guessed their 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

lives depended on their silence. 
But the Badduns had 
eyes and ears for nothing but Television. 

Lucky left his own brothers and sisters to the last—-
and last of all to leave was the Cadpig. 
She was an 
intelligent little puppy and quite understood that she had 
to escape, but oh, how she hated leaving the Television! 
She went out backwards, still staring at the screen. 

Then Pongo and Missis sped swiftly and silently across 
the big red kitchen. They looked back from the larder 
door and saw that the Badduns had not stirred. 

"How much longer will 'What's My Crime?' last?" 
whispered Pongo. 

"Twenty minutes," said the Cadpig, promptly and 
wistfully. 

Pongo and Missis closed the larder door. The bolt on 
the inside was low down and easy to manage. Pongo shot 
it home at once, while the pups looked on admiringly. 
Every pup had its place at a trough but not one lick of 
food had been eaten. 

"One, two, three—feed!" commanded Pongo. 
In fifty-nine seconds flat every scrap of food had been 
eaten. 

"But what about you and Mother?" said Lucky. 
"I 
think 1 can find the Badduns' Sunday dinner." 

He found it, on a shelf—two steaks, rather poor grade, 
but Pongo and Missis swiftly ate them. Then Pongo gave 
troops the right to forage and led a search through the 
larder. 
Everything eatable was eaten, the big pups 
sharing with the little pups most fairly. 

"Anything in that cupboard ?" said Pongo, at last. 
"Only coke for the central-heating furnace," said 
Lucky. "Well, the Badduns won't find anything to eat 
tomorrow, will they ?" 

1 2 0 

Sudden Danger 

"Let them eat coke," said Pongo. 
The entire meal had taken nearly five minutes. Pongo 
now felt he must get his troops out of Hell Hall as fast as 
possible. There had been no time to think out plans for 

* 
« 2 

the future—he was counting on the Colonel's advice. All 
that could be done now was to lead the pups to the Folly. 
The outer door of the larder was easily opened, then 
across the old orchard they went and in at the door which 
the Colonel had so thoughtfully propped open. 
Missis 
gave one backward glance at black Hell Hall under the 
full moon. 
What would the Badduns do when they 
found not one pup in the kitchen ? 

There was not room for ninety-seven pups on the 
ground floor of the Folly, nor would there have been in 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

the crowded upstairs rooms, so Pongo marched every-
one out on to the heath. As the last pup marched out, 
the Sheepdog arrived. 

At first he thought Pongo had recklessly begun the 
escape too soon but when he heard the true facts he 
praised Pongo highly, and was particularly pleased that 
all pups had been fed before escaping. 

"That was Sergeant Lucky's idea,' 
said 
Pongo, 
proudly. 

"Good work, Sergeant-A/rf/or," said the Colonel. 
"But where are we to go?" asked Missis, anxiously. 
"Look, the puppies are shivering." 

They were, indeed, for though it was not freezing it 
seemed terribly cold to them all after the warm kitchen. 

The Sheepdog looked worried—not that anyone could 
see this as his expressions were always hidden by hair. 
What was he to do, at a moment's notice, with ninety-
seven Dalmatian puppies and two full-grown Dalmatians ? 
At last he said: 

"Our big barn for the night, anyway. Pups can keep 
warm in the straw. It's only half a mile across the heath." 

Half a mile! How little to Pongo and Missis! How 
much, how terribly much to the tiny Cadpig! After even 
a few hundred yards, Pongo was in despair about the long 
journey to London which lay ahead. 

The big pups ran along happily. 
The medium-sized 
pups did quite well. 
Even most of the smaller pups 
looked as if they were capable of a reasonably long walk. 
But the smallest pups of all—Pongo's own family—how 
were they to walk over seventy miles? 
Lucky, Patch, 
Roly Poly and the other boys struggled along bravely, 
but the girls stumbled and panted and had to have many 
rests. As for the Cadpig, she would never have reached 

Sudden Danger 

the farm at all if the Sheepdog had not given her a lift. 
He lay down and she climbed on to his back and held on 
to his long hair with her teeth. 
Even so, she nearly 
slipped off twice. 

"She could never stay on our smooth backs," said 
Missis to Pongo. 
"If only I could wheel her in a doll's 
perambulator!" 

"You couldn't walk to London on your hind legs," 
said Pongo, "even if we had a perambulator." 

At last they reached the big barn at the back of the 
farm where the Colonel lived. The tired pups snuggled 
into the hay and straw and instantly fell asleep. Pongo, 
Missis and the Colonel stood at the door, trying to make 
plans. 

The Colonel said: "I can't keep you here long. 
You 
would be found—besides, I couldn't feed so many. We 
must get you to London by easy stages, just a few miles 
a day." 

"But where shall we sleep ? Where shall we find food ?" 
said Pongo, anxiously. 

"It will need tremendous organisation," said the Colonel. 

I 23 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"I hope to arrange the first stage at once, by Midnight 
Barking. I must bark some distance from the farm or I 
shall wake my pets." 

Pongo offered to bark with him but the Sheepdog 
would not hear of it. "You two must rest. It's now nearly 
ten o'clock. 
If my plan goes well I shall wake you at 
four, when there will still be over three hours of dark-
ness. That will be long enough to get you to the place I 
have in mind." 

"But my smallest daughter is so weak," said Missis. 
"How can she make any journey?" 

The Colonel smiled—not that anyone could see that. 
"I have a plan for the little lass," he said. "Now, sleep, 
sleep, both of you." 

So Pongo and Missis went into the dark barn and 
sniffed out their own family. Only Lucky stirred; he said 
he was trying to sleep with one eye open, so as to be on 
guard. 

"You close both eyes," said Missis, firmly. 
And Lucky did, quite happy now his parents were 
there to take charge. 

"What would happen if we were found here?" asked 
Missis. "Surely the people at the farm are kind ? They 
wouldn't hurt us." 

Pongo had been thinking about this. He guessed that 
as there had been so much in the papers about himself 
and Missis and their family, they might all get safely 
returned to the Dearlys. 
But the other puppies, what 
would happen to them? 
Even the dear, kind Dearlys 
would not take in eighty-two puppies they did not know. 
The poor things would be sent to a police station—any-
thing might happen to them. 
But if once the Dearlys 
saw them, then all the puppies would suddenly belong to 

Sudden Danger 

the Dearlys—just as they had suddenly seemed to belong 
to him, in the dark kitchen. 
Somehow, somehow he 
must get them all to London. 

Missis felt just the same, but she did not see how the 
Cadpig and some of her sisters would make the journey. 

"Well, sleep, now," said Pongo, giving her a loving 
lick. "Are you glad you didn't, after all, have to bite a 
human ?" 

"The Badduns are no more hufnan than Cruella is," 
said Missis. 
"Still, I'm glad I didn't have to soil my 
teeth." 

They would not have fallen asleep so easily if they had 
known what the Sheepdog had just seen. Across the 
heath, lanterns were moving. The Badduns were out, 
searching for the missing puppies. 

ij. THE LITTLE BLUE CART 

"The Colonel's compliments and would you and your 
lady please come to him ?" 

Missis was sleeping peacefully. 
Pongo woke her 
gently, wondering what dream she would be leaving and 
if the dark barn would look as strange to her as it had to 
him a moment earlier. She sprang up at once, dazed and 
anxious. 

"All well," said the cat, soothingly. 
"Food and 
shelter are arranged for two days ahead. Reception for the 
Midnight Barking was excellent. Please follow me now." 

She made no mention of the Baddun brothers with 
their lanterns, searching the heath. 

It was still quite dark as they left the barn and crossed 
the farmyard. The cat led them to the back door of a 
large white farm-house. 

1 2 6 

The Little Blue Cart 

"Help me to push the door," she said. " The Colonel 
has unbolted it." 

The door opened easily. They went through a kitchen 
and along a passage, at the end of which was an open 
door and a glimmer of light. The cat led them through 
the doorway and they found themselves in a nursery, lit 
by a night-light. At the far end, the Sheepdog stood 
beside a little painted bed in which was a very wide-awake 
two-year-old boy. 

"This is my pet, Tommy," said the Colonel. "He very 
much wants to meet you." 

Pongo and Missis went to the little boy and he patted 
them both. Then he made some odd, chuckling noises. 
They did not sound like Human nor did they sound like 
Dog. But the Sheepdog seemed to understand them and 
Tommy seemed to understand what the Sheepdog 
answered. Pongo decided this was quite a new language, 
half-Dog, half-Human. 

"Tommy wishes to lend you something," said the 
Colonel. "He knows how much you need it and is most 
anxious to help you. 
See, here it is." 

Pongo and Missis then saw a little wooden cart, 
painted blue. It was made like a real farm cart, with four 
high wheels and a wooden railing all round it to keep the 
hay in—it was full of hay now. 
At the front was a long 
piece of wood with a wide cross-bar at the end of it, so 
that Tommy could drag the cart about. 

"You can choose two pups exactly the right size," said 
the Colonel, "and they can use the long piece of wood as 
a shaft—in between them—and take the cross-bar in their 
mouths. 
Then they can pull the cart forward. 
And if 
needed, pups at the back can push with their noses. Your 
smallest daughter can travel comfortably in the hay, and 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

any puppy who is tired can sit beside her and take a rest." 

Pongo and Missis examined the pretty cart delightedly. 
They were too big to get between it and the cross-bar 
themselves but they felt sure plenty of the bigger pups 
would fit. 

"But does he really want us to take it ?" asked Missis. 
The Sheepdog then spoke to Tommy who nodded his 
head again and again, while talking his extraordinary 
language. 

"His name and address are painted on the side," said 
the Sheepdog, "and he would be glad if it can be returned 
one day. But if that isn't possible, he will quite under-
stand." 

"If we ever get home, I feel sure Mr. Dearly will 
return it," said Pongo. "Please tell Tommy how very 
grateful we are." 

The Sheepdog translated this to Tommy who smiled 
more than ever and made more chuckling noises. 

"He says he is pleased you are pleased, and would like 
to see all the puppies. I think it would be safe to march 
them all past his window when you leave—which should 
be soon now." 

So they said good-bye to Tommy, and then the Sheep-
dog, going backwards, pulled the cart along the passage 
and out through the back door. He had quite a job. 

"It's lucky my little pet sleeps on the ground floor," 
he said. 
"It's because our stairs are so steep. 
I could 
never have got this cart down them." 

They went back to the barn and woke the pups, and 
all the bigger ones came outside and tried the cart on for 
size. (The moon was lower now but still gave plenty of 
light.) One family of eight fitted perfectly, and a dozen 
other pups could manage quite well, so Pongo arranged 

The Little Blue Cart 

that all these should travel close to the cart and take it in 
turns to pull it, two at a time. The Cadpig was enchanted 
and settled down in the hay so that pups could practise 
pulling. 

While this was happening, Pongo was told the plans 
made by Midnight Barking. Only five miles was to be 
travelled before dawn—which would not be for over 
three hours—to a village where a friend of the Colonel's 
lived at a bakery. 

"And next door is a butchers, so food will be all right," 
said the Colonel. "Then you'll do another five miles as 
soon as it's dark tomorrow—but my friend will tell you 
all about that. 
I hope to get you to London in ten or 
twelve days, billeting you where you can be safely hidden 
and fed. The last stages of the march will be the most 
difficult, but there are warehouses, if we can get in touch 
with their watchdogs. There's a Great Dane somewhere 
near Hampstead working on that already. Fine fellow. I 
hear he's a Brigadier-General." 

Ten days or even longer! Missis felt her heart sink. 
"Pongo," she said suddenly, "when is Christmas 
Day?" 

"The day after tomorrow," said the Colonel. 
"No, 
bless me, it's tomorrow—because 
it's Christmas Eve 
already, even if it isn't light yet. 
Don't worry, Mrs. 
Pongo. You shall have some Christmas dinner." 

But it was not food Missis was thinking about, but the 
Dearlys, all alone for Christmas. Sometimes she forgot 
them for an hour or two, but never for very long. She 
thought now of that last evening when she had rested 
her head on Mrs. Dearly's knee, trying to make her 
understand—and of the warm, white drawing-room, 
where there was to have been a Christmas tree, with 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

presents for the three dogs and the fifteen pups. Missis 
had heard the Dearlys planning it. 

Pongo guessed his wife's thoughts—which was easy to 
do because his own were much the same. "Never mind, 
Missis," he said. "We'll be home by next Christmas." 

The pups who were to take turns at pulling the little 
blue cart were now quite good at it. 

"Then off you go," said the Colonel. 
"But first, our 
cows have asked you in to have a drink with them." 

He led Pongo, Missis and all the pups into the dim 
cow-shed, where the hay still smelt of summer weather. 
The head cows, Blossom and Clover, were waiting to 
welcome them and tell them how to drink at the milk-
bar. 
The pups found this easy, especially those who 
could remember being fed by their mothers—though the 
smaller pups had to stand on their hind legs and be 
supported by other pups. The long, warm drink of milk 
made a splendid breakfast. 

At last, after all their kind hostesses had been thanked, 
it was time to start. 

1 3 0 

The Little Blue Cart 

Tommy stood at his window peering into the moon-
light, watching the march-past. 
Pongo and Missis 
wrinkled their noses at him, in their best smile; every 
pup turned its head—except the Cadpig who lay on her 
back in the hay-filled cart and waved all her four paws. 

Pongo said to Missis: "How different Tommy is from 
the bad little boy who threw a stone at us." 

Missis said: "The bad little boy was only bad because 
he had never known dogs." And she was probably right. 

The Colonel took them to the cross-roads and started 
them on their way. 

"I wish I could come with you, but I've a job to do," 
lie said. Then he and the cat, who was riding on his back, 
said good-bye hastily and went off so fast that Pongo had 
to bark his thanks after them. The Colonel barked back 
that Sergeant-Major Lucky could now be a lieutenant, 
then galloped out of sight. 
Pongo stared in astonish-

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

ment, wondering what job had to be done in such a 
hurry. It was a long time before he learned the truth. 

The Colonel had just been informed by Lieutenant 
Willow that the Baddun brothers, having failed to find 
the puppies on the heath, were now on the outskirts of 
the village, less than half a mile behind the Dalmatians. 
He could think of only one thing to do and he set out to 
do it—with great pleasure. 

He galloped until he saw the Badduns' lanterns ahead 
of him. Then he told the cat to get off his back. The 
minute she was off, he hurled himself at the Badduns and 
bit both brothers in both legs. Seldom can four legs have 
been bitten so fast by one dog. 
The Badduns howled 
with rage, fear and pain, dropped their lanterns and 
limped back to Hell Hall as quickly as possible. 
(It is 
difficult to limp well when you are lame in both legs.) 
They never knew what bit them. They only knew it bit 
hard. 

"Good work, Colonel," said Lieutenant Willow. 
"I'm promoting you to Captain," said the Sheepdog. 
Then he gave a modest little cough and added: "Oh, by 
the way! I've just made myself a Brigadier-General." 

1 3 2 

14- CHRISTMAS 
EVE 

ing along the road in fine style. Though 
cold, the night was very still. 
The pups 
were rested and hopeful. And the fact that 

Cadpig in her cart made tired little dogs feel less tired. 
Indeed, Missis at first had to insist on the smaller pups 
taking turns to rest. 
But progress was not really fast. 
There were so many pauses while the pups who pulled 
the cart were changed, pauses while pups got in and out 
of the cart; and every half-mile, the whole army had a 
rest. 
Still, all went wonderfully well until they were 
within half a mile of the village where they were to spend 
the day. 

There was a hint of dawn in the sky now, but Pongo 
felt sure they could reach the village before it was danger-
ously light. He quickened the pace slightly and told the 
pups to think of breakfast ahead of them at the bakery. 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

It was soon after this that the Cadpig called out: "Look! 
Little painted houses on wheels!" 

Pongo saw them at the same moment and he knew 
they were not houses. They were caravans. 

He had seen them once when out with Mr. Dearly and 
had heard Mr. Dearly say that gipsies lived in caravans 
and gipsies sometimes stole valuable dogs. 

"Halt!" said Pongo, instantly. 
Could they get past the caravans without being seen? 
He wasn't going to risk it. Between them and the nearest 
caravan was an open gate. 
He would lead the puppies 
through it and take them through the fields until they 
were well past the caravans. Swiftly he gave his instruc-
tions, which were handed on from pup to pup: "We are 
to keep dead quiet and follow Pongo through the gate." 

And thus did the owner of one of the keenest brains 
in Dogdom make one of his few mistakes. 
For in the 
caravan nearest to them, an old gipsy woman was awake 
and looking out of the little back window. She saw the 
approaching Dalmatians and at once woke her husband. 
He was beside her at the window just as Pongo led the 
way into the field. 

The old gipsy woman never read newspapers so she 
knew nothing about the stolen puppies. 
But she knew 
that here were many valuable dogs. And she knew some-
thing else, which Pongo did not know. 
There is a con-
nection between Dalmatians and gipsies. 
Many people 
believe that it was the gipsies who first brought Dal-
matians to England, long, long ago. And nothing like 
as long ago as that, there were gipsies who travelled 
round England with Dalmatians trained to do tricks. 
And these performing dogs earned money for the gipsies. 
The old woman could remember such dogs and she 

Christmas Eve 

thought how splendid it would be if all these Dalmatians 
could be trained as money earners. 

"Quick! 
Close the gate!" she said to her husband. 
She spoke in the strange gipsy language, which is called 
Romany. "The only other way out of that field is through 
a break in the hedge. I will rouse the camp and we will 
all stop the dogs there and catch them." 
t 

In less than two minutes, the whole gipsy encampment 
was awake. Children cried, dogs barked, horses neighed. 
It was still so dark that it took Pongo five minutes to find 
the break in the hedge. And when he found it, he also 
found the way barred. All the gipsies were there, with 
sticks and ropes. 

"Back to the gate, as fast as you can!" he cried to the 
pups. 

But when they reached the gate, it was closed. 
They 
were trapped. 

Pongo barked loudly, hoping that some gipsy dog 
might help him. Many gipsy dogs barked in answer, but 
they had all been shut up in the caravans in case they 
should fight the Dalmatians. 
In any case, they only 
barked in Romany, so they could not understand a word 
Pongo said. 

But someone else did. Suddenly Pongo heard the high 
neigh of a horse, close at hand—and, oh, most wonder-
ful, the horse could neigh normally, as well as in Romany. 
It understood Pongo and he understood it. Horses are 
nearly always friendly to Dalmatians—perhaps because of 
those days when Dalmatians were trained to follow 
carriages. This horse was not old enough to remember 
such days but he took an instant liking to Pongo, Missis 
and all the pups. 
If these pleasant creatures wished to 
come out of the field, nothing could be easier. He strolled 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

up, opened the gate with his long, strong teeth and swung 
it back. Out poured the puppies. 

"Lead them past the caravans as fast as you can!" 
Pongo shouted to Missis, and waited to see the last pup 
out of the field. 

"What a vtry large family you and your wife have," 
said the horse. "My wife and I have never had more than 
the one. 
Well, good luck to you." 

He waved aside Pongo's thanks and then, being a very 
tidy horse, he carefully closed the gate again. So never 
did the gipsies—all waiting at the break in the hedge— 
know how their prisoners got away. 

Helter-skelter along the road went Missis, the puppies 
and, finally, Pongo. 
(The pups who drew the Cadpig's 
cart stuck faithfully to their task.) The shut-in Romany 
dogs heard them and shook the caravans in their efforts 
to get out. 
Volleys of furious barking came from the 
little windows. 

"The caravans bark but the dogs move on," remarked 
Pongo, when he feit they were out of danger. 

A few minutes later they reached the village where 
they were to sleep. The Sheepdog's friend, a handsome 
Collie, was waiting to welcome them. 

"No talk until you're safely hidden," he said. 
"It's 
almost light." 

Quickly they followed him across the village green to 
three old, gabled houses. The baker's was in the middle, 
between the butcher's and the chimney-sweep's. 
The 
baker and the butcher and the sweep were all widowers 
and, as it was Sunday, had already gone to spend 
Christmas with their married daughters, which was just 
as well. 

The baker's shop would not have been nearly big 

i?6 

Christmas Eve 

enough to house all the pups but luckily there was a 
large bakehouse at the back. And soon every pup was 
safely in and enjoying a splendid sausage roll. 
Pongo 
and Missis chatted to the Collie while they ate. He shook 
his head worriedly when he heard about the gipsies. 

"A narrow escape," he said. 
"The trouble is that 
Dalmatians are such noticeable dogs. Ninetv-nine of you 
together are spectacular—though I mean it as a compli-
ment. 
You'd be so much safer if you were black." 

"Like that nice little pup over there," said Missis. 
"What pup ?" The Collie looked across the bakehouse, 
then said sharply: "That pup doesn't belong in this 
village. 
Who are you, my lad ? Where have you come 

The black pup did not answer. 
Instead, he came 
running to Missis and butted her in the stomach. 

"Here, hold hard, young man!" said Missis. Then she 
gasped: "Goodness, it is! It isn't! It is Roly Poly!" 

The fat puppy who was always getting into mischief 
had found his way into a shed at the back of the sweep's 
house and had a fight with a bag of soot. 

from?" 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Mercy, you'll need some washing!" said his mother. 
Then it was that one of the keenest brains in Dogdom 
had one of its brainiest waves. 

"Roly Poly," said Pongo, "was there a lot of soot at 
the sweep's ?" 

"Bags and bags," said Roly Poly. 
"Then we are all going to be black dogs," said Pongo. 
"Your husband is a genius," said the Collie to Missis, 
as he showed them all into the sweep's shed. 

There was any amount of soot—waiting to have done 
with it whatever sweeps do do with soot. 

"Ten dogs forward at a time!" commanded Pongo. 
"Pups roll! Pups rub noses!" 

In a very short time there were ninety-seven pitch-
black pups. 

"And now, my love," said Pongo to Missis. 
"Let us 
take a roll in the soot." 

Frankly, Missis did not fancy it. She hated soiling her 
gleaming white hair and losing its smart contrast with 
her beautiful black spots. But when Pongo had helped 
her with the final touches he said: "Why, Missis, as a 
black dog, you're slimmer than ever. You're positively 
svelteY' And then she felt much better. 

Then Pongo said: "How does soot suit me?" 
"Suit soots you beautifully," said Missis, and all the 
pups roared with laughter at her mistake. 

Then they all went back to the bakehouse and settled 
down to sleep. 
The Collie said he would call them as 
soon as it was dark. They would only have five miles to 
go—to another bakery—but he felt they should get the 
journey over early as he had heard there might be snow. 

"But there may be cars on the road until late, as it is 
Christmas Eve—and Sunday," he told them. 
"So you 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

must go by the fields. I shall escort you. Rest well now." 

Poor Missis! When she awoke in the late afternoon 
and looked around her, she dissolved into sooty tears. 

"I can't tell one pup from the other now they're black," 
she moaned. But she soon found she could, though she 
could never have explained how she managed it. 

Another meal had been organised but it was not all 
that could have been wished, because the butcher had 
meanly locked up his shop. 

"This clears the bakery out," said the Collie, carrying 
in the last stale loaf. "But there will be a good supper 
waiting for you. And the journey oughtn't to take more 
than three or four hours." He then went off to see if there 
was any news coming in by the Twilight Barking. 

After half an hour or so, Pongo began to feel anxious. 
It was quite dark now; they ought to be off. What was 
delaying the Collie? 

"Listen!" said Missis, suddenly. 
Very, very faintly, they could hear the Collie barking. 
He was calling Pongo's name, again and again. 

Pongo and Missis ran out of the bakehouse to the little 
yard at the back. Now they could hear the Collie more 
clearly. 
But he was obviously some way off. 
Pongo 
barked in answer to him. 
Then swiftly the Collie told 
them what had happened. 

He was locked in a house across the green, with no 
hope of getting out. The postmistress had promised to 
look after him while the baker was away for Christmas. 
She had decided it was too cold a night for a dog to be 
out, hauled him in, and gone out for the evening. 
He 
had tried every door and every window but could undo 
none of them. It was impossible for him to escort the 
Dalmatians, as he had promised. 

Christmas Eve 

"But you can't miss your way, Pongo," he barked. 
"Out over the field at the back of the bakehouse and 
straight on for five miles." 

Pongo told him not to worry. But the poor Collie was 
most unhappy. "Here I am, locked in with a warm fire 
and a good supper—and powerless to help you." 

Both Pongo and Missis told him to eat the supper and 
enjoy the fire, and thanked him for all he had done. 

"And now, off we go," said Pongo, bringing the pups 
out of the bakehouse. "And no straggling! Because it 
would be very easy to lose a black pup on a dark night." 

But it was not really a very dark night for already the 
moon was rising and the stars were out. There was one 
specially large, bright star. 

"The Collie said straight ahead and that star is straight 
ahead," said Pongo. 
"So we'll steer by it." 
He was 
thankful they were going by way of the fields and not by 
the road—for he remembered that Cruella had told the 
Baddun brothers she would come down 'tomorrow night' 
to count the bodies. Now it was 'tomorrow night' and 
the great, zebra-striped car would be somewhere on the 
road from London to Suffolk. How terrible it would be 
to meet it! He imagined the glare from the headlights, 
imagined Cruella driving straight at the army of panic-
stricken puppies. 
Yes, he would certainly avoid the 
roads! 
But, even so, it was frightening to know that 
Cruella might be quite near. He put the thought from 
his mind, as he and Missis got the pups into marching 
order. 

Their way lay through grassy meadows over which 
the Cadpig's cart trundled smoothly. At every hedge and 
ditch, Pongo paused and counted the pups to see none 
had strayed, and Missis changed the pups who drew the 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

cart and the pups who rested in it. 
Already even the 
smallest puppies were getting hardier—even the Cadpig 
got out of the cart and walked three fields before getting 
in again. 

"Soon we shall be able to do ten miles a day," said 
Pongo. 

They had travelled about three miles when the first 
disaster of the night happened. 
There was a sudden 
bump, and a wild squeal from the Cadpig. A wheel had 
come off the little blue cart. 

Pongo saw at once that the cart could be mended. A 
wooden peg which fixed the hub of the wheel to the axle 
had come out. 
But could he ever, using his teeth, put 
this peg back ? He tried—and failed. 

"Could the Cadpig manage without the cart?" he 
whispered to Missis. 

Missis shook her head. 
Walking three fields had 
been enough for her smallest daughter. And her other 
daughters could not walk more than a mile without a 
rest. 

"Then mend the cart I must," said Pongo. "And you 
must help me, by holding the wheel in position." 

They tried and tried, without success. 
Then, while 
they were resting for a moment, Missis noticed that 
many of the pups were shivering. 

"They'd better keep warm by running races," said 
Pongo. 

"But that would tire them," said Missis. 
"Couldn't 
they all go to that barn over there?" 

They could just see a big, tiled roof, two short fields 
away—not very clearly, because the moon was behind 
clouds; it was this lack of light which made it so hard to 
mend the cart. 

1 4 2 

Christmas Eve 

"That's a good idea," said Pongo. "And when the 
cart's mended, we can bring it along and call for them 
all." 

Missis said the Cadpig had better stay in the cart and 
keep warm in the hay, but the Cadpig wanted to go with 
the others and see the barn—she felt sure she could walk 
two short fields. So Missis let her go. Two strong pups 
the right size to draw the cart stayed behind. They said 
they did not mind the cold. 

So ninety-five pups, led by Lieutenant Lucky, set off 
briskly for the barn. But when they got there, it did not 
look at all like the barn at the Sheepdog's farm. It was 
built of grey stone and had long windows, some with 
coloured glass in them, and at one end was a tower. 

"Why, there's a Folly!" said the Cadpig, remembering 
the tower of the Folly at Hell Hall. 

Lucky was looking for a door, but when he found one 
it was firmly shut. He told the pups to wait for him, while 
he went round the building looking for some other way 
in. 

The Cadpig did not wait. "Come on," she said to her 
devoted brother, Patch. "I want to look at that Folly." 

And when they got to the tower, they saw a narrow 
door that was not quite closed. It was too heavy for them 
to push but they could—just . . . just—squeeze through. 

Inside, this tower was nothing like the one at Hell 
Hall. And it opened into the grey stone building. 

"No hay in this barn," said the Cadpig. 
She had counted on the hay for warmth, but she soon 
found she was warm enough without it, for there was a 
big stove alight. It had a long iron pipe for a chimney 
which went right up through the raftered ceiling. 
The 
moon was out again now and its light was streaming in 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

through the tall windows, so that the clear glass made 
silver patterns on the stone floor and the coloured glass 
made blue, gold and rose patterns. The Cadpig putted 
one of the coloured patterns with a delicate paw. 

"I love this barn," she said. 
Patch said: "I don't think it is a barn." But he liked it 
as much as the Cadpig did. 

They wandered around—and suddenly they made a 
discovery. 
Whatever this mysterious place was, it was 
certainly intended for puppies. For in front of every seat 
—and there were many seats—was a puppy-sized dog-
bed, padded and most comfortable. 

"Why, it's just meant for us all to sleep in!" said the 
Cadpig. 

"I'll tell the other pups," said Patch, starting for the 
door. A glad cry from the Cadpig called him back. 

"Look, look! 
Television!" 

But it was not like the Television at Hell Hall. It was 
much larger. And the figures on the screen did not move 
or speak. Indeed, it was not a screen. The figures were 
really there, on a low platform, humans and animals, most 
life-like, though smaller than in real life. They were in a 
stable, above which was one bright star. 

"Look at the little humans, kneeling," said Patch. 
"And there's a kind of a cow," said the Cadpig, 
remembering the cows at the farm, who had given all the 
pups milk. 

"And a kind of a horse," said Patch, remembering the 
helpful horse who had let them all out of the field. 

"No dogs," said the Cadpig. "What a pity! But I like 
it much better than ordinary Television. 
Only I don't 
know why." 

Then they heard Lucky and the others, who had found 

Christmas Eve 

their way in. Soon every pup was curled up on a comfort-
able dogbed and fast asleep—except the Cadpig. 
She 
had dragged along one of the dogbeds by its most con-
venient little carpet ear, and was sitting on it, wide awake, 
gazing and gazing at this new and far more beautiful 
Television. 

Once the moon came out from behind the clouds 
Pongo managed to mend the wheel—oh, the feeling of 
satisfaction when the peg slipped into place! Missis, too, 
felt proud. Had she not held the wheel ? She, a dog who 
had never understood machinery! Quickly the two wait-
ing pups seized the cross-bar in their mouths. Then off 
they all went to the barm 

But as they drew nearer, Pongo saw this was no barn. 
"Surely they can't have gone in there}" he said to 
Missis. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Why not, if they were cold ?" said Missis. "And they 
are far too young to know they would not be welcome." 

Pongo and Missis both knew that humans did not like 
dogs to go into buildings which had towers and tall, 
narrow windows. 
They had no idea why, and had at 
first been a little hurt when told firmly to wait outside. 
But Mrs. Dearly had once said: "We would love you to 
come in if it was allowed. And I would go in far oftener 
ifyou could." So it was obviously one of those mysterious 
things such as no one—not even humans—ever being 
allowed to walk on certain parts of the grass in Regent's 
Park. 

"We must get them out quickly," said Pongo, "and go 
on with our journey." 

They soon found the door in the tower—which the 
biggest pups had pushed wide open. Because Missis had 
always been left outside, she disliked these curious build-
ings with towers and high windows; but the minute she 
got inside, she changed her mind. This was a wonderful 
place—so peaceful and, somehow, so welcoming. 

"But where are the pups ?" she said, peering all around. 
She saw lots of black patches on the moonlit floor but 
had quite forgotten that all the pups were now black. 
Then she remembered and as she drew nearer to the sleep-
ing pups, tears sprang to her eyes. 

"Look, look at all the puppybeds!" she cried. 
"What 
good people must live here!" 

"It can't be the kind of place I thought it was," said 
Pongo. 

He was about to wake the puppies when Missis stopped 
him. 

"Let me sit by the stove for a little while," she said. 
"Not too long, my dear," said Pongo. 

Christmas Eve 

He need not have worried. Missis only sat still for a 
few minutes. Then she got up, shook herself, and said 
brightly: 

"Let us start now. Things are going to be all right." 
*
*
*
*
* 

An hour or so later, just before the evening service, 
the Verger said to the Vicar: 

"I think there must be something wrong with the 
stove, sir." 

On every hassock he had found a small, circular patch 
of soot. 

i 5. MIRACLE 
N E E D E D 

this because he was hungry himself. And so was Missis. 
But she was feeling too peaceful to mind. 

They went on for nearly two miles, then Pongo saw a 
long row of cottage roofs ahead across the fields. 

"This should be it," he said. 
"What is that glow in the sky beyond the roof-tops ?" 
asked Missis. 

Pongo was puzzled. 
He had seen such a glow in the 
sky over towns which had many lights, but never over a 
village. And this was a very bright glow. "Perhaps it's 
a larger place than we expected it to be," he said, and did 
not feel it would be safe to go any nearer until some dog 
came to meet them. He called a halt and barked news of 
their arrival. 

He was answered at once, by a bark that said: "Wait 
where you are. I am coming." And though he did not 
tell Missis, Pongo felt there was something odd about 

AST lap before supper," said Pongo, as they 
started off again across the moonlit fields. 

It was the most cheering thing he could 
have said for the ninety-seven puppies were 
now extremely hungry. He had guessed 

Miracle Needed 

this bark that answered his. For one thing, there were no 
cheerful words of welcome. 

Soon a graceful red Setter came dashing towards them. 
They guessed, even before she spoke, that something was 
very wrong. 

"The bakery's on fire!" she gasped. 
The blaze, due to a faulty chimney, had begun only a 
few minutes before—the fire engine had not yet arrived. 
No one had been hurt, but the bakehouse was full of 
flames and smoke—all the food spread out for the 
Dalmatians was burned. 

"There's nothing for you to eat and nowhere for 
you to sleep," moaned the poor Setter—she 
was 
hysterical. "And the village street's full of people." She 
looked pitifully at Missis. 
"All your poor hungry 
puppies!" 

The strange thing was that Missis felt quite calm. She 
tried to comfort the Setter, saying they would go to some 
barn. 

"But no arrangements are made," wailed the Setter. 
"And there's no spare food anywhere. 
All the village 
dogs brought what they could to the bakery." 

Just then came a shrill whistle. 
"My pet is calling me," said the Setter. 
"He's the 
doctor here. 
There's no dog at the bakery, so I was 
chosen to arrange everything—because I took first prize 
in a Dog Show. And now I've failed you." 

"You have not failed," said Missis. 
"No one could 
say the fire was act of dog. 
Go back to your pet 
and don't worry. 
We shall simply go on to the next 
village." 

"Really?" said the Setter, gasping again—but with 
relief. 

1 4 9 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

Missis kissed her on the nose. "Off with you, my dear, 
and don't give the matter another thought. And thank 
you for all you did." 

The whistle came again and the Setter ran off, wildly 
waving her feathered tail. 

"Feather-brained as well as feather-tailed," said Pongo. 
"Just very young," said Missis, gently. 
"I doubt if 
she's had a family yet. Well, on to the next village." 

"Thank you for being so brave, dear Missis," said 
Pongo. 
"But where is the next village?" 

"In the country, there are villages in every direction," 
said Missis, brightly. 

Desperately worried though he was, Pongo smiled 
lovingly at her. Then he said: "We will go to the road 
now." 

"But what about traffic, Pongo?" 
"We shall not be very long on the road," said Pongo. 
Then he told her what he had decided. 
Even if the 
next village should only be a few miles away, many of the 
pups were too tired and too hungry to get there—some 
of them were already asleep on the frozen ground. And 
every minute it got colder. 

"And even if we could get to the next village, where 
should we sleep, Missis, what should we eat, with no 
plans made ahead? We must give in, my dear. 
Come, 
wake the pups! Quick march, everyone!" 

The waking pups whimpered and shivered, and Missis 
saw that even the strongest pups were now wretchedly 
cold. 
So she helped Pongo to make them all march 
briskly. Then she whispered: 

"But how do we give in, Pongo?" 
Pongo said: "We must go into the village and find the 
police station." 

1 5 0 

Miracle Needed 

Missis stared at him in horror. "No, Pongo, no! The 
police will take the puppies from us!" 

"But they will feed them, Missis. 
And perhaps we 
shall be kept together until Mr. Dearly has been told 
about us. 
They will have read the papers. 
They will 
know we are the Missing Dalmatians." 

"But we are not Dalmatians any more, Pongo," cried 
Missis. "We are black. They will think we are ordinary 
stray dogs. 
And we are illegal—ninety-nine dogs with-
out collars. We shall be put in prison." 

"No, Missis!" But Pongo was shaken, 
y e had for-
gotten they were now black dogs. Suppose the police did 
not recognise them ? Suppose the Dearlys were never told 
about them? What happened to stray dogs that no one 
claimed ? 

"Please, Pongo, I beg you!" cried Missis. "Let us go 
on with our journey! I know it will be all right." 

They had now reached the road and were on the edge 
of the village. 
Pongo was faced with a terrible choice. 
But it still seemed to him wiser to trust the police than to 
lead the hungry, exhausted puppies into the bitter winter 
night. 

"Missis, dear Missis, we must go to the police station," 
he said, and turned towards the village. They could now 
see the burning bakery and at that moment a huge flame 
leapt up through the roof. 
By its light Pongo saw the 
whole village street, with the villagers making a human 
chain to hand along buckets of water. And he also saw 
something else—something which made him stop dead, 
shouting "Halt!" at the top of his bark. 

In front of the burning bakery was a great striped 
black-and-white car. And with it was Cruella de Vil— 
standing right up on the roof of the car, where she had 

Miracle Needed 

climbed so as to get a good view of the fire. Her white 
face and absolutely simple white mink cloak no longer 
looked white. From head to foot she was bathed in the 
red-gold flicker of the flames. And as they leapt higher 
and higher she clapped her hands in delight. 

The next instant there was a wild clamour of bells as 
the fire engine arrived at last. The noise, the flames and, 
above all, the sight of Cruella were too much for many of 
the puppies. 
Squealing in terror, they turned and fled, 
with Pongo, Missis and Lucky desperately trying to call 
them to order. 

Fortunately, the clamour from the fire engine prevented 
anyone in the village hearing the barking and yapping. 
And after a little while, the terrified pups obeyed Pongo's 
orders and stopped their headlong flight. They were very 
shame-faced as Pongo told them that, though he quite 
understood how they had felt, they must never, never 
behave in such a panic-stricken way and must always, 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

always obey orders instantly. Then he praised the pups 
who had stuck to the Cadpig's cart, praised Patch for 
staying close to the Cadpig, rescued Roly Poly from a 
ditch and counted the pups carefully. He did all this as 
hurriedly as possible for he knew now that they must 
press on with their journey. There was no way they could 
get to the police station without passing Cruella de Vil. 

Their plight was now worse than ever. They not only 
had to face the dangers of hunger and cold; there was the 
added danger of Cruella. They knew from the direction 
her car was facing that their enemy must have already 
been to Hell Hall, learned that they had escaped, and now 
be on her way back to London. 
At any moment, she 
might leave the fire and overtake them. 

If only they could have left the road and travelled by 
the fields again! But there were now woods on either side 
of the road, woods so thick that the army could not have 
kept together. 

"But we can hide in there, if we see the car's head-
lights," said Pongo, and explained this to the puppies. 
Then the army was on the march again. 

"At least the pups are warm now," said Missis. "And 
they have forgotten how tired and hungry they are. 
It 
will be all right, Pongo." 

The pace was certainly good for a couple of miles, 
then it got slower and slower. 

"The puppies will have to rest," said Missis. 
"And 
this is a good place for it." 

There was now a wide, grassy verge to the road. The 
moment Pongo called a halt the pups sank down on the 
frorty grass. Many of them at once fell asleep. 

"They ought not to sleep," said Pongo, anxiously. 
"Let them, for a little while," said Missis. 

Miracle Needed 

The Cadpig was not asleep. She sat up in her cart and 
said: "Will there be a barn soon, with kind cows and 
warm milk?" 

"I'm sure there will be something nice," said Missis. 
"Snuggle down in your hay, my darling. 
Pongo, how 
strangely quiet it is." 

They could no longer hear any sounds from the village. 
No breath of wind rustled the grass or stirred the trees. 
The world seemed frozen into a silvery, silent stillness. 

Something soft and fluffy touched Pongo's head, some-
thing that puzzled him. Then, as he realised what it was, 
Missis whispered: 

"Lookj Pongo! Look at the puppies!" 
Tiny white dots were appearing on the sooty black 
coats. 
Snow had begun to fall. 

Missis said, smiling: "Instead of being white pups with 
black spots they are turning into black pups with white 
spots—only soon, they will be all white. 
How soft and 
gentle the snow is!" 

Pongo was not smiling. 
He cried: "If they sleep on 
until it has covered them, they will never wake—they 
will freeze to death beneath that soft, gentle snow! Wake 
up, pups! Wake up!" 

By now, every pup but Lucky and the Cadpig had 
fallen into a deep, exhausted sleep. 
Lucky helped his 
parents to rouse them, and the Cadpig helped, too, sitting 
up in her cart and yapping piercingly. 
The poor pups 
begged to be left to sleep, and those who tottered on to 
their feet soon tottered off them again. 

"We shall never get them going," said Pongo, 
despairingly. 

For a moment, the Cadpig stopped yapping and there 
was a sudden silence. 
Then, from the village behind 

iJ5 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

them, came the strident blare of the loudest motor-horn 
in England. 

The pups sprang up, their exhaustion driven away by 
terror. 

"To the woods!" cried Pongo. Then he saw that the 
woods were now protected by wire netting, through 
which not even the smallest pup could squeeze. 
And 
there was no ditch to hide in. But he could see that the 
woods ended, not very far ahead. "We must go on," he 
cried. "There may be fields, there may be a ditch." 

The horn sounded again, repeatedly. Pongo guessed 
that the fire engine had put out the fire and now Cruella 
was scattering the villagers as she drove on her way. 
Already she would be less than two miles behind them— 
and the great striped car could travel two miles in less 
than two minutes. 
But the woods were ending, there 
were fields ahead! 

"To the fields!" cried Pongo. 
"Faster, faster!" 

The pups made a great spurt forward, then fell back in 
dismay. For though the woods ended, the wire netting 
still continued, on both sides of them. There was still no 
way off the road. And the horn sounded again—louder 
and nearer. 

"Nothing but a miracle can save us now," said Pongo. 
"Then we must find a miracle," said Missis, firmly. 
"Pongo, what is a miracle?" 

It was at that moment that they suddenly saw, through 
the swirling snow, a very large van drawn up on the road 
ahead of them. The tailboard was down and the inside 
of the van was lit by electric light. And sitting there, 
on a newspaper, was a Staffordshire Terrier with a short 
clay pipe in his mouth. That is, it looked like a clay pipe. 
It was really made of sugar and had once had a fine long 

Miracle Needed 

stem. Now the Staffordshire drew the bowl of the pipe 
into his mouth and ate it. Then he looked up from the 
newspaper—which he was reading as well as sitting on 
—and stared in astonishment at the army of pups rushing 
helter-skelter towards him. 

"Help, help, help!" barked Pongo. 
"We are being 
pursued. 
How soon can we get off this road?" 

"I don't know, mate," barked back the Staffordshire. 
"You'd better hide in my van." 

"The miracle, the miracle!" gasped Pongo to Missis. 
"Quickly, pups! 
Jump into the nice miracle," said 
Missis, who now thought 'miracle' was another name for 
a removal van. 

A swarm of pups surged up the tailboard. 
Up went 
the Cadpig's cart, pulled from the front and pushed from 
behind. Then more and more pups jumped or scrambled 
up until the entire army was in. 

"Golly, there are a lot of you," said the Staffordshire, 
who had flattened himself against the side of the van. 
"Lucky the van was empty. 
Who's after you, mates?" 
Old Nick?" 

"Some relation of his, I think," said Pongo. 
The 
strident horn sounded again and now two strong head-
lights could be seen in the distance. 
"And she's in that 
car." 

"Then I'd better put the light off," said the Stafford-
shire, neatly working the switch with his teeth. 
"That's 
better." 

Pongo's heart seemed to miss a beat. 
Suddenly he 
knew that letting the pups get into the van had been a 
terrible mistake. 

"But the car's headlights will shine in," he gasped. 
"Our enemy will see the pups." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Not black pups in a black van," said the Staffordshire. 
"Not if they close their eyes." 

Oh, excellent suggestion! 
Quickly Pongo gave the 
command: 

"Pups, close your eyes—or they will reflect the car's 
headlights and shine like jewels in the darkness. 
Close 
them and do not open them, however frightened you are, 
until I give the word. Remember, your lives may depend 
on your obedience now. Close your eyes and keep them 
closed!" 

Instantly all the puppies closed their eyes tight. 
And 
now the car's headlights were less than a quarter of a mile 
away. 

"Close your eyes, Missis," said Pongo. 
"And don't forget to close your own, mate," said the 
Staffordshire. 

Now the car's powerful engine could be heard. The 
strident horn blared again and again, as if telling the van 
to get out of the way. Louder and louder grew the noise 
from the engine. The glare from the headlights was now 
so intense that Pongo was conscious of it through his 
tightly shut eyelids. Would the pups obey orders ? Or 
would terror make them look towards the oncoming car ? 
Pongo, himself, had a wild desire to do so and a wild 
fear that the car was going to crash into the van. 
The 
noise of horn and engine grew deafening, the glare 
seemed blinding, even to closed eyes. Then, with a roar, 
the great striped car was on them—and past them, roar-
ing on and on into the night! 

"You may open your eyes now, my brave, obedient 
pups," cried Pongo. 
And indeed they deserved praise 
for not one eye had been opened. 

"That was quite a car, mate," said the Staffordshire to 

Miracle Needed 

Pongo. "You must have quite an enemy. Who are you, 
anyway? 
The local pack of soot-hounds?" 
Then he 
suddenly stared very hard at Pongo's nose. "Well, swelp 
me if it isn't soot! And it doesn't fool me. You're the 
Missing Dalmatians. Want a lift back to London?" 

A lift! A lift all the way in this wonderful van! Pongo 
and Missis could hardly believe it. 
Swiftly the pups 
settled to sleep on the rugs and blankets used for wrapping 
round furniture. 

"But why are there so many pups ?" said the Stafford-
shire. "The newspapers don't know the half of it, nor 
the quarter, neither. 
They think there are only fifteen 
missing." 

Pongo started to explain but the Staffordshire said they 
would talk during the drive to London. "My pets will 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

be out of that house there any minute. Fancy us doing 
a removal on a Sunday—and Christmas Eve. 
But the 
van broke down yesterday and we had to finish the 
job." 

"How many days will the journey to London take?" 
asked Missis. 

"Days ?" said the Staffordshire. "It won't take much 
more than a couple of hours, if I know my pets. They 
want to get home to finish decorating their kids' Christ-
mas trees. Sssh, now! Pipe down, both of you." 

A large man in a rough apron was coming out of a 
near-by house. Missis thought: 'As soon as one danger 
is past, another threatens.' Would they all be turned out 
of the miracle ? 

The Staffordshire, wagging his tail enthusiastically, 
hurled himself at the man's chest, nearly knocking him 
down. 

"Look out, Bill!" said the man, over his shoulder. 
"The Canine Cannon Ball's feeling frisky." 

Bill was an even larger man, but even he was shaken 
by the Staffordshire's loving welcome. 

"Get down, you Self-launched Bomb," he shouted, 
with great affection. 

The two men and the Staffordshire came back to the 
van and the Staffordshire jumped inside. 
The sooty 
Dalmatians, huddled together, were invisible in the dark-
ness. 

"Want to ride inside, do you ?" said Bill. "Well, it is 
cold." He put the tailboard up and shouted: "Next stop, 
St. John's Wood." A moment later, the huge van took 
the road. 

St. John's Wood! Surely, that was where the Splendid 
Vet lived—quite close to Regent's Park! What wonderful, 

Miracle Needed 

wonderful luck, thought Pongo. 
Just then he heard a 
clock strike. It was still only eight o'clock. 

"Missis!" he cried. "We shall get home tonight! We 
shall be home for Christmas!" 

"Yes, Pongo," said Missis, gaily. But she did not feel 
as gay as she sounded. 
For Missis, who had been so 
brave, so confident up to the moment they had found 
the miracle, had suddenly been smitten by a great fear. 
Suppose the Dearlys did not recognise them now they 
were black dogs ? Suppose the dear, dear Dearlys turned 
them away ? 

She kept her fears to herself. Why should she frighten 
Pongo with them! How fast the miracle was travelling! 
She thought of the days it had taken her and Pongo to 
reach Suffolk on foot. Why, it seemed like weeks since 
they had left London! Yet it was only—how long ? Could 
it be only four days ? They'd slept one day in the stable 
at the inn, one day at the dear Spaniel's, one day in the 
Folly, part of a night in the barn after the escape from 
Hell Hall, then a day at the bakery. 
So much had 
happened in so short a time. And now, would it be all 
right when they got home ? Would it ? Would it ? 

Meanwhile, Pongo had his own worries. He had been 
telling the Staffordshire all about Cruella and had remem-
bered what she had said, that night at Hell Hall—how 
she intended to wait until people had forgotten about the 
stolen puppies, and then start her Dalmatian fur farm 
again. Surely he and Missis would get this lot of puppies 
safely home (it had never occurred to him that the Dearlys 
might not let them in) but what of the future? 
How 
could he make sure that other puppies did not end 
up as fur coats later on? 
He asked the Staffordshire's 
advice. 

1 6 1 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

"Why not kill this Cruella?" said the Staffordshire. 
"And I'll help you. 
Let's make a date for it now." 

Pongo shook his head. 
He had come to believe that 
Cruella was not an ordinary human but some kind of 
devil. If so, could one kill her? In any case, he didn't 
want his pups to have a killet-dog for a father. He would 
have sprung at Cruella if she had attacked any pup, but 
he didn't fancy cold-blooded murder. 
He told the 
Staffordshire so. 

"Your blood would soon warm up once you started 
the job," said the Staffordshire. "Well, let me know if 
you change your mind. And now you take a nap, mate. 
You've still got quite a job ahead of you." 

The Staffordshire, like Missis, wondered if the Dearlys 
would recognise these black Dalmatians—and if even the 
kindest pets would take in so many pups. 
But he said 
nothing of this to Pongo. 

Missis, lulled by the movement of the van, had fallen 
asleep. 
Soon Pongo slept, too. 
But their dreams were 
haunted by their separate anxieties. 

On and on through the dark went the mile-eating 
miracle. 

1 6 2 

16. T H E W H I T E CAT'S 
R E V E N G E 

if they saw you," said the Staffordshire. 
"But it might 
cause delay. 
The van will stop in a big, dark garage. 
Streak out, turn sharp left, and you will be in a dimly-lit 
mews—and on your way. 
We'll say good-bye now." 

"Can we send you news on the Twilight Barking?" 
asked Pongo. 

"Hardly ever get the chance to listen to it," said the 
Staffordshire. "But I shall get news of you all right. I'm 
a great one for newspapers—they pass the time on the 
road. Always plenty of them in the van; we use them for 
packing. 
Well, here we are." 

The van stopped. 
The Staffordshire started to bark 
loudly. 

"Let him out, Jim," said Bill. 
"Before he breaks the 
Sound Barrier." 

1 6 3 

HE Staffordshire woke them in good time— 
every pup must be ready to leap out of 
• the van the minute the tailboard was put 
down. 

"Not that my dear pets would hurt you 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

Down came the tailboard. Out shot the Staffordshire. 
This time he managed to knock Jim right down, before 
turning to Bill, whom he tackled low. 

"Just about winded me, he has," said Bill, proudly. 
"Grrh, you Flying Saucer, you!" 

Jim got to his feet and spoke lovingly to the Stafford-
shire. "If England had six of you, we shouldn't need no 
army," he said. "Come home and get your supper, you 
Misguided Missile." 

Bill and Jim had been much too occupied to notice the 
black dogs streaming out of the van, and out of the dark 
garage into the mews. Snow had been falling for hours, so 
that London was all white. The pups had scarcely noticed 
the snow while they were running away from Cruella's 
car. 
Now they at once fell in love with this beautiful, 
feathery stuff—it raised their spirits wonderfully. 
And 
they felt well-rested, after their sleep in the van. 
They 
were still hungry but they didn't mind that much because 
they were expecting a wonderful supper. Hearing them 
counting on this, poor Missis felt more anxious than ever. 

Bill, Jim and the Staffordshire had gone out of the 
garage by another way, so Pongo let the pups play in the 
snowy mews for a few minutes. Then Missis persuaded 
the Cadpig to get back into her cart, and off they went. 
Because of the snow there were very few people about— 
which was just as well, as the army of black dogs was now 
very noticeable against the white streets. The only person 
who saw them was an elderly gentleman on his way to a 
late party. He rubbed his eyes, then shook his head and 
murmured: "And I haven't even begun Christmas yet." 

It took only a few minutes to reach the Outer Circle. 
How beautiful Regent's Park looked, snowy under the 
stars! 

1 6 4 

The White Cat's Revenge 

Pongo said: "Missis, do you remember what I told you 
when we said good-bye to the Park?" 

Missis answered: "You told me to think of the day 
when we would come back with fifteen puppies running 
behind us. And now we have ninety-seven." 

They had not come back to the Outer Circle by the 
way they had left it but were at the other side of the Park, 
close to Cruella de Vil's house. As they drew near to it, 
Pongo saw that every window was dark, so he thought it 
would be safe to call a moment's halt. 

"Look, pups," he told them. 
"That is our enemy's 
house." 

Lucky said: "May we scratch it and bite it ?" 
"You would only hurt your nails and your teeth," said 
Pongo, looking up at the huge house. 

Missis was looking down into the area. 
Something 
moved there—something only a little less white than the 
snow. It was Cruella's Persian cat. 

Her back was arched and she was spitting angrily. 
Pongo said quickly: "Madam, none of us would ever 
dream of hurting you." 

The white cat said: "That's the civilest speech I ever 
had from a dog. Who are you ? There are no black dogs 
round here." 

"We are not usually black except for our spots," said 
Pongo. 
"We once visited your house 
" 

He got no further because the white cat guessed every-
thing—as well she might, after all the talk she had heard 
between Mr. and Mrs. de Vil. 

"And you've rescued all the pups from Hell Hall! 
Well, bravo, bravo! I couldn't be more pleased." 

Then Missis remembered what Cruella de Vil had said 
on the night when the puppies were born, and she spoke 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

to the white cat very kindly, saying: "I might have known 
you would sympathise—for I once heard you lost many 
kittens in early infancy." 

"Forty-four, to the present date," said the white cat. 
"All drowned by the fiend I live with." 

"Why don't you leave her?" asked Pongo. 
"I bide my time," said the white cat. 
"I wait for my 
full revenge. I can't do much on my own—I've only two 
pairs of paws. But I scare the servants away—any cat can 
make a house seem haunted. I let the place become over-
run with mice. 
And, oh, how I scratch the furniture! 
Though it's heartbreaking how little she notices it—she's 
such a rotten housewife. Why not let your pups come in 
and do some damage now?" 

"Oh, please, please let us!" clamoured all the pups. 
Pongo shook his head. 
"Cruella will be back. 
I'm 
surprised she's not home already." 

"Oh, she's been back," said the white cat, "and gone 
out to dinner. She had to, because I scared another batch 
of servants away this morning—as a little Christmas 
present for her. 
Do come in!" 

"No, no, Pongo!" cried Missis. 
"This is no moment 
for revenge. 
We should get the pups home. 
They are 
hungry." 

But the pups clamoured louder than ever. 
"Please, 
pleast, please let us damage Cruella's house!" They made 
so much noise that Missis could not hear what the white 
cat was now saying to Pongo. At last he turned, quietened 
the pups, and said: 

"Missis, I now feel that we should do as our friend here 
suggests. 
It would take me a long time to explain why, 
so will you trust me, please?" 

"Of course, Pongo," said Missis, loyally. 
"And if 

The White Cat's Revenge 

you're sure we really ought to be revenged on Cruella— 
well, naturally, I shall enjoy it." 

"Then follow me," said the white cat. "There's a way 
in at the back." 

Lucky and two big, loud-barked pups were left on 
guard—they were sorry to miss the fun, but duty was 
duty. 

"Three barks if you sight the striped car or hear its 
horn," Pongo told them, then marched all the other pups 
after the white cat. The little blue cart was left in the 
mews at the back of the house—the Cadpig insisted on 
going into the house and getting her fair share of the 
revenge. 

The white cat took them in through the coal cellar. 
"Nothing down here worth wrecking," she said, 
making for the stairs. Up through the dark house they 
went, until she paused outside a bolted door, 

"Now, if you really can undo that bolt!" she said to 
Pongo. 
"Goodness knows, I've tried often enough." 

"Oh, he's splendid at bolts," said Missis, proudly. 
It was a nice, chromium bolt, well-oiled. 
It gave 
Pongo no trouble at all. 

There was enough light from the lamps on the Outer 
Circle to show them a big room in which were many 
racks of fur coats. 

'Why, Cruella must own dozens of them!' thought 
Missis. And there were many fur stoles, muffs, etc., too. 

Pongo barked his orders: 
"Four pups to a coat, two pups to a stole, one pup to a 
muff. Present teeth! 
Tear-r-r!!!" 

There was not space enough in one room to finish the 
whole job, so the pups spread themselves throughout the 
house. 
After that, the fur flew with a vengeance—in 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

every direction. 
Chinchilla, Sable, Mink and Beaver, 
Nutria, Fox, Kolinsky, and many humbler skins—from 
kitchen to attic the house was filled with a fog of fur. 

And the white cat did not forget the ermine sheets. She 
did good work on those herself, moving so fast that it 
was hard to see which was clawed white ermine and 
which was clawing white cat. 

"I've been slack," she said. "I could have got at these 
years ago." 

"One needs company for a job like this," said Pongo. 
"No more furs to tear, now," said the Cadpig, sadly. 
She had just shredded a little sable tippet, all by herself. 

"Quiet!" barked Pongo, suddenly. 
Had his ears 

The White Cat's Revenge 

deceived him? 
No, there it was again—a distant blast 
from the loudest motor-horn in England! 
The next 
instant, the pups outside barked the alarm. 

"Down, down to the coal cellar!" barked Pongo. 
There was a wild scurry of pups down the dark stairs. 
The white cat sprang to a window. "You'll have time," 
she cried. 
"The car's only just turned in to the Outer 
Circle." 

But Pongo knew how fast that car could come. 
And 
pups were falling over each other in the darkness, there 
were bumps and yelps. 
Roly Poly fell through the 
banisters—it was amazing that he was not hurt. But at 
last they were all streaming out of the coal cellar into the 
mews. 

"In your places for counting!" barked Pongo. He had 
long ago invented a quick way of counting the army. 
Pups formed nine rows of ten, and one row of seven 
which included the Cadpig in her cart. 
Swiftly, he 
counted now. 
Ninety-three, ninety-four—there were 
three pups missing! 

"They must be somewhere in the house," cried Missis. 
"We must rescue them!" 

Pongo dashed towards the coal cellar—then stopped, 
gasping with relief. Lucky and the two loud-barked pups 
were just coming from the front of the house. Pongo had 
forgotten them in his counting. The army was complete! 

"Cruella's nearly here," said Lucky. 
"We must make sure she's gone indoors before we 
march on," said Pongo, and he ran into the narrow 
passage that led to the Outer Circle. 

Missis ran after him. 
"Be careful, Pongo! 
She'll see 
you!" 

"Not in this dark passage," said Pongo. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

The striped car went by the end of the passage. 
A 
light was on inside and they could see Cruella clearly. 

"Oh, Pongo!" wailed Missis. 
"She's still got her 
absolutely simple white mink cloak!" 

Pongo ran on towards the Outer Circle and Missis ran 
after him. Cautiously they peered out of the passage and 
saw the striped car stop in front of the de Vils' house. 
Mr. de Vil, who had been driving, helped Cruella out and 
then went up the front-door steps. He started to search 
for his latchkey. 
Cruella stood waiting, with the cloak 
hanging loosely round her shoulders. 

"I shan't sleep if she keeps that cloak," said Missis. 
"And you need your sleep, Missis," said Pongo. 
The same idea had come to both of them. 
The cloak 
hung so loosely, so temptingly! And the relief of getting 
the pups safely out of the house had made them feel 
daring. Pongo was happy to see his dear wife looking as 
mischievous as a puppy 

"She'll never recognise us now we're black," he said. 
"Let's risk it! 
Now!" 

They dashed towards Cruella and seized the hem of 
the cloak. 
It slipped from her shoulders quite easily— 
and fell on top of Pongo and Missis. Blindly they hurled 
themselves along the Outer Circle, with the cloak spread 
out over them and looking as if it was running by itself. 
Cruella screamed. "It's bewitched! Go after it—quick!" 

"No fear!" said Mr. de Vil. 
"I think an ancestor of 
yours is running away with it. 
You'd better come 
indoors." 

The next moment, he and Cruella started to cough 
violently. 
For as they opened the front door they were 
met by a choking cloud of fur. 

Somehow Pongo and Missis found their way to the 

The White Cat's Revenge 

passage, where they came from under the cloak and 
dragged it to the mews. Here the pups fell on it. And 
that was the end of the absolutely simple white mink 
cloak. 

Lights were now flashing on all over the de Vils' house 
and Cruella could be heard shrieking with rage. 

"This is where we march home quickly," said Pongo. 
Suddenly all her high spirits deserted Missis. 
Home! 
But would they be allowed into their home ? All her fears 
came back. 

Now they were marching along the Outer Circle again. 
And now they could see the Dearlys' house ahead of 
them. 

There were lights in the drawing-room window. 
"Mr. and Mrs. Dearly haven't gone to bed yet," said 
Pongo. 

Lights were shining up from the kitchen, 
"The Nannies are still awake," said Missis. 
She said 
it brightly; no one could have guessed how frightened 
she was, though her heart was thumping so hard that she 

The Hundred and One Dalmatians 

was afraid Pongo would hear it. Why should the Dearlys 
let a mob of strange black dogs into the house? And 
unless they did get in, how could they show the Dearlys 
they were not strange black dogs ? Barking would not 
help. 
She and Pongo would need to get close to their 
pets, close enough to put their sooty heads against the 
Dearlys' knees, or their sooty paws around the Dearlys' 
necks. 

Suppose they were all turned 
away—ninety-nine 
hungry Dalmatians, outcasts in the night ? 

At that moment, snow began to fall again, very, very 
thickly. 

»7* 

i 7. WHO A R E THESE 
S T R A N G E 
BLACK 
DOGS? 

gallons of hand-lotion. 
Fortunately, Perdita quite liked 
the taste of this. 

(She had received no news by way of the Twilight 
Barking. 
Reception was bad in that part of Regent's 
Park—which was why Pongo had done his barking, and 
listening, from Primrose Hill.) 

In the afternoon the Nannies trimmed the Christmas 
tree. They said it was for Perdita but they really hoped 
to cheer the Dearlys up. 
The Dearlys put Perdita's 
presents on it but they had not the heart to get out the 
presents which they had bought for Pongo, Missis and 
fifteen puppies just in case they all came home. 
Mr. 
Dearly had guessed that Pongo and Missis were searching 
for their family, but he now feared that family might be 
scattered all over England, and the best he really hoped 
for wa& that Pongo and Missis might return. 

HF. Dearlys, the Nannies and Perdita had 
spent a sad Christmas Eve. They had all 
been very kind to each other. Perdita had 
washed the humans so much that they 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

When snow first began to fall, everyone felt worse than 
ever. "And Missis didn't even take her-coat," said Mrs. 
Dearly. She pictured Pongo and Missis lost, shivering 
and starving. 
So did Mr. Dearly. But they kept the 
horrid thought to themselves. 

In the evening, the Dearlys invited the Nannies to 
come up to the drawing-room and they all played nursery 
card games: Snap, Beggar-my-Neighbour and Animal 
Grab. They all pretended to enjoy themselves which was 
very hard work. At last Mr. Dearly said he would put 
some Christmas carols on the gramophone. 

Now carols are always beautiful but if you are sad they 
can make you feel sadder. (There are some people who 
always find beauty makes them feel sadder, which is a 
very mysterious thing.) 
Soon the Dearlys and the 
Nannies could hardly keep the tears out of their eyes. 
When Mr. Dearly realised this, he thought: 'This must 
be the last carol we play.' It was 'Silent Night'. Mrs. 
Dearly put out the lights and drew back the curtains at 
the tall windows, so that they could see the stars while 
they listened. And she saw it was snowing again. 

She went back to the sofa and stroked Perdita who, for 
once, did no washing but just gazed at the falling snow 
flakes. The voices singing 'Silent Night' were high and 
clear and peaceful, and not very loud. 

Suddenly, everyone in the room heard a dog bark. 
"That's Pongo," cried Mr. Dearly, and dashed to a 
window. 

"That's Missis," cried Mrs. Dearly, hearing a different 
bark as she, too, dashed to the window. 

They flung the window open wide and stared down 
through the swirling snow. And then their hearts seemed 
turned to lead by disappointment. 

Who Art These Strange Black Dogs? 

Down below were two black dogs. 
Mrs. Dearly said gently: "You shouldn't be out on a 
night like this. Go home to your owners, my dears." 

(She used the word ' owners' when she should have 
said ' pets'—that mistake humans so often make.) 

The dogs barked again but Mr. Dearly said "Home!" 
very firmly, for he felt sure the dogs lived somewhere 
near and had been let out for a last run before going to 
bed. He shut the window, saying to Mrs. Dearly: "Odd-
looking dogs. I can't quite recognise the breed." 

He did not hear the despairing howl that came from 
Missis. 
It had happened, just as she had feared! 
They 
were turned away, outcasts in the night. 

Pongo had a moment of panic. This was something he 
had not foreseen. But quickly he pulled himself together. 
"We must bark again," he said, "and much louder." 

"Shall the puppies bark, too?" suggested Missis. 
The puppies were all lined up out of sight from the 
window, because Pongo felt that so many dogs at once 
might come as a bit of a shock. He now said: 

"No. Only you and I must bark, Missis. And one at 
a time. 
Then they will recognise our voices sooner or 
later. We would recognise theirs whatever clothes they 
wore, whatever colour their faces and hands were." 

So he barked again, and then Missis barked. 
They 
went on and on, taking it in turns. 

Up in the drawing-room Mrs. Dearly said: "I can't 
believe that's not Pongo and Missis. And look how excited 
Perdita is!" 

"It's because we are all so longing to hear them," said 
Mr. Dearly. "We imagine we do. But there must be some-
thing wrong with those black dogs—just listen to them! 
Perhaps they're lost." And again he opened the window. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Pongo and Missis barked louder than ever and wagged 
their tails wildly. 

"Anyone would think they knew us," said Mr. Dearly. 
"I shall go down and see if they have collars on. Perhaps 
I can take them to their homes." 

Pongo heard this and said to Missis quickly: "The 
moment the door opens, dash in and lead the way up to 
the drawing-room. 
Pups, you follow Missis, noses to 
tails. I will bring up the rear. And never let there be one 
moment when Mr. Dearly can close the front door. Once 
we are in, we can make them understand." 

The front door opened and out came Mr. Dearly. In 
shot Missis, closely followed by the Cadpig—now out 
of her cart—and all her brothers and sisters except Lucky, 
who insisted on waiting with Pongo. 
What with the 
darkness and the whirling snow, Mr. Dearly did not see 
what was happening until a pup bumped into him in 
passing (it was Roly Poly—of course). 
Then he looked 
down to see what had bumped him and saw a steady 
stream of black pups going through the front door and 
the white hall and up the white stairs. 

'I'm dreaming this,' thought Mr. Dearly, and pinched 
himself, hard. But the stream of pups went on and on. 

Suddenly there was a hitch. The two pups faithfully 
dragging the Cadpig's little blue cart, now empty, could 
not get it up the steps. Mr. Dearly, who could never see 
a dog in difficulty without helping, at once picked the 
cart up himself. After seeing the cart, he no longer felt 
he was dreaming. 'These dogs are a troop from a circus,' 
he thought. 
'But why have they come to us ?' 

A moment later, Pongo and Lucky went past and the 
stream of dogs stopped. Mr. Dearly called into the night: 
"Any more, out there?" To his relief, no dog answered, 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

so he went in and closed the door. 
Pongo's sooty hind-
quarters were just rounding the bend of the stairs. Mr. 
Dearly followed four steps at a time, still carrying the 
little blue cart. 

The scene in the front drawing-room was rather con-
fused. Large as the room was, there was not floor space 
for all the puppies, so they were jumping on to tables and 
chairs and piling up on top of each other. 
There was 
rather a lot of noise. 
Mrs. Dearly was just managing to 
keep on her feet. She had never been frightened of any 
dog in her life, but she did feel a trifle startled. 
The 
Nannies had taken refuge on top of the grand piano. 

Mr. Dearly took one look through the door, then 
dashed into the back drawing-room and flung open the 
double doors. A sea of pups surged in. And now that 
there was a little spare floor space, Pongo barked a 
command: 

"All pups who can find space: Roll! 
Roll, Missis!" 
And he, himself, rolled with a will. 

The Dearlys stared in utter bewilderment—and then 
both of them shouted: "Look!" 

The white carpet was becoming blacker, the black dogs 
were becoming whiter 

"It's Pongo!" cried Mr. Dearly. 
"It's Missis!" cried Mrs. Dearly. 
"It's Pongo, Missis and all their puppies!" cried the 
Nannies, from the top of the piano. 

"It's considerably more than all their puppies," said 
Mr. Dearly—just before Pongo forcibly embraced him. 

Missis was embracing Mrs. Dearly. And in a corner of 
the room there was a great deal more embracing. Perdita 
was going absolutely wild, trying to embrace eight pup-
pies at once. They were her own long lost family! It had 

Who Art These Strange Black Dogs? 

never struck Pongo that they might be among the rescued 
pups. He had not even noticed their brown spots, because 
he had scarcely seen any of the pups by daylight before 
they all rolled in the soot. 
It turned out that Perdita's 
family was the one that fitted the Cadpig's little blue cart 
so well and had pulled it so faithfully. 

Mr. Dearly had put the cart down in the back drawing-
room and the Nannies had now got off the piano and gone 
to look at it. 

"That's a child's toy," said Nanny Cook. 
"And it's got a name and address on it," said Nanny 
Butler. 
And she read out "Master Tommy Tompkins, 
Farmer. Dympling, Suffolk." 

"Dympling ?" said Mrs. Dearly. "That's where Cruella 
de Vil has a country house. She told us about it when we 
had dinner with her and asked if we'd like to buy it." 

And then Mr. Dearly Saw It All. 
He remembered 
Cruella's desire for a Dalmatian fur coat, guessed that she 
had collected all these pups so that Mr. de Vil could make 
many such coats. 

"You must have the law on her," cried both the 
Nannies together. 

Mr. Dearly said he would think about that after 
Christmas, but now he must think about feeding the pups 
—when all the shops were closed. 
He hurriedly tele-
phoned the Ritz, the Savoy, Claridges and other rather 
good hotels and asked them to send page boys along with 
steaks. The hotels were most anxious to help when they 
heard that the Missing Dalmatians had come home. "And 
at least six dozen more than I ever hoped for," said Mr. 
Dearly—not that he had had time to count the pups. 

Nanny Butler said: "They must be bathed before they 
eat." 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Bathed ?" gasped Mrs. Dearly. 
"All of them ?" 
"They can't sleep in their soot," said Nanny Cook, 
firmly. 
"Nanny Butler and I will work in our bathroom 

and you two can work in yours. And how about asking 
that Splendid Vet and his wife to pop round and bath 
pups in the laundry ?" 

So Mr. Dearly rang up the Splendid Vet, who was 
delighted to be woken up and called out at nearly mid-
night on Christmas Eve. He and his wife arrived in a 
few minutes. 

Mrs. Dearly got out all her best bath salts and bath 
oils and all the lovely coloured bath-towels given to her 
as wedding presents. The Nannies lit fires in every room. 
Then the three bathing teams got to work. 
Soon the 
house was filled with steam and the scent of lilac, roses 
and jasmine, mixed with the delightful smell of wet dogs. 

Who Are These Strange Black Dogs? 

It took, less time than you would believe, because five 
pups were put in a bath at a time. 
They were then 
wrapped in pink, blue, yellow and green towels and 
carried to blazing fires to dry. Mr. Dearly thoughtfully 
turned the drawing-room carpet over so that the soot on 
it would not come off on the clean pups. 

By the time the last pup was washed, the steaks were 
arriving. 
There were enough for everyone, even the 
humans—who were by this time pretty hungry. 
(They 
had theirs cooked.) 

At last the Splendid Vet and his wife went home and 
the house settled for the night. Pongo and Missis showed 
plainly that they wanted to sleep in their own baskets, 
with their puppies round them on the hearthrug and in 
arm-chairs. 
Perdita took her little lot into the laundry, 
on a rather good satin eiderdown. The other pups slept 
all over the house, on beds, sofas and chairs. The Dearlys 
and the Nannies managed to keep chairs for themselves 
—rather hard ones, but they did not mind because they 
didn't expect to sleep much. They wanted to be on hand 
in case any pup needed anything in the night. 

When all was quiet in the firelit kitchen and their 
fifteen pups were asleep, Pongo said to Missis: 

"Do you remember that night we left—how we looked 
back at this kitchen ? Look, now, at your legal collar on 
its peg, ready for you to wear tomorrow—and your 
beautiful blue coat." 

Missis said: "I am so hardy now that I shall not need 
the coat. But I shall wear it from vanity." 

At that moment, they heard a little noise at the window, 
a little scratching noise. Outside, in the midst of a white 
blur, were two green eyes. It was Cruella's white cat. 

Swiftly Pongo let her in. 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

"Such goings on at the de Vils!" she said. 
Quickly Pongo turned to his wife. 
"I haven't ex-
plained to you yet, Missis. Our friend here told me that 
if we could get into that bolted room we could destroy 
Mr. de Vil's whole stock of furs. Cruella made him keep 
them all there, so that she could wear any she fancied. I 
hoped we might put an end to his furrier's business. 
That was why I took the risk of going into the de Vils' 
house—not to be revenged, but to make England Safe 
for Dalmatians." 

"And it's even better than I hoped," said the white cat. 
"Because it turns out most of the furs weren't paid for. 
So Mr. de Vil's ruined." 

"The poor little man!" said Missis. "I feel quite sorry 
for him." 

"No need to," said the white cat. 
"He's as bad as 
Cruella. The only difference is, she's strong and bad and 
he's weak and bad. 
Anyway, they're going to leave 
England tomorrow, to get away from their debts." 

"Cruella still has her jewels," said Missis, regretfully. 
"Mostly sham," said the white cat. "And those that 
aren't will be needed by Mr. de Vil, to start another 
business abroad. 
He says he's going to make plastic 
raincoats." 

"Cruella won't look very well in those," said Missis, 
cheerfully. 

"She won't look very well in anything," said the cat. 
"You've heard of people's hair going white in a single 
night, from shock ? That's happened to the black side of 
her hair. 
And the white side's gone green—a horrid 
shade. 
People are going to think it's dyed. 
Well, I'm 
glad to have finished with the de Vils." 

"But where will you go ?" asked Pongo. 

Who Art 
These Strange Black Dogs? 

The white cat looked surprised. "Go ? I shan't go any-
where. I've just come—here. I'd have come long ago if 
you dogs hadn't barked—that night your pets gave me a 
kind sardine. They won't turn me out. I'll pop up and 
find them, now." 

Then Pongo and Missis sank into a blissful sleep with-
out a care in the world—except that they did want to 
know what the Dearlys were going to do with so very 
many puppies. . . . 

And so did the Dearlys! 

Those readers who also want to know should read on. 
Besides, there is a mystery to be cleared up. Most people 
who are good at arithmetic are likely-to think there is a 
mistake in this book. 
It is called The Hundred and One 
Dalmatians. 
Well, Pongo and Missis and Perdita make 
three. There were ninety-seven Dalmatian pups at Hell 
Hall including those belonging to Pongo, Missis and 
Perdita. 
Three and ninety-seven make one hundred. 
Where, then, is the hundred and oneth Dalmatian ? 

He has been mentioned but many readers may not 
remember him. Those who do not shall soon be reminded 
of him. And those who do shall soon learn more about 
him. 
On to the last chapter, if you please! 

1 8 3 

i8. THE H U N D R E D A N D 
O N E T H 

DALMATIAN 

the pups were able to play with lots of things in the house 
which were not intended to be played with (but were 
played with ever afterwards). The Dearlys took all the 
pups into the snowy Park; Pongo, Missis and Perdita 
circling round to make sure none got lost. 
And at 
twilight, Pongo and Missis firmly led the Dearlys up to 
the top of Primrose Hill and barked over a Dogdom-
wide network. 
They even managed to get a message 
through to the gallant old Spaniel, for two dogs from 
a village five miles from him made a special trip in 

HRISTMAS DAY at the house in Regent's 
Park was absolutely wonderful. 
The 
rather good hotels sent plenty more 
steaks, and though there were not, of 
course enough presents to go round, 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

order to bark to him. 
(He sent back a message that he 
and his dear old pet were very well.) 
Of course, the 
Dogdom-wide barking was relayed. The furthest-away 
dog Pongo and Missis spoke to direct was the Brigadier-
General Great Dane over towards Hampstead, who was 
in great barking form. 

"There is something very mysterious about this 
barking at twilight," said Mrs. Dearly. 
"Do you think 
they are sending messages ?" 

Mr. Dearly said it was a charming idea but 
And 

then he stopped. Was anything beyond dogs ? Not when 
he thought of all Pongo and Missis had done. How had 
they got ninety-seven pups back from Suffolk? 
Pongo 
and Missis longed to tell him, but they never could. 

As soon as Christmas was over, Mr. Dearly decided to 
act quickly, for he realised that one hundred Dalmatians 
was too much for one house in Regent's Park. 
It was 
even a bit much for Regent's Park. 

First he advertised—in case any of the rightful owners 
of pups wanted to claim them. 
But none did—for this 
reason: Cruella had bought all the pups except those stolen 
from the Dearlys, because it costs a lot to get any expert 
stealing done these days. (Cruella had paid more to the 
dog-thieves who stole from the Dearlys than for any 
litter she had bought.) And naturally, people who had 
sold puppies never thought of them as lost, or did any-
thing more about them. Only one owner turned up, the 
farmer who had owned Perdita. And he was quite happy 
to sell her to the Dearlys. 

So there was Mr. Dearly, lucky man, with one hundred 
delightful Dalmatians. He decided he must take a large 
country house. 
Happily, he could afford this as the 
Government had again got itself into debt and he had 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

again got it out. And this time he had been rewarded by 
an income to save his income tax on. So he had retired 
from business—except for being always ready to help the 
Government with its sums. 

One fine day in January, when the snow was all gone, 
he said to Mrs. Dearly: 

"Let's drive out to Suffolk and return the little blue 
cart to Master Tommy Tompkins, and also hunt for a 
country house. And we'll have a look at the house where 
the puppies were imprisoned—not that we'll take that 
>> 

one. 

Mrs. Dearly laughed at such an idea. 
They took Pongo and Missis with them, and Lucky 
came rs a stowaway, under a seat—because he wanted 
to see the Sheepdog again and be made a Captain. 
(He 
didn't stay under the seat long and everyone was delighted 
to see him when he came out.) 
When they reached 
Dympling, they went for a walk round the village and 
met Tommy Tompkins out with the Sheepdog. So the 
little blue cart was returned then and there—rather a 
relief to the Dearlys, who wouldn't quite have known 
what to say to Tommy's parents. 
They didn't have to 
say anything to Tommy as he still wasn't quite talking 
(though his chuckling noises were at last beginning to 
sound more like Human than like Dog). 
The Dearlys 
saw at once that Pongo, Missis and Lucky knew the 
Sheepdog—and the tabby cat that came hurrying up. 

"And now we'll find Cruella's house," said Mr. Dearly. 
When they got to Hell Hall there was a large notice 
outside saying: "For Sale—CHEAP. 
Owner gone to 
warm climate." And the gates stood wide open. 
The 
house was empty. 

(The Baddun brothers were now in jail for assaulting 

The Hundred and Oneth Dalmatian 

the man who came to take away the Television, which 
had never been paid for. They weren't minding jail much 
because meeting so many criminals was almost better 
than Television; and they now had high hopes of one day 
appearing on 'What's My Crime?'.) 

"What a hideous house!" said Mrs. Dearly. 
"What a lovely wall!" said Mr. Dearly. One thing had 
been worrying him. 
If he took a hundred Dalmatians 
into the country, how was he to prevent them from 
running wild? This magnificent wall was just the thing. 
If only the house were not so hideous! 

"Suppose it was painted white," he said, "and the 
blocked-up windows were put back? 
There's a lovely 
pond in front—almost a lake." 

Mrs. Dearly shook her head. But when they got into 
the house and saw the fine, large rooms and imagined 
them all white instead of red, she began to feel 
differently. 

Pongo, Missis and Lucky raced through the kitchen 
and larder, remembering all that had happened there. 
The Dearlys followed them and saw the furnace for the 
central heating. 
Then they all went out to the stables. 

"These would make fine kennels if they were heated," 
said Mr. Dearly. 

Then he looked up and saw the Folly, and both he and 
Mrs. Dearly took a fancy to it. And they decided then 
and there to buy Hell Hall and make it into a beautiful 
house. 

"Here we- will found a Dynasty of Dalmatians," said 
Mr. Dearly. 

Missis was insulted. 
She thought the word meant a 
nasty din. 
But Pongo explained that it meant a family 
that goes on and on. 

1 8 7 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

Mr. Dearly added: "And we'd better start a Dynasty of 
Dearlys, to look after the Dynasty of Dalmatians." And 
Mrs. Dearly quite agreed. 

The alterations to Hell Hall were quickly made, and 
one sunny day in early spring a removal van and an extra 
large double-decker motor-coach stood outside the house 
in Regent's Park. The van was for the furniture. The 
coach was for the Dearlys and the Dalmatians. 
The 
Nannies had already gone down by car, to open Hell Hall, 
Nanny Butler driving. She had added a smart chauffeur's 
cap to her butler's outfit. 

Mr. Dearly came out of the house with Pongo and 
Missis. Mrs. Dearly followed with Perdita, and with the 
white cat on her shoulder. (The white cat, too, was to 
start a Dynasty at Hell Hall. The Dearlys had promised 
her a white Persian husband.) 

Within the next few minutes, two surprising things 
had happened. First, just as Missis saw the removal van 
and said: " Oh, there's a miracle," a Staffordshire Terrier 
flung itself from the van, said "Here we are again", to 
Pongo and Missis, and hurled itself at Mr. Dearly's chest. 

"That's a compliment, if you only knew it," said Jim, 
who was standing by the van. 

"That's right," said BUI. "Old Battering Ram's fallen 
for you." 

"And I for him," said Mr. Dearly politely, rising from 
a sitting position. 

Pongo and Missis managed to quieten the Staffordshire 
before he paid any compliments to Mrs. Dearly. 
And 
then the second surprising thing happened. A large car 
had drawn up and the people in it were looking at Pongo, 
Missis and Perdita with interest. Suddenly there was a 
wild commotion in the car, and then the door burst open 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

and out sprang a superb liver-spotted Dalmatian. 
He 
dashed up to Perdita. It was her long-lost husband. 

His name was Prince. The people in the big car were 
much touched by his faithfulness to Perdita and at once 
offered him to the Dearlys, saying they would be glad of 
a good home for him as they were always going abroad 
and having to leave him in kennels. Prince was delighted. 
Apart from wanting to be with Perdita, he knew good 
pets when he saw them. 

So the Dalmatians started for Suffolk, one hundred and 
one strong. 
They all sat up on the motor-coach seats, 
looking out of the window, and many people who saw 
them pass, cheered—for there had been so much about 
them in the papers that they were now quite famous. And 
many, many dogs lined the route, as word of the journey 
had gone out by Twilight Barking. 
The waiting dogs 
barked their good wishes and the Dalmatians barked their 
thanks, so it was rather noisy in the motor-coach. The 
Dearlys didn't mind. They thought happy barking was a 
pleasant noise. 

Prince was rather shy at first, so Mr. Dearly sat beside 
him and punched him, in a way some big dogs like to be 
punched. (The punching needs to be hard enough but 
not too hard; it must please, not hurt. Mr. Dearly was a 
highly-skilled dog-puncher.) 
Prince thumped his tail, 
then suddenly gave Mr. Dearly's ear a playful nip, which 
was much appreciated. 
After that, Perdita's handsome 
husband felt he was completely one of the family. 

When the Dalmatians reached the village of Dympling, 
all the villagers were out to receive them, with the Sheep-
dog, the tabby cat and Tommy Tompkins well to the 
fore. (The cows were lowing a loving welcome from the 
farm.) 
Tommy had his little blue cart with him and 

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

the Cadpig felt just a bit envious—but she was happy 
to know she had grown too strong to need any cart. 

The white Persian Cat, who was now a charming 
creature (kindness makes kind cats) was extremely 
gracious to the farmyard tabby. It was the beginning of 
a firm friendship. 

At last the motor-coach drove in through the wide 
open gates of Hell Hall. The pond now reflected a snow-

The Hundred, and One Dalmatians 

white house with muslin curtains at all the windows. The 
front of the house still seemed like a face and had an 
expression—but now it was a pleasant expression. 

The Nannies were waiting at the open front door. As 
they came to meet the Dearlys, Nanny Butler said: 

"Do you know there is a Television aerial on the roof 
of this house ?" 

And Nanny Cook said: "Seems wasteful not to make 
use of it." 

Then Mr. Dearly knew that the Nannies wished for 
Television in the kitchen and he at once suggested it. 
Pongo and Missis were delighted, for they knew how 
very much their smallest daughter had missed it. 

But during the many happy hours the Cadpig was to 
sit watching it in the warm kitchen, she never liked it 
quite so much as that other Television—that still, silent 
Television she had seen on Christmas Eve, when the 
puppies had rested so peacefully in the strange, lofty 
building. 
She often remembered that building, and 
wondered who owned it—someone very kind, she was 
sure. For in front of every one of the many seats, there 
had been a little carpet-eared, puppy-sized dogbed. 

Cruella de Vil is delighted when 

Pongo and Missis become the 

proud parents of fifteen 

Dalmatian puppies. She can't 

take her eyes off them, or her 

mind off the fact that they will 

make a wonderful fur coat. 

When she steals them away to 

her fur factory, only Pongo and 

Missis can rescue them. With the 

help of all the dogs in England, 

they set off on a thrilling quest 

to save their pups - and the 

eighty-four others soon to fall 

prey to Cruella's wicked plans. 

FOR SALE IN INDIA, SRI LANKA 
& BANGLADESH ONLY 

ISBN 140522767-2 

