Edgar Allan Poe

Murder Mysteries (Illustrated

Edition)

The Gold Bug, The Masque of the Red Death, The Murders in the Rue

Morgue, The Devil in the Belfry…

Published by

Books

- Advanced Digital Solutions & High-Quality eBook Formatting -

musaicumbooks@okpublishing.info

2017 OK Publishing 

ISBN 978-80-272-1906-3

OceanofPDF.com

Reading suggestions

Carolyn Wells:  
The Clue

J. S. Fletcher:  
The Collected Works of J. S. Fletcher: 17 Novels & 28 Short
Stories (Illustrated Edition)

Arthur Conan Doyle:  
Sherlock Holmes vs. Professor Moriarty - Complete Trilogy

OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents 

 
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
The Mystery of Marie Roget
The Purloined Letter
The Gold Bug
Thou Art the Man
The Man of the Crowd
Assignation
The Tell-Tale Heart
A Tale of the Ragged Mountains
The Oblong Box
The Black Cat
The Fall of the House of Usher
The Premature Burial
The Masque of the Red Death
The Devil in the Belfry
The Cask of Amontillado
William Wilson

OceanofPDF.com

The Murders in the Rue Morgue

What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles
assumed when he hid himself among women, although
puzzling questions are not beyond all conjecture.

— SIR THOMAS BROWNE, Urn-Burial.

The mental features discoursed of as the analytical, are, in themselves, but
little susceptible of analysis. We appreciate them only in their effects. We
know of them, among other things, that they are always to their possessor,
when inordinately possessed, a source of the liveliest enjoyment. As the
strong man exults in his physical ability, delighting in such exercises as call
his muscles into action, so glories the analyst in that moral activity which
disentangles. He derives pleasure from even the most trivial occupations
bringing his talents into play. He is fond of enigmas, of conundrums, of
hieroglyphics; exhibiting in his solutions of each a degree of acumen which
appears to the ordinary apprehension preternatural. His results, brought
about by the very soul and essence of method, have, in truth, the whole air
of intuition. The faculty of re-solution is possibly much invigorated by
mathematical study, and especially by that highest branch of it which,
unjustly, and merely on account of its retrograde operations, has been
called, as if par excellence, analysis. Yet to calculate is not in itself to
analyze. A chess-player, for example, does the one without effort at the
other. It follows that the game of chess, in its effects upon mental character,
is greatly misunderstood. I am not now writing a treatise, but simply
prefacing a somewhat peculiar narrative by observations very much at
random; I will, therefore, take occasion to assert that the higher powers of
the reflective intellect are more decidedly and more usefully tasked by the
unostentatious game of draughts than by all the elaborate frivolity of chess.
In this latter, where the pieces have different and bizarre motions, with
various and variable values, what is only complex is mistaken (a not
unusual error) for what is profound. The attention is here called powerfully
into play. If it flag for an instant, an oversight is committed, resulting in
injury or defeat. The possible moves being not only manifold but involute,
the chances of such oversights are multiplied; and in nine cases out of ten it
is the more concentrative rather than the more acute player who conquers.
In draughts, on the contrary, where the moves are unique and have but little
variation, the probabilities of inadvertence are diminished, and the mere
attention being left comparatively what advantages are obtained by either
party are obtained by superior acumen. To be less abstract — Let us

suppose a game of draughts where the pieces are reduced to four kings, and
where, of course, no oversight is to be expected. It is obvious that here the
victory can be decided (the players being at all equal) only by some
recherche movement, the result of some strong exertion of the intellect.
Deprived of ordinary resources, the analyst throws himself into the spirit of
his opponent, identifies himself therewith, and not unfrequently sees thus, at
a glance, the sole methods (sometimes indeed absurdly simple ones) by
which he may seduce into error or hurry into miscalculation.

Whist has long been noted for its influence upon what is termed the

calculating power; and men of the highest order of intellect have been
known to take an apparently unaccountable delight in it, while eschewing
chess as frivolous. Beyond doubt there is nothing of a similar nature so
greatly tasking the faculty of analysis. The best chess-player in
Christendom may be little more than the best player of chess; but
proficiency in whist implies capacity for success in all these more important
undertakings where mind struggles with mind. When I say proficiency, I
mean that perfection in the game which includes a comprehension of all the
sources whence legitimate advantage may be derived. These are not only
manifold but multiform, and lie frequently among recesses of thought
altogether inaccessible to the ordinary understanding. To observe attentively
is to remember distinctly; and, so far, the concentrative chess-player will do
very well at whist; while the rules of Hoyle (themselves based upon the
mere 
mechanism 
of 
the 
game) 
are 
sufficiently 
and 
generally

comprehensible. Thus to have a retentive memory, and to proceed by “the
book,” are points commonly regarded as the sum total of good playing. But
it is in matters beyond the limits of mere rule that the skill of the analyst is
evinced. He makes, in silence, a host of observations and inferences. So,
perhaps, do his companions; and the difference in the extent of the
information obtained, lies not so much in the validity of the inference as in
the quality of the observation. The necessary knowledge is that of what to
observe. Our player confines himself not at all; nor, because the game is the
object, does he reject deductions from things external to the game. He
examines the countenance of his partner, comparing it carefully with that of

each of his opponents. He considers the mode of assorting the cards in each
hand; often counting trump by trump, and honor by honor, through the
glances bestowed by their holders upon each. He notes every variation of
face as the play progresses, gathering a fund of thought from the differences
in the expression of certainty, of surprise, of triumph, or chagrin. From the
manner of gathering up a trick he judges whether the person taking it can
make another in the suit. He recognizes what is played through feint, by the
air with which it is thrown upon the table. A casual or inadvertent word; the
accidental dropping or turning of a card, with the accompanying anxiety or
carelessness in regard to its concealment; the counting of the tricks, with the
order of their arrangement; embarrassment, hesitation, eagerness or
trepidation — all afford, to his apparently intuitive perception, indications
of the true state of affairs. The first two or three rounds having been played,
he is in full possession of the contents of each hand, and thenceforward puts
down his cards with as absolute a precision of purpose as if the rest of the
party had turned outward the faces of their own.

The analytical power should not be confounded with simple ingenuity;

for while the analyst is necessarily ingenious, the ingenious man often
remarkably incapable of analysis. The constructive or combining power, by
which ingenuity is usually manifested, and which the phrenologists (I
believe erroneously) have assigned a separate organ, supposing it a
primitive faculty, has been so frequently seen in those whose intellect
bordered otherwise upon idiocy, as to have attracted general observation
among writers on morals. Between ingenuity and the analytic ability there
exists a difference far greater, indeed, than that between the fancy and the
imagination, but of a character very strictly analogous. It will found, in fact,
that the ingenious are always fanciful, and the truly imaginative never
otherwise than analytic.

The narrative which follows will appear to the reader somewhat in the

light of a commentary upon the propositions just advanced.

Residing in Paris during the spring and part of the summer of 18 — I

there became acquainted with a Monsieur C. Auguste Dupin. This young
gentleman was of an excellent — indeed of an illustrious family, but, by a

variety of untoward events, had been reduced to such poverty that the
energy of his character succumbed beneath it, and he ceased to bestir
himself in the world, or to care for the retrieval of his fortunes. By courtesy
of his creditors, there still remained in his possession a small remnant of his
patrimony; and, upon the income arising from this, he managed, by means
of a rigorous economy, to procure the necessaries of life, without troubling
himself about its superfluities. Books, indeed, were his sole luxuries, and in
Paris these are easily obtained.

Our first meeting was at an obscure library in the Rue Montmartre,

where the accident of our both being in search of the same very rare and
very remarkable volume, brought us into closer communion. We saw each
other again and again. I was deeply interested in the little family history
which he detailed to me with all that candor which a Frenchman indulges
whenever mere self is the theme. I was astonished, too, at the vast extent of
his reading; and, above all, I felt my soul enkindled within me by the wild
fervor, and the vivid freshness of his imagination. Seeking in Paris the
objects I then sought, I felt that the society of such a man would be to me a
treasure beyond price; and this feeling I frankly confided to him. It was at
length arranged that we should live together during my stay in the city; and
as my worldly circumstances were somewhat less embarrassed than his
own, I was permitted to be at the expense of renting, and furnishing in a
style which suited the rather fantastic gloom of our common temper, a time-
eaten and grotesque mansion, long deserted through superstitions into
which we did not inquire, and tottering to its fall in a retired and desolate
portion of the Faubourg St. Germain.

Had the routine of our life at this place been known to the world, we

should have been regarded as madmen — although, perhaps, as madmen of
a harmless nature. Our seclusion was perfect. We admitted no visitors.
Indeed the locality of our retirement had been carefully kept a secret from
my own former associates; and it had been many years since Dupin had
ceased to know or be known in Paris. We existed within ourselves alone.

It was a freak of fancy in my friend (for what else shall I call it?) to be

enamored of the Night for her own sake; and into this bizarrerie, as into all

his others, I quietly fell; giving myself up to his wild whims with a perfect
abandon. The sable divinity would not herself dwell with us always; but we
could counterfeit her presence. At the first dawn of the morning we closed
all the massy shutters of our old building; lighted a couple of tapers which,
strongly perfumed, threw out only the ghastliest and feeblest of rays. By the
aid of these we then busied our souls in dreams — reading, writing, or
conversing, until warned by the clock of the advent of the true Darkness.
Then we sallied forth into the streets, arm and arm, continuing the topics of
the day, or roaming far and wide until a late hour, seeking, amid the wild
lights and shadows of the populous city, that infinity of mental excitement
which quiet observation can afford.

At such times I could not help remarking and admiring (although from

his rich ideality I had been prepared to expect it) a peculiar analytic ability
in Dupin. He seemed, too, to take an eager delight in its exercise — if not
exactly in its display — and did not hesitate to confess the pleasure thus
derived. He boasted to me, with a low chuckling laugh, that most men, in
respect to himself, wore windows in their bosoms, and was wont to follow
up such assertions by direct and very startling proofs of his intimate
knowledge of my own. His manner at these moments was frigid and
abstract; his eyes were vacant in expression; while his voice, usually a rich
tenor, rose into a treble which would have sounded petulantly but for the
deliberateness and entire distinctness of the enunciation. Observing him in
these moods, I often dwelt meditatively upon the old philosophy of the Bi-
Part Soul, and amused myself with the fancy of a double Dupin — the
creative and the resolvent.

Let it not be supposed, from what I have just said, that I am detailing

any mystery, or penning any romance. What I have described in the
Frenchman, was merely the result of an excited, or perhaps of a diseased
intelligence. But of the character of his remarks at the periods in question
an example will best convey the idea.

We were strolling one night down a long dirty street, in the vicinity of

the Palais Royal. Being both, apparently, occupied with thought, neither of

us had spoken a syllable for fifteen minutes at least. All at once Dupin
broke forth with these words:—

Theatre des Varietes.”

“There can be no doubt of that,” I replied unwittingly, and not at first

observing (so much had I been absorbed in reflection) the extraordinary
manner in which the speaker had chimed in with my meditations. In an
instant afterward I recollected myself, and my astonishment was profound.

“Dupin,” said I, gravely, “this is beyond my comprehension. I do not

hesitate to say that I am amazed, and can scarcely credit my senses. How
was it possible you should know I was thinking of —?” Here I paused, to
ascertain beyond a doubt whether he really knew of whom I thought.

—“of Chantilly,” said he, “why do you pause? You were remarking to

yourself that his diminutive figure unfitted him for tragedy.”

This was precisely what had formed the subject of my reflections.

Chantilly was a quondam cobbler of the Rue St. Denis, who, becoming
stage-mad, had attempted the role of Xerxes, in Crebillon’s tragedy so
called, and been notoriously Pasquinaded for his pains.

“Tell me, for Heaven’s sake,” I exclaimed, “the method — if method

there is — by which you have been enabled to fathom my soul in this
matter.” In fact I was even more startled than I would have been willing to
express.

“It was the fruiterer,” replied my friend, “who brought you to the

conclusion that the mender of soles was not of sufficient height for Xerxes
et id genus omne.”

“The fruiterer! — you astonish me — I know no fruiterer whomsoever.”
“The man who ran up against you as we entered the street — it may

have been fifteen minutes ago.”

I now remembered that, in fact, a fruiterer, carrying upon his head a

large basket of apples, had nearly thrown me down, by accident, as we
passed from the Rue C— into the thoroughfare where we stood; but what
this had to do with Chantilly I could not possibly understand.

he said, “and that you may comprehend all clearly, we will explain,” he
said, “and that you may comprehend all clearly, we will first retrace the
course of your meditations, from the moment in which I spoke to you until
that of the rencontre with the fruiterer in question. The larger links of the
chain run thus — Chantilly, Orion, Dr. Nichols, Epicurus, Stereotomy, the
street stones, the fruiterer.”

There are few persons who have not, at some period of their lives,

amused themselves in retracing the steps by which particular conclusions of
their own minds have been attained. The occupation is often full of interest;
and he who attempts it for the first time is astonished by the apparently
illimitable distance and incoherence between the starting-point and the goal.
What, then, must have been my amazement when I heard the Frenchman
speak what he had just spoken, and when I could not help acknowledging
that he had spoken the truth. He continued:

“We had been talking of horses, if I remember aright, just before leaving

the Rue C—. This was the last subject we discussed. As we crossed into
this street, a fruiterer, with a large basket upon his head, brushing quickly
past us, thrust you upon a pile of paving-stones collected at a spot where the
causeway is undergoing repair. You stepped upon one of the loose
fragments) slipped, slightly strained your ankle, appeared vexed or sulky,
muttered a few words, turned to look at the pile, and then proceeded in
silence. I was not particularly attentive to what you did; but observation has
become with me, of late, a species of necessity.

“You kept your eyes upon the ground — glancing, with a petulant

expression, at the holes and ruts in the pavement, (so that I saw you were
still thinking of the stones,) until we reached the little alley called
Lamartine, which has been paved, by way of experiment, with the
overlapping and riveted blocks. Here your countenance brightened up, and,
perceiving your lips move, I could not doubt that you murmured the word
‘stereotomy,’ a term very affectedly applied to this species of pavement. I
knew that you could not say to yourself ‘stereotomy’ without being brought
to think of atomies, and thus of the theories of Epicurus; and since, when

we discussed this subject not very long ago, I mentioned to you how
singularly, yet with how little notice, the vague guesses of that noble Greek
had met with confirmation in the late nebular cosmogony, I felt that you
could not avoid casting your eyes upward to the great nebula in Orion, and I
certainly expected that you would do so. You did look up; and I was now
assured that I had correctly followed your steps. But in that bitter tirade
upon Chantilly, which appeared in yesterday’s ‘Musee,’ the satirist, making
some disgraceful allusions to the cobbler’s change of name upon assuming
the buskin, quoted a Latin line about which we have often conversed. I
mean the line

Perdidit antiquum litera prima sonum.

I had told you that this was in reference to Orion, formerly written Urion;
and, from certain pungencies connected with this explanation, I was aware
that you could not have forgotten it. It was clear, therefore, that you would
not fall to combine the ideas of Orion and Chantilly. That you did combine
them I say by the character of the smile which passed over your lips. You
thought of the poor cobbler’s immolation. So far, you had been stooping in
your gait; but now I saw you draw yourself up to your full height. I was
then sure that you reflected upon the diminutive figure of Chantilly. At this
point I interrupted your meditations to remark that as, in fact, he was a very
little fellow — that Chantilly — he would do better at the Theatre des
Varietes.”

Not long after this, we were looking over an evening edition of the

“Gazette des Tribunaux,” when the following paragraphs arrested our
attention. “Extraordinary Murders. — This morning, about three o’clock,
the inhabitants of the Quartier St. Roch were aroused from sleep by a
succession of terrific shrieks, issuing, apparently, from the fourth story of a
house in the Rue Morgue, known to be in the sole occupancy of one
Madame L’Espanaye, and her daughter, Mademoiselle Camille L’Espanaye.
After some delay, occasioned by a fruitless attempt to procure admission in
the usual manner, the gateway was broken in with a crowbar, and eight or

ten of the neighbors entered, accompanied by two gendarmes. By this time
the cries had ceased; but, as the party rushed up the first flight of stairs, two
or more rough voices, in angry contention, were distinguished, and seemed
to proceed from the upper part of the house. As the second landing was
reached, these sounds, also, had ceased, and everything remained perfectly
quiet. The party spread themselves, and hurried from room to room. Upon
arriving at a large back chamber in the fourth story, (the door of which,
being found locked, with the key inside, was forced open,) a spectacle
presented itself which struck every one present not less with horror than
with astonishment.

“The apartment was in the wildest disorder — the furniture broken and

thrown about in all directions. There was only one bedstead; and from this
the bed had been removed, and thrown into the middle of the floor. On a
chair lay a razor, besmeared with blood. On the hearth were two or three
long and thick tresses of grey human hair, also dabbled in blood, and
seeming to have been pulled out by the roots. Upon the floor were found
four Napoleons, an ear-ring of topaz, three large silver spoons, three smaller
of metal d’Alger, and two bags, containing nearly four thousand francs in
gold. The drawers of a bureau, which stood in one corner, were open, and
had been, apparently, rifled, although many articles still remained in them.
A small iron safe was discovered under the bed (not under the bedstead). It
was open, with the key still in the door. It had no contents beyond a few old
letters, and other papers of little consequence.

“Of Madame L’Espanaye no traces were here seen; but an unusual

quantity of soot being observed in the fire-place, a search was made in the
chimney, and (horrible to relate!) the corpse of the daughter, head
downward, was dragged therefrom; it having been thus forced up the
narrow aperture for a considerable distance. The body was quite warm.
Upon examining it, many excoriations were perceived, no doubt occasioned
by the violence with which it had been thrust up and disengaged. Upon the
face were many severe scratches, and, upon the throat, dark bruises, and
deep indentations of finger nails, as if the deceased had been throttled to
death.

farther discovery, the party made its way into a small paved yard in the rear
of the building, where lay the corpse of the old lady, with her throat so
entirely cut that, upon an attempt to raise her, the head fell off. The body, as
well as the head, was fearfully mutilated — the former so much so as
scarcely to retain any semblance of humanity.

“To this horrible mystery there is not as yet, we believe, the slightest

clew.”

The next day’s paper had these additional particulars.
“The Tragedy in the Rue Morgue. Many individuals have been

examined in relation to this most extraordinary and frightful affair,” [The
word ‘affaire’ has not yet, in France, that levity of import which it conveys
with us] “but nothing whatever has transpired to throw light upon We give
below all the material testimony elicited.

“Pauline Dubourg, laundress, deposes that she has known both the

deceased for three years, having washed for them during that period. The
old lady and her daughter seemed on good terms-very affectionate towards
each other. They were excellent pay. Could not speak in regard to their
mode or means of living. Believed that Madame L. told fortunes for a
living. Was reputed to have money put by. Never met any persons in the
house when she called for the clothes or took them home. Was sure that
they had no servant in employ. There appeared to be no furniture in any part
of the building except in the fourth story.

“Pierre Moreau, tobacconist, deposes that he has been in the habit of

selling small quantities of tobacco and snuff to Madame L’Espanaye for
nearly four years. Was born in the neighborhood, and has always resided
there. The deceased and her daughter had occupied the house in which the
corpses were found, for more than six years. It was formerly occupied by a
jeweller, who under-let the upper rooms to various persons. The house was
the property of Madame L. She became dissatisfied with the abuse of the
premises by her tenant, and moved into them herself, refusing to let any
portion. The old lady was childish. Witness had seen the daughter some five
or six times during the six years. The two lived an exceedingly retired life

— were reputed to have money. Had heard it said among the neighbors that
Madame L. told fortunes — did not believe it. Had never seen any person
enter the door except the old lady and her daughter, a porter once or twice,
and a physician some eight or ten times.

“Many other persons, neighbors, gave evidence to the same effect. No

one was spoken of as frequenting the house. It was not known whether
there were any living connexions of Madame L. and her daughter. The
shutters of the front windows were seldom opened. Those in the rear were
always closed, with the exception of the large back room, fourth story. The
house was a good house — not very old.

“Isidore Muset, gendarme, deposes that he was called to the house about

three o’clock in the morning, and found some twenty or thirty persons at the
gateway, endeavoring to gain admittance. Forced it open, at length, with a
bayonet — not with a crowbar. Had but little difficulty in getting it open, on
account of its being a double or folding gate, and bolted neither at bottom
nor top. The shrieks were continued until the gate was forced — and then
suddenly ceased. They seemed to be screams of some person (or persons) in
great agony — were loud and drawn out, not short and quick. Witness led
the way up stairs. Upon reaching the first landing, heard two voices in loud
and angry contention-the one a gruff voice, the other much shriller — a
very strange voice. Could distinguish some words of the former, which was
that of a Frenchman. Was positive that it was not a woman’s voice. Could
distinguish the words ‘sacre’ and ‘diable.’ The shrill voice was that of a
foreigner. Could not be sure whether it was the voice of a man or of a
woman. Could not make out what was said, but believed the language to be
Spanish. The state of the room and of the bodies was described by this
witness as we described them yesterday.

“Henri Duval, a neighbor, and by trade a silversmith, deposes that he

was one of the party who first entered the house. Corroborates the
testimony of Muset in general. As soon as they forced an entrance, they
reclosed the door, to keep out the crowd, which collected very fast,
notwithstanding the lateness of the hour. The shrill voice, the witness
thinks, was that of an Italian. Was certain it was not French. Could not be

sure that it was a man’s voice. It might have been a woman’s. Was not
acquainted with the Italian language. Could not distinguish the words, but
was convinced by the intonation that the speaker was an Italian. Knew
Madame L. and her daughter. Had conversed with both frequently. Was sure
that the shrill voice was not that of either of the deceased.

Not speaking French, was examined through an interpreter. Is a native of
Amsterdam. Was passing the house at the time of the shrieks. They lasted
for several minutes — probably ten. They were long and loud — very awful
and distressing. Was one of those who entered the building. Corroborated
the previous evidence in every respect but one. Was sure that the shrill
voice was that of a man — of a Frenchman. Could not distinguish the words
uttered. They were loud and quick — unequal — spoken apparently in fear
as well as in anger. The voice was harsh — not so much shrill as harsh.
Could not call it a shrill voice. The gruff voice said repeatedly ‘sacre,’
‘diable’ and once ‘mon Dieu.’

“Jules Mignaud, banker, of the firm of Mignaud et Fils, Rue Deloraine.

Is the elder Mignaud. Madame L’Espanaye had some property. Had opened
an account with his baking house in the spring of the year —(eight years
previously). Made frequent deposits in small sums. Had checked for
nothing until the third day before her death, when she took out in person the
sum of 4000 francs. This sum was paid in gold, and a clerk sent home with
the money.

“Adolphe Le Bon, clerk to Mignaud et Fils, deposes that on the day in

question, about noon, he accompanied Madame L’Espanaye to her
residence with the 4000 francs, put up in two bags. Upon the door being
opened, Mademoiselle L. appeared and took from his hands one of the bags,
while the old lady relieved him of the other. He then bowed and departed.
Did not see any person in the street at the time. It is a bye-street — very
lonely.

William Bird, tailor, deposes that he was one of the party who entered

the house. Is an Englishman. Has lived in Paris two years. Was one of the
first to ascend the stairs. Heard the voices in contention. The gruff voice

was that of a Frenchman. Could make out several words, but cannot now
remember all. Heard distinctly ‘sacre’ and ‘mon Dieu.’ There was a sound
at the moment as if of several persons struggling — a scraping and scuffling
sound. The shrill voice was very loud — louder than the gruff one. Is sure
that it was not the voice of an Englishman. Appeared to be that of a
German. Might have been a woman’s voice. Does not understand German.

“Four of the above-named witnesses, being recalled, deposed that the

door of the chamber in which was found the body of Mademoiselle L. was
locked on the inside when the party reached it. Every thing was perfectly
silent — no groans or noises of any kind. Upon forcing the door no person
was seen. The windows, both of the back and front room, were down and
firmly fastened from within. A door between the two rooms was closed, but
not locked. The door leading from the front room into the passage was
locked, with the key on the inside. A small room in the front of the house,
on the fourth story, at the head of the passage, was open, the door being
ajar. This room was crowded with old beds, boxes, and so forth. These were
carefully removed and searched. There was not an inch of any portion of
the house which was not carefully searched. Sweeps were sent up and down
the chimneys. The house was a four story one, with garrets (mansardes). A
trap-door on the roof was nailed down very securely — did not appear to
have been opened for years. The time elapsing between the hearing of the
voices in contention and the breaking open of the room door, was variously
stated by the witnesses. Some made it as short as three minutes — some as
long as five. The door was opened with difficulty.

“Alfonzo Garcio, undertaker, deposes that he resides in the Rue

Morgue. Is a native of Spain. Was one of the party who entered the house.
Did not proceed up stairs. Is nervous, and was apprehensive of the
consequences of agitation. Heard the voices in contention. The gruff voice
was that of a Frenchman. Could not distinguish what was said. The shrill
voice was that of an Englishman — is sure of this. Does not understand the
English language, but judges by the intonation.

“Alberto Montani, confectioner, deposes that he was among the first to

ascend the stairs. Heard the voices in question. The gruff voice was that of a

Frenchman. Distinguished several words. The speaker appeared to be
expostulating. Could not make out the words of the shrill voice. Spoke
quick and unevenly. Thinks it the voice of a Russian. Corroborates the
general testimony. Is an Italian. Never conversed with a native of Russia.

“Several witnesses, recalled, here testified that the chimneys of all the

rooms on the fourth story were too narrow to admit the passage of a human
being. By ‘sweeps’ were meant cylindrical sweeping-brushes, such as are
employed by those who clean chimneys. These brushes were passed up and
down every flue in the house. There is no back passage by which any one
could have descended while the party proceeded up stairs. The body of
Mademoiselle L’Espanaye was so firmly wedged in the chimney that it
could not be got down until four or five of the party united their strength.

“Paul Dumas, physician, deposes that he was called to view the bodies

about day-break. They were both then lying on the sacking of the bedstead
in the chamber where Mademoiselle L. was found. The corpse of the young
lady was much bruised and excoriated. The fact that it had been thrust up
the chimney would sufficiently account for these appearances. The throat
was greatly chafed. There were several deep scratches just below the chin,
together with a series of livid spots which were evidently the impression of
fingers. The face was fearfully discolored, and the eye-balls protruded. The
tongue had been partially bitten through. A large bruise was discovered
upon the pit of the stomach, produced, apparently, by the pressure of a knee.
In the opinion of M. Dumas, Mademoiselle L’Espanaye had been throttled
to death by some person or persons unknown. The corpse of the mother was
horribly mutilated. All the bones of the right leg and arm were more or less
shattered. The left tibia much splintered, as well as all the ribs of the left
side. Whole body dreadfully bruised and discolored. It was not possible to
say how the injuries had been inflicted. A heavy club of wood, or a broad
bar of iron — a chair — any large, heavy, and obtuse weapon have
produced such results, if wielded by the hands of a very powerful man. No
woman could have inflicted the blows with any weapon. The head of the
deceased, when seen by witness, was entirely separated from the body, and

was also greatly shattered. The throat had evidently been cut with some
very sharp instrument — probably with a razor.

“Alexandre Etienne, surgeon, was called with M. Dumas to view the

bodies. Corroborated the testimony, and the opinions of M. Dumas.

persons were examined. A murder so mysterious, and so perplexing in all
its particulars, was never before committed in Paris — if indeed a murder
has been committed at all. The police are entirely at fault — an unusual
occurrence in affairs of this nature. There is not, however, the shadow of a
clew apparent.” The evening edition of the paper stated that the greatest
excitement continued in the Quartier St. Roch — that the premises in
question had been carefully re-searched, and fresh examinations of
witnesses instituted, but all to no purpose. A postscript, however mentioned
that Adolphe Le Bon had been arrested and imprisoned — although nothing
appeared to criminate him, beyond the facts already detailed.

Dupin seemed singularly interested in the progress of this affair — at

least so I judged from his manner, for he made no comments. It was only
after the announcement that Le Bon had been imprisoned, that he asked me
my opinion respecting the murders.

I could merely agree with all Paris in considering them an insoluble

mystery. I saw no means by which it would be possible to trace the
murderer.

“We must not judge of the means,” said Dupin, “by this shell of an

examination. The Parisian police, so much extolled for acumen, are
cunning, but no more. There is no method in their proceedings, beyond the
method of the moment. They make a vast parade of measures; but, not
unfrequently, these are so ill adapted to the objects proposed, as to put us in
mind of Monsieur Jourdain’s calling for his robe-de-chambre — pour
mieux entendre la musique. The results attained by them are not
unfrequently surprising, but, for the most part, are brought about by simple
diligence and activity. When these qualities are unavailing, their schemes
fall. Vidocq, for example, was a good guesser, and a persevering man. But,
without educated thought, he erred continually by the very intensity of his

investigations. He impaired his vision by holding the object too close. He
might see, perhaps, one or two points with unusual clearness, but in so
doing he, necessarily, lost sight of the matter as a whole. Thus there is such
a thing as being too profound. Truth is not always in a well. In fact, as
regards the more important knowledge, I do believe that she is invariably
superficial. The depth lies in the valleys where we seek her, and not upon
the mountain-tops where she is found. The modes and sources of this kind
of error are well typified in the contemplation of the heavenly bodies. To
look at a star by glances — to view it in a side-long way, by turning toward
it the exterior portions of the retina (more susceptible of feeble impressions
of light than the interior), is to behold the star distinctly — is to have the
best appreciation of its lustre — a lustre which grows dim just in proportion
as we turn our vision fully upon it. A greater number of rays actually fall
upon the eye in the latter case, but, in the former, there is the more refined
capacity for comprehension. By undue profundity we perplex and enfeeble
thought; and it is possible to make even Venus herself vanish from the
firmament by a scrutiny too sustained, too concentrated, or too direct.

“As for these murders, let us enter into some examinations for

ourselves, before we make up an opinion respecting them. An inquiry will
afford us amusement,” (I thought this an odd term, so applied, but said
nothing) “and, besides, Le Bon once rendered me a service for which I am
not ungrateful. We will go and see the premises with our own eyes. I know
G — the Prefect of Police, and shall have no difficulty in obtaining the
necessary permission.”

The permission was obtained, and we proceeded at once to the Rue

Morgue. This is one of those miserable thoroughfares which intervene
between the Rue Richelieu and the Rue St. Roch. It was late in the
afternoon when we reached it; as this quarter is at a great distance from that
in which we resided. The house was readily found; for there were still many
persons gazing up at the closed shutters, with an objectless curiosity, from
the opposite side of the way. It was an ordinary Parisian house, with a
gateway, on one side of which was a glazed watch-box, with a sliding way,
on one si panel in the window, indicating a loge de concierge. Before going

in we walked up the street, turned down an alley, and then, again turning,
passed in the rear of the building-Dupin, meanwhile, examining the whole
neighborhood, as well as the house, with a minuteness of attention for
which I could see no possible object.

Retracing our steps, we came again to the front of the dwelling, rang,

and, having shown our credentials, were admitted by the agents in charge.
We went up stairs — into the chamber where the body of Mademoiselle
L’Espanaye had been found, and where both the deceased still lay. The
disorders of the room had, as usual, been suffered to exist. I saw nothing
beyond what had been stated in the “Gazette des Tribunaux.” Dupin
scrutinized every thing-not excepting the bodies of the victims. We then
went into the other rooms, and into the yard; a gendarme accompanying us
throughout. The examination occupied us until dark, when we took our
departure. On our way home my companion stopped in for a moment at the
office of one of the dally papers.

I have said that the whims of my friend were manifold, and that Fe les

menageais:— for this phrase there is no English equivalent. It was his
humor, now, to decline all conversation on the subject of the murder, until
about noon the next day. He then asked me, suddenly, if I had observed any
thing peculiar at the scene of the atrocity.

which caused me to shudder, without knowing why.

“No, nothing peculiar,” I said; “nothing more, at least, than we both saw

stated in the paper.”

“The ‘Gazette,’” he replied, “has not entered, I fear, into the unusual

horror of the thing. But dismiss the idle opinions of this print. It appears to
me that this mystery is considered insoluble, for the very reason which
should cause it to be regarded as easy of solution — I mean for the outre
character of its features. The police are confounded by the seeming absence
of motive — not for the murder itself — but for the atrocity of the murder.
They are puzzled, too, by the seeming impossibility of reconciling the
voices heard in contention, with the facts that no one was discovered up
stairs but the assassinated Mademoiselle L’Espanaye, and that there were no

means of egress without the notice of the party ascending. The wild
disorder of the room; the corpse thrust, with the head downward, up the
chimney; the frightful mutilation of the body of the old lady; these
considerations with those just mentioned, and others which I need not
mention, have sufficed to paralyze the powers, by putting completely at
fault the boasted acumen, of the government agents. They have fallen into
the gross but common error of confounding the unusual with the abstruse.
But it is by these deviations from the plane of the ordinary, that reason feels
its way, if at all, in its search for the true. In investigations such as we are
now pursuing, it should not be so much asked ‘what has occurred,’ as ‘what
has occurred that has never occurred before.’ In fact, the facility with which
I shall arrive, or have arrived, at the solution of this mystery, is in the direct
ratio of its apparent insolubility in the eyes of the police.”

I stared at the speaker in mute astonishment.
“I am now awaiting,” continued he, looking toward the door of our

apartment —“I am now awaiting a person who, although perhaps not the
perpetrator of these butcheries, must have been in some measure implicated
in their perpetration. Of the worst portion of the crimes committed, it is
probable that he is innocent. I hope that I am right in this supposition; for
upon it I build my expectation of reading the entire riddle. I look for the
man here — in this room — every moment. It is true that he may not arrive;
but the probability is that he will. Should he come, it will be necessary to
detain him. Here are pistols; and we both know how to use them when
occasion demands their use.”

I took the pistols, scarcely knowing what I did, or believing what I

heard, while Dupin went on, very much as if in a soliloquy. I have already
spoken of his abstract manner at such times. His discourse was addressed to
myself; but his voice, although by no means loud, had that intonation which
is commonly employed in speaking to some one at a great distance. His
eyes, vacant in expression, regarded only the wall.

“That the voices heard in contention,” he said, “by the party upon the

stairs, were not the voices of the women themselves, was fully proved by
the evidence. This relieves us of all doubt upon the question whether the old

lady could have first destroyed the daughter, and afterward have committed
suicide. I speak of this point chiefly for the sake of method; for the strength
of Madame L’Espanaye would have been utterly unequal to the task of
thrusting her daughter’s corpse up the chimney as it was found; and the
nature of the wounds upon her own person entirely preclude the idea of
self-destruction. Murder, then, has been committed by some third party; and
the voices of this third party were those heard in contention. Let me now
advert — not to the whole testimony respecting these voices — but to what
was peculiar in that testimony. Did you observe anything peculiar about it?”

I remarked that, while all the witnesses agreed in supposing the gruff

voice to be that of a Frenchman, there was much disagreement in regard to
the shrill, or, as one individual termed it, the harsh voice.

“That was the evidence itself,” said Dupin, “but it was not the

peculiarity of the evidence. You have observed nothing distinctive. Yet
there was something to be observed. The witnesses, as you remark, agreed
about the gruff voice; they were here unanimous. But in regard to the shrill
voice, the peculiarity is not that they disagreed — but that, while an Italian,
an Englishman, a Spaniard, a Hollander, and a Frenchman attempted to
describe it, each one spoke of it as that of a foreigner. Each is sure that it
was not the voice of one of his own countrymen. Each likens it — not to the
voice of an individual of any nation with whose language he is conversant
— but the converse. The Frenchman supposes it the voice of a Spaniard,
and ‘might have distinguished some words had he been acquainted with the
Spanish.’ The Dutchman maintains it to have been that of a Frenchman; but
we find it stated that ‘not understanding French this witness was examined
through an interpreter.’ The Englishman thinks it the voice of a German,
and ‘does not understand German.’ The Spaniard ‘is sure’ that it was that of
an Englishman, but ‘judges by the intonation’ altogether, ‘as he has no
knowledge of the English.’ The Italian believes it the voice of a Russian,
but ‘has never conversed with a native of Russia.’ A second Frenchman
differs, moreover, with the first, and is positive that the voice was that of an
Italian; but, not being cognizant of that tongue, is, like the Spaniard,
‘convinced by the intonation.’ Now, how strangely unusual must that voice

have really been, about which such testimony as this could have been
elicited! — in whose tones, even, denizens of the five great divisions of
Europe could recognise nothing familiar! You will say that it might have
been the voice of an Asiatic — of an African. Neither Asiatics nor Africans
abound in Paris; but, without denying the inference, I will now merely call
your attention to three points. The voice is termed by one witness ‘harsh
rather than shrill.’ It is represented by two others to have been ‘quick and
unequal’ No words — no sounds resembling words — were by any witness
mentioned as distinguishable.

“I know not,” continued Dupin, “what impression I may have made, so

far, upon your own understanding; but I do not hesitate to say that
legitimate deductions even from this portion of the testimony — the portion
respecting the gruff and shrill voices — are in themselves sufficient to
engender a suspicion which should give direction to all farther progress in
the investigation of the mystery. I said ‘legitimate deductions;’ but my
meaning is not thus fully expressed. I designed to imply that the deductions
are the sole proper ones, and that the suspicion arises inevitably from them
as the single result. What the suspicion is, however, I will not say just yet. I
merely wish you to bear in mind that, with myself, it was sufficiently
forcible to give a definite form — a certain tendency — to my inquiries in
the chamber.

“Let us now transport ourselves, in fancy, to this chamber. What shall

we first seek here? The means of egress employed by the murderers. It is
not too much to say that neither of us believe in praeternatural events.
Madame and Mademoiselle L’Espanaye were not destroyed by spirits. The
doers of the deed were material, and escaped materially. Then how?
Fortunately, there is but one mode of reasoning upon the point, and that
mode must lead us to a definite decision. — Let us examine, each by each,
the possible means of egress. It is clear that the assassins were in the room
where Mademoiselle L’Espanaye was found, or at least in the room
adjoining, when the party ascended the stairs. It is then only from these two
apartments that we have to seek issues. The police have laid bare the floors,
the ceilings, and the masonry of the walls, in every direction. No secret

issues could have escaped their vigilance. But, not trusting to their eyes, I
examined with my own. There were, then, no secret issues. Both doors
leading from the rooms into the passage were securely locked, with the keys
inside. Let us turn to the chimneys. These, although of ordinary width for
some eight or ten feet above the hearths, will not admit, throughout their
extent, the body of a large cat. The impossibility of egress, by means
already stated, being thus absolute, we are reduced to the windows.
Through those of the front room no one could have escaped without notice
from the crowd in the street. The murderers must have passed, then, through
those of the back room. Now, brought to this conclusion in so unequivocal a
manner as we are, it is not our part, as reasoners, to reject it on account of
apparent impossibilities. It is only left for us to prove that these apparent
‘impossibilities’ are, in reality, not such.

“There are two windows in the chamber. One of them is unobstructed

by furniture, and is wholly visible. The lower portion of the other is hidden
from view by the head of the unwieldy bedstead which is thrust close up
against it. The former was found securely fastened from within. It resisted
the utmost force of those who endeavored to raise it. A large gimlet-hole
had been pierced in its frame to the left, and a very stout nail was found
fitted therein, nearly to the head. Upon examining the other window, a
similar nail was seen similarly fitted in it; and a vigorous attempt to raise
this sash, failed also. The police were now entirely satisfied that egress had
not been in these directions. And, therefore, it was thought a matter of
supererogation to withdraw the nails and open the windows.

“My own examination was somewhat more particular, and was so for

the reason I have just given — because here it was, I knew, that all apparent
impossibilities must be proved to be not such in reality.

“I proceeded to think thus — a posteriori. The murderers did escape

from one of these windows. This being so, they could not have re-fastened
the sashes from the inside, as they were found fastened; — the
consideration which put a stop, through its obviousness, to the scrutiny of
the police in this quarter. Yet the sashes were fastened. They must, then,
have the power of fastening themselves. There was no escape from this

conclusion. I stepped to the unobstructed casement, withdrew the nail with
some difficulty, and attempted to raise the sash. It resisted all my efforts, as
I had anticipated. A concealed spring must, I now knew, exist; and this
corroboration of my idea convinced me that my premises, at least, were
correct, however mysterious still appeared the circumstances attending the
nails. A careful search soon brought to light the hidden spring. I pressed it,
and, satisfied with the discovery, forebore to upraise the sash.

“I now replaced the nail and regarded it attentively. A person passing

out through this window might have reclosed it, and the spring would have
caught — but the nail could not have been replaced. The conclusion was
plain, and again narrowed in the field of my investigations. The assassins
must have escaped through the other window. Supposing, then, the springs
upon each sash to be the same, as was probable, there must be found a
difference between the nails, or at least between the modes of their fixture.
Getting upon the sacking of the bedstead, I looked over the headboard
minutely at the second casement. Passing my hand down behind the board,
I readily discovered and pressed the spring, which was, as I had supposed,
identical in character with its neighbor. I now looked at the nail. It was as
stout as the other, and apparently fitted in the same manner — driven in
nearly up to the head.

misunderstood the nature of the inductions. To use a sporting phrase, I had
not been once ‘at fault.’ The scent had never for an instant been lost. There
was no flaw in any link of the chain. I had traced the secret to its ultimate
result — and that result was the nail. It had, I say, in every respect, the
appearance of its fellow in the other window; but this fact was an absolute
nullity (conclusive as it might seem to be) when compared with the
consideration that here, at this point, terminated the clew. ‘There must be
something wrong,’ I said, ‘about the nail.’ I touched it; and the head, with
about a quarter of an inch of the shank, came off in my fingers. The rest of
the shank was in the gimlet-hole, where it had been broken off. The fracture
was an old one (for its edges were incrusted with rust), and had apparently
been accomplished by the blow of a hammer, which had partially imbedded,

in the top of the bottom sash, the head portion of the nail. now carefully
replaced this head portion in the indentation whence I had taken it, and the
resemblance to a perfect nail was complete-the fissure was invisible.
Pressing the spring, I gently raised the sash for a few inches; the head went
up with it, remaining firm in its bed. I closed the window, and the
semblance of the whole nail was again perfect.

“The riddle, so far, was now unriddled. The assassin had escaped

through the window which looked upon the bed. Dropping of its own
accord upon his exit (or perhaps purposely closed) it had become fastened
by the spring; and it was the retention of this spring which had been
mistaken by the police for that of the nail — farther inquiry being thus
considered unnecessary.

“The next question is that of the mode of descent. Upon this point I had

been satisfied in my walk with you around the building. About five feet and
a half from the casement in question there runs a lightning-rod. From this
rod it would have been impossible for any one to reach the window itself, to
say nothing of entering it. I observed, however, that shutters of the fourth
story were of the peculiar kind called by Parisian carpenters ferrades — a
kind rarely employed at the present day, but frequently seen upon very old
mansions at Lyons and Bordeaux. They are in the form of an ordinary door,
(a single, not a folding door) except that the upper half is latticed or worked
in open trellis — thus affording an excellent hold for the hands. In the
present instance these shutters are fully three feet and a half broad. When
we saw them from the rear of the house, they were both about half open —
that is to say, they stood off at right angles from the wall. It is probable that
the police, as well as myself, examined the back of the tenement; but, if so,
in looking at these ferrades in the line of their breadth (as they must have
done), they did not perceive this great breadth itself, or, at all events, failed
to take it into due consideration. In fact, having once satisfied themselves
that no egress could have been made in this quarter, they would naturally
bestow here a very cursory examination. It was clear to me, however, that
the shutter belonging to the window at the head of the bed, would, if swung
fully back to the wall, reach to within two feet of the lightning-rod. It was

also evident that, by exertion of a very unusual degree of activity and
courage, an entrance into the window, from the rod, might have been thus
effected. — By reaching to the distance of two feet and a half (we now
suppose the shutter open to its whole extent) a robber might have taken a
firm grasp upon the trellis-work. Letting go, then, his hold upon the rod,
placing his feet securely against the wall, and springing boldly from it, he
might have swung the shutter so as to close it, and, if we imagine the
window open at the time, might have swung himself into the room.

“I wish you to bear especially in mind that I have spoken of a very

unusual degree of activity as requisite to success in so hazardous and so
difficult a feat. It is my design to show you, first, that the thing might
possibly have been accomplished:— but, secondly and chiefly, I wish to
impress upon your understanding the very extraordinary — the almost
praeternatural character of that agility which could have accomplished it.

“You will say, no doubt, using the language of the law, that ‘to make out

my case’ I should rather undervalue, than insist upon a full estimation of the
activity required in this matter. This may be the practice in law, but it is not
the usage of reason. My ultimate object is only the truth. My immediate
purpose is to lead you to place in juxta-position that very unusual activity of
which I have just spoken, with that very peculiar shrill (or harsh) and
unequal voice, about whose nationality no two persons could be found to
agree, and in whose utterance no syllabification could be detected.”

At these words a vague and half-formed conception of the meaning of

Dupin flitted over my mind. I seemed to be upon the verge of
comprehension, without power to comprehend — as men, at times, find
themselves upon the brink of remembrance, without being able, in the end,
to remember. My friend went on with his discourse.

“You will see,” he said, “that I have shifted the question from the mode

of egress to that of ingress. It was my design to suggest that both were
effected in the same manner, at the same point. Let us now revert to the
interior of the room. Let us survey the appearances here. The drawers of the
bureau, it is said, had been rifled, although many articles of apparel still
remained within them. The conclusion here is absurd. It is a mere guess —

a very silly one — and no more. How are we to know that the articles found
in the drawers were not all these drawers had originally contained? Madame
L’Espanaye and her daughter lived an exceedingly retired life — saw no
company — seldom went out — had little use for numerous changes of
habiliment. Those found were at least of as good quality as any likely to be
possessed by these ladies. If a thief had taken any, why did he not take the
best — why did he not take all? In a word, why did he abandon four
thousand francs in gold to encumber himself with a bundle of linen? The
gold was abandoned. Nearly the whole sum mentioned by Monsieur
Mignaud, the banker, was discovered, in bags, upon the floor. I wish you,
therefore, to discard from your thoughts the blundering idea of motive,
engendered in the brains of the police by that portion of the evidence which
speaks of money delivered at the door of the house. Coincidences ten times
as remarkable as this (the delivery of the money, and murder committed
within three days upon the party receiving it), happen to all of us every hour
of our lives, without attracting even momentary notice. Coincidences, in
general, are great stumbling-blocks in the way of that class of thinkers who
have been educated to know nothing of the theory of probabilities — that
theory to which the most glorious objects of human research are indebted
for the most glorious of illustration. In the present instance, had the gold
been gone, the fact of its delivery three days before would have formed
something more than a coincidence. It would have been corroborative of
this idea of motive. But, under the real circumstances of the case, if we are
to suppose gold the motive of this outrage, we must also imagine the
perpetrator so vacillating an idiot as to have abandoned his gold and his
motive together.

“Keeping now steadily in mind the points to which I have drawn your

attention — that peculiar voice, that unusual agility, and that startling
absence of motive in a murder so singularly atrocious as this — let us
glance at the butchery itself. Here is a woman strangled to death by manual
strength, and thrust up a chimney, head downward. Ordinary assassins
employ no such modes of murder as this. Least of all, do they thus dispose
of the murdered. In the manner of thrusting the corpse up the chimney, you

will that there was something excessively outre — something altogether
irreconcilable with our common notions of human action, even when we
suppose the actors the most depraved of men. Think, too, how great must
have been that strength which could have thrust the body up such an
aperture so forcibly that the united vigor of several persons was found
barely sufficient to drag it down!

“Turn, now, to other indications of the employment of a vigor most

marvellous. On the hearth were thick tresses — very thick tresses — of
grey human hair. These had been torn out by the roots. You are aware of the
great force necessary in tearing thus from the head even twenty or thirty
hairs together. You saw the locks in question as well as myself. Their roots
(a hideous sight!) were clotted with fragments of the flesh of the scalp —
sure token of the prodigious power which had been exerted in uprooting
perhaps half a million of hairs at a time. The throat of the old lady was not
merely cut, but the head absolutely severed from the body: the instrument
was a mere razor. I wish you also to look at the brutal ferocity of these
deeds. Of the bruises upon the body of Madame L’Espanaye I do not speak.
Monsieur Dumas, and his worthy coadjutor Monsieur Etienne, have
pronounced that they were inflicted by some obtuse instrument; and so far
these gentlemen are very correct. The obtuse instrument was clearly the
stone pavement in the yard, upon which the victim had fallen from the
window which looked in upon the bed. This idea, however simple it may
now seem, escaped the police for the same reason that the breadth of the
shutters escaped them — because, by the affair of the nails, their
perceptions had been hermetically sealed against the possibility of the
windows have ever been opened at all.

If now, in addition to all these things, you have properly reflected upon

the odd disorder of the chamber, we have gone so far as to combine the
ideas of an agility astounding, a strength superhuman, a ferocity brutal, a
butchery without motive, a grotesquerie in horror absolutely alien from
humanity, and a voice foreign in tone to the ears of men of many nations,
and devoid of all distinct or intelligible syllabification. What result, then,
has ensued? What impression have I made upon your fancy?”

madman,” I said, “has done this deed — some raving maniac, escaped from
a neighboring Maison de Sante.”

“In some respects,” he replied, “your idea is not irrelevant. But the

voices of madmen, even in their wildest paroxysms, are never found to tally
with that peculiar voice heard upon the stairs. Madmen are of some nation,
and their language, however incoherent in its words, has always the
coherence of syllabification. Besides, the hair of a madman is not such as I
now hold in my hand. I disentangled this little tuft from the rigidly clutched
fingers of Madame L’Espanaye. Tell me what you can make of it.”

“Dupin!” I said, completely unnerved; “this hair is most unusual — this

is no human hair.”

“I have not asserted that it is,” said he; “but, before we decide this point,

I wish you to glance at the little sketch I have here traced upon this paper. It
is a fac-simile drawing of what has been described in one portion of the
testimony as ‘dark bruises, and deep indentations of finger nails,’ upon the
throat of Mademoiselle L’Espanaye, and in another, (by Messrs. Dumas and
Etienne,) as a ‘series of livid spots, evidently the impression of fingers.’

the table before us, “that this drawing gives the idea of a firm and fixed
hold. There is no slipping apparent. Each finger has retained — possibly
until the death of the victim — the fearful grasp by which it originally
imbedded itself. Attempt, now, to place all your fingers, at the same time, in
the respective impressions as you see them.”

I made the attempt in vain.
“We are possibly not giving this matter a fair trial,” he said. “The paper

is spread out upon a plane surface; but the human throat is cylindrical. Here
is a billet of wood, the circumference of which is about that of the throat.
Wrap the drawing around it, and try the experiment again.”

I did so; but the difficulty was even more obvious than before.
“This,” I said, “is the mark of no human hand.”
“Read now,” replied Dupin, “this passage from Cuvier.” It was a minute

anatomical and generally descriptive account of the large fulvous Ourang-

Outang of the East Indian Islands. The gigantic stature, the prodigious
strength and activity, the wild ferocity, and the imitative propensities of
these mammalia are sufficiently well known to all. I understood the full
horrors of the murder at once.

“The description of the digits,” said I, as I made an end of reading, “is

in exact accordance with this drawing, I see that no animal but an Ourang-
Outang, of the species here mentioned, could have impressed the
indentations as you have traced them. This tuft of tawny hair, too, is
identical in character with that of the beast of Cuvier. But I cannot possibly
comprehend the particulars of this frightful mystery. Besides, there were
two voices heard in contention, and one of them was unquestionably the
voice of a Frenchman.”

True; and you will remember an expression attributed almost

unanimously, by the evidence, to this voice — the expression, ‘mon Dieu!’
This, under the circumstances, has been justly characterized by one of the
witnesses (Montani, the confectioner,) as an expression of remonstrance or
expostulation. Upon these two words, therefore, I have mainly built my
hopes of a full solution of the riddle. A Frenchman was cognizant of the
murder. It is possible — indeed it is far more than probable — that he was
innocent of all participation in the bloody transactions which took place.
The Ourang-Outang may have escaped from him. He may have traced it to
the chamber; but, under the agitating circumstances which ensued, he could
never have re-captured it. It is still at large. I will not pursue these guesses-
for I have no right to call them more — since the shades of reflection upon
which they are based are scarcely of sufficient depth to be appreciable by
my own intellect, and since I could not pretend to make them intelligible to
the understanding of another. We will call them guesses then, and speak of
them as such. If the Frenchman in question is indeed, as I suppose, innocent
of this atrocity, this advertisement, which I left last night, upon our return
home, at the office of ‘Le Monde,’ (a paper devoted to the shipping interest,
and much sought by sailors,) will bring him to our residence.”

He handed me a paper, and I read thus: Caught — In the Bois de

Boulogne, early in the morning of the — inst., (the morning of the murder,)

a very large, tawny Ourang-Outang of the Bornese species. The owner,
(who is ascertained to be a sailor, belonging to a Maltese vessel,) may have
the animal again, upon identifying it satisfactorily, and paying a few
charges arising from its capture and keeping. Call at No. — Rue —
Faubourg St. Germain — au troisieme.

sailor, and belonging to a Maltese vessel?”

“I do not know it,” said Dupin. “I am not sure of it. Here, however, is a

small piece of ribbon, which from its form, and from its greasy appearance,
has evidently been used in tying the hair in one of those long queues of
which sailors are so fond. Moreover, this knot is one which few besides
sailors can tie, and is peculiar to the Maltese. I picked the ribbon up at the
foot of the lightning-rod. It could not have belonged to either of the
deceased. Now if, after all, I am wrong in my induction from this ribbon,
that the Frenchman was a sailor belonging to a Maltese vessel, still I can
have done no harm in saying what I did in the advertisement. If I am in
error, he will merely suppose that I have been misled by some circumstance
into which he will not take the trouble to inquire. But if I am right, a great
point is gained. Cognizant although innocent of the murder, the Frenchman
will naturally hesitate about replying to the advertisement — about
demanding the Ourang-Outang. He will reason thus:—‘I am innocent; I am
poor; my Ourang-Outang is of great value — to one in my circumstances a
fortune of itself — why should I lose it through idle apprehensions of
danger? Here it is, within my grasp. It was found in the Bois de Boulogne
— at a vast distance from the scene of that butchery. How can it ever be
suspected that a brute beast should have done the deed? The police are at
fault — they have failed to procure the slightest clew. Should they even
trace the animal, it would be impossible to prove me cognizant of the
murder, or to implicate me in guilt on account of that cognizance. Above
all, I am known. The advertiser designates me as the possessor of the beast.
I am not sure to what limit his knowledge may extend. Should I avoid
claiming a property of so great value, which it is known that I possess, I
will render the animal, at least, liable to suspicion. It is not my policy to

attract attention either to myself or to the beast. I will answer the
advertisement, get the Ourang-Outang, and keep it close until this matter
has blown over.

At this moment we heard a step upon the stairs.
“Be ready,” said Dupin, “with your pistols, but neither use them nor

show them until at a signal from myself.”

The front door of the house had been left open, and the visitor had

entered, without ringing, and advanced several steps upon the staircase.
Now, however, he seemed to hesitate. Presently we heard him descending.
Dupin was moving quickly to the door, when we again heard him coming
up. He did not turn back a second time, but stepped up with decision and
rapped at the door of our chamber.

“Come in,” said Dupin, in a cheerful and hearty tone.
A man entered. He was a sailor, evidently — a tall, stout, and muscular-

looking person, with a certain dare-devil expression of countenance, not
altogether unprepossessing. His face, greatly sunburnt, was more than half
hidden by whisker and mustachio. He had with him a huge oaken cudgel,
but appeared to be otherwise unarmed. He bowed awkwardly, and bade us
“good evening,” in French accents, which, although somewhat
Neufchatelish, were still sufficiently indicative of a Parisian origin.

Sit down, my friend,” said Dupin. “I suppose you have called about the

Ourang-Outang. Upon my word, I almost envy you the possession of him; a
remarkably fine, and no doubt a very valuable animal. How old do you
suppose him to be?”

intolerable burden, and then replied, in an assured tone:

“I have no way of telling — but he can’t be more than four or five years

old. Have you got him here?”

“Oh no; we had no conveniences for keeping him here. He is at a livery

stable in the Rue Dubourg, just by. You can get him in the morning. Of
course you are prepared to identify the property?”

“To be sure I am, sir.”
“I shall be sorry to part with him,” said Dupin.

“I don’t mean that you should be at all this trouble for nothing, sir,” said

the man. “Couldn’t expect it. Am very willing to pay a reward for the
finding of the animal — that is to say, any thing in reason.”

“Well,” replied my friend, “that is all very fair, to be sure. Let me think!

— what should I have? Oh! I will tell you. My reward shall be this. You
shall give me all the information in your power about these murders in the
Rue Morgue.”

Dupin said the last words in a very low tone, and very quietly. Just as

quietly, too, he walked toward the door, locked it, and put the key in his
pocket. He then drew a pistol from his bosom and placed it, without the
least flurry, upon the table.

The sailor’s face flushed up as if he were struggling with suffocation.

He started to his feet and grasped his cudgel; but the next moment he fell
back into his seat, trembling violently, and with the countenance of death
itself. He spoke not a word. I pitied him from the bottom of my heart.

“My friend,” said Dupin, in a kind tone, “you are alarming yourself

unnecessarily — you are indeed. We mean you no harm whatever. I pledge
you the honor of a gentleman, and of a Frenchman, that we intend you no
injury. I perfectly well know that you are innocent of the atrocities in the
Rue Morgue. It will not do, however, to deny that you are in some measure

implicated in them. From what I have already said, you must know that I
have had means of information about this matter — means of which you
could never have dreamed. Now the thing stands thus. You have done
nothing which you could have avoided — nothing, certainly, which renders
you culpable. You were not even guilty of robbery, when you might have
robbed with impunity. You have nothing to conceal. You have no reason for
concealment. On the other hand, you are bound by every principle of honor
to confess all you know. An innocent man is now imprisoned, charged with
that crime of which you can point out the perpetrator.”

The sailor had recovered his presence of mind, in a great measure, while

Dupin uttered these words; but his original boldness of bearing was all
gone.

“So help me God,” said he, after a brief pause, “I will tell you all I know

about this affair; — but I do not expect you to believe one half I say — I
would be a fool indeed if I did. Still, I am innocent, and I will make a clean
breast if I die for it.”

What he stated was, in substance, this. He had lately made a voyage to

the Indian Archipelago. A party, of which he formed one, landed at Borneo,
and passed into the interior on an excursion of pleasure. Himself and a
companion had captured the Ourang-Outang. This companion dying, the
animal fell into his own exclusive possession. After great trouble,
occasioned by the intractable ferocity of his captive during the home
voyage, he at length succeeded in lodging it safely at his own residence in
Paris, where, not to attract toward himself the unpleasant curiosity of his
neighbors, he kept it carefully secluded, until such time as it should recover
from a wound in the foot, received from a splinter on board ship. His
ultimate design was to sell it.

Returning home from some sailors’ frolic on the night, or rather in the

morning of the murder, he found the beast occupying his own bed-room,
into which it had broken from a closet adjoining, where it had been, as was
thought, securely confined. Razor in hand, and fully lathered, it was sitting
before a looking-glass, attempting the operation of shaving, in which it had
no doubt previously watched its master through the key-hole of the closet.

Terrified at the sight of so dangerous a weapon in the possession of an
animal so ferocious, and so well able to use it, the man, for some moments,
was at a loss what to do. He had been accustomed, however, to quiet the
creature, even in its fiercest moods, by the use of a whip, and to this he now
resorted. Upon sight of it, the Ourang-Outang sprang at once through the
door of the chamber, down the stairs, and thence, through a window,
unfortunately open, into the street.

The Frenchman followed in despair; the ape, razor still in hand,

occasionally stopping to look back and gesticulate at its pursuer, until the
latter had nearly come up with it. It then again made off. In this manner the
chase continued for a long time. The streets were profoundly quiet, as it was
nearly three o’clock in the morning. In passing down an alley in the rear of
the Rue Morgue, the fugitive’s attention was arrested by a light gleaming
from the open window of Madame L’Espanaye’s chamber, in the fourth
story of her house. Rushing to the building, it perceived the lightning-rod,
clambered up with inconceivable agility, grasped the shutter, which was
thrown fully back against the wall, and, by its means, swung itself directly
upon the headboard of the bed. The whole feat did not occupy a minute.
The shutter was kicked open again by the Ourang-Outang as it entered the
room.

strong hopes of now recapturing the brute, as it could scarcely escape from
the trap into which it had ventured, except by the rod, where it might be
intercepted as it came down. On the other hand, there was much cause for
anxiety as to what it might do in the house. This latter reflection urged the
man still to follow the fugitive. A lightning-rod is ascended without
difficulty, especially by a sailor; but, when he had arrived as high as the
window, which lay far to his left, his career was stopped; the most that he
could accomplish was to reach over so as to obtain a glimpse of the interior
of the room. At this glimpse he nearly fell from his hold through excess of
horror. Now it was that those hideous shrieks arose upon the night, which
had startled from slumber the inmates of the Rue Morgue. Madame
L’Espanaye and her daughter, habited in their night clothes, had apparently

been arranging some papers in the iron chest already mentioned, which had
been wheeled into the middle of the room. It was open, and its contents lay
beside it on the floor. The victims must have been sitting with their backs
toward the window; and, from the time elapsing between the ingress of the
beast and the screams, it seems probable that it was not immediately
perceived. The flapping-to of the shutter would naturally have been
attributed to the wind.

As the sailor looked in, the gigantic animal had seized Madame

L’Espanaye by the hair, (which was loose, as she had been combing it,) and
was flourishing the razor about her face, in imitation of the motions of a
barber. The daughter lay prostrate and motionless; she had swooned. The
screams and struggles of the old lady (during which the hair was torn from
her head) had the effect of changing the probably pacific purposes of the
Ourang-Outang into those of wrath. With one determined sweep of its
muscular arm it nearly severed her head from her body. The sight of blood
inflamed its anger into phrenzy. Gnashing its teeth, and flashing fire from
its eves, it flew upon the body of the girl, and imbedded its fearful talons in
her throat, retaining its grasp until she expired. Its wandering and wild
glances fell at this moment upon the head of the bed, over which the face of
its master, rigid with horror, was just discernible. The fury of the beast, who
no doubt bore still in mind the dreaded whip, was instantly converted into
fear. Conscious of having deserved punishment, it seemed desirous of
concealing its bloody deeds, and skipped about the chamber in an agony of
nervous agitation; throwing down and breaking the furniture as it moved,
and dragging the bed from the bedstead. In conclusion, it seized first the
corpse of the daughter, and thrust it up the chimney, as it was found; then
that of the old lady, which it immediately hurled through the window
headlong.

As the ape approached the casement with its mutilated burden, the sailor

shrank aghast to the rod, and, rather gliding than clambering down it,
hurried at once home — dreading the consequences of the butchery, and
gladly abandoning, in his terror, all solicitude about the fate of the Ourang-
Outang. The words heard by the party upon the staircase were the

Frenchman’s exclamations of horror and affright, commingled with the
fiendish jabberings of the brute.

from the chamber, by the rod, just before the breaking of the door. It must
have closed the window as it passed through it. It was subsequently caught
by the owner himself, who obtained for it a very large sum at the Jardin des
Plantes. Le Bon was instantly released, upon our narration of the
circumstances (with some comments from Dupin) at the bureau of the
Prefect of Police. This functionary, however well disposed to my friend,
could not altogether conceal his chagrin at the turn which affairs had taken,
and was fain to indulge in a sarcasm or two, about the propriety of every
person minding his own business.

“Let them talk,” said Dupin, who had not thought it necessary to reply.

“Let him discourse; it will ease his conscience. I am satisfied with having
defeated him in his own castle. Nevertheless, that he failed in the solution
of this mystery, is by no means that matter for wonder which he supposes it;
for, in truth, our friend the Prefect is somewhat too cunning to be profound.
In his wisdom is no stamen. It is all head and no body, like the pictures of
the Goddess Laverna — or, at best, all head and shoulders, like a codfish.
But he is a good creature after all. I like him especially for one master
stroke of cant, by which he has attained his reputation for ingenuity. I mean
the way he has ‘de nier ce qui est, et d’expliquer ce qui n’est pas.’”

OceanofPDF.com

The Mystery of Marie Roget

A Sequel to “The Murder in the Rue Morgue”

There are ideal series of events which run parallel with the
real ones. They rarely coincide. Men and circumstances
generally modify the ideal train of events, so that it seems
imperfect, and its consequences are equally imperfect. Thus
with the Reformation; instead of Protestantism came
Lutheranism. — Novalis. Moral Ansichten.

There are few persons, even among the calmest thinkers, who have not
occasionally been startled into a vague yet thrilling half-credence in the
supernatural, by coincidences of so seemingly marvellous a character that,
as mere coincidences, the intellect has been unable to receive them. Such
sentiments — for the half-credences of which I speak have never the full
force of thought — such sentiments are seldom thoroughly stifled unless by
reference to the doctrine of chance, or, as it is technically termed, the
Calculus of Probabilities. Now this Calculus is, in its essence, purely
mathematical; and thus we have the anomaly of the most rigidly exact in
science applied to the shadow and spirituality of the most intangible in
speculation.

The extraordinary details which I am now called upon to make public,

will be found to form, as regards sequence of time, the primary branch of a
series of scarcely intelligible coincidences, whose secondary or concluding
branch will be recognized by all readers in the late murder of MARY
CECILIA ROGERS, at New York.

When, in an article entitled “The Murders in the Rue Morgue,” I

endeavored, about a year ago, to depict some very remarkable features in
the mental character of my friend, the Chevalier C. Auguste Dupin, it did
not occur to me that I should ever resume the subject. This depicting of

character constituted my design; and this design was thoroughly fulfilled in
the wild train of circumstances brought to instance Dupin’s idiosyncrasy. I
might have adduced other examples, but I should have proven no more.
Late events, however, in their surprising development, have startled me into
some farther details, which will carry with them the air of extorted
confession. Hearing what I have lately heard, it would be indeed strange
should I remain silent in regard to what I both heard and saw so long ago.

Upon the winding up of the tragedy involved in the deaths of Madame

L’Espanaye and her daughter, the Chevalier dismissed the affair at once
from his attention, and relapsed into his old habits of moody revery. Prone,
at all times, to abstraction, I readily fell in with his humor; and continuing
to occupy our chambers in the Faubourg Saint Germain, we gave the Future
to the winds, and slumbered tranquilly in the Present, weaving the dull
world around us into dreams.

But these dreams were not altogether uninterrupted. It may readily be

supposed that the part played by my friend, in the drama at the Rue Morgue
had not failed of its impression upon the fancies of the Parisian police. With
its emissaries, the name of Dupin had grown into a household word. The
simple character of those inductions by which he had disentangled the
mystery never having been explained even to the Prefect, or to any other
individual than myself, of course it is not surprising that the affair was
regarded as little less than miraculous, or that the Chevalier’s analytical
abilities acquired for him the credit of intuition. His frankness would have
led him to disabuse every inquirer of such prejudice; but his indolent humor
forbade all further agitation of a topic whose interest to himself had long
ceased. It thus happened that he found himself the cynosure of the political
eyes; and the cases were not few in which attempt was made to engage his
services at the Prefecture. One of the most remarkable instances was that of
the murder of a young girl named Marie Roget.

This event occurred about two years after the atrocity in the Rue

Morgue. Marie, whose Christian and family name will at once arrest
attention from their resemblance to those of the unfortunate “cigar-girl” was
the only daughter of the widow Estelle Roget. The father had died during

the child’s infancy, and from the period of his death, until within eighteen
months before the assassination which forms the subject of our narrative,
the mother and daughter had dwelt together in the Rue Pavee Saint Andree;

Madame there keeping a pension, assisted by Marie. Affairs went on thus
until the latter had attained her twenty-second year, when her great beauty
attracted the notice of a perfumer, who occupied one of the shops in the
basement of the Palais Royal, and whose custom lay, chiefly among the
desperate adventurers infesting that neighborhood. Monsieur Le Blanc

3(2)

was not unaware of the advantages to be derived from the attendance of the
fair Marie in his perfumery; and his liberal proposals were accepted eagerly
by the girl, although with somewhat more of hesitation by Madame.

The anticipations of the shopkeeper were realized, and his rooms soon

became notorious through the charms of the sprightly grisette. She had been
in his employ about a year, when her admirers were thrown into confusion
by her sudden disappearance from the shop. Monsieur Le Blanc was unable
to account for her absence, and Madame Roget was distracted with anxiety
and terror. The public papers immediately took up the theme, and the police
were upon the point of making serious investigations, when, one fine
morning, after the lapse of a week, Marie, in good health, but with a
somewhat saddened air, made her re-appearance at her usual counter in the
perfumery. All inquiry, except that of a private character, was of course,
immediately hushed. Monsieur Le Blanc professed total ignorance, as
before. Marie, with Madame, replied to all questions, that the last week had
been spent at the house of a relation in the country. Thus the affair died
away, and was generally forgotten; for the girl, ostensibly to relieve herself
from the impertinence of curiosity soon bade a final adieu to the perfumer,
and sought the shelter of her mother’s residence in the Rue Pavee Saint
Andree.

It was about five months after this return home, that her friends were

alarmed by her sudden disappearance for the second time. Three days
elapsed, and nothing was heard of her. On the fourth her corpse was found
floating in the Seine

4 near the shore which is opposite the Quartier of the

Rue Saint Andre, and at a point not very far distant from the secluded
neighborhood of the Barriere du Roule.

5(2)

The atrocity of this murder (for it was at once evident that murder had

been committed), the youth and beauty of the victim, and, above all her
previous notoriety, conspired to produce intense excitement in the minds of
the sensitive Parisians. I can call to mind no similar occurrence producing
so general and so intense an effect. For several weeks, in the discussion of
this one absorbing theme, even the momentous political topics of the day
were forgotten. The Prefect made unusual exertions; and the powers of the
whole Parisian police were, of course, tasked to the utmost extent.

Upon the first discovery of the corpse, it was not supposed that the

murderer would be able to elude, for more than a very brief period, the
inquisition which was immediately set on foot. It was not until the
expiration of a week that it was deemed necessary to offer a reward; and
even then this reward was limited to a thousand francs. In the meantime the
investigation proceeded with vigor, if not always with judgment, and
numerous individuals were examined to no purpose; while, owing to the
continual absence of all clew to the mystery, the popular excitement greatly
increased. At the end of the tenth day it was thought advisable to double the
sum originally proposed; and, at length, the second week having elapsed
without leading to any discoveries, and the prejudice which always exists in
Paris against the Police having given vent to itself in several serious
emeutes, the Prefect took it upon himself to offer the sum of twenty
thousand francs “for the conviction of the assassin,” or, if more than one
should prove to have been implicated, “for the conviction of any one of the
assassins.” In the proclamation setting forth this reward, a full pardon was
promised to any accomplice who should come forward in evidence against
his fellow; and to the whole was appended, wherever it appeared, the
private placard of a committee of citizens, offering ten thousand francs, in
addition to the amount proposed by the Prefecture. The entire reward thus
stood at no less than thirty thousand francs, which will be regarded as an
extraordinary sum when we consider the humble condition of the girl, and
the great frequency, in large cities, of such atrocities as the one described.

No one doubted now that the mystery of this murder would be

immediately brought to light. But although, in one or two instances, arrests
were made which promised elucidation, yet nothing was elicited which
could implicate the parties suspected; and they were discharged forthwith.
Strange as it may appear, the third week from the discovery of the body had
passed, and passed without any light being thrown upon the subject, before
even a rumor of the events which had so agitated the public mind reached
the ears of Dupin and myself. Engaged in researches which had absorbed
our whole attention, it had been nearly a month since either of us had gone
abroad, or received a visitor, or more than glanced at the leading political
articles in one of the daily papers. The first intelligence of the murder was
brought us by G — in person. He called upon us early in the afternoon of
the thirteenth of July, 18-, and remained with us until late in the night. He
had been piqued by the failure of all his endeavors to ferret out the
assassins. His reputation — so he said with a peculiarly Parisian air — was
at stake. Even his honor was concerned. The eyes of the public were upon
him; and there was really no sacrifice which he would not be willing to
make for the development of the mystery. He concluded a somewhat droll
speech with a compliment upon what he was pleased to term the tact of
Dupin, and made him a direct and certainly a liberal proposition, the precise
nature of which I do not feel myself at liberty to disclose, but which has no
bearing upon the proper subject of my narrative.

The compliment my friend rebutted as best he could, but the proposition

he accepted at once, although its advantages were altogether provisional.
This point being settled, the Prefect broke forth at once into explanations of
his own views, interspersing them with long comments upon the evidence;
of which latter we were not yet in possession. He discoursed much and,
beyond doubt, learnedly; while I hazarded an occasional suggestion as the
night wore drowsily away. Dupin, sitting steadily in his accustomed
armchair, was the embodiment of respectful attention. He wore spectacles,
during the whole interview; and an occasional glance beneath their green
glasses sufficed to convince me that he slept not the less soundly, because

silently, throughout the seven or eight leaden-footed hours which
immediately preceded the departure of the Prefect.

evidence elicited, and, at the various newspaper offices, a copy of every
paper in which, from first to last, had been published any decisive
information in regard to this sad affair. Freed from all that was positively
disproved, this mass of information stood thus:

Marie Roget left the residence of her mother, in the Rue Pavee St.

Andree, about nine o’clock in the morning of Sunday, June the twenty
second, 18-. In going out, she gave notice to a Monsieur Jacques St.
Eustache,

6 and to him only, of her intention to spend the day with an aunt,

who resided in the Rue des Dromes. The Rue des Dromes is a short and
narrow but populous thoroughfare, not far from the banks of the river, and
at a distance of some two miles, in the most direct course possible, from the
pension of Madame Roget. St. Eustache was the accepted suitor of Marie,
and lodged, as well as took his meals, at the pension. He was to have gone
for his betrothed at dusk, and to have escorted her home. In the afternoon,
however, it came on to rain heavily; and, supposing that she would remain
all night at her aunt’s (as she had done under similar circumstances before),
he did not think it necessary to keep his promise. As night drew on,
Madame Roget (who was an infirm old lady, seventy years of age) was
heard to express a fear “that she should never see Marie again;” but this
observation attracted little attention at the time.

On Monday it was ascertained that the girl had not been to the Rue des

Dromes; and when the day elapsed without tidings of her, a tardy search
was instituted at several points in the city and its environs. It was not,
however, until the fourth day from the period of her disappearance that any
thing satisfactory was ascertained respecting her. On this day (Wednesday,
the twenty-fifth of June) a Monsieur Beauvais,

7 who, with a friend, had

been making inquiries for Marie near the Barriere du Roule, on the shore of
the Seine which is opposite the Rue Pavee St. Andree, was informed that a
corpse had just been towed ashore by some fishermen, who had found it
floating in the river. Upon seeing the body, Beauvais, after some hesitation,

identified it as that of the perfumery-girl. His friend recognized it more
promptly.

mouth. No foam was seen, as in the case of the merely drowned. There was
no discoloration in the cellular tissue. About the throat were bruises and
impressions of fingers. The arms were bent over on the chest, and were
rigid. The right hand was clenched; the left partially open. On the left wrist
were two circular excoriations, apparently the effect of ropes, or of a rope in
more than one volution. A part of the right wrist, also, was much chafed, as
well as the back throughout its extent, but more especially at the shoulder-
blades. In bringing the body to the shore the fishermen had attached to it a
rope, but none of the excorations had been effected by this. The flesh of the
neck was much swollen. There were no cuts apparent, or bruises which
appeared the effect of blows. A piece of lace was found tied so tightly
around the neck as to be hidden from sight; it was completely buried in the
flesh, and was fastened by a knot which lay just under the left ear. This
alone would have sufficed to produce death. The medical testimony spoke
confidently of the virtuous character of the deceased. She had been
subjected, it said, to brutal violence. The corpse was in such condition when
found, that there could have been no difficulty in its recognition by friends.

The dress was much torn and otherwise disordered. In the outer

garment, a slip, about a foot wide, had been torn upward from the bottom
hem to the waist, but not torn off. It was wound three times around the
waist, and secured by a sort of hitch in the back. The dress immediately
beneath the frock was of fine muslin; and from this a slip eighteen inches
wide had been torn entirely out-torn very evenly and with great care. It was
found around her neck, fitting loosely, and secured with a hard knot. Over
this muslin slip and the slip of lace the strings of a bonnet were attached,
the bonnet being appended. The knot by which the strings of the bonnet
were fastened was not a lady’s, but a slip or sailors knot.

After the recognition of the corpse, it was not, as usual, taken to the

Morgue (this formality being superfluous), but hastily interred not far from
the spot at which it was brought ashore. Through the exertions of Beauvais,

the matter was industriously hushed up, as far as possible; and several days
had elapsed before any public emotion resulted. A weekly paper,

8 however,

at length took up the theme; the corpse was disinterred, and a re-
examination instituted; but nothing was elicited beyond what has been
already noted. The clothes, however, were now submitted to the mother and
friends of the deceased, and fully identified as those worn by the girl upon
leaving home.

Meantime, the excitement increased hourly. Several individuals were

arrested and discharged. St. Eustache fell especially under suspicion; and he
failed, at first, to give an intelligible account of his whereabouts during the
Sunday on which Marie left home. Subsequently, however, he submitted to
Monsieur G — affidavits, accounting satisfactorily for every hour of the
day in question. As time passed and no discovery ensued, a thousand
contradictory rumors were circulated and journalists busied themselves in
suggestions. Among these, the one which attracted the most notice, was the
idea that Marie Roget still lived — that the corpse found in the Seine was
that of some other unfortunate. It will be proper that I submit to the reader
some passages which embody the suggestion alluded to. These passages are
literal translations from L’Etoile,

9 a paper conducted, in general, with much

ability.

“Mademoiselle Roget left her mother’s house on Sunday morning, June

the twenty-second, 18-, with the ostensible purpose of going to see her aunt,
or some other connection, in the Rue des Dromes. From that hour, nobody
is proved to have seen her. There is no trace or tidings of her at all. . . .
There has no person, whatever, come forward, so far, who saw her at all in
that day, after she left her mother’s door. . . . Now, though we have no
evidence that Marie Roget was in the land of the living after nine o’clock
on Sunday, June the twenty-second, we have proof that, up to that hour, she
was alive. On Wednesday noon, at twelve, a female body was discovered
afloat on the shore of the Barriere du Roule. This was, even if we presume
that Marie Roget was thrown into the river within three hours after she left
her mother’s house, only three days from the time she left her home —
three days to an hour. But it is folly to suppose that the murder, if murder

was committed on her body, could have been consummated soon enough to
have enabled her murderers to throw the body into the river before
midnight. Those who are guilty of such horrid crimes choose darkness
rather than light . . . Thus we see that if the body found in the river was that
of Marie Roget it could only have been in the water two and a half days, or
three at the outside. All experience has shown that drowned bodies, or
bodies thrown into the water immediately after death by violence, require
from six to ten days for sufficient decomposition to take place to bring them
to the top of the water. Even where a cannon is fired over a corpse, and it
rises before at least five or six days’ immersion, it sinks again, if left alone.
Now, we ask, what was there in this case to cause a departure from the
ordinary course of nature? . . . If the body had been kept in its mangled state
on shore until Tuesday night some trace would be found in shore of the
murderers. It is a doubtful point, also, whether the body would be so soon
afloat, even were it thrown in after having been dead two days. And,
furthermore, it is exceedingly improbable that any villains who had
committed such a murder as is here supposed, would have thrown the body
in without weight to sink it, when such a precaution could have so easily
been taken.”

The editor here proceeds to argue that the body must have been in the

water “not three days merely, but, at least, five times three days,” because it
was so far decomposed that Beauvais had great difficulty in recognizing it.
This latter point, however, was fully disproved. I continue the translation:

“What, then, are the facts on which M. Beauvais says that he had no

doubt the body was that of Marie Roget? He ripped up the gown sleeve, and
says he found marks which satisfied him of the identity. The public
generally supposed those marks to have consisted of some description of
scars. He rubbed the arm and found hair upon it — something as indefinite,
we think, as can readily be imagined — as little conclusive as finding an
arm in the sleeve. M. Beauvais did not return that night, but sent word to
Madame Roget, at seven o’clock, on Wednesday evening, that an
investigation was still in progress respecting her daughter. If we allow that
Madame Roget, from her age and grief, could not go over (which is

allowing a great deal), there certainly must have been some one who would
have thought it worth while to go over and attend the investigation, if they
thought the body was that of Marie. Nobody went over. There was nothing
said or heard about the matter in the Rue Pavee St. Andree, that reached
even the occupants of the same building. M. St. Eustache, the lover and
intended husband of Marie, who boarded in her mother’s house, deposes
that he did not hear of the discovery of the body of his intended until the
next morning, when M. Beauvais came into his chamber and told him of it.
For an item of news like this, it strikes us it was very coolly received.”

In this way the journal endeavored to create the impression of an apathy

on the part of the relatives of Marie, inconsistent with the supposition that
these relatives believed the corpse to be hers. Its insinuations amount to
this:— that Marie, with the connivance of her friends, had absented herself
from the city for reasons involving a charge against her chastity; and that
these friends upon the discovery of a corpse in the Seine, somewhat
resembling that of the girl, had availed themselves of the opportunity to
impress the public with the belief of her death. But L’Etoile was again
overhasty. It was distinctly proved that no apathy, such as was imagined,
existed; that the old lady was exceedingly feeble, and so agitated as to be
unable to attend to any duty; that St. Eustache, so far from receiving the
news coolly, was distracted with grief, and bore himself so frantically, that
M. Beauvais prevailed upon a friend and relative to take charge of him, and
prevent his attending the examination at the disinterment. Moreover,
although it was stated by L’Etoile, that the corpse was re-interred at the
public expense — that an advantageous offer of private sepulture was
absolutely declined by the family — and that no member of the family
attended the ceremonial:— although, I say, all this was asserted by L’Etoile
in furtherance of the impression it designed to convey — yet all this was
satisfactorily disproved. In a subsequent number of the paper, an attempt
was made to throw suspicion upon Beauvais himself. The editor says:

“Now, then, a change comes over the matter. We are told that, on one

occasion, while a Madame B— was at Madame Roget’s house, M.
Beauvais, who was going out, told her that a gendarme was expected there,

and that she, Madame B., must not say any thing to the gendarme until he
returned, but let the matter be for him. . . . In the present posture of affairs,
M. Beauvais appears to have the whole matter locked up in his head. A
single step cannot be taken without M. Beauvais, for, go which way you
will you run against him. . . . For some reason he determined that nobody
shall have anything to do with the proceedings but himself, and he has
elbowed the male relatives out of the way, according to their
representations, in a very singular manner. He seems to have been very
much averse to permitting the relatives to see the body.”

By the following fact, some color was given to the suspicion thus

thrown upon Beauvais. A visitor at his office, a few days prior to the girl’s
disappearance, and during the absence of its occupant, had observed a rose
in the key-hole of the door, and the name “Marie” inscribed upon a slate
which hung near at hand.

The general impression, so far as we were enabled to glean it from the

newspapers, seemed to be, that Marie had been the victim of a gang of
desperadoes — that by these she had been borne across the river,
maltreated, and murdered. Le Commerciel,

10 however, a print of extensive

influence, was earnest in combatting this popular idea. I quote a passage or
two from its columns:

“We are persuaded that pursuit has hitherto been on a false scent, so far

as it has been directed to the Barriere du Roule. It is impossible that a
person so well known to thousands as this young woman was, should have
passed three blocks without some one having seen her; and any one who
saw her would have remembered it, for she interested all who knew her. It
was when the streets were full of people, when she went out. . . . It is
impossible that she could have gone to the Barriere du Roule, or to the Rue
des Dromes, without being recognized by a dozen persons; yet no one has
come forward who saw her outside of her mother’s door, and there is no
evidence, except the testimony concerning her expressed intentions, that she
did go out at all. Her gown was torn, bound round her, and tied; and by that
the body was carried as a bundle. If the murder had been committed at the
Barriere du Roule, there would have been no necessity for any such

arrangement. The fact that the body was found floating near the Barriere, is
no proof as to where it was thrown into the water. . . . A piece of one of the
unfortunate girl’s petticoats, two feet long and one foot wide, was torn out
and tied under her chin around the back of her head, probably to prevent
screams. This was done by fellows who had no pocket-handkerchief.”

A day or two before the Prefect called upon us, however, some

important information reached the police, which seemed to overthrow, at
least, the chief portion of Le Commerciel’s argument. Two small boys, sons
of a Madame Deluc, while roaming among the woods near the Barriere du
Roule, chanced to penetrate a close thicket, within which were three or four
large stones, forming a kind of seat with a back and footstool. On the upper
stone lay a white petticoat; on the second, a silk scarf. A parasol, gloves,
and a pocket-handkerchief were also here found. The handkerchief bore the
name “Marie Roget.” Fragments of dress were discovered on the brambles
around. The earth was trampled, the bushes were broken, and there was
every evidence of a struggle. Between the thicket and the river, the fences
were found taken down, and the ground bore evidence of some heavy
burthen having been dragged along it.

A weekly paper, Le Soleil,

11 had the following comments upon this

discovery — comments which merely echoed the sentiment of the whole
Parisian press:

“The things had all evidently been there at least three or four weeks;

they were all mildewed down hard with the action of the rain, and stuck
together from mildew. The grass had grown around and over some of them.
The silk on the parasol was strong, but the threads of it were run together
within. The upper part, where it had been doubled and folded, was all
mildewed and rotten, and tore on its being opened. . . . The pieces of her
frock torn out by the bushes were about three inches wide and six inches
long. One part was the hem of the frock, and it had been mended; the other
piece was part of the skirt, not the hem. They looked like strips torn off, and
were on the thorn bush, about a foot from the ground. . . . There can be no
doubt, therefore, that the spot of this appalling outrage has been
discovered.”

Consequent upon this discovery, new evidence appeared. Madame

Deluc testified that she keeps a roadside inn not far from the bank of the
river, opposite the Barriere du Roule. The neighborhood is secluded —
particularly so. It is the usual Sunday resort of blackguards from the city,
who cross the river in boats. About three o’clock, in the afternoon of the
Sunday in question, a young girl arrived at the inn, accompanied by a young
man of dark complexion. The two remained here for some time. On their
departure, they took the road to some thick woods in the vicinity. Madame
Deluc’s attention was called to the dress worn by the girl, on account of its
resemblance to one worn by a deceased relative. A scarf was particularly
noticed. Soon after the departure of the couple, a gang of miscreants made
their appearance, behaved boisterously, ate and drank without making
payment, followed in the route of the young man and girl, returned to the
inn about dusk, and re-crossed the river as if in great haste.

It was soon after dark, upon this same evening, that Madame Deluc, as

well as her eldest son, heard the screams of a female in the vicinity of the
inn. The screams were violent but brief. Madame D. recognized not only
the scarf which was found in the thicket, but the dress which was
discovered upon the corpse. An omnibus-driver, Valence,

12 now also

testified that he saw Marie Roget cross a ferry on the Seine, on the Sunday
in question, in company with a young man of dark complexion. He,
Valence, knew Marie, and could not be mistaken in her identity. The articles
found in the thicket were fully identified by the relatives of Marie.

The items of evidence and information thus collected by myself, from

the newspapers, at the suggestion of Dupin, embraced only one more point
— but this was a point of seemingly vast consequence. It appears that,
immediately after the discovery of the clothes as above described, the
lifeless or nearly lifeless body of St. Eustache, Marie’s betrothed, was found
in the vicinity of what all now supposed the scene of the outrage. A phial
labelled “laudanum,” and emptied, was found near him. His breath gave
evidence of the poison. He died without speaking. Upon his person was
found a letter, briefly stating his love for Marie, with his design of self-
destruction.

notes, “that this is a far more intricate case than that of the Rue Morgue;
from which it differs in one important respect. This is an ordinary, although
an atrocious, instance of crime. There is nothing peculiarly outre about it.
You will observe that, for this reason, the mystery has been considered easy,
when, for this reason, it should have been considered difficult, of solution.
Thus, at first, it was thought unnecessary to offer a reward. The myrmidons
of G— were able at once to comprehend how and why such an atrocity
might have been committed. They could picture to their imaginations a
mode — many modes — and a motive — many motives; and because it
was not impossible that either of these numerous modes or motives could
have been the actual one, they have taken it for granted that one of them
must. But the ease with which these variable fancies were entertained, and
the very plausibility which each assumed, should have been understood as
indicative rather of the difficulties than of the facilities which must attend
elucidation. I have before observed that it is by prominences above the
plane of the ordinary, that reason feels her way, if at all, in her search for the
true, and that the proper question in cases such as this, is not so much ‘what
has occurred?’ as ‘what has occurred that has never occurred before?’ In the
investigations at the house of Madame L’Espanaye,

13 the agents of G—

were discouraged and confounded by that very unusualness which, to a
properly regulated intellect, would have afforded the surest omen of
success; while this same intellect might have been plunged in despair at the
ordinary character of all that met the eye in the case of the perfumery girl,
and yet told of nothing but easy triumph to the functionaries of the
Prefecture.

“In the case of Madame L’Espanaye and her daughter, there was, even

at the begining of our investigation, no doubt that murder had been
committed. The idea of suicide was excluded at once. Here, too, we are
freed, at the commencement, from all supposition of self-murder. The body
found at the Barriere du Roule was found under such circumstances as to
leave us no room for embarrassment upon this important point. But it has
been suggested that the corpse discovered is not that of the Marie Roget for

the conviction of whose assassin, or assassins, the reward is offered, and
respecting whom, solely, our agreement has been arranged with the Prefect.
We both know this gentleman well. It will not do to trust him too far. If,
dating our inquiries from the body found, and then tracing a murderer, we
yet discover this body to be that of some other individual than Marie; or if,
starting from the living Marie, we find her, yet find her unassassinated — in
either case we lose our labor; since it is Monsieur G— with whom we have
to deal. For our own purpose, therefore, if not for the purpose of justice, it is
indispensable that our first step should be the determination of the identity
of the corpse with the Marie Roget who is missing.

“With the public the arguments of L’Etoile have had weight; and that

the journal itself is convinced of their importance would appear from the
manner in which it commences one of its essays upon the subject
—‘Several of the morning papers of the day,’ it says, ‘speak of the
conclusive article in Monday’s Etoile.’ To me, this article appears
conclusive of little beyond the zeal of its inditer. We should bear in mind
that, in general, it is the object of our newspapers rather to create a
sensation — to make a point — than to further the cause of truth. The latter
end is only pursued when it seems coincident with the former. The print
which merely falls in with ordinary opinion (however well founded this
opinion may be) earns for itself no credit with the mob. The mass of the
people regard as profound only him who suggests pungent contradictions of
the general idea. In ratiocination, not less than in literature, it is the epigram
which is the most immediately and the most universally appreciated. In
both, it is of the lowest order of merit.

“What I mean to say is, that it is the mingled epigram and melodrame of

the idea, that Marie Roget still lives, rather than any true plausibility in this
idea, which have suggested it to L’Etoile, and secured it a favorable
reception with the public. Let us examine the heads of this journal’s
argument, endeavoring to avoid the incoherence with which it is originally
set forth.

“The first aim of the writer is to show, from the brevity of the interval

between Marie’s disappearance and the finding of the floating corpse, that

this corpse cannot be that of Marie. The reduction of this interval to its
smallest possible dimension, becomes thus, at once, an object with the
reasoner. In the rash pursuit of this object, he rushes into mere assumption
at the outset. ‘It is folly to suppose,’ he says, ‘that the murder, if murder
was committed on her body, could have been consummated soon enough to
have enabled her murderers to throw the body into the river before
midnight.’ We demand at once, and very naturally, why? Why is it folly to
suppose that the murder was committed within five minutes after the girl’s
quitting her mother’s house? Why is it folly to suppose that the murder was
committed at any given period of the day? There have been assassinations
at all hours. But, had the murder taken place at any moment between nine
o’clock in the morning of Sunday and a quarter before midnight, there
would still have been time enough ‘to throw the body into the river before
midnight.’ This assumption, then, amounts precisely to this — that the
murder was not committed on Sunday at all — and, if we allow L’Etoile to
assume this, we may permit it any liberties whatever. The paragraph
beginning ‘It is folly to suppose that the murder, etc.,’ however it appears as
printed in L’Etoile, may be imagined to have existed actually thus in the
brain of its inditer: ‘It is folly to suppose that the murder, if murder was
committed on the body, could have been committed soon enough to have
enabled her murderers to throw the body into the river before midnight; it is
folly, we say, to suppose all this, and to suppose at the same time, (as we are
resolved to suppose), that the body was not thrown in until after
midnight’— a sentence sufficiently inconsequential in itself, but not so
utterly preposterous as the one printed.

“Were it my purpose,” continued Dupin, “merely to make out a case

against this passage of L’Etoile’s argument, I might safely leave it where it
is. It is not, however, with L’Etoile that we have to do, but with truth. The
sentence in question has but one meaning, as it stands; and this meaning I
have fairly stated, but it is material that we go behind the mere words, for
an idea which these words have obviously intended, and failed to convey. It
was the design of the journalists to say that at whatever period of the day or
night of Sunday this murder was committed, it was improbable that the

assassins would have ventured to bear the corpse to the river before
midnight. And herein lies, really, the assumption of which I complain. It is
assumed that the murder was committed at such a position, and under such
circumstances, that the bearing it to the river became necessary. Now, the
assassination might have taken place upon the river’s brink, or on the river
itself; and, thus, the throwing the corpse in the water might have been
resorted to at any period of the day or night, as the most obvious and most
immediate mode of disposal. You will understand that I suggest nothing
here as probable, or as coincident with my own opinion. My design, so far,
has no reference to the facts of the case. I wish merely to caution you
against the whole tone of L’Etoile’s suggestion, by calling your attention to
its ex-parte character at the outset.

“Having prescribed thus a limit to suit its own preconceived notions;

having assumed that, if this were the body of Marie, it could have been in
the water but a very brief time, the journal goes on to say:

All experience has shown that drowned bodies, or bodies thrown into

the water immediately after death by violence, require from six to ten days
for sufficient decomposition to take place to bring them to the top of the
water. Even when a cannon is fired over a corpse, and it rises before at least
five or six days’ immersion, it sinks again if let alone.

with the exception of Le Moniteur.

14 This latter print endeavors to combat

that portion of the paragraph which has reference to ‘drowned bodies’ only,
by citing some five or six instances in which the bodies of individuals
known to be drowned were found floating after the lapse of less time than is
insisted upon by L’Etoile. But there is something excessively
unphilosophical in the attempt, on the part of Le Moniteur, to rebut the
general assertion of L’Etoile, by a citation of particular instances militating
against that assertion. Had it been possible to adduce fifty instead of five
examples of bodies found floating at the end of two or three days, these
fifty examples could still have been properly regarded only as exceptions to
L’Etoile’s rule, until such time as the rule itself should be confuted.
Admitting the rule, (and this Le Moniteur does not deny, insisting merely

upon its exceptions,) the argument of L’Etoile is suffered to remain in full
force; for this argument does not pretend to involve more than a question of
the probability of the body having risen to the surface in less than three
days; and this probability will be in favor of L’Etoile’s position until the
instances so childishly adduced shall be sufficient in number to establish an
antagonistical rule.

if at all, against the rule itself; and for this end we must examine the
rationale of the rule. Now the human body, in general is neither much
lighter nor much heavier than the water of the Seine; that is to say, the
specific gravity of the human body, in its natural condition, is about equal to
the bulk of fresh water which it displaces. The bodies of fat and fleshy
persons, with small bones, and of women generally, are lighter than those of
the lean and large-boned, and of men; and the specific gravity of the water
of a river is somewhat influenced by the presence of the tide from the sea.
But, leaving this tide out of the question, it may be said that very few
human bodies will sink at all, even in fresh water, of their own accord.
Almost any one, falling into a river, will be enabled to float, if he suffer the
specific gravity of the water fairly to be adduced in comparison with his
own — that is to say, if he suffer his whole person to be immersed, with as
little exception as possible. The proper position for one who cannot swim,
is the upright position of the walker on land, with the head thrown fully
back, and immersed; the mouth and nostrils alone remaining above the
surface. Thus circumstanced; we shall find that we float without difficulty
and without exertion. It is evident, however, that the gravities of the body,
and of the bulk of water displaced, are very nicely balanced, and that a trifle
will cause either to preponderate. An arm, for instance, uplifted from the
water, and thus deprived of its support, is an additional weight sufficient to
immerse the whole head, while the accidental aid of the smallest piece of
timber will enable us to elevate the head so as to look about. Now, in the
struggles of one unused to swimming, the arms are invariably thrown
upward, while an attempt is made to keep the head in its usual
perpendicular position. The result is the immersion of the mouth and

nostrils, and the inception, during efforts to breathe while beneath the
surface, of water into the lungs. Much is also received into the stomach, and
the whole body becomes heavier by the difference between the weight of
the air originally distending these cavities, and that of the fluid which now
fills them. This difference is sufficient to cause the body to sink, as a
general rule; but is insufficient in the case of individuals with small bones
and an abnormal quantity of flaccid or fatty matter. Such individuals float
even after drowning.

“The corpse, being supposed at the bottom of the river, will there

remain until, by some means, its specific gravity again becomes less than
that of the bulk of water which it displaces. This effect is brought about by
decomposition, or otherwise. The result of decomposition is the generation
of gas, distending the cellular tissues and all the cavities, and giving the
puffed appearance which is so horrible. When this distension has so far
progressed that the bulk of the corpse is materially increased without a
corresponding increase of mass or weight, its specific gravity becomes less
than that of the water displaced, and it forthwith makes its appearance at the
surface. But decomposition is modified by innumerable circumstances — is
hastened or retarded by innumerable agencies; for example, by the heat or
cold of the season, by the mineral impregnation or purity of the water, by its
depth or shallowness, by its currency or stagnation, by the temperament of
the body, by its infection or freedom from disease before death. Thus it is
evident that we can assign no period, with anything like accuracy, at which
the corpse shall rise through decomposition. Under certain conditions this
result would be brought about within an hour, under others it might not take
place at all. There are chemical infusions by which the animal frame can be
preserved forever from corruption; the Bi-chloride of Mercury is one. But,
apart from decomposition, there may be, and very usually is, a generation of
gas within the stomach, from the acetous fermentation of vegetable matter
(or within other cavities from other causes), sufficient to induce a distension
which will bring the body to the surface. The effect produced by the firing
of a cannon is that of simple vibration. This may either loosen the corpse
from the soft mud or ooze in which it is imbedded, thus permitting it to rise

when other agencies have already prepared it for so doing, or it may
overcome the tenacity of some putrescent portions of the cellular tissue,
allowing the cavities to distend under the influence of the gas.

“Having thus before us the whole philosophy of this subject, we can

easily test by it the assertions of L’Etoile. ‘All experience shows,’ says this
paper, ‘that drowned bodies, or bodies thrown into the water immediately
after death by violence, require from six to ten days for sufficient
decomposition to take place to bring them to the top of the water. Even
when a cannon is fired over a corpse, and it rises before at least five or six
days’ immersion, it sinks again if let alone.’

“The whole of this paragraph must now appear a tissue of

inconsequence and incoherence. All experience does not show that
‘drowned bodies’ require from six to ten days for sufficient decomposition
to take place to bring them to the surface. Both science and experience
show that the period of their rising is, and necessarily must be,
indeterminate. If, moreover, a body has risen to the surface through firing of
cannon, it will not ‘sink again if let alone,’ until decomposition has so far
progressed as to permit the escape of the generated gas. But I wish to call
your attention to the distinction which is made between ‘drowned bodies,’
and ‘bodies thrown into the water immediately after death by violence:
Although the writer admits the distinction, he yet includes them all in the
same category. I have shown how it is that the body of a drowning man
becomes specifically heavier than its bulk of water, and that he would not
sink at all, except for the struggle by which he elevates his arms above the
surface, and his gasps for breath while beneath the surface — gasps which
supply by water the place of the original air in the lungs. But these struggles
and these gasps would not occur in the body ‘thrown into the water
immediately after death by violence.’ Thus, in the latter instance, the body,
as a general rule, would not sink at all — a fact of which L’Etoile is
evidently ignorant. When decomposition had proceeded to a very great
extent — when the flesh had in a great measure left the bones — then,
indeed, but not till then, should we lose sight of the corpse.

could not be that of Marie Roget, because, three days only having elapsed,
this body was found floating? If drowned, being a woman, she might never
have sunk; or, having sunk, might have reappeared in twenty — four hours
or less. But no one supposes her to have been drowned; and, dying before
being thrown into the river, she might have been found floating at any
period afterwards whatever.

“‘But,’ says L’Etoile, ‘if the body had been kept in its mangled state on

shore until Tuesday night, some trace would be found on shore of the
murderers.’ Here it is at first difficult to perceive the intention of the
reasoner. He means to anticipate what he imagines would be an objection to
his theory — viz.: that the body was kept on shore two days, suffering rapid
decomposition — more rapid than if immersed in water. He supposes that,
had this been the case, it might have appeared at the surface on the
Wednesday, and thinks that only under such circumstances it could so have
appeared. He is accordingly in haste to show that it was not kept on shore;
for, if so, ‘some trace would be found on shore of the murderers.’ I presume
you smile at the sequitur. You cannot be made to see how the mere duration
of the corpse on the shore could operate to multiply traces of the assassins.
Nor can I.

“‘And furthermore it is exceedingly improbable,’ continues our journal,

‘that any villains who had committed such a murder as is here supposed,
would have thrown the body in without weight to sink it, when such a
precaution could have so easily been taken.’ Observe, here, the laughable
confusion of thought! No one — not even L’Etoile — disputes the murder
committed on the body found. The marks of violence are too obvious. It is
our reasoner’s object merely to show that this body is not Marie’s . He
wishes to prove that Marie is not assassinated — not that the corpse was
not. Yet his observation proves only the latter point. Here is a corpse
without weight attached. Murderers, casting it in, would not have failed to
attach a weight. Therefore it was not thrown in by murderers. This is all
which is proved, if any thing is. The question of identity is not even
approached, and L’Etoile has been at great pains merely to gainsay now

what it has admitted only a moment before. ‘We are perfectly convinced,’ it
says, ‘that the body found was that of a murdered female.’

“Nor is this the sole instance, even in this division of the subject, where

our reasoner unwittingly reasons against himself. His evident object I have
already said, is to reduce, as much as possible, the interval between Marie’s
disappearance and the finding of the corpse. Yet we find him urging the
point that no person saw the girl from the moment of her leaving her
mother’s house. ‘We have no evidence,’ he says, ‘that Marie Roget was in
the land of the living after nine o’clock on Sunday, June the twenty-
second.’ As his argument is obviously an ex-parte one, he should, at least,
have left this matter out of sight; for had any one been known to see Marie,
say on Monday, or on Tuesday, the interval in question would have been
much reduced, and, by his own ratiocination, the probability much
diminished of the corpse being that of the grisette. It is, nevertheless,
amusing to observe that L’Etoile insists upon its point in the full belief of its
furthering its general argument.

“Reperuse now that portion of this argument which has reference to the

identification of the corpse by Beauvais. In regard to the hair upon the arm,
L’Etoile has been obviously disingenuous. M. Beauvais, not being an idiot,
could never have urged in identification of the corpse, simply hair upon its
arm. No arm is without hair. The generality of the expression of L’Etoile is
a mere perversion of the witness’ phraseology. He must have spoken of
some peculiarity in this hair. It must have been a peculiarity of color, of
quantity, of length, or of situation.

“‘Her foot,’ says the journal, ‘was small — so are thousands of feet. Her

garter is no proof whatever — nor is her shoe — for shoes and garters are
sold in packages. The same may be said of the flowers in her hat. One thing
upon which M. Beauvais strongly insists is, that the clasp on the garter
found had been set back to take it in. This amounts to nothing; for most
women find it proper to take a pair of garters home and, fit them to the size
of the limbs they are to encircle, rather than to try them in the store where
they purchase.’ Here it is difficult to suppose the reasoner in earnest. Had
M. Beauvais, in his search for the body of Marie, discovered a corpse

corresponding in general size and appearance to the missing girl, he would
have been warranted (without reference to the question of habiliment at all)
in forming an opinion that his search had been successful. If, in addition to
the point of general size and contour, he had found upon the arm a peculiar
hairy appearance which he had observed upon the living Marie, his opinion
might have been justly strengthened; and the increase of positiveness might
well have been in the ratio of the peculiarity, or unusualness, of the hairy
mark. If, the feet of Marie being small, those of the corpse were also small,
the increase of probability that the body was that of Marie would not be an
increase in a ratio merely arithmetical, but in one highly geometrical, or
accumulative. Add to all this shoes such as she had been known to wear
upon the day of her disappearance, and, although these shoes may be ‘sold
in packages,’ you so far augment the probability as to verge upon the
certain. What, of itself, would be no evidence of identity, becomes through
its corroborative position, proof most sure. Give us, then, flowers in the hat
corresponding to those worn by the missing girl, and we seek for nothing
farther. If only one flower, we seek for nothing farther — what then if two
or three, or more? Each successive one is multiple evidence — proof not
added to proof, but multiplied by hundreds or thousands. Let us now
discover, upon the deceased, garters such as the living used, and it is almost
folly to proceed. But these garters are found to be tightened, by the setting
back of a clasp, in just such a manner as her own had been tightened by
Marie shortly previous to her leaving home. It is now madness or hypocrisy
to doubt. What L’Etoile says in respect to this abbreviation of the garter’s
being an unusual occurrence, shows nothing beyond its own pertinacity in
error. The elastic nature of the clasp-garter is self-demonstration of the
unusualness of the abbreviation. What is made to adjust itself, must of
necessity require foreign adjustment but rarely. It must have been by an
accident, in its strictest sense, that these garters of Marie needed the
tightening described. They alone would have amply established her identity.
But it is not that the corpse was found to have the garters of the missing
girl, or found to have her shoes, or her bonnet, or the flowers of her bonnet,
or her feet, or a peculiar mark upon the arm, or her general size and

appearance — it is that the corpse had each and all collectively. Could it be
proved that the editor of L’Etoile really entertained a doubt, under the
circumstances, there would be no need, in his case, of a commission de
lunatico inquirendo. He has thought it sagacious to echo the small talk of
the lawyers, who, for the most part, content themselves with echoing the
rectangular precepts of the courts. I would here observe that very much of
what is rejected as evidence by a court, is the best of evidence to the
intellect. For the court, guiding itself by the general principles of evidence
— the recognized and booked principles — is averse from swerving at
particular instances. And this steadfast adherence to principle, with rigorous
disregard of the conflicting exception, is a sure mode of attaining the
maximum of attainable truth, in any long sequence of time. The practice, in
mass, is therefore philosophical; but it is not the less certain that it
engenders vast individual error.

“In respect to the insinuations levelled at Beauvais, you will be willing

to dismiss them in a breath. You have already fathomed the true character of
this good gentleman. He is a busy-body, with much of romance and little of
wit. Any one so constituted will readily so conduct himself, upon occasion
of real excitement, as to render himself liable to suspicion on the part of the
over-acute, or the ill-disposed. M. Beauvais (as it appears from your notes)
had some personal interviews with the editor of L’Etoile, and offended him
by venturing an opinion that the corpse, notwithstanding the theory of the
editor, was, in sober fact, that of Marie. ‘He persists,’ says the paper, ‘in
asserting the corpse to be that of Marie, but cannot give a circumstance, in
addition to those which we have commented upon, to make others believe.’
Now, without readverting to the fact that stronger evidence ‘to make others
believe,’ could never have been adduced, it may be remarked that a man
may very well be understood to believe, in a case of this kind, without the
ability to advance a single reason for the belief of a second party. Nothing is
more vague than impressions of individual identity. Each man recognizes
his neighbor, yet there are few instances in which any one is prepared to
give a reason for his recognition. The editor of L’Etoile had no right to be
offended at M. Beauvais’ unreasoning belief.

much better with my hypothesis of romantic busy-bodyism, than with the
reasoner’s suggestion of guilt. Once adopting the more charitable
interpretation, we shall find no difficulty in comprehending the rose in the
key-hole; the ‘Marie’ upon the slate; the ‘elbowing the male relatives out of
the way’; the ‘aversion to permitting them to see the body’; the caution
given to Madame B-, that she must hold no conversation with the gendarme
until his return (Beauvais); and, lastly, his apparent determination ‘that
nobody should have any thing to do with the proceedings except himself.’ It
seems to be unquestionable that Beauvais was a suitor of Marie’s; that she
coquetted with him; and that he was ambitious of being thought to enjoy her
fullest intimacy and confidence. I shall say nothing more upon this point;
and, as the evidence fully rebuts the assertion of L’Etoile, touching the
matter of apathy on the part of the mother and other relatives — an apathy
inconsistent with the supposition of their believing the corpse to be that of
the perfumery — girl — we shall now proceed as if the question of identity
were settled to our perfect satisfaction.”

“And what,” I here demanded, “do you think of the opinions of Le

Commerciel?”

“That in spirit, they are far more worthy of attention than any which

have been promulgated upon the subject. The deductions from the premises
are philosophical and acute; but the premises, in two instances, at least, are
founded in imperfect observation. Le Commerciel wishes to intimate that
Marie was seized by some gang of low ruffians not far from her mother’s
door. ‘It is impossible,’ it urges, ‘that a person so well known to thousands
as this young woman was, should have passed three blocks without some
one having seen her.” This is the idea of a man long resident in Paris — a
public man — and one whose walks to and fro in the city have been mostly
limited to the vicinity of the public offices. He is aware that he seldom
passes so far as a dozen blocks from his own bureau, without being
recognized and accosted. And, knowing the extent of his personal
acquaintance with others, and of others with him, he compares his notoriety
with that of the perfumery-girl, finds no great difference between them, and

reaches at once the conclusion that she, in her walks, would be equally
liable to recognition with himself in his. This could only be the case were
her walks of the same unvarying, methodical character, and within the same
species of limited region as are his own. He passes to and fro, at regular
intervals, within a confined periphery, abounding in individuals who are led
to observation of his person through interest in the kindred nature of his
occupation with their own. But the walks of Marie may, in general, be
supposed discursive. In this particular instance, it will be understood as
most probable, that she proceeded upon a route of more than average
diversity from her accustomed ones. The parallel which we imagine to have
existed in the mind of Le Commerciel would only be sustained in the event
of the two individuals traversing the whole city. In this case, granting the
personal acquaintances to be equal, the chances would be also equal that an
equal number of personal encounters would be made. For my own part, I
should hold it not only as possible, but as very far more probable, that
Marie might have proceeded, at any given period, by any one of the many
routes between her own residence and that of her aunt, without meeting a
single individual whom she knew, or by whom she was known. In viewing
this question in its full and proper light, we must hold steadily in mind the
great disproportion between the personal acquaintances of even the most
noted individual in Paris, and the entire population of Paris itself.

“But whatever force there may still appear to be in the suggestion of Le

Commerciel, will be much diminished when we take into consideration the
hour at which the girl went abroad. ‘It was when the streets were full of
people,’ says Le Commerciel, ‘that she went out.’ But not so. It was at nine
o’clock in the morning. Now at nine o’clock of every morning in the week,
with the exception of Sunday, the streets of the city are, it is true, thronged
with people. At nine on Sunday, the populace are chiefly within doors
preparing for church. No observing person can have failed to notice the
peculiarly deserted air of the town, from about eight until ten on the
morning of every Sabbath. Between ten and eleven the streets are thronged,
but not at so early a period as that designated.

on the part of Le Commerciel. ‘A piece,’ it says, ‘of one of the unfortunate
girl’s petticoats, two feet long, and one foot wide, was torn out and tied
under her chin, and around the back of her head, probably to prevent
screams. This was done by fellows who had no pocket-handkerchiefs.’
Whether this idea is or is not well founded, we will endeavor to see
hereafter, but by ‘fellows who have no pocket-handkerchiefs,’ the editor
intends the lowest class of ruffians. These, however, are the very
description of people who will always be found to have handkerchiefs even
when destitute of shirts. You must have had occasion to observe how
absolutely indispensable, of late years, to the thorough blackguard, has
become the pocket-handkerchief.”

“And what are we to think,” I asked, “of the article in Le Soleil?”
“That it is a vast pity its inditer was not born a parrot — in which case

he would have been the most illustrious parrot of his race. He has merely
repeated the individual items of the already published opinion; collecting
them, with a laudable industry, from this paper and from that. ‘The things
had all evidently been there,’ he says, ‘at least three or four weeks, and
there can be no doubt that the spot of this appalling outrage has been
discovered.’ The facts here re-stated by Le Soleil, are very far indeed from
removing my own doubts upon this subject, and we will examine them
more particularly hereafter in connection with another division of the
theme.

“At present we must occupy ourselves with other investigations. You

cannot fail to have remarked the extreme laxity of the examination of the
corpse. To be sure, the question of identity was readily determined, or
should have been; but there were other points to be ascertained. Had the
body been in any respect despoiled? Had the deceased any articles of
jewelry about her person upon leaving home? If so, had she any when
found? These are important questions utterly untouched by the evidence;
and there are others of equal moment, which have met with no attention.
We must endeavor to satisfy ourselves by personal inquiry. The case of St.
Eustache must be re-examined. I have no suspicion of this person; but let us

proceed methodically. We will ascertain beyond a doubt the validity of the
affidavits in regard to his whereabouts on the Sunday. Affidavits of this
character are readily made matter of mystification. Should there be nothing
wrong here, however, we will dismiss St. Eustache from our investigations.
His suicide, however, corroborative of suspicion, were there found to be
deceit in the affidavits, is, without such deceit, in no respect an
unaccountable circumstance, or one which need cause us to deflect from the
line of ordinary analysis.

“In that which I now propose, we will discard the interior points of this

tragedy, and concentrate our attention upon its outskirts. Not the least usual
error in investigations such as this is the limiting of inquiry to the
immediate, with total disregard of the collateral or circumstantial events. It
is the malpractice of the courts to confine evidence and discussion to the
bounds of apparent relevancy. Yet experience has shown, and a true
philosophy will always show, that a vast, perhaps the larger, portion of truth
arises from the seemingly irrelevant. It is through the spirit of this principle,
if not precisely through its letter, that modern science has resolved to
calculate upon the unforeseen. But perhaps you do not comprehend me. The
history of human knowledge has so uninterruptedly shown that to collateral,
or incidental, or accidental events we are indebted for the most numerous
and most valuable discoveries, that it has at length become necessary, in
any prospective view of improvement, to make not only large, but the
largest, allowances for inventions that shall arise by chance, and quite out of
the range of ordinary expectation. It is no longer philosophical to base upon
what has been a vision of what is to be. Accident is admitted as a portion of
the substructure. We make chance a matter of absolute calculation. We
subject the unlooked for and unimagined to the mathematical formulae of
the schools.

“I repeat that it is no more than fact that the larger portion of all truth

has sprung from the collateral; and it is but in accordance with the spirit of
the principle involved in this fact that I would divert inquiry, in the present
case, from the trodden and hitherto unfruitful ground of the event itself to
the contemporary circumstances which surround it. While you ascertain the

validity of the affidavits, I will examine the newspapers more generally than
you have as yet done. So far, we have only reconnoitred the field of
investigation; but it will be strange, indeed, if a comprehensive survey, such
as I propose, of the public prints will not afford us some minute points
which shall establish a direction for inquiry.”

the affair of the affidavits. The result was a firm conviction of their validity,
and of the consequent innocence of St. Eustache. In the meantime my friend
occupied himself, with what seemed to me a minuteness altogether
objectless, in a scrutiny of the various newspaper files. At the end of a week
he placed before me the following extracts:

“About three years and a half ago, a disturbance very similar to the

present was caused by the disappearance of this same Marie Roget from the
parfumerie of Monsieur Le Blanc, in the Palais Royal. At the end of a week,
however, she re-appeared at her customary comptoir, as well as ever, with
the exception of a slight paleness not altogether usual. It was given out by
Monsieur Le Blanc and her mother that she had merely been on a visit to
some friend in the country; and the affair was speedily hushed up. We
presume that the present absence is a freak of the same nature, and that, at
the expiration of a week or, perhaps, of a month, we shall have her among
us again."— Evening Paper, Monday, June 23.

“An evening journal of yesterday refers to a former mysterious

disappearance of Mademoiselle Roget. It is well known that, during the
week of her absence from Le Blanc’s parfumerie, she was in the company
of a young naval officer much noted for his debaucheries. A quarrel, it is
supposed, providentially, led to her return home. We have the name of the
Lothario in question, who is at present stationed in Paris, but for obvious
reasons forbear to make it public."— Le Mercure, Tuesday Morning, June
24.

“An outrage of the most atrocious character was perpetrated near this

city the day before yesterday. A gentleman, with his wife and daughter,
engaged, about dusk, the services of six young men, who were idly rowing
a boat to and fro near the banks of the Seine, to convey him across the river.

Upon reaching the opposite shore the three passengers stepped out, and had
proceeded so far as to be beyond the view of the boat, when the daughter
discovered that she had left in it her parasol. She returned for it, was seized
by the gang, carried out into the stream, gagged, brutally treated, and finally
taken to the shore at a point not far from that at which she had originally
entered the boat with her parents. The villains have escaped for the time,
but the police are upon their trail, and some of them will soon be taken."—
Morning Paper, June 25-

“We have received one or two communications, the object of which is

to fasten the crime of the late atrocity upon Mennais

19; but as this gentleman

has been fully exonerated by a legal inquiry, and as the arguments of our
several correspondents appear to be more zealous than profound, we do not
think it advisable to make them public."— Morning Paper, June 28.

20(2)

“We have received several forcibly written communications, apparently

from various sources, and which go far to render it a matter of certainty that
the unfortunate Marie Roget has become a victim of one of the numerous
bands of blackguards which infest the vicinity of the city upon Sunday. Our
own opinion is decidedly in favor of this supposition. We shall endeavor to
make room for some of these arguments hereafter."— Evening Paper,
Tuesday, June 31.

“On Monday, one of the bargemen connected with the revenue service

saw an empty boat floating down the Seine. Sails were lying in the bottom
of the boat. The bargeman towed it under the barge office. The next
morning it was taken from thence without the knowledge of any of the
officers. The rudder is now at the barge office."— Le Diligence, Thursday,
June 26.

Upon reading these various extracts, they not only seemed to me

irrelevant, but I could perceive no mode in which any one of them could be
brought to bear upon the matter in hand. I waited for some explanation from
Dupin.

“It is not my present design,” he said, “to dwell upon the first and

second of these extracts. I have copied them chiefly to show you the

extreme remissness of the police, who, as far as I can understand from the
Prefect, have not troubled themselves, in any respect, with an examination
of the naval officer alluded to. Yet it is mere folly to say that between the
first and second disappearance of Marie there is no supposable connection.
Let us admit the first elopement to have resulted in a quarrel between the
lovers, and the return home of the betrayed. We are now prepared to view a
second elopement (if we know that an elopement has again taken place) as
indicating a renewal of the betrayer’s advances, rather than as the result of
new proposals by a second individual — we are prepared to regard it as a
‘making up’ of the old amour, rather than as the commencement of a new
one. The chances are ten to one, that he who had once eloped with Marie
would again propose an elopement, rather than that she to whom proposals
of an elopement had been made by one individual, should have them made
to her by another. And here let me call your attention to the fact, that the
time elapsing between the first ascertained and the second supposed
elopement is a few months more than the general period of the cruises of
our men-of-war. Had the lover been interrupted in his first villainy by the
necessity of departure to sea, and had he seized the first moment of his
return to renew the base designs not yet altogether accomplished — or not
yet altogether accomplished by him? Of all these things we know nothing.

“You will say, however, that, in the second instance, there was no

elopement as imagined. Certainly not — but are we prepared to say that
there was not the frustrated design? Beyond St. Eustache, and perhaps
Beauvais, we find no recognized, no open, no honorable suitors of Marie.
Of none other is there any thing said. Who, then, is the secret lover, of
whom the relatives (at least most of them) know nothing, but whom Marie
meets upon the morning of Sunday, and who is so deeply in her confidence,
that she hesitates not to remain with him until the shades of the evening
descend, amid the solitary groves of the Barriere du Roule? Who is that
secret lover, I ask, of whom, at least, most of the relatives know nothing?
And what means the singular prophecy of Madam Roget on the morning of
Marie’s departure? — ‘I fear that I shall never see Marie again.’

“But if we cannot imagine Madame Roget privy to the design of

elopement, may we not at least suppose this design entertained by the girl?
Upon quitting home, she gave it to be understood that she was about to visit
her aunt in the Rue des Dromes, and St. Eustache was requested to call for
her at dark. Now, at first glance, this fact strongly militates against my
suggestion; — but let us reflect. That she did meet some companion, and
proceed with him across the river, reaching the Barriere du Roule at so late
an hour as three o’clock in the afternoon, is known. But in consenting so to
accompany this individual, (for whatever purpose — to her mother known
or unknown,) she must have thought of her expressed intention when
leaving home, and of the surprise and suspicion aroused in the bosom of her
affianced suitor, St. Eustache, when, calling for her, at the hour appointed,
in the Rue des Dromes, he should find that she had not been there, and
when, moreover, upon returning to the pension with this alarming
intelligence, he should become aware of her continued absence from home.
She must have thought of these things, I say. She must have foreseen the
chagrin of St. Eustache, the suspicion of all. She could not have thought of
returning to brave this suspicion; but the suspicion becomes a point of
trivial importance to her, if we suppose her not intending to return.

“We may imagine her thinking thus —‘I am to meet a certain person for

the purpose of elopement, or for certain other purposes known only to
myself. It is necessary that there be no chance of interruption — there must
be sufficient time given us to elude pursuit — I will give it to be understood
that I shall visit and spend the day with my aunt at the Rue des Dromes — I
will tell St. Eustache not to call for me until dark — in this way, my
absence from home for the longest possible period, without causing
suspicion or anxiety, will be accounted for, and I shall gain more time than
in any other manner. If I bid St. Eustache call for me at dark, he will be sure
not to call before; but if I wholly neglect to bid him call, my time for escape
will be diminished, since it will be expected that I return the earlier, and my
absence will the sooner excite anxiety. Now, if it were my design to return
at all — if I had in contemplation merely a stroll with the individual in
question — it would not be my policy to bid St. Eustache call; for, calling,

he will be sure to ascertain that I have played him false — a fact of which I
might keep him forever in ignorance, by leaving home without notifying
him of my intention, by returning before dark, and by then stating that I had
been to visit my aunt in the Rue des Dromes. But, as it is my design never
to return — or not for some weeks — or not until certain concealments are
effected — the gaining of time is the only point about which I need give
myself any concern.’

“You have observed, in your notes, that the most general opinion in

relation to this sad affair is, and was from the first, that the girl had been the
victim of a gang of blackguards. Now, the popular opinion, under certain
conditions, is not to be disregarded. When arising of itself — when
manifesting itself in a strictly spontaneous manner — we should look upon
it as analogous with that intuition which is the idiosyncrasy of the
individual man of genius. In ninety-nine cases from the hundred I would
abide by its decision. But it is important that we find no palpable traces of
suggestion. The opinion must be rigorously the public’s own, and the
distinction is often exceedingly difficult to perceive and to maintain. In the
present instance, it appears to me that this ‘public opinion,’ in respect to a
gang, has been superinduced by the collateral event which is detailed in the
third of my extracts. All Paris is excited by the discovered corpse of Marie,
a girl young, beautiful, and notorious. This corpse is found, bearing marks
of violence, and floating in the river. But it is now made known that, at the
very period, or about the very period, in which it is supposed that the girl
was assassinated, an outrage similar in nature to that endured by the
deceased, although less in extent, was perpetrated by a gang of young
ruffians, upon the person of a second young female. Is it wonderful that the
one known atrocity should influence the popular judgment in regard to the
other unknown? This judgment awaited direction, and the known outrage
seemed so opportunely to afford it! Marie, too, was found in the river; and
upon this very river was this known outrage committed. The connection of
the two events had about it so much of the palpable, that the true wonder
would have been a failure of the populace to appreciate and to seize it. But,
in fact, the one atrocity, known to be so committed, is, if any thing,

evidence that the other, committed at a time nearly coincident, was not so
committed. It would have been a miracle indeed, if, while a gang of ruffians
were perpetrating, at a given locality, a most unheard — of wrong, there
should have been another similar gang, in a similar locality, in the same
city, under the same circumstances, with the same means and appliances,
engaged in a wrong of precisely the same aspect, at precisely the same
period of time! Yet in what, if not in this marvellous train of coincidence,
does the accidentally suggested opinion of the populace call upon us to
believe?

assassination, in the thicket at the Barriere du Roule. This thicket, although
dense, was in the close vicinity of a public road. Within were three or four
large stones, forming a kind of seat with a back and a footstool. On the
upper stone was discovered a white petticoat; on the second, a silk scarf. A
parasol, gloves, and a pocket-handkerchief were also here found. The
handkerchief bore the name ‘Marie Roget’. Fragments of dress were seen
on the branches around. The earth was trampled, the bushes were broken,
and there was every evidence of a violent struggle.

“Notwithstanding the acclamation with which the discovery of this

thicket was received by the press, and the unanimity with which it was
supposed to indicate the precise scene of the outrage, it must be admitted
that there was some very good reason for doubt. That it was the scene, I
may or I may not believe — but there was excellent reason for doubt. Had
the true scene been, as Le Commerciel suggested, in the neighborhood of
the Rue Pavee St. Andree, the perpetrators of the crime, supposing them
still resident in Paris, would naturally have been stricken with terror at the
public attention thus acutely directed into the proper channel; and, in certain
classes of minds, there would have arisen, at once, a sense of the necessity
of some exertion to re-divert this attention. And thus, the thicket of the
Barriere du Roule having been already suspected, the idea of placing the
articles where they were found, might have been naturally entertained.
There is no real evidence, although Le Soleil so supposes, that the articles
discovered had been more than a very few days in the thicket; while there is

much circumstantial proof that they could not have remained there, without
attracting attention, during the twenty days elapsing between the fatal
Sunday and the afternoon upon which they were found by the boys. ‘They
were all mildewed down hard,’ says Le Soleil, adopting the opinions of its
predecessors, ‘with the action of the rain and stuck together from mildew.
The grass had grown around and over some of them. The silk of the parasol
was strong, but the threads of it were run together within. The upper part,
where it had been doubled and folded, was all mildewed and rotten, and
tore on being opened.’ In respect to the grass having ‘grown around and
over some of them,’ it is obvious that the fact could only have been
ascertained from the words, and thus from the recollections, of two small
boys; for these boys removed the articles and took them home before they
had been seen by a third party. But the grass will grow, especially in warm
and damp weather (such as was that of the period of the murder), as much
as two or three inches in a single day. A parasol lying upon a newly turfed
ground, might, in a single week, be entirely concealed from sight by the
upspringing grass. And touching that mildew upon which the editor of Le
Soleil so pertinaciously insists, that he employs the word no less than three
times in the brief paragraph just quoted, is he really unaware of the nature
of this mildew? Is he to be told that it is one of the many classes of fungus,
of which the most ordinary feature is its upspringing and decadence within
twenty-four hours?

“Thus we see, at a glance, that what has been most triumphantly

adduced in support of the idea that the articles had been ‘for at least three or
four weeks’ in the thicket, is most absurdly null as regards any evidence of
that fact. On the other hand, it is exceedingly difficult to believe that these
articles could have remained in the thicket specified for a longer period than
a single week — for a longer period than from one Sunday to the next.
Those who know any thing of the vicinity of Paris, know the extreme
difficulty of finding seclusion, unless at a great distance from its suburbs.
Such a thing as an unexplored or even an unfrequently visited recess, amid
its woods or groves, is not for a moment to be imagined. Let any one who,
being at heart a lover of nature, is yet chained by duty to the dust and heat

of this great metropolis — let any such one attempt, even during the week-
days, to slake his thirst for solitude amid the scenes of natural loveliness
which immediately surround us. At every second step, he will find the
growing charm dispelled by the voice and personal intrusion of some
ruffian or party of carousing blackguards. He will seek privacy amid the
densest foliage, all in vain. Here are the very nooks where the unwashed
most abound — here are the temples most desecrate. With sickness of the
heart the wanderer will flee back to the polluted Paris as to a less odious
because less incongruous sink of pollution. But if the vicinity of the city is
so beset during the working days of the week, how much more so on the
Sabbath! It is now especially that, released from the claims of labor, or
deprived of the customary opportunities of crime, the town blackguard
seeks the precincts of the town, not through love of the rural, which in his
heart he despises, but by way of escape from the restraints and
conventionalities of society. He desires less the fresh air and the green trees,
than the utter license of the country. Here, at the road-side inn, or beneath
the foliage of the woods, he indulges unchecked by any eye except those of
his boon companions, in all the mad excess of a counterfeit hilarity — the
joint offspring of liberty and of rum. I say nothing more than what must be
obvious to every dispassionate observer, when I repeat that the
circumstance of the articles in question having remained undiscovered, for a
longer period than from one Sunday to another, in any thicket in the
immediate neighborhood of Paris, is to be looked upon as little less than
miraculous.

“But there are not wanting other grounds for the suspicion that the

articles were placed in the thicket with the view of diverting attention from
the real scene of the outrage. And first, let me direct your notice to the date
of the discovery of the articles. Collate this with the date of the fifth extract
made by myself from the newspapers. You will find that the discovery
followed, almost immediately, the urgent communications sent to the
evening paper. These communications, although various, and apparently
from various sources, tended all to the same point-viz., the directing of
attention to a gang as the perpetrators of the outrage, and to the

neighborhood of the Barriere du Roule as its scene. Now, here, of course,
the suspicion is not that, in consequence of these communications, or of the
public attention by them directed, the articles were found by the boys; but
the suspicion might and may well have been, that the articles were not
before found by the boys, for the reason that the articles had not before been
in the thicket; having been deposited there only at so late a period as at the
date, or shortly prior to the date of the communications, by the guilty
authors of these communications themselves.

“This thicket was a singular — an exceedingly singular one. It was

unusually dense. Within its naturally walled enclosure were three
extraordinary stones, forming a seat with a back and a footstool. And this
thicket, so full of art, was in the immediate vicinity, within a few rods, of
the dwelling of Madame Deluc, whose boys were in the habit of closely
examining the shrubberies about them in search of the bark of the sassafras.
Would it be a rash wager — a wager of one thousand to one — that a day
never passed over the heads of these boys without finding at least one of
them ensconced in the umbrageous hall, and enthroned upon its natural
throne? Those who would hesitate at such a wager, have either never been
boys themselves, or have forgotten the boyish nature. I repeat — it is
exceedingly hard to comprehend how the articles could have remained in
this thicket undiscovered, for a longer period than one or two days; and that
thus there is good ground for suspicion, in spite of the dogmatic ignorance
of Le Soleil, that they were, at a comparatively late date, deposited where
found.

deposited, than any which I have as yet urged. And, now, let me beg your
notice to the highly artificial arrangement of the articles. On the upper stone
lay a white petticoat; on the second, a silk scarf; scattered around, were a
parasol, gloves, and a pocket-handkerchief bearing the name ‘Marie Roget.’
Here is just such an arrangement as would naturally be made by a not over-
acute person wishing to dispose the articles naturally. But it is by no means
a really natural arrangement. I should rather have looked to see the things
all lying on the ground and trampled under foot. In the narrow limits of that

bower, it would have been scarcely possible that the petticoat and scarf
should have retained a position upon the stones, when subjected to the
brushing to and fro of many struggling persons. ‘There was evidence,’ it is
said, ‘of a struggle; and the earth was trampled, the bushes were broken,’—
but the petticoat and the scarf are found deposited as if upon shelves. ‘The
pieces of the frock torn out by the bushes were about three inches wide and
six inches long. One part was the hem of the frock and it had been mended.
They looked like strips torn off.’ Here, inadvertently, Le Soleil has
employed an exceedingly suspicious phrase. The pieces, as described, do
indeed look like strips torn off; but purposely and by hand. It is one of the
rarest of accidents that a piece is ‘torn off,’ from any garment such as is
now in question, by the agency of a thorn. From the very nature of such
fabrics, a thorn or nail becoming tangled in them, tears them rectangularly
— divides them into two longitudinal rents, at right angles with each other,
and meeting at an apex where the thorn enters — but it is scarcely possible
to conceive the piece ‘torn off.’ I never so knew it, nor did you. To tear a
piece off from such fabric, two distinct forces, in different directions, will
be, in almost every case, required. If there be two edges to the fabric — if,
for example, it be a pocket-handkerchief, and it is desired to tear from it a
slip, then, and then only, will the one force serve the purpose. But in the
present case the question is of a dress, presenting but one edge. To tear a
piece from the interior, where no edge is presented, could only be effected
by a miracle through the agency of thorns, and no one thorn could
accomplish it. But, even where an edge is presented, two thorns will be
necessary, operating, the one in two distinct directions, and the other in one.
And this in the supposition that the edge is unhemmed. If hemmed, the
matter is nearly out of the question. We thus see the numerous and great
obstacles in the way of pieces being ‘torn off’ through the simple agency of
‘thorns’; yet we are required to believe not only that one piece but that
many have been so torn. ‘And one part,’ too, ‘was the hem of the frock’!
Another piece was ‘part of the skirt, not the hem,’— that is to say, was torn
completely out, through the agency of thorns, from the unedged interior of
the dress! These, I say, are things which one may well be pardoned for

disbelieving; yet, taken collectedly, they form, perhaps, less of reasonable
ground for suspicion, than the one startling circumstance of the articles
having been left in this thicket at all, by any murderers who had enough
precaution to think of removing the corpse. You will not have apprehended
me rightly, however, if you suppose it my design to deny this thicket as the
scene of the outrage. There might have been a wrong here, or more
possibly, an accident at Madame Deluc’s . But, in fact, this is a point of
minor importance. We are not engaged in an attempt to discover the scene,
but to produce the perpetrators of the murder. What I have adduced,
notwithstanding the minuteness with which I have adduced it, has been with
the view, first, to show the folly of the positive and headlong assertions of
Le Soleil, but secondly and chiefly, to bring you, by the most natural route,
to a further contemplation of the doubt whether this assassination has, or
has not, been the work of a gang.

of the surgeon examined at the inquest. It is only necessary to say that his
published inferences, in regard to the number of the ruffians, have been
properly ridiculed as unjust and totally baseless, by all the reputable
anatomists of Paris. Not that the matter might not have been as inferred, but
that there was no ground for the inference:— was there not much for
another?

“Let us reflect now upon ‘the traces of a struggle’; let me — ask what

these traces have been supposed to demonstrate. A gang. But do they not
rather demonstrate the absence of a gang? What struggle could have taken
place — what struggle so violent and so enduring as to have left its ‘traces’
in all directions — between a weak and defenceless girl and a gang of
ruffians imagined? The silent grasp of a few rough arms and all would have
been over. The victim must have been absolutely passive at their will. You
will here bear in mind that the arguments urged against the thicket as the
scene, are applicable, in chief part, only against it as the scene of an outrage
committed by more than a single individual. If we imagine but one violator,
we can conceive, and thus only conceive, the struggle of so violent and so
obstinate a nature as to have left the ‘traces’ apparent.

fact that the articles in question were suffered to remain at all in the thicket
where discovered. It seems almost impossible that these evidences of guilt
should have been accidentally left where found. There was sufficient
presence of mind (it is supposed) to remove the corpse, and yet a more
positive evidence than the corpse itself (whose features might have been
quickly obliterated by decay), is allowed to lie conspicuously in the scene
of the outrage — I allude to the handkerchief with the name of the
deceased. If this was accident, it was not the accident of a gang. We can
imagine it only the accident of an individual. Let us see. An individual has
committed the murder. He is alone with the ghost of the departed. He is
appalled by what lies motionless before him. The fury of his passion is
over, and there is abundant room in his heart for the natural awe of the deed.
His is none of that confidence which the presence of numbers inevitably
inspires. He is alone with the dead. He trembles and is bewildered. Yet there
is a necessity for disposing of the corpse. He bears it to the river, and leaves
behind him the other evidences of his guilt; for it is difficult, if not
impossible to carry all the burthen at once, and it will be easy to return for
what is left. But in his toilsome journey to the water his fears redouble
within him. The sounds of life encompass his path. A dozen times he hears
or fancies he hears the step of an observer. Even the very lights from the
city bewilder him. Yet, in time, and by long and frequent pauses of deep
agony, he reaches the river’s brink, and disposes of his ghastly charge —
perhaps through the medium of a boat. But now what treasure does the
world hold — what threat of vengeance could it hold out — which would
have power to urge the return of that lonely murderer over that toilsome and
perilous path, to the thicket and its blood-chilling recollections? He returns
not, let the consequences be what they may. He could not return if he
would. His sole thought is immediate escape. He turns his back forever
upon those dreadful shrubberies, and flees as from the wrath to come.

“But how with a gang? Their number would have inspired them with

confidence; if, indeed, confidence is ever wanting in the breast of the arrant
blackguard; and of arrant blackguards alone are the supposed gangs ever

constituted. Their number, I say, would have prevented the bewildering and
unreasoning terror which I have imagined to paralyze the single man. Could
we suppose an oversight in one, or two, or three, this oversight would have
been remedied by a fourth. They would have left nothing behind them; for
their number would have enabled them to carry all at once. There would
have been no need of return.

when found, ‘a slip, about a foot wide, had been torn upward from the
bottom hem to the waist, wound three times around the waist, and secured
by a sort of hitch in the back.’ This was done with the obvious design of
affording a handle by which to carry the body. But would any number of
men have dreamed of resorting to such an expedient? To three or four, the
limbs of the corpse would have afforded not only a sufficient, but the best
possible, hold. The device is that of a single individual; and this brings us to
the fact that ‘between the thicket and the river, the rails of the fences were
found taken down, and the ground bore evident traces of some heavy
burden having been dragged along it!’ But would a number of men have put
themselves to the superfluous trouble of taking down a fence, for the
purpose of dragging through it a corpse which they might have lifted over
any fence in an instant? Would a number of men have so dragged a corpse
at all as to have left evident traces of the dragging?

“And here we must refer to an observation of Le Commerciel; an

observation upon which I have already, in some measure, commented. ‘A
piece,’ says this journal, ‘of one of the unfortunate girl’s petticoats was torn
out and tied under her chin, and around the back of her head, probably to
prevent screams. This was done by fellows who had no pocket-
handkerchiefs.’

“I have before suggested that a genuine blackguard is never without a

pocket-handkerchief. But it is not to this fact that I now especially advert.
That it was not through want of a handkerchief for the purpose imagined by
Le Commerciel that this bandage was employed, is rendered apparent by
the handkerchief left in the thicket; and that the object was not ‘to prevent
screams’ appears, also, from the bandage having been employed in

preference to what would so much better have answered the purpose. But
the language of the evidence speaks of the strip in question as ‘found
around the neck, fitting loosely, and secured with a hard knot.’ These words
are sufficiently vague, but differ materially from those of Le Commerciel.
The slip was eighteen inches wide, and therefore, although of muslin,
would form a strong band when folded or rumpled longitudinally. And thus
rumpled it was discovered. My inference is this. The solitary murderer,
having borne the corpse for some distance (whether from the thicket or
elsewhere) by means of the bandage hitched around its middle, found the
weight, in this mode of procedure, too much for his strength. He resolved to
drag the burthen — the evidence goes to show that it was dragged. With this
object in view, it became necessary to attach something like a rope to one of
the extremities. It could be best attached about the neck, where the head
would prevent it slipping off. And now the murderer bethought him,
unquestionably, of the bandage about the loins. He would have used this,
but for its volution about the corpse, the hitch which embarrassed it, and the
reflection that it had not been ‘torn off from the garment. It was easier to
tear a new slip from the petticoat. He tore it, made it fast about the neck,
and so dragged his victim to the brink of the river. That this ‘bandage,’ only
attainable with trouble and delay, and but imperfectly answering its purpose
— that this bandage was employed at all, demonstrates that the necessity
for its employment sprang from circumstances arising at a period when the
handkerchief was no longer attainable — that is to say, arising, as we have
imagined, after quitting the thicket (if the thicket it was), and on the road
between the thicket and the river.

“But the evidence, you will say, of Madame Deluc(!) points especially

to the presence of a gang in the vicinity of the thicket, at or about the epoch
of the murder. This I grant. I doubt if there were not a dozen gangs, such as
described by Madame Deluc, in and about the vicinity of the Barriere du
Roule at or about the period of this tragedy. But the gang which has drawn
upon itself the pointed animadversion, although the somewhat tardy and
very suspicious evidence, of Madame Deluc, is the only gang which is
represented by that honest and scrupulous old lady as having eaten her

cakes and swallowed her brandy, without putting themselves to the trouble
of making her payment. Et hinc illae irae?

“But what is the precise evidence of Madame Deluc? ‘A gang of

miscreants made their appearance, behaved boisterously, ate and drank
without making payment, followed in the route of the young man and the
girl, returned to the inn about dusk, and re-crossed the river as if in great
haste.’

“Now this ‘great haste very possibly seemed greater haste in the eyes of

Madame Deluc, since she dwelt lingeringly and lamentingly upon her
violated cakes and ale — cakes and ale for which she might still have
entertained a faint hope of compensation. Why, otherwise, since it was
about dusk, should she make a point of the haste? It is no cause for wonder,
surely, that even a gang of blackguards should make haste to get home
when a wide river is to be crossed in small boats, when storm impends, and
when night approaches.

dusk that the indecent haste of these ‘miscreants’ offended the sober eyes of
Madame Deluc. But we are told that it was upon this very evening that
Madame Deluc, as well as her eldest son, ‘heard the screams of a female in
the vicinity of the inn.’ And in what words does Madame Deluc designate
the period of the evening at which these screams were heard? ‘It was soon
after dark’ she says. But ‘soon after dark’ is, at least, dark; and ‘about dusk’
is as certainly daylight. Thus it is abundantly clear that the gang quitted the
Barriere da Roule prior to the screams overheard(?) by Madame Deluc. And
although, in all the many reports of the evidence, the relative expressions in
question are distinctly and invariably employed just as I have employed
them in this conversation with yourself, no notice whatever of the gross
discrepancy has, as yet, been taken by any of the public journals, or by any
of the myrmidons of police.

“I shall add but one to the arguments against a gang, but this one has, to

my own understanding at least, a weight altogether irresistible. Under the
circumstances of large reward offered, and full pardon to any king’s
evidence, it is not to be imagined, for a moment, that some member of a

gang of low ruffians, or of any body of men would not long ago have
betrayed his accomplices. Each one of a gang, so placed, is not so much
greedy of reward, or anxious for escape, as fearful of betrayal. He betrays
eagerly and early that he may not himself be betrayed. That the secret has
not been divulged is the very best of proof that it is, in fact, a secret. The
horrors of this dark deed are known only to one, or two, living human
beings, and to God.

“Let us sum up now the meagre yet certain fruits of our long analysis.

We have attained the idea either of a fatal accident under the roof of
Madame Deluc, or of a murder perpetrated, in the thicket at the Barriere du
Roule, by a lover, or at least by an intimate and secret associate of the
deceased. This associate is of swarthy complexion. This complexion, the
‘hitch’ in the bandage, and the ‘sailor’s knot’ with which the bonnet-ribbon
is tied, point to a seaman. His companionship with the deceased, a gay but
not an abject young girl, designates him as above the grade of the common
sailor. Here the well-written and urgent communications to the journals are
much in the way of corroboration. The circumstance of the first elopement
as mentioned by Le Mercurie, tends to blend the idea of this seaman with
that of that ‘naval officer’ who is first known to have led the unfortunate
into crime.

“And here, most fitly, comes the consideration of the continued absence

of him of the dark complexion. Let me pause to observe that the
complexion of this man is dark and swarthy; it was no common swarthiness
which constituted the sole point of remembrance, both as regards Valence
and Madame Deluc. But why is this man absent? Was he murdered by the
gang? If so, why are there only traces of the assassinated girl? The scene of
the two outrages will naturally be supposed identical. And where is his
corpse? The assassins would most probably have disposed of both in the
same way. But it may be said that this man lives, and is deterred from
making himself known, through dread of being charged with the murder.
This consideration might be supposed to operate upon him now — at late
period — since it has been given in evidence that he was seen with Marie
— but it would have had no force at the period of the deed. The first

impulse of an innocent man would have been to announce the outrage, and
to aid in identifying the ruffians. This, policy would have suggested. He had
been seen with the girl. He had crossed the river with her in an open ferry-
boat. The denouncing of the assassins would have appeared, even to an
idiot, the surest and sole means of relieving himself from suspicion. We
cannot suppose him, on the night of the fatal Sunday, both innocent himself
and incognizant of an outrage committed. Yet only under such
circumstances is it possible to imagine that he would have failed, if alive, in
the denouncement of the assassins.

“And what means are ours of attaining the truth? We shall find these

means multiplying and gathering distinctness as we proceed. Let us sift to
the bottom this affair of the first elopement. Let us know the full history of
‘the officer,’ with his present circumstances, and his whereabouts at the
precise period of the murder. Let us carefully compare with each other the
various communications sent to the evening paper, in which the object was
to inculpate a gang. This done, let us compare these communications, both
as regards style and MS., with those sent to the morning paper, at a previous
period, and insisting so vehemently upon the guilt of Mennais. And, all this
done, let us again compare these various communications with the known
MSS. of the officer. Let us endeavor to ascertain, by repeated questionings
of Madame Deluc and her boys, as well as of the omnibus-driver, Valence,
something more of the personal appearance and bearing of the ‘man of dark
complexion.’ Queries, skillfully directed will not fail to elicit, from some of
these parties, information on this particular point (or upon others)—
information which the parties themselves may not even be aware of
possessing. And let us now trace the boat picked up by the bargeman on the
morning of Monday the twenty-third of June, and which was removed from
the barge-office, without the cognizance of the officer in attendance, and
without the rudder, at some period prior to the discovery of the corpse. With
a proper caution and perseverance we shall infallibly trace this boat; for not
only can the bargeman who picked it up identify it, but the rudder is at
hand. The rudder of a sail boat would not have been abandoned, without
inquiry, by one altogether at ease in heart. And here let me pause to

insinuate a question. There was no advertisement of the picking up of this
boat. It was silently taken to the barge-office and as silently removed. But
its owner or employer — how happened he, at so early a period as Tuesday
morning, to be informed, without the agency of advertisement, of the
locality of the boat taken up on Monday, unless we imagine some
connection with the navy — some personal permanent connexion leading to
cognizance of its minute interests — its petty local news?

“In speaking of the lonely assassin dragging his burden to the shore, I

have already suggested the probability of his availing himself of a boat.
Now we are to understand that Marie Roget was precipitated from a boat.
This would naturally have been the case. The corpse could not have been
trusted to the shallow waters of the shore. The peculiar marks on the back
and shoulders of the victim tell of the bottom ribs of a boat. That the body
was found without weight is also corroborative of the idea. If thrown from
the shore a weight would have been attached. We can only account for its
absence by supposing the murderer to have neglected the precaution of
supplying himself with it before pushing off. In the act of consigning the
corpse to the water, he would unquestionably have noticed his oversight;
but then no remedy would have been at hand. Any risk would have been
preferred to a return to that accursed shore. Having rid himself of his
ghastly charge, the murderer would have hastened to the city. There, at
some obscure wharf, he would have leaped on land. But the boat — would
he have secured it? He would have been in too great haste for such things as
securing a boat. Moreover, in fastening it to the wharf, he would have felt as
if securing evidence against himself. His natural thought would have been
to cast from him, as far as possible, all that had held connection with his
crime. He would not only have fled from the wharf, but he would not have
permitted the boat to remain. Assuredly he would have cast it adrift. Let us
pursue our fancies. In the morning, the wretch is stricken with unutterable
horror at finding that the boat has been picked up and detained at a locality
which he is in the daily habit of frequenting — at a locality, perhaps, which
his duty compels him to frequent. The next night, without daring to ask for
the rudder, he removes it. Now where is that rudderless boat? Let it be one

of our first purposes to discover. With the first glimpse we obtain of it, the
dawn of our success shall begin. This boat shall guide us, with a rapidity
which will surprise even ourselves, to him who employed it in the midnight
of the fatal Sabbath. Corroboration will rise upon corroboration, and the
murderer will be traced.”

(For reasons which we shall not specify, but which to many readers will

appear obvious, we have taken the liberty of here omitting, from the MSS.
placed in our hands, such portion as details the following up of the
apparently slight clew obtained by Dupin. We feel it advisable only to state,
in brief, that the result desired was brought to pass; and that the Prefect
fulfilled punctually, although with reluctance, the terms of his compact with
the Chevalier. Mr. Poe’s article concludes with the following words. — 

23)

It will be understood that I speak of coincidences and no more. What I

have said above upon this topic must suffice. In my own heart there dwells
no faith in praeter-nature. That Nature and its God are two, no man who
thinks will deny. That the latter, creating the former, can, at will, control or
modify it, is also unquestionable. I say “at will”; for the question is of will,
and not, as the insanity of logic has assumed, of power. It is not that the
Deity cannot modify his laws, but that we insult him in imagining a
possible necessity for modification. In their origin these laws were
fashioned to embrace all contingencies which could lie in the Future. With
God all is Now.

I repeat, then, that I speak of these things only as of coincidences. And

further: in what I relate it will be seen that between the fate of the unhappy
Mary Cecilia Rogers, so far as that fate is known, and the fate of one Marie
Roget up to a certain epoch in her history, there has existed a parallel in the
contemplation of whose wonderful exactitude the reason becomes
embarrassed. I say all this will be seen. But let it not for a moment be
supposed that, in proceeding with the sad narrative of Marie from the epoch
just mentioned, and in tracing to its denouement the mystery which
enshrouded her, it is my covert design to hint at an extension of the parallel,
or even to suggest that the measures adopted in Paris for the discovery of

the assassin of a grisette, or measures founded in any similar ratiocination
would produce any similar result.

considered that the most trifling variation in the facts of the two cases might
give rise to the most important miscalculations, by diverting thoroughly the
two courses of events; very much as, in arithmetic, an error which, in its
own individuality, may be inappreciable, produces, at length, by dint of
multiplication at all points of the process, a result enormously at variance
with truth. And, in regard to the former branch, we must not fail to hold in
view that the very Calculus of Probabilities to which I have referred, forbids
all idea of the extension of the parallel — forbids it with a positiveness
strong and decided just in proportion as this parallel has already been long-
drawn and exact. This is one of those anomalous propositions which,
seemingly appealing to thought altogether apart from the mathematical, is
yet one which only the mathematician can fully entertain. Nothing, for
example, is more difficult than to convince the merely general reader that
the fact of sixes having been thrown twice in succession by a player at dice,
is sufficient cause for betting the largest odds that sixes will not be thrown
in the third attempt. A suggestion to this effect is usually rejected by the
intellect at once. It does not appear that the two throws which have been
completed, and which lie now absolutely in the Past, can have influence
upon the throw which exists only in the Future. The chance for throwing
sixes seems to be precisely as it was at any ordinary time — that is to say,
subject only to the influence of the various other throws which may be
made by the dice. And this is a reflection which appears so exceedingly
obvious that attempts to controvert it are received more frequently with a
derisive smile than with any thing like respectful attention. The error here
involved — a gross error redolent of mischief — I cannot pretend to expose
within the limits assigned me at present; and with the philosophical it needs
no exposure. It may be sufficient here to say that it forms one of an infinite
series of mistakes which arise in the path of Reason through her propensity
for seeking truth in detail.

1. Upon the original publication of “Marie Roget,” the footnotes now appended were considered

unnecessary; but the lapse of several years since the tragedy upon which the tale is based,
renders it expedient to give them, and also to say a few words in explanation of the general
design. A young girl, Mary Cecilia Rogers, was murdered in the vicinity of New York; and
although her death occasioned an intense and long-enduring excitement, the mystery attending it
had remained unsolved at the period when the present paper was written and published
(November, 1842). Herein, under pretence of relating the fate of a Parisian grisette, the author
has followed, in minute detail, the essential, while merely paralleling the inessential, facts of the
real murder of Mary Rogers. Thus all argument founded upon the fiction is applicable to the
truth: and the investigation of the truth was the object. 
 
The “Mystery of Marie Roget” was composed at a distance from the scene of the atrocity, and
with no other means of investigation than the newspapers afforded. Thus much escaped the
writer of which he could have availed himself had he been upon the spot and visited the
localities. It may not be improper to record, nevertheless, that the confessions of two persons
(one of them the Madame Deluc of the narrative), made, at different periods, long subsequent to
the publication, confirmed, in full, not only the general conclusion, but absolutely all the chief
hypothetical details by which that conclusion was attained.

2. Nassau Street

3. Anderson

4. The Hudson

5. Weehawken

6. Payne

7. Crommelin

8. The New York Mercury.

9. The New York Brother Jonathon

10. New York Journal of Commerce

11. Philadelphia Saturday Evening Post

12. Adam

13. See “Murder’s in the Rue Morgue.”

14. The New York Commercial Advertiser

15. “A theory based on the qualities of an object, will prevent its being unfolded according to its

objects; and he who arranges topics in reference to their causes, will cease to value them
according to their results. Thus the jurisprudence of every nation will show that, when law
becomes a science and a system, it ceases to be justice. The errors into which a blind devotion to
principles of classification has led the common law, will be seen by observing how often the
legislature has been obliged to come forward to restore the equity its scheme had lost."—
Landor.

16. New York Express

17. New York Herald

18. New York Courier and Inquirer

19. Mennais was one of the parties originally arrested, but discharged through total lack of

evidence.

20. New York Courier and Inquirer

21. New York Evening Post

22. New York Standard

23. Of the magazine in which the article was originally published.

OceanofPDF.com

The Purloined Letter

Nil sapientiae odiosius acumine nimio.

— Seneca.

At Paris, just after dark one gusty evening in the autumn of 18 — I was
enjoying the twofold luxury of meditation and a meerschaum, in company
with my friend C. Auguste Dupin, in his little back library, or book-closet,
au troisieme, No. 33, Rue Dunot, Faubourg St. Germain. For one hour at
least we had maintained a profound silence; while each, to any casual
observer, might have seemed intently and exclusively occupied with the
curling eddies of smoke that oppressed the atmosphere of the chamber. For
myself, however, I was mentally discussing certain topics which had
formed matter for conversation between us at an earlier period of the
evening; I mean the affair of the Rue Morgue, and the mystery attending the
murder of Marie Roget. I looked upon it, therefore, as something of a
coincidence, when the door of our apartment was thrown open and admitted
our old acquaintance, Monsieur G — the Prefect of the Parisian police.

We gave him a hearty welcome; for there was nearly half as much of the

entertaining as of the contemptible about the man, and we had not seen him
for several years. We had been sitting in the dark, and Dupin now arose for
the purpose of lighting a lamp, but sat down again, without doing so, upon
G.’s saying that he had called to consult us, or rather to ask the opinion of
my friend, about some official business which had occasioned a great deal
of trouble.

“If it is any point requiring reflection,” observed Dupin, as he forbore to

enkindle the wick, “we shall examine it to better purpose in the dark.”

“That is another of your odd notions,” said the Prefect, who had a

fashion of calling every thing “odd” that was beyond his comprehension,
and thus lived amid an absolute legion of “oddities.”

rolled towards him a comfortable chair.

“And what is the difficulty now?” I asked. “Nothing more in the

assassination way, I hope?”

“Oh no; nothing of that nature. The fact is, the business is very simple

indeed, and I make no doubt that we can manage it sufficiently well
ourselves; but then I thought Dupin would like to hear the details of it,
because it is so excessively odd.”

“Simple and odd,” said Dupin.
“Why, yes; and not exactly that, either. The fact is, we have all been a

good deal puzzled because the affair is so simple, and yet baffles us
altogether.”

“Perhaps it is the very simplicity of the thing which puts you at fault,”

said my friend.

“What nonsense you do talk!” replied the Prefect, laughing heartily.
“Perhaps the mystery is a little too plain,” said Dupin.
“Oh, good heavens! who ever heard of such an idea?”
“A little too self-evident.”
“Ha! ha! ha! — ha! ha! ha! — ho! ho! ho!"— roared our visitor,

profoundly amused, “oh, Dupin, you will be the death of me yet!”

“And what, after all, is the matter on hand?” I asked.
“Why, I will tell you,” replied the Prefect, as he gave a long, steady, and

contemplative puff, and settled himself in his chair. “I will tell you in a few
words; but, before I begin, let me caution you that this is an affair
demanding the greatest secrecy, and that I should most probably lose the
position I now hold, were it known that I confided it to any one.

“Proceed,” said I.
“Or not,” said Dupin.
“Well, then; I have received personal information, from a very high

quarter, that a certain document of the last importance, has been purloined
from the royal apartments. The individual who purloined it is known; this
beyond a doubt; he was seen to take it. It is known, also, that it still remains
in his possession.”

“How is this known?” asked Dupin.
“It is clearly inferred,” replied the Prefect, “from the nature of the

document, and from the nonappearance of certain results which would at
once arise from its passing out of the robber’s possession; — that is to say,
from his employing it as he must design in the end to employ it.”

“Be a little more explicit,” I said.
“Well, I may venture so far as to say that the paper gives its holder a

certain power in a certain quarter where such power is immensely
valuable.” The Prefect was fond of the cant of diplomacy.

“Still I do not quite understand,” said Dupin.
“No? Well; the disclosure of the document to a third person, who shall

be nameless, would bring in question the honor of a personage of most
exalted station; and this fact gives the holder of the document an
ascendancy over the illustrious personage whose honor and peace are so
jeopardized.”

knowledge of the loser’s knowledge of the robber. Who would dare —”

“The thief,” said G., is the Minister D — who dares all things, those

unbecoming as well as those becoming a man. The method of the theft was
not less ingenious than bold. The document in question — a letter, to be
frank — had been received by the personage robbed while alone in the
royal boudoir. During its perusal she was suddenly interrupted by the
entrance of the other exalted personage from whom especially it was her
wish to conceal it. After a hurried and vain endeavor to thrust it in a drawer,
she was forced to place it, open as it was, upon a table. The address,
however, was uppermost, and, the contents thus unexposed, the letter
escaped notice. At this juncture enters the Minister D—. His lynx eye
immediately perceives the paper, recognises the handwriting of the address,
observes the confusion of the personage addressed, and fathoms her secret.
After some business transactions, hurried through in his ordinary manner,
he produces a letter somewhat similar to the one in question, opens it,
pretends to read it, and then places it in close juxtaposition to the other.
Again he converses, for some fifteen minutes, upon the public affairs. At

length, in taking leave, he takes also from the table the letter to which he
had no claim. Its rightful owner saw, but, of course, dared not call attention
to the act, in the presence of the third personage who stood at her elbow.
The minister decamped; leaving his own letter — one of no importance —
upon the table.”

“Here, then,” said Dupin to me, “you have precisely what you demand

to make the ascendancy complete — the robber’s knowledge of the loser’s
knowledge of the robber.”

“Yes,” replied the Prefect; “and the power thus attained has, for some

months past, been wielded, for political purposes, to a very dangerous
extent. The personage robbed is more thoroughly convinced, every day, of
the necessity of reclaiming her letter. But this, of course, cannot be done
openly. In fine, driven to despair, she has committed the matter to me.”

“Than whom,” said Dupin, amid a perfect whirlwind of smoke, “no

more sagacious agent could, I suppose, be desired, or even imagined.”

“You flatter me,” replied the Prefect; “but it is possible that some such

opinion may have been entertained.”

“It is clear,” said I, “as you observe, that the letter is still in possession

of the minister; since it is this possession, and not any employment of the
letter, which bestows the power. With the employment the power departs.”

was to make thorough search of the minister’s hotel; and here my chief
embarrassment lay in the necessity of searching without his knowledge.
Beyond all things, I have been warned of the danger which would result
from giving him reason to suspect our design.”

“But,” said I, “you are quite au fait in these investigations. The Parisian

police have done this thing often before.”

“Oh yes; and for this reason I did not despair. The habits of the minister

gave me, too, a great advantage. He is frequently absent from home all
night. His servants are by no means numerous. They sleep at a distance
from their master’s apartment, and, being chiefly Neapolitans, are readily
made drunk. I have keys, as you know, with which I can open any chamber
or cabinet in Paris. For three months a night has not passed, during the

greater part of which I have not been engaged, personally, in ransacking the
D— Hotel. My honor is interested, and, to mention a great secret, the
reward is enormous. So I did not abandon the search until I had become
fully satisfied that the thief is a more astute man than myself. I fancy that I
have investigated every nook and corner of the premises in which it is
possible that the paper can be concealed.”

“But is it not possible,” I suggested, “that although the letter may be in

possession of the minister, as it unquestionably is, he may have concealed it
elsewhere than upon his own premises?”

“This is barely possible,” said Dupin. “The present peculiar condition of

affairs at court, and especially of those intrigues in which D— is known to
be involved, would render the instant availability of the document — its
susceptibility of being produced at a moment’s notice — a point of nearly
equal importance with its possession.”

“Its susceptibility of being produced?” said I.
“That is to say, of being destroyed,” said Dupin.
“True,” I observed; “the paper is clearly then upon the premises. As for

its being upon the person of the minister, we may consider that as out of the
question.”

“Entirely,” said the Prefect. “He has been twice waylaid, as if by

footpads, and his person rigorously searched under my own inspection.

“You might have spared yourself this trouble,” said Dupin. “D — I

presume, is not altogether a fool, and, if not, must have anticipated these
waylayings, as a matter of course.”

“Not altogether a fool,” said G., “but then he’s a poet, which I take to be

only one remove from a fool.”

“True,” said Dupin, after a long and thoughtful whiff from his

meerschaum, “although I have been guilty of certain doggerel myself.”

“Suppose you detail,” said I, “the particulars of your search.”
“Why the fact is, we took our time, and we searched every where. I

have had long experience in these affairs. I took the entire building, room
by room; devoting the nights of a whole week to each. We examined, first,
the furniture of each apartment. We opened every possible drawer; and I

presume you know that, to a properly trained police agent, such a thing as a
secret drawer is impossible. Any man is a dolt who permits a ‘secret’
drawer to escape him in a search of this kind. The thing is so plain. There is
a certain amount of bulk — of space — to be accounted for in every
cabinet. Then we have accurate rules. The fiftieth part of a line could not
escape us. After the cabinets we took the chairs. The cushions we probed
with the fine long needles you have seen me employ. From the tables we
removed the tops.”

“Why so?”
“Sometimes the top of a table, or other similarly arranged piece of

furniture, is removed by the person wishing to conceal an article; then the
leg is excavated, the article deposited within the cavity, and the top
replaced. The bottoms and tops of bedposts are employed in the same way.”

“But could not the cavity be detected by sounding?” I asked.
“By no means, if, when the article is deposited, a sufficient wadding of

cotton be placed around it. Besides, in our case, we were obliged to proceed
without noise.”

“But you could not have removed — you could not have taken to pieces

all articles of furniture in which it would have been possible to make a
deposit in the manner you mention. A letter may be compressed into a thin
spiral roll, not differing much in shape or bulk from a large knitting-needle,
and in this form it might be inserted into the rung of a chair, for example.
You did not take to pieces all the chairs?”

“Certainly not; but we did better — we examined the rungs of every

chair in the hotel, and, indeed, the jointings of every description of
furniture, by the aid of a most powerful microscope. Had there been any
traces of recent disturbance we should not have failed to detect it instantly.
A single grain of gimlet-dust, for example, would have been as obvious as
an apple. Any disorder in the glueing — any unusual gaping in the joints —
would have sufficed to insure detection.”

“I presume you looked to the mirrors, between the boards and the

plates, and you probed the beds and the bed-clothes, as well as the curtains
and carpets.”

of the furniture in this way, then we examined the house itself. We divided
its entire surface into compartments, which we numbered, so that none
might be missed; then we scrutinized each individual square inch
throughout the premises, including the two houses immediately adjoining,
with the microscope, as before.”

“The two houses adjoining!” I exclaimed; “you must have had a great

deal of trouble.”

“We had; but the reward offered is prodigious.
“You include the grounds about the houses?”
“All the grounds are paved with brick. They gave us comparatively little

trouble. We examined the moss between the bricks, and found it
undisturbed.”

“You looked among D—’s papers, of course, and into the books of the

library?”

“Certainly; we opened every package and parcel; we not only opened

every book, but we turned over every leaf in each volume, not contenting
ourselves with a mere shake, according to the fashion of some of our police
officers. We also measured the thickness of every book-cover, with the most
accurate admeasurement, and applied to each the most jealous scrutiny of
the microscope. Had any of the bindings been recently meddled with, it
would have been utterly impossible that the fact should have escaped
observation. Some five or six volumes, just from the hands of the binder,
we carefully probed, longitudinally, with the needles.”

“You explored the floors beneath the carpets?”
“Beyond doubt. We removed every carpet, and examined the boards

with the microscope.”

“And the paper on the walls?”
“Yes.
“You looked into the cellars?”
“We did.”
“Then,” I said, “you have been making a miscalculation, and the letter is

not upon the premises, as you suppose.

would you advise me to do?”

“To make a thorough re-search of the premises.”
“That is absolutely needless,” replied G—. “I am not more sure that I

breathe than I am that the letter is not at the Hotel.”

“I have no better advice to give you,” said Dupin. “You have, of course,

an accurate description of the letter?”

“Oh yes!"— And here the Prefect, producing a memorandum-book,

proceeded to read aloud a minute account of the internal, and especially of
the external appearance of the missing document. Soon after finishing the
perusal of this description, he took his departure, more entirely depressed in
spirits than I had ever known the good gentleman before.

In about a month afterwards he paid us another visit, and found us

occupied very nearly as before. He took a pipe and a chair and entered into
some ordinary conversation. At length I said —

made up your mind that there is no such thing as overreaching the
Minister?”

“Confound him, say I— yes; I made the reexamination, however, as

Dupin suggested — but it was all labor lost, as I knew it would be.”

“How much was the reward offered, did you say?” asked Dupin.
“Why, a very great deal — a very liberal reward — I don’t like to say

how much, precisely; but one thing I will say, that I wouldn’t mind giving
my individual check for fifty thousand francs to any one who could obtain
me that letter. The fact is, it is becoming of more and more importance
every day; and the reward has been lately doubled. If it were trebled,
however, I could do no more than I have done.”

“Why, yes,” said Dupin, drawlingly, between the whiffs of his

meerschaum, “I really — think, G — you have not exerted yourself — to
the utmost in this matter. You might — do a little more, I think, eh?”

“How? — In what way?”
“Why — puff, puff — you might — puff, puff — employ counsel in the

matter, eh? — puff, puff, puff. Do you remember the story they tell of

Abernethy?”

“No; hang Abernethy!”
“To be sure! hang him and welcome. But, once upon a time, a certain

rich miser conceived the design of spunging upon this Abernethy for a
medical opinion. Getting up, for this purpose, an ordinary conversation in a
private company, he insinuated his case to the physician, as that of an
imaginary individual.

“‘We will suppose,’ said the miser, ‘that his symptoms are such and

such; now, doctor, what would you have directed him to take?’

“‘Take!’ said Abernethy, ‘why, take advice, to be sure.’”
“But,” said the Prefect, a little discomposed, “I am perfectly willing to

take advice, and to pay for it. I would really give fifty thousand francs to
any one who would aid me in the matter.”

“In that case,” replied Dupin, opening a drawer, and producing a check-

book, “you may as well fill me up a check for the amount mentioned. When
you have signed it, I will hand you the letter.”

I was astounded. The Prefect appeared absolutely thunderstricken. For

some minutes he remained speechless and motionless, less, looking
incredulously at my friend with open mouth, and eyes that seemed starting
from their sockets; then, apparently in some measure, he seized a pen, and
after several pauses and vacant stares, finally filled up and signed a check
for fifty thousand francs, and handed it across the table to Dupin. The latter
examined it carefully and deposited it in his pocket-book; then, unlocking
an escritoire, took thence a letter and gave it to the Prefect. This functionary
grasped it in a perfect agony of joy, opened it with a trembling hand, cast a
rapid glance at its contents, and then, scrambling and struggling to the door,
rushed at length unceremoniously from the room and from the house,
without having uttered a syllable since Dupin had requested him to fill up
the check.

When he had gone, my friend entered into some explanations.
“The Parisian police,” he said, “are exceedingly able in their way. They

are persevering, ingenious, cunning, and thoroughly versed in the
knowledge which their duties seem chiefly to demand. Thus, when G—

detailed to us his mode of searching the premises at the Hotel D — I felt
entire confidence in his having made a satisfactory investigation — so far
as his labors extended.”

“So far as his labors extended?” said I.
“Yes,” said Dupin. “The measures adopted were not only the best of

their kind, but carried out to absolute perfection. Had the letter been
deposited within the range of their search, these fellows would, beyond a
question, have found it.”

I merely laughed — but he seemed quite serious in all that he said.
“The measures, then,” he continued, “were good in their kind, and well

executed; their defect lay in their being inapplicable to the case, and to the
man. A certain set of highly ingenious resources are, with the Prefect, a sort
of Procrustean bed, to which he forcibly adapts his designs. But he
perpetually errs by being too deep or too shallow, for the matter in hand;
and many a schoolboy is a better reasoner than he. I knew one about eight
years of age, whose success at guessing in the game of ‘even and odd’
attracted universal admiration. This game is simple, and is played with
marbles. One player holds in his hand a number of these toys, and demands
of another whether that number is even or odd. If the guess is right, the
guesser wins one; if wrong, he loses one. The boy to whom I allude won all
the marbles of the school. Of course he had some principle of guessing; and
this lay in mere observation and admeasurement of the astuteness of his
opponents. For example, an arrant simpleton is his opponent, and, holding
up his closed hand, asks, ‘are they even or odd?’ Our schoolboy replies,
‘odd,’ and loses; but upon the second trial he wins, for he then says to
himself, the simpleton had them even upon the first trial, and his amount of
cunning is just sufficient to make him have them odd upon the second; I
will therefore guess odd’; — he guesses odd, and wins. Now, with a
simpleton a degree above the first, he would have reasoned thus: ‘This
fellow finds that in the first instance I guessed odd, and, in the second, he
will propose to himself upon the first impulse, a simple variation from even
to odd, as did the first simpleton; but then a second thought will suggest that
this is too simple a variation, and finally he will decide upon putting it even

as before. I will therefore guess even’ guesses even, and wins. Now this
mode of reasoning in the schoolboy, whom his fellows termed “lucky,"—
what, in its last analysis, is it?”

“It is merely,” I said, “an identification of the reasoner’s intellect with

that of his opponent.”

effected the thorough identification in which his success consisted, I
received answer as follows: ‘When I wish to find out how wise, or how
stupid, or how good, or how wicked is any one, or what are his thoughts at
the moment, I fashion the expression of my face, as accurately as possible,
in accordance with the expression of his, and then wait to see what thoughts
or sentiments arise in my mind or heart, as if to match or correspond with
the expression.’ This response of the schoolboy lies at the bottom of all the
spurious profundity which has been attributed to Rochefoucauld, to La
Bougive, to Machiavelli, and to Campanella.”

“And the identification,” I said, “of the reasoner’s intellect with that of

his opponent, depends, if I understand you aright upon the accuracy with
which the opponent’s intellect is admeasured.”

Prefect and his cohort fall so frequently, first, by default of this
identification, and, secondly, by ill-admeasurement, or rather through non-
admeasurement, of the intellect with which they are engaged. They consider
only their own ideas of ingenuity; and, in searching for anything hidden,
advert only to the modes in which they would have hidden it. They are right
in this much — that their own ingenuity is a faithful representative of that
of the mass; but when the cunning of the individual felon is diverse in
character from their own, the felon foils them, of course. This always
happens when it is above their own, and very usually when it is below.
They have no variation of principle in their investigations; at best, when
urged by some unusual emergency — by some extraordinary reward —
they extend or exaggerate their old modes of practice, without touching
their principles. What, for example, in this case of D — has been done to
vary the principle of action? What is all this boring, and probing, and

sounding, and scrutinizing with the microscope, and dividing the surface of
the building into registered square inches — what is it all but an
exaggeration of the application of the one principle or set of principles of
search, which are based upon the one set of notions regarding human
ingenuity, to which the Prefect, in the long routine of his duty, has been
accustomed? Do you not see he has taken it for granted that all men proceed
to conceal a letter — not exactly in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg —
but, at least, in some hole or corner suggested by the same tenor of thought
which would urge a man to secrete a letter in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-
leg? And do you not see also, that such recherches nooks for concealment
are adapted only for ordinary occasions, and would be adopted only by
ordinary intellects; for, in all cases of concealment, a disposal of the article
concealed — a disposal of it in this recherche manner — is, in the very first
instance, presumable and presumed; and thus its discovery depends, not at
all upon the acumen, but altogether upon the mere care, patience, and
determination of the seekers; and where the case is of importance — or,
what amounts to the same thing in the policial eyes, when the reward is of
magnitude — the qualities in question have never been known to fall. You
will now understand what I meant in suggesting that, had the purloined
letter been hidden anywhere within the limits of the Prefect’s examination
— in other words, had the principle of its concealment been comprehended
within the principles of the Prefect — its discovery would have been a
matter altogether beyond question. This functionary, however, has been
thoroughly mystified; and the remote source of his defeat lies in the
supposition that the Minister is a fool, because he has acquired renown as a
poet. All fools are poets; this the Prefect feels; and he is merely guilty of a
non distributio medii in thence inferring that all poets are fools.”

“But is this really the poet?” I asked. “There are two brothers, I know;

and both have attained reputation in letters. The Minister I believe has
written learnedly on the Differential Calculus. He is a mathematician, and
no poet.”

“You are mistaken; I know him well; he is both. As poet and

mathematician, he would reason well; as mere mathematician, he could not

have reasoned at all, and thus would have been at the mercy of the Prefect.”

“You surprise me,” I said, “by these opinions, which have been

contradicted by the voice of the world. You do not mean to set at naught the
well-digested idea of centuries. The mathematical reason has long been
regarded as the reason par excellence.

idee publique, toute convention recue, est une sottise, car elle a convenu au
plus grand nombre.’ The mathematicians, I grant you, have done their best
to promulgate the popular error to which you allude, and which is none the
less an error for its promulgation as truth. With an art worthy a better cause,
for example, they have insinuated the term ‘analysis’ into application to
algebra. The French are the originators of this particular deception; but if a
term is of any importance — if words derive any value from applicability
— then ‘analysis’ conveys ‘algebra’ about as much as, in Latin, ‘ambitus’
implies ‘ambition,’ ‘religio’ religion or ‘homines honesti,’ a set of
honorable men.”

“You have a quarrel on hand, I see,” said I, “with some of the

algebraists of Paris; but proceed.”

“I dispute the availability, and thus the value, of that reason which is

cultivated in any especial form other than the abstractly logical. I dispute, in
particular, the reason educed by mathematical study. The mathematics are
the science of form and quantity; mathematical reasoning is merely logic
applied to observation upon form and quantity. The great error lies in
supposing that even the truths of what is called pure algebra, are abstract or
general truths. And this error is so egregious that I am confounded at the
universality with which it has been received. Mathematical axioms are not
axioms of general truth. What is true of relation — of form and quantity —
is often grossly false in regard to morals, for example. In this latter science
it is very usually untrue that the aggregated parts are equal to the whole. In
chemistry also the axiom falls. In the consideration of motive it falls; for
two motives, each of a given value, have not, necessarily, a value when
united, equal to the sum of their values apart. There are numerous other
mathematical truths which are only truths within the limits of relation. But

the mathematician argues, from his finite truths, through habit, as if they
were of an absolutely general applicability — as the world indeed imagines
them to be. Bryant, in his very learned ‘Mythology,’ mentions an analogous
source of error, when he says that ‘although the Pagan fables are not
believed, yet we forget ourselves continually, and make inferences from
them as existing realities.’ With the algebraists, however, who are Pagans
themselves, the ‘Pagan fables’ are believed, and the inferences are made,
not so much through lapse of memory, as through an unaccountable addling
of the brains. In short, I never yet encountered the mere mathematician who
could be trusted out of equal roots, or one who did not clandestinely hold it
as a point of his faith that x squared + px was absolutely and
unconditionally equal to q. Say to one of these gentlemen, by way of
experiment, if you please, that you believe occasions may occur where x
squared + px is not altogether equal to q, and, having made him understand
what you mean, get out of his reach as speedily as convenient, for, beyond
doubt, he will endeavor to knock you down.

I mean to say,” continued Dupin, while I merely laughed at his last

observations, “that if the Minister had been no more than a mathematician,
the Prefect would have been under no necessity of giving me this check. I
knew him, however, as both mathematician and poet, and my measures
were adapted to his capacity, with reference to the circumstances by which
he was surrounded. I knew him as a courtier, too, and as a bold intriguant.
Such a man, I considered, could not fall to be aware of the ordinary policial
modes of action. He could not have failed to anticipate — and events have
proved that he did not fail to anticipate — the waylayings to which he was
subjected. He must have foreseen, I reflected, the secret investigations of
his premises. His frequent absences from home at night, which were hailed
by the Prefect as certain aids to his success, I regarded only as ruses, to
afford opportunity for thorough search to the police, and thus the sooner to
impress them with the conviction to which G — in fact, did finally arrive —
the conviction that the letter was not upon the premises. I felt, also, that the
whole train of thought, which I was at some pains in detailing to you just
now, concerning the invariable principle of policial action in searches for

articles concealed — I felt that this whole train of thought would
necessarily pass through the mind of the Minister. It would imperatively
lead him to despise all the ordinary nooks of concealment. He could not, I
reflected, be so weak as not to see that the most intricate and remote recess
of his hotel would be as open as his commonest closets to the eyes, to the
probes, to the gimlets, and to the microscopes of the Prefect. I saw, in fine,
that he would be driven, as a matter of course, to simplicity, if not
deliberately induced to it as a matter of choice. You will remember,
perhaps, how desperately the Prefect laughed when I suggested, upon our
first interview, that it was just possible this mystery troubled him so much
on account of its being so very self-evident.”

“Yes,” said I, “I remember his merriment well. I really thought he would

have fallen into convulsions.”

“The material world,” continued Dupin, “abounds with very strict

analogies to the immaterial; and thus some color of truth has been given to
the rhetorical dogma, that metaphor, or simile, may be made to strengthen
an argument, as well as to embellish a description. The principle of the vis
inertiae, for example, seems to be identical in physics and metaphysics. It is
not more true in the former, that a large body is with more difficulty set in
motion than a smaller one, and that its subsequent momentum is
commensurate with this difficulty, than it is, in the latter, that intellects of
the vaster capacity, while more forcible, more constant, and more eventful
in their movements than those of inferior grade, are yet the less readily
moved, and more embarrassed and full of hesitation in the first few steps of
their progress. Again: have you ever noticed which of the street signs, over
the shop doors, are the most attractive of attention?”

“I have never given the matter a thought,” I said.
“There is a game of puzzles,” he resumed, “which is played upon a

map. One party playing requires another to find a given word — the name
of town, river, state or empire — any word, in short, upon the motley and
perplexed surface of the chart. A novice in the game generally seeks to
embarrass his opponents by giving them the most minutely lettered names;
but the adept selects such words as stretch, in large characters, from one end

of the chart to the other. These, like the over-largely lettered signs and
placards of the street, escape observation by dint of being excessively
obvious; and here the physical oversight is precisely analogous with the
moral inapprehension by which the intellect suffers to pass unnoticed those
considerations which are too obtrusively and too palpably self-evident. But
this is a point, it appears, somewhat above or beneath the understanding of
the Prefect. He never once thought it probable, or possible, that the Minister
had deposited the letter immediately beneath the nose of the whole world,
by way of best preventing any portion of that world from perceiving it.

“But the more I reflected upon the daring, dashing, and discriminating

ingenuity of D—; upon the fact that the document must always have been at
hand, if he intended to use it to good purpose; and upon the decisive
evidence, obtained by the Prefect, that it was not hidden within the limits of
that dignitary’s ordinary search — the more satisfied I became that, to
conceal this letter, the Minister had resorted to the comprehensive and
sagacious expedient of not attempting to conceal it at all.

“Full of these ideas, I prepared myself with a pair of green spectacles,

and called one fine morning, quite by accident, at the Ministerial hotel. I
found D— at home, yawning, lounging, and dawdling, as usual, and
pretending to be in the last extremity of ennui. He is, perhaps, the most
really energetic human being now alive — but that is only when nobody
sees him.

“To be even with him, I complained of my weak eyes, and lamented the

necessity of the spectacles, under cover of which I cautiously and
thoroughly surveyed the apartment, while seemingly intent only upon the
conversation of my host.

“I paid special attention to a large writing-table near which he sat, and

upon which lay confusedly, some miscellaneous letters and other papers,
with one or two musical instruments and a few books. Here, however, after
a long and very deliberate scrutiny, I saw nothing to excite particular
suspicion.

“At length my eyes, in going the circuit of the room, fell upon a

trumpery filigree card-rack of pasteboard, that hung dangling by a dirty

blue ribbon, from a little brass knob just beneath the middle of the
mantelpiece. In this rack, which had three or four compartments, were five
or six visiting cards and a solitary letter. This last was much soiled and
crumpled. It was torn nearly in two, across the middle — as if a design, in
the first instance, to tear it entirely up as worthless, had been altered, or
stayed, in the second. It had a large black seal, bearing the D— cipher very
conspicuously, and was addressed, in a diminutive female hand, to D — the
minister, himself. It was thrust carelessly, and even, as it seemed,
contemptuously, into one of the upper divisions of the rack.

“No sooner had I glanced at this letter, than I concluded it to be that of

which I was in search. To be sure, it was, to all appearance, radically
different from the one of which the Prefect had read us so minute a
description. Here the seal was large and black, with the D— cipher; there it
was small and red, with the ducal arms of the S— family. Here, the address,
to the Minister, was diminutive and feminine; there the superscription, to a
certain royal personage, was markedly bold and decided; the size alone
formed a point of correspondence. But, then, the radicalness of these
differences, which was excessive; the dirt; the soiled and torn condition of
the paper, so inconsistent with the true methodical habits of D — and so
suggestive of a design to delude the beholder into an idea of the
worthlessness of the document; these things, together with the
hyperobtrusive situation of this document, full in the view of every visitor,
and thus exactly in accordance with the conclusions to which I had
previously arrived; these things, I say, were strongly corroborative of
suspicion, in one who came with the intention to suspect.

“I protracted my visit as long as possible, and, while I maintained a

most animated discussion with the Minister, on a topic which I knew well
had never failed to interest and excite him, I kept my attention really riveted
upon the letter. In this examination, I committed to memory its external
appearance and arrangement in the rack; and also fell, at length, upon a
discovery which set at rest whatever trivial doubt I might have entertained.
In scrutinizing the edges of the paper, I observed them to be more chafed
than seemed necessary. They presented the broken appearance which is

manifested when a stiff paper, having been once folded and pressed with a
folder, is refolded in a reversed direction, in the same creases or edges
which had formed the original fold. This discovery was sufficient. It was
clear to me that the letter had been turned, as a glove, inside out, re-
directed, and re-sealed. I bade the Minister good morning, and took my
departure at once, leaving a gold snuff-box upon the table.

“The next morning I called for the snuff-box, when we resumed, quite

eagerly, the conversation of the preceding day. While thus engaged,
however, a loud report, as if of a pistol, was heard immediately beneath the
windows of the hotel, and was succeeded by a series of fearful screams, and
the shoutings of a mob. D— rushed to a casement, threw it open, and
looked out. In the meantime, I stepped to the card-rack, took the letter, put it
in my pocket, and replaced it by a fac-simile, (so far as regards externals,)
which I had carefully prepared at my lodgings; imitating the D— cipher,
very readily, by means of a seal formed of bread.

“The disturbance in the street had been occasioned by the frantic

behavior of a man with a musket. He had fired it among a crowd of women
and children. It proved, however, to have been without ball, and the fellow
was suffered to go his way as a lunatic or a drunkard. When he had gone,
D-came from the window, whither I had followed him immediately upon
securing the object in view. Soon afterwards I bade him farewell. The
pretended lunatic was a man in my own pay.

simile? Would it not have been better, at the first visit, to have seized it
openly, and departed?”

“D — ” replied Dupin, “is a desperate man, and a man of nerve. His

hotel, too, is not without attendants devoted to his interests. Had I made the
wild attempt you suggest, I might never have left the Ministerial presence
alive. The good people of Paris might have heard of me no more. But I had
an object apart from these considerations. You know my political
prepossessions. In this matter, I act as a partisan of the lady concerned. For
eighteen months the Minister has had her in his power. She has now him in
hers; since, being unaware that the letter is not in his possession, he will

proceed with his exactions as if it was. Thus will he inevitably commit
himself, at once, to his political destruction. His downfall, too, will not be
more precipitate than awkward. It is all very well to talk about the facilis
descensus Averni; but in all kinds of climbing, as Catalani said of singing, it
is far more easy to get up than to come down. In the present instance I have
no sympathy — at least no pity — for him who descends. He is the
monstrum horrendum, an unprincipled man of genius. I confess, however,
that I should like very well to know the precise character of his thoughts,
when, being defied by her whom the Prefect terms ‘a certain personage,’ he
is reduced to opening the letter which I left for him in the card-rack.”

“How? did you put any thing particular in it?”
“Why — it did not seem altogether right to leave the interior blank —

that would have been insulting. D — at Vienna once, did me an evil turn,
which I told him, quite good-humoredly, that I should remember. So, as I
knew he would feel some curiosity in regard to the identity of the person
who had outwitted him, I thought it a pity not to give him a clue. He is well
acquainted with my MS., and I just copied into the middle of the blank
sheet the words —

— Un dessein si funeste, 
S’il n’est digne d’Atree, est digne de Thyeste.

They are to be found in Crebillon’s ‘Atree.’”

OceanofPDF.com

The Gold Bug

What ho! what ho! this fellow is dancing mad! 
He hath been bitten by the Tarantula.

— All in the Wrong.

Many years ago, I contracted an intimacy with a Mr. William Legrand. He
was of an ancient Huguenot family, and had once been wealthy; but a series
of misfortunes had reduced him to want. To avoid the mortification
consequent upon his disasters, he left New Orleans, the city of his
forefathers, and took up his residence at Sullivan’s Island, near Charleston,
South Carolina.

This Island is a very singular one. It consists of little else than the sea

sand, and is about three miles long. Its breadth at no point exceeds a quarter
of a mile. It is separated from the main land by a scarcely perceptible creek,
oozing its way through a wilderness of reeds and slime, a favorite resort of
the marsh-hen. The vegetation, as might be supposed, is scant, or at least
dwarfish. No trees of any magnitude are to be seen. Near the western
extremity, where Fort Moultrie stands, and where are some miserable frame
buildings, tenanted, during summer, by the fugitives from Charleston dust
and fever, may be found, indeed, the bristly palmetto; but the whole island,
with the exception of this western point, and a line of hard, white beach on
the seacoast, is covered with a dense undergrowth of the sweet myrtle, so
much prized by the horticulturists of England. The shrub here often attains
the height of fifteen or twenty feet, and forms an almost impenetrable
coppice, burthening the air with its fragrance.

In the inmost recesses of this coppice, not far from the eastern or more

remote end of the island, Legrand had built himself a small hut, which he
occupied when I first, by mere accident, made his acquaintance. This soon
ripened into friendship — for there was much in the recluse to excite

interest and esteem. I found him well educated, with unusual powers of
mind, but infected with misanthropy, and subject to perverse moods of
alternate enthusiasm and melancholy. He had with him many books, but
rarely employed them. His chief amusements were gunning and fishing, or
sauntering along the beach and through the myrtles, in quest of shells or
entomological specimens;-his collection of the latter might have been
envied by a Swammerdamm. In these excursions he was usually
accompanied by an old negro, called Jupiter, who had been manumitted
before the reverses of the family, but who could be induced, neither by
threats nor by promises, to abandon what he considered his right of
attendance upon the footsteps of his young “Massa Will.” It is not
improbable that the relatives of Legrand, conceiving him to be somewhat
unsettled in intellect, had contrived to instil this obstinacy into Jupiter, with
a view to the supervision and guardianship of the wanderer.

The winters in the latitude of Sullivan’s Island are seldom very severe,

and in the fall of the year it is a rare event indeed when a fire is considered
necessary. About the middle of October, 18 — there occurred, however, a
day of remarkable chilliness. Just before sunset I scrambled my way
through the evergreens to the hut of my friend, whom I had not visited for
several weeks — my residence being, at that time, in Charleston, a distance
of nine my miles from the Island, while the facilities of passage and re-
passage were very far behind those of the present day. Upon reaching the
hut I rapped, as was my custom, and getting no reply, sought for the key
where I knew it was secreted, unlocked the door and went in. A fine fire
was blazing upon the hearth. It was a novelty, and by no means an
ungrateful one. I threw off an overcoat, took an arm-chair by the crackling
logs, and awaited patiently the arrival of my hosts.

Soon after dark they arrived, and gave me a most cordial welcome.

Jupiter, grinning from ear to ear, bustled about to prepare some marsh-hens
for supper. Legrand was in one of his fits — how else shall I term them? —
of enthusiasm. He had found an unknown bivalve, forming a new genus,
and, more than this, he had hunted down and secured, with Jupiter’s

assistance, a scarabaeus which he believed to be totally new, but in respect
to which he wished to have my opinion on the morrow.

wishing the whole tribe of scarabaei at the devil.

long since I saw you; and how could I foresee that you would pay me a visit
this very night of all others? As I was coming home I met Lieutenant G —
from the fort, and, very foolishly, I lent him the bug; so it will be impossible
for you to see it until morning. Stay here to-night, and I will send Jup down
for it at sunrise. It is the loveliest thing in creation!”

“What? — sunrise?”
“Nonsense! no! — the bug. It is of a brilliant gold color — about the

size of a large hickory-nut — with two jet black spots near one extremity of
the back, and another, somewhat longer, at the other. The antennae are — ”

“Dey aint no tin in him, Massa Will, I keep a tellin on you,” here

interrupted Jupiter; “de bug is a goole bug, solid, ebery bit of him, inside
and all, sep him wing — neber feel half so hebby a bug in my life.”

“Well, suppose it is, Jup,” replied Legrand, somewhat more earnestly, it

seemed to me, than the case demanded, “is that any reason for your letting
the birds burn? The color” — here he turned to me — “is really almost
enough to warrant Jupiter’s idea. You never saw a more brilliant metallic
lustre than the scales emit — but of this you cannot judge till tomorrow. In
the mean time I can give you some idea of the shape.” Saying this, he
seated himself at a small table, on which were a pen and ink, but no paper.
He looked for some in a drawer, but found none.

“Never mind,” said he at length, “this will answer”; and he drew from

his waistcoat pocket a scrap of what I took to be very dirty foolscap, and
made upon it a rough drawing with the pen. While he did this, I retained my
seat by the fire, for I was still chilly. When the design was complete, he
handed it to me without rising. As I received it, a loud growl was heard,
succeeded by a scratching at the door. Jupiter opened it, and a large
Newfoundland, belonging to Legrand, rushed in, leaped upon my shoulders,
and loaded me with caresses; for I had shown him much attention during

previous visits. When his gambols were over, I looked at the paper, and, to
speak the truth, found myself not a little puzzled at what my friend had
depicted.

“Well!” I said, after contemplating it for some minutes, “this is a strange

scarabaeus, I must confess: new to me: never saw anything like it before —
unless it was a skull, or a death’s-head — which it more nearly resembles
than anything else that has come under my observation.”

“A death’s-head!” echoed Legrand — “Oh — yes — well, it has

something of that appearance upon paper, no doubt. The two upper black
spots look like eyes, eh? and the longer one at the bottom like a mouth —
and then the shape of the whole is oval.”

“Perhaps so,” said I; “but, Legrand, I fear you are no artist. I must wait

until I see the beetle itself, if I am to form any idea of its personal
appearance.”

“Well, I don’t know,” said he, a little nettled, “I draw tolerably —

should do it at least — have had good masters, and flatter myself that I am
not quite a blockhead.”

“But, my dear fellow, you are joking then,” said I, “this is a very

passable skull — indeed, I may say that it is a very excellent skull,
according to the vulgar notions about such specimens of physiology — and
your scarabaeus must be the queerest scarabaeus in the world if it resembles
it. Why, we may get up a very thrilling bit of superstition upon this hint. I
presume you will call the bug scarabaeus caput hominis, or something of
that kind — there are many titles in the Natural Histories. But where are the
antennae you spoke of?”

“The antennae!” said Legrand, who seemed to be getting unaccountably

warm upon the subject; “I am sure you must see the antennae. I made them
as distinct as they are in the original insect, and I presume that is sufficient.”

“Well, well,” I said, “perhaps you have — still I don’t see them;” and I

handed him the paper without additional remark, not wishing to ruffle his
temper; but I was much surprised at the turn affairs had taken; his ill humor
puzzled me — and, as for the drawing of the beetle, there were positively

no antennae visible, and the whole did bear a very close resemblance to the
ordinary cuts of a death’s-head.

He received the paper very peevishly, and was about to crumple it,

apparently to throw it in the fire, when a casual glance at the design seemed
suddenly to rivet his attention. In an instant his face grew violently red — in
another as excessively pale. For some minutes he continued to scrutinize
the drawing minutely where he sat. At length he arose, took a candle from
the table, and proceeded to seat himself upon a sea-chest in the farthest
corner of the room. Here again he made an anxious examination of the
paper; turning it in all directions. He said nothing, however, and his conduct
greatly astonished me; yet I thought it prudent not to exacerbate the
growing moodiness of his temper by any comment. Presently he took from
his coat pocket a wallet, placed the paper carefully in it, and deposited both
in a writing-desk, which he locked. He now grew more composed in his
demeanor; but his original air of enthusiasm had quite disappeared. Yet he
seemed not so much sulky as abstracted. As the evening wore away he
became more and more absorbed in reverie, from which no sallies of mine
could arouse him. It had been my to pass the night at the hut, as I had
frequently done before, but, seeing my host in this mood, I deemed it proper
to take leave. He did not press me to remain, but, as I departed, he shook
my hand with even more than his usual cordiality.

It was about a month after this (and during the interval I had seen

nothing of Legrand) when I received a visit, at Charleston, from his man,
Jupiter. I had never seen the good old negro look so dispirited, and I feared
that some serious disaster had befallen my friend.

“Well, Jup,” said I, “what is the matter now? — how is your master?”
“Why, to speak de troof, massa, him not so berry well as mought be.”
“Not well! I am truly sorry to hear it. What does he complain of?”
Dar! dat’s it! — him neber plain of notin — but him berry sick for all

dat.”

“Very sick, Jupiter! — why didn’t you say so at once? Is he confined to

bed?”

“No, dat he ain’t! — he ain’t find nowhar — dat’s just whar de shoe

pinch — my mind is got to be berry hebby bout poor Massa Will.”

You say your master is sick. Hasn’t he told you what ails him?”

Will say noffin at all ain’t de matter wid him — but den what make him go
about looking dis here way, wid he head down and he soldiers up, and as
white as a gose? And den he keep a syphon all de time — ”

“Keeps a what, Jupiter?”
“Keeps a syphon wid de figgurs on de slate — de queerest figgurs I

ebber did see. Ise gittin to be skeered, I tell you. Hab for to keep mighty
tight eye pon him noovers. Todder day he gib me slip fore de sun up and
was gone de whole ob de blessed day. I had a big stick ready cut for to gib
him d — d good beating when he did come — but Ise sich a fool dat I
hadn’t de heart arter all — he look so berry poorly.”

“Eh? — what? — ah yes! — upon the whole I think you had better not

be too severe with the poor fellow — don’t flog him, Jupiter — he can’t
very well stand it — but can you form no idea of what has occasioned this
illness, or rather this change of conduct? Has anything unpleasant happened
since I saw you?”

“No, massa, dey ain’t bin noffin onpleasant since den — ‘t was fore den

I’m feared — ‘t was de berry day you was dare.”

“How? what do you mean?”
“Why, massa, I mean de bug — dare now.”
“The what?”
“De bug — I’m berry sartain dat Massa Will bin bit somewhere bout de

head by dat goole-bug.”

“And what cause have you, Jupiter, for such a supposition?”
“Claws enoff, massa, and mouff too. I nabber did see sich a d — d bug

— he kick and he bite ebery ting what cum near him. Massa Will cotch him
fuss, but had for to let him go gin mighty quick, I tell you — den was de
time he must ha got de bite. I didn’t like de look ob de bug mouff, myself,
no how, so I wouldn’t take hold ob him wid my finger, but I cotch him wid

a piece ob paper dat I found. I rap him up in de paper and stuff piece ob it in
he mouff — dat was de way.”

and that the bite made him sick?”

“I don’t tink noffin about it — I nose it. What make him dream bout de

goole so much, if tain’t cause he bit by de goole-bug? Ise heerd bout dem
goole-bugs fore dis.”

“But how do you know he dreams about gold?”
“How I know? why cause he talk about it in he sleep — dat’s how I

nose.”

“Well, Jup, perhaps you are right; but to what fortunate circumstance

am I to attribute the honor of a visit from you to-day?”

“What de matter, massa?”
“Did you bring any message from Mr. Legrand?”
“No, massa, I bring dis here pissel;” and here Jupiter handed me a note

which ran thus:

My DEAR—

Why have I not seen you for so long a time? I hope you have

not been so foolish as to take offence at any little brusquerie of
mine; but no, that is improbable.

Since I saw you I have had great cause for anxiety. I have

something to tell you, yet scarcely know how to tell it, or whether
I should tell it at all.

I have not been quite well for some days past, and poor old

Jup annoys me, almost beyond endurance, by his well-meant
attentions. Would you believe it? — he had prepared a huge stick,
the other day, with which to chastise me for giving him the slip,
and spending the day, solus, among the hills on the main land. I
verily believe that my ill looks alone saved me a flogging.

I have made no addition to my cabinet since we met.
If you can, in any way, make it convenient, come over with

Jupiter. Do come. I wish to see you tonight, upon business of
importance. I assure you that it is of the highest importance.

Ever yours, WILLIAM LEGRAND.

There was something in the tone of this note which gave me great
uneasiness. Its whole style differed materially from that of Legrand. What
could he be dreaming of? What new crotchet possessed his excitable brain?
What “business of the highest importance” could he possibly have to
transact? Jupiter’s account of him boded no good. I dreaded lest the
continued pressure of misfortune had, at length, fairly unsettled the reason
of my friend. Without a moment’s hesitation, therefore, I prepared to
accompany the negro.

Upon reaching the wharf, I noticed a scythe and three spades, all

apparently new, lying in the bottom of the boat in which we were to
embark.

“What is the meaning of all this, Jup?” I inquired.
“Him syfe, massa, and spade.”
“Very true; but what are they doing here?”
“Him de syfe and de spade what Massa Will sis pon my buying for him

in de town, and de debbil’s own lot of money I had to gib for em.”

But what, in the name of all that is mysterious, is your ‘Massa Will’

going to do with scythes and spades?”

“Dat’s more dan I know, and debbil take me if I don’t blieve ’tis more

dan he know, too. But it’s all cum ob de bug.”

Finding that no satisfaction was to be obtained of Jupiter, whose whole

intellect seemed to be absorbed by “de bug,” I now stepped into the boat
and made sail. With a fair and strong breeze we soon ran into the little cove
to the northward of Fort Moultrie, and a walk of some two miles brought us
to the hut. It was about three in the afternoon when we arrived. Legrand had
been awaiting us in eager expectation. He grasped my hand with a nervous
empressement which alarmed me and strengthened the suspicions already
entertained. His countenance was pale even to ghastliness, and his deep-set
eyes glared with unnatural lustre. After some inquiries respecting his health,
I asked him, not knowing what better to say, if he had yet obtained the
scarabaeus from Lieutenant G—.

morning. Nothing should tempt me to part with that scarabaeus. Do you
know that Jupiter is quite right about it?”

“In what way?” I asked, with a sad foreboding at heart.
“In supposing it to be a bug of real gold.” He said this with an air of

profound seriousness, and I felt inexpressibly shocked.

“This bug is to make my fortune,” he continued, with a triumphant

smile, “to reinstate me in my family possessions. Is it any wonder, then, that
I prize it? Since Fortune has thought fit to bestow it upon me, I have only to
use it properly and I shall arrive at the gold of which it is the index. Jupiter,
bring me that scarabaeus!”

git him for your own self.” Hereupon Legrand arose, with a grave and
stately air, and brought me the beetle from a glass case in which it was
enclosed. It was a beautiful scarabaeus, and, at that time, unknown to
naturalists — of course a great prize in a scientific point of view. There
were two round, black spots near one extremity of the back, and a long one
near the other. The scales were exceedingly hard and glossy, with all the
appearance of burnished gold. The weight of the insect was very
remarkable, and, taking all things into consideration, I could hardly blame
Jupiter for his opinion respecting it; but what to make of Legrand’s
agreement with that opinion, I could not, for the life of me, tell.

“I sent for you,” said he, in a grandiloquent tone, when I had completed

my examination of the beetle, “I sent for you, that I might have your
counsel and assistance in furthering the views of Fate and of the bug”—

“My dear Legrand,” I cried, interrupting him, “you are certainly unwell,

and had better use some little precautions. You shall go to bed, and I will
remain with you a few days, until you get over this. You are feverish
and”—

“Feel my pulse,” said he.
I felt it, and, to say the truth, found not the slightest indication of fever.
“But you may be ill and yet have no fever. Allow me this once to

prescribe for you. In the first place, go to bed. In the next”—

under the excitement which I suffer. If you really wish me well, you will
relieve this excitement.”

“And how is this to be done?”
“Very easily. Jupiter and myself are going upon an expedition into the

hills, upon the main land, and, in this expedition, we shall need the aid of
some person in whom we can confide. You are the only one we can trust.
Whether we succeed or fail, the excitement which you now perceive in me
will be equally allayed.”

“I am anxious to oblige you in any way,” I replied; “but do you mean to

say that this infernal beetle has any connection with your expedition into
the hills?”

“It has.”
“Then, Legrand, I can become a party to no such absurd proceeding.
“I am sorry — very sorry — for we shall have to try it by ourselves.”
“Try it by yourselves! The man is surely mad! — but stay! — how long

do you propose to be absent?”

“Probably all night. We shall start immediately, and be back, at all

events, by sunrise.”

“And will you promise me, upon your honor, that when this freak of

yours is over, and the bug business (good God!) settled to your satisfaction,
you will then return home and follow my advice implicitly, as that of your
physician?”

“Yes; I promise; and now let us be off, for we have no time to lose.”
With a heavy heart I accompanied my friend. We started about four

o’clock — Legrand, Jupiter, the dog, and myself. Jupiter had with him the
scythe and spades — the whole of which he insisted upon carrying — more
through fear, it seemed to me, of trusting either of the implements within
reach of his master, than from any excess of industry or complaisance. His
demeanor was dogged in the extreme, and “dat d — d bug” were the sole
words which escaped his lips during the journey. For my own part, I had
charge of a couple of dark lanterns, while Legrand contented himself with
the scarabaeus, which he carried attached to the end of a bit of whip-cord;

twirling it to and fro, with the air of a conjuror, as he went. When I
observed this last, plain evidence of my friend’s aberration of mind, I could
scarcely refrain from tears. I thought it best, however, to humor his fancy, at
least for the present, or until I could adopt some more energetic measures
with a chance of success. In the mean time I endeavored, but all in vain, to
sound him in regard to the object of the expedition. Having succeeded in
inducing me to accompany him, he seemed unwilling to hold conversation
upon any topic of minor importance, and to all my questions vouchsafed no
other reply than “we shall see!”

We crossed the creek at the head of the island by means of a skiff, and,

ascending the high grounds on the shore of the mainland, proceeded in a
northwesterly direction, through a tract of country excessively wild and
desolate, where no trace of a human footstep was to be seen. Legrand led
the way with decision; pausing only for an instant, here and there, to consult
what appeared to be certain landmarks of his own contrivance upon a
former occasion.

In this manner we journeyed for about two hours, and the sun was just

setting when we entered a region infinitely more dreary than any yet seen. It
was a species of table land, near the summit of an almost inaccessible hill,
densely wooded from base to pinnacle, and interspersed with huge crags
that appeared to lie loosely upon the soil, and in many cases were prevented
from precipitating themselves into the valleys below, merely by the support
of the trees against which they reclined. Deep ravines, in various directions,
gave an air of still sterner solemnity to the scene.

The natural platform to which we had clambered was thickly overgrown

with brambles, through which we soon discovered that it would have been
impossible to force our way but for the scythe; and Jupiter, by direction of
his master, proceeded to clear for us a path to the foot of an enormously tall
tulip-tree, which stood, with some eight or ten oaks, upon the level, and far
surpassed them all, and all other trees which I had then ever seen, in the
beauty of its foliage and form, in the wide spread of its branches, and in the
general majesty of its appearance. When we reached this tree, Legrand
turned to Jupiter, and asked him if he thought he could climb it. The old

man seemed a little staggered by the question, and for some moments made
no reply. At length he approached the huge trunk, walked slowly around it,
and examined it with minute attention. When he had completed his scrutiny,
he merely said,

“Yes, massa, Jup climb any tree he ebber see in he life.”
“Then up with you as soon as possible, for it will soon be too dark to

see what we are about.”

“How far mus go up, massa?” inquired Jupiter.
“Get up the main trunk first, and then I will tell you which way to go —

and here — stop! take this beetle with you.”

“De bug, Massa Will! — de goole bug!” cried the negro, drawing back

in dismay — “what for mus tote de bug way up de tree? — d — n if I do!”

“If you are afraid, Jup, a great big negro like you, to take hold of a

harmless little dead beetle, why you can carry it up by this string — but, if
you do not take it up with you in some way, I shall be under the necessity of
breaking your head with this shovel.”

“What de matter now, massa?” said Jup, evidently shamed into

compliance; “always want for to raise fuss wid old nigger. Was only funnin’
anyhow. Me feered de bug! what I keer for de bug?” Here he took
cautiously hold of the extreme end of the string, and, maintaining the insect
as far from his person as circumstances would permit, prepared to ascend
the tree.

In youth, the tulip-tree, or Liriodendron Tulipiferum, the most

magnificent of American foresters, has a trunk peculiarly smooth, and often
rises to a great height without lateral branches; but, in its riper age, the bark
becomes gnarled and uneven, while many short limbs make their
appearance on the stem. Thus the difficulty of ascension, in the present
case, lay more in semblance than in reality. Embracing the huge cylinder, as
closely as possible, with his arms and knees, seizing with his hands some
projections, and resting his naked toes upon others, Jupiter, after one or two
narrow escapes from falling, at length wriggled himself into the first great
fork, and seemed to consider the whole business as virtually accomplished.

The risk of the achievement was, in fact, now over, although the climber
was some sixty or seventy feet from the ground.

“Which way mus go now, Massa Will?” he asked. Keep up the largest

branch — the one on this side,” said Legrand. The negro obeyed him
promptly, and apparently with but little trouble; ascending higher and
higher, until no glimpse of his squat figure could be obtained through the
dense foliage which enveloped it. Presently his voice was heard in a sort of
halloo.

“How much fudder is got for go?”
“How high up are you?” asked Legrand.
“Ebber so fur,” replied the negro; “can see de sky fru de top ob de tree.”
“Never mind the sky, but attend to what I say. Look down the trunk and

count the limbs below you on this side. How many limbs have you passed?”

“One, two, tree, four, fibe — I done pass fibe big limb, massa, ‘pon dis

side.”

“Then go one limb higher.”
In a few minutes the voice was heard again, announcing that the seventh

limb was attained.

“Now, Jup,” cried Legrand, evidently much excited, “I want you to

work your way out upon that limb as far as you can. If you see anything
strange, let me know.”

By this time what little doubt I might have entertained of my poor

friend’s insanity, was put finally at rest. I had no alternative but to conclude
him stricken with lunacy, and I became seriously anxious about getting him
home. While I was pondering upon what was best to be done, Jupiter’s
voice was again heard.

“Mos’ feerd for to ventur ‘pon dis limb berry far — ’tis dead limb putty

much all de way.”

“Did you say it was a dead limb, Jupiter?” cried Legrand in a quavering

voice.

departed dis here life.”

the greatest distress.

home and go to bed. Come now! — that’s a fine fellow. It’s getting late,
and, besides, you remember your promise.”

“Jupiter,” cried he, without heeding me in the least, “do you hear me?”
“Yes, Massa Will, hear you ebber so plain.”
“Try the wood well, then, with your knife, and see if you think it very

rotten.”

“Him rotten, massa, sure nuff,” replied the negro in a few moments,

“but not so berry rotten as mought be. Mought ventur out leetle way pon de
limb by myself, dat’s true.”

“By yourself! — what do you mean?”
“Why I mean de bug. ’Tis berry hebby bug. Spose I drop him down

fuss, and den de limb won’t break wid just de weight ob one nigger.”

“You infernal scoundrel!” cried Legrand, apparently much relieved,

“what do you mean by telling me such nonsense as that? As sure as you let
that beetle fall! — I’ll break your neck. Look here, Jupiter! do you hear
me?”

“Yes, massa, needn’t hollo at poor nigger dat style.”
“Well! now listen! — if you will venture out on the limb as far as you

think safe, and not let go the beetle, I’ll make you a present of a silver
dollar as soon as you get down.”

“I’m gwine, Massa Will — deed I is,” replied the negro very promptly

— “mos out to the eend now.”

“Out to the end!” here fairly screamed Legrand, “do you say you are out

to the end of that limb?”

“Soon be to de eend, massa, — o-o-o-o-oh! Lor-gol-a-marcy! what is

dis here pon de tree?”

“Well!” cried Legrand, highly delighted, “what is it?”

and de crows done gobble ebery bit ob de meat off.”

what holds it on?”

my word — dare’s a great big nail in de skull, what fastens ob it on to de
tree.”

“Well now, Jupiter, do exactly as I tell you — do you hear?”
“Yes, massa.”
“Pay attention, then! — find the left eye of the skull.”
“Hum! hoo! dat’s good! why dar ain’t no eye lef’ at all.”
“Curse your stupidity! do you know your right hand from your left?”
“Yes, I nose dat — nose all bout dat — ’tis my left hand what I chops de

wood wid.”

as your left hand. Now, I suppose, you can find the left eye of the skull, or
the place where the left eye has been. Have you found it?”

Here was a long pause. At length the negro asked,
“Is de lef’ eye of de skull pon de same side as de lef’ hand of de skull,

too? — cause de skull ain’t got not a bit ob a hand at all — nebber mind! I
got de lef’ eye now — here de lef’ eye! what mus do wid it?”

“Let the beetle drop through it, as far as the string will reach — but be

careful and not let go your hold of the string.”

“All dat done, Massa Will; mighty easy ting for to put de bug fru de

hole — look out for him dar below?”

During this colloquy no portion of Jupiter’s person could be seen; but

the beetle, which he had suffered to descend, was now visible at the end of
the string, and glistened, like a globe of burnished gold, in the last rays of
the setting sun, some of which still faintly illumined the eminence upon
which we stood. The scarabaeus hung quite clear of any branches, and, if
allowed to fall, would have fallen at our feet. Legrand immediately took the
scythe, and cleared with it a circular space, three or four yards in diameter,

just beneath the insect, and, having accomplished this, ordered Jupiter to let
go the string and come down from the tree.

Driving a peg, with great nicety, into the ground, at the precise spot

where the beetle fell, my friend now produced from his pocket a tape-
measure. Fastening one end of this at that point of the trunk of the tree
which was nearest the peg, he unrolled it till it reached the peg, and thence
farther unrolled it, in the direction already established by the two points of
the tree and the peg, for the distance of fifty feet — Jupiter clearing away
the brambles with the scythe. At the spot thus attained a second peg was

driven, and about this, as a centre, a rude circle, about four feet in diameter,
described. Taking now a spade himself, and giving one to Jupiter and one to
me, Legrand begged us to set about one to digging as quickly as possible.

To speak the truth, I had no especial relish for such amusement at any

time, and, at that particular moment, would most willingly have declined it;
for the night was coming on, and I felt much fatigued with the exercise
already taken; but I saw no mode of escape, and was fearful of disturbing
my poor friend’s equanimity by a refusal. Could I have depended, indeed,
upon Jupiter’s aid, I would have had no hesitation in attempting to get the
lunatic home by force; but I was too well assured of the old negro’s
disposition, to hope that he would assist me, under any circumstances, in a
personal contest with his master. I made no doubt that the latter had been
infected with some of the innumerable Southern superstitions about money
buried, and that his phantasy had received confirmation by the finding of
the scarabaeus, or, perhaps, by Jupiter’s obstinacy in maintaining it to be “a
bug of real gold.” A mind disposed to lunacy would readily be led away by
such suggestions — especially if chiming in with favorite preconceived
ideas — and then I called to mind the poor fellow’s speech about the
beetle’s being “the index of his fortune.” Upon the whole, I was sadly vexed
and puzzled, but, at length, I concluded to make a virtue of necessity — to
dig with a good will, and thus the sooner to convince the visionary, by
ocular demonstration, of the fallacy of the opinions he entertained.

more rational cause; and, as the glare fell upon our persons and implements,
I could not help thinking how picturesque a group we composed, and how
strange and suspicious our labors must have appeared to any interloper
who, by chance, might have stumbled upon our whereabouts.

We dug very steadily for two hours. Little was said; and our chief

embarrassment lay in the yelpings of the dog, who took exceeding interest
in our proceedings. He, at length, became so obstreperous that we grew
fearful of his giving the alarm to some stragglers in the vicinity; — or,
rather, this was the apprehension of Legrand; — for myself, I should have
rejoiced at any interruption which might have enabled me to get the

wanderer home. The noise was, at length, very effectually silenced by
Jupiter, who, getting out of the hole with a dogged air of deliberation, tied
the brute’s mouth up with one of his suspenders, and then returned, with a
grave chuckle, to his task.

feet, and yet no signs of any treasure became manifest. A general pause
ensued, and I began to hope that the farce was at an end. Legrand, however,
although evidently much disconcerted, wiped his brow thoughtfully and
recommenced. We had excavated the entire circle of four feet diameter, and
now we slightly enlarged the limit, and went to the farther depth of two feet.
Still nothing appeared. The gold-seeker, whom I sincerely pitied, at length
clambered from the pit, with the bitterest disappointment imprinted upon
every feature, and proceeded, slowly and reluctantly, to put on his coat,
which he had thrown off at the beginning of his labor. In the mean time I
made no remark. Jupiter, at a signal from his master, began to gather up his
tools. This done, and the dog having been unmuzzled, we turned in
profound silence towards home.

We had taken, perhaps, a dozen steps in this direction, when, with a

loud oath, Legrand strode up to Jupiter, and seized him by the collar. The
astonished negro opened his eyes and mouth to the fullest extent, let fall the
spades, and fell upon his knees.

“You scoundrel,” said Legrand, hissing out the syllables from between

his clenched teeth — “you infernal black villain! — speak, I tell you! —
answer me this instant, without prevarication! which — which is your left
eye?”

“Oh, my golly, Massa Will! ain’t dis here my lef’ eye for sartain?”

roared the terrified Jupiter, placing his hand upon his right organ of vision,
and holding it there with a desperate pertinacity, as if in immediate dread of
his master’s attempt at a gouge.

“I thought so! — I knew it! — hurrah!” vociferated Legrand, letting the

negro go, and executing a series of curvets and caracols, much to the
astonishment of his valet, who, arising from his knees, looked, mutely, from
his master to myself, and then from myself to his master.

he again led the way to the tulip-tree.

nailed to the limb with the face outward, or with the face to the limb?”

widout any trouble.”

“Well, then, was it this eye or that through which you let the beetle

fall?” — here Legrand touched each of Jupiter’s eyes.

“’Twas dis eye, massa — de lef’ eye — jis as you tell me,” and here it

was his right eye that the negro indicated.

“That will do — we must try it again.”
Here my friend, about whose madness I now saw, or fancied that I saw,

certain indications of method, removed the peg which marked the spot
where the beetle fell, to a spot about three inches to the westward of its
former position. Taking, now, the tape-measure from the nearest point of the
trunk to the peg, as before, and continuing the extension in a straight line to
the distance of fifty feet, a spot was indicated, removed, by several yards,
from the point at which we had been digging.

Around the new position a circle, somewhat larger than in the former

instance, was now described, and we again set to work with the spades. I
was dreadfully weary, but, scarcely understanding what had occasioned the
change in my thoughts, I felt no longer any great aversion from the labor
imposed. I had become most unaccountably interested — nay, even excited.
Perhaps there was something, amid all the extravagant demeanor of
Legrand — some air of forethought, or of deliberation, which impressed
me. I dug eagerly, and now and then caught myself actually looking, with
something that very much resembled expectation, for the fancied treasure,
the vision of which had demented my unfortunate companion. At a period
when such vagaries of thought most fully possessed me, and when we had
been at work perhaps an hour and a half, we were again interrupted by the
violent howlings of the dog. His uneasiness, in the first instance, had been,
evidently, but the result of playfulness or caprice, but he now assumed a
bitter and serious tone. Upon Jupiter’s again attempting to muzzle him, he

made furious resistance, and, leaping into the hole, tore up the mould
frantically with his claws. In a few seconds he had uncovered a mass of
human bones, forming two complete skeletons, intermingled with several
buttons of metal, and what appeared to be the dust of decayed woollen. One
or two strokes of a spade upturned the blade of a large Spanish knife, and,
as we dug farther, three or four loose pieces of gold and silver coin came to
light.

At sight of these the joy of Jupiter could scarcely be restrained, but the

countenance of his master wore an air of extreme disappointment. He urged
us, however, to continue our exertions, and the words were hardly uttered
when I stumbled and fell forward, having caught the toe of my boot in a
large ring of iron that lay half buried in the loose earth.

We now worked in earnest, and never did I pass ten minutes of more

intense excitement. During this interval we had fairly unearthed an oblong
chest of wood, which, from its perfect preservation, and wonderful
hardness, had plainly been subjected to some mineralizing process —
perhaps that of the Bi-chloride of Mercury. This box was three feet and a
half long, three feet broad, and two and a half feet deep. It was firmly
secured by bands of wrought iron, riveted, and forming a kind of trellis-
work over the whole. On each side of the chest, near the top, were three
rings of iron — six in all — by means of which a firm hold could be
obtained by six persons. Our utmost united endeavors served only to disturb
the coffer very slightly in its bed. We at once saw the impossibility of
removing so great a weight. Luckily, the sole fastenings of the lid consisted
of two sliding bolts. These we drew back — trembling and panting with
anxiety. In an instant, a treasure of incalculable value lay gleaming before
us. As the rays of the lanterns fell within the pit, there flashed upwards,
from a confused heap of gold and of jewels, a glow and a glare that
absolutely dazzled our eyes.

I shall not pretend to describe the feelings with which I gazed.

Amazement was, of course, predominant. Legrand appeared exhausted with
excitement, and spoke very few words. Jupiter’s countenance wore, for
some minutes, as deadly a pallor as it is possible, in the nature of things, for

any negro’s visage to assume. He seemed stupefied — thunder-stricken.
Presently he fell upon his knees in the pit, and, burying his naked arms up
to the elbows in gold, let them there remain, as if enjoying the luxury of a
bath. At length, with a deep sigh, he exclaimed, as if in a soliloquy.

“And dis all cum ob de goole-bug! de putty goole-bug! de poor little

goole-bug, what I boosed in dat sabage kind ob style! Ain’t you shamed ob
yourself, nigger? — answer me dat!”

It became necessary, at last, that I should arouse both master and valet

to the expediency of removing the treasure. It was growing late, and it
behooved us to make exertion, that we might get every thing housed before
daylight. It was difficult to say what should be done; and much time was
spent in deliberation — so confused were the ideas of all. We, finally,
lightened the box by removing two thirds of its contents, when we were
enabled, with some trouble, to raise it from the hole. The articles taken out
were deposited among the brambles, and the dog left to guard them, with
strict orders from Jupiter neither, upon any pretence, to stir from the spot,
nor to open his mouth until our return. We then hurriedly made for home
with the chest; reaching the hut in safety, but after excessive toil, at one
o’clock in the morning. Worn out as we were, it was not in human nature to
do more just then. We rested until two, and had supper; starting for the hills
immediately afterwards, armed with three stout sacks, which, by good luck,
were upon the premises. A little before four we arrived at the pit, divided
the remainder of the booty, as equally as might be, among us, and, leaving
the holes unfilled, again set out for the hut, at which, for the second time,
we deposited our golden burthens, just as the first streaks of the dawn
gleamed from over the tree-tops in the East.

We were now thoroughly broken down; but the intense excitement of

the time denied us repose. After an unquiet slumber of some three or four
hours’ duration, we arose, as if by preconcert, to make examination of our
treasure.

The chest had been full to the brim, and we spent the whole day, and the

greater part of the next night, in a scrutiny of its contents. There had been
nothing like order or arrangement. Every thing had been heaped in

promiscuously. Having assorted all with care, we found ourselves possessed
of even vaster wealth than we had at first supposed. In coin there was rather
more than four hundred and fifty thousand dollars — estimating the value
of the pieces, as accurately as we could, by the tables of the period. There
was not a particle of silver. All was gold of antique date and of great variety
— French, Spanish, and German money, with a few English guineas, and
some counters, of which we had never seen specimens before. There were
several very large and heavy coins, so worn that we could make nothing of
their inscriptions. There was no American money. The value of the jewels
we found more difficulty in estimating. There were diamonds — some of
them exceedingly large and fine — a hundred and ten in all, and not one of
them small; eighteen rubies of remarkable brilliancy; — three hundred and
ten emeralds, all very beautiful; and twenty-one sapphires, with an opal.
These stones had all been broken from their settings and thrown loose in the
chest. The settings themselves, which we picked out from among the other
gold, appeared to have been beaten up with hammers, as if to prevent
identification. Besides all this, there was a vast quantity of solid gold
ornaments; — nearly two hundred massive finger and ear rings; — rich
chains — thirty of these, if I remember; — eighty-three very large and
heavy crucifixes; — five gold censers of great value; — a prodigious
golden punch-bowl, ornamented with richly chased vine-leaves and
Bacchanalian figures; with two sword-handles exquisitely embossed, and
many other smaller articles which I cannot recollect. The weight of these
valuables exceeded three hundred and fifty pounds avoirdupois; and in this
estimate I have not included one hundred and ninety-seven superb gold
watches; three of the number being worth each five hundred dollars, if one.
Many of them were very old, and as time keepers valueless; the works
having suffered, more or less, from corrosion — but all were richly jewelled
and in cases of great worth. We estimated the entire contents of the chest,
that night, at a million and a half of dollars; and, upon the subsequent
disposal of the trinkets and jewels (a few being retained for our own use), it
was found that we had greatly undervalued the treasure.

excitement of the time had, in some measure, subsided, Legrand, who saw
that I was dying with impatience for a solution of this most extraordinary
riddle, entered into a full detail of all the circumstances connected with it.

“You remember,” said he, “the night when I handed you the rough

sketch I had made of the scarabaeus. You recollect also, that I became quite
vexed at you for insisting that my drawing resembled a death’s-head. When
you first made this assertion I thought you were jesting; but afterwards I
called to mind the peculiar spots on the back of the insect, and admitted to
myself that your remark had some little foundation in fact. Still, the sneer at
my graphic powers irritated me — for I am considered a good artist — and,
therefore, when you handed me the scrap of parchment, I was about to
crumple it up and throw it angrily into the fire.”

“The scrap of paper, you mean,” said I.
“No; it had much of the appearance of paper, and at first I supposed it to

be such, but when I came to draw upon it, I discovered it, at once, to be a
piece of very thin parchment. It was quite dirty, you remember. Well, as I
was in the very act of crumpling it up, my glance fell upon the sketch at
which you had been looking, and you may imagine my astonishment when I
perceived, in fact, the figure of a death’s-head just where, it seemed to me, I
had made the drawing of the beetle. For a moment I was too much amazed
to think with accuracy. I knew that my design was very different in detail
from this — although there was a certain similarity in general outline.
Presently I took a candle, and seating myself at the other end of the room,
proceeded to scrutinize the parchment more closely. Upon turning it over, I
saw my own sketch upon the reverse, just as I had made it. My first idea,
now, was mere surprise at the really remarkable similarity of outline — at
the singular coincidence involved in the fact, that unknown to me, there
should have been a skull upon the other side of the parchment, immediately
beneath my figure of the scarabaeus and that this skull, not only in outline,
but in size, should so closely resemble my drawing. I say the singularity of
this coincidence absolutely stupefied me for a time. This is the usual effect
of such coincidences. The mind struggles to establish a connection — a

sequence of cause and effect — and, being unable to do so, suffers a species
of temporary paralysis. But, when I recovered from this stupor, there
dawned upon me gradually a conviction which startled me even far more
than the coincidence. I began distinctly, positively, to remember that there
had been no drawing on the parchment when I made my sketch of the
scarabaeus. I became perfectly certain of this; for I recollected turning up
first one side and then the other, in search of the cleanest spot. Had the skull
been then there, of course I could not have failed to notice it. Here was
indeed a mystery which I felt it impossible to explain; but, even at that early
moment, there it seemed to glimmer, faintly, within the most remote and
secret chambers of my intellect, a glow-worm-like conception of that truth
which last night’s adventure brought to so magnificent a demonstration. I
arose at once, and putting the parchment securely away, dismissed all
farther reflection until I should be alone.

“When you had gone, and when Jupiter was fast asleep, I betook myself

to a more methodical investigation of the affair. In the first place I
considered the manner in which the parchment had come into my
possession. The spot where we discovered the scarabaeus was on the coast
of the main land, about a mile eastward of the island, and but a short
distance above high water mark. Upon my taking hold of it, it gave me a
sharp bite, which caused me to let it drop. Jupiter, with his accustomed
caution, before seizing the insect, which had flown towards him, looked
about him for a leaf, or something of that nature, by which to take hold of it.
It was at this moment that his eyes, and mine also, fell upon the scrap of
parchment, which I then supposed to be paper. It was lying half buried in
the sand, a corner sticking up. Near the spot where we found it, I observed
the remnants of the hull of what appeared to have been a ship’s long boat.
The wreck seemed to have been there for a very great while; for the
resemblance to boat timbers could scarcely be traced.

“Well, Jupiter picked up the parchment, wrapped the beetle in it, and

gave it to me. Soon afterwards we turned to go home, and on the way met
Lieutenant G—. I showed him the insect, and he begged me to let him take
it to the fort. On my consenting, he thrust it forthwith into his waistcoat

pocket, without the parchment in which it had been wrapped, and which I
had continued to hold in my hand during his inspection. Perhaps he dreaded
my changing my mind, and thought it best to make sure of the prize at once
— you know how enthusiastic he is on all subjects connected with Natural
History. At the same time without being conscious of it, I must have
deposited the parchment in my own pocket.

“You remember that when I went to the table, for the purpose of making

a sketch of the beetle, I found no paper where it was usually kept. I looked
in the drawer, and found none there. I searched my pockets, hoping to find
an old letter — and then my hand fell upon the parchment. I thus detail the
precise mode in which it came into my possession; for the circumstances
impressed me with peculiar force.

“No doubt you will think me fanciful — but I had already established a

kind of connexion. I had put together two links of a great chain. There was
a boat lying on a sea-coast, and not far from the boat was a parchment —
not a paper — with a skull depicted on it. You will, of course, ask ‘where is
the connexion?’ I reply that the skull, or death’s-head, is the well-known
emblem of the pirate. The flag of the death’s-head is hoisted in all
engagements.

“I have said that the scrap was parchment, and not paper. Parchment is

durable — almost imperishable. Matters of little moment are rarely
consigned to parchment; since, for the mere ordinary purposes of drawing
or writing, it is not nearly so well adapted as paper. This reflection
suggested some meaning — some relevancy — in the death’s-head. I did
not fail to observe, also, the form of the parchment. Although one of its
corners had been, by some accident, destroyed, it could be seen that the
original form was oblong. It was just such a slip, indeed, as might have
been chosen for a memorandum — for a record of something to be long
remembered and carefully preserved.”

“But,” I interposed, “you say that the skull was not upon the parchment

when you made the drawing of the beetle. How then do you trace any
connexion between the boat and the skull — since this latter, according to

your own admission, must have been designed (God only knows how or by
whom) at some period subsequent to your sketching the scarabaeus?”

point, I had comparatively little difficulty in solving. My steps were sure,
and could afford but a single result. I reasoned, for example, thus: When I
drew the scarabaeus, there was no skull apparent on the parchment. When I
had completed the drawing, I gave it to you, and observed you narrowly
until you returned it. You, therefore, did not design the skull, and no one
else was present to do it. Then it was not done by human agency. And
nevertheless it was done.

“At this stage of my reflections I endeavored to remember, and did

remember, with entire distinctness, every incident which occurred about the
period in question. The weather was chilly (oh rare and happy accident!),
and a fire was blazing on the hearth. I was heated with exercise and sat near
the table. You, however, had drawn a chair close to the chimney. Just as I
placed the parchment in your hand, and as you were in the act of inspecting
it, Wolf, the Newfoundland, entered, and leaped upon your shoulders. With
your left hand you caressed him and kept him off, while your right, holding
the parchment, was permitted to fall listlessly between your knees, and in
close proximity to the fire. At one moment I thought the blaze had caught it,
and was about to caution you, but, before I could speak, you had withdrawn
it, and were engaged in its examination. When I considered all these
particulars, I doubted not for a moment that heat had been the agent in
bringing to light, on the parchment, the skull which I saw designed on it.
You are well aware that chemical preparations exist, and have existed time
out of mind, by means of which it is possible to write on either paper or
vellum, so that the characters shall become visible only when subjected to
the action of fire. Zaire, digested in aqua regia, and diluted with four times
its weight of water, is sometimes employed; a green tint results. The regulus
of cobalt, dissolved in spirit of nitre, gives a red. These colors disappear at
longer or shorter intervals after the material written on cools, but again
become apparent upon the re-application of heat.

edges of the drawing nearest the edge of the vellum — were far more
distinct than the others. It was clear that the action of the caloric had been
imperfect or unequal. I immediately kindled a fire, and subjected every
portion of the parchment to a glowing heat. At first, the only effect was the
strengthening of the faint lines in the skull; but, on persevering in the
experiment, there became visible, at the corner of the slip, diagonally
opposite to the spot in which the death’s-head was delineated, the figure of
what I at first supposed to be a goat. A closer scrutiny, however, satisfied
me that it was intended for a kid.”

“Ha! ha!” said I, “to be sure I have no right to laugh at you — a million

and a half of money is too serious a matter for mirth — but you are not
about to establish a third link in your chain — you will not find any especial
connexion between your pirates and goat — pirates, you know, have
nothing to do with goats; they appertain to the farming interest.”

“But I have just said that the figure was not that of a goat.”
“Well, a kid then — pretty much the same thing.”
“Pretty much, but not altogether,” said Legrand. “You may have heard

of one Captain Kidd. I at once looked on the figure of the animal as a kind
of punning or hieroglyphical signature. I say signature; because its position
on the vellum suggested this idea. The death’s-head at the corner diagonally
opposite, had, in the same manner, the air of a stamp, or seal. But I was
sorely put out by the absence of all else — of the body to my imagined
instrument — of the text for my context.”

“I presume you expected to find a letter between the stamp and the

signature.”

“Something of that kind. The fact is, I felt irresistibly impressed with a

presentiment of some vast good fortune impending. I can scarcely say why.
Perhaps, after all, it was rather a desire than an actual belief; — but do you
know that Jupiter’s silly words, about the bug being of solid gold, had a
remarkable effect on my fancy? And then the series of accidents and
coincidences — these were so very extraordinary. Do you observe how
mere an accident it was that these events should have occurred on the sole

day of all the year in which it has been, or may be, sufficiently cool for fire,
and that without the fire, or without the intervention of the dog at the
precise moment in which he appeared, I should never have become aware
of the death’s-head, and so never the possessor of the treasure?”

“But proceed — I am all impatience.”
“Well; you have heard, of course, the many stories current — the

thousand vague rumors afloat about money buried, somewhere on the
Atlantic coast, by Kidd and his associates. These rumors must have had
some foundation in fact. And that the rumors have existed so long and so
continuously could have resulted, it appeared to me, only from the
circumstance of the buried treasure still remaining entombed. Had Kidd
concealed his plunder for a time, and afterwards reclaimed it, the rumors
would scarcely have reached us in their present unvarying form. You will
observe that the stories told are all about money-seekers, not about money-
finders. Had the pirate recovered his money, there the affair would have
dropped. It seemed to me that some accident — say the loss of a
memorandum indicating its locality — had deprived him of the means of
recovering it, and that this accident had become known to is followers, who
otherwise might never have heard that treasure had been concealed at all,
and who, busying themselves in vain, because unguided attempts, to regain
it, had given first birth, and then universal currency, to the reports which are
now so common. Have you ever heard of any important treasure being
unearthed along the coast?”

“Never.”
“But that Kidd’s accumulations were immense, is well known. I took it

for granted, therefore, that the earth still held them; and you will scarcely be
surprised when I tell you that I felt a hope, nearly amounting to certainty,
that the parchment so strangely found, involved a lost record of the place of
deposit.”

“But how did you proceed?”
“I held the vellum again to the fire, after increasing the heat; but nothing

appeared. I now thought it possible that the coating of dirt might have
something to do with the failure; so I carefully rinsed the parchment by

pouring warm water over it, and, having done this, I placed it in a tin pan,
with the skull downwards, and put the pan upon a furnace of lighted
charcoal. In a few minutes, the pan having become thoroughly heated, I
removed the slip, and, to my inexpressible joy, found it spotted, in several
places, with what appeared to be figures arranged in lines. Again I placed it
in the pan, and suffered it to remain another minute. On taking it off, the
whole was just as you see it now.”

Here Legrand, having re-heated the parchment, submitted it to my

inspection. The following characters were rudely traced, in a red tint,
between the death’s-head and the goat:

53++!305))6*;4826)4+.)4+);806*;48!8‘60))85;] 
8*:+*8!83(88) 5*!;46(;88*96*?;8)*+(;485);5*! 
2:*+(;4956*2(5*-4) 8‘8*; 4069285);)6!8) 4++;1 

(+9; 48081; 8:8+1;48!85;4) 485!528806*81 (+9;48; 

(88;4(+?34;48)4+;161;:188;+?;

“But,” said I, returning him the slip, “I am as much in the dark as ever.
Were all the jewels of Golconda awaiting me on my solution of this enigma,
I am quite sure that I should be unable to earn them.”

“And yet,” said Legrand, “the solution is by no means so difficult as

you might be led to imagine from the first hasty inspection of the
characters. These characters, as any one might readily guess, form a cipher
— that is to say, they convey a meaning; but then, from what is known of
Kidd, I could not suppose him capable of constructing any of the more
abstruse cryptographs. I made up my mind, at once, that this was of a
simple species — such, however, as would appear, to the crude intellect of
the sailor, absolutely insoluble without the key.”

“And you really solved it?”
“Readily; I have solved others of an abstruseness ten thousand times

greater. Circumstances, and a certain bias of mind, have led me to take
interest in such riddles, and it may well be doubted whether human
ingenuity can construct an enigma of the kind which human ingenuity may

not, by proper application, resolve. In fact, having once established
connected and legible characters, I scarcely gave a thought to the mere
difficulty of developing their import.

“In the present case — indeed in all cases of secret writing — the first

question regards the language of the cipher; for the principles of solution, so
far, especially, as the more simple ciphers are concerned, depend on, and
are varied by, the genius of the particular idiom. In general, there is no
alternative but experiment (directed by probabilities) of every tongue
known to him who attempts the solution, until the true one be attained. But,
with the cipher now before us, all difficulty is removed by the signature.
The pun on the word ‘Kidd’ is appreciable in no other language than the
English. But for this consideration I should have begun my attempts with
the Spanish and French, as the tongues in which a secret of this kind would
most naturally have been written by a pirate of the Spanish main. As it was,
I assumed the cryptograph to be English.

“You observe there are no divisions between the words. Had there been

divisions, the task would have been comparatively easy. In such case I
should have commenced with a collation and analysis of the shorter words,
and, had a word of a single letter occurred, as is most likely, (a or I, for
example,) I should have considered the solution as assured. But, there being
no division, my first step was to ascertain the predominant letters, as well as
the least frequent. Counting all, I constructed a table, thus:

character
8
there
are
33

;
“
26

4
“
19

+
)
“
16

*
“
13

5
“
12

6
“
11

! 1
“
8

0
“
6

9
2
“
5

: 3
“
4

?
“
3

‘
“
2

- .
“
1.

 
“Now, in English, the letter which most frequently occurs is e. Afterwards,
the succession runs thus: a o i d h n r s t u y c f g l m w b k p q x z. E
however predominates so remarkably that an individual sentence of any
length is rarely seen, in which it is not the prevailing character.

“Here, then, we have, in the very beginning, the groundwork for

something more than a mere guess. The general use which may be made of
the table is obvious — but, in this particular cipher, we shall only very
partially require its aid. As our predominant character is 8, we will
commence by assuming it as the e of the natural alphabet. To verify the
supposition, let us observe if the 8 be seen often in couples — for e is
doubled with great frequency in English — in such words, for example, as
‘meet,’ ‘fleet,’ ‘speed, ‘seen,’ ‘been,’ ‘agree,’ &c. In the present instance
we see it doubled less than five times, although the cryptograph is brief.

“Let us assume 8, then, as e. Now, of all words in the language, ‘the’ is

the most usual; let us see, therefore, whether they are not repetitions of any
three characters in the same order of collocation, the last of them being 8. If

we discover repetitions of such letters, so arranged, they will most probably
represent the word ‘the.’ On inspection, we find no less than seven such
arrangements, the characters being;48. We may, therefore, assume that the
semicolon represents t, that 4 represents h, and that 8 represents e — the
last being now well confirmed. Thus a great step has been taken.

vastly important point; that is to say, several commencements and
terminations of other words. Let us refer, for example, to the last instance
but one, in which the combination;48 occurs — not far from the end of the
cipher. We know that the semicolon immediately ensuing is the
commencement of a word, and, of the six characters succeeding this ‘the,’
we are cognizant of no less than five. Let us set these characters down, thus,
by the letters we know them to represent, leaving a space for the unknown
—

t eeth.

“Here we are enabled, at once, to discard the ‘th,’ as forming no portion of
the word commencing with the first t; since, by experiment of the entire
alphabet for a letter adapted to the vacancy we perceive that no word can be
formed of which this th can be a part. We are thus narrowed into

t ee,

and, going through the alphabet, if necessary, as before, we arrive at the
word ‘tree,’ as the sole possible reading. We thus gain another letter, r,
represented by (, with the words ‘the tree’ in juxtaposition.

“Looking beyond these words, for a short distance, we again see the

combination;48, and employ it by way of termination to what immediately
precedes. We have thus this arrangement:

the tree;4(+?34 the,

or substituting the natural letters, where known, it reads thus:

the tree thr+?3h the.

“Now, if, in place of the unknown characters, we leave blank spaces, or
substitute dots, we read thus:

the tree thr . . . h the,

when the word ‘through’ makes itself evident at once. But this discovery
gives us three new letters, o, u and g, represented by +? and 3.

“Looking now, narrowly, through the cipher for combinations of known

characters, we find, not very far from the beginning, this arrangement,

83(88, or egree,

which, plainly, is the conclusion of the word ‘degree,’ and gives us another
letter, d, represented by!.

“Four letters beyond the word ‘degree,’ we perceive the combination

;46(;88*.

“Translating the known characters, and representing the unknown by dots,
as before, we read thus:

th.rtee.

an arrangement immediately suggestive of the word ‘thirteen,’ and again
furnishing us with two new characters, i and n, represented by 6 and *.

“Referring, now, to the beginning of the cryptograph, we find the

combination,

53++!.

“Translating, as before, we obtain

.good,

which assures us that the first letter is A, and that the first two words are ‘A
good.’

discovered, in a tabular form. It will stand thus:

!
“
d

8
“
e

3
“
g

4
“
h

6
“
i

*
“
n

+
“
o

(
“
r

;
“
t

“‘A good glass in the bishop’s hostel in the devil’s seat twenty-one

degrees and thirteen minutes northeast and by north main branch seventh

limb east side shoot from the left eye of the death’s-head a bee line from the
tree through the shot fifty feet out.’”

“But,” said I, “the enigma seems still in as bad a condition as ever. How

is it possible to extort a meaning from all this jargon about ‘devil’s seats,’
‘death’s-heads,’ and ‘bishop’s hostel’?”

aspect, when regarded with a casual glance. My first endeavor was to divide
the sentence into the natural division intended by the cryptographist.”

“You mean, to punctuate it?”
“Something of that kind.”
“But how was it possible to effect this?”
“I reflected that it had been a point with the writer to run his words

together without division, so as to increase the difficulty of solution. Now, a
not overacute man, in pursuing such an object, would be nearly certain to
overdo the matter. When, in the course of his composition, he arrived at a
break in his subject which would naturally require a pause, or a point, he
would be exceedingly apt to run his characters, at this place, more than
usually close together. If you will observe the MS., in the present instance,
you will easily detect five such cases of unusual crowding. Acting on this
hint, I made the division thus:

‘A good glass in the bishop’s hostel in the devil’s — twenty-one degrees

and thirteen minutes — northeast and by north — main branch seventh limb
east side — shoot from the left eye of the death’s-head — a bee-line from
the tree through the shot fifty feet out.’”

“Even this division,” said I, “leaves me still in the dark.”
“It left me also in the dark,” replied Legrand, “for a few days; during

which I made diligent inquiry, in the neighborhood of Sullivan’s Island, for
any building which went by the name of the ‘Bishop’s Hotel’; for, of
course, I dropped the obsolete word ‘hostel.’ Gaining no information on the
subject, I was on the point of extending my sphere of search, and
proceeding in a more systematic manner, when, one morning, it entered into
my head, quite suddenly, that this ‘Bishop’s Hostel’ might have some
reference to an old family, of the name of Bessop, which, time out of mind,

had held possession of an ancient manor-house, about four miles to the
northward of the Island. I accordingly went over to the plantation, and
reinstituted my inquiries among the older negroes of the place. At length
one of the most aged of the women said that she had heard of such a place
as Bessop’s Castle, and thought that she could guide me to it, but that it was
not a castle, nor a tavern, but a high rock.

“I offered to pay her well for her trouble, and, after some demur, she

consented to accompany me to the spot. We found it without much
difficulty, when, dismissing her, I proceeded to examine the place. The
‘castle’ consisted of an irregular assemblage of cliffs and rocks — one of
the latter being quite remarkable for its height as well as for its insulated
and artificial appearance. I clambered to its apex, and then felt much at a
loss as to what should be next done.

“While I was busied in reflection, my eyes fell upon a narrow ledge in

the eastern face of the rock, perhaps a yard below the summit on which I
stood. This ledge projected about eighteen inches, and was not more than a
foot wide, while a niche in the cliff just above it, gave it a rude resemblance
to one of the hollow-backed chairs used by our ancestors. I made no doubt
that here was the ‘devil’s-seat’ alluded to in the MS., and now I seemed to
grasp the full secret of the riddle.

“The ‘good glass,’ I knew, could have reference to nothing but a

telescope; for the word ‘glass’ is rarely employed in any other sense by
seamen. Now here, I at once saw, was a telescope to be used, and a definite
point of view, admitting no variation, from which to use it. Nor did I
hesitate to believe that the phrases, ‘twenty-one degrees and thirteen
minutes,’ and northeast and by north,’ were intended as directions for the
levelling of the glass. Greatly excited by these discoveries, I hurried home,
procured a telescope, and returned to the rock.

“I let myself down to the ledge, and found that it was impossible to

retain a seat on it unless in one particular position. This fact confirmed my
preconceived idea. I proceeded to use the glass. Of course, the ‘twenty-one
degrees and thirteen minutes’ could allude to nothing but elevation above
the visible horizon, since the horizontal direction was clearly indicated by

the words, ‘northeast and by north.’ This latter direction I at once
established by means of a pocket-compass; then, pointing the glass as
nearly at an angle of twenty-one degrees of elevation as I could do it by
guess, I moved it cautiously up or down, until my attention was arrested by
a circular rift or opening in the foliage of a large tree that overtopped its
fellows in the distance. In the centre of this rift I perceived a white spot, but
could not, at first, distinguish what it was. Adjusting the focus of the
telescope, I again looked, and now made it out to be a human skull.

“On this discovery I was so sanguine as to consider the enigma solved;

for the phrase ‘main branch, seventh limb, east side,’ could refer only to the
position of the skull on the tree, while shoot from the left eye of the death’s-
head’ admitted, also, of but one interpretation, in regard to a search for
buried treasure. I perceived that the design was to drop a bullet from the left
eye of the skull, and that a bee-line, or, in other words, a straight line, drawn
from the nearest point of the trunk through ‘the shot,’ (or the spot where the
bullet fell,) and thence extended to a distance of fifty feet, would indicate a
definite point — and beneath this point I thought it at least possible that a
deposit of value lay concealed.”

“All this,” I said, “is exceedingly clear, and, although ingenious, still

simple and explicit. When you left the Bishop’s Hotel, what then?”

“Why, having carefully taken the bearings of the tree, I turned

homewards. The instant that I left ‘the devil’s seat,’ however, the circular
rift vanished; nor could I get a glimpse of it afterwards, turn as I would.
What seems to me the chief ingenuity in this whole business, is the fact (for
repeated experiment has convinced me it is a fact) that the circular opening
in question is visible from no other attainable point of view than that
afforded by the narrow ledge on the face of the rock.

“In this expedition to the ‘Bishop’s Hotel’ I had been attended by

Jupiter, who had, no doubt, observed, for some weeks past, the abstraction
of my demeanor, and took especial care not to leave me alone. But, on the
next day, getting up very early, I contrived to give him the slip, and went
into the hills in search of the tree. After much toil I found it. When I came

home at night my valet proposed to give me a flogging. With the rest of the
adventure I believe you are as well acquainted as myself.”

“I suppose,” said I, “you missed the spot, in the first attempt at digging

through Jupiter’s stupidity in letting the bug fall through the right instead of
the left of the skull.”

half in the ‘shot’ — that is to say, in the position of the peg nearest the tree;
and had the treasure been beneath the ‘shot,’ the error would have been of
little moment; but the ‘shot,’ together with the nearest point of the tree,
were merely two points for the establishment of a line of direction; of
course the error, however trivial in the beginning, increased as we
proceeded with the line, and by the time we had gone fifty feet, threw us
quite off the scent. But for my deep-seated convictions that treasure was
here somewhere actually buried, we might have had all our labor in vain.”

skull’s eye — was suggested to Kidd by the piratical flag. No doubt he felt
a kind of poetical consistency in recovering his money through this
ominous insignium.”

“Perhaps so; still I cannot help thinking that common-sense had quite as

much to do with the matter as poetical consistency. To be visible from the
devil’s-seat, it was necessary that the object, if small, should be white; and
there is nothing like your human skull for retaining and even increasing its
whiteness under exposure to all vicissitudes of weather.”

“But your grandiloquence, and your conduct in swinging the beetle —

how excessively odd! I was sure you were mad. And why did you insist on
letting fall the bug, instead of a bullet, from the skull?”

“Why, to be frank, I felt somewhat annoyed by your evident suspicions

touching my sanity, and so resolved to punish you quietly, in my own way,
by a little bit of sober mystification. For this reason I swung the beetle, and
for this reason I let it fall from the tree. An observation of yours about its
great weight suggested the latter idea.”

“Yes, I perceive; and now there is only one point which puzzles me.

What are we to make of the skeletons found in the hole?”

seems, however, only one plausible way of accounting for them — and yet
it is dreadful to believe in such atrocity as my suggestion would imply. It is
clear that Kidd — if Kidd indeed secreted this treasure, which I doubt not
— it is clear that he must have had assistance in the labor. But, the worst of
this labor concluded, he may have thought it expedient to remove all
participants in his secret. Perhaps a couple of blows with a mattock were
sufficient, while his coadjutors were busy in the pit; perhaps it required a
dozen — who shall tell?”

OceanofPDF.com

Thou Art the Man

I will now play the Oedipus to the Rattleborough enigma. I will expound to
you — as I alone can — the secret of the enginery that effected the
Rattleborough miracle — the one, the true, the admitted, the undisputed, the
indisputable miracle, which put a definite end to infidelity among the
Rattleburghers and converted to the orthodoxy of the grandames all the
carnal-minded who had ventured to be sceptical before.

This event — which I should be sorry to discuss in a tone of unsuitable

levity — occurred in the summer of 18-. Mr. Barnabas Shuttleworthy —
one of the wealthiest and most respectable citizens of the borough — had
been missing for several days under circumstances which gave rise to
suspicion of foul play. Mr. Shuttleworthy had set out from Rattleborough
very early one Saturday morning, on horseback, with the avowed intention
of proceeding to the city of-, about fifteen miles distant, and of returning the
night of the same day. Two hours after his departure, however, his horse
returned without him, and without the saddle-bags which had been strapped
on his back at starting. The animal was wounded, too, and covered with
mud. These circumstances naturally gave rise to much alarm among the
friends of the missing man; and when it was found, on Sunday morning,
that he had not yet made his appearance, the whole borough arose en masse
to go and look for his body.

The foremost and most energetic in instituting this search was the

bosom friend of Mr. Shuttleworthy — a Mr. Charles Goodfellow, or, as he
was universally called, “Charley Goodfellow,” or “Old Charley
Goodfellow.” Now, whether it is a marvellous coincidence, or whether it is
that the name itself has an imperceptible effect upon the character, I have
never yet been able to ascertain; but the fact is unquestionable, that there
never yet was any person named Charles who was not an open, manly,
honest, good-natured, and frank-hearted fellow, with a rich, clear voice, that

did you good to hear it, and an eye that looked you always straight in the
face, as much as to say: “I have a clear conscience myself, am afraid of no
man, and am altogether above doing a mean action.” And thus all the
hearty, careless, “walking gentlemen” of the stage are very certain to be
called Charles.

Now, “Old Charley Goodfellow,” although he had been in

Rattleborough not longer than six months or thereabouts, and although
nobody knew any thing about him before he came to settle in the
neighborhood, had experienced no difficulty in the world in making the
acquaintance of all the respectable people in the borough. Not a man of
them but would have taken his bare word for a thousand at any moment;
and as for the women, there is no saying what they would not have done to
oblige him. And all this came of his having been christened Charles, and of
his possessing, in consequence, that ingenuous face which is proverbially
the very “best letter of recommendation.”

I have already said that Mr. Shuttleworthy was one of the most

respectable and, undoubtedly, he was the most wealthy man in
Rattleborough, while “Old Charley Goodfellow” was upon as intimate
terms with him as if he had been his own brother. The two old gentlemen
were next-door neighbours, and, although Mr. Shuttleworthy seldom, if
ever, visited “Old Charley,” and never was known to take a meal in his
house, still this did not prevent the two friends from being exceedingly
intimate, as I have just observed; for “Old Charley” never let a day pass
without stepping in three or four times to see how his neighbour came on,
and very often he would stay to breakfast or tea, and almost always to
dinner, and then the amount of wine that was made way with by the two
cronies at a sitting, it would really be a difficult thing to ascertain. “Old
Charleys” favorite beverage was Chateau-Margaux, and it appeared to do
Mr. Shuttleworthy’s heart good to see the old fellow swallow it, as he did,
quart after quart; so that, one day, when the wine was in and the wit as a
natural consequence, somewhat out, he said to his crony, as he slapped him
upon the back —“I tell you what it is, ‘Old Charley,’ you are, by all odds,
the heartiest old fellow I ever came across in all my born days; and, since

you love to guzzle the wine at that fashion, I’ll be darned if I don’t have to
make thee a present of a big box of the Chateau-Margaux. Od rot me,"—
(Mr. Shuttleworthy had a sad habit of swearing, although he seldom went
beyond “Od rot me,” or “By gosh,” or “By the jolly golly,")—“Od rot me,”
says he, “if I don’t send an order to town this very afternoon for a double
box of the best that can be got, and I’ll make ye a present of it, I will! — ye
needn’t say a word now — I will, I tell ye, and there’s an end of it; so look
out for it — it will come to hand some of these fine days, precisely when ye
are looking for it the least!” I mention this little bit of liberality on the part
of Mr. Shuttleworthy, just by way of showing you how very intimate an
understanding existed between the two friends.

Well, on the Sunday morning in question, when it came to be fairly

understood that Mr. Shuttleworthy had met with foul play, I never saw any
one so profoundly affected as “Old Charley Goodfellow.” When he first
heard that the horse had come home without his master, and without his
master’s saddle-bags, and all bloody from a pistol-shot, that had gone clean
through and through the poor animal’s chest without quite killing him;
when he heard all this, he turned as pale as if the missing man had been his
own dear brother or father, and shivered and shook all over as if he had had
a fit of the ague.

thing at all, or to concert upon any plan of action; so that for a long time he
endeavoured to dissuade Mr. Shuttleworthy’s other friends from making a
stir about the matter, thinking it best to wait awhile — say for a week or
two, or a month, or two — to see if something wouldn’t turn up, or if Mr.
Shuttleworthy wouldn’t come in the natural way, and explain his reasons for
sending his horse on before. I dare say you have often observed this
disposition to temporize, or to procrastinate, in people who are labouring
under any very poignant sorrow. Their powers of mind seem to be rendered
torpid, so that they have a horror of any thing like action, and like nothing
in the world so well as to lie quietly in bed and “nurse their grief,” as the
old ladies express it — that is to say, ruminate over the trouble.

wisdom and discretion of “Old Charley,” that the greater part of them felt
disposed to agree with him, and not make a stir in the business “until
something should turn up,” as the honest old gentleman worded it; and I
believe that, after all this would have been the general determination, but
for the very suspicious interference of Mr. Shuttleworthy’s nephew, a young
man of very dissipated habits, and otherwise of rather bad character. This
nephew, whose name was Pennifeather, would listen to nothing like reason
in the matter of “lying quiet,” but insisted upon making immediate search
for the “corpse of the murdered man. — This was the expression he
employed; and Mr. Goodfellow acutely remarked at the time, that it was “a
singular expression, to say no more.” This remark of ‘Old Charley’s,’ too,
had great effect upon the crowd; and one of the party was heard to ask, very
impressively, “how it happened that young Mr. Pennifeather was so
intimately cognizant of all the circumstances connected with his wealthy
uncle’s disappearance, as to feel authorized to assert, distinctly and
unequivocally, that his uncle was ‘a murdered man.’” Hereupon some little
squibbing and bickering occurred among various members of the crowd,
and especially between “Old Charley” and Mr. Pennifeather — although
this latter occurrence was, indeed, by no means a novelty, for no good will
had subsisted between the parties for the last three or four months; and
matters had even gone so far that Mr. Pennifeather had actually knocked
down his uncles friend for some alleged excess of liberty that the latter had
taken in the uncle’s house, of which the nephew was an inmate. Upon this
occasion “Old Charley” is said to have behaved with exemplary moderation
and Christian charity. He arose from the blow, adjusted his clothes, and
made no attempt at retaliation at all — merely muttering a few words about
“taking summary vengeance at the first convenient opportunity,"— a
natural and very justifiable ebullition of anger, which meant nothing,
however, and, beyond doubt, was no sooner given vent to than forgotten.

However these matters may be (which have no reference to the point

now at issue), it is quite certain that the people of Rattleborough, principally
through the persuasion of Mr. Pennifeather, came at length to the

determination of dispersion over the adjacent country in search of the
missing Mr. Shuttleworthy. I say they came to this determination in the first
instance. After it had been fully resolved that a search should be made, it
was considered almost a matter of course that the seekers should disperse
— that is to say, distribute themselves in parties — for the more thorough
examination of the region round about. I forget, however, by what
ingenious train of reasoning it was that “Old Charley” finally convinced the
assembly that this was the most injudicious plan that could be pursued.
Convince them, however, he did — all except Mr. Pennifeather, and, in the
end, it was arranged that a search should be instituted, carefully and very
thoroughly, by the burghers en masse, “Old Charley” himself leading the
way.

As for the matter of that, there could have been no better pioneer than

“Old Charley,” whom everybody knew to have the eye of a lynx; but,
although he led them into all manner of out-of-the-way holes and corners,
by routes that nobody had ever suspected of existing in the neighbourhood,
and although the search was incessantly kept up day and night for nearly a
week, still no trace of Mr. Shuttleworthy could be discovered. When I say
no trace, however, I must not be understood to speak literally, for trace, to
some extent, there certainly was. The poor gentleman had been tracked, by
his horses shoes (which were peculiar), to a spot about three miles to the
east of the borough, on the main road leading to the city. Here the track
made off into a by-path through a piece of woodland — the path coming out
again into the main road, and cutting off about half a mile of the regular
distance. Following the shoe-marks down this lane, the party came at length
to a pool of stagnant water, half hidden by the brambles, to the right of the
lane, and opposite this pool all vestige of the track was lost sight of. It
appeared, however, that a struggle of some nature had here taken place, and
it seemed as if some large and heavy body, much larger and heavier than a
man, had been drawn from the by-path to the pool. This latter was carefully
dragged twice, but nothing was found; and the party was upon the point of
going away, in despair of coming to any result, when Providence suggested
to Mr. Goodfellow the expediency of draining the water off altogether. This

project was received with cheers, and many high compliments to “Old
Charley” upon his sagacity and consideration. As many of the burghers had
brought spades with them, supposing that they might possibly be called
upon to disinter a corpse, the drain was easily and speedily effected; and no
sooner was the bottom visible, than right in the middle of the mud that
remained was discovered a black silk velvet waistcoat, which nearly every
one present immediately recognized as the property of Mr. Pennifeather.
This waistcoat was much torn and stained with blood, and there were
several persons among the party who had a distinct remembrance of its
having been worn by its owner on the very morning of Mr. Shuttleworthy’s
departure for the city; while there were others, again, ready to testify upon
oath, if required, that Mr. P. did not wear the garment in question at any
period during the remainder of that memorable day, nor could any one be
found to say that he had seen it upon Mr. P.’s person at any period at all
subsequent to Mr. Shuttleworthy’s disappearance.

observed, as an indubitable confirmation of the suspicions which were
excited against him, that he grew exceedingly pale, and when asked what he
had to say for himself, was utterly incapable of saying a word. Hereupon,
the few friends his riotous mode of living had left him, deserted him at once
to a man, and were even more clamorous than his ancient and avowed
enemies for his instantaneous arrest. But, on the other hand, the
magnanimity of Mr. Goodfellow shone forth with only the more brilliant
lustre through contrast. He made a warm and intensely eloquent defence of
Mr. Pennifeather, in which he alluded more than once to his own sincere
forgiveness of that wild young gentleman —“the heir of the worthy Mr.
Shuttleworthy,"— for the insult which he (the young gentleman) had, no
doubt in the heat of passion, thought proper to put upon him (Mr.
Goodfellow). “He forgave him for it,” he said, “from the very bottom of his
heart; and for himself (Mr. Goodfellow), so far from pushing the suspicious
circumstances to extremity, which he was sorry to say, really had arisen
against Mr. Pennifeather, he (Mr. Goodfellow) would make every exertion
in his power, would employ all the little eloquence in his possession to —

to — to — soften down, as much as he could conscientiously do so, the
worst features of this really exceedingly perplexing piece of business.”

much to the credit both of his head and of his heart; but your warm-hearted
people are seldom apposite in their observations — they run into all sorts of
blunders, contre-temps and mal apropos-isms, in the hot-headedness of their
zeal to serve a friend — thus, often with the kindest intentions in the world,
doing infinitely more to prejudice his cause than to advance it.

So, in the present instance, it turned out with all the eloquence of “Old

Charley”; for, although he laboured earnestly in behalf of the suspected, yet
it so happened, somehow or other, that every syllable he uttered of which
the direct but unwitting tendency was not to exalt the speaker in the good
opinion of his audience, had the effect to deepen the suspicion already
attached to the individual whose cause he pleaded, and to arouse against
him the fury of the mob.

allusion to the suspected as “the heir of the worthy old gentleman Mr.
Shuttleworthy.” The people had really never thought of this before. They
had only remembered certain threats of disinheritance uttered a year or two
previously by the uncle (who had no living relative except the nephew), and
they had, therefore, always looked upon this disinheritance as a matter that
was settled — so single-minded a race of beings were the Rattleburghers;
but the remark of “Old Charley” brought them at once to a consideration of
this point, and thus gave them to see the possibility of the threats having
been nothing more than a threat. And straightway hereupon, arose the
natural question of cui bono? — a question that tended even more than the
waistcoat to fasten the terrible crime upon the young man. And here, lest I
may be misunderstood, permit me to digress for one moment merely to
observe that the exceedingly brief and simple Latin phrase which I have
employed, is invariably mistranslated and misconceived. “Cui bono?” in all
the crack novels and elsewhere — in those of Mrs. Gore, for example, (the
author of “Cecil,") a lady who quotes all tongues from the Chaldaean to
Chickasaw, and is helped to her learning, “as needed,” upon a systematic

plan, by Mr. Beckford — in all the crack novels, I say, from those of
Bulwer and Dickens to those of Bulwer and Dickens to those of
Turnapenny and Ainsworth, the two little Latin words cui bono are rendered
“to what purpose?” or, (as if quo bono,) “to what good.” Their true
meaning, nevertheless, is “for whose advantage.” Cui, to whom; bono, is it
for a benefit. It is a purely legal phrase, and applicable precisely in cases
such as we have now under consideration, where the probability of the doer
of a deed hinges upon the probability of the benefit accruing to this
individual or to that from the deed’s accomplishment. Now in the present
instance, the question cui bono? very pointedly implicated Mr. Pennifeather.
His uncle had threatened him, after making a will in his favour, with
disinheritance. But the threat had not been actually kept; the original will, it
appeared, had not been altered. Had it been altered, the only supposable
motive for murder on the part of the suspected would have been the
ordinary one of revenge; and even this would have been counteracted by the
hope of reinstation into the good graces of the uncle. But the will being
unaltered, while the threat to alter remained suspended over the nephew’s
head, there appears at once the very strongest possible inducement for the
atrocity, and so concluded, very sagaciously, the worthy citizens of the
borough of Rattle.

Mr. Pennifeather was, accordingly, arrested upon the spot, and the

crowd, after some further search, proceeded homeward, having him in
custody. On the route, however, another circumstance occurred tending to
confirm the suspicion entertained. Mr. Goodfellow, whose zeal led him to
be always a little in advance of the party, was seen suddenly to run forward
a few paces, stoop, and then apparently to pick up some small object from
the grass. Having quickly examined it he was observed, too, to make a sort
of half attempt at concealing it in his coat pocket; but this action was
noticed, as I say, and consequently prevented, when the object picked up
was found to be a Spanish knife which a dozen persons at once recognized
as belonging to Mr. Pennifeather. Moreover, his initials were engraved upon
the handle. The blade of this knife was open and bloody.

upon reaching Rattleborough he was taken before a magistrate for
examination.

Here matters again took a most unfavourable turn. The prisoner, being

questioned as to his whereabouts on the morning of Mr. Shuttleworthy’s
disappearance, had absolutely the audacity to acknowledge that on that very
morning he had been out with his rifle deer-stalking, in the immediate
neighbourhood of the pool where the blood-stained waistcoat had been
discovered through the sagacity of Mr. Goodfellow.

This latter now came forward, and, with tears in his eyes, asked

permission to be examined. He said that a stern sense of the duty he owed
his Maker, not less than his fellow-men, would permit him no longer to
remain silent. Hitherto, the sincerest affection for the young man
(notwithstanding the latter’s ill-treatment of himself, Mr. Goodfellow) had
induced him to make every hypothesis which imagination could suggest, by
way of endeavouring to account for what appeared suspicious in the
circumstances that told so seriously against Mr. Pennifeather, but these
circumstances were now altogether too convincing — too damning, he
would hesitate no longer — he would tell all he knew, although his heart
(Mr. Goodfellow’s ) should absolutely burst asunder in the effort. He then
went on to state that, on the afternoon of the day previous to Mr.
Shuttleworthy’s departure for the city, that worthy old gentleman had
mentioned to his nephew, in his hearing (Mr. Goodfellow’s ), that his object
in going to town on the morrow was to make a deposit of an unusually large
sum of money in the “Farmers and Mechanics’ Bank,” and that, then and
there, the said Mr. Shuttleworthy had distinctly avowed to the said nephew
his irrevocable determination of rescinding the will originally made, and of
cutting him off with a shilling. He (the witness) now solemnly called upon
the accused to state whether what he (the witness) had just stated was or
was not the truth in every substantial particular. Much to the astonishment
of every one present, Mr. Pennifeather frankly admitted that it was.

The magistrate now considered it his duty to send a couple of constables

to search the chamber of the accused in the house of his uncle. From this

search they almost immediately returned with the well-known steel-bound,
russet leather pocket-book which the old gentleman had been in the habit of
carrying for years. Its valuable contents, however, had been abstracted, and
the magistrate in vain endeavoured to extort from the prisoner the use
which had been made of them, or the place of their concealment. Indeed, he
obstinately denied all knowledge of the matter. The constables, also,
discovered, between the bed and sacking of the unhappy man, a shirt and
neck-handkerchief both marked with the initials of his name, and both
hideously besmeared with the blood of the victim.

had just expired in the stable from the effects of the wound he had received,
and it was proposed by Mr. Goodfellow that a post mortem examination of
the beast should be immediately made, with the view, if possible, of
discovering the ball. This was accordingly done; and, as if to demonstrate
beyond a question the guilt of the accused, Mr. Goodfellow, after
considerable searching in the cavity of the chest was enabled to detect and
to pull forth a bullet of very extraordinary size, which, upon trial, was found
to be exactly adapted to the bore of Mr. Pennifeather’s rifle, while it was far
too large for that of any other person in the borough or its vicinity. To
render the matter even surer yet, however, this bullet was discovered to
have a flaw or seam at right angles to the usual suture, and upon
examination, this seam corresponded precisely with an accidental ridge or
elevation in a pair of moulds acknowledged by the accused himself to be his
own property. Upon finding of this bullet, the examining magistrate refused
to listen to any farther testimony, and immediately committed the prisoner
for trial-declining resolutely to take any bail in the case, although against
this severity Mr. Goodfellow very warmly remonstrated, and offered to
become surety in whatever amount might be required. This generosity on
the part of “Old Charley” was only in accordance with the whole tenour of
his amiable and chivalrous conduct during the entire period of his sojourn
in the borough of Rattle. In the present instance the worthy man was so
entirely carried away by the excessive warmth of his sympathy, that he
seemed to have quite forgotten, when he offered to go bail for his young

friend, that he himself (Mr. Goodfellow) did not possess a single dollar’s
worth of property upon the face of the earth.

amid the loud execrations of all Rattleborough, was brought to trial at the
next criminal sessions, when the chain of circumstantial evidence
(strengthened as it was by some additional damning facts, which Mr.
Goodfellow’s sensitive conscientiousness forbade him to withhold from the
court) was considered so unbroken and so thoroughly conclusive, that the
jury, without leaving their seats, returned an immediate verdict of “Guilty of
murder in the first degree.” Soon afterward the unhappy wretch received
sentence of death, and was remanded to the county jail to await the
inexorable vengeance of the law.

In the meantime, the noble behaviour of “Old Charley Goodfellow, had

doubly endeared him to the honest citizens of the borough. He became ten
times a greater favorite than ever, and, as a natural result of the hospitality
with which he was treated, he relaxed, as it were, perforce, the extremely
parsimonious habits which his poverty had hitherto impelled him to
observe, and very frequently had little reunions at his own house, when wit
and jollity reigned supreme-dampened a little, of course, by the occasional
remembrance of the untoward and melancholy fate which impended over
the nephew of the late lamented bosom friend of the generous host.

One fine day, this magnanimous old gentleman was agreeably surprised

at the receipt of the following letter:—

Chat. Mar. A- No. 1.- 
6 doz. bottles (1/2 Gross) 
From H.F.B. & Co. 
Charles Goodfellow, Esq., Rattleborough

“Charles Goodfellow, Esquire.

“Dear Sir- In conformity with an order transmitted to our firm about two

months since, by our esteemed correspondent, Mr. Barnabus Shuttleworthy,
we have the honour of forwarding this morning, to your address, a double

box of Chateau-Margaux of the antelope brand, violet seal. Box numbered
and marked as per margin.

“We remain, sir, Your most ob’nt ser’ts, HOGGS, FROGS, BOGS, &

CO. “City of-, June 21, 18-.

“P.S.- The box will reach you by wagon, on the day after your receipt of

this letter. Our respects to Mr. Shuttleworthy.

“H., F., B., & CO.”
The fact is, that Mr. Goodfellow had, since the death of Mr.

Shuttleworthy, given over all expectation of ever receiving the promised
Chateau-Margaux; and he, therefore, looked upon it now as a sort of
especial dispensation of Providence in his behalf. He was highly delighted,
of course, and in the exuberance of his joy invited a large party of friends to
a petit souper on the morrow, for the purpose of broaching the good old Mr.
Shuttleworthy’s present. Not that he said any thing about “the good old Mr.
Shuttleworthy” when he issued the invitations. The fact is, he thought much
and concluded to say nothing at all. He did not mention to any one — if I
remember aright — that he had received a present of Chateau-Margaux. He
merely asked his friends to come and help him drink some, of a remarkable
fine quality and rich flavour, that he had ordered up from the city a couple
of months ago, and of which he would be in the receipt upon the morrow. I
have often puzzled myself to imagine why it was that “Old Charley” came
to the conclusion to say nothing about having received the wine from his
old friend, but I could never precisely understand his reason for the silence,
although he had some excellent and very magnanimous reason, no doubt.

The morrow at length arrived, and with it a very large and highly

respectable company at Mr. Goodfellow’s house. Indeed, half the borough
was there — I myself among the number — but, much to the vexation of
the host, the Chateau-Margaux did not arrive until a late hour, and when the
sumptuous supper supplied by “Old Charley” had been done very ample
justice by the guests. It came at length, however — a monstrously big box
of it there was, too — and as the whole party were in excessively good
humor, it was decided, nem. con., that it should be lifted upon the table and
its contents disembowelled forthwith.

the box upon the table, in the midst of all the bottles and glasses, not a few
of which were demolished in the scuffle. “Old Charley,” who was pretty
much intoxicated, and excessively red in the face, now took a seat, with an
air of mock dignity, at the head of the board, and thumped furiously upon it
with a decanter, calling upon the company to keep order “during the
ceremony of disinterring the treasure.”

After some vociferation, quiet was at length fully restored, and, as very

often happens in similar cases, a profound and remarkable silence ensued.
Being then requested to force open the lid, I complied, of course, “with an
infinite deal of pleasure.” I inserted a chisel, and giving it a few slight taps
with a hammer, the top of the box flew suddenly off, and at the same
instant, there sprang up into a sitting position, directly facing the host, the
bruised, bloody, and nearly putrid corpse of the murdered Mr.
Shuttleworthy himself. It gazed for a few seconds, fixedly and sorrowfully,
with its decaying and lack-lustre eyes, full into the countenance of Mr.
Goodfellow; uttered slowly, but clearly and impressively, the words
—“Thou art the man!” and then, falling over the side of the chest as if
thoroughly satisfied, stretched out its limbs quiveringly upon the table.

The scene that ensued is altogether beyond description. The rush for the

doors and windows was terrific, and many of the most robust men in the
room fainted outright through sheer horror. But after the first wild,
shrieking burst of affright, all eyes were directed to Mr. Goodfellow. If I
live a thousand years, I can never forget the more than mortal agony which
was depicted in that ghastly face of his, so lately rubicund with triumph and
wine. For several minutes he sat rigidly as a statue of marble; his eyes
seeming, in the intense vacancy of their gaze, to be turned inward and
absorbed in the contemplation of his own miserable, murderous soul. At
length their expression appeared to flash suddenly out into the external
world, when, with a quick leap, he sprang from his chair, and falling heavily
with his head and shoulders upon the table, and in contact with the corpse,
poured out rapidly and vehemently a detailed confession of the hideous
crime for which Mr. Pennifeather was then imprisoned and doomed to die.

What he recounted was in substance this:— He followed his victim to

the vicinity of the pool; there shot his horse with a pistol; despatched its
rider with the butt end; possessed himself of the pocket-book, and,
supposing the horse dead, dragged it with great labour to the brambles by
the pond. Upon his own beast he slung the corpse of Mr. Shuttleworthy, and
thus bore it to a secure place of concealment a long distance off through the
woods.

The waistcoat, the knife, the pocket-book, and bullet, had been placed

by himself where found, with the view of avenging himself upon Mr.
Pennifeather. He had also contrived the discovery of the stained
handkerchief and shirt.

wretch faltered and grew hollow. When the record was finally exhausted, he
arose, staggered backward from the table, and fell-dead.

The means by which this happily-timed confession was extorted,

although efficient, were simple indeed. Mr. Goodfellow’s excess of
frankness had disgusted me, and excited my suspicions from the first. I was
present when Mr. Pennifeather had struck him, and the fiendish expression
which then arose upon his countenance, although momentary, assured me
that his threat of vengeance would, if possible, be rigidly fulfilled. I was
thus prepared to view the manoeuvering of “Old Charley” in a very
different light from that in which it was regarded by the good citizens of
Rattleborough. I saw at once that all the criminating discoveries arose,
either directly or indirectly, from himself. But the fact which clearly opened
my eyes to the true state of the case, was the affair of the bullet, found by
Mr. G. in the carcass of the horse. I had not forgotten, although the
Rattleburghers had, that there was a hole where the ball had entered the
horse, and another where it went out. If it were found in the animal then,
after having made its exit, I saw clearly that it must have been deposited by
the person who found it. The bloody shirt and handkerchief confirmed the
idea suggested by the bullet; for the blood on examination proved to be
capital claret, and no more. When I came to think of these things, and also
of the late increase of liberality and expenditure on the part of Mr.

Goodfellow, I entertained a suspicion which was none the less strong
because I kept it altogether to myself.

In the meantime, I instituted a rigorous private search for the corpse of

Mr. Shuttleworthy, and, for good reasons, searched in quarters as divergent
as possible from those to which Mr. Goodfellow conducted his party. The
result was that, after some days, I came across an old dry well, the mouth of
which was nearly hidden by brambles; and here, at the bottom, I discovered
what I sought.

Now it so happened that I had overheard the colloquy between the two

cronies, when Mr. Goodfellow had contrived to cajole his host into the
promise of a box of Chateaux-Margaux. Upon this hint I acted. I procured a
stiff piece of whalebone, thrust it down the throat of the corpse, and
deposited the latter in an old wine box-taking care so to double the body up
as to double the whalebone with it. In this manner I had to press forcibly
upon the lid to keep it down while I secured it with nails; and I anticipated,
of course, that as soon as these latter were removed, the top would fly off
and the body up.

Having thus arranged the box, I marked, numbered, and addressed it as

already told; and then writing a letter in the name of the wine merchants
with whom Mr. Shuttleworthy dealt, I gave instructions to my servant to
wheel the box to Mr. Goodfellow’s door, in a barrow, at a given signal from
myself. For the words which I intended the corpse to speak, I confidently
depended upon my ventriloquial abilities; for their effect, I counted upon
the conscience of the murderous wretch.

released upon the spot, inherited the fortune of his uncle, profited by the
lessons of experience, turned over a new leaf, and led happily ever
afterward a new life.

OceanofPDF.com

The Man of the Crowd

Ce grand malheur, de ne pouvoir etre seul.

LA BRUYERE.

It was well said of a certain German book that “er lasst sich nicht lesen” —
it does not permit itself to be read. There are some secrets which do not

permit themselves to be told. Men die nightly in their beds, wringing the
hands of ghostly confessors, and looking them piteously in the eyes — die
with despair of heart and convulsion of throat, on account of the
hideousness of mysteries which will not suffer themselves to be revealed.
Now and then, alas, the conscience of man takes up a burden so heavy in
horror that it can be thrown down only into the grave. And thus the essence
of all crime is undivulged.

Not long ago, about the closing in of an evening in autumn, I sat at the

large bow-window of the D— Coffee-House in London. For some months I
had been ill in health, but was now convalescent, and, with returning
strength, found myself in one of those happy moods which are so precisely
the converse of ennui-moods of the keenest appetency, when the film from
the mental vision departs — achlus os prin epeen — and the intellect,
electrified, surpasses as greatly its everyday condition, as does the vivid yet
candid reason of Leibnitz, the mad and flimsy rhetoric of Gorgias. Merely
to breathe was enjoyment; and I derived positive pleasure even from many
of the legitimate sources of pain. I felt a calm but inquisitive interest in
every thing. With a cigar in my mouth and a newspaper in my lap, I had
been amusing myself for the greater part of the afternoon, now in poring
over advertisements, now in observing the promiscuous company in the
room, and now in peering through the smoky panes into the street.

This latter is one of the principal thoroughfares of the city, and had been

very much crowded during the whole day. But, as the darkness came on, the
throng momently increased; and, by the time the lamps were well lighted,
two dense and continuous tides of population were rushing past the door. At
this particular period of the evening I had never before been in a similar
situation, and the tumultuous sea of human heads filled me, therefore, with
a delicious novelty of emotion. I gave up, at length, all care of things within
the hotel, and became absorbed in contemplation of the scene without.

At first my observations took an abstract and generalizing turn. I looked

at the passengers in masses, and thought of them in their aggregate
relations. Soon, however, I descended to details, and regarded with minute

interest the innumerable varieties of figure, dress, air, gait, visage, and
expression of countenance.

By far the greater number of those who went by had a satisfied,

business-like demeanor, and seemed to be thinking only of making their
way through the press. Their brows were knit, and their eyes rolled quickly;
when pushed against by fellow-wayfarers they evinced no symptom of
impatience, but adjusted their clothes and hurried on. Others, still a
numerous class, were restless in their movements, had flushed faces, and
talked and gesticulated to themselves, as if feeling in solitude on account of
the very denseness of the company around. When impeded in their
progress, these people suddenly ceased muttering; but redoubled their
gesticulations, and awaited, with an absent and overdone smile upon their
lips, the course of the persons impeding them. If jostled, they bowed
profusely to the jostlers, and appeared overwhelmed with confusion. There
was nothing very distinctive about these two large classes beyond what I
have noted. Their habiliments belonged to that order which is pointedly
termed the decent. They were undoubtedly noblemen, merchants, attorneys,
tradesmen, stock-jobbers — the Eupatrids and the common-places of
society — men of leisure and men actively engaged in affairs of their own
— conducting business upon their own responsibility. They did not greatly
excite my attention.

The tribe of clerks was an obvious one; and here I discerned two

remarkable divisions. There were the junior clerks of flash houses — young
gentlemen with tight coats, bright boots, well-oiled hair, and supercilious
lips. Setting aside a certain dapperness of carriage, which may be termed
deskism for want of a better word, the manner of these persons seemed to
be an exact facsimile of what had been the perfection of bon ton about
twelve or eighteen months before. They wore the castoff graces of the
gentry; — and this, I believe, involves the best definition of the class.

The division of the upper clerks of staunch firms, or of the “steady old

fellows,” it was not possible to mistake. These were known by their coats
and pantaloons of black or brown, made to sit comfortably, with white
cravats and waistcoats, broad solid-looking shoes, and thick hose or gaiters.

They had all slightly bald heads, from which the right ears, long used to
pen-holding, had an odd habit of standing off on end. I observed that they
always removed or settled their hats with both bands, and wore watches,
with short gold chains of a substantial and ancient pattern. Theirs was the
affectation of respectability — if indeed there be an affectation so
honorable.

There were many individuals of dashing appearance, whom I easily

understood as belonging to the race of swell pick-pockets, with which all
great cities are infested. I watched these gentry with much inquisitiveness,
and found it difficult to imagine how they should ever be mistaken for
gentlemen by gentlemen themselves. Their voluminousness of wristband,
with an air of excessive frankness, should betray them at once.

The gamblers, of whom I descried not a few, were still more easily

recognizable. They wore every variety of dress, from that of the desperate
thimble-rig bully, with velvet waistcoat, fancy neckerchief, gilt chains, and
filagreed buttons, to that of the scrupulously inornate clergyman, than
which nothing could be less liable to suspicion. Still all were distinguished
by a certain sodden swarthiness of complexion, a filmy dimness of eye, and
pallor and compression of lip. There were two other traits, moreover, by
which I could always detect them: a guarded lowness of tone in
conversation, and a more than ordinary extension of the thumb in a
direction at right angles with the fingers. Very often, in company with these
sharpers, I observed an order of men somewhat different in habits, but still
birds of a kindred feather. They may be defined as the gentlemen who live
by their wits. They seem to prey upon the public in two battalions — that of
the dandies and that of the military men. Of the first grade the leading
features are long locks and smiles; of the second, frogged coats and frowns.

Descending in the scale of what is termed gentility, I found darker and

deeper themes for speculation. I saw Jew pedlars, with hawk eyes flashing
from countenances whose every other feature wore only an expression of
abject humility; sturdy professional street beggars scowling upon
mendicants of a better stamp, whom despair alone had driven forth into the
night for charity; feeble and ghastly invalids, upon whom death had placed

a sure hand, and who sidled and tottered through the mob, looking every
one beseechingly in the face, as if in search of some chance consolation,
some lost hope; modest young girls returning from long and late labor to a
cheerless home, and shrinking more tearfully than indignantly from the
glances of ruffians, whose direct contact, even, could not be avoided;
women of the town of all kinds and of all ages — the unequivocal beauty in
the prime of her womanhood, putting one in mind of the statue in Lucian,
with the surface of Parian marble, and the interior filled with filth — the
loathsome and utterly lost leper in rags — the wrinkled, bejewelled, and
paint-begrimed beldame, making a last effort at youth — the mere child of
immature form, yet, from long association, an adept in the dreadful
coquetries of her trade, and burning with a rabid ambition to be ranked the
equal of her elders in vice; drunkards innumerable and indescribable —
some in shreds and patches, reeling, inarticulate, with bruised visage and
lack-lustre eyes — some in whole although filthy garments, with a slightly
unsteady swagger, thick sensual lips, and hearty-looking rubicund faces —
others clothed in materials which had once been good, and which even now
were scrupulously well brushed-men who walked with a more than
naturally firm and springy step, but whose countenances were fearfully
pale, and whose eyes were hideously wild and red; and who clutched with
quivering fingers, as they strode through the crowd, at every object which
came within their reach; beside these, pic-men, porters, coal-heavers,
sweeps; organ-grinders, monkey-exhibitors, and ballad-mongers, those who
vended with those who sang; ragged artizans and exhausted laborers of
every description, and all full of a noisy and inordinate vivacity which
jarred discordantly upon the ear, and gave an aching sensation to the eye.

As the night deepened, so deepened to me the interest of the scene; for

not only did the general character of the crowd materially alter (its gentler
features retiring in the gradual withdrawal of the more orderly portion of
the people, and its harsher ones coming out into bolder relief, as the late
hour brought forth every species of infamy from its den), but the rays of the
gas-lamps, feeble at first in their struggle with the dying day, had now at
length gained ascendancy, and threw over every thing a fitful and garish

lustre. All was dark yet splendid — as that ebony to which has been likened
the style of Tertullian.

The wild effects of the light enchained me to an examination of

individual faces; and although the rapidity with which the world of light
flitted before the window prevented me from casting more than a glance
upon each visage, still it seemed that, in my then peculiar mental state, I
could frequently read, even in that brief interval of a glance, the history of
long years.

With my brow to the glass, I was thus occupied in scrutinizing the mob,

when suddenly there came into view a countenance (that of a decrepid old
man, some sixty-five or seventy years of age) — a countenance which at
once arrested and absorbed my whole attention, on account of the absolute
idiosyncrasy of its expression. Any thing even remotely resembling that
expression I had never seen before. I well remember that my first thought,
upon beholding it, was that Retszch, had he viewed it, would have greatly
preferred it to his own pictural incarnations of the fiend. As I endeavored,
during the brief minute of my original survey, to form some analysis of the
meaning conveyed, there arose confusedly and paradoxically within my
mind, the ideas of vast mental power, of caution, of penuriousness, of
avarice, of coolness, of malice, of blood-thirstiness, of triumph, of
merriment, of excessive terror, of intense — of supreme despair. I felt
singularly aroused, startled, fascinated. “How wild a history,” I said to
myself, “is written within that bosom!” Then came a craving desire to keep
the man in view — to know more of him. Hurriedly putting on all overcoat,
and seizing my hat and cane, I made my way into the street, and pushed
through the crowd in the direction which I had seen him take; for he had
already disappeared. With some little difficulty I at length came within sight
of him, approached, and followed him closely, yet cautiously, so as not to
attract his attention.

I had now a good opportunity of examining his person. He was short in

stature, very thin, and apparently very feeble. His clothes, generally, were
filthy and ragged; but as he came, now and then, within the strong glare of a
lamp, I perceived that his linen, although dirty, was of beautiful texture; and

my vision deceived me, or, through a rent in a closely buttoned and
evidently second-handed roquelaire which enveloped him, I caught a
glimpse both of a diamond and of a dagger. These observations heightened
my curiosity, and I resolved to follow the stranger whithersoever he should
go.

soon ending in a settled and heavy rain. This change of weather had an odd
effect upon the crowd, the whole of which was at once put into new
commotion, and overshadowed by a world of umbrellas. The waver, the
jostle, and the hum increased in a tenfold degree. For my own part I did not
much regard the rain — the lurking of an old fever in my system rendering
the moisture somewhat too dangerously pleasant. Tying a handkerchief
about my mouth, I kept on. For half an hour the old man held his way with
difficulty along the great thoroughfare; and I here walked close at his elbow
through fear of losing sight of him. Never once turning his head to look
back, he did not observe me. By and by he passed into a cross street, which,
although densely filled with people, was not quite so much thronged as the
main one he had quitted. Here a change in his demeanor became evident.
He walked more slowly and with less object than before — more
hesitatingly. He crossed and re-crossed the way repeatedly, without
apparent aim; and the press was still so thick, that, at every such movement,
I was obliged to follow him closely. The street was a narrow and long one,
and his course lay within it for nearly an hour, during which the passengers
had gradually diminished to about that number which is ordinarily seen at
noon in Broadway near the park — so vast a difference is there between a
London populace and that of the most frequented American city. A second
turn brought us into a square, brilliantly lighted, and overflowing with life.
The old manner of the stranger reappeared. His chin fell upon his breast,
while his eyes rolled wildly from under his knit brows, in every direction,
upon those who hemmed him in. He urged his way steadily and
perseveringly. I was surprised, however, to find, upon his having made the
circuit of the square, that he turned and retraced his steps. Still more was I

astonished to see him repeat the same walk several times — once nearly
detecting me as he came around with a sudden movement.

far less interruption from passengers than at first. The rain fell fast, the air
grew cool; and the people were retiring to their homes. With a gesture of
impatience, the wanderer passed into a by-street comparatively deserted.
Down this, some quarter of a mile long, he rushed with an activity I could
not have dreamed of seeing in one so aged, and which put me to much
trouble in pursuit. A few minutes brought us to a large and busy bazaar,
with the localities of which the stranger appeared well acquainted, and
where his original demeanor again became apparent, as he forced his way to
and fro, without aim, among the host of buyers and sellers.

During the hour and a half, or thereabouts, which we passed in this

place, it required much caution on my part to keep him within reach without
attracting his observation. Luckily I wore a pair of caoutchouc overshoes,
and could move about in perfect silence. At no moment did he see that I
watched him. He entered shop after shop, priced nothing, spoke no word,
and looked at all objects with a wild and vacant stare. I was now utterly
amazed at his behavior, and firmly resolved that we should not part until I
had satisfied myself in some measure respecting him.

the bazaar. A shop-keeper, in putting up a shutter, jostled the old man, and
at the instant I saw a strong shudder come over his frame. He hurried into
the street, looked anxiously around him for an instant, and then ran with
incredible swiftness through many crooked and peopleless lanes, until we
emerged once more upon the great thoroughfare whence we had started —
the street of the D— Hotel. It no longer wore, however, the same aspect. It
was still brilliant with gas; but the rain fell fiercely, and there were few
persons to be seen. The stranger grew pale. He walked moodily some paces
up the once populous avenue, then, with a heavy sigh, turned in the
direction of the river, and, plunging through a great variety of devious ways,
came out, at length, in view of one of the principal theatres. It was about
being closed, and the audience were thronging from the doors. I saw the old

man gasp as if for breath while he threw himself amid the crowd; but I
thought that the intense agony of his countenance had, in some measure,
abated. His head again fell upon his breast; he appeared as I had seen him at
first. I observed that he now took the course in which had gone the greater
number of the audience but, upon the whole, I was at a loss to comprehend
the waywardness of his actions.

As he proceeded, the company grew more scattered, and his old

uneasiness and vacillation were resumed. For some time he followed
closely a party of some ten or twelve roisterers; but from this number one
by one dropped off, until three only remained together, in a narrow and
gloomy lane, little frequented. The stranger paused, and, for a moment,
seemed lost in thought; then, with every mark of agitation, pursued rapidly
a route which brought us to the verge of the city, amid regions very different
from those we had hitherto traversed. It was the most noisome quarter of
London, where every thing wore the worst impress of the most deplorable
poverty, and of the most desperate crime. By the dim light of an accidental
lamp, tall, antique, worm-eaten, wooden tenements were seen tottering to
their fall, in directions so many and capricious, that scarce the semblance of
a passage was discernible between them. The paving-stones lay at random,
displaced from their beds by the rankly-growing grass. Horrible filth
festered in the dammed-up gutters. The whole atmosphere teemed with
desolation. Yet, as we proceeded, the sounds of human life revived by sure
degrees, and at length large bands of the most abandoned of a London
populace were seen reeling to and fro. The spirits of the old man again
flickered up, as a lamp which is near its death-hour. Once more he strode
onward with elastic tread. Suddenly a corner was turned, a blaze of light
burst upon our sight, and we stood before one of the huge suburban temples
of Intemperance — one of the palaces of the fiend, Gin.

It was now nearly daybreak; but a number of wretched inebriates still

pressed in and out of the flaunting entrance. With a half shriek of joy the
old man forced a passage within, resumed at once his original bearing, and
stalked backward and forward, without apparent object, among the throng.
He had not been thus long occupied, however, before a rush to the doors

gave token that the host was closing them for the night. It was something
even more intense than despair that I then observed upon the countenance
of the singular being whom I had watched so pertinaciously. Yet he did not
hesitate in his career, but, with a mad energy, retraced his steps at once, to
the heart of the mighty London. Long and swiftly he fled, while I followed
him in the wildest amazement, resolute not to abandon a scrutiny in which I
now felt an interest all-absorbing. The sun arose while we proceeded, and,
when we had once again reached that most thronged mart of the populous
town, the street of the D— Hotel, it presented an appearance of human
bustle and activity scarcely inferior to what I had seen on the evening
before. And here, long, amid the momently increasing confusion, did I
persist in my pursuit of the stranger. But, as usual, he walked to and fro, and
during the day did not pass from out the turmoil of that street. And, as the
shades of the second evening came on, I grew wearied unto death, and,
stopping fully in front of the wanderer, gazed at him steadfastly in the face.
He noticed me not, but resumed his solemn walk, while I, ceasing to follow,
remained absorbed in contemplation. “The old man,” I said at length, “is the
type and the genius of deep crime. He refuses to be alone. He is the man of
the crowd. It will be in vain to follow, for I shall learn no more of him, nor
of his deeds. The worst heart of the world is a grosser book than the
‘Hortulus Animae,’

1 and perhaps it is but one of the great mercies of God

that “er lasst sich nicht lesen.”

OceanofPDF.com

Assignation

Stay for me there! I will not fail 
To meet thee in that hollow vale.

Exequy on the death of his wife, 

by Henry King, Bishop of Chichester.

Ill-fated and mysterious man!—bewildered in the brilliancy of thine own
and fallen in the flames of thine own youth! Again in fancy I behold thee!
Once more thy form hath risen before me!—not—oh not as thou art — in
the cold valley and shadow—but as thou shouldst be—squandering away a
life of magnificent meditation in that city of dim visions, thine own Venice
—which is a star-beloved Elysium of the sea, and the wide windows of
whose Palladian palaces look down with a deep and bitter meaning upon
the secrets of her silent waters. Yes! I repeat it-as thou shouldst be. There
are surely other worlds than this—other thoughts than the thoughts of the
multitude—other speculations than the speculations of the sophist. Who
then shall call thy conduct into question? who blame thee for thy visionary
hours, or denounce those occupations as a wasting away of life, which were
but the overflowings of thine everlasting energies?

It was at Venice, beneath the covered archway there called the Ponte di

Sospiri, that I met for the third or fourth time the person of whom I speak. It
is with a confused recollection that I bring to mind the circumstances of that
meeting. Yet I remember—aah! how should I forget?—the deep midnight,
the Bridge of Sighs, the beauty of woman, and the Genius of Romance that
stalked up and down the narrow canal.

It was a night of unusual gloom. The great clock of the Piazza had

sounded the fifth hour of the Italian evening. The square of the Campanile
lay silent and deserted, and the lights in the old Ducal Palace were dying
fast away. I was returning home from the Piazetta, by way of the Grand

Canal. But as my gondola arrived opposite the mouth of the canal San
Marco, a female voice from its recesses broke suddenly upon the night, in
one hysterical, and long continued shriek. Startled at the sound, I sprang
upon my feet: while the gondolier, letting slip his single oar, lost it in the
pitchy darkness beyond a chance of recovery, and we were consequently
left to the guidance of the current which here sets from the greater into the
smaller channel. Like some huge and sable-feathered condor, we were
slowly drifting down towards the Bridge of Sighs, when a thousand
flambeaux flashing from the windows, and down the staircases of the Ducal
Palace, turned all at once that deep gloom into a livid and preternatural day.

A child, slipping from the arms of its own mother, had fallen from an

upper window of the lofty structure into the deep and dim canal. The quiet
waters had closed placidly over their victim; and, although my own gondola
was the only one in sight, many a stout swimmer, already in the stream, was
seeking in vain upon the surface, the treasure which was to be found, alas!
only within the abyss. Upon the broad black marble flagstones at the
entrance of the palace, and a few steps above the water, stood a figure
which none who then saw can have ever since forgotten. It was the
Marchesa Aphrodite—the adoration of all Venice—the gayest of the gay—
the most lovely where all were beautiful—but still the young wife of the old
and intriguing Mentoni, and the mother of that fair child, her first and only
one, who now deep beneath the murky water, was thinking in bitterness of
heart upon her sweet caresses, and exhausting its little life in struggles to
call upon her name.

She stood alone. Her small, bare, and silvery feet gleamed in the black

mirror of marble beneath her. Her hair, not as yet more than half loosened
for the night from its ball-room array, clustered, amid a shower of
diamonds, round and round her classical head, in curls like those of the
young hyacinth. A snowy-white and gauze-like drapery seemed to be nearly
the sole covering to her delicate form; but the mid-summer and midnight air
was hot, sullen, and still, and no motion in the statue-like form itself, stirred
even the folds of that raiment of very vapor which hung around it as the
heavy marble hangs around the Niobe. Yet—strange to say!—her large

lustrous eyes were not turned downwards upon that grave wherein her
brightest hope lay buried—but riveted in a widely different direction! The
prison of the Old Republic is, I think, the stateliest building in all Venice—
but how could that lady gaze so fixedly upon it, when beneath her lay
stifling her only child? Yon dark, gloomy niche, too, yawns right opposite
her chamber window—what, then, could there be in its shadows—in its
architecture—in its ivy-wreathed and solemn cornices—that the Marchesa
di Mentoni had not wondered at a thousand times before? Nonsense!—Who
does not remember that, at such a time as this, the eye, like a shattered
mirror, multiplies the images of its sorrow, and sees in innumerable far-off
places, the wo which is close at hand?

stood, in full dress, the Satyr-like figure of Mentoni himself. He was
occasionally occupied in thrumming a guitar, and seemed ennuye to the
very death, as at intervals he gave directions for the recovery of his child.
Stupefied and aghast, I had myself no power to move from the upright
position I had assumed upon first hearing the shriek, and must have
presented to the eyes of the agitated group a spectral and ominous
appearance, as with pale countenance and rigid limbs, I floated down
among them in that funereal gondola.

were relaxing their exertions, and yielding to a gloomy sorrow. There
seemed but little hope for the child; (how much less than for the mother!)
but now, from the interior of that dark niche which has been already
mentioned as forming a part of the Old Republican prison, and as fronting
the lattice of the Marchesa, a figure muffled in a cloak, stepped out within
reach of the light, and, pausing a moment upon the verge of the giddy
descent, plunged headlong into the canal. As, in an instant afterwards, he
stood with the still living and breathing child within his grasp, upon the
marble flagstones by the side of the Marchesa, his cloak, heavy with the
drenching water, became unfastened, and, falling in folds about his feet,
discovered to the wonder-stricken spectators the graceful person of a very

young man, with the sound of whose name the greater part of Europe was
then ringing.

her child—she will press it to her heart—she will cling to its little form, and
smother it with her caresses. Alas! another’s arms have taken it from the
stranger — another’s arms have taken it away, and borne it afar off,
unnoticed, into the palace! And the Marchesa! Her lip—her beautiful lip
trembles: tears are gathering in her eyes—those eyes which, like Pliny’s
acanthus, are “soft and almost liquid.” Yes! tears are gathering in those
eyes-and see! the entire woman thrills throughout the soul, and the statue
has started into life! The pallor of the marble countenance, the swelling of
the marble bosom, the very purity of the marble feet, we behold suddenly
flushed over with a tide of ungovernable crimson; and a slight shudder
quivers about her delicate frame, as a gentle air at Napoli about the rich
silver lilies in the grass.

that, having left, in the eager haste and terror of a mother’s heart, the
privacy of her own boudoir, she has neglected to enthrall her tiny feet in
their slippers, and utterly forgotten to throw over her Venetian shoulders
that drapery which is their due. What other possible reason could there have
been for her so blushing?—for the glance of those wild appealing eyes? for
the unusual tumult of that throbbing bosom?—for the convulsive pressure
of that trembling hand?—that hand which fell, as Mentoni turned into the
palace, accidentally, upon the hand of the stranger. What reason could there
have been for the low—the singularly low tone of those unmeaning words
which the lady uttered hurriedly in bidding him adieu? “Thou hast
conquered —” she said, or the murmurs of the water deceived me-“thou
hast conquered—one hour after sunrise—we shall meet—so let it be!”

The tumult had subsided, the lights had died away within the palace,

and the stranger, whom I now recognized, stood alone upon the flags. He
shook with inconceivable agitation, and his eye glanced around in search of
a gondola. I could not do less than offer him the service of my own; and he
accepted the civility. Having obtained an oar at the water-gate, we
proceeded together to his residence, while he rapidly recovered his self-
possession, and spoke of our former slight acquaintance in terms of great
apparent cordiality.

There are some subjects upon which I take pleasure in being minute.

The person of the stranger—let me call him by this title, who to all the

world was still a stranger—the person of the stranger is one of these
subjects. In height he might have been below rather than above the medium
size: although there were moments of intense passion when his frame
actually expanded and belled the assertion. The light, almost slender
symmetry of his figure, promised more of that ready activity which he
evinced at the Bridge of Sighs, than of that Herculean strength which he has
been known to wield without an effort, upon occasions of more dangerous
emergency. With the mouth and chin of a deity—singular, wild, full, liquid
eyes, whose shadows varied from pure hazel to intense and brilliant jet—
and a profusion of curling, black hair, from which a forehead of unusual
breadth gleamed forth at intervals all light and ivory—his were features
than which I have seen none more classically regular, except, perhaps, the
marble ones of the Emperor Commodus. Yet his countenance was,
nevertheless, one of those which all men have seen at some period of their
lives, and have never afterwards seen again. It had no peculiar—it had no
settled predominant expression to be fastened upon the memory; a
countenance seen and instantly forgotten—but forgotten with a vague and
never-ceasing desire of recalling it to mind. Not that the spirit of each rapid
passion failed, at any time, to throw its own distinct image upon the mirror
of that face—but that the mirror, mirror-like, retained no vestige of the
passion, when the passion had departed.

Upon leaving him on the night of our adventure, he solicited me, in

what I thought an urgent manner, to call upon him very early the next
morning. Shortly after sunrise, I found myself accordingly at his Palazzo,
one of those huge structures of gloomy, yet fantastic pomp, which tower
above the waters of the Grand Canal in the vicinity of the Rialto. I was
shown up a broad winding staircase of mosaics, into an apartment whose
unparalleled splendor burst through the opening door with an actual glare,
making me blind and dizzy with luxuriousness.

I knew my acquaintance to be wealthy. Report had spoken of his

possessions in terms which I had even ventured to call terms of ridiculous
exaggeration. But as I gazed about me, I could not bring myself to believe

that the wealth of any subject in Europe could have supplied the princely
magnificence which burned and blazed around.

Although, as I say, the sun had arisen, yet the room was still brilliantly

lighted up. I judge from this circumstance, as well as from an air of
exhaustion in the countenance of my friend, that he had not retired to bed
during the whole of the preceding night. In the architecture and
embellishments of the chamber, the evident design had been to dazzle and
astound. Little attention had been paid to the decora of what is technically
called keeping, or to the proprieties of nationality. The eye wandered from
object to object, and rested upon none—neither the grotesques of the Greek
painters, nor the sculptures of the best Italian days, nor the huge carvings of
untutored Egypt. Rich draperies in every part of the room trembled to the
vibration of low, melancholy music, whose origin was not to be discovered.
The senses were oppressed by mingled and conflicting perfumes, reeking
up from strange convolute censers, together with multitudinous flaring and
flickering tongues of emerald and violet fire. The rays of the newly, risen
sun poured in upon the whole, through windows formed each of a single
pane of crimson-tinted glass. Glancing to and fro, in a thousand reflections,
from curtains which rolled from their cornices like cataracts of molten
silver, the beams of natural glory mingled at length fitfully with the
artificial light, and lay weltering in subdued masses upon a carpet of rich,
liquid-looking cloth of Chili gold.

“Ha! ha! ha!—ha! ha! ha!”— laughed the proprietor, motioning me to a

seat as I entered the room, and throwing himself back at full length upon an
ottoman. “I see,” said he, perceiving that I could not immediately reconcile
myself to the bienseance of so singular a welcome —“I see you are
astonished at my apartment—at my statues—my pictures — my originality
of conception in architecture and upholstery—absolutely drunk, eh? with
my magnificence? But pardon me, my dear sir, (here his tone of voice
dropped to the very spirit of cordiality,) pardon me for my uncharitable
laughter. You appeared so utterly astonished. Besides, some things are so
completely ludicrous that a man must laugh or die. To die laughing must be
the most glorious of all glorious deaths! Sir Thomas More—a very fine man

was Sir Thomas More—Sir Thomas More died laughing, you remember.
Also in the Absurdities of Ravisius Textor, there is a long list of characters
who came to the same magnificent end. Do you know, however,” continued
he musingly, “that at Sparta (which is now Palaeochori,) at Sparta, I say, to
the west of the citadel, among a chaos of scarcely visible ruins, is a kind of
socle, upon which are still legible the letters ‘LASM’. They are
undoubtedly part of ‘GELASMA’. Now at Sparta were a thousand temples
and shrines to a thousand different divinities. How exceedingly strange that
the altar of Laughter should have survived all the others! But in the present
instance,” he resumed, with a singular alteration of voice and manner, “I
have no right to be merry at your expense. You might well have been
amazed. Europe cannot produce anything so fine as this, my little regal
cabinet. My other apartments are by no means of the same order; mere
ultras of fashionable insipidity. This is better than fashion—is it not? Yet
this has but to be seen to become the rage—that is, with those who could
afford it at the cost of their entire patrimony. I have guarded, however,
against any such profanation. With one exception you are the only human
being besides myself and my valet, who has been admitted within the
mysteries of these imperial precincts, since they have been bedizened as
you see!”

I bowed in acknowledgment; for the overpowering sense of splendor

and perfume, and music, together with the unexpected eccentricity of his
address and manner, prevented me from expressing, in words, my
appreciation of what I might have construed into a compliment.

“Here,” he resumed, arising and leaning on my arm as he sauntered

around the apartment, “here are paintings from the Greeks to Cimabue, and
from Cimabue to the present hour. Many are chosen, as you see, with little
deference to the opinions of Virtu. They are all, however, fitting tapestry for
a chamber such as this. Here too, are some chefs d’oeuvre of the unknown
great—and here unfinished designs by men, celebrated in their day, whose
very names the perspicacity of the academies has left to silence and to me.
What think you,” said he, turning abruptly as he spoke —“what think you
of this Madonna della Pieta?”

It is Guido’s own!” I said with all the enthusiasm of my nature, for I had

been poring intently over its surpassing loveliness. “It is Guido’s own!—
how could you have obtained it?—she is undoubtedly in painting what the
Venus is in sculpture.”

“Ha!” said he thoughtfully, “the Venus—the beautiful Venus?—the

Venus of the Medici?—she of the diminutive head and the gilded hair? Part
of the left arm (here his voice dropped so as to be heard with difficulty,) and
all the right are restorations, and in the coquetry of that right arm lies, I
think, the quintessence of all affectation. Give me the Canova! The Apollo,
too!—is a copy—there can be no doubt of it—blind fool that I am, who
cannot behold the boasted inspiration of the Apollo! I cannot help—pity
me!—I cannot help preferring the Antinous. Was it not Socrates who said
that the statuary found his statue in the block of marble? Then Michael
Angelo was by no means original in his couplet —

‘Non ha l’ottimo artista alcun concetto
Che tin marmo solo in se non circonscriva.’”

It has been, or should be remarked, that, in the manner of the true
gentleman, we are always aware of a difference from the bearing of the
vulgar, without being at once precisely able to determine in what such
difference consists. Allowing the remark to have applied in its full force to
the outward demeanor of my acquaintance, I felt it, on that eventful
morning, still more fully applicable to his moral temperament and character.
Nor can I better define that peculiarity of spirit which seemed to place him
so essentially apart from all other human beings, than by calling it a habit of
intense and continual thought, pervading even his most trivial actions—
intruding upon his moments of dalliance—and interweaving itself with his
very flashes of merriment—like adders which writhe from out the eyes of
the grinning masks in the cornices around the temples of Persepolis.

I could not help, however, repeatedly observing, through the mingled

tone of levity and solemnity with which he rapidly descanted upon matters
of little importance, a certain air of trepidation—a degree of nervous

unction in action and in speech—an unquiet excitability of manner which
appeared to me at all times unaccountable, and upon some occasions even
filled me with alarm. Frequently, too, pausing in the middle of a sentence
whose commencement he had apparently forgotten, he seemed to be
listening in the deepest attention, as if either in momentary expectation of a
visitor, or to sounds, which must have had existence in his imagination
alone.

It was during one of these reveries or pauses of apparent abstraction,

that, in turning over a page of the poet and scholar Politian’s beautiful
tragedy “The Orfeo,” (the first native Italian tragedy,) which lay near me
upon an ottoman, I discovered a passage underlined in pencil. It was a
passage towards the end of the third act—a passage of the most heart-
stirring excitement—a passage which, although tainted with impurity, no
man shall read without a thrill of novel emotion—no woman without a sigh.
The whole page was blotted with fresh tears, and, upon the opposite
interleaf, were the following English lines, written in a hand so very
different from the peculiar characters of my acquaintance, that I had some
difficulty in recognising it as his own.

Thou wast that all to me, love, 
For which my soul did pine — 
A green isle in the sea, love, 
A fountain and a shrine, 
All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers; 
And all the flowers were mine.

Ah, dream too bright to last; 
Ah, starry Hope that didst arise 
But to be overcast! 
A voice from out the Future cries 
“Onward!”— but o’er the Past 
(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies, 
Mute, motionless, aghast!

For alas! alas! me 
The light of life is o’er. 
“No more-no more-no more,” 
(Such language holds the solemn sea 
To the sands upon the shore,) 
Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree, 
Or the stricken eagle soar!

Now all my hours are trances; 
And all my nightly dreams 
Are where the dark eye glances, 
And where thy footstep gleams, 
In what ethereal dances, 
By what Italian streams.

Alas! for that accursed time 
They bore thee o’er the billow, 
For Love to titled age and crime, 
And an unholy pillow — 
From me, and from our misty clime, 
Where weeps the silver willow!

That these lines were written in English—a language with which I had not
believed their author acquainted — afforded me little matter for surprise. I
was too well aware of the extent of his acquirements, and of the singular
pleasure he took in concealing them from observation, to be astonished at
any similar discovery; but the place of date, I must confess, occasioned me
no little amazement. It had been originally written London, and afterwards
carefully overscored—not, however, so effectually as to conceal the word
from a scrutinizing eye. I say this occasioned me no little amazement; for I
well remember that, in a former conversation with a friend, I particularly
inquired if he had at any time met in London the Marchesa di Mentoni,
(who for some years previous to her marriage had resided in that city,)

when his answer, if I mistake not, gave me to understand that he had never
visited the metropolis of Great Britain. I might as well here mention, that I
have more than once heard, (without of course giving credit to a report
involving so many improbabilities,) that the person of whom I speak was
not only by birth, but in education, an Englishman.

the tragedy —“there is still one painting which you have not seen.” And
throwing aside a drapery, he discovered a full length portrait of the
Marchesa Aphrodite.

Human art could have done no more in the delineation of her

superhuman beauty. The same ethereal figure which stood before me the
preceding night upon the steps of the Ducal Palace, stood before me once
again. But in the expression of the countenance, which was beaming all
over with smiles, there still lurked (incomprehensible anomaly!) that fitful
stain of melancholy which will ever be found inseparable from the
perfection of the beautiful. Her right arm lay folded over her bosom. With
her left she pointed downward to a curiously fashioned vase. One small,
fairy foot, alone visible, barely touched the earth—and, scarcely discernible
in the brilliant atmosphere which seemed to encircle and enshrine her
loveliness, floated a pair of the most delicately imagined wings. My glance
fell from the painting to the figure of my friend, and the vigorous words of
Chapman’s Bussy D’Ambois quivered instinctively upon my lips:

“He is up 
There like a Roman statue! He will stand 
Till Death hath made him marble!”

“Come!” he said at length, turning towards a table of richly enamelled and
massive silver, upon which were a few goblets fantastically stained,
together with two large Etruscan vases, fashioned in the same extraordinary
model as that in the foreground of the portrait, and filled with what I
supposed to be Johannisberger. “Come!” he said abruptly, “let us drink! It is
early—but let us drink. It is indeed early,” he continued, musingly, as a

cherub with a heavy golden hammer, made the apartment ring with the first
hour after sunrise —“It is indeed early, but what matters it? let us drink! Let
us pour out an offering to yon solemn sun which these gaudy lamps and
censers are so eager to subdue!” And, having made me pledge him in a
bumper, he swallowed in rapid succession several goblets of the wine.

“To dream”, he continued, resuming the tone of his desultory

conversation, as he held up to the rich light of a censer one of the
magnificent vases —“to dream has been the business of my life. I have
therefore framed for myself, as you see, a bower of dreams. In the heart of
Venice could I have erected a better? You behold around you, it is true, a
medley of architectural embellishments. The chastity of Ionia is offended
by antediluvian devices, and the sphynxes of Egypt are outstretched upon
carpets of gold. Yet the effect is incongruous to the timid alone. Proprieties
of place, and especially of time, are the bugbears which terrify mankind
from the contemplation of the magnificent. Once I was myself a decorist:
but that sublimation of folly has palled upon my soul. All this is now the
fitter for my purpose. Like these arabesque censers, my spirit is writhing in
fire, and the delirium of this scene is fashioning me for the wilder visions of
that land of real dreams whither I am now rapidly departing.” He here
paused abruptly, bent his head to his bosom, and seemed to listen to a sound
which I could not hear. At length, erecting his frame, he looked upwards
and ejaculated the lines of the Bishop of Chichester:—

Stay for me there! I will not fail 
To meet thee in that hollow vale.

In the next instant, confessing the power of the wine, he threw himself at
full length upon an ottoman.

A quick step was now heard upon the staircase, and a loud knock at the

door rapidly succeeded. I was hastening to anticipate a second disturbance,
when a page of Mentoni’s household burst into the room, and faltered out,
in a voice choking with emotion, the incoherent words, “My mistress!—my
mistress!—poisoned!—poisoned! Oh beautiful—oh beautiful Aphrodite!”

to a sense of the startling intelligence. But his limbs were rigid—his lips
were livid—his lately beaming eyes were riveted in death. I staggered back
toward the table—my hand fell upon a cracked and blackened goblet—and
a consciousness of the entire and terrible truth flashed suddenly over my
soul.

OceanofPDF.com

The Tell-Tale Heart

True! — nervous — very, very dreadfully nervous I had been and am; but
why will you say that I am mad? The disease had sharpened my senses —
not destroyed — not dulled them. Above all was the sense of hearing acute.
I heard all things in the heaven and in the earth. I heard many things in hell.

How, then, am I mad? Hearken! and observe how healthily — how calmly I
can tell you the whole story.

conceived, it haunted me day and night. Object there was none. Passion
there was none. I loved the old man. He had never wronged me. He had
never given me insult. For his gold I had no desire. I think it was his eye!
yes, it was this! He had the eye of a vulture — a pale blue eye, with a film
over it. Whenever it fell upon me, my blood ran cold; and so by degrees —
very gradually — I made up my mind to take the life of the old man, and
thus rid myself of the eye forever.

Now this is the point. You fancy me mad. Madmen know nothing. But

you should have seen me. You should have seen how wisely I proceeded —
with what caution — with what foresight — with what dissimulation I went
to work! I was never kinder to the old man than during the whole week
before I killed him. And every night, about midnight, I turned the latch of
his door and opened it — oh so gently! And then, when I had made an
opening sufficient for my head, I put in a dark lantern, all closed, closed,
that no light shone out, and then I thrust in my head. Oh, you would have
laughed to see how cunningly I thrust it in! I moved it slowly — very, very
slowly, so that I might not disturb the old man’s sleep. It took me an hour to
place my whole head within the opening so far that I could see him as he
lay upon his bed. Ha! would a madman have been so wise as this, And then,
when my head was well in the room, I undid the lantern cautiously-oh, so
cautiously — cautiously (for the hinges creaked) — I undid it just so much
that a single thin ray fell upon the vulture eye. And this I did for seven long
nights — every night just at midnight — but I found the eye always closed;
and so it was impossible to do the work; for it was not the old man who
vexed me, but his Evil Eye. And every morning, when the day broke, I went
boldly into the chamber, and spoke courageously to him, calling him by
name in a hearty tone, and inquiring how he has passed the night. So you
see he would have been a very profound old man, indeed, to suspect that
every night, just at twelve, I looked in upon him while he slept.

door. A watch’s minute hand moves more quickly than did mine. Never
before that night had I felt the extent of my own powers — of my sagacity. I
could scarcely contain my feelings of triumph. To think that there I was,
opening the door, little by little, and he not even to dream of my secret
deeds or thoughts. I fairly chuckled at the idea; and perhaps he heard me;
for he moved on the bed suddenly, as if startled. Now you may think that I
drew back — but no. His room was as black as pitch with the thick
darkness, (for the shutters were close fastened, through fear of robbers,) and
so I knew that he could not see the opening of the door, and I kept pushing
it on steadily, steadily.

I had my head in, and was about to open the lantern, when my thumb

slipped upon the tin fastening, and the old man sprang up in bed, crying out
— “Who’s there?”

I kept quite still and said nothing. For a whole hour I did not move a

muscle, and in the meantime I did not hear him lie down. He was still
sitting up in the bed listening; — just as I have done, night after night,
hearkening to the death watches in the wall.

Presently I heard a slight groan, and I knew it was the groan of mortal

terror. It was not a groan of pain or of grief — oh, no! — it was the low
stifled sound that arises from the bottom of the soul when overcharged with
awe. I knew the sound well. Many a night, just at midnight, when all the
world slept, it has welled up from my own bosom, deepening, with its
dreadful echo, the terrors that distracted me. I say I knew it well. I knew
what the old man felt, and pitied him, although I chuckled at heart. I knew
that he had been lying awake ever since the first slight noise, when he had
turned in the bed. His fears had been ever since growing upon him. He had
been trying to fancy them causeless, but could not. He had been saying to
himself — “It is nothing but the wind in the chimney — it is only a mouse
crossing the floor,” or “It is merely a cricket which has made a single
chirp.” Yes, he had been trying to comfort himself with these suppositions:
but he had found all in vain. All in vain; because Death, in approaching him
had stalked with his black shadow before him, and enveloped the victim.

And it was the mournful influence of the unperceived shadow that caused
him to feel — although he neither saw nor heard — to feel the presence of
my head within the room.

When I had waited a long time, very patiently, without hearing him lie

down, I resolved to open a little — a very, very little crevice in the lantern.
So I opened it — you cannot imagine how stealthily, stealthily — until, at
length a simple dim ray, like the thread of the spider, shot from out the
crevice and fell full upon the vulture eye.

It was open — wide, wide open — and I grew furious as I gazed upon

it. I saw it with perfect distinctness — all a dull blue, with a hideous veil
over it that chilled the very marrow in my bones; but I could see nothing
else of the old man’s face or person: for I had directed the ray as if by
instinct, precisely upon the damned spot.

And have I not told you that what you mistake for madness is but over-

acuteness of the sense? — now, I say, there came to my ears a low, dull,
quick sound, such as a watch makes when enveloped in cotton. I knew that
sound well, too. It was the beating of the old man’s heart. It increased my
fury, as the beating of a drum stimulates the soldier into courage.

But even yet I refrained and kept still. I scarcely breathed. I held the

lantern motionless. I tried how steadily I could maintain the ray upon the
eye. Meantime the hellish tattoo of the heart increased. It grew quicker and
quicker, and louder and louder every instant. The old man’s terror must
have been extreme! It grew louder, I say, louder every moment! — do you
mark me well I have told you that I am nervous: so I am. And now at the
dead hour of the night, amid the dreadful silence of that old house, so
strange a noise as this excited me to uncontrollable terror. Yet, for some
minutes longer I refrained and stood still. But the beating grew louder,
louder! I thought the heart must burst. And now a new anxiety seized me —
the sound would be heard by a neighbour! The old man’s hour had come!
With a loud yell, I threw open the lantern and leaped into the room. He
shrieked once — once only. In an instant I dragged him to the floor, and
pulled the heavy bed over him. I then smiled gaily, to find the deed so far
done. But, for many minutes, the heart beat on with a muffled sound. This,

however, did not vex me; it would not be heard through the wall. At length
it ceased. The old man was dead. I removed the bed and examined the
corpse. Yes, he was stone, stone dead. I placed my hand upon the heart and
held it there many minutes. There was no pulsation. He was stone dead. His
eye would trouble me no more.

the wise precautions I took for the concealment of the body. The night
waned, and I worked hastily, but in silence. First of all I dismembered the
corpse. I cut off the head and the arms and the legs.

I then took up three planks from the flooring of the chamber, and

deposited all between the scantlings. I then replaced the boards so cleverly,
so cunningly, that no human eye — not even his — could have detected any
thing wrong. There was nothing to wash out — no stain of any kind — no
blood-spot whatever. I had been too wary for that. A tub had caught all —
ha! ha!

When I had made an end of these labors, it was four o’clock — still

dark as midnight. As the bell sounded the hour, there came a knocking at
the street door. I went down to open it with a light heart, — for what had I
now to fear? There entered three men, who introduced themselves, with
perfect suavity, as officers of the police. A shriek had been heard by a
neighbour during the night; suspicion of foul play had been aroused;
information had been lodged at the police office, and they (the officers) had
been deputed to search the premises.

I smiled, — for what had I to fear? I bade the gentlemen welcome. The

shriek, I said, was my own in a dream. The old man, I mentioned, was
absent in the country. I took my visitors all over the house. I bade them
search — search well. I led them, at length, to his chamber. I showed them
his treasures, secure, undisturbed. In the enthusiasm of my confidence, I
brought chairs into the room, and desired them here to rest from their
fatigues, while I myself, in the wild audacity of my perfect triumph, placed
my own seat upon the very spot beneath which reposed the corpse of the
victim.

The officers were satisfied. My manner had convinced them. I was

singularly at ease. They sat, and while I answered cheerily, they chatted of
familiar things. But, ere long, I felt myself getting pale and wished them
gone. My head ached, and I fancied a ringing in my ears: but still they sat
and still chatted. The ringing became more distinct:— It continued and
became more distinct: I talked more freely to get rid of the feeling: but it
continued and gained definiteness — until, at length, I found that the noise
was not within my ears.

No doubt I now grew very pale; — but I talked more fluently, and with

a heightened voice. Yet the sound increased — and what could I do? It was
a low, dull, quick sound — much such a sound as a watch makes when
enveloped in cotton. I gasped for breath — and yet the officers heard it not.
I talked more quickly — more vehemently; but the noise steadily increased.
I arose and argued about trifles, in a high key and with violent
gesticulations; but the noise steadily increased. Why would they not be
gone? I paced the floor to and fro with heavy strides, as if excited to fury by
the observations of the men — but the noise steadily increased. Oh God!
what could I do? I foamed — I raved — I swore! I swung the chair upon
which I had been sitting, and grated it upon the boards, but the noise arose
over all and continually increased. It grew louder — louder — louder! And
still the men chatted pleasantly, and smiled. Was it possible they heard not?
Almighty God! — no, no! They heard! — they suspected! — they knew! —
they were making a mockery of my horror!-this I thought, and this I think.
But anything was better than this agony! Anything was more tolerable than
this derision! I could bear those hypocritical smiles no longer! I felt that I
must scream or die! and now — again! — hark! louder! louder! louder!
louder!

“Villains!” I shrieked, “dissemble no more! I admit the deed! — tear up

the planks! here, here! — It is the beating of his hideous heart!”

OceanofPDF.com

A Tale of the Ragged Mountains

During the fall of the year 1827, while residing near Charlottesville,
Virginia, I casually made the acquaintance of Mr. Augustus Bedloe. This
young gentleman was remarkable in every respect, and excited in me a
profound interest and curiosity. I found it impossible to comprehend him
either in his moral or his physical relations. Of his family I could obtain no
satisfactory account. Whence he came, I never ascertained. Even about his
age — although I call him a young gentleman — there was something
which perplexed me in no little degree. He certainly seemed young — and
he made a point of speaking about his youth — yet there were moments
when I should have had little trouble in imagining him a hundred years of
age. But in no regard was he more peculiar than in his personal appearance.
He was singularly tall and thin. He stooped much. His limbs were
exceedingly long and emaciated. His forehead was broad and low. His
complexion was absolutely bloodless. His mouth was large and flexible,
and his teeth were more wildly uneven, although sound, than I had ever
before seen teeth in a human head. The expression of his smile, however,
was by no means unpleasing, as might be supposed; but it had no variation
whatever. It was one of profound melancholy — of a phaseless and
unceasing gloom. His eyes were abnormally large, and round like those of a
cat. The pupils, too, upon any accession or diminution of light, underwent
contraction or dilation, just such as is observed in the feline tribe. In
moments of excitement the orbs grew bright to a degree almost
inconceivable; seeming to emit luminous rays, not of a reflected but of an
intrinsic lustre, as does a candle or the sun; yet their ordinary condition was
so totally vapid, filmy, and dull as to convey the idea of the eyes of a long-
interred corpse.

These peculiarities of person appeared to cause him much annoyance,

and he was continually alluding to them in a sort of half explanatory, half

apologetic strain, which, when I first heard it, impressed me very painfully.
I soon, however, grew accustomed to it, and my uneasiness wore off. It
seemed to be his design rather to insinuate than directly to assert that,
physically, he had not always been what he was — that a long series of
neuralgic attacks had reduced him from a condition of more than usual
personal beauty, to that which I saw. For many years past he had been
attended by a physician, named Templeton — an old gentleman, perhaps
seventy years of age — whom he had first encountered at Saratoga, and
from whose attention, while there, he either received, or fancied that he
received, great benefit. The result was that Bedloe, who was wealthy, had
made an arrangement with Dr. Templeton, by which the latter, in
consideration of a liberal annual allowance, had consented to devote his
time and medical experience exclusively to the care of the invalid.

Doctor Templeton had been a traveller in his younger days, and at Paris

had become a convert, in great measure, to the doctrines of Mesmer. It was
altogether by means of magnetic remedies that he had succeeded in
alleviating the acute pains of his patient; and this success had very naturally
inspired the latter with a certain degree of confidence in the opinions from
which the remedies had been educed. The Doctor, however, like all
enthusiasts, had struggled hard to make a thorough convert of his pupil, and
finally so far gained his point as to induce the sufferer to submit to
numerous experiments. By a frequent repetition of these, a result had arisen,
which of late days has become so common as to attract little or no attention,
but which, at the period of which I write, had very rarely been known in
America. I mean to say, that between Doctor Templeton and Bedloe there
had grown up, little by little, a very distinct and strongly marked rapport, or
magnetic relation. I am not prepared to assert, however, that this rapport
extended beyond the limits of the simple sleep-producing power, but this
power itself had attained great intensity. At the first attempt to induce the
magnetic somnolency, the mesmerist entirely failed. In the fifth or sixth he
succeeded very partially, and after long continued effort. Only at the twelfth
was the triumph complete. After this the will of the patient succumbed
rapidly to that of the physician, so that, when I first became acquainted with

the two, sleep was brought about almost instantaneously by the mere
volition of the operator, even when the invalid was unaware of his presence.
It is only now, in the year 1845, when similar miracles are witnessed daily
by thousands, that I dare venture to record this apparent impossibility as a
matter of serious fact.

The temperature of Bedloe was, in the highest degree sensitive,

excitable, enthusiastic. His imagination was singularly vigorous and
creative; and no doubt it derived additional force from the habitual use of
morphine, which he swallowed in great quantity, and without which he
would have found it impossible to exist. It was his practice to take a very
large dose of it immediately after breakfast each morning — or, rather,
immediately after a cup of strong coffee, for he ate nothing in the forenoon
— and then set forth alone, or attended only by a dog, upon a long ramble
among the chain of wild and dreary hills that lie westward and southward of
Charlottesville, and are there dignified by the title of the Ragged
Mountains.

Upon a dim, warm, misty day, toward the close of November, and

during the strange interregnum of the seasons which in America is termed
the Indian Summer, Mr. Bedloe departed as usual for the hills. The day
passed, and still he did not return.

protracted absence, we were about setting out in search of him, when he
unexpectedly made his appearance, in health no worse than usual, and in
rather more than ordinary spirits. The account which he gave of his
expedition, and of the events which had detained him, was a singular one
indeed.

“You will remember,” said he, “that it was about nine in the morning

when I left Charlottesville. I bent my steps immediately to the mountains,
and, about ten, entered a gorge which was entirely new to me. I followed
the windings of this pass with much interest. The scenery which presented
itself on all sides, although scarcely entitled to be called grand, had about it
an indescribable and to me a delicious aspect of dreary desolation. The
solitude seemed absolutely virgin. I could not help believing that the green

sods and the gray rocks upon which I trod had been trodden never before by
the foot of a human being. So entirely secluded, and in fact inaccessible,
except through a series of accidents, is the entrance of the ravine, that it is
by no means impossible that I was indeed the first adventurer — the very
first and sole adventurer who had ever penetrated its recesses.

Summer, and which now hung heavily over all objects, served, no doubt, to
deepen the vague impressions which these objects created. So dense was
this pleasant fog that I could at no time see more than a dozen yards of the
path before me. This path was excessively sinuous, and as the sun could not
be seen, I soon lost all idea of the direction in which I journeyed. In the
meantime the morphine had its customary effect — that of enduing all the
external world with an intensity of interest. In the quivering of a leaf — in
the hue of a blade of grass — in the shape of a trefoil — in the humming of
a bee — in the gleaming of a dew-drop — in the breathing of the wind — in
the faint odors that came from the forest — there came a whole universe of
suggestion — a gay and motley train of rhapsodical and immethodical
thought.

“Busied in this, I walked on for several hours, during which the mist

deepened around me to so great an extent that at length I was reduced to an
absolute groping of the way. And now an indescribable uneasiness
possessed me — a species of nervous hesitation and tremor. I feared to
tread, lest I should be precipitated into some abyss. I remembered, too,
strange stories told about these Ragged Hills, and of the uncouth and fierce
races of men who tenanted their groves and caverns. A thousand vague
fancies oppressed and disconcerted me — fancies the more distressing
because vague. Very suddenly my attention was arrested by the loud beating
of a drum.

“My amazement was, of course, extreme. A drum in these hills was a

thing unknown. I could not have been more surprised at the sound of the
trump of the Archangel. But a new and still more astounding source of
interest and perplexity arose. There came a wild rattling or jingling sound,
as if of a bunch of large keys, and upon the instant a dusky-visaged and

half-naked man rushed past me with a shriek. He came so close to my
person that I felt his hot breath upon my face. He bore in one hand an
instrument composed of an assemblage of steel rings, and shook them
vigorously as he ran. Scarcely had he disappeared in the mist before,
panting after him, with open mouth and glaring eyes, there darted a huge
beast. I could not be mistaken in its character. It was a hyena.

for I now made sure that I dreamed, and endeavored to arouse myself to
waking consciousness. I stepped boldly and briskly forward. I rubbed my
eyes. I called aloud. I pinched my limbs. A small spring of water presented
itself to my view, and here, stooping, I bathed my hands and my head and
neck. This seemed to dissipate the equivocal sensations which had hitherto
annoyed me. I arose, as I thought, a new man, and proceeded steadily and
complacently on my unknown way.

“At length, quite overcome by exertion, and by a certain oppressive

closeness of the atmosphere, I seated myself beneath a tree. Presently there
came a feeble gleam of sunshine, and the shadow of the leaves of the tree
fell faintly but definitely upon the grass. At this shadow I gazed
wonderingly for many minutes. Its character stupefied me with
astonishment. I looked upward. The tree was a palm.

fancy that I dreamed would serve me no longer. I saw — I felt that I had
perfect command of my senses — and these senses now brought to my soul
a world of novel and singular sensation. The heat became all at once
intolerable. A strange odor loaded the breeze. A low, continuous murmur,
like that arising from a full, but gently flowing river, came to my ears,
intermingled with the peculiar hum of multitudinous human voices.

“While I listened in an extremity of astonishment which I need not

attempt to describe, a strong and brief gust of wind bore off the incumbent
fog as if by the wand of an enchanter.

“I found myself at the foot of a high mountain, and looking down into a

vast plain, through which wound a majestic river. On the margin of this
river stood an Eastern-looking city, such as we read of in the Arabian Tales,

but of a character even more singular than any there described. From my
position, which was far above the level of the town, I could perceive its
every nook and corner, as if delineated on a map. The streets seemed
innumerable, and crossed each other irregularly in all directions, but were
rather long winding alleys than streets, and absolutely swarmed with
inhabitants. The houses were wildly picturesque. On every hand was a
wilderness of balconies, of verandas, of minarets, of shrines, and
fantastically carved oriels. Bazaars abounded; and in these were displayed
rich wares in infinite variety and profusion — silks, muslins, the most
dazzling cutlery, the most magnificent jewels and gems. Besides these
things, were seen, on all sides, banners and palanquins, litters with stately
dames close veiled, elephants gorgeously caparisoned, idols grotesquely
hewn, drums, banners, and gongs, spears, silver and gilded maces. And
amid the crowd, and the clamor, and the general intricacy and confusion —
amid the million of black and yellow men, turbaned and robed, and of
flowing beard, there roamed a countless multitude of holy filleted bulls,
while vast legions of the filthy but sacred ape clambered, chattering and
shrieking, about the cornices of the mosques, or clung to the minarets and
oriels. From the swarming streets to the banks of the river, there descended
innumerable flights of steps leading to bathing places, while the river itself
seemed to force a passage with difficulty through the vast fleets of deeply
— burthened ships that far and wide encountered its surface. Beyond the
limits of the city arose, in frequent majestic groups, the palm and the cocoa,
with other gigantic and weird trees of vast age, and here and there might be
seen a field of rice, the thatched hut of a peasant, a tank, a stray temple, a
gypsy camp, or a solitary graceful maiden taking her way, with a pitcher
upon her head, to the banks of the magnificent river.

“You will say now, of course, that I dreamed; but not so. What I saw —

what I heard — what I felt — what I thought — had about it nothing of the
unmistakable idiosyncrasy of the dream. All was rigorously self-consistent.
At first, doubting that I was really awake, I entered into a series of tests,
which soon convinced me that I really was. Now, when one dreams, and, in
the dream, suspects that he dreams, the suspicion never fails to confirm

itself, and the sleeper is almost immediately aroused. Thus Novalis errs not
in saying that ‘we are near waking when we dream that we dream.’ Had the
vision occurred to me as I describe it, without my suspecting it as a dream,
then a dream it might absolutely have been, but, occurring as it did, and
suspected and tested as it was, I am forced to class it among other
phenomena.”

“In this I am not sure that you are wrong,” observed Dr. Templeton, “but

proceed. You arose and descended into the city.”

“I arose,” continued Bedloe, regarding the Doctor with an air of

profound astonishment “I arose, as you say, and descended into the city. On
my way I fell in with an immense populace, crowding through every
avenue, all in the same direction, and exhibiting in every action the wildest
excitement. Very suddenly, and by some inconceivable impulse, I became
intensely imbued with personal interest in what was going on. I seemed to
feel that I had an important part to play, without exactly understanding what
it was. Against the crowd which environed me, however, I experienced a
deep sentiment of animosity. I shrank from amid them, and, swiftly, by a
circuitous path, reached and entered the city. Here all was the wildest tumult
and contention. A small party of men, clad in garments half-Indian, half-
European, and officered by gentlemen in a uniform partly British, were
engaged, at great odds, with the swarming rabble of the alleys. I joined the
weaker party, arming myself with the weapons of a fallen officer, and
fighting I knew not whom with the nervous ferocity of despair. We were
soon overpowered by numbers, and driven to seek refuge in a species of
kiosk. Here we barricaded ourselves, and, for the present were secure. From
a loop-hole near the summit of the kiosk, I perceived a vast crowd, in
furious agitation, surrounding and assaulting a gay palace that overhung the
river. Presently, from an upper window of this place, there descended an
effeminate-looking person, by means of a string made of the turbans of his
attendants. A boat was at hand, in which he escaped to the opposite bank of
the river.

“And now a new object took possession of my soul. I spoke a few

hurried but energetic words to my companions, and, having succeeded in

gaining over a few of them to my purpose made a frantic sally from the
kiosk. We rushed amid the crowd that surrounded it. They retreated, at first,
before us. They rallied, fought madly, and retreated again. In the mean time
we were borne far from the kiosk, and became bewildered and entangled
among the narrow streets of tall, overhanging houses, into the recesses of
which the sun had never been able to shine. The rabble pressed impetuously
upon us, harrassing us with their spears, and overwhelming us with flights
of arrows. These latter were very remarkable, and resembled in some
respects the writhing creese of the Malay. They were made to imitate the
body of a creeping serpent, and were long and black, with a poisoned barb.
One of them struck me upon the right temple. I reeled and fell. An
instantaneous and dreadful sickness seized me. I struggled — I gasped — I
died.” “You will hardly persist now,” said I smiling, “that the whole of your
adventure was not a dream. You are not prepared to maintain that you are
dead?”

Bedloe in reply, but, to my astonishment, he hesitated, trembled, became
fearfully pallid, and remained silent. I looked toward Templeton. He sat
erect and rigid in his chair — his teeth chattered, and his eyes were starting
from their sockets. “Proceed!” he at length said hoarsely to Bedloe.

“For many minutes,” continued the latter, “my sole sentiment — my

sole feeling — was that of darkness and nonentity, with the consciousness
of death. At length there seemed to pass a violent and sudden shock through
my soul, as if of electricity. With it came the sense of elasticity and of light.
This latter I felt — not saw. In an instant I seemed to rise from the ground.
But I had no bodily, no visible, audible, or palpable presence. The crowd
had departed. The tumult had ceased. The city was in comparative repose.
Beneath me lay my corpse, with the arrow in my temple, the whole head
greatly swollen and disfigured. But all these things I felt — not saw. I took
interest in nothing. Even the corpse seemed a matter in which I had no
concern. Volition I had none, but appeared to be impelled into motion, and
flitted buoyantly out of the city, retracing the circuitous path by which I had
entered it. When I had attained that point of the ravine in the mountains at

which I had encountered the hyena, I again experienced a shock as of a
galvanic battery, the sense of weight, of volition, of substance, returned. I
became my original self, and bent my steps eagerly homeward — but the
past had not lost the vividness of the real — and not now, even for an
instant, can I compel my understanding to regard it as a dream.”

would be difficult to say how otherwise it should be termed. Let us suppose
only, that the soul of the man of to-day is upon the verge of some
stupendous psychal discoveries. Let us content ourselves with this
supposition. For the rest I have some explanation to make. Here is a
watercolor drawing, which I should have shown you before, but which an
unaccountable sentiment of horror has hitherto prevented me from
showing.”

We looked at the picture which he presented. I saw nothing in it of an

extraordinary character, but its effect upon Bedloe was prodigious. He
nearly fainted as he gazed. And yet it was but a miniature portrait — a
miraculously accurate one, to be sure — of his own very remarkable
features. At least this was my thought as I regarded it.

here, scarcely visible, in this corner — 1780. In this year was the portrait
taken. It is the likeness of a dead friend — a Mr. Oldeb — to whom I
became much attached at Calcutta, during the administration of Warren
Hastings. I was then only twenty years old. When I first saw you, Mr.
Bedloe, at Saratoga, it was the miraculous similarity which existed between
yourself and the painting which induced me to accost you, to seek your
friendship, and to bring about those arrangements which resulted in my
becoming your constant companion. In accomplishing this point, I was
urged partly, and perhaps principally, by a regretful memory of the
deceased, but also, in part, by an uneasy, and not altogether horrorless
curiosity respecting yourself.

“In your detail of the vision which presented itself to you amid the hills,

you have described, with the minutest accuracy, the Indian city of Benares,
upon the Holy River. The riots, the combat, the massacre, were the actual

events of the insurrection of Cheyte Sing, which took place in 1780, when
Hastings was put in imminent peril of his life. The man escaping by the
string of turbans was Cheyte Sing himself. The party in the kiosk were
sepoys and British officers, headed by Hastings. Of this party I was one,
and did all I could to prevent the rash and fatal sally of the officer who fell,
in the crowded alleys, by the poisoned arrow of a Bengalee. That officer
was my dearest friend. It was Oldeb. You will perceive by these
manuscripts,” (here the speaker produced a note-book in which several
pages appeared to have been freshly written,) “that at the very period in
which you fancied these things amid the hills, I was engaged in detailing
them upon paper here at home.”

In about a week after this conversation, the following paragraphs

appeared in a Charlottesville paper:

“We have the painful duty of announcing the death of Mr. Augustus

Bedlo, a gentleman whose amiable manners and many virtues have long
endeared him to the citizens of Charlottesville.

“Mr. B., for some years past, has been subject to neuralgia, which has

often threatened to terminate fatally; but this can be regarded only as the
mediate cause of his decease. The proximate cause was one of especial
singularity. In an excursion to the Ragged Mountains, a few days since, a
slight cold and fever were contracted, attended with great determination of
blood to the head. To relieve this, Dr. Templeton resorted to topical
bleeding. Leeches were applied to the temples. In a fearfully brief period
the patient died, when it appeared that in the jar containing the leeches, had
been introduced, by accident, one of the venomous vermicular sangsues
which are now and then found in the neighboring ponds. This creature
fastened itself upon a small artery in the right temple. Its close resemblance
to the medicinal leech caused the mistake to be overlooked until too late.

“N. B. The poisonous sangsue of Charlottesville may always be

distinguished from the medicinal leech by its blackness, and especially by
its writhing or vermicular motions, which very nearly resemble those of a
snake.”

I was speaking with the editor of the paper in question, upon the topic of

this remarkable accident, when it occurred to me to ask how it happened
that the name of the deceased had been given as Bedlo.

“I presume,” I said, “you have authority for this spelling, but I have

always supposed the name to be written with an e at the end.”

name is Bedlo with an e, all the world over, and I never knew it to be spelt
otherwise in my life.”

“Then,” said I mutteringly, as I turned upon my heel, “then indeed has it

come to pass that one truth is stranger than any fiction — for Bedloe,
without the e, what is it but Oldeb conversed! And this man tells me that it
is a typographical error.”

OceanofPDF.com

The Oblong Box

Some years ago, I engaged passage from Charleston, S. C, to the city of
New York, in the fine packet-ship “Independence,” Captain Hardy. We were
to sail on the fifteenth of the month (June), weather permitting; and on the
fourteenth, I went on board to arrange some matters in my state-room.

I found that we were to have a great many passengers, including a more

than usual number of ladies. On the list were several of my acquaintances,
and among other names, I was rejoiced to see that of Mr. Cornelius Wyatt, a
young artist, for whom I entertained feelings of warm friendship. He had
been with me a fellow-student at C— University, where we were very much
together. He had the ordinary temperament of genius, and was a compound
of misanthropy, sensibility, and enthusiasm. To these qualities he united the
warmest and truest heart which ever beat in a human bosom.

I observed that his name was carded upon three state-rooms; and, upon

again referring to the list of passengers, I found that he had engaged
passage for himself, wife, and two sisters — his own. The state-rooms were
sufficiently roomy, and each had two berths, one above the other. These
berths, to be sure, were so exceedingly narrow as to be insufficient for more
than one person; still, I could not comprehend why there were three state-
rooms for these four persons. I was, just at that epoch, in one of those
moody frames of mind which make a man abnormally inquisitive about
trifles: and I confess, with shame, that I busied myself in a variety of ill-
bred and preposterous conjectures about this matter of the supernumerary
state-room. It was no business of mine, to be sure, but with none the less
pertinacity did I occupy myself in attempts to resolve the enigma. At last I
reached a conclusion which wrought in me great wonder why I had not
arrived at it before. “It is a servant of course,” I said; “what a fool I am, not
sooner to have thought of so obvious a solution!” And then I again repaired
to the list — but here I saw distinctly that no servant was to come with the

party, although, in fact, it had been the original design to bring one — for
the words “and servant” had been first written and then overscored. “Oh,
extra baggage, to be sure,” I now said to myself —“something he wishes
not to be put in the hold — something to be kept under his own eye — ah, I
have it — a painting or so — and this is what he has been bargaining about
with Nicolino, the Italian Jew.” This idea satisfied me, and I dismissed my
curiosity for the nonce.

Wyatt’s two sisters I knew very well, and most amiable and clever girls

they were. His wife he had newly married, and I had never yet seen her. He
had often talked about her in my presence, however, and in his usual style
of enthusiasm. He described her as of surpassing beauty, wit, and
accomplishment. I was, therefore, quite anxious to make her acquaintance.

On the day in which I visited the ship (the fourteenth), Wyatt and party

were also to visit it — so the captain informed me — and I waited on board
an hour longer than I had designed, in hope of being presented to the bride,
but then an apology came. “Mrs. W. was a little indisposed, and would
decline coming on board until to-morrow, at the hour of sailing.”

The morrow having arrived, I was going from my hotel to the wharf,

when Captain Hardy met me and said that, “owing to circumstances” (a
stupid but convenient phrase), “he rather thought the ‘Independence’ would
not sail for a day or two, and that when all was ready, he would send up and
let me know.” This I thought strange, for there was a stiff southerly breeze;
but as “the circumstances” were not forthcoming, although I pumped for
them with much perseverance, I had nothing to do but to return home and
digest my impatience at leisure.

I did not receive the expected message from the captain for nearly a

week. It came at length, however, and I immediately went on board. The
ship was crowded with passengers, and every thing was in the bustle
attendant upon making sail. Wyatt’s party arrived in about ten minutes after
myself. There were the two sisters, the bride, and the artist — the latter in
one of his customary fits of moody misanthropy. I was too well used to
these, however, to pay them any special attention. He did not even introduce
me to his wife — this courtesy devolving, per force, upon his sister Marian

— a very sweet and intelligent girl, who, in a few hurried words, made us
acquainted.

acknowledging my bow, I confess that I was very profoundly astonished. I
should have been much more so, however, had not long experience advised
me not to trust, with too implicit a reliance, the enthusiastic descriptions of
my friend, the artist, when indulging in comments upon the loveliness of
woman. When beauty was the theme, I well knew with what facility he
soared into the regions of the purely ideal.

The truth is, I could not help regarding Mrs. Wyatt as a decidedly plain-

looking woman. If not positively ugly, she was not, I think, very far from it.
She was dressed, however, in exquisite taste — and then I had no doubt that
she had captivated my friend’s heart by the more enduring graces of the
intellect and soul. She said very few words, and passed at once into her
state-room with Mr. W.

a settled point. I looked, therefore, for the extra baggage. After some delay,
a cart arrived at the wharf, with an oblong pine box, which was every thing
that seemed to be expected. Immediately upon its arrival we made sail, and
in a short time were safely over the bar and standing out to sea.

The box in question was, as I say, oblong. It was about six feet in length

by two and a half in breadth; I observed it attentively, and like to be precise.
Now this shape was peculiar; and no sooner had I seen it, than I took credit
to myself for the accuracy of my guessing. I had reached the conclusion, it
will be remembered, that the extra baggage of my friend, the artist, would
prove to be pictures, or at least a picture; for I knew he had been for several
weeks in conference with Nicolino:— and now here was a box, which, from
its shape, could possibly contain nothing in the world but a copy of
Leonardo’s “Last Supper;” and a copy of this very “Last Supper,” done by
Rubini the younger, at Florence, I had known, for some time, to be in the
possession of Nicolino. This point, therefore, I considered as sufficiently
settled. I chuckled excessively when I thought of my acumen. It was the
first time I had ever known Wyatt to keep from me any of his artistical

secrets; but here he evidently intended to steal a march upon me, and
smuggle a fine picture to New York, under my very nose; expecting me to
know nothing of the matter. I resolved to quiz him well, now and hereafter.

One thing, however, annoyed me not a little. The box did not go into the

extra state-room. It was deposited in Wyatt’s own; and there, too, it
remained, occupying very nearly the whole of the floor — no doubt to the
exceeding discomfort of the artist and his wife; — this the more especially
as the tar or paint with which it was lettered in sprawling capitals, emitted a
strong, disagreeable, and, to my fancy, a peculiarly disgusting odor. On the
lid were painted the words —“Mrs. Adelaide Curtis, Albany, New York.
Charge of Cornelius Wyatt, Esq. This side up. To be handled with care.”

Now, I was aware that Mrs. Adelaide Curtis, of Albany, was the artist’s

wife’s mother — but then I looked upon the whole address as a
mystification, intended especially for myself. I made up my mind, of
course, that the box and contents would never get farther north than the
studio of my misanthropic friend, in Chambers Street, New York.

For the first three or four days we had fine weather, although the wind

was dead ahead; having chopped round to the northward, immediately upon
our losing sight of the coast. The passengers were, consequently, in high
spirits and disposed to be social. I must except, however, Wyatt and his
sisters, who behaved stiffly, and, I could not help thinking, uncourteously to
the rest of the party. Wyatt’s conduct I did not so much regard. He was
gloomy, even beyond his usual habit — in fact he was morose — but in him
I was prepared for eccentricity. For the sisters, however, I could make no
excuse. They secluded themselves in their staterooms during the greater
part of the passage, and absolutely refused, although I repeatedly urged
them, to hold communication with any person on board.

Mrs. Wyatt herself was far more agreeable. That is to say, she was

chatty; and to be chatty is no slight recommendation at sea. She became
excessively intimate with most of the ladies; and, to my profound
astonishment, evinced no equivocal disposition to coquet with the men. She
amused us all very much. I say “amused”— and scarcely know how to
explain myself. The truth is, I soon found that Mrs. W. was far oftener

laughed at than with. The gentlemen said little about her; but the ladies, in a
little while, pronounced her “a good-hearted thing, rather indifferent
looking, totally uneducated, and decidedly vulgar.” The great wonder was,
how Wyatt had been entrapped into such a match. Wealth was the general
solution — but this I knew to be no solution at all; for Wyatt had told me
that she neither brought him a dollar nor had any expectations from any
source whatever. “He had married,” he said, “for love, and for love only;
and his bride was far more than worthy of his love.” When I thought of
these expressions, on the part of my friend, I confess that I felt
indescribably puzzled. Could it be possible that he was taking leave of his
senses? What else could I think? He, so refined, so intellectual, so
fastidious, with so exquisite a perception of the faulty, and so keen an
appreciation of the beautiful! To be sure, the lady seemed especially fond of
him — particularly so in his absence — when she made herself ridiculous
by frequent quotations of what had been said by her “beloved husband, Mr.
Wyatt.” The word “husband” seemed forever — to use one of her own
delicate expressions — forever “on the tip of her tongue.” In the meantime,
it was observed by all on board, that he avoided her in the most pointed
manner, and, for the most part, shut himself up alone in his state-room,
where, in fact, he might have been said to live altogether, leaving his wife at
full liberty to amuse herself as she thought best, in the public society of the
main cabin.

My conclusion, from what I saw and heard, was, that, the artist, by

some unaccountable freak of fate, or perhaps in some fit of enthusiastic and
fanciful passion, had been induced to unite himself with a person altogether
beneath him, and that the natural result, entire and speedy disgust, had
ensued. I pitied him from the bottom of my heart — but could not, for that
reason, quite forgive his incommunicativeness in the matter of the “Last
Supper.” For this I resolved to have my revenge.

One day he came upon deck, and, taking his arm as had been my wont, I

sauntered with him backward and forward. His gloom, however (which I
considered quite natural under the circumstances), seemed entirely
unabated. He said little, and that moodily, and with evident effort. I

ventured a jest or two, and he made a sickening attempt at a smile. Poor
fellow! — as I thought of his wife, I wondered that he could have heart to
put on even the semblance of mirth. I determined to commence a series of
covert insinuations, or innuendoes, about the oblong box — just to let him
perceive, gradually, that I was not altogether the butt, or victim, of his little
bit of pleasant mystification. My first observation was by way of opening a
masked battery. I said something about the “peculiar shape of that box-,”
and, as I spoke the words, I smiled knowingly, winked, and touched him
gently with my forefinger in the ribs.

me, at once, that he was mad. At first he stared at me as if he found it
impossible to comprehend the witticism of my remark; but as its point
seemed slowly to make its way into his brain, his eyes, in the same
proportion, seemed protruding from their sockets. Then he grew very red —
then hideously pale — then, as if highly amused with what I had insinuated,
he began a loud and boisterous laugh, which, to my astonishment, he kept
up, with gradually increasing vigor, for ten minutes or more. In conclusion,
he fell flat and heavily upon the deck. When I ran to uplift him, to all
appearance he was dead.

I called assistance, and, with much difficulty, we brought him to

himself. Upon reviving he spoke incoherently for some time. At length we
bled him and put him to bed. The next morning he was quite recovered, so
far as regarded his mere bodily health. Of his mind I say nothing, of course.
I avoided him during the rest of the passage, by advice of the captain, who
seemed to coincide with me altogether in my views of his insanity, but
cautioned me to say nothing on this head to any person on board.

Several circumstances occurred immediately after this fit of Wyatt

which contributed to heighten the curiosity with which I was already
possessed. Among other things, this: I had been nervous — drank too much
strong green tea, and slept ill at night — in fact, for two nights I could not
be properly said to sleep at all. Now, my state-room opened into the main
cabin, or dining-room, as did those of all the single men on board. Wyatt’s
three rooms were in the after-cabin, which was separated from the main one

by a slight sliding door, never locked even at night. As we were almost
constantly on a wind, and the breeze was not a little stiff, the ship heeled to
leeward very considerably; and whenever her starboard side was to leeward,
the sliding door between the cabins slid open, and so remained, nobody
taking the trouble to get up and shut it. But my berth was in such a position,
that when my own state-room door was open, as well as the sliding door in
question (and my own door was always open on account of the heat,) I
could see into the after-cabin quite distinctly, and just at that portion of it,
too, where were situated the state-rooms of Mr. Wyatt. Well, during two
nights (not consecutive) while I lay awake, I clearly saw Mrs. W., about
eleven o’clock upon each night, steal cautiously from the state-room of Mr.
W., and enter the extra room, where she remained until daybreak, when she
was called by her husband and went back. That they were virtually
separated was clear. They had separate apartments — no doubt in
contemplation of a more permanent divorce; and here, after all I thought
was the mystery of the extra state-room.

There was another circumstance, too, which interested me much.

During the two wakeful nights in question, and immediately after the
disappearance of Mrs. Wyatt into the extra state-room, I was attracted by
certain singular cautious, subdued noises in that of her husband. After
listening to them for some time, with thoughtful attention, I at length
succeeded perfectly in translating their import. They were sounds
occasioned by the artist in prying open the oblong box, by means of a chisel
and mallet — the latter being apparently muffled, or deadened, by some soft
woollen or cotton substance in which its head was enveloped.

In this manner I fancied I could distinguish the precise moment when he

fairly disengaged the lid — also, that I could determine when he removed it
altogether, and when he deposited it upon the lower berth in his room; this
latter point I knew, for example, by certain slight taps which the lid made in
striking against the wooden edges of the berth, as he endeavored to lay it
down very gently — there being no room for it on the floor. After this there
was a dead stillness, and I heard nothing more, upon either occasion, until
nearly daybreak; unless, perhaps, I may mention a low sobbing, or

murmuring sound, so very much suppressed as to be nearly inaudible — if,
indeed, the whole of this latter noise were not rather produced by my own
imagination. I say it seemed to resemble sobbing or sighing — but, of
course, it could not have been either. I rather think it was a ringing in my
own ears. Mr. Wyatt, no doubt, according to custom, was merely giving the
rein to one of his hobbies — indulging in one of his fits of artistic
enthusiasm. He had opened his oblong box, in order to feast his eyes on the
pictorial treasure within. There was nothing in this, however, to make him
sob. I repeat, therefore, that it must have been simply a freak of my own
fancy, distempered by good Captain Hardy’s green tea. just before dawn, on
each of the two nights of which I speak, I distinctly heard Mr. Wyatt replace
the lid upon the oblong box, and force the nails into their old places by
means of the muffled mallet. Having done this, he issued from his state-
room, fully dressed, and proceeded to call Mrs. W. from hers.

We had been at sea seven days, and were now off Cape Hatteras, when

there came a tremendously heavy blow from the southwest. We were, in a
measure, prepared for it, however, as the weather had been holding out
threats for some time. Every thing was made snug, alow and aloft; and as
the wind steadily freshened, we lay to, at length, under spanker and
foretopsail, both double-reefed.

In this trim we rode safely enough for forty-eight hours — the ship

proving herself an excellent sea-boat in many respects, and shipping no
water of any consequence. At the end of this period, however, the gale had
freshened into a hurricane, and our after — sail split into ribbons, bringing
us so much in the trough of the water that we shipped several prodigious
seas, one immediately after the other. By this accident we lost three men
overboard with the caboose, and nearly the whole of the larboard bulwarks.
Scarcely had we recovered our senses, before the foretopsail went into
shreds, when we got up a storm stay — sail and with this did pretty well for
some hours, the ship heading the sea much more steadily than before.

The gale still held on, however, and we saw no signs of its abating. The

rigging was found to be ill-fitted, and greatly strained; and on the third day
of the blow, about five in the afternoon, our mizzen-mast, in a heavy lurch

to windward, went by the board. For an hour or more, we tried in vain to get
rid of it, on account of the prodigious rolling of the ship; and, before we had
succeeded, the carpenter came aft and announced four feet of water in the
hold. To add to our dilemma, we found the pumps choked and nearly
useless.

the ship by throwing overboard as much of her cargo as could be reached,
and by cutting away the two masts that remained. This we at last
accomplished — but we were still unable to do any thing at the pumps; and,
in the meantime, the leak gained on us very fast.

At sundown, the gale had sensibly diminished in violence, and as the

sea went down with it, we still entertained faint hopes of saving ourselves
in the boats. At eight P. M., the clouds broke away to windward, and we had
the advantage of a full moon — a piece of good fortune which served
wonderfully to cheer our drooping spirits.

over the side without material accident, and into this we crowded the whole
of the crew and most of the passengers. This party made off immediately,
and, after undergoing much suffering, finally arrived, in safety, at Ocracoke
Inlet, on the third day after the wreck.

Fourteen passengers, with the captain, remained on board, resolving to

trust their fortunes to the jolly-boat at the stern. We lowered it without
difficulty, although it was only by a miracle that we prevented it from
swamping as it touched the water. It contained, when afloat, the captain and
his wife, Mr. Wyatt and party, a Mexican officer, wife, four children, and
myself, with a negro valet.

We had no room, of course, for any thing except a few positively

necessary instruments, some provisions, and the clothes upon our backs. No
one had thought of even attempting to save any thing more. What must
have been the astonishment of all, then, when having proceeded a few
fathoms from the ship, Mr. Wyatt stood up in the stern-sheets, and coolly
demanded of Captain Hardy that the boat should be put back for the
purpose of taking in his oblong box!

capsize us if you do not sit quite still. Our gunwhale is almost in the water
now.”

“The box!” vociferated Mr. Wyatt, still standing —“the box, I say!

Captain Hardy, you cannot, you will not refuse me. Its weight will be but a
trifle — it is nothing — mere nothing. By the mother who bore you — for
the love of Heaven — by your hope of salvation, I implore you to put back
for the box!”

The captain, for a moment, seemed touched by the earnest appeal of the

artist, but he regained his stern composure, and merely said:

“Mr. Wyatt, you are mad. I cannot listen to you. Sit down, I say, or you

will swamp the boat. Stay — hold him — seize him! — he is about to
spring overboard! There — I knew it — he is over!”

As the captain said this, Mr. Wyatt, in fact, sprang from the boat, and, as

we were yet in the lee of the wreck, succeeded, by almost superhuman
exertion, in getting hold of a rope which hung from the fore-chains. In
another moment he was on board, and rushing frantically down into the
cabin.

out of her lee, were at the mercy of the tremendous sea which was still
running. We made a determined effort to put back, but our little boat was
like a feather in the breath of the tempest. We saw at a glance that the doom
of the unfortunate artist was sealed.

As our distance from the wreck rapidly increased, the madman (for as

such only could we regard him) was seen to emerge from the companion —
way, up which by dint of strength that appeared gigantic, he dragged,
bodily, the oblong box. While we gazed in the extremity of astonishment,
he passed, rapidly, several turns of a three-inch rope, first around the box
and then around his body. In another instant both body and box were in the
sea — disappearing suddenly, at once and forever.

We lingered awhile sadly upon our oars, with our eyes riveted upon the

spot. At length we pulled away. The silence remained unbroken for an hour.
Finally, I hazarded a remark.

exceedingly singular thing? I confess that I entertained some feeble hope of
his final deliverance, when I saw him lash himself to the box, and commit
himself to the sea.”

“They sank as a matter of course,” replied the captain, “and that like a

shot. They will soon rise again, however — but not till the salt melts.”

“The salt!” I ejaculated.
“Hush!” said the captain, pointing to the wife and sisters of the

deceased. “We must talk of these things at some more appropriate time.”

We suffered much, and made a narrow escape, but fortune befriended

us, as well as our mates in the long-boat. We landed, in fine, more dead than
alive, after four days of intense distress, upon the beach opposite Roanoke
Island. We remained here a week, were not ill-treated by the wreckers, and
at length obtained a passage to New York.

About a month after the loss of the “Independence,” I happened to meet

Captain Hardy in Broadway. Our conversation turned, naturally, upon the
disaster, and especially upon the sad fate of poor Wyatt. I thus learned the
following particulars.

The artist had engaged passage for himself, wife, two sisters and a

servant. His wife was, indeed, as she had been represented, a most lovely,
and most accomplished woman. On the morning of the fourteenth of June
(the day in which I first visited the ship), the lady suddenly sickened and
died. The young husband was frantic with grief — but circumstances
imperatively forbade the deferring his voyage to New York. It was
necessary to take to her mother the corpse of his adored wife, and, on the
other hand, the universal prejudice which would prevent his doing so
openly was well known. Nine-tenths of the passengers would have
abandoned the ship rather than take passage with a dead body.

In this dilemma, Captain Hardy arranged that the corpse, being first

partially embalmed, and packed, with a large quantity of salt, in a box of
suitable dimensions, should be conveyed on board as merchandise. Nothing
was to be said of the lady’s decease; and, as it was well understood that Mr.
Wyatt had engaged passage for his wife, it became necessary that some

person should personate her during the voyage. This the deceased lady’s -
maid was easily prevailed on to do. The extra state-room, originally
engaged for this girl during her mistress’ life, was now merely retained. In
this state-room the pseudo-wife, slept, of course, every night. In the daytime
she performed, to the best of her ability, the part of her mistress — whose
person, it had been carefully ascertained, was unknown to any of the
passengers on board.

My own mistake arose, naturally enough, through too careless, too

inquisitive, and too impulsive a temperament. But of late, it is a rare thing
that I sleep soundly at night. There is a countenance which haunts me, turn
as I will. There is an hysterical laugh which will forever ring within my
ears.

OceanofPDF.com

The Black Cat

For the most wild, yet most homely narrative which I am about to pen, I
neither expect nor solicit belief. Mad indeed would I be to expect it, in a

case where my very senses reject their own evidence. Yet, mad am I not —
and very surely do I not dream. But to-morrow I die, and to-day I would
unburthen my soul. My immediate purpose is to place before the world,
plainly, succinctly, and without comment, a series of mere household
events. In their consequences, these events have terrified — have tortured
— have destroyed me. Yet I will not attempt to expound them. To me, they
have presented little but Horror — to many they will seem less terrible than
baroques. Hereafter, perhaps, some intellect may be found which will
reduce my phantasm to the common-place — some intellect more calm,
more logical, and far less excitable than my own, which will perceive, in
the circumstances I detail with awe, nothing more than an ordinary
succession of very natural causes and effects.

From my infancy I was noted for the docility and humanity of my

disposition. My tenderness of heart was even so conspicuous as to make me
the jest of my companions. I was especially fond of animals, and was
indulged by my parents with a great variety of pets. With these I spent most
of my time, and never was so happy as when feeding and caressing them.
This peculiar of character grew with my growth, and in my manhood, I
derived from it one of my principal sources of pleasure. To those who have
cherished an affection for a faithful and sagacious dog, I need hardly be at
the trouble of explaining the nature or the intensity of the gratification thus
derivable. There is something in the unselfish and self-sacrificing love of a
brute, which goes directly to the heart of him who has had frequent
occasion to test the paltry friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere Man.

I married early, and was happy to find in my wife a disposition not

uncongenial with my own. Observing my partiality for domestic pets, she
lost no opportunity of procuring those of the most agreeable kind. We had
birds, gold fish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small monkey, and a cat.

This latter was a remarkably large and beautiful animal, entirely black,

and sagacious to an astonishing degree. In speaking of his intelligence, my
wife, who at heart was not a little tinctured with superstition, made frequent
allusion to the ancient popular notion, which regarded all black cats as
witches in disguise. Not that she was ever serious upon this point — and I

mention the matter at all for no better reason than that it happens, just now,
to be remembered.

alone fed him, and he attended me wherever I went about the house. It was
even with difficulty that I could prevent him from following me through the
streets.

Our friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, during which

my general temperament and character — through the instrumentality of the
Fiend Intemperance — had (I blush to confess it) experienced a radical
alteration for the worse. I grew, day by day, more moody, more irritable,
more regardless of the feelings of others. I suffered myself to use
intemperate language to my At length, I even offered her personal violence.
My pets, of course, were made to feel the change in my disposition. I not
only neglected, but ill-used them. For Pluto, however, I still retained
sufficient regard to restrain me from maltreating him, as I made no scruple
of maltreating the rabbits, the monkey, or even the dog, when by accident,
or through affection, they came in my way. But my disease grew upon me
— for what disease is like Alcohol! — and at length even Pluto, who was
now becoming old, and consequently somewhat peevish — even Pluto
began to experience the effects of my ill temper.

One night, returning home, much intoxicated, from one of my haunts

about town, I fancied that the cat avoided my presence. I seized him; when,
in his fright at my violence, he inflicted a slight wound upon my hand with
his teeth. The fury of a demon instantly possessed me. I knew myself no
longer. My original soul seemed, at once, to take its flight from my body;
and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrilled every fibre of
my frame. I took from my waistcoat-pocket a pen-knife, opened it, grasped
the poor beast by the throat, and deliberately cut one of its eyes from the
socket! I blush, I burn, I shudder, while I pen the damnable atrocity.

When reason returned with the morning — when I had slept off the

fumes of the night’s debauch — I experienced a sentiment half of horror,
half of remorse, for the crime of which I had been guilty; but it was, at best,

a feeble and equivocal feeling, and the soul remained untouched. I again
plunged into excess, and soon drowned in wine all memory of the deed.

presented, it is true, a frightful appearance, but he no longer appeared to
suffer any pain. He went about the house as usual, but, as might be
expected, fled in extreme terror at my approach. I had so much of my old
heart left, as to be at first grieved by this evident dislike on the part of a
creature which had once so loved me. But this feeling soon gave place to
irritation. And then came, as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow, the
spirit of PERVERSENESS. Of this spirit philosophy takes no account. Yet I
am not more sure that my soul lives, than I am that perverseness is one of
the primitive impulses of the human heart — one of the indivisible primary
faculties, or sentiments, which give direction to the character of Man. Who
has not, a hundred times, found himself committing a vile or a silly action,
for no other reason than because he knows he should not? Have we not a
perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to violate that which
is Law, merely because we understand it to be such? This spirit of
perverseness, I say, came to my final overthrow. It was this unfathomable
longing of the soul to vex itself — to offer violence to its own nature — to
do wrong for the wrong’s sake only — that urged me to continue and finally
to consummate the injury I had inflicted upon the unoffending brute. One
morning, in cool blood, I slipped a noose about its neck and hung it to the
limb of a tree; — hung it with the tears streaming from my eyes, and with
the bitterest remorse at my heart; — hung it because I knew that it had
loved me, and because I felt it had given me no reason of offence; — hung
it because I knew that in so doing I was committing a sin — a deadly sin
that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to place it — if such a thing
were possible — even beyond the reach of the infinite mercy of the Most
Merciful and Most Terrible God.

On the night of the day on which this cruel deed was done, I was

aroused from sleep by the cry of fire. The curtains of my bed were in
flames. The whole house was blazing. It was with great difficulty that my
wife, a servant, and myself, made our escape from the conflagration. The

destruction was complete. My entire worldly wealth was swallowed up, and
I resigned myself thenceforward to despair.

effect, between the disaster and the atrocity. But I am detailing a chain of
facts — and wish not to leave even a possible link imperfect. On the day
succeeding the fire, I visited the ruins. The walls, with one exception, had
fallen in. This exception was found in a compartment wall, not very thick,
which stood about the middle of the house, and against which had rested the
head of my bed. The plastering had here, in great measure, resisted the
action of the fire — a fact which I attributed to its having been recently
spread. About this wall a dense crowd were collected, and many persons
seemed to be examining a particular portion of it with every minute and
eager attention. The words “strange!” “singular!” and other similar
expressions, excited my curiosity. I approached and saw, as if graven in bas
relief upon the white surface, the figure of a gigantic cat. The impression
was given with an accuracy truly marvellous. There was a rope about the
animal’s neck.

When I first beheld this apparition — for I could scarcely regard it as

less — my wonder and my terror were extreme. But at length reflection
came to my aid. The cat, I remembered, had been hung in a garden adjacent
to the house. Upon the alarm of fire, this garden had been immediately
filled by the crowd — by some one of whom the animal must have been cut
from the tree and thrown, through an open window, into my chamber. This
had probably been done with the view of arousing me from sleep. The
falling of other walls had compressed the victim of my cruelty into the
substance of the freshly-spread plaster; the lime of which, had then with the
flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, accomplished the portraiture as I
saw it.

Although I thus readily accounted to my reason, if not altogether to my

conscience, for the startling fact ‘just detailed, it did not the less fall to
make a deep impression upon my fancy. For months I could not rid myself
of the phantasm of the cat; and, during this period, there came back into my
spirit a half-sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. I went so far as to

regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the vile haunts
which I now habitually frequented, for another pet of the same species, and
of somewhat similar appearance, with which to supply its place.

One night as I sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy, my

attention was suddenly drawn to some black object, reposing upon the head
of one of the immense hogsheads of Gin, or of Rum, which constituted the
chief furniture of the apartment. I had been looking steadily at the top of
this hogshead for some minutes, and what now caused me surprise was the
fact that I had not sooner perceived the object thereupon. I approached it,
and touched it with my hand. It was a black cat — a very large one — fully
as large as Pluto, and closely resembling him in every respect but one. Pluto
had not a white hair upon any portion of his body; but this cat had a large,
although indefinite splotch of white, covering nearly the whole region of
the breast.

Upon my touching him, he immediately arose, purred loudly, rubbed

against my hand, and appeared delighted with my notice. This, then, was
the very creature of which I was in search. I at once offered to purchase it of
the landlord; but this person made no claim to it — knew nothing of it —
had never seen it before.

I continued my caresses, and, when I prepared to go home, the animal

evinced a disposition to accompany me. I permitted it to do so; occasionally
stooping and patting it as I proceeded. When it reached the house it
domesticated itself at once, and became immediately a great favorite with
my wife.

For my own part, I soon found a dislike to it arising within me. This was

just the reverse of what I had anticipated; but I know not how or why it was
— its evident fondness for myself rather disgusted and annoyed. By slow
degrees, these feelings of disgust and annoyance rose into the bitterness of
hatred. I avoided the creature; a certain sense of shame, and the
remembrance of my former deed of cruelty, preventing me from physically
abusing it. I did not, for some weeks, strike, or otherwise violently ill use it;
but gradually — very gradually — I came to look upon it with unutterable

loathing, and to flee silently from its odious presence, as from the breath of
a pestilence.

the morning after I brought it home, that, like Pluto, it also had been
deprived of one of its eyes. This circumstance, however, only endeared it to
my wife, who, as I have already said, possessed, in a high degree, that
humanity of feeling which had once been my distinguishing trait, and the
source of many of my simplest and purest pleasures.

With my aversion to this cat, however, its partiality for myself seemed

to increase. It followed my footsteps with a pertinacity which it would be
difficult to make the reader comprehend. Whenever I sat, it would crouch
beneath my chair, or spring upon my knees, covering me with its loathsome
caresses. If I arose to walk it would get between my feet and thus nearly
throw me down, or, fastening its long and sharp claws in my dress, clamber,
in this manner, to my breast. At such times, although I longed to destroy it
with a blow, I was yet withheld from so doing, partly it at by a memory of
my former crime, but chiefly — let me confess it at once — by absolute
dread of the beast.

be at a loss how otherwise to define it. I am almost ashamed to own — yes,
even in this felon’s cell, I am almost ashamed to own — that the terror and
horror with which the animal inspired me, had been heightened by one of
the merest chimaeras it would be possible to conceive. My wife had called
my attention, more than once, to the character of the mark of white hair, of
which I have spoken, and which constituted the sole visible difference
between the strange beast and the one I had destroyed. The reader will
remember that this mark, although large, had been originally very
indefinite; but, by slow degrees — degrees nearly imperceptible, and which
for a long time my Reason struggled to reject as fanciful — it had, at length,
assumed a rigorous distinctness of outline. It was now the representation of
an object that I shudder to name — and for this, above all, I loathed, and
dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had I dared — it was
now, I say, the image of a hideous — of a ghastly thing — of the

GALLOWS! — oh, mournful and terrible engine of Horror and of Crime —
of Agony and of Death!

And now was I indeed wretched beyond the wretchedness of mere

Humanity. And a brute beast — whose fellow I had contemptuously
destroyed — a brute beast to work out for me — for me a man, fashioned in
the image of the High God — so much of insufferable wo! Alas! neither by
day nor by night knew I the blessing of Rest any more! During the former
the creature left me no moment alone; and, in the latter, I started, hourly,
from dreams of unutterable fear, to find the hot breath of the thing upon my
face, and its vast weight — an incarnate Night-Mare that I had no power to
shake off — incumbent eternally upon my heart!

the good within me succumbed. Evil thoughts became my sole intimates —
the darkest and most evil of thoughts. The moodiness of my usual temper
increased to hatred of all things and of all mankind; while, from the sudden,
frequent, and ungovernable outbursts of a fury to which I now blindly
abandoned myself, my uncomplaining wife, alas! was the most usual and
the most patient of sufferers.

One day she accompanied me, upon some household errand, into the

cellar of the old building which our poverty compelled us to inhabit. The
cat followed me down the steep stairs, and, nearly throwing me headlong,
exasperated me to madness. Uplifting an axe, and forgetting, in my wrath,
the childish dread which had hitherto stayed my hand, I aimed a blow at the
animal which, of course, would have proved instantly fatal had it descended
as I wished. But this blow was arrested by the hand of my wife. Goaded, by
the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal, I withdrew my arm from
her grasp and buried the axe in her brain. She fell dead upon the spot,
without a groan.

This hideous murder accomplished, I set myself forthwith, and with

entire deliberation, to the task of concealing the body. I knew that I could
not remove it from the house, either by day or by night, without the risk of
being observed by the neighbors. Many projects entered my mind. At one
period I thought of cutting the corpse into minute fragments, and destroying

them by fire. At another, I resolved to dig a grave for it in the floor of the
cellar. Again, I deliberated about casting it in the well in the yard — about
packing it in a box, as if merchandize, with the usual arrangements, and so
getting a porter to take it from the house. Finally I hit upon what I
considered a far better expedient than either of these. I determined to wall it
up in the cellar — as the monks of the middle ages are recorded to have
walled up their victims.

For a purpose such as this the cellar was well adapted. Its walls were

loosely constructed, and had lately been plastered throughout with a rough
plaster, which the dampness of the atmosphere had prevented from
hardening. Moreover, in one of the walls was a projection, caused by a false
chimney, or fireplace, that had been filled up, and made to resemble the rest
of the cellar. I made no doubt that I could readily displace the bricks at this
point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole up as before, so that no eye
could detect anything suspicious.

easily dislodged the bricks, and, having carefully deposited the body against
the inner wall, I propped it in that position, while, with little trouble, I re-
laid the whole structure as it originally stood. Having procured mortar,
sand, and hair, with every possible precaution, I prepared a plaster which
could not be distinguished from the old, and with this I very carefully went
over the new brick-work. When I had finished, I felt satisfied that all was
right. The wall did not present the slightest appearance of having been
disturbed. The rubbish on the floor was picked up with the minutest care. I
looked around triumphantly, and said to myself — “Here at least, then, my
labor has not been in vain.”

My next step was to look for the beast which had been the cause of so

much wretchedness; for I had, at length, firmly resolved to put it to death.
Had I been able to meet with it, at the moment, there could have been no
doubt of its fate; but it appeared that the crafty animal had been alarmed at
the violence of my previous anger, and forebore to present itself in my
present mood. It is impossible to describe, or to imagine, the deep, the
blissful sense of relief which the absence of the detested creature

occasioned in my bosom. It did not make its appearance during the night —
and thus for one night at least, since its introduction into the house, I
soundly and tranquilly slept; aye, slept even with the burden of murder
upon my soul!

The second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor came not.

Once again I breathed as a free-man. The monster, in terror, had fled the
premises forever! I should behold it no more! My happiness was supreme!
The guilt of my dark deed disturbed me but little. Some few inquiries had
been made, but these had been readily answered. Even a search had been
instituted — but of course nothing was to be discovered. I looked upon my
future felicity as secured.

very unexpectedly, into the house, and proceeded again to make rigorous
investigation of the premises. Secure, however, in the inscrutability of my
place of concealment, I felt no embarrassment whatever. The officers bade
me accompany them in their search. They left no nook or corner
unexplored. At length, for the third or fourth time, they descended into the
cellar. I quivered not in a muscle. My heart beat calmly as that of one who
slumbers in innocence. I walked the cellar from end to end. I folded my
arms upon my bosom, and roamed easily to and fro. The police were
thoroughly satisfied and prepared to depart. The glee at my heart was too
strong to be restrained. I burned to say if but one word, by way of triumph,
and to render doubly sure their assurance of my guiltlessness.

“Gentlemen,” I said at last, as the party ascended the steps, “I delight to

have allayed your suspicions. I wish you all health, and a little more
courtesy. By the bye, gentlemen, this — this is a very well constructed
house.” (In the rabid desire to say something easily, I scarcely knew what I
uttered at all.) — “I may say an excellently well constructed house. These
walls — are you going, gentlemen? — these walls are solidly put together”;
and here, through the mere phrenzy of bravado, I rapped heavily, with a
cane which I held in my hand, upon that very portion of the brick-work
behind which stood the corpse of the wife of my bosom.

But may God shield and deliver me from the fangs of the Arch-Fiend!

No sooner had the reverberation of my blows sunk into silence than I was
answered by a voice from within the tomb! — by a cry, at first muffled and
broken, like the sobbing of a child, and then quickly swelling into one long,
loud, and continuous scream, utterly anomalous and inhuman — a howl —
a wailing shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as might have
arisen only out of hell, conjointly from the throats of the damned in their
agony and of the demons that exult in the damnation.

Of my own thoughts it is folly to speak. Swooning, I staggered to the

opposite wall. For one instant the party upon the stairs remained motionless,

through extremity of terror and of awe. In the next, a dozen stout arms were
tolling at the wall. It fell bodily. The corpse, already greatly decayed and
clotted with gore, stood erect before the eyes of the spectators. Upon its
head, with red extended mouth and solitary eye of fire, sat the hideous beast
whose craft had seduced me into murder, and whose informing voice had
consigned me to the hangman. I had walled the monster up within the tomb!

OceanofPDF.com

The Fall of the House of Usher

Son coeur est un luth suspendu; 
Sitot qu’on le touche il resonne.

De Beranger.

During the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the autumn of the
year, when the clouds hung oppressively low in the heavens, had been

passing alone, on horseback, through a singularly dreary tract of country;
and at length found myself, as the shades of the evening drew on, within
view of the melancholy House of Usher. I know not how it was — but, with
the first glimpse of the building, a sense of insufferable gloom pervaded my
spirit. I say insufferable; for the feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-
pleasurable, because poetic, sentiment, with which the mind usually
receives even the sternest natural images of the desolate or terrible. I looked
upon the scene before me — upon the mere house, and the simple
landscape features of the domain — upon the bleak walls — upon the
vacant eye-like windows — upon a few rank sedges — and upon a few
white trunks of decayed trees — with an utter depression of soul which I
can compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to the after-dream
of the reveller upon opium — the bitter lapse into everyday life-the hideous
dropping off of the reveller upon opium — the bitter lapse into everyday
life — the hideous dropping off of the veil. There was an iciness, a sinking,
a sickening of the heart — an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no
goading of the imagination could torture into aught of the sublime. What
was it — I paused to think — what was it that so unnerved me in the
contemplation of the House of Usher? It was a mystery all insoluble; nor
could I grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as I
pondered. I was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion, that
while, beyond doubt, there are combinations of very simple natural objects
which have the power of thus affecting us, still the analysis of this power
lies among considerations beyond our depth. It was possible, I reflected,
that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the scene, of the
details of the picture, would be sufficient to modify, or perhaps to annihilate
its capacity for sorrowful impression; and, acting upon this idea, I reined
my horse to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in
unruffled lustre by the dwelling, and gazed down — but with a shudder
even more thrilling than before — upon the remodelled and inverted images
of the gray sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and the vacant and eye-like
windows.

sojourn of some weeks. Its proprietor, Roderick Usher, had been one of my
boon companions in boyhood; but many years had elapsed since our last
meeting. A letter, however, had lately reached me in a distant part of the
country — a letter from him — which, in its wildly importunate nature, had
admitted of no other than a personal reply. The MS. gave evidence of
nervous agitation. The writer spoke of acute bodily illness — of a mental
disorder which oppressed him — and of an earnest desire to see me, as his
best, and indeed his only personal friend, with a view of attempting, by the
cheerfulness of my society, some alleviation of his malady. It was the
manner in which all this, and much more, was said — it the apparent heart
that went with his request — which allowed me no room for hesitation; and
I accordingly obeyed forthwith what I still considered a very singular
summons.

Although, as boys, we had been even intimate associates, yet really

knew little of my friend. His reserve had been always excessive and
habitual. I was aware, however, that his very ancient family had been noted,
time out of mind, for a peculiar sensibility of temperament, displaying
itself, through long ages, in many works of exalted art, and manifested, of
late, in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity, as well as in a
passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even more than to the
orthodox and easily recognisable beauties, of musical science. I had
learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that the stem of the Usher race, all
time-honoured as it was, had put forth, at no period, any enduring branch;
in other words, that the entire family lay in the direct line of descent, and
had always, with very trifling and very temporary variation, so lain. It was
this deficiency, I considered, while running over in thought the perfect
keeping of the character of the premises with the accredited character of the
people, and while speculating upon the possible influence which the one, in
the long lapse of centuries, might have exercised upon the other — it was
this deficiency, perhaps, of collateral issue, and the consequent undeviating
transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimony with the name, which had,
at length, so identified the two as to merge the original title of the estate in

the quaint and equivocal appellation of the “House of Usher” — an
appellation which seemed to include, in the minds of the peasantry who
used it, both the family and the family mansion.

I have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish experiment —

that of looking down within the tarn — had been to deepen the first singular
impression. There can be no doubt that the consciousness of the rapid
increase of my superstition — for why should I not so term it? — served
mainly to accelerate the increase itself. Such, I have long known, is the
paradoxical law of all sentiments having terror as a basis. And it might have
been for this reason only, that, when I again uplifted my eyes to the house
itself, from its image in the pool, there grew in my mind a strange fancy —
a fancy so ridiculous, indeed, that I but mention it to show the vivid force of
the sensations which oppressed me. I had so worked upon my imagination
as really to believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an
atmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity-an
atmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven, but which had
reeked up from the decayed trees, and the gray wall, and the silent tarn — a
pestilent and mystic vapour, dull, sluggish, faintly discernible, and leaden-
hued.

Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream, I scanned

more narrowly the real aspect of the building. Its principal feature seemed
to be that of an excessive antiquity. The discoloration of ages had been
great. Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior, hanging in a fine tangled
web-work from the eaves. Yet all this was apart from any extraordinary
dilapidation. No portion of the masonry had fallen; and there appeared to be
a wild inconsistency between its still perfect adaptation of parts, and the
crumbling condition of the individual stones. In this there was much that
reminded me of the specious totality of old wood-work which has rotted for
long years in some neglected vault, with no disturbance from the breath of
the external air. Beyond this indication of extensive decay, however, the
fabric gave little token of instability. Perhaps the eye of a scrutinising
observer might have discovered a barely perceptible fissure, which,
extending from the roof of the building in front, made its way down the

wall in a zigzag direction, until it became lost in the sullen waters of the
tarn.

servant in waiting took my horse, and I entered the Gothic archway of the
hall. A valet, of stealthy step, thence conducted me, in silence, through
many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio of his master.
Much that I encountered on the way contributed, I know not how, to
heighten the vague sentiments of which I have already spoken. While the
objects around me — while the carvings of the ceilings, the sombre
tapestries of the walls, the ebon blackness of the floors, and the
phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as I strode, were but matters
to which, or to such as which, I had been accustomed from my infancy —
while I hesitated not to acknowledge how familiar was all this — I still
wondered to find how unfamiliar were the fancies which ordinary images
were stirring up. On one of the staircases, I met the physician of the family.
His countenance, I thought, wore a mingled expression of low cunning and
perplexity. He accosted me with trepidation and passed on. The valet now
threw open a door and ushered me into the presence of his master.

The room in which I found myself was very large and lofty. The

windows were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a distance from the
black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible from within. Feeble
gleams of encrimsoned light made their way through the trellised panes,
and served to render sufficiently distinct the more prominent objects around
the eye, however, struggled in vain to reach the remoter angles of the
chamber, or the recesses of the vaulted and fretted ceiling. Dark draperies
hung upon the walls. The general furniture was profuse, comfortless,
antique, and tattered. Many books and musical instruments lay scattered
about, but failed to give any vitality to the scene. I felt that I breathed an
atmosphere of sorrow. An air of stern, deep, and irredeemable gloom hung
over and pervaded all.

Upon my entrance, Usher arose from a sofa on which he had been lying

at full length, and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much in
it, I at first thought, of an overdone cordiality — of the constrained effort of

the ennuye man of the world. A glance, however, at his countenance,
convinced me of his perfect sincerity. We sat down; and for some moments,
while he spoke not, I gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity, half of
awe. Surely, man had never before so terribly altered, in so brief a period, as
had Roderick Usher! It was with difficulty that I could bring myself to
admit the identity of the wan being before me with the companion of my
early boyhood. Yet the character of his face had been at all times
remarkable. A cadaverousness of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and
luminous beyond comparison; lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but of a
surpassingly beautiful curve; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model, but with a
breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations; a finely moulded chin,
speaking, in its want of prominence, of a want of moral energy; hair of a
more than web-like softness and tenuity; these features, with an inordinate
expansion above the regions of the temple, made up altogether a
countenance not easily to be forgotten. And now in the mere exaggeration
of the prevailing character of these features, and of the expression they were
wont to convey, lay so much of change that I doubted to whom I spoke. The
now ghastly pallor of the skin, and the now miraculous lustre of the eve,
above all things startled and even awed me. The silken hair, too, had been
suffered to grow all unheeded, and as, in its wild gossamer texture, it
floated rather than fell about the face, I could not, even with effort, connect
its Arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity.

In the manner of my friend I was at once struck with an incoherence —

an inconsistency; and I soon found this to arise from a series of feeble and
futile struggles to overcome an habitual trepidancy — an excessive nervous
agitation. For something of this nature I had indeed been prepared, no less
by his letter, than by reminiscences of certain boyish traits, and by
conclusions deduced from his peculiar physical conformation and
temperament. His action was alternately vivacious and sullen. His voice
varied rapidly from a tremulous indecision (when the animal spirits seemed
utterly in abeyance) to that species of energetic concision — that abrupt,
weighty, unhurried, and hollow-sounding enunciation — that leaden, self-
balanced and perfectly modulated guttural utterance, which may be

observed in the lost drunkard, or the irreclaimable eater of opium, during
the periods of his most intense excitement.

It was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of his earnest desire

to see me, and of the solace he expected me to afford him. He entered, at
some length, into what he conceived to be the nature of his malady. It was,
he said, a constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he despaired to
find a remedy — a mere nervous affection, he immediately added, which
would undoubtedly soon pass off. It displayed itself in a host of unnatural
sensations. Some of these, as he detailed them, interested and bewildered
me; although, perhaps, the terms, and the general manner of the narration
had their weight. He suffered much from a morbid acuteness of the senses;
the most insipid food was alone endurable; he could wear only garments of
certain texture; the odours of all flowers were oppressive; his eyes were
tortured by even a faint light; and there were but peculiar sounds, and these
from stringed instruments, which did not inspire him with horror.

perish,” said he, “I must perish in this deplorable folly. Thus, thus, and not
otherwise, shall I be lost. I dread the events of the future, not in themselves,
but in their results. I shudder at the thought of any, even the most trivial,
incident, which may operate upon this intolerable agitation of soul. I have,
indeed, no abhorrence of danger, except in its absolute effect — in terror. In
this unnerved-in this pitiable condition — I feel that the period will sooner
or later arrive when I must abandon life and reason together, in some
struggle with the grim phantasm, FEAR.”

I learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and equivocal

hints, another singular feature of his mental condition. He was enchained by
certain superstitious impressions in regard to the dwelling which he
tenanted, and whence, for many years, he had never ventured forth — in
regard to an influence whose supposititious force was conveyed in terms
too shadowy here to be re-stated — an influence which some peculiarities
in the mere form and substance of his family mansion, had, by dint of long
sufferance, he said, obtained over his spirit-an effect which the physique of

the gray walls and turrets, and of the dim tarn into which they all looked
down, had, at length, brought about upon the morale of his existence.

He admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of the

peculiar gloom which thus afflicted him could be traced to a more natural
and far more palpable origin — to the severe and long-continued illness —
indeed to the evidently approaching dissolution-of a tenderly beloved sister
— his sole companion for long years — his last and only relative on earth.
“Her decease,” he said, with a bitterness which I can never forget, “would
leave him (him the hopeless and the frail) the last of the ancient race of the
Ushers.” While he spoke, the lady Madeline (for so was she called) passed
slowly through a remote portion of the apartment, and, without having
noticed my presence, disappeared. I regarded her with an utter astonishment
not unmingled with dread — and yet I found it impossible to account for
such feelings. A sensation of stupor oppressed me, as my eyes followed her
retreating steps. When a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance sought
instinctively and eagerly the countenance of the brother — but he had
buried his face in his hands, and I could only perceive that a far more than
ordinary wanness had overspread the emaciated fingers through which
trickled many passionate tears.

The disease of the lady Madeline had long baffled the skill of her

physicians. A settled apathy, a gradual wasting away of the person, and
frequent although transient affections of a partially cataleptical character,
were the unusual diagnosis. Hitherto she had steadily borne up against the
pressure of her malady, and had not betaken herself finally to bed; but, on
the closing in of the evening of my arrival at the house, she succumbed (as
her brother told me at night with inexpressible agitation) to the prostrating
power of the destroyer; and I learned that the glimpse I had obtained of her
person would thus probably be the last I should obtain — that the lady, at
least while living, would be seen by me no more.

For several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by either Usher or

myself: and during this period I was busied in earnest endeavours to
alleviate the melancholy of my friend. We painted and read together; or I
listened, as if in a dream, to the wild improvisations of his speaking guitar.

And thus, as a closer and still intimacy admitted me more unreservedly into
the recesses of his spirit, the more bitterly did I perceive the futility of all
attempt at cheering a mind from which darkness, as if an inherent positive
quality, poured forth upon all objects of the moral and physical universe, in
one unceasing radiation of gloom.

I shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solemn hours I thus

spent alone with the master of the House of Usher. Yet I should fail in any
attempt to convey an idea of the exact character of the studies, or of the
occupations, in which he involved me, or led me the way. An excited and
highly distempered ideality threw a sulphureous lustre over all. His long
improvised dirges will ring forever in my cars. Among other things, I hold
painfully in mind a certain singular perversion and amplification of the wild
air of the last waltz of Von Weber. From the paintings over which his
elaborate fancy brooded, and which grew, touch by touch, into vaguenesses
at which I shuddered the more thrillingly, because I shuddered knowing not
why; — from these paintings (vivid as their images now are before me) I
would in vain endeavour to educe more than a small portion which should
lie within the compass of merely written words. By the utter simplicity, by
the nakedness of his designs, he arrested and overawed attention. If ever
mortal painted an idea, that mortal was Roderick Usher. For me at least —
in the circumstances then surrounding me — there arose out of the pure
abstractions which the hypochondriac contrived to throw upon his canvas,
an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow of which felt I ever yet in the
contemplation of the certainly glowing yet too concrete reveries of Fuseli.

One of the phantasmagoric conceptions of my friend, partaking not so

rigidly of the spirit of abstraction, may be shadowed forth, although feebly,
in words. A small picture presented the interior of an immensely long and
rectangular vault or tunnel, with low walls, smooth, white, and without
interruption or device. Certain accessory points of the design served well to
convey the idea that this excavation lay at an exceeding depth below the
surface of the earth. No outlet was observed in any portion of its vast
extent, and no torch, or other artificial source of light was discernible; yet a

flood of intense rays rolled throughout, and bathed the whole in a ghastly
and inappropriate splendour.

rendered all music intolerable to the sufferer, with the exception of certain
effects of stringed instruments. It was, perhaps, the narrow limits to which
he thus confined himself upon the guitar, which gave birth, in great
measure, to the fantastic character of his performances. But the fervid
facility of his impromptus could not be so accounted for. They must have
been, and were, in the notes, as well as in the words of his wild fantasias
(for he not unfrequently accompanied himself with rhymed verbal
improvisations), the result of that intense mental collectedness and
concentration to which I have previously alluded as observable only in
particular moments of the highest artificial excitement. The words of one of
these rhapsodies I have easily remembered. I was, perhaps, the more
forcibly impressed with it, as he gave it, because, in the under or mystic
current of its meaning, I fancied that I perceived, and for the first time, a
full consciousness on the part of Usher, of the tottering of his lofty reason
upon her throne. The verses, which were entitled “The Haunted Palace,” ran
very nearly, if not accurately, thus:

I.

In the greenest of our valleys, 
By good angels tenanted, 
Once fair and stately palace — 
Radiant palace — reared its head. 
In the monarch Thought’s dominion — 
It stood there! 
Never seraph spread a pinion 
Over fabric half so fair.

II.

Banners yellow, glorious, golden, 
On its roof did float and flow; 
(This — all this — was in the olden 
Time long ago) 
And every gentle air that dallied, 
In that sweet day, 
Along the ramparts plumed and pallid, 
A winged odour went away.

III.

Wanderers in that happy valley 
Through two luminous windows saw 
Spirits moving musically 
To a lute’s well-tuned law, 
Round about a throne, where sitting 
(Porphyrogene!) 
In state his glory well befitting, 
The ruler of the realm was seen.

IV.

And all with pearl and ruby glowing 
Was the fair palace door, 
Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing 
And sparkling evermore, 
A troop of Echoes whose sweet duty 
Was but to sing, 
In voices of surpassing beauty, 
The wit and wisdom of their king.

V.

But evil things, in robes of sorrow, 
Assailed the monarch’s high estate; 
(Ah, let us mourn, for never morrow 
Shall dawn upon him, desolate!) 
And, round about his home, the glory 
That blushed and bloomed 
Is but a dim-remembered story 
Of the old time entombed.

VI.

And travellers now within that valley, 
Through the red-litten windows, see 
Vast forms that move fantastically 
To a discordant melody; 
While, like a rapid ghastly river, 
Through the pale door, 
A hideous throng rush out forever, 
And laugh — but smile no more.

I well remember that suggestions arising from this ballad led us into a train
of thought wherein there became manifest an opinion of Usher’s which I
mention not so much on account of its novelty, (for other men have thought
thus,) as on account of the pertinacity with which he maintained it. This
opinion, in its general form, was that of the sentience of all vegetable
things. But, in his disordered fancy, the idea had assumed a more daring
character, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon the kingdom of
inorganization. I lack words to express the full extent, or the earnest
abandon of his persuasion. The belief, however, was connected (as I have
previously hinted) with the gray stones of the home of his forefathers. The
conditions of the sentience had been here, he imagined, fulfilled in the
method of collocation of these stones — in the order of their arrangement,
as well as in that of the many fungi which overspread them, and of the

decayed trees which stood around — above all, in the long undisturbed
endurance of this arrangement, and in its reduplication in the still waters of
the tarn. Its evidence — the evidence of the sentience — was to be seen, he
said, (and I here started as he spoke,) in the gradual yet certain condensation
of an atmosphere of their own about the waters and the walls. The result
was discoverable, he added, in that silent, yet importunate and terrible
influence which for centuries had moulded the destinies of his family, and
which made him what I now saw him — what he was. Such opinions need
no comment, and I will make none.

Our books — the books which, for years, had formed no small portion

of the mental existence of the invalid — were, as might be supposed, in
strict keeping with this character of phantasm. We pored together over such
works as the Ververt et Chartreuse of Gresset; the Belphegor of
Machiavelli; the Heaven and Hell of Swedenborg; the Subterranean Voyage
of Nicholas Klimm by Holberg; the Chiromancy of Robert Flud, of Jean
D’Indagine, and of De la Chambre; the Journey into the Blue Distance of
Tieck; and the City of the Sun of Campanella. One favourite volume was a
small octavo edition of the Directorium Inquisitorum, by the Dominican
Eymeric de Gironne; and there were passages in Pomponius Mela, about
the old African Satyrs and AEgipans, over which Usher would sit dreaming
for hours. His chief delight, however, was found in the perusal of an
exceedingly rare and curious book in quarto Gothic — the manual of a
forgotten church — the Vigilae Mortuorum secundum Chorum Ecclesiae
Maguntinae.

probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one evening, having
informed me abruptly that the lady Madeline was no more, he stated his
intention of preserving her corpse for a fortnight, (previously to its final
interment,) in one of the numerous vaults within the main walls of the
building. The worldly reason, however, assigned for this singular
proceeding, was one which I did not feel at liberty to dispute. The brother
had been led to his resolution (so he told me) by consideration of the
unusual character of the malady of the deceased, of certain obtrusive and

eager inquiries on the part of her medical men, and of the remote and
exposed situation of the burial-ground of the family. I will not deny that
when I called to mind the sinister countenance of the person whom I met
upon the stair case, on the day of my arrival at the house, I had no desire to
oppose what I regarded as at best but a harmless, and by no means an
unnatural, precaution.

the temporary entombment. The body having been encoffined, we two
alone bore it to its rest. The vault in which we placed it (and which had
been so long unopened that our torches, half smothered in its oppressive
atmosphere, gave us little opportunity for investigation) was small, damp,
and entirely without means of admission for light; lying, at great depth,
immediately beneath that portion of the building in which was my own
sleeping apartment. It had been used, apparently, in remote feudal times, for
the worst purposes of a donjon-keep, and, in later days, as a place of deposit
for powder, or some other highly combustible substance, as a portion of its
floor, and the whole interior of a long archway through which we reached it,
were carefully sheathed with copper. The door, of massive iron, had been,
also, similarly protected. Its immense weight caused an unusually sharp
grating sound, as it moved upon its hinges.

of horror, we partially turned aside the yet unscrewed lid of the coffin, and
looked upon the face of the tenant. A striking similitude between the
brother and sister now first arrested my attention; and Usher, divining,
perhaps, my thoughts, murmured out some few words from which I learned
that the deceased and himself had been twins, and that sympathies of a
scarcely intelligible nature had always existed between them. Our glances,
however, rested not long upon the dead — for we could not regard her
unawed. The disease which had thus entombed the lady in the maturity of
youth, had left, as usual in all maladies of a strictly cataleptical character,
the mockery of a faint blush upon the bosom and the face, and that
suspiciously lingering smile upon the lip which is so terrible in death. We
replaced and screwed down the lid, and, having secured the door of iron,

made our way, with toll, into the scarcely less gloomy apartments of the
upper portion of the house.

And now, some days of bitter grief having elapsed, an observable

change came over the features of the mental disorder of my friend. His
ordinary manner had vanished. His ordinary occupations were neglected or
forgotten. He roamed from chamber to chamber with hurried, unequal, and
objectless step. The pallor of his countenance had assumed, if possible, a
more ghastly hue — but the luminousness of his eye had utterly gone out.
The once occasional huskiness of his tone was heard no more; and a
tremulous quaver, as if of extreme terror, habitually characterized his
utterance. There were times, indeed, when I thought his unceasingly
agitated mind was labouring with some oppressive secret, to divulge which
he struggled for the necessary courage. At times, again, I was obliged to
resolve all into the mere inexplicable vagaries of madness, for I beheld him
gazing upon vacancy for long hours, in an attitude of the profoundest
attention, as if listening to some imaginary sound. It was no wonder that his
condition terrified-that it infected me. I felt creeping upon me, by slow yet
certain degrees, the wild influences of his own fantastic yet impressive
superstitions.

It was, especially, upon retiring to bed late in the night of the seventh or

eighth day after the placing of the lady Madeline within the donjon, that I
experienced the full power of such feelings. Sleep came not near my couch
— while the hours waned and waned away. I struggled to reason off the
nervousness which had dominion over me. I endeavoured to believe that
much, if not all of what I felt, was due to the bewildering influence of the
gloomy furniture of the room — of the dark and tattered draperies, which,
tortured into motion by the breath of a rising tempest, swayed fitfully to and
fro upon the walls, and rustled uneasily about the decorations of the bed.
But my efforts were fruitless. An irrepressible tremour gradually pervaded
my frame; and, at length, there sat upon my very heart an incubus of utterly
causeless alarm. Shaking this off with a gasp and a struggle, I uplifted
myself upon the pillows, and, peering earnestly within the intense darkness
of the chamber, hearkened — I know not why, except that an instinctive

spirit prompted me — to certain low and indefinite sounds which came,
through the pauses of the storm, at long intervals, I knew not whence.
Overpowered by an intense sentiment of horror, unaccountable yet
unendurable, I threw on my clothes with haste (for I felt that I should sleep
no more during the night), and endeavoured to arouse myself from the
pitiable condition into which I had fallen, by pacing rapidly to and fro
through the apartment.

I had taken but few turns in this manner, when a light step on an

adjoining staircase arrested my attention. I presently recognised it as that of
Usher. In an instant afterward he rapped, with a gentle touch, at my door,
and entered, bearing a lamp. His countenance was, as usual, cadaverously
wan — but, moreover, there was a species of mad hilarity in his eyes — an
evidently restrained hysteria in his whole demeanour. His air appalled me
— but anything was preferable to the solitude which I had so long endured,
and I even welcomed his presence as a relief.

him for some moments in silence — “you have not then seen it? — but,
stay! you shall.” Thus speaking, and having carefully shaded his lamp, he
hurried to one of the casements, and threw it freely open to the storm.

The impetuous fury of the entering gust nearly lifted us from our feet. It

was, indeed, a tempestuous yet sternly beautiful night, and one wildly
singular in its terror and its beauty. A whirlwind had apparently collected its
force in our vicinity; for there were frequent and violent alterations in the
direction of the wind; and the exceeding density of the clouds (which hung
so low as to press upon the turrets of the house) did not prevent our
perceiving the life-like velocity with which they flew careering from all
points against each other, without passing away into the distance. I say that
even their exceeding density did not prevent our perceiving this — yet we
had no glimpse of the moon or stars — nor was there any flashing forth of
the lightning. But the under surfaces of the huge masses of agitated vapour,
as well as all terrestrial objects immediately around us, were glowing in the
unnatural light of a faintly luminous and distinctly visible gaseous
exhalation which hung about and enshrouded the mansion.

Usher, as I led him, with a gentle violence, from the window to a seat.
“These appearances, which bewilder you, are merely electrical phenomena
not uncommon — or it may be that they have their ghastly origin in the
rank miasma of the tarn. Let us close this casement; — the air is chilling
and dangerous to your frame. Here is one of your favourite romances. I will
read, and you shall listen; — and so we will pass away this terrible night
together.”

The antique volume which I had taken up was the “Mad Trist” of Sir

Launcelot Canning; but I had called it a favourite of Usher’s more in sad
jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there is little in its uncouth and
unimaginative prolixity which could have had interest for the lofty and
spiritual ideality of my friend. It was, however, the only book immediately
at hand; and I indulged a vague hope that the excitement which now
agitated the hypochondriac, might find relief (for the history of mental
disorder is full of similar anomalies) even in the extremeness of the folly
which I should read. Could I have judged, indeed, by the wild over-strained
air of vivacity with which he hearkened, or apparently hearkened, to the
words of the tale, I might well have congratulated myself upon the success
of my design.

I had arrived at that well-known portion of the story where Ethelred, the

hero of the Trist, having sought in vain for peaceable admission into the
dwelling of the hermit, proceeds to make good an entrance by force. Here,
it will be remembered, the words of the narrative run thus:

“And Ethelred, who was by nature of a doughty heart, and who was

now mighty withal, on account of the powerfulness of the wine which he
had drunken, waited no longer to hold parley with the hermit, who, in sooth,
was of an obstinate and maliceful turn, but, feeling the rain upon his
shoulders, and fearing the rising of the tempest, uplifted his mace outright,
and, with blows, made quickly room in the plankings of the door for his
gauntleted hand; and now pulling there-with sturdily, he so cracked, and
ripped, and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry and hollow-sounding
wood alarumed and reverberated throughout the forest.

for it appeared to me (although I at once concluded that my excited fancy
had deceived me) — it appeared to me that, from some very remote portion
of the mansion, there came, indistinctly, to my ears, what might have been,
in its exact similarity of character, the echo (but a stifled and dull one
certainly) of the very cracking and ripping sound which Sir Launcelot had
so particularly described. It was, beyond doubt, the coincidence alone
which had arrested my attention; for, amid the rattling of the sashes of the
casements, and the ordinary commingled noises of the still increasing
storm, the sound, in itself, had nothing, surely, which should have interested
or disturbed me. I continued the story:

“But the good champion Ethelred, now entering within the door, was

sore enraged and amazed to perceive no signal of the maliceful hermit; but,
in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scaly and prodigious demeanour, and of a
fiery tongue, which sate in guard before a palace of gold, with a floor of
silver; and upon the wall there hung a shield of shining brass with this
legend enwritten —

Who entereth herein, a conqueror hath bin; 
Who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win;

And Ethelred uplifted his mace, and struck upon the head of the dragon,
which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, with a shriek so horrid
and harsh, and withal so piercing, that Ethelred had fain to close his ears
with his hands against the dreadful noise of it, the like whereof was never
before heard.”

Here again I paused abruptly, and now with a feeling of wild

amazement — for there could be no doubt whatever that, in this instance, I
did actually hear (although from what direction it proceeded I found it
impossible to say) a low and apparently distant, but harsh, protracted, and
most unusual screaming or grating sound — the exact counterpart of what
my fancy had already conjured up for the dragon’s unnatural shriek as
described by the romancer.

most extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand conflicting sensations, in
which wonder and extreme terror were predominant, I still retained
sufficient presence of mind to avoid exciting, by any observation, the
sensitive nervousness of my companion. I was by no means certain that he
had noticed the sounds in question; although, assuredly, a strange alteration
had, during the last few minutes, taken place in his demeanour. From a
position fronting my own, he had gradually brought round his chair, so as to
sit with his face to the door of the chamber; and thus I could but partially
perceive his features, although I saw that his lips trembled as if he were
murmuring inaudibly. His head had dropped upon his breast — yet I knew
that he was not asleep, from the wide and rigid opening of the eye as I
caught a glance of it in profile. The motion of his body, too, was at variance
with this idea — for he rocked from side to side with a gentle yet constant
and uniform sway. Having rapidly taken notice of all this, I resumed the
narrative of Sir Launcelot, which thus proceeded:

“And now, the champion, having escaped from the terrible fury of the

dragon, bethinking himself of the brazen shield, and of the breaking up of
the enchantment which was upon it, removed the carcass from out of the
way before him, and approached valorously over the silver pavement of the
castle to where the shield was upon the wall; which in sooth tarried not for
his full coming, but fell down at his feet upon the silver floor, with a mighty
great and terrible ringing sound.”

No sooner had these syllables passed my lips, than — as if a shield of

brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavily upon a floor of silver
became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, and clangorous, yet apparently
muffled reverberation. Completely unnerved, I leaped to my feet; but the
measured rocking movement of Usher was undisturbed. I rushed to the
chair in which he sat. His eyes were bent fixedly before him, and
throughout his whole countenance there reigned a stony rigidity. But, as I
placed my hand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder over his
whole person; a sickly smile quivered about his lips; and I saw that he
spoke in a low, hurried, and gibbering murmur, as if unconscious of my

presence. Bending closely over him, I at length drank in the hideous import
of his words.

— many minutes, many hours, many days, have I heard it — yet I dared not
— oh, pity me, miserable wretch that I am! — I dared not — I dared not
speak! We have put her living in the tomb! Said I not that my senses were
acute? I now tell you that I heard her first feeble movements in the hollow
coffin. I heard them — many, many days ago — yet I dared not — I dared
not speak! And now — to-night — Ethelred — ha! ha! — the breaking of
the hermit’s door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangour of the
shield! — say, rather, the rending of her coffin, and the grating of the iron
hinges of her prison, and her struggles within the coppered archway of the
vault! Oh whither shall I fly? Will she not be here anon? Is she not hurrying
to upbraid me for my haste? Have I not heard her footstep on the stair? Do I
not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her heart? MADMAN!”
here he sprang furiously to his feet, and shrieked out his syllables, as if in
the effort he were giving up his soul — “MADMAN! I TELL YOU THAT
SHE NOW STANDS WITHOUT THE DOOR!”

As if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had been found

the potency of a spell — the huge antique panels to which the speaker
pointed, threw slowly back, upon the instant, ponderous and ebony jaws. It
was the work of the rushing gust — but then without those doors there DID
stand the lofty and enshrouded figure of the lady Madeline of Usher. There
was blood upon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter struggle
upon every portion of her emaciated frame. For a moment she remained
trembling and reeling to and fro upon the threshold, then, with a low
moaning cry, fell heavily inward upon the person of her brother, and in her

violent and now final death-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse, and a
victim to the terrors he had anticipated.

still abroad in all its wrath as I found myself crossing the old causeway.
Suddenly there shot along the path a wild light, and I turned to see whence
a gleam so unusual could wi have issued; for the vast house and its shadows
were alone behind me. The radiance was that of the full, setting, and blood-
red moon which now shone vividly through that once barely-discernible
fissure of which I have before spoken as extending from the roof of the
building, in a zigzag direction, to the base. While I gazed, this fissure
rapidly widened — there came a fierce breath of the whirlwind — the entire
orb of the satellite burst at once upon my sight — my brain reeled as I saw
the mighty walls rushing asunder — there was a long tumultuous shouting
sound like the voice of a thousand waters — and the deep and dank tarn at
my feet closed sullenly and silently over the fragments of the “HOUSE OF
USHER.”

OceanofPDF.com

The Premature Burial

There are certain themes of which the interest is all-absorbing, but which
are too entirely horrible for the purposes of legitimate fiction. These the
mere romanticist must eschew, if he do not wish to offend or to disgust.
They are with propriety handled only when the severity and majesty of
Truth sanctify and sustain them. We thrill, for example, with the most

intense of “pleasurable pain” over the accounts of the Passage of the
Beresina, of the Earthquake at Lisbon, of the Plague at London, of the
Massacre of St. Bartholomew, or of the stifling of the hundred and twenty-
three prisoners in the Black Hole at Calcutta. But in these accounts it is the
fact — it is the reality — it is the history which excites. As inventions, we
should regard them with simple abhorrence.

I have mentioned some few of the more prominent and august

calamities on record; but in these it is the extent, not less than the character
of the calamity, which so vividly impresses the fancy. I need not remind the
reader that, from the long and weird catalogue of human miseries, I might
have selected many individual instances more replete with essential
suffering than any of these vast generalities of disaster. The true
wretchedness, indeed — the ultimate woe — is particular, not diffuse. That
the ghastly extremes of agony are endured by man the unit, and never by
man the mass — for this let us thank a merciful God!

To be buried while alive is, beyond question, the most terrific of these

extremes which has ever fallen to the lot of mere mortality. That it has
frequently, very frequently, so fallen will scarcely be denied by those who
think. The boundaries which divide Life from Death are at best shadowy
and vague. Who shall say where the one ends, and where the other begins?
We know that there are diseases in which occur total cessations of all the
apparent functions of vitality, and yet in which these cessations are merely
suspensions, properly so called. They are only temporary pauses in the
incomprehensible mechanism. A certain period elapses, and some unseen
mysterious principle again sets in motion the magic pinions and the wizard
wheels. The silver cord was not for ever loosed, nor the golden bowl
irreparably broken. But where, meantime, was the soul?

Apart, however, from the inevitable conclusion, a priori that such causes

must produce such effects — that the well-known occurrence of such cases
of suspended animation must naturally give rise, now and then, to
premature interments — apart from this consideration, we have the direct
testimony of medical and ordinary experience to prove that a vast number
of such interments have actually taken place. I might refer at once, if

necessary to a hundred well authenticated instances. One of very
remarkable character, and of which the circumstances may be fresh in the
memory of some of my readers, occurred, not very long ago, in the
neighboring city of Baltimore, where it occasioned a painful, intense, and
widely-extended excitement. The wife of one of the most respectable
citizens-a lawyer of eminence and a member of Congress — was seized
with a sudden and unaccountable illness, which completely baffled the skill
of her physicians. After much suffering she died, or was supposed to die.
No one suspected, indeed, or had reason to suspect, that she was not
actually dead. She presented all the ordinary appearances of death. The face
assumed the usual pinched and sunken outline. The lips were of the usual
marble pallor. The eyes were lustreless. There was no warmth. Pulsation
had ceased. For three days the body was preserved unburied, during which
it had acquired a stony rigidity. The funeral, in short, was hastened, on
account of the rapid advance of what was supposed to be decomposition.

years, was undisturbed. At the expiration of this term it was opened for the
reception of a sarcophagus; — but, alas! how fearful a shock awaited the
husband, who, personally, threw open the door! As its portals swung
outwardly back, some white-apparelled object fell rattling within his arms.
It was the skeleton of his wife in her yet unmoulded shroud.

A careful investigation rendered it evident that she had revived within

two days after her entombment; that her struggles within the coffin had
caused it to fall from a ledge, or shelf to the floor, where it was so broken as
to permit her escape. A lamp which had been accidentally left, full of oil,
within the tomb, was found empty; it might have been exhausted, however,
by evaporation. On the uttermost of the steps which led down into the dread
chamber was a large fragment of the coffin, with which, it seemed, that she
had endeavored to arrest attention by striking the iron door. While thus
occupied, she probably swooned, or possibly died, through sheer terror;
and, in failing, her shroud became entangled in some iron — work which
projected interiorly. Thus she remained, and thus she rotted, erect.

attended with circumstances which go far to warrant the assertion that truth
is, indeed, stranger than fiction. The heroine of the story was a
Mademoiselle Victorine Lafourcade, a young girl of illustrious family, of
wealth, and of great personal beauty. Among her numerous suitors was
Julien Bossuet, a poor litterateur, or journalist of Paris. His talents and
general amiability had recommended him to the notice of the heiress, by
whom he seems to have been truly beloved; but her pride of birth decided
her, finally, to reject him, and to wed a Monsieur Renelle, a banker and a
diplomatist of some eminence. After marriage, however, this gentleman
neglected, and, perhaps, even more positively ill-treated her. Having passed
with him some wretched years, she died — at least her condition so closely
resembled death as to deceive every one who saw her. She was buried —
not in a vault, but in an ordinary grave in the village of her nativity. Filled
with despair, and still inflamed by the memory of a profound attachment,
the lover journeys from the capital to the remote province in which the
village lies, with the romantic purpose of disinterring the corpse, and
possessing himself of its luxuriant tresses. He reaches the grave. At
midnight he unearths the coffin, opens it, and is in the act of detaching the
hair, when he is arrested by the unclosing of the beloved eyes. In fact, the
lady had been buried alive. Vitality had not altogether departed, and she
was aroused by the caresses of her lover from the lethargy which had been
mistaken for death. He bore her frantically to his lodgings in the village. He
employed certain powerful restoratives suggested by no little medical
learning. In fine, she revived. She recognized her preserver. She remained
with him until, by slow degrees, she fully recovered her original health. Her
woman’s heart was not adamant, and this last lesson of love sufficed to
soften it. She bestowed it upon Bossuet. She returned no more to her
husband, but, concealing from him her resurrection, fled with her lover to
America. Twenty years afterward, the two returned to France, in the
persuasion that time had so greatly altered the lady’s appearance that her
friends would be unable to recognize her. They were mistaken, however,
for, at the first meeting, Monsieur Renelle did actually recognize and make

claim to his wife. This claim she resisted, and a judicial tribunal sustained
her in her resistance, deciding that the peculiar circumstances, with the long
lapse of years, had extinguished, not only equitably, but legally, the
authority of the husband.

The “Chirurgical Journal” of Leipsic — a periodical of high authority

and merit, which some American bookseller would do well to translate and
republish, records in a late number a very distressing event of the character
in question.

An officer of artillery, a man of gigantic stature and of robust health,

being thrown from an unmanageable horse, received a very severe
contusion upon the head, which rendered him insensible at once; the skull
was slightly fractured, but no immediate danger was apprehended.
Trepanning was accomplished successfully. He was bled, and many other of
the ordinary means of relief were adopted. Gradually, however, he fell into
a more and more hopeless state of stupor, and, finally, it was thought that he
died.

The weather was warm, and he was buried with indecent haste in one of

the public cemeteries. His funeral took place on Thursday. On the Sunday
following, the grounds of the cemetery were, as usual, much thronged with
visiters, and about noon an intense excitement was created by the
declaration of a peasant that, while sitting upon the grave of the officer, he
had distinctly felt a commotion of the earth, as if occasioned by some one
struggling beneath. At first little attention was paid to the man’s
asseveration; but his evident terror, and the dogged obstinacy with which he
persisted in his story, had at length their natural effect upon the crowd.
Spades were hurriedly procured, and the grave, which was shamefully
shallow, was in a few minutes so far thrown open that the head of its
occupant appeared. He was then seemingly dead; but he sat nearly erect
within his coffin, the lid of which, in his furious struggles, he had partially
uplifted.

He was forthwith conveyed to the nearest hospital, and there

pronounced to be still living, although in an asphytic condition. After some

hours he revived, recognized individuals of his acquaintance, and, in broken
sentences spoke of his agonies in the grave.

life for more than an hour, while inhumed, before lapsing into insensibility.
The grave was carelessly and loosely filled with an exceedingly porous soil;
and thus some air was necessarily admitted. He heard the footsteps of the
crowd overhead, and endeavored to make himself heard in turn. It was the
tumult within the grounds of the cemetery, he said, which appeared to
awaken him from a deep sleep, but no sooner was he awake than he became
fully aware of the awful horrors of his position.

This patient, it is recorded, was doing well and seemed to be in a fair

way of ultimate recovery, but fell a victim to the quackeries of medical
experiment. The galvanic battery was applied, and he suddenly expired in
one of those ecstatic paroxysms which, occasionally, it superinduces.

a well known and very extraordinary case in point, where its action proved
the means of restoring to animation a young attorney of London, who had
been interred for two days. This occurred in 1831, and created, at the time,
a very profound sensation wherever it was made the subject of converse.

The patient, Mr. Edward Stapleton, had died, apparently of typhus fever,

accompanied with some anomalous symptoms which had excited the
curiosity of his medical attendants. Upon his seeming decease, his friends
were requested to sanction a post-mortem examination, but declined to
permit it. As often happens, when such refusals are made, the practitioners
resolved to disinter the body and dissect it at leisure, in private.
Arrangements were easily effected with some of the numerous corps of
body-snatchers, with which London abounds; and, upon the third night after
the funeral, the supposed corpse was unearthed from a grave eight feet
deep, and deposited in the opening chamber of one of the private hospitals.

An incision of some extent had been actually made in the abdomen,

when the fresh and undecayed appearance of the subject suggested an
application of the battery. One experiment succeeded another, and the
customary effects supervened, with nothing to characterize them in any

respect, except, upon one or two occasions, a more than ordinary degree of
life-likeness in the convulsive action.

at length, to proceed at once to the dissection. A student, however, was
especially desirous of testing a theory of his own, and insisted upon
applying the battery to one of the pectoral muscles. A rough gash was
made, and a wire hastily brought in contact, when the patient, with a hurried
but quite unconvulsive movement, arose from the table, stepped into the
middle of the floor, gazed about him uneasily for a few seconds, and then
— spoke. What he said was unintelligible, but words were uttered; the
syllabification was distinct. Having spoken, he fell heavily to the floor.

For some moments all were paralyzed with awe — but the urgency of

the case soon restored them their presence of mind. It was seen that Mr.
Stapleton was alive, although in a swoon. Upon exhibition of ether he
revived and was rapidly restored to health, and to the society of his friends
— from whom, however, all knowledge of his resuscitation was withheld,
until a relapse was no longer to be apprehended. Their wonder — their
rapturous astonishment — may be conceived.

The most thrilling peculiarity of this incident, nevertheless, is involved

in what Mr. S. himself asserts. He declares that at no period was he
altogether insensible — that, dully and confusedly, he was aware of
everything which happened to him, from the moment in which he was
pronounced dead by his physicians, to that in which he fell swooning to the
floor of the hospital. “I am alive,” were the uncomprehended words which,
upon recognizing the locality of the dissecting-room, he had endeavored, in
his extremity, to utter.

It were an easy matter to multiply such histories as these — but I

forbear — for, indeed, we have no need of such to establish the fact that
premature interments occur. When we reflect how very rarely, from the
nature of the case, we have it in our power to detect them, we must admit
that they may frequently occur without our cognizance. Scarcely, in truth, is
a graveyard ever encroached upon, for any purpose, to any great extent, that

skeletons are not found in postures which suggest the most fearful of
suspicions.

asserted, without hesitation, that no event is so terribly well adapted to
inspire the supremeness of bodily and of mental distress, as is burial before
death. The unendurable oppression of the lungs — the stifling fumes from
the damp earth — the clinging to the death garments — the rigid embrace
of the narrow house — the blackness of the absolute Night — the silence
like a sea that overwhelms — the unseen but palpable presence of the
Conqueror Worm — these things, with the thoughts of the air and grass
above, with memory of dear friends who would fly to save us if but
informed of our fate, and with consciousness that of this fate they can never
be informed — that our hopeless portion is that of the really dead — these
considerations, I say, carry into the heart, which still palpitates, a degree of
appalling and intolerable horror from which the most daring imagination
must recoil. We know of nothing so agonizing upon Earth — we can dream
of nothing half so hideous in the realms of the nethermost Hell. And thus all
narratives upon this topic have an interest profound; an interest,
nevertheless, which, through the sacred awe of the topic itself, very
properly and very peculiarly depends upon our conviction of the truth of the
matter narrated. What I have now to tell is of my own actual knowledge —
of my own positive and personal experience.

For several years I had been subject to attacks of the singular disorder

which physicians have agreed to term catalepsy, in default of a more
definitive title. Although both the immediate and the predisposing causes,
and even the actual diagnosis, of this disease are still mysterious, its
obvious and apparent character is sufficiently well understood. Its variations
seem to be chiefly of degree. Sometimes the patient lies, for a day only, or
even for a shorter period, in a species of exaggerated lethargy. He is
senseless and externally motionless; but the pulsation of the heart is still
faintly perceptible; some traces of warmth remain; a slight color lingers
within the centre of the cheek; and, upon application of a mirror to the lips,
we can detect a torpid, unequal, and vacillating action of the lungs. Then

again the duration of the trance is for weeks — even for months; while the
closest scrutiny, and the most rigorous medical tests, fail to establish any
material distinction between the state of the sufferer and what we conceive
of absolute death. Very usually he is saved from premature interment solely
by the knowledge of his friends that he has been previously subject to
catalepsy, by the consequent suspicion excited, and, above all, by the non-
appearance of decay. The advances of the malady are, luckily, gradual. The
first manifestations, although marked, are unequivocal. The fits grow
successively more and more distinctive, and endure each for a longer term
than the preceding. In this lies the principal security from inhumation. The
unfortunate whose first attack should be of the extreme character which is
occasionally seen, would almost inevitably be consigned alive to the tomb.

My own case differed in no important particular from those mentioned

in medical books. Sometimes, without any apparent cause, I sank, little by
little, into a condition of hemi-syncope, or half swoon; and, in this
condition, without pain, without ability to stir, or, strictly speaking, to think,
but with a dull lethargic consciousness of life and of the presence of those
who surrounded my bed, I remained, until the crisis of the disease restored
me, suddenly, to perfect sensation. At other times I was quickly and
impetuously smitten. I grew sick, and numb, and chilly, and dizzy, and so
fell prostrate at once. Then, for weeks, all was void, and black, and silent,
and Nothing became the universe. Total annihilation could be no more.
From these latter attacks I awoke, however, with a gradation slow in
proportion to the suddenness of the seizure. Just as the day dawns to the
friendless and houseless beggar who roams the streets throughout the long
desolate winter night — just so tardily — just so wearily — just so cheerily
came back the light of the Soul to me.

Apart from the tendency to trance, however, my general health appeared

to be good; nor could I perceive that it was at all affected by the one
prevalent malady — unless, indeed, an idiosyncrasy in my ordinary sleep
may be looked upon as superinduced. Upon awaking from slumber, I could
never gain, at once, thorough possession of my senses, and always
remained, for many minutes, in much bewilderment and perplexity; — the

mental faculties in general, but the memory in especial, being in a condition
of absolute abeyance.

In all that I endured there was no physical suffering but of moral

distress an infinitude. My fancy grew charnel, I talked “of worms, of tombs,
and epitaphs.” I was lost in reveries of death, and the idea of premature
burial held continual possession of my brain. The ghastly Danger to which I
was subjected haunted me day and night. In the former, the torture of
meditation was excessive — in the latter, supreme. When the grim Darkness
overspread the Earth, then, with every horror of thought, I shook — shook
as the quivering plumes upon the hearse. When Nature could endure
wakefulness no longer, it was with a struggle that I consented to sleep —
for I shuddered to reflect that, upon awaking, I might find myself the tenant
of a grave. And when, finally, I sank into slumber, it was only to rush at
once into a world of phantasms, above which, with vast, sable,
overshadowing wing, hovered, predominant, the one sepulchral Idea.

From the innumerable images of gloom which thus oppressed me in

dreams, I select for record but a solitary vision. Methought I was immersed
in a cataleptic trance of more than usual duration and profundity. Suddenly
there came an icy hand upon my forehead, and an impatient, gibbering
voice whispered the word “Arise!” within my ear.

I sat erect. The darkness was total. I could not see the figure of him who

had aroused me. I could call to mind neither the period at which I had fallen
into the trance, nor the locality in which I then lay. While I remained
motionless, and busied in endeavors to collect my thought, the cold hand
grasped me fiercely by the wrist, shaking it petulantly, while the gibbering
voice said again:

“Arise! did I not bid thee arise?”
“And who,” I demanded, “art thou?”
“I have no name in the regions which I inhabit,” replied the voice,

mournfully; “I was mortal, but am fiend. I was merciless, but am pitiful.
Thou dost feel that I shudder. — My teeth chatter as I speak, yet it is not
with the chilliness of the night — of the night without end. But this
hideousness is insufferable. How canst thou tranquilly sleep? I cannot rest

for the cry of these great agonies. These sights are more than I can bear. Get
thee up! Come with me into the outer Night, and let me unfold to thee the
graves. Is not this a spectacle of woe? — Behold!”

I looked; and the unseen figure, which still grasped me by the wrist, had

caused to be thrown open the graves of all mankind, and from each issued
the faint phosphoric radiance of decay, so that I could see into the innermost
recesses, and there view the shrouded bodies in their sad and solemn
slumbers with the worm. But alas! the real sleepers were fewer, by many
millions, than those who slumbered not at all; and there was a feeble
struggling; and there was a general sad unrest; and from out the depths of
the countless pits there came a melancholy rustling from the garments of
the buried. And of those who seemed tranquilly to repose, I saw that a vast
number had changed, in a greater or less degree, the rigid and uneasy
position in which they had originally been entombed. And the voice again
said to me as I gazed:

“Is it not — oh! is it not a pitiful sight?"— but, before I could find

words to reply, the figure had ceased to grasp my wrist, the phosphoric
lights expired, and the graves were closed with a sudden violence, while
from out them arose a tumult of despairing cries, saying again: “Is it not —
O, God, is it not a very pitiful sight?”

Phantasies such as these, presenting themselves at night, extended their

terrific influence far into my waking hours. My nerves became thoroughly
unstrung, and I fell a prey to perpetual horror. I hesitated to ride, or to walk,
or to indulge in any exercise that would carry me from home. In fact, I no
longer dared trust myself out of the immediate presence of those who were
aware of my proneness to catalepsy, lest, falling into one of my usual fits, I
should be buried before my real condition could be ascertained. I doubted
the care, the fidelity of my dearest friends. I dreaded that, in some trance of
more than customary duration, they might be prevailed upon to regard me
as irrecoverable. I even went so far as to fear that, as I occasioned much
trouble, they might be glad to consider any very protracted attack as
sufficient excuse for getting rid of me altogether. It was in vain they
endeavored to reassure me by the most solemn promises. I exacted the most

sacred oaths, that under no circumstances they would bury me until
decomposition had so materially advanced as to render farther preservation
impossible. And, even then, my mortal terrors would listen to no reason —
would accept no consolation. I entered into a series of elaborate
precautions. Among other things, I had the family vault so remodelled as to
admit of being readily opened from within. The slightest pressure upon a
long lever that extended far into the tomb would cause the iron portal to fly
back. There were arrangements also for the free admission of air and light,
and convenient receptacles for food and water, within immediate reach of
the coffin intended for my reception. This coffin was warmly and softly
padded, and was provided with a lid, fashioned upon the principle of the
vault-door, with the addition of springs so contrived that the feeblest
movement of the body would be sufficient to set it at liberty. Besides all
this, there was suspended from the roof of the tomb, a large bell, the rope of
which, it was designed, should extend through a hole in the coffin, and so
be fastened to one of the hands of the corpse. But, alas? what avails the
vigilance against the Destiny of man? Not even these well-contrived
securities sufficed to save from the uttermost agonies of living inhumation,
a wretch to these agonies foredoomed!

There arrived an epoch — as often before there had arrived — in which

I found myself emerging from total unconsciousness into the first feeble
and indefinite sense of existence. Slowly — with a tortoise gradation —
approached the faint gray dawn of the psychal day. A torpid uneasiness. An
apathetic endurance of dull pain. No care — no hope — no effort. Then,
after a long interval, a ringing in the ears; then, after a lapse still longer, a
prickling or tingling sensation in the extremities; then a seemingly eternal
period of pleasurable quiescence, during which the awakening feelings are
struggling into thought; then a brief re-sinking into non-entity; then a
sudden recovery. At length the slight quivering of an eyelid, and
immediately thereupon, an electric shock of a terror, deadly and indefinite,
which sends the blood in torrents from the temples to the heart. And now
the first positive effort to think. And now the first endeavor to remember.
And now a partial and evanescent success. And now the memory has so far

regained its dominion, that, in some measure, I am cognizant of my state. I
feel that I am not awaking from ordinary sleep. I recollect that I have been
subject to catalepsy. And now, at last, as if by the rush of an ocean, my
shuddering spirit is overwhelmed by the one grim Danger — by the one
spectral and ever-prevalent idea.

For some minutes after this fancy possessed me, I remained without

motion. And why? I could not summon courage to move. I dared not make
the effort which was to satisfy me of my fate — and yet there was
something at my heart which whispered me it was sure. Despair — such as
no other species of wretchedness ever calls into being — despair alone
urged me, after long irresolution, to uplift the heavy lids of my eyes. I
uplifted them. It was dark — all dark. I knew that the fit was over. I knew
that the crisis of my disorder had long passed. I knew that I had now fully
recovered the use of my visual faculties — and yet it was dark — all dark
— the intense and utter raylessness of the Night that endureth for evermore.

I endeavored to shriek-, and my lips and my parched tongue moved

convulsively together in the attempt — but no voice issued from the
cavernous lungs, which oppressed as if by the weight of some incumbent
mountain, gasped and palpitated, with the heart, at every elaborate and
struggling inspiration.

they were bound up, as is usual with the dead. I felt, too, that I lay upon
some hard substance, and by something similar my sides were, also, closely
compressed. So far, I had not ventured to stir any of my limbs — but now I
violently threw up my arms, which had been lying at length, with the wrists
crossed. They struck a solid wooden substance, which extended above my
person at an elevation of not more than six inches from my face. I could no
longer doubt that I reposed within a coffin at last.

And now, amid all my infinite miseries, came sweetly the cherub Hope

— for I thought of my precautions. I writhed, and made spasmodic
exertions to force open the lid: it would not move. I felt my wrists for the
bell-rope: it was not to be found. And now the Comforter fled for ever, and
a still sterner Despair reigned triumphant; for I could not help perceiving

the absence of the paddings which I had so carefully prepared — and then,
too, there came suddenly to my nostrils the strong peculiar odor of moist
earth. The conclusion was irresistible. I was not within the vault. I had
fallen into a trance while absent from home-while among strangers —
when, or how, I could not remember — and it was they who had buried me
as a dog — nailed up in some common coffin — and thrust deep, deep, and
for ever, into some ordinary and nameless grave.

As this awful conviction forced itself, thus, into the innermost chambers

of my soul, I once again struggled to cry aloud. And in this second
endeavor I succeeded. A long, wild, and continuous shriek, or yell of agony,
resounded through the realms of the subterranean Night.

“Hillo! hillo, there!” said a gruff voice, in reply.
“What the devil’s the matter now!” said a second.
“Get out o’ that!” said a third.
“What do you mean by yowling in that ere kind of style, like a

cattymount?” said a fourth; and hereupon I was seized and shaken without
ceremony, for several minutes, by a junto of very rough-looking
individuals. They did not arouse me from my slumber — for I was wide
awake when I screamed — but they restored me to the full possession of
my memory.

friend, I had proceeded, upon a gunning expedition, some miles down the
banks of the James River. Night approached, and we were overtaken by a
storm. The cabin of a small sloop lying at anchor in the stream, and laden
with garden mould, afforded us the only available shelter. We made the best
of it, and passed the night on board. I slept in one of the only two berths in
the vessel — and the berths of a sloop of sixty or twenty tons need scarcely
be described. That which I occupied had no bedding of any kind. Its
extreme width was eighteen inches. The distance of its bottom from the
deck overhead was precisely the same. I found it a matter of exceeding
difficulty to squeeze myself in. Nevertheless, I slept soundly, and the whole
of my vision — for it was no dream, and no nightmare — arose naturally
from the circumstances of my position — from my ordinary bias of thought

— and from the difficulty, to which I have alluded, of collecting my senses,
and especially of regaining my memory, for a long time after awaking from
slumber. The men who shook me were the crew of the sloop, and some
laborers engaged to unload it. From the load itself came the earthly smell.
The bandage about the jaws was a silk handkerchief in which I had bound
up my head, in default of my customary nightcap.

The tortures endured, however, were indubitably quite equal for the

time, to those of actual sepulture. They were fearfully — they were
inconceivably hideous; but out of Evil proceeded Good; for their very
excess wrought in my spirit an inevitable revulsion. My soul acquired tone
— acquired temper. I went abroad. I took vigorous exercise. I breathed the
free air of Heaven. I thought upon other subjects than Death. I discarded my
medical books. “Buchan” I burned. I read no “Night Thoughts”— no
fustian about churchyards — no bugaboo tales — such as this. In short, I
became a new man, and lived a man’s life. From that memorable night, I
dismissed forever my charnel apprehensions, and with them vanished the
cataleptic disorder, of which, perhaps, they had been less the consequence
than the cause.

There are moments when, even to the sober eye of Reason, the world of

our sad Humanity may assume the semblance of a Hell — but the
imagination of man is no Carathis, to explore with impunity its every
cavern. Alas! the grim legion of sepulchral terrors cannot be regarded as
altogether fanciful — but, like the Demons in whose company Afrasiab
made his voyage down the Oxus, they must sleep, or they will devour us —
they must be suffered to slumber, or we perish.

OceanofPDF.com

The Masque of the Red Death

The “Red Death” had long devastated the country. No pestilence had ever
been so fatal, or so hideous. Blood was its Avatar and its seal — the redness
and the horror of blood. There were sharp pains, and sudden dizziness, and
then profuse bleeding at the pores, with dissolution. The scarlet stains upon
the body and especially upon the face of the victim, were the pest ban
which shut him out from the aid and from the sympathy of his fellow-men.
And the whole seizure, progress and termination of the disease, were the
incidents of half an hour.

But the Prince Prospero was happy and dauntless and sagacious. When

his dominions were half depopulated, he summoned to his presence a
thousand hale and light-hearted friends from among the knights and dames
of his court, and with these retired to the deep seclusion of one of his
castellated abbeys. This was an extensive and magnificent structure, the
creation of the prince’s own eccentric yet august taste. A strong and lofty
wall girdled it in. This wall had gates of iron. The courtiers, having entered,
brought furnaces and massy hammers and welded the bolts. They resolved
to leave means neither of ingress or egress to the sudden impulses of
despair or of frenzy from within. The abbey was amply provisioned. With
such precautions the courtiers might bid defiance to contagion. The external
world could take care of itself. In the meantime it was folly to grieve, or to
think. The prince had provided all the appliances of pleasure. There were
buffoons, there were improvisatori, there were ballet-dancers, there were
musicians, there was Beauty, there was wine. All these and security were
within. Without was the “Red Death.”

It was toward the close of the fifth or sixth month of his seclusion, and

while the pestilence raged most furiously abroad, that the Prince Prospero
entertained his thousand friends at a masked ball of the most unusual
magnificence.

rooms in which it was held. There were seven — an imperial suite. In many
palaces, however, such suites form a long and straight vista, while the
folding doors slide back nearly to the walls on either hand, so that the view
of the whole extent is scarcely impeded. Here the case was very different;
as might have been expected from the duke’s love of the bizarre. The
apartments were so irregularly disposed that the vision embraced but little
more than one at a time. There was a sharp turn at every twenty or thirty
yards, and at each turn a novel effect. To the right and left, in the middle of
each wall, a tall and narrow Gothic window looked out upon a closed
corridor which pursued the windings of the suite. These windows were of
stained glass whose color varied in accordance with the prevailing hue of
the decorations of the chamber into which it opened. That at the eastern
extremity was hung, for example, in blue — and vividly blue were its
windows. The second chamber was purple in its ornaments and tapestries,
and here the panes were purple. The third was green throughout, and so
were the casements. The fourth was furnished and lighted with orange —
the fifth with white — the sixth with violet. The seventh apartment was
closely shrouded in black velvet tapestries that hung all over the ceiling and
down the walls, falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same material
and hue. But in this chamber only, the color of the windows failed to
correspond with the decorations. The panes here were scarlet — a deep
blood color. Now in no one of the seven apartments was there any lamp or
candelabrum, amid the profusion of golden ornaments that lay scattered to
and fro or depended from the roof. There was no light of any kind
emanating from lamp or candle within the suite of chambers. But in the
corridors that followed the suite, there stood, opposite to each window, a
heavy tripod, bearing a brazier of fire that protected its rays through the
tinted glass and so glaringly illumined the room. And thus were produced a
multitude of gaudy and fantastic appearances. But in the western or black
chamber the effect of the fire-light that streamed upon the dark hangings
through the blood-tinted panes, was ghastly in the extreme, and produced so

wild a look upon the countenances of those who entered, that there were
few of the company bold enough to set foot within its precincts at all.

It was in this apartment, also, that there stood against the western wall, a

gigantic clock of ebony. Its pendulum swung to and fro with a dull, heavy,
monotonous clang; and when the minute-hand made the circuit of the face,
and the hour was to be stricken, there came from the brazen lungs of the
clock a sound which was clear and loud and deep and exceedingly musical,
but of so peculiar a note and emphasis that, at each lapse of an hour, the
musicians of the orchestra were constrained to pause, momentarily, in their
performance, to hearken to the sound; and thus the waltzers perforce ceased
their evolutions; and there was a brief disconcert of the whole gay
company; and, while the chimes of the clock yet rang, it was observed that
the giddiest grew pale, and the more aged and sedate passed their hands
over their brows as if in confused reverie or meditation. But when the
echoes had fully ceased, a light laughter at once pervaded the assembly; the
musicians looked at each other and smiled as if at their own nervousness
and folly, and made whispering vows, each to the other, that the next
chiming of the clock should produce in them no similar emotion; and then,
after the lapse of sixty minutes, (which embrace three thousand and six
hundred seconds of the Time that flies,) there came yet another chiming of
the clock, and then were the same disconcert and tremulousness and
meditation as before.

tastes of the duke were peculiar. He had a fine eye for colors and effects. He
disregarded the decora of mere fashion. His plans were bold and fiery, and
his conceptions glowed with barbaric lustre. There are some who would
have thought him mad. His followers felt that he was not. It was necessary
to hear and see and touch him to be sure that he was not.

He had directed, in great part, the moveable embellishments of the

seven chambers, upon occasion of this great fete; and it was his own
guiding taste which had given character to the masqueraders. Be sure they
were grotesque. There were much glare and glitter and piquancy and
phantasm — much of what has been since seen in “Hernani.” There were
arabesque figures with unsuited limbs and appointments. There were
delirious fancies such as the madman fashions. There was much of the

beautiful, much of the wanton, much of the bizarre, something of the
terrible, and not a little of that which might have excited disgust. To and fro
in the seven chambers there stalked, in fact, a multitude of dreams. And
these — the dreams — writhed in and about, taking hue from the rooms,
and causing the wild music of the orchestra to seem as the echo of their
steps. And, anon, there strikes the ebony clock which stands in the hall of
the velvet. And then, for a moment, all is still, and all is silent save the
voice of the clock. The dreams are stiff-frozen as they stand. But the echoes
of the chime die away — they have endured but an instant — and a light,
half-subdued laughter floats after them as they depart. And now again the
music swells, and the dreams live, and writhe to and fro more merrily than
ever, taking hue from the many-tinted windows through which stream the
rays from the tripods. But to the chamber which lies most westwardly of the
seven, there are now none of the maskers who venture; for the night is
waning away; and there flows a ruddier light through the blood-colored
panes; and the blackness of the sable drapery appals; and to him whose foot
falls upon the sable carpet, there comes from the near clock of ebony a
muffled peal more solemnly emphatic than any which reaches their ears
who indulge in the more remote gaieties of the other apartments.

But these other apartments were densely crowded, and in them beat

feverishly the heart of life. And the revel went whirlingly on, until at length
there commenced the sounding of midnight upon the clock. And then the
music ceased, as I have told; and the evolutions of the waltzers were
quieted; and there was an uneasy cessation of all things as before. But now
there were twelve strokes to be sounded by the bell of the clock; and thus it
happened, perhaps, that more of thought crept, with more of time, into the
meditations of the thoughtful among those who revelled. And thus, too, it
happened, perhaps, that before the last echoes of the last chime had utterly
sunk into silence, there were many individuals in the crowd who had found
leisure to become aware of the presence of a masked figure which had
arrested the attention of no single individual before. And the rumor of this
new presence having spread itself whisperingly around, there arose at
length from the whole company a buzz, or murmur, expressive of

disapprobation and surprise — then, finally, of terror, of horror, and of
disgust.

In an assembly of phantasms such as I have painted, it may well be

supposed that no ordinary appearance could have excited such sensation. In
truth the masquerade license of the night was nearly unlimited; but the
figure in question had out-Heroded Herod, and gone beyond the bounds of
even the prince’s indefinite decorum. There are chords in the hearts of the
most reckless which cannot be touched without emotion. Even with the
utterly lost, to whom life and death are equally jests, there are matters of
which no jest can be made. The whole company, indeed, seemed now
deeply to feel that in the costume and bearing of the stranger neither wit nor
propriety existed. The figure was tall and gaunt, and shrouded from head to
foot in the habiliments of the grave. The mask which concealed the visage
was made so nearly to resemble the countenance of a stiffened corpse that
the closest scrutiny must have had difficulty in detecting the cheat. And yet
all this might have been endured, if not approved, by the mad revellers
around. But the mummer had gone so far as to assume the type of the Red
Death. His vesture was dabbled in blood — and his broad brow, with all the
features of the face, was besprinkled with the scarlet horror.

When the eyes of Prince Prospero fell upon this spectral image (which

with a slow and solemn movement, as if more fully to sustain its role,
stalked to and fro among the waltzers) he was seen to be convulsed, in the
first moment with a strong shudder either of terror or distaste; but, in the
next, his brow reddened with rage.

“Who dares?” he demanded hoarsely of the courtiers who stood near

him —“who dares insult us with this blasphemous mockery? Seize him and
unmask him — that we may know whom we have to hang at sunrise, from
the battlements!”

It was in the eastern or blue chamber in which stood the Prince Prospero

as he uttered these words. They rang throughout the seven rooms loudly and

clearly — for the prince was a bold and robust man, and the music had
become hushed at the waving of his hand.

courtiers by his side. At first, as he spoke, there was a slight rushing
movement of this group in the direction of the intruder, who at the moment
was also near at hand, and now, with deliberate and stately step, made
closer approach to the speaker. But from a certain nameless awe with which
the mad assumptions of the mummer had inspired the whole party, there
were found none who put forth hand to seize him; so that, unimpeded, he
passed within a yard of the prince’s person; and, while the vast assembly, as
if with one impulse, shrank from the centres of the rooms to the walls, he
made his way uninterruptedly, but with the same solemn and measured step
which had distinguished him from the first, through the blue chamber to the
purple — through the purple to the green — through the green to the orange
— through this again to the white — and even thence to the violet, ere a
decided movement had been made to arrest him. It was then, however, that
the Prince Prospero, maddening with rage and the shame of his own
momentary cowardice, rushed hurriedly through the six chambers, while
none followed him on account of a deadly terror that had seized upon all.
He bore aloft a drawn dagger, and had approached, in rapid impetuosity, to
within three or four feet of the retreating figure, when the latter, having
attained the extremity of the velvet apartment, turned suddenly and
confronted his pursuer. There was a sharp cry — and the dagger dropped
gleaming upon the sable carpet, upon which, instantly afterwards, fell
prostrate in death the Prince Prospero. Then, summoning the wild courage
of despair, a throng of the revellers at once threw themselves into the black
apartment, and, seizing the mummer, whose tall figure stood erect and
motionless within the shadow of the ebony clock, gasped in unutterable
horror at finding the grave-cerements and corpse-like mask which they
handled with so violent a rudeness, untenanted by any tangible form.

And now was acknowledged the presence of the Red Death. He had

come like a thief in the night. And one by one dropped the revellers in the
blood-bedewed halls of their revel, and died each in the despairing posture
of his fall. And the life of the ebony clock went out with that of the last of
the gay. And the flames of the tripods expired. And Darkness and Decay
and the Red Death held illimitable dominion over all.

OceanofPDF.com

The Devil in the Belfry

What o’clock is it?

Old Saying.

Everybody knows, in a general way, that the finest place in the world is —
or, alas, was — the Dutch borough of Vondervotteimittiss. Yet as it lies
some distance from any of the main roads, being in a somewhat out-of-the-
way situation, there are perhaps very few of my readers who have ever paid
it a visit. For the benefit of those who have not, therefore, it will be only
proper that I should enter into some account of it. And this is indeed the
more necessary, as with the hope of enlisting public sympathy in behalf of
the inhabitants, I design here to give a history of the calamitous events
which have so lately occurred within its limits. No one who knows me will
doubt that the duty thus self-imposed will be executed to the best of my
ability, with all that rigid impartiality, all that cautious examination into
facts, and diligent collation of authorities, which should ever distinguish
him who aspires to the title of historian.

By the united aid of medals, manuscripts, and inscriptions, I am enabled

to say, positively, that the borough of Vondervotteimittiss has existed, from
its origin, in precisely the same condition which it at present preserves. Of
the date of this origin, however, I grieve that I can only speak with that
species of indefinite definiteness which mathematicians are, at times, forced
to put up with in certain algebraic formulae. The date, I may thus say, in
regard to the remoteness of its antiquity, cannot be less than any assignable
quantity whatsoever.

Touching the derivation of the name Vondervotteimittiss, I confess

myself, with sorrow, equally at fault. Among a multitude of opinions upon
this delicate point — some acute, some learned, some sufficiently the
reverse — I am able to select nothing which ought to be considered

satisfactory. Perhaps the idea of Grogswigg — nearly coincident with that
of Kroutaplenttey — is to be cautiously preferred. — It runs:—
Vondervotteimittis — Vonder, lege Donder — Votteimittis, quasi und
Bleitziz — Bleitziz obsol:— pro Blitzen.” This derivative, to say the truth,
is still countenanced by some traces of the electric fluid evident on the
summit of the steeple of the House of the Town-Council. I do not choose,
however, to commit myself on a theme of such importance, and must refer
the reader desirous of information to the “Oratiunculae de Rebus Praeter-
Veteris,” of Dundergutz. See, also, Blunderbuzzard “De Derivationibus,”
pp. 27 to 5010, Folio, Gothic edit., Red and Black character, Catch-word
and No Cypher; wherein consult, also, marginal notes in the autograph of
Stuffundpuff, with the Sub-Commentaries of Gruntundguzzell.

Notwithstanding the obscurity which thus envelops the date of the

foundation of Vondervotteimittis, and the derivation of its name, there can
be no doubt, as I said before, that it has always existed as we find it at this
epoch. The oldest man in the borough can remember not the slightest
difference in the appearance of any portion of it; and, indeed, the very
suggestion of such a possibility is considered an insult. The site of the
village is in a perfectly circular valley, about a quarter of a mile in
circumference, and entirely surrounded by gentle hills, over whose summit
the people have never yet ventured to pass. For this they assign the very
good reason that they do not believe there is anything at all on the other
side.

Round the skirts of the valley (which is quite level, and paved

throughout with flat tiles), extends a continuous row of sixty little houses.
These, having their backs on the hills, must look, of course, to the centre of
the plain, which is just sixty yards from the front door of each dwelling.
Every house has a small garden before it, with a circular path, a sun-dial,
and twenty-four cabbages. The buildings themselves are so precisely alike,
that one can in no manner be distinguished from the other. Owing to the
vast antiquity, the style of architecture is somewhat odd, but it is not for that
reason the less strikingly picturesque. They are fashioned of hard-burned
little bricks, red, with black ends, so that the walls look like a chess-board

upon a great scale. The gables are turned to the front, and there are cornices,
as big as all the rest of the house, over the eaves and over the main doors.
The windows are narrow and deep, with very tiny panes and a great deal of
sash. On the roof is a vast quantity of tiles with long curly ears. The
woodwork, throughout, is of a dark hue and there is much carving about it,
with but a trifling variety of pattern for, time out of mind, the carvers of
Vondervotteimittiss have never been able to carve more than two objects —
a time-piece and a cabbage. But these they do exceedingly well, and
intersperse them, with singular ingenuity, wherever they find room for the
chisel.

The dwellings are as much alike inside as out, and the furniture is all

upon one plan. The floors are of square tiles, the chairs and tables of black-
looking wood with thin crooked legs and puppy feet. The mantelpieces are
wide and high, and have not only time-pieces and cabbages sculptured over
the front, but a real time-piece, which makes a prodigious ticking, on the
top in the middle, with a flower-pot containing a cabbage standing on each
extremity by way of outrider. Between each cabbage and the time-piece,
again, is a little China man having a large stomach with a great round hole
in it, through which is seen the dial-plate of a watch.

The fireplaces are large and deep, with fierce crooked-looking fire-dogs.

There is constantly a rousing fire, and a huge pot over it, full of sauer-kraut
and pork, to which the good woman of the house is always busy in
attending. She is a little fat old lady, with blue eyes and a red face, and
wears a huge cap like a sugar-loaf, ornamented with purple and yellow
ribbons. Her dress is of orange-colored linsey-woolsey, made very full
behind and very short in the waist — and indeed very short in other
respects, not reaching below the middle of her leg. This is somewhat thick,
and so are her ankles, but she has a fine pair of green stockings to cover
them. Her shoes — of pink leather — are fastened each with a bunch of
yellow ribbons puckered up in the shape of a cabbage. In her left hand she
has a little heavy Dutch watch; in her right she wields a ladle for the
sauerkraut and pork. By her side there stands a fat tabby cat, with a gilt toy-

repeater tied to its tail, which “the boys” have there fastened by way of a
quiz.

pig. They are each two feet in height. They have three-cornered cocked
hats, purple waistcoats reaching down to their thighs, buckskin knee-
breeches, red stockings, heavy shoes with big silver buckles, long surtout
coats with large buttons of mother-of-pearl. Each, too, has a pipe in his
mouth, and a little dumpy watch in his right hand. He takes a puff and a
look, and then a look and a puff. The pig — which is corpulent and lazy —
is occupied now in picking up the stray leaves that fall from the cabbages,
and now in giving a kick behind at the gilt repeater, which the urchins have
also tied to his tail in order to make him look as handsome as the cat.

Right at the front door, in a high-backed leather-bottomed armed chair,

with crooked legs and puppy feet like the tables, is seated the old man of
the house himself. He is an exceedingly puffy little old gentleman, with big
circular eyes and a huge double chin. His dress resembles that of the boys
— and I need say nothing farther about it. All the difference is, that his pipe
is somewhat bigger than theirs and he can make a greater smoke. Like
them, he has a watch, but he carries his watch in his pocket. To say the
truth, he has something of more importance than a watch to attend to — and
what that is, I shall presently explain. He sits with his right leg upon his left
knee, wears a grave countenance, and always keeps one of his eyes, at least,
resolutely bent upon a certain remarkable object in the centre of the plain.

This object is situated in the steeple of the House of the Town Council.

The Town Council are all very little, round, oily, intelligent men, with big
saucer eyes and fat double chins, and have their coats much longer and their
shoe-buckles 
much 
bigger 
than 
the 
ordinary 
inhabitants 
of

Vondervotteimittiss. Since my sojourn in the borough, they have had several
special meetings, and have adopted these three important resolutions:

“That it is wrong to alter the good old course of things:”
“That there is nothing tolerable out of Vondervotteimittiss:” and —
“That we will stick by our clocks and our cabbages.”

is the belfry, where exists, and has existed time out of mind, the pride and
wonder of the village — the great clock of the borough of
Vondervotteimittiss. And this is the object to which the eyes of the old
gentlemen are turned who sit in the leather-bottomed arm-chairs.

The great clock has seven faces — one in each of the seven sides of the

steeple — so that it can be readily seen from all quarters. Its faces are large
and white, and its hands heavy and black. There is a belfry-man whose sole
duty is to attend to it; but this duty is the most perfect of sinecures — for
the clock of Vondervotteimittis was never yet known to have anything the
matter with it. Until lately, the bare supposition of such a thing was
considered heretical. From the remotest period of antiquity to which the
archives have reference, the hours have been regularly struck by the big
bell. And, indeed the case was just the same with all the other clocks and
watches in the borough. Never was such a place for keeping the true time.
When the large clapper thought proper to say “Twelve o’clock!” all its
obedient followers opened their throats simultaneously, and responded like
a very echo. In short, the good burghers were fond of their sauer-kraut, but
then they were proud of their clocks.

All people who hold sinecure offices are held in more or less respect,

and as the belfry — man of Vondervotteimittiss has the most perfect of
sinecures, he is the most perfectly respected of any man in the world. He is
the chief dignitary of the borough, and the very pigs look up to him with a
sentiment of reverence. His coat-tail is very far longer — his pipe, his shoe
— buckles, his eyes, and his stomach, very far bigger — than those of any
other old gentleman in the village; and as to his chin, it is not only double,
but triple.

I have thus painted the happy estate of Vondervotteimittiss: alas, that so

fair a picture should ever experience a reverse!

There has been long a saying among the wisest inhabitants, that “no

good can come from over the hills”; and it really seemed that the words had
in them something of the spirit of prophecy. It wanted five minutes of noon,
on the day before yesterday, when there appeared a very odd-looking object

on the summit of the ridge of the eastward. Such an occurrence, of course,
attracted universal attention, and every little old gentleman who sat in a
leather-bottomed arm-chair turned one of his eyes with a stare of dismay
upon the phenomenon, still keeping the other upon the clock in the steeple.

By the time that it wanted only three minutes to noon, the droll object in

question was perceived to be a very diminutive foreign-looking young man.
He descended the hills at a great rate, so that every body had soon a good
look at him. He was really the most finicky little personage that had ever
been seen in Vondervotteimittiss. His countenance was of a dark snuff-
color, and he had a long hooked nose, pea eyes, a wide mouth, and an
excellent set of teeth, which latter he seemed anxious of displaying, as he
was grinning from ear to ear. What with mustachios and whiskers, there
was none of the rest of his face to be seen. His head was uncovered, and his
hair neatly done up in papillotes. His dress was a tight-fitting swallow-
tailed black coat (from one of whose pockets dangled a vast length of white
handkerchief), black kerseymere knee-breeches, black stockings, and
stumpy-looking pumps, with huge bunches of black satin ribbon for bows.
Under one arm he carried a huge chapeau-de-bras, and under the other a
fiddle nearly five times as big as himself. In his left hand was a gold snuff-
box, from which, as he capered down the hill, cutting all manner of
fantastic steps, he took snuff incessantly with an air of the greatest possible
self-satisfaction. God bless me! — here was a sight for the honest burghers
of Vondervotteimittiss!

To speak plainly, the fellow had, in spite of his grinning, an audacious

and sinister kind of face; and as he curvetted right into the village, the old
stumpy appearance of his pumps excited no little suspicion; and many a
burgher who beheld him that day would have given a trifle for a peep
beneath the white cambric handkerchief which hung so obtrusively from the
pocket of his swallow-tailed coat. But what mainly occasioned a righteous
indignation was, that the scoundrelly popinjay, while he cut a fandango
here, and a whirligig there, did not seem to have the remotest idea in the
world of such a thing as keeping time in his steps.

their eyes thoroughly open, when, just as it wanted half a minute of noon,
the rascal bounced, as I say, right into the midst of them; gave a chassez
here, and a balancez there; and then, after a pirouette and a pas-de-zephyr,
pigeon-winged himself right up into the belfry of the House of the Town
Council, where the wonder-stricken belfry-man sat smoking in a state of
dignity and dismay. But the little chap seized him at once by the nose; gave
it a swing and a pull; clapped the big chapeau de-bras upon his head;
knocked it down over his eyes and mouth; and then, lifting up the big
fiddle, beat him with it so long and so soundly, that what with the belfry-
man being so fat, and the fiddle being so hollow, you would have sworn
that there was a regiment of double-bass drummers all beating the devil’s
tattoo up in the belfry of the steeple of Vondervotteimittiss.

There is no knowing to what desperate act of vengeance this

unprincipled attack might have aroused the inhabitants, but for the
important fact that it now wanted only half a second of noon. The bell was
about to strike, and it was a matter of absolute and pre-eminent necessity
that every body should look well at his watch. It was evident, however, that
just at this moment the fellow in the steeple was doing something that he
had no business to do with the clock. But as it now began to strike, nobody
had any time to attend to his manoeuvres, for they had all to count the
strokes of the bell as it sounded.

“One!” said the clock.
“Von!” echoed every little old gentleman in every leather-bottomed

arm-chair in Vondervotteimittiss. “Von!” said his watch also; “von!” said

the watch of his vrow; and “von!” said the watches of the boys, and the
little gilt repeaters on the tails of the cat and pig.

“Two!” continued the big bell; and
“Doo!” repeated all the repeaters.
“Three! Four! Five! Six! Seven! Eight! Nine! Ten!” said the bell.
“Dree! Vour! Fibe! Sax! Seben! Aight! Noin! Den!” answered the

others.

“Eleven!” said the big one.
“Eleben!” assented the little ones.
“Twelve!” said the bell.
“Dvelf!” they replied perfectly satisfied, and dropping their voices.
“Und dvelf it is!” said all the little old gentlemen, putting up their

watches. But the big bell had not done with them yet.

“Thirteen!” said he.
“Der Teufel!” gasped the little old gentlemen, turning pale, dropping

their pipes, and putting down all their right legs from over their left knees.

“Der Teufel!” groaned they, “Dirteen! Dirteen!! — Mein Gott, it is

Dirteen o’clock!!”

Why attempt to describe the terrible scene which ensued? All

Vondervotteimittiss flew at once into a lamentable state of uproar.

“Vot is cum’d to mein pelly?” roared all the boys —“I’ve been ongry

for dis hour!”

“Vot is com’d to mein kraut?” screamed all the vrows, “It has been done

to rags for this hour!”

“Vot is cum’d to mein pipe?” swore all the little old gentlemen, “Donder

and Blitzen; it has been smoked out for dis hour!"— and they filled them up
again in a great rage, and sinking back in their arm-chairs, puffed away so
fast and so fiercely that the whole valley was immediately filled with
impenetrable smoke.

Meantime the cabbages all turned very red in the face, and it seemed as

if old Nick himself had taken possession of every thing in the shape of a
timepiece. The clocks carved upon the furniture took to dancing as if
bewitched, while those upon the mantel-pieces could scarcely contain

themselves for fury, and kept such a continual striking of thirteen, and such
a frisking and wriggling of their pendulums as was really horrible to see.
But, worse than all, neither the cats nor the pigs could put up any longer
with the behavior of the little repeaters tied to their tails, and resented it by
scampering all over the place, scratching and poking, and squeaking and
screeching, and caterwauling and squalling, and flying into the faces, and
running under the petticoats of the people, and creating altogether the most
abominable din and confusion which it is possible for a reasonable person
to conceive. And to make matters still more distressing, the rascally little
scape-grace in the steeple was evidently exerting himself to the utmost.
Every now and then one might catch a glimpse of the scoundrel through the
smoke. There he sat in the belfry upon the belfry-man, who was lying flat
upon his back. In his teeth the villain held the bell-rope, which he kept
jerking about with his head, raising such a clatter that my ears ring again
even to think of it. On his lap lay the big fiddle, at which he was scraping,
out of all time and tune, with both hands, making a great show, the
nincompoop! of playing “Judy O’Flannagan and Paddy O’Rafferty.”

Affairs being thus miserably situated, I left the place in disgust, and now

appeal for aid to all lovers of correct time and fine kraut. Let us proceed in a
body to the borough, and restore the ancient order of things in
Vondervotteimittiss by ejecting that little fellow from the steeple.

OceanofPDF.com

The Cask of Amontillado

The thousand injuries of Fortunato I had borne as I best could, but when he
ventured upon insult I vowed revenge. You, who so well know the nature of
my soul, will not suppose, however, that gave utterance to a threat. At
length I would be avenged; this was a point definitely, settled — but the
very definitiveness with which it was resolved precluded the idea of risk. I
must not only punish but punish with impunity. A wrong is unredressed
when retribution overtakes its redresser. It is equally unredressed when the
avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done the wrong.

It must be understood that neither by word nor deed had I given

Fortunato cause to doubt my good will. I continued, as was my in to smile
in his face, and he did not perceive that my to smile now was at the thought
of his immolation.

He had a weak point — this Fortunato — although in other regards he

was a man to be respected and even feared. He prided himself on his
connoisseurship in wine. Few Italians have the true virtuoso spirit. For the
most part their enthusiasm is adopted to suit the time and opportunity, to
practise imposture upon the British and Austrian millionaires. In painting
and gemmary, Fortunato, like his countrymen, was a quack, but in the
matter of old wines he was sincere. In this respect I did not differ from him
materially; — I was skilful in the Italian vintages myself, and bought
largely whenever I could.

It was about dusk, one evening during the supreme madness of the

carnival season, that I encountered my friend. He accosted me with
excessive warmth, for he had been drinking much. The man wore motley.
He had on a tight-fitting parti-striped dress, and his head was surmounted
by the conical cap and bells. I was so pleased to see him that I thought I
should never have done wringing his hand.

I said to him —“My dear Fortunato, you are luckily met. How

remarkably well you are looking to-day. But I have received a pipe of what
passes for Amontillado, and I have my doubts.”

“How?” said he. “Amontillado, A pipe? Impossible! And in the middle

of the carnival!”

Amontillado price without consulting you in the matter. You were not to be
found, and I was fearful of losing a bargain.”

“Amontillado!”
“I have my doubts.”
“Amontillado!”
“And I must satisfy them.”
“Amontillado!”
“As you are engaged, I am on my way to Luchresi. If any one has a

critical turn it is he. He will tell me —”

“Luchresi cannot tell Amontillado from Sherry.”
“And yet some fools will have it that his taste is a match for your own.
“Come, let us go.”
“Whither?”
“To your vaults.”
“My friend, no; I will not impose upon your good nature. I perceive you

have an engagement. Luchresi —”

“I have no engagement; — come.”
“My friend, no. It is not the engagement, but the severe cold with which

I perceive you are afflicted. The vaults are insufferably damp. They are
encrusted with nitre.”

“Let us go, nevertheless. The cold is merely nothing. Amontillado! You

have been imposed upon. And as for Luchresi, he cannot distinguish Sherry
from Amontillado.”

Thus speaking, Fortunato possessed himself of my arm; and putting on

a mask of black silk and drawing a roquelaire closely about my person, I
suffered him to hurry me to my palazzo.

in honour of the time. I had told them that I should not return until the
morning, and had given them explicit orders not to stir from the house.
These orders were sufficient, I well knew, to insure their immediate
disappearance, one and all, as soon as my back was turned.

bowed him through several suites of rooms to the archway that led into the
vaults. I passed down a long and winding staircase, requesting him to be
cautious as he followed. We came at length to the foot of the descent, and
stood together upon the damp ground of the catacombs of the Montresors.

The gait of my friend was unsteady, and the bells upon his cap jingled

as he strode.

“The pipe,” he said.
“It is farther on,” said I; “but observe the white web-work which gleams

from these cavern walls.”

He turned towards me, and looked into my eves with two filmy orbs

that distilled the rheum of intoxication.

“Nitre?” he asked, at length.
“Nitre,” I replied. “How long have you had that cough?”
“Ugh! ugh! ugh! — ugh! ugh! ugh! — ugh! ugh! ugh! — ugh! ugh!

ugh! — ugh! ugh! ugh!”

My poor friend found it impossible to reply for many minutes.
“It is nothing,” he said, at last.
“Come,” I said, with decision, “we will go back; your health is precious.

You are rich, respected, admired, beloved; you are happy, as once I was.
You are a man to be missed. For me it is no matter. We will go back; you
will be ill, and I cannot be responsible. Besides, there is Luchresi —”

“Enough,” he said; “the cough’s a mere nothing; it will not kill me. I

shall not die of a cough.”

“True — true,” I replied; “and, indeed, I had no intention of alarming

you unnecessarily — but you should use all proper caution. A draught of
this Medoc will defend us from the damps.

its fellows that lay upon the mould.

“Drink,” I said, presenting him the wine.
He raised it to his lips with a leer. He paused and nodded to me

familiarly, while his bells jingled.

“I drink,” he said, “to the buried that repose around us.”
“And I to your long life.”
He again took my arm, and we proceeded.
“These vaults,” he said, “are extensive.”
“The Montresors,” I replied, “were a great and numerous family.”
“I forget your arms.”
“A huge human foot d’or, in a field azure; the foot crushes a serpent

rampant whose fangs are imbedded in the heel.”

“And the motto?”
“Nemo me impune lacessit.”
“Good!” he said.
The wine sparkled in his eyes and the bells jingled. My own fancy grew

warm with the Medoc. We had passed through long walls of piled skeletons,
with casks and puncheons intermingling, into the inmost recesses of the
catacombs. I paused again, and this time I made bold to seize Fortunato by
an arm above the elbow.

“The nitre!” I said; “see, it increases. It hangs like moss upon the vaults.

We are below the river’s bed. The drops of moisture trickle among the
bones. Come, we will go back ere it is too late. Your cough —”

“It is nothing,” he said; “let us go on. But first, another draught of the

Medoc.”

I broke and reached him a flagon of De Grave. He emptied it at a breath.

His eyes flashed with a fierce light. He laughed and threw the bottle
upwards with a gesticulation I did not understand.

I looked at him in surprise. He repeated the movement — a grotesque

one.

“You do not comprehend?” he said.
“Not I,” I replied.

“Then you are not of the brotherhood.”
“How?”
“You are not of the masons.”
“Yes, yes,” I said; “yes, yes.”
“You? Impossible! A mason?”
“A mason,” I replied.
“A sign,” he said, “a sign.”
“It is this,” I answered, producing from beneath the folds of my

roquelaire a trowel.

“You jest,” he exclaimed, recoiling a few paces. “But let us proceed to

the Amontillado.”

“Be it so,” I said, replacing the tool beneath the cloak and again offering

him my arm. He leaned upon it heavily. We continued our route in search of
the Amontillado. We passed through a range of low arches, descended,
passed on, and descending again, arrived at a deep crypt, in which the
foulness of the air caused our flambeaux rather to glow than flame.

At the most remote end of the crypt there appeared another less

spacious. Its walls had been lined with human remains, piled to the vault
overhead, in the fashion of the great catacombs of Paris. Three sides of this
interior crypt were still ornamented in this manner. From the fourth side the
bones had been thrown down, and lay promiscuously upon the earth,
forming at one point a mound of some size. Within the wall thus exposed
by the displacing of the bones, we perceived a still interior crypt or recess,
in depth about four feet, in width three, in height six or seven. It seemed to
have been constructed for no especial use within itself, but formed merely
the interval between two of the colossal supports of the roof of the
catacombs, and was backed by one of their circumscribing walls of solid
granite.

It was in vain that Fortunato, uplifting his dull torch, endeavoured to pry

into the depth of the recess. Its termination the feeble light did not enable us
to see.

“Proceed,” I said; “herein is the Amontillado. As for Luchresi —”

forward, while I followed immediately at his heels. In niche, and finding an
instant he had reached the extremity of the niche, and finding his progress
arrested by the rock, stood stupidly bewildered. A moment more and I had
fettered him to the granite. In its surface were two iron staples, distant from
each other about two feet, horizontally. From one of these depended a short
chain, from the other a padlock. Throwing the links about his waist, it was
but the work of a few seconds to secure it. He was too much astounded to
resist. Withdrawing the key I stepped back from the recess.

nitre. Indeed, it is very damp. Once more let me implore you to return. No?
Then I must positively leave you. But I must first render you all the little
attentions in my power.”

“The Amontillado!” ejaculated my friend, not yet recovered from his

astonishment.

“True,” I replied; “the Amontillado.”
As I said these words I busied myself among the pile of bones of which

I have before spoken. Throwing them aside, I soon uncovered a quantity of
building stone and mortar. With these materials and with the aid of my
trowel, I began vigorously to wall up the entrance of the niche.

I had scarcely laid the first tier of the masonry when I discovered that

the intoxication of Fortunato had in a great measure worn off. The earliest
indication I had of this was a low moaning cry from the depth of the recess.
It was not the cry of a drunken man. There was then a long and obstinate
silence. I laid the second tier, and the third, and the fourth; and then I heard
the furious vibrations of the chain. The noise lasted for several minutes,
during which, that I might hearken to it with the more satisfaction, I ceased
my labours and sat down upon the bones. When at last the clanking
subsided, I resumed the trowel, and finished without interruption the fifth,
the sixth, and the seventh tier. The wall was now nearly upon a level with
my breast. I again paused, and holding the flambeaux over the mason-work,
threw a few feeble rays upon the figure within.

A succession of loud and shrill screams, bursting suddenly from the

throat of the chained form, seemed to thrust me violently back. For a brief
moment I hesitated, I trembled. Unsheathing my rapier, I began to grope
with it about the recess; but the thought of an instant reassured me. I placed
my hand upon the solid fabric of the catacombs, and felt satisfied. I
reapproached the wall; I replied to the yells of him who clamoured. I re-
echoed, I aided, I surpassed them in volume and in strength. I did this, and
the clamourer grew still.

It was now midnight, and my task was drawing to a close. I had

completed the eighth, the ninth and the tenth tier. I had finished a portion of
the last and the eleventh; there remained but a single stone to be fitted and
plastered in. I struggled with its weight; I placed it partially in its destined
position. But now there came from out the niche a low laugh that erected
the hairs upon my head. It was succeeded by a sad voice, which I had
difficulty in recognizing as that of the noble Fortunato. The voice said —

“Ha! ha! ha! — he! he! he! — a very good joke, indeed — an excellent

jest. We will have many a rich laugh about it at the palazzo — he! he! he!
— over our wine — he! he! he!”

“The Amontillado!” I said.
“He! he! he! — he! he! he! — yes, the Amontillado. But is it not getting

late? Will not they be awaiting us at the palazzo, the Lady Fortunato and the
rest? Let us be gone.”

“Yes,” I said, “let us be gone.”
“For the love of God, Montresor!”
“Yes,” I said, “for the love of God!”
But to these words I hearkened in vain for a reply. I grew impatient. I

called aloud —

“Fortunato!”
No answer. I called again —
“Fortunato!”
No answer still. I thrust a torch through the remaining aperture and let it

fall within. There came forth in return only a jingling of the bells. My heart
grew sick; it was the dampness of the catacombs that made it so. I hastened
to make an end of my labour. I forced the last stone into its position; I
plastered it up. Against the new masonry I re-erected the old rampart of
bones. For the half of a century no mortal has disturbed them. In pace
requiescat!

OceanofPDF.com

William Wilson

What say of it? what say (of) CONSCIENCE grim, 
That spectre in my path?

— Chamberlayne’s Pharronida.

Let me call myself, for the present, William Wilson. The fair page now
lying before me need not be sullied with my real appellation. This has been

already too much an object for the scorn — for the horror — for the
detestation of my race. To the uttermost regions of the globe have not the
indignant winds bruited its unparalleled infamy? Oh, outcast of all outcasts
most abandoned! — to the earth art thou not forever dead? to its honors, to
its flowers, to its golden aspirations? — and a cloud, dense, dismal, and
limitless, does it not hang eternally between thy hopes and heaven?

I would not, if I could, here or to-day, embody a record of my later

years of unspeakable misery, and unpardonable crime. This epoch — these
later years — took unto themselves a sudden elevation in turpitude, whose
origin alone it is my present purpose to assign. Men usually grow base by
degrees. From me, in an instant, all virtue dropped bodily as a mantle. From
comparatively trivial wickedness I passed, with the stride of a giant, into
more than the enormities of an Elah-Gabalus. What chance — what one
event brought this evil thing to pass, bear with me while I relate. Death
approaches; and the shadow which foreruns him has thrown a softening
influence over my spirit. I long, in passing through the dim valley, for the
sympathy — I had nearly said for the pity — of my fellow men. I would
fain have them believe that I have been, in some measure, the slave of
circumstances beyond human control. I would wish them to seek out for
me, in the details I am about to give, some little oasis of fatality amid a
wilderness of error. I would have them allow — what they cannot refrain
from allowing — that, although temptation may have erewhile existed as
great, man was never thus, at least, tempted before — certainly, never thus
fell. And is it therefore that he has never thus suffered? Have I not indeed
been living in a dream? And am I not now dying a victim to the horror and
the mystery of the wildest of all sublunary visions?

I am the descendant of a race whose imaginative and easily excitable

temperament has at all times rendered them remarkable; and, in my earliest
infancy, I gave evidence of having fully inherited the family character. As I
advanced in years it was more strongly developed; becoming, for many
reasons, a cause of serious disquietude to my friends, and of positive injury
to myself. I grew self-willed, addicted to the wildest caprices, and a prey to
the most ungovernable passions. Weak-minded, and beset with

constitutional infirmities akin to my own, my parents could do but little to
check the evil propensities which distinguished me. Some feeble and ill-
directed efforts resulted in complete failure on their part, and, of course, in
total triumph on mine. Thenceforward my voice was a household law; and
at an age when few children have abandoned their leading-strings, I was left
to the guidance of my own will, and became, in all but name, the master of
my own actions.

My earliest recollections of a school-life, are connected with a large,

rambling, Elizabethan house, in a misty-looking village of England, where
were a vast number of gigantic and gnarled trees, and where all the houses
were excessively ancient. In truth, it was a dream-like and spirit-soothing
place, that venerable old town. At this moment, in fancy, I feel the
refreshing chilliness of its deeply-shadowed avenues, inhale the fragrance
of its thousand shrubberies, and thrill anew with undefinable delight, at the
deep hollow note of the church-bell, breaking, each hour, with sullen and
sudden roar, upon the stillness of the dusky atmosphere in which the fretted
Gothic steeple lay imbedded and asleep.

It gives me, perhaps, as much of pleasure as I can now in any manner

experience, to dwell upon minute recollections of the school and its
concerns. Steeped in misery as I am — misery, alas! only too real — I shall
be pardoned for seeking relief, however slight and temporary, in the
weakness of a few rambling details. These, moreover, utterly trivial, and
even ridiculous in themselves, assume, to my fancy, adventitious
importance, as connected with a period and a locality when and where I
recognise the first ambiguous monitions of the destiny which afterwards so
fully overshadowed me. Let me then remember.

The house, I have said, was old and irregular. The grounds were

extensive, and a high and solid brick wall, topped with a bed of mortar and
broken glass, encompassed the whole. This prison-like rampart formed the
limit of our domain; beyond it we saw but thrice a week — once every
Saturday afternoon, when, attended by two ushers, we were permitted to
take brief walks in a body through some of the neighbouring fields — and
twice during Sunday, when we were paraded in the same formal manner to

the morning and evening service in the one church of the village. Of this
church the principal of our school was pastor. With how deep a spirit of
wonder and perplexity was I wont to regard him from our remote pew in the
gallery, as, with step solemn and slow, he ascended the pulpit! This
reverend man, with countenance so demurely benign, with robes so glossy
and so clerically flowing, with wig so minutely powdered, so rigid and so
vast, — -could this be he who, of late, with sour visage, and in snuffy
habiliments, administered, ferule in hand, the Draconian laws of the
academy? Oh, gigantic paradox, too utterly monstrous for solution!

At an angle of the ponderous wall frowned a more ponderous gate. It

was riveted and studded with iron bolts, and surmounted with jagged iron
spikes. What impressions of deep awe did it inspire! It was never opened
save for the three periodical egressions and ingressions already mentioned;
then, in every creak of its mighty hinges, we found a plenitude of mystery
— a world of matter for solemn remark, or for more solemn meditation.

recesses. Of these, three or four of the largest constituted the play-ground. It
was level, and covered with fine hard gravel. I well remember it had no
trees, nor benches, nor anything similar within it. Of course it was in the
rear of the house. In front lay a small parterre, planted with box and other
shrubs; but through this sacred division we passed only upon rare occasions
indeed — such as a first advent to school or final departure thence, or
perhaps, when a parent or friend having called for us, we joyfully took our
way home for the Christmas or Midsummer holy-days.

But the house! — how quaint an old building was this! — to me how

veritably a palace of enchantment! There was really no end to its windings
— to its incomprehensible subdivisions. It was difficult, at any given time,
to say with certainty upon which of its two stories one happened to be.
From each room to every other there were sure to be found three or four
steps either in ascent or descent. Then the lateral branches were
innumerable — inconceivable — and so returning in upon themselves, that
our most exact ideas in regard to the whole mansion were not very far
different from those with which we pondered upon infinity. During the five

years of my residence here, I was never able to ascertain with precision, in
what remote locality lay the little sleeping apartment assigned to myself and
some eighteen or twenty other scholars.

The school-room was the largest in the house — I could not help

thinking, in the world. It was very long, narrow, and dismally low, with
pointed Gothic windows and a celling of oak. In a remote and terror-
inspiring angle was a square enclosure of eight or ten feet, comprising the
sanctum, “during hours,” of our principal, the Reverend Dr. Bransby. It was
a solid structure, with massy door, sooner than open which in the absence of
the “Dominic,” we would all have willingly perished by the peine forte et
dure. In other angles were two other similar boxes, far less reverenced,
indeed, but still greatly matters of awe. One of these was the pulpit of the
“classical” usher, one of the “English and mathematical.” Interspersed about
the room, crossing and recrossing in endless irregularity, were innumerable
benches and desks, black, ancient, and time-worn, piled desperately with
much-bethumbed books, and so beseamed with initial letters, names at full
length, grotesque figures, and other multiplied efforts of the knife, as to
have entirely lost what little of original form might have been their portion
in days long departed. A huge bucket with water stood at one extremity of
the room, and a clock of stupendous dimensions at the other.

Encompassed by the massy walls of this venerable academy, I passed,

yet not in tedium or disgust, the years of the third lustrum of my life. The
teeming brain of childhood requires no external world of incident to occupy
or amuse it; and the apparently dismal monotony of a school was replete
with more intense excitement than my riper youth has derived from luxury,
or my full manhood from crime. Yet I must believe that my first mental
development had in it much of the uncommon — even much of the outre.
Upon mankind at large the events of very early existence rarely leave in
mature age any definite impression. All is gray shadow — a weak and
irregular remembrance — an indistinct regathering of feeble pleasures and
phantasmagoric pains. With me this is not so. In childhood I must have felt
with the energy of a man what I now find stamped upon memory in lines as
vivid, as deep, and as durable as the exergues of the Carthaginian medals.

remember! The morning’s awakening, the nightly summons to bed; the
connings, the recitations; the periodical half-holidays, and perambulations;
the play-ground, with its broils, its pastimes, its intrigues; — these, by a
mental sorcery long forgotten, were made to involve a wilderness of
sensation, a world of rich incident, an universe of varied emotion, of
excitement the most passionate and spirit-stirring. “Oh, le bon temps, que
ce siecle de fer!”

In truth, the ardor, the enthusiasm, and the imperiousness of my

disposition, soon rendered me a marked character among my schoolmates,
and by slow, but natural gradations, gave me an ascendancy over all not
greatly older than myself; — over all with a single exception. This
exception was found in the person of a scholar, who, although no relation,
bore the same Christian and surname as myself; — a circumstance, in fact,
little remarkable; for, notwithstanding a noble descent, mine was one of
those everyday appellations which seem, by prescriptive right, to have been,
time out of mind, the common property of the mob. In this narrative I have
therefore designated myself as William Wilson, — a fictitious title not very
dissimilar to the real. My namesake alone, of those who in school
phraseology constituted “our set,” presumed to compete with me in the
studies of the class — in the sports and broils of the play-ground — to
refuse implicit belief in my assertions, and submission to my will —
indeed, to interfere with my arbitrary dictation in any respect whatsoever. If
there is on earth a supreme and unqualified despotism, it is the despotism of
a master mind in boyhood over the less energetic spirits of its companions.

Wilson’s rebellion was to me a source of the greatest embarrassment; —

the more so as, in spite of the bravado with which in public I made a point
of treating him and his pretensions, I secretly felt that I feared him, and
could not help thinking the equality which he maintained so easily with
myself, a proof of his true superiority; since not to be overcome cost me a
perpetual struggle. Yet this superiority — even this equality — was in truth
acknowledged by no one but myself; our associates, by some unaccountable
blindness, seemed not even to suspect it. Indeed, his competition, his

resistance, and especially his impertinent and dogged interference with my
purposes, were not more pointed than private. He appeared to be destitute
alike of the ambition which urged, and of the passionate energy of mind
which enabled me to excel. In his rivalry he might have been supposed
actuated solely by a whimsical desire to thwart, astonish, or mortify myself;
although there were times when I could not help observing, with a feeling
made up of wonder, abasement, and pique, that he mingled with his injuries,
his insults, or his contradictions, a certain most inappropriate, and assuredly
most unwelcome affectionateness of manner. I could only conceive this
singular behavior to arise from a consummate self-conceit assuming the
vulgar airs of patronage and protection.

Perhaps it was this latter trait in Wilson’s conduct, conjoined with our

identity of name, and the mere accident of our having entered the school
upon the same day, which set afloat the notion that we were brothers,
among the senior classes in the academy. These do not usually inquire with
much strictness into the affairs of their juniors. I have before said, or should
have said, that Wilson was not, in the most remote degree, connected with
my family. But assuredly if we had been brothers we must have been twins;
for, after leaving Dr. Bransby’s, I casually learned that my namesake was
born on the nineteenth of January, 1813 — and this is a somewhat
remarkable coincidence; for the day is precisely that of my own nativity.

It may seem strange that in spite of the continual anxiety occasioned me

by the rivalry of Wilson, and his intolerable spirit of contradiction, I could
not bring myself to hate him altogether. We had, to be sure, nearly every
day a quarrel in which, yielding me publicly the palm of victory, he, in
some manner, contrived to make me feel that it was he who had deserved it;
yet a sense of pride on my part, and a veritable dignity on his own, kept us
always upon what are called “speaking terms,” while there were many
points of strong congeniality in our tempers, operating to awake me in a
sentiment which our position alone, perhaps, prevented from ripening into
friendship. It is difficult, indeed, to define,or even to describe, my real
feelings towards him. They formed a motley and heterogeneous admixture;
— some petulant animosity, which was not yet hatred, some esteem, more

respect, much fear, with a world of uneasy curiosity. To the moralist it will
be unnecessary to say, in addition, that Wilson and myself were the most
inseparable of companions.

It was no doubt the anomalous state of affairs existing between us,

which turned all my attacks upon him, (and they were many, either open or
covert) into the channel of banter or practical joke (giving pain while
assuming the aspect of mere fun) rather than into a more serious and
determined hostility. But my endeavours on this head were by no means
uniformly successful, even when my plans were the most wittily concocted;
for my namesake had much about him, in character, of that unassuming and
quiet austerity which, while enjoying the poignancy of its own jokes, has no
heel of Achilles in itself, and absolutely refuses to be laughed at. I could
find, indeed, but one vulnerable point, and that, lying in a personal
peculiarity, arising, perhaps, from constitutional disease, would have been
spared by any antagonist less at his wit’s end than myself; — my rival had a
weakness in the faucal or guttural organs, which precluded him from raising
his voice at any time above a very low whisper. Of this defect I did not fall
to take what poor advantage lay in my power.

practical wit that disturbed me beyond measure. How his sagacity first
discovered at all that so petty a thing would vex me, is a question I never
could solve; but, having discovered, he habitually practised the annoyance.
I had always felt aversion to my uncourtly patronymic, and its very
common, if not plebeian praenomen. The words were venom in my ears;
and when, upon the day of my arrival, a second William Wilson came also
to the academy, I felt angry with him for bearing the name, and doubly
disgusted with the name because a stranger bore it, who would be the cause
of its twofold repetition, who would be constantly in my presence, and
whose concerns, in the ordinary routine of the school business, must
inevitably, on account of the detestable coincidence, be often confounded
with my own.

The feeling of vexation thus engendered grew stronger with every

circumstance tending to show resemblance, moral or physical, between my

rival and myself. I had not then discovered the remarkable fact that we were
of the same age; but I saw that we were of the same height, and I perceived
that we were even singularly alike in general contour of person and outline
of feature. I was galled, too, by the rumor touching a relationship, which
had grown current in the upper forms. In a word, nothing could more
seriously disturb me, although I scrupulously concealed such disturbance,)
than any allusion to a similarity of mind, person, or condition existing
between us. But, in truth, I had no reason to believe that (with the exception
of the matter of relationship, and in the case of Wilson himself,) this
similarity had ever been made a subject of comment, or even observed at all
by our schoolfellows. That he observed it in all its bearings, and as fixedly
as I, was apparent; but that he could discover in such circumstances so
fruitful a field of annoyance, can only be attributed, as I said before, to his
more than ordinary penetration.

and in actions; and most admirably did he play his part. My dress it was an
easy matter to copy; my gait and general manner were, without difficulty,
appropriated; in spite of his constitutional defect, even my voice did not
escape him. My louder tones were, of course, unattempted, but then the key,
it was identical; and his singular whisper, it grew the very echo of my own.

How greatly this most exquisite portraiture harassed me, (for it could

not justly be termed a caricature,) I will not now venture to describe. I had
but one consolation — in the fact that the imitation, apparently, was noticed
by myself alone, and that I had to endure only the knowing and strangely
sarcastic smiles of my namesake himself. Satisfied with having produced in
my bosom the intended effect, he seemed to chuckle in secret over the sting
he had inflicted, and was characteristically disregardful of the public
applause which the success of his witty endeavours might have so easily
elicited. That the school, indeed, did not feel his design, perceive its
accomplishment, and participate in his sneer, was, for many anxious
months, a riddle I could not resolve. Perhaps the gradation of his copy
rendered it not so readily perceptible; or, more possibly, I owed my security
to the master air of the copyist, who, disdaining the letter, (which in a

painting is all the obtuse can see,) gave but the full spirit of his original for
my individual contemplation and chagrin.

which he assumed toward me, and of his frequent officious interference
withy my will. This interference often took the ungracious character of
advice; advice not openly given, but hinted or insinuated. I received it with
a repugnance which gained strength as I grew in years. Yet, at this distant
day, let me do him the simple justice to acknowledge that I can recall no
occasion when the suggestions of my rival were on the side of those errors
or follies so usual to his immature age and seeming inexperience; that his
moral sense, at least, if not his general talents and worldly wisdom, was far
keener than my own; and that I might, to-day, have been a better, and thus a
happier man, had I less frequently rejected the counsels embodied in those
meaning whispers which I then but too cordially hated and too bitterly
despised.

As it was, I at length grew restive in the extreme under his distasteful

supervision, and daily resented more and more openly what I considered his
intolerable arrogance. I have said that, in the first years of our connexion as
schoolmates, my feelings in regard to him might have been easily ripened
into friendship: but, in the latter months of my residence at the academy,
although the intrusion of his ordinary manner had, beyond doubt, in some
measure, abated, my sentiments, in nearly similar proportion, partook very
much of positive hatred. Upon one occasion he saw this, I think, and
afterwards avoided, or made a show of avoiding me.

It was about the same period, if I remember aright, that, in an altercation

of violence with him, in which he was more than usually thrown off his
guard, and spoke and acted with an openness of demeanor rather foreign to
his nature, I discovered, or fancied I discovered, in his accent, his air, and
general appearance, a something which first startled, and then deeply
interested me, by bringing to mind dim visions of my earliest infancy —
wild, confused and thronging memories of a time when memory herself was
yet unborn. I cannot better describe the sensation which oppressed me than
by saying that I could with difficulty shake off the belief of my having been

acquainted with the being who stood before me, at some epoch very long
ago — some point of the past even infinitely remote. The delusion,
however, faded rapidly as it came; and I mention it at all but to define the
day of the last conversation I there held with my singular namesake.

The huge old house, with its countless subdivisions, had several large

chambers communicating with each other, where slept the greater number
of the students. There were, however, (as must necessarily happen in a
building so awkwardly planned,) many little nooks or recesses, the odds and
ends of the structure; and these the economic ingenuity of Dr. Bransby had
also fitted up as dormitories; although, being the merest closets, they were
capable of accommodating but a single individual. One of these small
apartments was occupied by Wilson.

One night, about the close of my fifth year at the school, and

immediately after the altercation just mentioned, finding every one wrapped
in sleep, I arose from bed, and, lamp in hand, stole through a wilderness of
narrow passages from my own bedroom to that of my rival. I had long been
plotting one of those ill-natured pieces of practical wit at his expense in
which I had hitherto been so uniformly unsuccessful. It was my intention,
now, to put my scheme in operation, and I resolved to make him feel the
whole extent of the malice with which I was imbued. Having reached his
closet, I noiselessly entered, leaving the lamp, with a shade over it, on the
outside. I advanced a step, and listened to the sound of his tranquil
breathing. Assured of his being asleep, I returned, took the light, and with it
again approached the bed. Close curtains were around it, which, in the
prosecution of my plan, I slowly and quietly withdrew, when the bright rays
fell vividly upon the sleeper, and my eyes, at the same moment, upon his
countenance. I looked; — and a numbness, an iciness of feeling instantly
pervaded my frame. My breast heaved, my knees tottered, my whole spirit
became possessed with an objectless yet intolerable horror. Gasping for
breath, I lowered the lamp in still nearer proximity to the face. Were these
— these the lineaments of William Wilson? I saw, indeed, that they were
his, but I shook as if with a fit of the ague in fancying they were not. What
was there about them to confound me in this manner? I gazed; — while my

brain reeled with a multitude of incoherent thoughts. Not thus he appeared
— assuredly not thus — in the vivacity of his waking hours. The same
name! the same contour of person! the same day of arrival at the academy!
And then his dogged and meaningless imitation of my gait, my voice, my
habits, and my manner! Was it, in truth, within the bounds of human
possibility, that what I now saw was the result, merely, of the habitual
practice of this sarcastic imitation? Awe-stricken, and with a creeping
shudder, I extinguished the lamp, passed silently from the chamber, and left,
at once, the halls of that old academy, never to enter them again.

myself a student at Eton. The brief interval had been sufficient to enfeeble
my remembrance of the events at Dr. Bransby’s, or at least to effect a
material change in the nature of the feelings with which I remembered
them. The truth — the tragedy — of the drama was no more. I could now
find room to doubt the evidence of my senses; and seldom called up the
subject at all but with wonder at extent of human credulity, and a smile at
the vivid force of the imagination which I hereditarily possessed. Neither
was this species of scepticism likely to be diminished by the character of
the life I led at Eton. The vortex of thoughtless folly into which I there so
immediately and so recklessly plunged, washed away all but the froth of my
past hours, engulfed at once every solid or serious impression, and left to
memory only the veriest levities of a former existence.

here — a profligacy which set at defiance the laws, while it eluded the
vigilance of the institution. Three years of folly, passed without profit, had
but given me rooted habits of vice, and added, in a somewhat unusual
degree, to my bodily stature, when, after a week of soulless dissipation, I
invited a small party of the most dissolute students to a secret carousal in
my chambers. We met at a late hour of the night; for our debaucheries were
to be faithfully protracted until morning. The wine flowed freely, and there
were not wanting other and perhaps more dangerous seductions; so that the
gray dawn had already faintly appeared in the east, while our delirious
extravagance was at its height. Madly flushed with cards and intoxication, I

was in the act of insisting upon a toast of more than wonted profanity, when
my attention was suddenly diverted by the violent, although partial
unclosing of the door of the apartment, and by the eager voice of a servant
from without. He said that some person, apparently in great haste,
demanded to speak with me in the hall.

than surprised me. I staggered forward at once, and a few steps brought me
to the vestibule of the building. In this low and small room there hung no
lamp; and now no light at all was admitted, save that of the exceedingly
feeble dawn which made its way through the semi-circular window. As I
put my foot over the threshold, I became aware of the figure of a youth
about my own height, and habited in a white kerseymere morning frock, cut
in the novel fashion of the one I myself wore at the moment. This the faint
light enabled me to perceive; but the features of his face I could not
distinguish. Upon my entering he strode hurriedly up to me, and, seizing me
by. the arm with a gesture of petulant impatience, whispered the words
“William Wilson!” in my ear.

I grew perfectly sober in an instant.
There was that in the manner of the stranger, and in the tremulous shake

of his uplifted finger, as he held it between my eyes and the light, which
filled me with unqualified amazement; but it was not this which had so
violently moved me. It was the pregnancy of solemn admonition in the
singular, low, hissing utterance; and, above all, it was the character, the
tone, the key, of those few, simple, and familiar, yet whispered syllables,
which came with a thousand thronging memories of bygone days, and
struck upon my soul with the shock of a galvanic battery. Ere I could
recover the use of my senses he was gone.

Although this event failed not of a vivid effect upon my disordered

imagination, yet was it evanescent as vivid. For some weeks, indeed, I
busied myself in earnest inquiry, or was wrapped in a cloud of morbid
speculation. I did not pretend to disguise from my perception the identity of
the singular individual who thus perseveringly interfered with my affairs,
and harassed me with his insinuated counsel. But who and what was this

Wilson? — and whence came he? — and what were his purposes? Upon
neither of these points could I be satisfied; merely ascertaining, in regard to
him, that a sudden accident in his family had caused his removal from Dr.
Bransby’s academy on the afternoon of the day in which I myself had
eloped. But in a brief period I ceased to think upon the subject; my attention
being all absorbed in a contemplated departure for Oxford. Thither I soon
went; the uncalculating vanity of my parents furnishing me with an outfit
and annual establishment, which would enable me to indulge at will in the
luxury already so dear to my heart, — to vie in profuseness of expenditure
with the haughtiest heirs of the wealthiest earldoms in Great Britain.

Excited by such appliances to vice, my constitutional temperament

broke forth with redoubled ardor, and I spurned even the common restraints
of decency in the mad infatuation of my revels. But it were absurd to pause
in the detail of my extravagance. Let it suffice, that among spendthrifts I
out-Heroded Herod, and that, giving name to a multitude of novel follies, I
added no brief appendix to the long catalogue of vices then usual in the
most dissolute university of Europe.

It could hardly be credited, however, that I had, even here, so utterly

fallen from the gentlemanly estate, as to seek acquaintance with the vilest
arts of the gambler by profession, and, having become an adept in his
despicable science, to practise it habitually as a means of increasing my
already enormous income at the expense of the weak-minded among my
fellow-collegians. Such, nevertheless, was the fact. And the very enormity
of this offence against all manly and honourable sentiment proved, beyond
doubt, the main if not the sole reason of the impunity with which it was
committed. Who, indeed, among my most abandoned associates, would not
rather have disputed the clearest evidence of his senses, than have suspected
of such courses, the gay, the frank, the generous William Wilson — the
noblest and most commoner at Oxford — him whose follies (said his
parasites) were but the follies of youth and unbridled fancy — whose errors
but inimitable whim — whose darkest vice but a careless and dashing
extravagance?

came to the university a young parvenu nobleman, Glendinning — rich,
said report, as Herodes Atticus — his riches, too, as easily acquired. I soon
found him of weak intellect, and, of course, marked him as a fitting subject
for my skill. I frequently engaged him in play, and contrived, with the
gambler’s usual art, to let him win considerable sums, the more effectually
to entangle him in my snares. At length, my schemes being ripe, I met him
(with the full intention that this meeting should be final and decisive) at the
chambers of a fellow-commoner, (Mr. Preston,) equally intimate with both,
but who, to do him Justice, entertained not even a remote suspicion of my
design. To give to this a better colouring, I had contrived to have assembled
a party of some eight or ten, and was solicitously careful that the
introduction of cards should appear accidental, and originate in the proposal
of my contemplated dupe himself. To be brief upon a vile topic, none of the
low finesse was omitted, so customary upon similar occasions that it is a
just matter for wonder how any are still found so besotted as to fall its
victim.

We had protracted our sitting far into the night, and I had at length

effected the manoeuvre of getting Glendinning as my sole antagonist. The
game, too, was my favorite ecarte!. The rest of the company, interested in
the extent of our play, had abandoned their own cards, and were standing
around us as spectators. The parvenu, who had been induced by my artifices
in the early part of the evening, to drink deeply, now shuffled, dealt, or
played, with a wild nervousness of manner for which his intoxication, I
thought, might partially, but could not altogether account. In a very short
period he had become my debtor to a large amount, when, having taken a
long draught of port, he did precisely what I had been coolly anticipating —
he proposed to double our already extravagant stakes. With a well-feigned
show of reluctance, and not until after my repeated refusal had seduced him
into some angry words which gave a color of pique to my compliance, did I
finally comply. The result, of course, did but prove how entirely the prey
was in my toils; in less than an hour he had quadrupled his debt. For some
time his countenance had been losing the florid tinge lent it by the wine; but

now, to my astonishment, I perceived that it had grown to a pallor truly
fearful. I say to my astonishment. Glendinning had been represented to my
eager inquiries as immeasurably wealthy; and the sums which he had as yet
lost, although in themselves vast, could not, I supposed, very seriously
annoy, much less so violently affect him. That he was overcome by the
wine just swallowed, was the idea which most readily presented itself; and,
rather with a view to the preservation of my own character in the eyes of
my associates, than from any less interested motive, I was about to insist,
peremptorily, upon a discontinuance of the play, when some expressions at
my elbow from among the company, and an ejaculation evincing utter
despair on the part of Glendinning, gave me to understand that I had
effected his total ruin under circumstances which, rendering him an object
for the pity of all, should have protected him from the ill offices even of a
fiend.

What now might have been my conduct it is difficult to say. The pitiable

condition of my dupe had thrown an air of embarrassed gloom over all; and,
for some moments, a profound silence was maintained, during which I
could not help feeling my cheeks tingle with the many burning glances of
scorn or reproach cast upon me by the less abandoned of the party. I will
even own that an intolerable weight of anxiety was for a brief instant lifted
from my bosom by the sudden and extraordinary interruption which ensued.
The wide, heavy folding doors of the apartment were all at once thrown
open, to their full extent, with a vigorous and rushing impetuosity that
extinguished, as if by magic, every candle in the room. Their light, in dying,
enabled us just to perceive that a stranger had entered, about my own
height, and closely muffled in a cloak. The darkness, however, was now
total; and we could only feel that he was standing in our midst. Before any
one of us could recover from the extreme astonishment into which this
rudeness had thrown all, we heard the voice of the intruder.

“Gentlemen,” he said, in a low, distinct, and never-to-be-forgotten

whisper which thrilled to the very marrow of my bones, “Gentlemen, I
make no apology for this behaviour, because in thus behaving, I am but
fulfilling a duty. You are, beyond doubt, uninformed of the true character of

the person who has to-night won at ecarte a large sum of money from Lord
Glendinning. I will therefore put you upon an expeditious and decisive plan
of obtaining this very necessary information. Please to examine, at your
leisure, the inner linings of the cuff of his left sleeve, and the several little
packages which may be found in the somewhat capacious pockets of his
embroidered morning wrapper.”

a pin drop upon the floor. In ceasing, he departed at once, and as abruptly as
he had entered. Can I— shall I describe my sensations? — must I say that I
felt all the horrors of the damned? Most assuredly I had little time given for
reflection. Many hands roughly seized me upon the spot, and lights were
immediately reprocured. A search ensued. In the lining of my sleeve were
found all the court cards essential in ecarte, and, in the pockets of my
wrapper, a number of packs, facsimiles of those used at our sittings, with
the single exception that mine were of the species called, technically,
arrondees; the honours being slightly convex at the ends, the lower cards
slightly convex at the sides. In this disposition, the dupe who cuts, as
customary, at the length of the pack, will invariably find that he cuts his
antagonist an honor; while the gambler, cutting at the breadth, will, as
certainly, cut nothing for his victim which may count in the records of the
game.

Any burst of indignation upon this discovery would have affected me

less than the silent contempt, or the sarcastic composure, with which it was
received.

an exceedingly luxurious cloak of rare furs, “Mr. Wilson, this is your
property.” (The weather was cold; and, upon quitting my own room, I had
thrown a cloak over my dressing wrapper, putting it off upon reaching the
scene of play.) “I presume it is supererogatory to seek here (eyeing the folds
of the garment with a bitter smile) for any farther evidence of your skill.
Indeed, we have had enough. You will see the necessity, I hope, of quitting
Oxford — at all events, of quitting instantly my chambers.”

have resented this galling language by immediate personal violence, had not
my whole attention been at the moment arrested by a fact of the most
startling character. The cloak which I had worn was of a rare description of
fur; how rare, how extravagantly costly, I shall not venture to say. Its
fashion, too, was of my own fantastic invention; for I was fastidious to an
absurd degree of coxcombry, in matters of this frivolous nature. When,
therefore, Mr. Preston reached me that which he had picked up upon the
floor, and near the folding doors of the apartment, it was with an
astonishment nearly bordering upon terror, that I perceived my own already
hanging on my arm, (where I had no doubt unwittingly placed it,) and that
the one presented me was but its exact counterpart in every, in even the
minutest possible particular. The singular being who had so disastrously
exposed me, had been muffled, I remembered, in a cloak; and none had
been worn at all by any of the members of our party with the exception of
myself. Retaining some presence of mind, I took the one offered me by
Preston; placed it, unnoticed, over my own; left the apartment with a
resolute scowl of defiance; and, next morning ere dawn of day, commenced
a hurried journey from Oxford to the continent, in a perfect agony of horror
and of shame.

I fled in vain. My evil destiny pursued me as if in exultation, and

proved, indeed, that the exercise of its mysterious dominion had as yet only
begun. Scarcely had I set foot in Paris ere I had fresh evidence of the
detestable interest taken by this Wilson in my concerns. Years flew, while I
experienced no relief. Villain! — at Rome, with how untimely, yet with
how spectral an officiousness, stepped he in between me and my ambition!
At Vienna, too — at Berlin — and at Moscow! Where, in truth, had I not
bitter cause to curse him within my heart? From his inscrutable tyranny did
I at length flee, panic-stricken, as from a pestilence; and to the very ends of
the earth I fled in vain.

And again, and again, in secret communion with my own spirit, would I

demand the questions “Who is he? — whence came he? — and what are his
objects?” But no answer was there found. And then I scrutinized, with a

minute scrutiny, the forms, and the methods, and the leading traits of his
impertinent supervision. But even here there was very little upon which to
base a conjecture. It was noticeable, indeed, that, in no one of the multiplied
instances in which he had of late crossed my path, had he so crossed it
except to frustrate those schemes, or to disturb those actions, which, if fully
carried out, might have resulted in bitter mischief. Poor justification this, in
truth, for an authority so imperiously assumed! Poor indemnity for natural
rights of self-agency so pertinaciously, so insultingly denied!

I had also been forced to notice that my tormentor, for a very long

period of time, (while scrupulously and with miraculous dexterity
maintaining his whim of an identity of apparel with myself,) had so
contrived it, in the execution of his varied interference with my will, that I
saw not, at any moment, the features of his face. Be Wilson what he might,
this, at least, was but the veriest of affectation, or of folly. Could he, for an
instant, have supposed that, in my admonisher at Eton — in the destroyer of
my honor at Oxford, — in him who thwarted my ambition at Rome, my
revenge at Paris, my passionate love at Naples, or what he falsely termed
my avarice in Egypt, — that in this, my arch-enemy and evil genius, could
fall to recognise the William Wilson of my school boy days, — the
namesake, the companion, the rival, — the hated and dreaded rival at Dr.
Bransby’s? Impossible! — But let me hasten to the last eventful scene of
the drama.

Thus far I had succumbed supinely to this imperious domination.
The sentiment of deep awe with which I habitually regarded the

elevated character, the majestic wisdom, the apparent omnipresence and
omnipotence of Wilson, added to a feeling of even terror, with which
certain other traits in his nature and assumptions inspired me, had operated,
hitherto, to impress me with an idea of my own utter weakness and
helplessness, and to suggest an implicit, although bitterly reluctant
submission to his arbitrary will. But, of late days, I had given myself up
entirely to wine; and its maddening influence upon my hereditary temper
rendered me more and more impatient of control. I began to murmur, — to
hesitate, — to resist. And was it only fancy which induced me to believe

that, with the increase of my own firmness, that of my tormentor underwent
a proportional diminution? Be this as it may, I now began to feel the
inspiration of a burning hope, and at length nurtured in my secret thoughts a
stern and desperate resolution that I would submit no longer to be enslaved.

It was at Rome, during the Carnival of 18 — that I attended a

masquerade in the palazzo of the Neapolitan Duke Di Broglio. I had
indulged more freely than usual in the excesses of the wine-table; and now
the suffocating atmosphere of the crowded rooms irritated me beyond
endurance. The difficulty, too, of forcing my way through the mazes of the
company contributed not a little to the ruffling of my temper; for I was
anxiously seeking, (let me not say with what unworthy motive) the young,
the gay, the beautiful wife of the aged and doting Di Broglio. With a too
unscrupulous confidence she had previously communicated to me the secret
of the costume in which she would be habited, and now, having caught a
glimpse of her person, I was hurrying to make my way into her presence. —
At this moment I felt a light hand placed upon my shoulder, and that ever-
remembered, low, damnable whisper within my ear.

In an absolute phrenzy of wrath, I turned at once upon him who had

thus interrupted me, and seized him violently by tile collar. He was attired,
as I had expected, in a costume altogether similar to my own; wearing a
Spanish cloak of blue velvet, begirt about the waist with a crimson belt
sustaining a rapier. A mask of black silk entirely covered his face.

“Scoundrel!” I said, in a voice husky with rage, while every syllable I

uttered seemed as new fuel to my fury, “scoundrel! impostor! accursed
villain! you shall not — you shall not dog me unto death! Follow me, or I
stab you where you stand!” — and I broke my way from the ball-room into
a small ante-chamber adjoining — dragging him unresistingly with me as I
went.

Upon entering, I thrust him furiously from me. He staggered against the

wall, while I closed the door with an oath, and commanded him to draw. He
hesitated but for an instant; then, with a slight sigh, drew in silence, and put
himself upon his defence.

excitement, and felt within my single arm the energy and power of a
multitude. In a few seconds I forced him by sheer strength against the
wainscoting, and thus, getting him at mercy, plunged my sword, with brute
ferocity, repeatedly through and through his bosom.

prevent an intrusion, and then immediately returned to my dying antagonist.
But what human language can adequately portray that astonishment, that
horror which possessed me at the spectacle then presented to view? The
brief moment in which I averted my eyes had been sufficient to produce,
apparently, a material change in the arrangements at the upper or farther end
of the room. A large mirror, — so at first it seemed to me in my confusion
— now stood where none had been perceptible before; and, as I stepped up
to it in extremity of terror, mine own image, but with features all pale and
dabbled in blood, advanced to meet me with a feeble and tottering gait.

Thus it appeared, I say, but was not. It was my antagonist — it was

Wilson, who then stood before me in the agonies of his dissolution. His
mask and cloak lay, where he had thrown them, upon the floor. Not a thread
in all his raiment — not a line in all the marked and singular lineaments of
his face which was not, even in the most absolute identity, mine own!

fancied that I myself was speaking while he said:

— dead to the World, to Heaven and to Hope! In me didst thou exist — and,
in my death, see by this image, which is thine own, how utterly thou hast
murdered thyself.”

OceanofPDF.com

