The Sweet 
Hereafter

A Novel by 

Russell Banks 

OceanofPDF.com

for Chase

OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Cover
Title Page
Dolores Driscoll
Billy Ansel
Mitchell Stephens, Esquire
Nichole Burnell
Dolores Driscoll
Books by Russell Banks
Copyright
About the Publisher

OceanofPDF.com

Dolores Driscoll

A dog—it was a dog I saw for certain. Or thought I saw. It was
snowing pretty hard by then, and you can see things in the snow that
aren’t there, or aren’t exactly there, but you also can’t see some of the
things that are there, so that by God when you do see something, you
react anyhow, erring on the distaff side, if you get my drift. That’s my
training as a driver, but it’s also my temperament as a mother of two
grown sons and wife to an invalid, and that way when I’m wrong at
least I’m wrong on the side of the angels.

It was like the ghost of a dog I saw, a reddish-brown blur, much

smaller than a deer—which is what you’d expect to see out there that
early—although the same gingerbread color as a deer it was, moving
fast behind the cloud of snow falling between us, then slow, and then
stopped altogether in the middle of the road, like it was trying to make
up its mind whether to go on or go back.

I couldn’t see it clearly, so can’t say what it was for sure, but I

saw the blur clearly, that’s what I mean to say, and that’s what I reacted
to. These things have to happen faster than you can think about them,
because if they don’t, you’re going to be locked in place just like that
dog or deer or whatever the hell it was, and you’ll get smacked head-
on the same as that dog would have if I hadn’t hit the brake and pulled
the wheel without thinking.

But there’s no point now to lingering over the dog, whether it was

a dog or a tiny deer, or even an optical illusion, which, to be absolutely
truthful, now seems likeliest. All that matters is that I saw something I
didn’t expect out there and didn’t particularly identify at the time, there
being no time for that—so let’s just say it was like a dog, one of those
small red spaniels, smaller than a setter, the size of a kid in a rust-

colored snowsuit, and I did what anyone with half a brain would have
done: I tried to avoid hitting it.

It was in first light and, as I said, blowing snow by then, but when

I started my route that morning, when I left the house, it was still dark,
of course, and no snow falling. You could sniff the air, though, and
smell it coming, but despite that, I had thought at first that it was too
cold to snow. Which is what I said to Abbott, who is my husband and
doesn’t get out of the house very much because of his being in a
wheelchair, so I have this habit of reporting the weather to him, more
or less, every morning when I first step out of the kitchen onto the
back porch.

“I smell snow,” I said, and leaned down and checked the

thermometer by the door. It’s posted low on the frame of the storm
door, so Abbott can scoot over and open the inside door and check the
temperature anytime he wants. “Seventeen below,” I told him. “Too
cold to snow.”

Abbott was at one time an excellent carpenter, but in 1984 he had

a stroke, and although he has recovered somewhat, he’s still pretty
much housebound and has trouble talking normally and according to
some people is incomprehensible, yet I myself understand him
perfectly. No doubt it’s because I know that his mind is clear. The way
Abbott has handled the consequences of his stroke is sufficient
evidence that he is a very courageous man, but he was always a logical
person with a lively interest in the world around him, so I make an
effort to bring him as much information about the world as I can. It’s
the least I can do.

“Never … that … cold,” he said. He’s worked out a way of

talking with just the left side of his mouth, but he stammers some and
spits a bit and makes a grimace that some people would find
embarrassing and so would look away and as a result not fully
understand him. I myself find his way of talking very interesting,
actually, and even charming. And not just because I’m used to it. To
tell the truth, I don’t think I’ll ever get used to it, which is why it’s so
interesting and attractive to me. Me, I’m a talker, and consequently
like a lot of talkers tend to say things I don’t mean. But Abbott, more

than anyone else I know, has to make his words count, almost like a
poet, and because he’s passed so close to death he has a clarity about
life that most of us can’t even imagine.

“North … Pole’s … under … snow,” he said.
No arguing with that. I grabbed my coffee thermos, pecked him

with a kiss and waved him goodbye as usual, shut the door and went
out to the barn and got my bus started. I kept an extra battery and
jumper cables in the kitchen, just in case, but the old girl was fine that
morning and cranked right up. By nature I’m a careful person and not
overly optimistic, especially when it comes to machinery and tools; I
keep everything in tiptop condition, with plenty of backup. Batteries,
tires, oil, antifreeze, the whole bit. I treated that bus like it was my
own, maybe even better, for obvious reasons, but also because that’s
my temperament. I’m the kind of person who always follows the
manual. No shortcuts.

Weather, meaning snow or ice, stopped me numerous times a year

—of course, those were days that Gary Dillinger, the principal, called
school off anyhow, so it didn’t count—but in twenty-two years I did
not miss a single morning or afternoon pickup because of a mechanical
breakdown, and although I went through three buses in that time, it
was only to have each bus replaced with a larger one, as the town
grew. I started back in 1968, as a courtesy and convenience, with my
own brand-new Dodge station wagon, carting my two boys, who were
then in Sam Dent School, and scooping up with them the six or eight
other children who lived on the Bartlett Hill Road side of town. Then
the district made my route official, enlarging it somewhat, and gave
me a salary and purchased me a GMC that had twenty-four seats.
Finally, in 1987, to handle the baby boomers’ babies, I’d guess you’d
call them, the district had to get me the International fifty-seater. My
old Dodge wagon finally gave out at 168,000 miles, and I drove it
behind the barn, drained it, and put it up on blocks, and now for my
personal vehicle and for running Abbott over to Lake Placid for his
therapy I drive an almost new Plymouth Voyager van. It’s got a lift for
his chair, and he can lock the chair into the passenger’s side and sit

next to me up front, which gives him a distinct pleasure. The old GMC
they use for hauling the high school kids over to Placid.

Luckily, our barn being plenty large enough and standing empty, I

was always able to park the bus at home overnight, where I could look
after it in a proper way. Not that I didn’t trust Billy Ansel and his
Vietnam vets at the Sunoco, where the district’s two other buses were
kept and serviced, to take good care of my bus; I did—they are
intelligent mechanics and thoughtful men, especially Billy himself,
and anything more complicated than a tune-up I happily turned over to
them. But when it came to daily maintenance, I was like the pilot of an
airplane—no one was going to treat my vehicle as carefully as I did
myself.

That morning was typical, as I said, and the bus started up

instantly, even though it was minus seventeen out, and I took off from
our place halfway up the hill to commence my day. The bus I had
given the name Shoe to, which is just something I do, because the kids
seemed to like it when they could personalize the thing. I think it made
going to school a little more pleasurable for them, especially the
younger children, some of whose home lives were not exactly
sweetness and light, if you know what I mean.

My old Dodge wagon, which was a masculine-type car, had been

nicknamed Boomer by my own kids during a period when the springs
were bad. Since the district was not then paying for repairs, I couldn’t
afford to get them replaced right away, causing the vehicle to make a
booming sound when it bottomed out on the washboard ruts on Bartlett
Hill Road, which at that time had not yet been paved. I noted how fast
the other children seized on the use of the name, asking me, “How’s
ol’ Boomer today?” and suchlike when I picked them up, as if the
vehicle was a horse they felt affectionate toward. So later, when my
sons were in high school and I got the GMC, I made a little act of
introducing it to the children as Rufus, Boomer’s larger, dumber
cousin, which is how it seemed to me and to the children as well. The
International got named Shoe because when I drove it with a load of
thirty, thirty-five kids I felt like the old woman who lived in a shoe
who had so many children she didn’t know what to do, and it tickled

the kids to hear me tell it, and in no time they were slapping old Shoe
on the side as they lined up at their stop to climb aboard, saying things
like “Shoe sleep good last night?” “Shoe eat a good breakfast this
morning?” That sort of remark. By staying away from the cutesy
names, sticking with names that were slightly humorous, I was able to
get the older kids, especially the boys, who could be curt, to go along
with the game, making the ride more cheerful for everyone that way. It
was something we could all participate in together, which was a value I
tried to promote among young people.

My first stop that morning was at the top of Bartlett Hill Road,

where it branches into Avalanche Road and McNeil. I pulled over and
made my turnaround so the bus was facing east and waited for the
Lamston kids to come down the hill on McNeil. The three of them,
since the day the oldest, Harold, started school, always got to the stop
late, no matter how often I threatened to leave them if they weren’t
there waiting for me, so eventually I just made it a habit to come a
little early and pour myself a cup of coffee and wait. It’s like when
they were born their clocks were set permanently five minutes behind
everybody else’s, so the only way you could meet them on time was to
set your own clock five minutes early.

I didn’t mind. It gave me a chance to enjoy my second cup of

coffee in solitude in the bus with the heater running. It was peaceful,
way up there on top of Bartlett Hill looking east toward Giant and
Noonmark and Wolf Jaw, watching the sky lighten, with the mountains
outlined in black against this milky stripe of light widening from the
horizon. Made you appreciate living here, instead of some milder
place, where I suppose life comes somewhat easier. Down in the
valley, you could see the house lights of Sam Dent coming on one by
one, and along Routes 9 and 73 the headlights of a few cars flashed
like fireflies as people headed out to work.

I’ve spent my whole life in this town, and I can safely say I know

everyone in it, even the newcomers, even the summer people. Well,
not all the summer people; just the regulars, who own their own houses
and arrive early and leave late. Them I know because when school’s
out I work part time sorting their mail in the post office and helping

Eden Schraft deliver it. That is, I used to, before the accident. Now I
work in Lake Placid, driving for the hotels.

That morning, while I waited for the Lamstons, I was thinking

about my sons. Reginald and William. We always called them that,
never Reggie or Billy; I think it helped them grow up faster. Not that I
was in a hurry for them to grow up. I just didn’t want them to become
the kind of men who think of themselves as little boys and then tend to
act that way when you need them to act like adults. No, thanks.
William, who is the younger, is in the army in Virginia and was just
back from Panama then, and although he had not been wounded or
anything, he was sounding a little strange and distant to me, which is
understandable, I suppose. He hadn’t been shipped out to Arabia yet.
Reginald was having some marital problems, you might say, in that his
wife, Tracy, was bored with her job at the Plattsburgh Marriott, where
she worked as a receptionist, and wanted to get pregnant. As he was
still in night school at Plattsburgh State and wasn’t making much as a
draftsman, he preferred to wait a few years before having a child. I told
him why didn’t he tell Tracy to find a job that wasn’t boring. That
irritated him. We were talking on the phone; I guess she was out
somewhere. “Ma, it’s not that simple,” he said, as if he thought I was
simpleminded. Well, I knew it was complicated—I’ve been married
twenty-eight years—but what else could I say? Anyhow, I was feeling
cut off from my sons, which is unusual and gives me an empty feeling
in the stomach when it happens, almost like hunger, and I wanted to do
something to change it, but nothing would come to my mind.

Then suddenly there they were, the Lamstons, the two older boys,

Harold and Jesse, banging on the door, and the little girl, Sheila, who
was barely six, running along behind. I flipped open the door, and they
marched in, silent, sober-faced, as always, wearing their hand-me-
down snow-suits, lugging lunchboxes and schoolbooks, all three
plumping down next to one another halfway back. They had their
choice of seats, but they always put themselves behind me precisely in
the middle of the bus, between the boys, most of whom preferred to sit
way in the back, and the girls, who tended to cluster in the front near

me, while whoever was last to get picked up took whatever seats were
left, usually those nearest the Lamstons.

felt sorry for them, so instead I acted as if I was very fond of them.
They were what you call uncommunicative, all three, although they
certainly communicated fine with one another, always whispering back
and forth in a way that made you think they were criticizing you. I
think they felt different from the other kids. Due to their father, Kyle
Lamston, a sometime housepainter who was a drinker and was known
in town for his propensity to commit acts of public violence. Their
mother, Doreen, had the hangdog look of a woman who has to comfort
such a man. The Lamstons were field-mouse poor and lived until
recently in a trailer on a lot a half mile in on McNeil Road. Poverty
and house trailers are not uncommon in Sam Dent, however. No, I’m
sure it was the violence that made those children act like they were
different from the others. They had secrets.

with one another in whispers behind my back while I drove and every
now and then tried to chat them up. “How’re you this morning? All
ready to read ’n’ write ’n’ ‘rithmetic?” That sort of thing. Make myself
sick. “Pretty damned cold this morning coming down the hill, I bet.”
Nothing. Silence.

“Harold, you planning to play little league this summer?” I asked

him. Still nothing, like I was talking to myself or was on the radio.

Most days I just ignored them, left them to themselves, since

that’s clearly what they wanted, and whistled my way down the hill to
the second stop, treating it in my mind like it was my first stop coming
up and not the second and I was still alone in the bus. But that day for
some reason I wanted to get a rise out of at least one of the three.
Maybe because I felt so cut off from my own children; maybe out of
some pure perversity. Who knows now? Fixing motives is like fixing
blame—the further away from the act you get, the harder it is to single
out one thing as having caused it.

boy in town; his family had come from over the border, Ontario
someplace, and settled here in the early 1950s, when there were still a
few dairy farms left in the area that kept unskilled people working year
round. The only Canadians you see nowadays are tourists. Kyle was a
promising youth, athletic, good-looking, smart enough, but he got into
alcohol early, when he was still going through the turbulence and
anger of a male teenager, and like a lot of unruly boys, he seemed to
get stuck there.

Doreen was a Pomeroy from Lake Placid, a sweet little ding-a-

ling of a girl, and she fell for Kyle and before she knew it was
pregnant and situated in a trailer up on McNeil Road on a woodlot
Kyle’s father had once owned, with Kyle coming home later and later
every night from the Spread Eagle or the Rendez-Vous, drunk and
feeling trapped by life and blaming her, no doubt, for that, and taking it
out on her.

Now he was in his thirties and already gone to fat, and after half a

dozen DWI convictions, permanently without a driver’s license,
making it difficult for him to get off that hill and go to work, of course.
What little money Kyle did earn housepainting, he spent most of it on
booze at the Spread or the Rendez-Vous. Food stamps, welfare, and
local and church charity kept them more or less fed, clothed, and
sheltered, but the Lamstons were a family that, after a good start, had
come to be characterized by permanent overall failure, and people
generally shunned them for it. In return, they withheld themselves. It
was their only point of pride, I suppose. Which is why the children
behaved so sadly aloof, even to me. And who could begrudge them?

“Harold!” I said. “You hear me ask you a question?” I turned

around and cut him a look.

“Leave us alone!” he said, coming right back at me with those

cold blue eyes of his. His brother, Jesse, sat by the window, looking
out as if he could see into the dark.

Harold was trying to wipe his baby sister’s red face with the end

of his scarf. She had been crying in that silent way of a very sad and

frightened person, and I suddenly felt terrible and wished I had kept
my big mouth shut.

“I’m sorry,” I said in a low voice, and turned back to my driving.
From the Lamstons’ stop at McNeil and Avalanche, the route ran

west along the ridge into the dark, with the black heights of Big and
Little Hawk on your right and the valley and town of Sam Dent on
your left, out to the crest of the hill, where I picked up a kid I actually
liked personally a whole lot and was always pleased to see. Bear Otto.
He was an energetic, oversized, eleven-year-old Abenaki Indian boy
adopted by Hartley and Wanda Otto. For years they had tried and
failed to conceive a child of their own, until finally they gave up and
somehow found Bear in an orphanage over in Vermont, and I guess
because Hartley was quarter Indian himself, a Western-type Indian,
Shawnee or Sioux or something, they were able to adopt him right off.
Now, three years later—which is how it often happens, as if the arrival
of an adopted child somehow loosens up the new parents—Wanda was
suddenly pregnant.

Bear was ready and waiting for me, and the second I swung open

the door he jumped straight into the bus from the ground, as if he had
been planning it, and grinned in triumph and held out the flat of his
hand for a high five, like a black kid from the city. I slapped it, and he
said, “Yo, Dolores!” and bounced back down the aisle and sat in the
middle of the last seat with his legs stretched out, raiding his lunchbox
and waiting for the other boys. He had a round burnt-orange baby face
with a perpetual peaceful smile on it, as if someone had just told him a
terrific joke and he was telling it over again to himself. His hair, which
was straight and coal black and long in back, hung in bangs across his
broad forehead. Bear was supposed to be only eleven, but because of
his size he looked thirteen or fourteen. A stocky boy, but not fat, he
was built like one of those sumo wrestlers. Numerous times, in the
quick bristly quarrels that boys like to get into, I had seen him play the
calm, good-natured peacemaker, and I admired him and imagined that
he would turn into a wonderful man. He was one of those rare children
who bring out the best in people instead of the worst.

only their hair and clothing, mannerisms, politics, house, et cetera—
their general life-style, let us say, which was extreme and somewhat
innovative. But in fact they were model citizens. Regular at the town
meetings, where they offered sound opinions in a respectful way, and
members of the voluntary fire brigade. They even took the CPR
training and the emergency first aid courses offered at the school, and
they always helped out at the various fund-raising bazaars and
carnivals in town, although they were not themselves churchgoers.
They both were tall and thin and moved and talked slowly.
Vegetarians, they were.

Hartley, who was a furniture-maker for a company up in

Keeseville, had a thick, unkempt beard and wore his hair in a long
ponytail, which to me was a little pathetic-looking, now that he was
turning gray. Wanda, who made pots with sticks and straw stuck into
holes in the clay and baskets with tubes of clay in the straw—very
original items, which she sold at fairs around the state—wore old-
fashioned spectacles and had hair like that woman Morticia, the
mother on The Addams Family TV show. Their house was a dome,
half buried in the side of Little Hawk. They had built it themselves, a
peculiar-looking structure, although people who have been inside tell
me it is quite large and comfortable, if dark. Like the inside of an army
field tent, I’m told. The Ottos had a special interest in protecting the
environment, as you might expect, and were from someplace
downstate and I believe were college educated. There were persistent
rumors that they grew and smoked marijuana, which, as far as I’m
concerned, was their business, since nobody else got hurt by it.

I keep saying “was,” as if they are no longer with us, like the

Lamstons, who have moved to Plattsburgh. But in fact the Ottos are
still here in Sam Dent, living in their dome, Hartley making his
Adirondack porch chairs up in Keeseville and Wanda her straw pots
and clay baskets at home. She has delivered her baby safely, thank
God, a healthy little boy (whose name I don’t know, since I don’t see
them much anymore and don’t keep track of those things as much as I
used to). But I’m telling about life in Sam Dent before the accident,

and so much has changed since then that it’s difficult for me to
describe people or things concerned with the accident, except in terms
that put them into the past.

Beyond the Ottos’ and over the crest of Bartlett Hill, the road

drops fairly fast, and I made three stops in short order, so I barely got
the bus out of first gear before having to hit the brakes and pull over
again. These were the Hamilton kids, the Prescotts, and the Walkers,
seven in all, little kids, first, second, and third graders, mostly, the
children of young couples living in small houses that they built
piecemeal themselves on lots cut out of a tract of land that had once
belonged to my father and grandfather.

The acreage, along with the old family house and barn, passed to

me and Abbott when my dad died back in 1974 (my ma died early,
when I was nineteen), and then in ‘84, when Abbott had his stroke, we
sold off most of the uphill land that fronted on the road. Sold too
cheaply, it turned out, as it was a few years too soon to take advantage
of what they call the second-home land boom. But we needed the
money right then and there, for Abbott’s hospital bills and so on, since
his insurance had run out so fast, and those young couples needed land
to build their homes to raise their children in.

I’ve never especially regretted it. I’d rather watch the little tatty

Capes and ranches of local folks, people I’ve known since they were
children themselves, going up on that land than the high-tech summer
houses and A-frame ski lodges with decks and hot tubs and so on built
by rich yuppies from New York City who don’t give a damn for this
town or the people in it.

I’ve got nothing against outsiders per se, you understand. It’s just

that you have to love a town before you can live in it right, and you
have to live in it before you can love it right. Otherwise, you’re a
parasite of sorts. I know that the tourists, the summer people, bring a
load of seasonal cash to town, but as Abbott likes to say, “Short …
term … profits … make … long … term … losses.” Which is true
about a lot of things.

drove slowly past my own house, where I could see from the light in
the kitchen window that Abbott was on his second cup of coffee and
listening to the radio news—he likes the National Public Radio news
from Burlington, which is one of his sources of unusual facts. He
listens to the radio the way some people read the newspaper—he looks
right at it, his brow furrowed, as if committing what he hears to
memory. He hates television. Which is unusual in an invalid, I
understand, but may account for the fact that he is rarely depressed by
his condition. He always had more of a radio personality than a
television personality anyhow. I gave him a blast of the horn, as I
always do, and rolled past the house.

By now there was some noise in the bus, the early morning

sounds of children practicing at being adults, making themselves
known to one another and to themselves in their small voices (some of
them not so small)—asking questions, arguing, making exchanges,
gossiping, bragging, pleading, courting, threatening, testing—doing
everything we ourselves do, the way puppies and kittens at play mimic
grown dogs and cats at work. It’s not altogether peaceful or sweet, any
more than the noises adults make are peaceful and sweet, but it doesn’t
do any serious harm. And because you can listen to children without
fear, the way you can watch puppies tumble and bite and kittens sneak
up on one another and spring without worrying that they’ll be hurt by
it, the talk of children can be very instructive. I guess it’s because they
play openly at what we grownups do seriously and in secret.

There was enough light, a predawn grayness, so that I could by

this time see the lowered sky, and I knew that it was going to snow.
The roads were dry and ice-free—it had stayed cold and hadn’t
snowed for over a week—and because the temperature was so low, I
figured that the new snow would be dry and hard, so was not
concerned that I had not put chains on the tires that morning. I knew
I’d be needing them for the afternoon run, though, and groaned silently
to myself—putting on chains in the cold is tedious and hard on the
hands. You have to remove your gloves to snap the damned things
together, at least I do, and the circulation in my fingers—due to

cigarettes, Abbott tells me, although I quit fifteen years ago—is not
good anymore.

But for now I was not worried. You drive these roads for forty-

five years in every season and all kinds of weather, there’s not much
can surprise you. Which is one of the reasons I was given this job in
1968 and rehired every year since—the others being my considerable
ability as a driver, pure and simple, and my reliability and punctuality.
And, of course, my affection for children and ease with them. This is
not bragging; it’s simple fact. No two ways about it—I was the most
qualified school bus driver in the district.

By the time I reached the bottom of Bartlett Hill Road, where it

enters Route 73 by the old mill, I had half my load, over twenty kids,
on board. They had walked to their places on Bartlett Hill Road from
the smaller roads and lanes that run off it, bright little knots of three
and four children gathered by a cluster of mailboxes to wait there for
me—like berries waiting to be plucked, I sometimes thought as I made
my descent, clearing the hillside of its children. I always enjoyed
watching the older children, the seventh and eighth graders, play their
music on their Walkmans and portable radios and dance around each
other, flirting and jostling for position in their numerous and
mysterious pecking orders, impossible for me or any adult to
understand, while the younger boys and girls soberly studied and
evaluated the older kids’ moves for their own later use. I liked the way
the older boys slicked their hair back in precise dips and waves, and
the way the girls dolled themselves up with lipstick and eyeliner, as if
they weren’t already as beautiful as they would ever be again.

When they climbed onto the bus, they had to shut their radios off.

It was one of the three rules I laid down every year the first day of
school. Rule one: No tape players or radios playing inside the bus.
Headsets, Walkmans, were permissible, of course, but I could not
abide half a dozen tiny radio speakers squawking three kinds of rock
‘n’ roll behind me. Not with all the other noises those kids made. Rule
number two: No fighting. Anyone fights, he by God walks. And no
matter who starts it, both parties walk. Girls the same as boys. They
could argue and holler at one another all they wanted, but let one of

them strike another, and both of them were on the road in seconds. I
usually had to enforce this rule no more than once a year, and after that
the kids enforced it themselves. Or if they did hit each other, they did it
silently, since the victim knew that he or she would have to walk too. I
was well aware that I couldn’t ever stop them altogether from striking
each other, but at least I could make them conscious of it, which is a
start. Rule number three: No throwing things. Not food, not paper
airplanes, not hats or mittens—nothing. That rule was basically so I
could drive without sudden undue distraction. For safety’s sake.

I’m a fairly large woman, taller and heavier than even the biggest

eighth-grade boy (although Bear Otto was soon going to be bigger than
I am), and my voice is sharp, so it was not especially difficult, with
only these few rules, to maintain order and establish tranquillity. Also,
I made no attempt to teach them manners, no moves to curb or restrain
their language—I figured they heard enough of that from their teachers
and parents—and I think this kept them loose enough that they did not
feel particularly restricted. Besides, I have always liked listening to the
way kids talk when they’re not trying to please or deceive an adult. I
just perched up there in the driver’s seat and drove, letting them forget
all about me, while I listened to their jumble of words, songs, and
shouts and cries, and it was almost as if I were not present, or were
invisible, or as if I were a child again myself, a child blessed or cursed
(I’m not sure which) with foresight, with the ability to see the closing
off that adulthood would bring, the pleasures, the shame, the secrets,
the fearfulness. The eventual silence; that too.

At Route 73 by the old mill, I banged a left and headed north

along the Ausable River, picking up the valley kids. There was always
a fair amount of vehicular traffic on 73 at this hour, mostly local
people driving to work, which never presented a problem, but
sometimes there were downstate skiers up early on their way to a long
weekend at Lake Placid and Whiteface. Them I had to watch out for,
especially today, this being a Friday—they were generally young
urban-type drivers and were not used to coming up suddenly on a
school bus stopped at the side of the road to pick up children, and the
flashing red lights on the bus didn’t seem to register somehow, as if

they thought all they had to do was slow down a little and then pass me
by. They thought they were up in the mountains and no people lived
here. To let them know, I kept a notebook and pen next to my seat, and
whenever one of those turkeys blew past me in his Porsche or BMW, I
took his number and later phoned it in to Wyatt Pitney at state police
headquarters in Marlowe. Wyatt usually managed to get their attention.

Anyhow, this morning I was stopped across from the Bide-a-Wile

Motel, which is owned and operated by Risa and Wendell Walker, and
Risa was walking their little boy, Sean, across Route 73, as is
customary. Sean had some kind of learning disability—he was close to
ten but seemed more like a very nervous, frightened five or six, an
unusually runtish boy and delicate, with a sickly pale complexion and
huge dark eyes. He was a strange little fellow, but you couldn’t help
liking him and feeling protective toward him. Apparently, although he
was way behind all the other kids his age in school and was too fragile
and nervous to play at sports, he was expert at playing video games
and much admired for it by the other children. A wizard, they say, with
fabulous eye-hand coordination, and when sitting in front of a video
game, he was supposed to be capable of scary concentration. It was
probably the only time he felt competent and was not lonely.

It had started to snow, light windblown flecks falling like bits of

wood ash. Risa had her down parka over her nightgown and bathrobe
and was wearing slippers, and she held Sean by the hand and carefully
walked him from the motel office, where they had an apartment in
back, to the road, which, although it’s only two lanes, is actually a state
highway along there, the main truck route connecting Placid and the
Saranac region to the Northway.

There were no cars or trucks in sight as Risa brought her son

across to the bus. He was Risa’s and Wendell’s only child and the frail
object of all their attention. Wendell was a pleasantly withdrawn sort
of man who seemed to have given up on life, but Risa, I knew, still had
dreams. In warm weather, she’d be out there roofing the motel or
repainting the signs, while Wendell stayed inside and watched baseball
on TV. They had a lot of financial problems—the motel had about a
dozen units and was old and in shabby condition; they had bought it in

a foreclosure sale eight or ten years before, and I don’t think they’d put
up the No Vacancy sign once in that time. (Sam Dent is one of those
towns that’s on the way to somewhere else, and people get this far,
they usually keep going.) Also, I think that the Walkers’ marriage was
shaky. Judging from what happened to them after the accident, it was
probably just that motel and their love for the boy, Sean, that had
bound them.

I flung open the door, and the child, because he was so small,

stepped up with difficulty, and when he got to the landing he turned
and did an unusual thing. Like a scared baby who wanted his mother to
lift him up and hug him, he held his arms out to Risa and said, “I want
to stay with you.”

Risa had large dark circles under her eyes, as if she hadn’t slept

well, or at all, for that matter, and her hair was tangled and matted, and
for a second I wondered if she had a drinking problem. “Go on now,”
she said to the boy in a weary voice. “Go on.”

The kids sitting near the door were watching Sean, surprised and

puzzled by his behavior, maybe embarrassed by it, since he was doing
what so many of them would sometimes like to do but did not dare,
certainly not in public like this. One of the eighth-grade girls, Nichole
Burnell, who was sitting next to the door and has a wonderful maternal
streak, squinched over a few inches and patted the seat next to her and
said, “C’mon, Sean, sit next to me.”

With his large eyes fixed on Risa’s face, the boy edged sideways

toward Nichole and finally sat, but still he watched his mother, as if he
was frightened. Not for himself but for her. “Is he okay?” I asked Risa.
Normally he just marched on board and found himself a seat and
stared out the window for the whole trip. A very private boy enjoying
his thoughts and fancies, thinking maybe about his video games.

“I don’t know. He’s fine, I mean. Not sick or anything. It’s just

one of those mornings, I guess. We all have them, Dolores, don’t we?”
She made a wistful smile.

“By Jesus, I sure do!” I said, trying to cheer the woman up,

although in fact I almost never had those mornings myself, so long as I

had the school bus to drive. It’s almost impossible to say how
important and pleasurable that job was to me. Though I liked being at
home with Abbott and had the post office and mail carrier job to get
me through the summers, I could hardly wait till school started again
in September and I could get back out there in the early morning light
and start up my bus and commence to gather the children of the town
and carry them to school. I have what you call a sanguine personality.
That’s what Abbott calls it.

“Are you okay, Risa?” I asked.
She looked at me and sighed. Woman to woman. “You want to

buy a good used motel?” she said. She looked across the road at the
row of empty units. Not a car in the lot, except their Wagoneer. It’s the
Holiday Inns and the Marriotts that keep folks like the Walkers from
making a living.

“Winter’s been tough, eh?”
“No more than usual, I guess. The usual just gets harder and

harder, though.”

“I guess it does,” I said. A big Grand Union sixteen-wheeler had

come up behind me and stopped. “But I got enough problems of my
own, honey,” I said. “Last thing I need is a motel.” We were talking
finances, not husbands—or at least I was. I suspected she was talking
husband, however. “I got to get moving,” I said, “before the snow
blows.”

“Yes. It will snow some today. Six to eight inches by nightfall.”
I thought about the chains again. Sean was still watching his

mother with that strange grief-stricken expression on his small, bony
face, and she waved limply at him, like she was dismissing him, and
stepped away. Shutting the door with one hand, I released the brake
with the other, waited a second for Risa to cross in front of the bus,
and pulled slowly out. I heard the air brakes of the sixteen-wheeler hiss
as the driver chunked into gear and, checking the side mirror, saw him
move into line behind me.

Then suddenly Sean shrieked, “Mommy!” and he was all over

me, scrambling across my lap to the window, and I glimpsed Risa off

to my left, leaping out of the way of a red Saab that seemed to have
bolted out of nowhere. It had come around the bend in front of me and
the truck and hadn’t slowed a bit as I drew back onto the road, and the
driver must have felt squeezed and had accelerated and had just missed
clipping Risa as she crossed to the other side. I hit the brakes, and
thank God the driver of the truck behind me did too, managing to pull
up an inch or two from my rear.

“Sean! Sit the hell down!” I yelled. “She’s okay! Now sit down,”

I said, and he obeyed.

I slid my window open and called to Risa. “You get his number?”

All I’d caught was that the car was a tomato-red Saab with a ski rack
on top.

She was shaken, standing there white-faced in the motel lot with

her arms wrapped around herself. She shook her head no, turned away,
and walked slowly back to the office. I drew a couple of deep breaths
and checked Sean, who was seated now but still craning and peering
wide-eyed after his mother. Nichole had him on her lap, with her arms
around his narrow shoulders.

“There’s a lot of damn fool idiots out there, Sean,” I said. “I guess

you got a right to worry.” I smiled at him, but he only glared back at
me, as if I was to blame.

Again, I put the bus into first gear and started moving cautiously

down the road, with the Grand Union truck rumbling along behind. I
said, “I’m sorry, Sean. I’m really sorry.” That was all I could think of
to say.

There were half a dozen more stops along the valley, and then I

turned right onto Staples Mill Road and made my way uphill to the
ridge, where you get a terrific view east and south toward Limekiln
and Avalanche mountains. It’s mostly state forest up there, not many
houses, and the few you see are old, built back before the Adirondack
Park was created.

The snow was falling lightly now, hard dry flakes floating on the

breeze. There was enough daylight that I could have shut off my
headlights, but I didn’t, even though they weren’t helping me see the

road any better. In fact, it was the time of day when headlights make
no difference, on or off, but they let the bus itself be seen sooner and
more clearly by oncoming cars. Not that there was any traffic up on
Staples Mill Road, especially this early. But when you drive a school
bus you have to think of these things. You have to anticipate the worst.

Obviously, you can’t control everything, but you are obliged to

take care of the few things you can. I’m an optimist, basically, who
acts like a pessimist. On principle. Just in case.

Abbott says, “Biggest … difference … between … people … is

… quality … of … attention.” And since a person’s quality of attention
is one of the few things about her that a human can control, then she
damn well better do it, say I. Put that together with the Golden Rule in
a nutshell, and you’ve got my philosophy of life. Abbott’s too. And
you don’t need religion for it.

Oh, like most people, we go to church—First Methodist—but

irregularly and mostly for social reasons, so as not to stand out too
much in the community. But we’re not religious persons, Abbott and I.
Although, since the accident, there have been numerous times when I
have wished that I was. Religion being the main way the unexplainable
gets explained. God’s will and all.

The first house you come to up there on the ridge is Billy Ansel’s

old cut-stone colonial. I always liked stopping at Billy’s. For one thing,
he used me as an alarm clock, not leaving for work himself until I
arrived to pick up his children, Jessica and Mason, nine-year-old
identical twins. I liked it when the parents were aware of my arrival,
and he was always looking out the kitchen window when I pulled up,
waiting for his kids to climb into the bus. Then as I pulled away I’d see
the house lights go out, and a mile or two down the road, I’d look into
my side mirror, and there he’d be, coming along behind in his pickup,
on his way into town to open up his Sunoco station.

Normally he followed me the whole distance over the ridge to the

Marlowe road, then south all the way into town, keeping a slow and
distant sort of company with the bus, never bothering to pass on the
straightaways, until finally, just before I got to the school, he turned off

at the garage. Once I asked him why he didn’t pass me by, so he
wouldn’t have to stop and wait every time I pulled over to make a
pickup. He just laughed. “Well,” he said, “then I’d get to work before
eight, wouldn’t I, and I’d have to stand around the garage waiting for
the help to show up. There’s no point to that,” he said.

Truth is, I don’t think he wanted to move through that big empty

house alone, once his kids were gone to school, and I believe it
particularly pleased and comforted him, as he drove into town, to catch
glimpses of his son and daughter in the school bus, waving back at
him. Their mother, Lydia, a fairy princess of a woman, died of cancer
some four years ago, and Billy took over raising the children by
himself—although believe me, there are plenty of young women who
would have been happy to help him out, as he is one fine-looking man.
Smart and charming. And a successful businessman too. Even I found
him sexy, and normally I don’t give a younger man a second look.

But it was more than sexy; there was always something noble

about Billy Ansel. In high school, he was the boy other boys imitated
and followed, quarterback and captain of the football team, president
of his senior class, et cetera. After graduation, like a lot of boys from
Sam Dent back then, he went into the service. The Marines. In
Vietnam, he was field commissioned as a lieutenant, and when he
came back to Sam Dent in the mid-seventies, he married his high
school sweetheart, Lydia Storrow, and borrowed a lot of money from
the bank and bought Creppitt’s old Sunoco station, where he had
worked summers, and turned it into a regular automotive repair shop,
with three bays and all kinds of electronic troubleshooting equipment.
Lydia, who had gone to Plattsburgh State and knew accounting, kept
the books, and Billy ran the garage. The stone house up on Staples
Mill they bought a few years later, when the twins were born, and then
renovated top to bottom, which it sorely needed. They were an ideal
couple. An ideal family.

Billy Ansel, though, was always a man with a mission. Nothing

discouraged him or made him bitter. When he came back to Sam Dent,
right away he joined the VFW post in Placid, and soon he became an
officer and went to work making the boys who had served in Vietnam

respectable there, at a time when, most places, people still thought of
them as drug addicts and murderers. He got them out marching
proudly with the other vets every Fourth of July and Veterans Day. In
fact, until recently, to work for him at the garage, you yourself had to
be a Vietnam vet. He hired young men from all over the region, surly
boys with long hair and hurt looks on their faces. At different times he
even had a couple of black men working for him—very unusual in
Sam Dent. His men were loyal to him and treated him like he was their
lieutenant and they were still back in Vietnam. It was strange and in a
way thrilling to watch a lost boy get rehabilitated like that. After a year
or two, the fellow would have learned a trade, more or less, and he’d
brighten up, and soon he’d be gone, replaced a week later by another
sad-faced angry young man.

All the way across the back ridge on Staples Mill Road, Billy

followed the bus. Whenever I slowed to pick up a waiting child, I’d
look into the side mirror, and there he’d be, grinning through his beard
at the kids in the back seat, who liked to turn and make V-for-victory
signs at him. Especially Bear Otto, who regarded Billy Ansel as a hero,
and of course the twins, who, because of Bear’s protection, were
allowed by the older boys to sit in the back seat of the bus. Bear
dreamed of going into the Marines himself someday and working
afterwards in Billy’s garage. “Can’t go to no Vietnam no more,” he
once told me. “But there’s always someplace where they need the U.S.
Marines, right?” I nodded and hoped he was wrong. I have a son in the
military, after all. But I understood Bear Otto’s desire to become a
noble man, a man like Billy Ansel, and I respected that, naturally. I just
wished the boy had more ways of imagining the thing than by
becoming a good soldier. But that’s boys, I guess.

Out there on the far side of Irish Hill, just before Staples Mill

Road ties onto the old Marlowe road and makes a beeline for Sam
Dent, three miles away, there’s a stretch of tableland called Wilmot
Flats. Supposedly, in ancient times it was the bottom of a glacial river
or lake, but now it’s mostly poor sandy soil and scrub brush and jack
pine, with no open views of the mountains or valleys, at least not from
the road. The town dump takes up half the Flats, with the other half

parceled into odd lots with trailers on them and a couple of hand-built
houses that are little more than shanties, tarpaper-covered clusters of
tiny rooms heated by kerosene and wood. The folks who live in them
are mostly named Atwater, with a few Bilodeaus thrown in. Every
winter there’s a bad fire up on the Flats, and at town meeting for a
spell everyone talks about instituting regulations to govern the ways
houses are heated, as if the state legislature hadn’t already tried to
regulate them from down in Albany. But nothing ever comes of it—
there’s too many of us who heat with kerosene or wood to change
things. They’re dangerous, of course, but what isn’t?

Anyhow, I was making my stops up along the Flats, picking up

the last of my load—nine kids up there, except when there’s a virus
going around—boys and girls of various ages who are the poorest
children in town, generally. Their parents are young, little more than
teenaged kids themselves, and half of them are cousins or actual
siblings. There’s intermarriage up there and all sorts of mingling that
it’s better not to know about, and between that and alcohol and
ignorance, the children have little chance of doing more with their
lives than imitating their parents’ lives. With them, says Abbott, you
have to sympathize. Regardless of what you think of their parents and
the rest of the adults up there. It’s like all those poor children are born
banished and spend their lives trying to get back to where they belong.
And only a few of them manage it. The occasional plucky one, who
happens also to be lucky and gifted with intelligence, good looks, and
charm, he might get back, before he dies, to his native town. But the
rest stay banished, permanently exiled, if not up there on Wilmot Flats,
then someplace just like it.

That’s when I saw the dog. The actual dog, I mean—not the one I

thought I saw on the Marlowe road a few minutes later. It’s probably
irrelevant, but I offer it as a possible explanation for my seeing what I
thought was a dog later, since both were the same dull red color. The
dog on Wilmot Flats was a garbage hound, one of those wandering
strays you see hanging around the dump. They are often sick and
vicious and are known to chase deer, so the boys in town shoot them
whenever they come across one in the woods. Over the years I’ve

come up on four or five of their rotting corpses in the woods behind
our house, and it always gives me a painful chill and then a protracted
sad feeling. I don’t like the dogs one bit, but I hate to see them dead.

As I was saying, I had picked up the kids on the Flats and was

passing by the open chain-link entrance to the dump, when this
raggedy old mutt shot out the gate and ran across the road in front of
me, and it scared the bejesus out of me, although I could not for the
life of me tell you why, as he was ordinary-looking and there was no
danger of my hitting him.

My mind must have been locked onto something contrasted—my

sons Reginald and William, probably, since I felt that morning
particularly estranged from them, and you tend to embrace with
thought what you’re forbidden to embrace in fact. For when that dog
entered my field of vision, it somehow astonished and then frightened
me. The dog was skinny and torn-looking, a yellow-eyed young male
with a long pointed head and large ears laid flat against his skull as he
darted across the road, leapt over the snowbank, and disappeared into
the darkness of the scrub pine woods there.

Although the snow was blowing in feathery waves by then, the

road was still dry and black, easy to see, and I gripped the wheel and
drove straight on, as if nothing had happened. For nothing had
happened! Yet I wanted intensely to pull the bus over and stop, to sit
there for a moment and try to gather my fragmented thoughts and calm
my clanging nerves.

I glanced into the side mirror at Billy Ansel’s face smiling

through the windshield of his pickup, an innocent and diligent man
waving to children at play, and I felt a wave of pity for him come over
me, although I did not know what I pitied him for. I turned back from
the mirror and stared straight ahead at the road and clamped my hands
onto the steering wheel and drove on toward the intersection at the
Marlowe road, where I slowed, and when I saw that there was no
traffic coming or even going, I turned right and headed down the long
slope toward town.

passing lane and narrow shoulders and a bed of gravel and guardrails,
before it drops off a ways on the right-hand side to Jones Brook, which
is mostly boulders up there and not much water. Eventually, as the
brook descends it fills, and by the time it joins the Ausable River down
in the valley it’s a significant fast-running stream. There’s an old town
sandpit down there dug into the ancient lakebed, and a closed-off road
in from the Flats, near the dump. On the left-hand side, the land is
wooded and rises slowly toward Knob Lock Mountain and Giant in the
southeast.

Coming down from the Flats on the Marlowe road toward town,

the greatest danger was that I would be going too slow and a lumber
truck or some idiot in a car would come barreling along at seventy-five
or eighty, which you can easily do up there, once you’ve made the
crest from the other side, and would come up on me fast and not be
able to slow or pass and would run smack into me, or, more likely, first
would hit Billy Ansel’s pickup truck lollygagging along behind and
then the bus. As a result, since I didn’t have any more stops to make
once I’d gathered the kids from the Flats, I tended to drive that stretch
of road at a pretty good clip. Nothing reckless, you understand.
Nothing illegal. Fifty, fifty-five is all. Also, if I happened to be running
a few minutes late, that was the only time when I could make up for it.

After passing through the gloom and closed-in feeling of Wilmot

Flats, when you turn onto the Marlowe road and start the drive toward
town, you tend to feel uplifted, released. Or I should say, I always did.
The road is straight and there is more sky than land for the first time,
and the valley opens up below you and on your right, like Montana or
Wyoming—a large snow-covered bowl with a range of distant
mountains surrounding it, and beyond the mountains there are still
more mountains shouldering toward the sky, as if the surface of the
planet were the same everywhere as here. This was always the most
pleasurable part of my journey—with the bus in high gear and running
smooth, enough pale daylight now, despite the thin gauzy snow falling,
to see the entire landscape stretched out before me, and the busload of
children peaceful behind me as they contentedly conversed with one

another or silently prepared themselves for the next segment of their
long day.

And, yes, it was then that I saw the dog, the second dog, the one I

maybe only thought I saw. It emerged from the blowing snow on the
right side of the road, popped up from the ditch there, or so it seemed,
and crossed to the center of the road, where it appeared to stop, as if
unsure whether to continue or go back. No, I am almost sure now that
it was an optical illusion or a mirage, a sort of afterimage, maybe, of
the dog that I had seen on the Flats and that had frightened and moved
me so. But at the time I could not tell the difference.

And as I have always done when I’ve had two bad choices and

nothing else available to me, I arranged it so that if I erred I’d come
out on the side of the angels. Which is to say, I acted as though it was a
real dog I saw or a small deer or possibly even a lost child from the
Flats, barely a half mile away.

For the rest of my life I will remember that red-brown blur, like a

stain of dried blood, standing against the road with a thin screen of
blown snow suspended between it and me, the full weight of the
vehicle and the thirty-four children in it bearing down on me like a
wall of water. And I will remember the formal clarity of my mind,
beyond thinking or choosing now, for I had made my choice, as I
wrenched the steering wheel to the right and slapped my foot against
the brake pedal, and I wasn’t the driver anymore, so I hunched my
shoulders and ducked my head, as if the bus were a huge wave about
to break over me. There was Bear Otto, and the Lamston kids, and the
Walkers, the Hamiltons, and the Prescotts and the teenaged boys and
girls from Bartlett Hill, and Risa and Wendell Walker’s sad little boy,
Sean, and sweet Nichole Burnell, and all the kids from the valley, and
the children from Wilmot Flats, and Billy Ansel’s twins, Jessica and
Mason—the children of my town—their wide-eyed faces and fragile
bodies swirling and tumbling in a tangled mass as the bus went over
and the sky tipped and veered away and the ground lurched brutally
forward.

OceanofPDF.com

Billy Ansel

Just to show you how far I was from predicting the accident or
suspecting that it could occur—even though, except for Dolores
Driscoll, who drove the bus, I was surely the person in town closest to
the event, the only eyewitness, you might say—at the moment it
occurred I was thinking about fucking Risa Walker. My truck was right
behind the bus when it went over, and my body was driving my truck,
and one hand was on the steering wheel and the other was waving at
Jessica and Mason, who were aboard the bus and waving back at me
from the rear window—but my eyes were looking at Risa Walker’s
breasts and belly and hips cast in a hazy neon glow through the slats of
the Venetian blind in Room 11 of the Bide-a-Wile.

So I don’t know anything of what immediately preceded the

accident, although once it happened, of course, I saw it all, every last
mind-numbing detail. And still do, every time I close my eyes. The
swerve off the road to the right, the skid, the smashing of the guardrail
and the snowbank; and then the tilted angled plummet down the
embankment to the sandpit, where, moving fast and somehow still
upright, the bus slid across the ice to the far side; and then the ice
letting go and the rear half of the yellow bus being swallowed at once
by the freezing blue-green water.

I don’t close my eyes a whole lot now. Unless I’m drunk and

can’t help it—therefore, a frequently desired state, you might say.

Many of the folks in Sam Dent have come out since the accident

and claimed that they knew it was going to happen someday, oh yes,
they just knew it: because of Dolores’s driving, which, to be fair, is not
reckless but casual; or because of the condition of the bus itself, which
Dolores serviced at home in her barn, and as a consequence it did not

get the same supervision by me as the other school buses got; or
because of that downhill stretch of road and the fact that there’s almost
no shoulder to it on either side of the guardrail; or because of the
sandpit below the highway there, which the town had opened up a few
years before and then abandoned when it filled with water, thinking no
one could get to it except by the old blocked-off access road on the
other side of the Flats.

It’s a way of living with a tragedy, I guess, to claim after it

happens that you saw it coming, as if somehow you had already made
the necessary adjustments beforehand. I could understand that. But it
irritated me to hear it, especially with so many journalists poking
microphones in people’s faces and with all the downstate lawyers
crawling around looking for someone to blame, so I want to say right
out front that I was the person closest to the accident and I never saw it
coming.

I knew that stretch of road as well as anyone in town, and I knew

the bus inside and out, and I knew better than anyone what Dolores’s
driving habits were, because one of my habits was to follow her into
town every morning; and believe me, I was not in the slightest afraid
of an accident. I would be now, of course, because the accident has
changed everything, but back then, even though I expected death in a
general way as much as the next person—probably even more so,
since I am a widower and a Vietnam vet and had already learned a few
things about the precariousness of daily life—I was able that morning,
while I drove along behind the school bus, to let my mind fix on the
image of the woman I happened to be sleeping with, a woman I was
having an illicit affair with. Illicit because she was married to a friend
of mine.

I feel guilty for it, of course—for conducting the affair, I mean,

not for having a fantasy about sex with her at that awful moment in my
life, in her life, in the life of everybody in this town, practically. I
could as easily have been thinking about money, which I did not have
much of, as sex with Risa, which at that time I had quite a lot of,
owing, I suppose, to my freedom of movement and to her unhappiness
with her husband, Wendell, and her financial problems—although we

liked to believe then that we were in love with each other, and often
said it: “I love you, I love you, oh God, how I love you.” That sort of
thing; playing a role. We did talk that way then. We don’t anymore.

But it was a lie, and I think we both knew it. I surely did. I still

loved my wife, Lydia, and I don’t think Risa loved anyone except her
son, Sean. Nevertheless, we were both lonely and both burdened with
strong sexual natures. But neither of us had the ability to say that to the
other in a way that would not be hurtful. So, instead, we said, “I love
you,” and let it go at that. I have the benefit of hindsight now, of
course, and at the time maybe I half believed the tender words I
whispered in her ear after we had made love and I was still inside and
surrounding her, covering her body with mine in the darkness of the
motel room.

We used to meet like that, in Room 11 at the Bide-a-Wile, after

Wendell had gone early to bed alone, which he had been doing for
several years, except when there was a Montreal Expos ball game on
TV—Wendell adored the Expos; probably still does. I would leave my
kids with a babysitter, usually Nichole Burnell, who took care of the
house and kids from after school two days a week until eleven at night,
when her father, Sam, drove over from Bartlett Hill and picked her up.
The drill was for me to kiss the twins good night, tell Nichole that I
was going down to the Rendez-Vous or the Spread Eagle for a few
beers or to Placid for a movie, and a few minutes later, with the key
that Risa had given me, to let myself into Room 11 and sit in the
darkness and wait for Risa to arrive.

It sounds sordid, I know, but it didn’t feel cheap or low. It was too

often too lonely, too solitary, for that. Many nights Risa could not get
away to Room 11, and I sat there by myself in the wicker chair beside
the bed for an hour or so, smoking cigarettes and thinking and
remembering my life before Lydia died, until finally, when it was clear
that Risa could not get away from Wendell, I would leave the room
and walk across the road to the lot next to the Rendez-Vous where I
had parked my truck and drive home.

On those nights when Risa did arrive, we spent our time together

entirely in darkness, for we couldn’t turn on the room light, and we

barely saw each other, except for what we could make out in the dim
light from the motel sign outside falling through the blinds: rose-
colored profiles, the curve of a thigh or shoulder, a breast, a knee. It
was melancholy and sweet and reflective, and of course very sexual,
straightforwardly sexual, for both of us.

Our meetings were respites from our real and very troubled lives,

and we knew that. Whenever I saw Risa in daylight, in public, it was
as if she were a wholly different person, her sister, maybe, or a cousin,
who only resembled in vague ways the woman I was having an affair
with. I’m not sure that’s how I appeared to her—men and women see
each other differently. For instance, a man generally doesn’t even
know how small a woman really is until he holds an article of her
clothing up in front of him, one of her nightgowns, say, and sees how
small and flimsy it is and how like a child’s and unlike his own, and
how thick and heavy his hands seem. Women almost always appear
larger to us than they actually are, and we don’t have much
opportunity to observe how small and delicate their bodies are in
comparison to ours.

They know our size, of course, know it thoroughly, for they have

felt our weight on top of them—smaller people always know the size
of people who are larger than they. But we men have usually taken the
physical measure of the women in our lives only with our eyes, and
because we are secretly afraid of them, we tend to see women as
having bodies that are at least as large as our own. I think that’s one
reason why a man is so often surprised by how easily he can injure a
woman with his hands. Although I myself have never hurt a woman
with my hands. But you know how men talk to one another. Surprise is
one of our main motifs. We like to pretend we’re surprised by common
knowledge.

I remember one night shortly after my wife, Lydia, went into the

hospital to stay, I gathered up all her clothing and spread it across our
bed—dresses, blouses and skirts, jeans and shirts, nightgowns, her
underwear, even—and folded everything neatly and boxed it and
carried the boxes out to the garage, where we have a storage room in
back. I don’t know why I did that; she hadn’t died yet, although I knew

of course that in a few weeks at most she would be dead from the
cancer. But I could not bear to look at her clothes hanging in our closet
or see them whenever I opened a dresser drawer; I could not bear even
to walk past the closet or dresser and know that her clothes were
inside, hanging or neatly folded in darkness like some foolish hope for
her eventual return.

That night, without planning it, I made myself a double-sized

drink of Scotch and water (the twins had finally fallen off to sleep),
and I walked back to our bedroom and simply started to pack her
clothing, and at once it seemed deeply correct somehow, and so I went
on doing it until the job was done. I must have known this was a task
that I would have to do soon anyhow, and I must have sensed that it
would be much more painful for me later, with her dead, so I did it
now, while she was still alive, while I could keep myself from weeping
with self-pity.

It was not so bad, it was almost a kindness, as if she were about to

leave me and the children for a long journey, and as I held up her thin
blouses and nightgowns one by one and studied them, I was amazed at
how small they were, what bare scraps of cloth they were, seen like
that, without her body inside to fill them out and give them weight.

I remember that night and standing there beside our bed and

holding up my wife’s articles of clothing as clearly as if it were last
night; it was a discovery of an aspect of her deepest reality and,
through it, a discovery of a part of my own. Mourning can be very
selfish. When someone you love has died, you tend to recall best those
few moments and incidents that helped to clarify your sense, not of the
person who has died, but of your own self. And if you loved the person
a great deal, as I loved Lydia and my children, your sense of who you
are will have been clarified many times, and so you will have many
such moments to remember. I have learned that.

Nights now I can sit in my living room alone, looking at the glass

of the picture window, with the reflection of my body and the drink in
my hand and the chair and lamp beside me glaring flat and white back
at me, and I am in no way as real in that room as I am in my memories
of my wife and children. Sometimes it’s not as if they have died so

much as that I myself have died and have become a ghost. You might
think that remembering those moments is a way of keeping my family
alive, but it’s not; it’s a way of keeping myself alive. Just as you might
think my drinking is a way to numb the pain; it’s not; it’s a way to feel
the pain.

Four years ago—well, four years before the accident, the year

before Lydia died—she and I and the twins spent two weeks on the
island of Jamaica. It was late in the winter, early March, which is when
if you’re going to get out of Sam Dent at all, you get out then. I don’t
care how much you think you like the snow and ice and darkness of
upstate New York; after four or five months of it, nobody in this region
manages to keep from being depressed that late in the winter. And
unless you drive a snowplow or run a ski lift, you’re not making any
money here anyhow, so if you can afford it, you leave for anywhere
south of Albany. That March, for the first time in my life I could afford
it, the garage was finally running in the black, and Lydia was feeling
bad for the first time, although we did not yet know why. By May
they’d remove her thyroid; by the following May she’d be dead. We
merely thought we deserved a vacation, so to speak.

We rented a house, a “villa” the travel agent called it, but it was a

house, a modest three-bedroom cinder-block affair surrounded by a
chain-link fence. It was a compound, more or less, situated up on a hill
in an inland village a dozen miles west of Montego Bay. There was a
small swimming pool and a terrace and a yard stuffed with flowers,
and we had a part-time gardener and a cook, as advertised, local folks
whose relation to us was the same as the one most folks back home in
Sam Dent bore to summer people. In Jamaica we were winter people,
which was a little unsettling at first, but in a day or two we got used to
it (it’s amazing how fast you can accommodate yourself to luxuries
like domestic help and swimming pools), which gave me some insight
into the Adirondack summer people.

We weren’t big drinkers, Lydia and I, but we were smoking a lot

of dope. Both of us. Not so much back at home, because after all we
both had to work every day and take care of the kids and couldn’t very
well walk around stoned all day and night, and unless you were a

teenager, marijuana was somewhat difficult to acquire in Sam Dent.
Even so, by the time we went to Jamaica, marijuana had become our
recreational drug of choice, you might say, which meant that three or
four times a week, usually late at night in our bedroom at home, we
got high. In Jamaica, though, there was an abundance of very strong
dope, which they called ganja and sold cheap. There was cocaine too,
but we bought ganja. Every other kid on the street sold it; you could
smell it in the marketplace, on the crowded streets of Montego Bay,
even in the yard of our house.

I would rise early, and feeling wicked and weirdly dislocated,

would walk out onto the terrace and look over the hills to a silvery
wedge of sea glistening in the morning sun, and the breeze would carry
the smell of the natives’ wood-burning cook fires and marijuana
smoke across the tops of the trees straight into my face, and just like in
Vietnam, I would think, What a damned good idea, to get stoned early
and stay stoned all day long and go to sleep stoned. So I’d roll a joint
and take off. It made the dream and the threat of travel and being
surrounded by permanently poor black people whose language was
incomprehensible to me both safe and real—it woke me up without
scaring me.

With marijuana, your inner life and outer life merge and comfort

each other. With alcohol, too, they merge, but they tend to beat up on
you instead, and I didn’t particularly like getting beat up on. Which is
why I have never had a problem with alcohol. Until now, I mean.
Since the accident. I admit it; what do I lose by admitting it? I do have
a problem with alcohol, and I’ll probably continue that way until
something terrible happens and brings me up short, something I can’t
or won’t imagine now. It could be the collapse of my business;
although frankly I don’t think that would do it. It could be my own
death.

But back then I had a problem with marijuana, and I did not know

it. I thought it was just me taking unnecessary chances, and I was still
young and undamaged enough, despite Vietnam, to think you could get
away with taking unnecessary chances without admitting that you had
a problem. I believed that it was an interesting way to live. Lydia too—

although she was more cautious than I and followed a ways behind me,
just in case I stumbled and fell, which was her habit and temperament
in most things. We were a powerful couple, and I cannot think of her
without feeling my heart instantly harden against the thought, because
when I remember her and how powerful and happy we were and why I
loved her so, I think at once of her death. Just as with the twins, Jessica
and Mason. I can barely say their names without feeling the flesh of
my heart turn into iron. This is not bitterness; it’s what happens when
you have eaten your bitterness.

We had rented a car for the entire two weeks, a beat-up yellow

Ford Escort, and every day we left the house on a family outing of
some kind—the beach at Doctor’s Cave, Rose Hall, the straw market,
river rafting, whatever took our fancy—and usually on our way home
in the afternoon we stopped at a pathetic shabby little shopping center
in Montego Bay called Westgate, to pick up a few household supplies,
like toilet paper or paper towels, and snacks for the kids, who were
always tired and fussy by then. They loved those things called coco-
pops, clear plastic tubes of flavored ice hawked by kids in the parking
lot, sticky disgusting things that melted as soon as you bought them,
and while Lydia and I scurried up and down the aisles of the store, the
twins sucked their coco-pops and waited outside in the car.

One afternoon late in our stay, we drove back from what I think

was the beach at Doctor’s Cave—I don’t recall exactly where we were
coming from, but I do remember feeling sunburned and sandy, which
certainly suggests the beach—and stopped at Westgate. The last time
we had come here, Jessica and Mason had been hassled in the parking
lot by a bunch of local kids attracted to them by their whiteness and
the fact that they were twins, which seemed to have an unusual
fascination for people down there, even though they were not identical
twins. It was harmless enough, but because there hadn’t been any
adults to control the Jamaican kids, the episode had scared Jessica and
Mason. They were only four years old and did not have much interest
in other cultures.

Anyhow, this time, instead of waiting out in the lot in the car, they

followed us into the store, a cavernous supermarket with no air-

conditioning and smelling of sour milk, bad meat, and pickles. It was
like every food store on the island that we happened to enter during
those two weeks: half-empty shelves stocked more with paper goods
and bottles of rum for tourists than with food for the natives—a
generally depressing place, which I wanted to avoid, and but for the
kids, who seemed to need a few familiar things to eat and drink, potato
chips, cereal, packaged cookies, that sort of thing, I would have. Those
items comforted the children somehow. They were lonely in Jamaica,
and being the only white children in the village, or so it must have
seemed to them, they were always a little tense and frightened. All
their routines were broken, and they were not used to being without
TV, and they were not accustomed to receiving so much daytime
attention from us. The twins were at a very cautious age that spring,
and, too, they may have sensed, even before I or she herself did, that
their mother was sick. Also, they weren’t able, as Lydia and I were, to
get stoned every day and night.

Looking back, I feel very sorry for them. Then, I thought that we

were all having the time of our lives, which made it easier for me to
accept the high level of anxiety that the time of our life extracted as
payment. We were surrounded by black people, people who carried
machetes and sold drugs openly and talked a foreign-sounding English
in loud voices, who pointed at us because of our skin color and made
ugly noises with their lips at my wife or smiled and lied and tried to
take our money. But here we are, on vacation in Jamaica, I thought.
Isn’t that just the greatest thing an American dad can do for his family?
I think I’ll celebrate and reward myself by getting blasted on this
terrific ganja I bought today for only ten bucks while getting the car
filled with gas.

You think that way down there.
While we paid for our groceries at the register—always a slow

and sullen process interrupted by several arguments and exchanges
between the Jamaican clerks and customers—Mason went on ahead of
us to the car, so that when we arrived there he was already seated in
back, slurping at his second coco-pop. I put the bag of groceries into
the trunk, got in and backed away from the front of the store and drove

quickly out of the lot, sweating in the car, which distracted me
somewhat. I again regretted not having rented an air-conditioned car.

I remember that they were burning off the sugarcane fields at that

time of year. West of Montego Bay there were broad fields of
smoldering cane stubble, and the air was filled with a sugary haze that
smelled like burnt molasses. It looked like after a firefight, with
patches of grass flaming in the distance and the air filled with a spooky
haze that filtered out the sunlight but did not dull the bright green
foliage or the tall yellow grass. There was a kind of false breeze,
caused by the distant and immense heat of the fires, so that the air blew
warmly against your face, pushing toward the fires that burned behind
you.

When we had crossed the plain, we entered a neighborhood of

seaside houses owned by foreigners and rich Jamaicans, where high
concrete walls topped with razor wire ran alongside the narrow
winding coastal road. Then, after a few miles, we turned left and
started the three-mile climb into the hills to our village. Halfway up the
first long hill, I turned to smile at the twins in back. They had been
silent since Westgate, and I expected them to be asleep, curled up in
each other’s arms like litter mates, like puppies or kittens, which was
their inclination then, so that you couldn’t tell whose blond head
belonged to which set of arms and legs, or whether they were two
separate children at all and not one strange creature with two heads
and eight limbs, which I am sure is how they themselves sometimes
felt.

But they were not sleeping. Mason stared absently out the

window; he was alone in the back seat. Jessica was gone.

Had she somehow climbed over to the front, to sit in her mother’s

lap, and I hadn’t noticed? I looked over at Lydia, whose eyes were half
closed, approaching sleep, trusting me to get us all safely, smoothly
back to the house. She wore shorts and halter, her pale hair tied back
with a pink scarf, her tanned arms and legs glittering with dried sea
salt. There was no child on her lap. Our daughter was gone.

narrow road, and with a sideways glance checked the rear doors, for
perhaps one had opened and—too horrible to believe, maybe, but not
too horrible to imagine, not for me—she had fallen from the car
without a cry and, amazingly, no one had seen it, not even her twin
brother, seated next to her. Both doors were shut tight.

We were almost at the top of the hill, approaching the turnoff to

the potholed lane that led along the narrow tree-covered ridge to our
house. Pale green sunlight fell at oblique angles through the trees and
speckled the roadway and the packed dirt yards of the tiny tin-roofed
houses. I remember that. Barefoot children walked along the edges of
the rain gullies, lugging water home from the village stand-pipe in
buckets that they balanced on their heads. It was almost evening, time
to begin cooking supper. Where was our daughter? How had she been
taken from us?

I kept driving straight on toward what we called home and could

not say aloud the words that were thrashing me, as if somehow by
remaining silent I could keep the terrible thing from having occurred.
Finally, when we passed through the gate and drew up in front of the
house, I said, without turning back to him, “Mason, is Jessica asleep?”

I was afraid, terrified, and did not yet believe that such a thing

could happen to you in America or even while on vacation from
America. My wife had not yet died, and my two children had not yet
been taken from me in the accident, so all I had to go on was what had
happened to me in Vietnam when I was a nineteen-year-old kid, and by
some necessary logic, I believed that because terrible things had
happened to me then and there, it was impossible for them to happen
here and now. I did not want to give up that logic; it was like my
childhood: if I admitted that my daughter had been kidnapped or had
fallen from the car or had simply been lost in a foreign country, then
the whole world for the rest of my life would be Vietnam. I knew that.

Mason’s response was very strange—or at least that’s how I

remember it. Of course, you have to keep in mind that Lydia and I
were pretty much stoned most of the time, so that when we were
coming down we were thinking about having been high, and when we

finally were down, like now, we were thinking about getting high
again. Our perspective on things was tilted, and foreground kept
getting confused with background, and vice versa. Mason answered,
“You left her at the store.” Straight out, as if he were slightly pleased
by my having abandoned his twin sister and somewhat annoyed by his
having to remind me.

But twins are like that. They behave in ways, especially regarding

each other, that can seem very strange to someone who is not a twin
himself. They have a morality that is different from ours—at least
when they are young they do—because, unlike other children, they are
not inclined to imitate adults until much later. To children who are
twins, even when they are not identical, the other twin is both more
and less real than everyone else in the family, and they deal with each
other the way we deal with ourselves alone. Which means that it’s like
twins are permanently stoned. I don’t think that’s an exaggeration.

I started to holler. “Jesus, Mason! I left her at the store? Why the

hell didn’t you say something?”

“My God! How could we do that?” Lydia cried. “How could we

have left her there?”

“I thought she was sleeping!” I shouted at her. By now I had the

car turned around and headed back up the drive toward the gate. “I
thought she was sleeping in back!”

“Hurry,” she said. “And shut up. Please.”
“What the hell did I do? I didn’t do anything wrong, it was a

goddamn accident,” I said.

“No one’s to blame, we’re both to blame, we’re all to blame, even

she is, so let’s just get back there and pray that she’s all right. That no
one—”

“She’ll be fine,” I said. “No one’ll hurt her. These people, they

love children.” I said it, but I didn’t believe it. How could my four-
year-old daughter be safe among people I myself felt frightened of?
The image of flaxen-haired Jessica searching the aisles of the store for
us, wide-eyed, fighting tears, lower lip trembling as she starts to call
for us, “Mommy? Daddy? Where are you?”—the thought made me

tremble with rage, and because I could not blame my wife or son for
what Jessica was enduring, I had to blame myself alone, and because,
as Lydia had said, I could not blame myself alone, I blamed love.

This was the beginning of what I have come to think of as the

permanent end of my childhood and adolescence. The Vietnamization
of my domestic life. Which is why I am telling you this. What had
been an exception was now possibly the rule. That headlong terrified
drive back down the hill and across the smoking cane fields to
Westgate in Montego Bay, Jamaica—there began the secret hardening
of my heart, a process that today, as I guess is obvious, is nearly
complete.

Jessica was not in the parking lot. A scattering of skinny shirtless

boys in bare feet kicked a bundled rag in loopy overhead arcs. I drew
the car up in front of the grocery store, leapt out, and made for the
door; then remembered Mason and came running back. But Lydia
already had him out of the car and was hurrying along behind, holding
his hand. He was oddly calm and watched the older boys enviously, as
if he did not understand what was happening to our family, although of
course he did.

There was a single strange thought leading me into the store: I

will make this one last try to save her, and then I will give it up. I must
have known that if my child was indeed to be lost to me, then I would
need all my strength just to survive that fact, so I had decided ahead of
time not to waste any of my strength trying to save what was already
lost.

You are probably astonished that I gave her up so easily. And

although you could say that it was only a minor event in my life, a
scare is all, that broke me, you’d be wrong; I think I was broken long
before that afternoon in Jamaica, possibly in Vietnam but more likely
not. Maybe in the womb, or even earlier. If not broken, I was
weakened. Which is not all bad, you understand. The way we deal with
death depends on how it’s imagined for us beforehand, by our parents
and the people who surround them, and what happens to us early on.
And if we believed properly in death—the way we actually do believe
in taxes, for instance—and did not insist on thinking that we had it

beat, we might never even have had a Vietnam war. Or any war.
Instead, we believe the lie, that death, unlike taxes, can be postponed
indefinitely, and we spend our lives defending that belief. Some people
are very good at it, and they become our nation’s heroes. Some, like
me, for obscure reasons, see the lie early for what it is, fake it for a
while and grow bitter, and then go beyond bitterness to … to what? To
this, I suppose. Cowardice. Adulthood.

We entered the store frantic, wild-eyed, looking ridiculous, I’m

sure, and the three women at the registers saw us and smiled
knowingly and pointed, together in a single gesture, as in a chorus line,
to the counter at the end, where Jessica was seated cross-legged like a
little blond yogi, sucking on an orange coco-pop and studying the
pages of a Jamaican romance comic book. She hadn’t seen us, or if she
had, she had decided to ignore us.

Lydia got to her first and swept her up in her arms. Mason and I

hung back a bit—emotions in dignified check. When Lydia put her
down, Jessica marched quickly past me and out the door, haughty,
empowered by neglect, with Mason falling in line behind her, and the
two of them got into the back seat of the car and began together to
study the drawings of the black men and women in love. A tall, broad-
shouldered cashier asked me for two dollars for the comic book and
the coco-pops Jessica had consumed, and I paid her, and Lydia and I
left the store.

We never returned to that store; we couldn’t face the cashiers, I

think. Also, we stopped smoking marijuana. It was one of those
episodes that clarify things, that shape and control your future
behavior. We never went back to Jamaica, of course: a year later, Lydia
was dead. Four years later, the twins were dead. And now, here am I.

I could say that I saw it all coming, like most people in town do,

but unlike them, I’d almost be lying. It’s just that after Jamaica, while I
expected death, I did not anticipate it.

That’s how Risa thinks, however, and she believes it, poor woman

—she actually believes that she saw it all coming. Before the accident,
for several years, mainly due to her collapsed marriage and numerous

financial problems, she was merely a woman depressed and troubled;
but that’s what she thinks of now as prescience. Which is like writing
history backward, if you ask me, fixing the past to fit the present.
Hindsight made over into foresight.

“Oh, I knew it, Billy,” she told me after the accident, when finally

we could speak of it to each other. “I knew for the longest time, I knew
that something terrible was coming down. When I heard the sirens and
the alarm from the firehouse, nobody had to tell me that something
terrible had happened, that something unimaginably awful had been
visited on me and Wendell, and on you, too, and on the entire town. I
knew it instantly, because I had known for months that it was coming.
That was why all those months, all the time we were meeting each
other, in fact, I was so unhappy and turbulent in my emotions.”

Risa actually said that to me. And when she did, it turned me off,

but there was a time when that particular cast to her mind, the
superstitious part of it, you might say, made her appear wonderfully
attractive to me. After the accident, however, it made her seem stupid
and weak, and it embarrassed me to find myself talking so intimately
with her.

She had always been essentially the same person, of course, just

as I had been, but the Bide-a-Wile Motel, which she and Wendell
bought from the bank at auction and which anyone who’d ever tracked
the economy of this town could have predicted would be nothing but a
sinkhole for their little bit of money (that’s the sort of thing you can
predict), was probably the start of her decline, the ending of her dream,
the end of her youth. Some people, when their dreams collapse, turn
superstitious in order to explain it, and Risa is one of them. The motel,
in addition to the insurmountable financial difficulties it created for
them, made Wendell, who’d always worked behind the counter of
someone else’s business, never his own, look lazy and a little dumb
and pessimistic to her, which of course he was anyhow and had been
from the day they married. But she hadn’t seen it before, and now she
believed that his character was getting in front of her realizing a very
important dream. That got her angry at him in a profound way, which
drove him further into himself, and although they both loved their boy

Sean dearly, they soon began to love each other less. That’s when he
started going to bed early and alone, and Risa started meeting me in
Room 11.

By that time, which was about three years before the accident,

their marriage was essentially dead, except for their love of Sean, of
course. I suppose I want to believe that; anyone who’s an interloper in
a marriage wants to think the marriage was dead before he pulled up
and parked; but in this case I’m sure it’s the truth.

It started innocently enough—that is, without my knowing

anything had been started. I’ve known Risa and Wendell most of my
life; we more or less grew up together here in Sam Dent, although Risa
is a few years younger than Wendell and I. When I was in Vietnam,
Wendell, who was bagging groceries at Valley Grocery in Keene
Valley, started dating Risa, who was then barely out of the eighth
grade. They stuck together, though, and the year she graduated high
school, he got a job as a Tru-Value cashier in Marlowe, and they got
married. I always liked Wendell, even though he was indeed, as Risa
eventually discovered, lazy and pretty dumb and pessimistic. That’s a
hard combination for a wife to like, and frankly I never would have
hired him to work for me, even if he had been one of the Vietnam vets
who for a long time were the only people I hired at the garage. But
Wendell made it relatively simple, by being good-looking and passive,
for a man to call him a friend. (Some folks might regard him as low-
key or easygoing, but I have to say passive.)

What it came down to was that in an important sense, Wendell

didn’t really give a damn about much. He liked sports—TV sports, that
is; he was a little heavy in the gut to play any himself—and he was
very fond of his son. Not like Risa was, of course, for she was much
more intense about everything than he, but sufficiently fond to have his
heart broken by the boy’s death.

Wendell is like the rest of us, a person whose life has two

meanings, one before the accident and one after. I doubt, however, that
he worries much about connecting the two meanings, as the rest of us
do, but that’s Wendell Walker. That was always Wendell Walker. Even
so, I felt guilty because, before his life became a tragedy, he was

basically a likable fellow. Just as, before her life became a tragedy,
Risa’s superstitious nature was an aspect of her character that was
downright attractive. At least to me it was.

I was a widower and a relatively young man still, with two small

children in a big house and a business that was making money but was
top-heavy with debt. Those were the facts that filled my head night and
day—the death of my wife, the needs of my children, and cash flow at
the garage. For a year or so after Lydia died, and even for most of the
year before she died, it was as if I had no sexual nature. From the time
she went to the hospital to stay, I woke alone in that huge king-sized
bed of ours every morning in darkness and never once had an erection
or even thought about the pleasures Lydia and I had taken from each
other in that bed at exactly that time of day so many hundreds of times;
I couldn’t permit such a thought. I had work to do, children to wash
and dress and feed and get off to school so I could get to the garage by
eight, and at the garage I’d work like two men until the kids got out of
school, so I’d be free then to drive them to Cub Scouts and Brownies,
to their friends’, to the dentist in Placid, to Ames in Saranac for winter
boots, stopping off at the Grand Union for groceries that I’d cook for
supper and popcorn for after supper while watching TV together, and
when they had gone to bed, I’d stay up late drinking and doing the
garage account books that Lydia used to take care of. I had started
drinking pretty heavily by then; but nothing like now.

For a long time, though, that was my whole life. There was no

way I could let myself think about anything that did not lie directly
before me—the death of my wife, the physical and emotional needs of
my children, and my business. It was as if during that period I were
crossing a crevasse on a high wire, and if I once looked down at the
ground or off to the side or even ahead of me or behind, I’d fall, and
I’d take down with me anyone holding on to me, meaning my children.

Then I started to change. First in erotic dreams and after a while

in fantasy—little pornographic movies in which I was both actor and
audience: my sexual nature had begun to reassert itself. It was only
chromosomal and glandular, but even so, whenever it happened I felt
oddly disloyal to Lydia. While she was alive I had been able to wake

from my dream or fantasy and immediately cast her in the leading
female role and let reality take over; but with her gone, if I tried
casting her, the dream turned instantly to grief and sorrow. It was
specifically to avoid that pain that I auditioned for the sex scenes
numerous women I knew personally and believed I could be attracted
to—the wives and daughters of the town of Sam Dent. And to my
surprise, my number one sex goddess turned out to be Risa Walker.

I say surprise because Risa was by no stretch of the imagination

the sexiest woman in town. That title went by male consensus to
Wanda Otto, whom the boys in the garage called The Beatnik Queen,
because of her long straight hair and her eye makeup and the low-cut
knit dresses she wore. It was probably the image of 1960s hippie sex
that she evoked—most of my mechanics suffered from a kind of time
warp anyhow. Also, Wanda behaved in what you might call a
provocative way—at least it provoked the boys in the garage, who
scrambled to fill her Peugeot with gas whenever she drove in.
Normally, when someone pulled up to the pump, Bud or Jimbo or
whoever was on duty only crawled further into the vehicle he was
working on and pretended not to see or hear it. Selling gas was strictly
a necessary frill at the station, and whoever happened to be on duty
was supposed to look after it; there was no regular attendant, and I
myself spent most of my time in the office, with Lydia when she was
alive and alone afterwards, or supervising the more delicate and
difficult jobs out in the garage. No one wanted to pump gas. But
Wanda Otto never to my knowledge wore a bra, and so long as she was
without her husband, Hartley, or her son, the Indian boy Bear, she had
a habit of driving into the station with her dress pulled halfway up her
very attractive thighs. Wanda could get a mechanic out from under the
hood and beside her open window faster than any other customer. She
laughed easily and flirted and used expressions like “Shit!” and
“Fuck!” if you told her she was down a quart, and that turned men on.
Although it probably scared them too, because I don’t know of anyone
who ever made a direct pass at Wanda, at least not when he was sober.
They just talked about it with one another.

Risa, by contrast, though she is an intense person and when

present fills your entire screen, drawing all your attention, is
unadorned, shy, and private. Her manner, until the accident, was
upbeat and warm, but her smile was undercut by a look of permanent
sadness that she seemed to be trying to hide, as if she were struggling
to protect you from it. Everyone liked Risa, but when she pulled in
with her Wagoneer, no one rushed out to fill her tank, and like most
people, she often had to fill it herself. She is tall, broad-shouldered,
with ample breasts and a nice large female butt that she covers with
somewhat mannish clothes, flannel shirts and loose jeans, that sort of
thing. Typical for up here. She is the kind of woman who makes a man
think of his favorite sister, if he has one, or his best friend’s sister, if he
doesn’t. Not a likely candidate for erotic fantasy.

But lying half drunk in the darkness in that king-sized bed in my

house on the hill, the twins sleeping soundly in their room at the end of
the hall, I’d imagine Risa Walker naked and ecstatic, and it positively
thrilled me. Took me straight out of the misery of my daily life and let
my hormones run things for a while. Risa released me sexually when
no other woman could. Women like Wanda Otto are already so close to
naked and ecstatic in public, it’s not much of a thrill to take them one
more step alone and in private. In fact, what you imagine is a woman
you can’t satisfy—an image that is well known for dousing the fire in a
man. But picturing Risa—calm, reticent, controlled, decent, and
modest Risa Walker—picturing her wild with passion, sweating and
naked, long legs akimbo, hands digging into your back, mouth
grunting and licking into your ear … well, that’s a picture a man can
cook with.

In time, the fantasies were insufficient. That’s how it is—the more

vivid the imagined sex, the less satisfying it is as sex. You have to keep
upping the ante, just like they do in pornographic movies, until finally
you have to either replace it with the real thing or else rent a different
movie. I didn’t want a different movie; by then all I wanted was Risa
Walker. Any other woman was a diminishment, and even a slight
diminishment was a total loss. I wanted, I needed, Risa.

and in all the years I had known her, she had not once shown the
slightest interest in going to bed with anyone other than her husband.
Especially not with me. To be fair, I had not given her much
opportunity. I am known as a self-contained man and am probably not
very approachable, which has always been my choice of character
anyhow, insofar as a person can choose his character.

I like to be the strong, silent man in charge, the boss, the point

man, the lieutenant, the head of the household, et cetera, a preference
that may come from my having been the oldest of five children, with a
more or less incompetent mother and a father who took off for Alaska
when I was twelve and was never heard from again. Looking back, it
seems I spent most of my youth cleaning up my father’s mess and the
rest of my life making sure that no one mistook me for him. He was an
impractical man, not quite honest, a fellow of grand beginnings and no
follow-through, one of those men who present their children and wives
with dreams instead of skills, charm in place of discipline, and
constant seduction for love and loyalty. When he took off to make a
fortune in the oil fields, he left behind a huge hole in the yard that was
going to be a swimming pool, a pile of cinder blocks that was going to
be a restaurant, a hundred old casement windows that were going to be
a greenhouse, a stack of IOUs written to half the people in town, and a
promise to return by fall, which no one in town wanted him to keep.

Anyhow, when I began trying to seduce Risa Walker, I found

myself behaving like my father, which embarrassed me and made me
feel incompetent as well. I felt his phony smile on my face, heard his
glib words coming from my mouth, and it made me cringe. I’d be
pumping gas into her Wagoneer and mouthing lines like “Gee, Risa,
you’re looking swell these days! Life must agree with you, or you
must agree with life, or something like that anyhow….” I’d smile and
smile and yammer on, playing a part. Then suddenly I’d switch roles.
I’d have somehow become a member of the audience, and I’d hear
myself yammering on, and it would be my father, and I’d see myself
wink and grin and see my father, so I’d break off in the middle and
freeze Risa out completely, leaving her somewhat confused, I’m sure.

Other times I’d call her on the phone, and if Wendell answered, I’d gab
about the Expos and the weather and local politics, like we were close
buddies, which we were not; if Risa answered, I’d just ask for
Wendell. Passing by the motel in my truck, if I happened to see her
outside, I’d slow almost to a stop, wave like a long-lost friend, and
when she made a move toward me, I’d speed up and take off, as if I
were heading to a fire.

I have never been good with women, that is, skilled at the games

that most men play—flirting, cajoling, soliciting their attention and
favors—and until Risa, had never especially wanted to be. After all, I
had always been able to count on Lydia. Who needed to flirt? Lydia
and I in a sense spent our whole lives together: we were childhood
friends and then high school sweethearts, and when I came back from
Vietnam we discovered that we still loved each other, and so we got
married. Technically, I was faithful to Lydia from beginning to end.
There were a couple of occasions while we were married when, drunk
or stoned or just inattentive, I slipped into what might be called
compromising positions with a few local women, who shall remain
nameless, but I got out before any damage was done and was even able
to come home feeling virtuous. And there were a few sexual
encounters with bar girls and prostitutes when I was in the service,
Stateside and in Vietnam and once in Honolulu. Sowing wild oats, as
they say. But in fact, for my age, I was unusually inexperienced in
sexual matters.

The night Risa and I finally got together, it happened not because

of anything I did but because Risa simply came up and put it to me at
the bar at the Rendez-Vous, where I was sitting over a beer watching
an NBA playoff on TV with three or four other men. She’d come
through the door and stood there a minute as if looking for someone in
particular. Then she walked straight to me, slipped her arm through
mine and leaned in close and whispered in my ear, “Listen, Billy, when
you’re through here, why don’t you come over and visit me? Room
11,” she added, and patted my forearm and departed. As simple as that.

I left at halftime. Los Angeles was beating the hell out of Utah,

and I just said I was going home. It was a cold, clear spring night with

a sky full of stars, and my breath puffed out in front of me in little
clouds as I walked past my pickup in the parking lot, crossed the road,
and practically jogged the hundred or so yards along the road to the
motel and went straight to Room 11.

I don’t know how much in fact I had controlled or arranged it,

how much I actually had seduced her with my awkward embarrassed
onslaughts of alternating attention and withdrawal—probably a lot
(sometimes you act a part and don’t realize that the role is of a man
who doesn’t know how to act). But that night it appeared to me that
Risa alone had made it possible for me to be, once again, not my father
but myself, the strong, silent type of man I admired and had grown
used to being, and I was deeply relieved and immensely grateful to her.

From then on, I guess you could say we were in love. At least we

called it that. From start to finish, though, it was a secret affair. Risa
has always assured me that no one knew we were in love; she insists
that during the nearly three years we were involved she confided in no
one. Consequently, she had her private version of the love affair, and I
had mine, and there was no third version to correct them. None that I
know of, anyhow.

As a result, until the morning of the accident, Risa Walker and I

behaved toward each other as if we could go on like that forever—
meeting and making love a couple of times a week in a darkened room
late at night for an hour or two, and acting like mere acquaintances the
rest of the time. Our love affair seemed to be permanently suspended
halfway between fantasy and reality. Our sense of time and sequence
was open-ended; it was like a movie with no beginning and no ending,
and it remained that way because we did nothing to make our
relationship public, to involve other people, a process that would have
been started if Risa had ever confided in someone or if I had revealed
it to someone. That would have objectified it somehow, taken it
outside our heads, and no doubt would have led Risa to choose
between me and Wendell, or would have led me to demand it. She
would have chosen me, I believe that, and we would have married
soon after. And then, by the time of the accident, when we lost our

children, we would have had each other to turn to, instead of away
from, which is what we did.

Out there on the Marlowe road that snowy morning, I remember

at last climbing back up the embankment from the sandpit to the road
and seeing her in the crowd. It was by then a large mixed stunned
gathering along the shoulder of the road, of parents and local folks
trying to calm and comfort one another, and cold exhausted state
troopers, firemen, and rescue workers, and a pack of ravenous
photographers and journalists. There was even a TV camera crew from
the NBC affiliate in Plattsburgh on the scene, headed by a blond
woman in tights and leg warmers and a leather miniskirt who kept
shoving her microphone at people’s gray faces, asking them what they
were feeling. As if they could say.

Of course, I thought of Vietnam, but nothing I had seen or felt in

Vietnam had prepared me for this. There was no fire and smoke or
explosive noise, no wild shouts and frightened screams; instead, there
was silence, broken ice, snow, and men and women moving with
abject slowness: there was death, and it was everywhere on the planet
and it was natural and forever; not just dying, perversely here and
merely now.

And when I saw Risa Walker standing among the others up there

by the road, it was as if I were seeing her for the first time in my life—
as if seeing her on newsreel footage, a woman from the village who
had lost her son, a mother who had lost her only child. She was like a
stranger to me then, a stranger whose life had just been made utterly
meaningless. I know this because I felt the same way. Meaning had
gone wholly and in one clot right out of my life too, and as a result I’m
sure I was like a stranger to her as well. Our individual pain was so
great that we could not recognize any other.

The bus had not been hauled out—you could see the front end of

the vehicle up on the ice-cluttered far bank of the pit, like some huge
dying yellow beast caught struggling to clamber out and frozen in the
midst of the attempt, with the rest of the thing underwater. The snow
and the cold made everyone down there—the rescue workers, the wet-
suited divers from Burlington, the state troopers—move slowly,

hunched in on their bodies as if with fear and permanent resentment,
like lifetime prisoners in a Siberian gulag.

On the near bank, covered with dark green wool blankets, were

the bodies of the last of the children removed from the bus by the
divers, the kids who had been seated near the back. They had been laid
out in the trampled snow but had not been brought up to the road yet.
And among these were the bodies of Risa’s son, Sean, who had been in
front but whose body had got jammed under a seat, and the Ottos’ boy,
Bear, and my twins, Mason and Jessica.

I had seen them myself, I looked straight down into their peaceful

ice-blue faces, and then quickly drew the blankets back over them
again, turned and walked away alone, numb and solid as stone, and
climbed slowly, on legs that weighed like lead, the steep side of the
frozen embankment to the road. Photographs of them alive and smiling
would have made me cry and fall down and beat the earth with my
fists; their actual dead faces only sealed me off from myself.

I don’t know where I was going, whom I was looking for. Yes, I

do know. Lydia. I was looking for Lydia—to tell her that our children
were dead, and that I had not been able to save them, and that finally
we were all four of us together again.

The last of the ambulances had left for the medical center in

Marlowe, where they were taking the survivors before dispatching the
most seriously injured children to Lake Placid and Plattsburgh, and the
firehouse in Sam Dent, where they had set up a temporary morgue, and
there was a break while the workers waited for them to return for the
rest. The wrecker from my garage, driven by Jimbo Gagne, was being
brought around by the dump road from Wilmot Flats, preceded by a
huge town snowplow, for that road had not been used since fall and
was under six or eight feet of snow.

Except for Dolores Driscoll, who was uninjured and had

remained down by the sandpit, lost and mumbling in a kind of shock
but refusing stubbornly to leave the scene, there were no more
survivors. Everyone knew that now. Those of us who had not left with
the ambulances knew what we were waiting for—the removal of the

last of the bodies of our children. Some people sobbed and wailed into
the arms of friends and strangers, whoever would hold them; a few had
been placed in the back seats of friends’ cars; a few others, like Risa,
just stood among friends and relatives and stared silently at the ground,
their minds emptied of thought or feeling.

I guess I was one of these, although at first I had tried to keep on

working down below alongside the other men, as if my own children
had not been on the bus, as if this had happened to someone else and
not me. At first, a few people—Jimbo and Bud from the garage, who
had raced out at once with the wrecker when they heard on the CB that
there’d been an accident (a message that in fact I myself had called in,
although I don’t know how I managed that; I don’t even remember it),
and Wyatt Pitney, the state trooper, and a couple of guys on the rescue
squad—had tried to get me the hell out of there, but like Dolores, I
wouldn’t leave.

Later, I learned that people thought I was being courageous. Not

so. There were selfish reasons for my behavior. I shoved everyone
away and kept more or less to myself, silent, stone-faced, although
continuing nonetheless to help the other men, as we received one child
after another from the divers and wrapped them in blankets and
dispatched them in stretchers up the steep slope to the road and the
waiting ambulances, as if by doing that I could somehow prolong this
part of the nightmare and postpone waking up to what I knew would
be the inescapable and endless reality of it. No one spoke. Somehow,
at bottom, I did not want this awful work to end. That’s not courage.

It was still snowing pretty hard; close to half a foot of it had fallen

since the bus had gone over. There was no horizon. The sky was ash
gray and hung low over the mountains. Within a few hundred yards the
spruce trees and pines in the wide valley below the road and the thick
birch trees and the road itself quickly dimmed and then simply faded
into sheets of falling snow and disappeared entirely from view. There
was a long disorderly line of cars, pickups, snowmobiles, and police
cruisers parked on the shoulder, while several troopers wearing
fluorescent orange jackets stood out in the middle of the road directing
traffic, hurrying onlookers—skiers mostly, up for the weekend,

delighted by the new snow, slowed suddenly and properly sobered by
the sight of our town’s disaster, memorizing as much of it as they
could, so as to confirm it to their friends later, when it appeared in the
newspapers and on television—past the scene and on to their weekend.

When I reached the top of the embankment, I stepped over the

orange plastic ribbon the state troopers had hung along the roadway to
keep people from scrambling down to the crash site. One of the
troopers, a man I knew vaguely, came toward me, as if to escort me,
and when I looked straight through him and waved him off, he backed
quickly away, as if I had cursed him. That’s when I saw Risa, standing
a few feet in front of Wendell, who looked as though someone had
punched him in the chest: all the force had gone out of him, and his
face was twisted with the pain of the blow. By comparison, Risa was
solid and resolved, already mourning, and slowly she looked up and
then saw me when I passed near her. We could no longer pretend to
love each other or even pretend to be hiding our love. Our eyes locked
for a fraction of a second, and then we both looked away, and I moved
on.

After that it was as if no one dared to talk to me or come forward

in any way; I walked straight down the line of parents and other
townspeople, the onlookers, cops, and reporters, until finally I was
alone, plodding along the side of the road, moving uphill, back the way
barely two hours earlier the school bus had come and then right behind
it I had come in my pickup, idly daydreaming of sleeping with Risa
Walker.

The snow continued to fall, and from the perspective of Risa and

the others back at the accident site, I must have disappeared into it, just
walked straight out of their reality into my own. In a few moments I
was utterly alone in the cold snowy world, walking steadily away from
everyone else, moving as fast as I could, toward my children and my
wife.

For a long time that’s how it was for me; perhaps it still is. The

only way I could go on living was to believe that I was not living. I
can’t explain it; I can only tell you how it felt. I think it felt that way
for a lot of people in town. Death permanently entered our lives with

that accident. And while some people simply denied it, as poor
Dolores Driscoll seems to have done, or moved to another part of the
state and attempted to start their lives over, like the Lamstons, or tried
to believe that death had been there all along, like Risa, claiming no
difference between then and now, which is a way of denying it too—
for me, and perhaps for some of the children who survived the
accident, like Nichole Burnell and the Bigelows and Baptistes and the
several sad little Bilodeau kids whose older brothers and sisters had
been killed, for us there was life, true life, real life, no matter how bad
it had seemed, before the accident, and nothing that came after the
accident resembled it in any important way. So for us, it was as if we,
too, had died when the bus went over the embankment and tumbled
down into the frozen water-filled sandpit, and now we were lodged
temporarily in a kind of purgatory, waiting to be moved to wherever
the other dead ones had gone.

We didn’t have available to us the various means that many of our

neighbors and relatives had for easing the blow. At least I didn’t. The
Christians’ talk about God’s will and all—that only made me angry,
although I suppose I am glad that they were able to comfort
themselves with such talk. But I could not bring myself to attend any
of the memorial services that the various churches in Sam Dent and the
neighboring towns invited me to. It was enough to have to listen to
Reverend Dreiser at the twins’ funeral. He wanted us all to believe that
God was like a father who had taken our children for himself. Some
father.

The only father I had known was the one who had abandoned his

children to others.

And then there were those folks who wanted to believe that the

accident was not really an accident, that it was somehow caused, and
that, therefore, someone was to blame. Was it Dolores’s fault? A lot of
people thought so. Or was it the fault of the State of New York for not
replacing the guardrail out there on the Marlowe road? Was it the fault
of the town highway department for having dug a sandpit and let it fill
with water? What about the seat belts that had tied so many of the
children into their seats while the rear half of the bus filled with icy

water? Was it the governor’s fault, then, for having generated
legislation that required seat belts? Who caused this accident anyhow?
Who can we blame?

Naturally, the lawyers fed off this need and cultivated it among

people who should have known better. They swam north like sharks
from Albany and New York City, advertising their skills and intentions
in the local papers, and a few even showed up at the funerals, slipping
their cards into the pockets of mourners as they departed from the
graveyard, and before long that segment of the story had begun—the
lawsuits and all the anger and nastiness and greed that people at their
worst are capable of.

At first, however, people behaved well, which is to say, they

behaved as you would expect: they decently gathered around one
another and tried to provide comfort and aid. That’s when you could be
glad that you lived in a small town, relieved that you had family and
friends, whether they could help you or not. The attempt was dignified
and praiseworthy.

Most of my own family, at first, did exactly that, and I was

appropriately grateful. We are not an unusual family—that is, we are
not much of one. My mother, because of Alzheimer’s, had been in a
nursing home in Potsdam for over two years then, and she no longer
even remembered the bare fact of my existence, let alone my
children’s; but my three sisters, who are married and have children of
their own, called me as soon as they heard about the accident on the
evening news. They and I are not personally close, we are in no sense
confidants, but they are conscientious women and live in the area, you
could say—the nearest, Sally, in Saratoga Springs, with her husband,
who is an accountant for the racetrack commission, the other two in
western New York, Rochester and Buffalo, where their husbands work,
one as a machinist, the other as some kind of technician for Eastman
Kodak. My brother, Darryl, the youngest, is out of the loop altogether.
Years ago, he followed our father to Alaska but only got as far as
Washington State and didn’t quite disappear; once every eighteen
months or so, he gets drunk and calls me late at night. I never heard
from Darryl when the twins were killed, although I am sure he learned

about it right away from my sisters, and when a year or so later he did
call me, drunk as usual, very late at night, neither of us mentioned it,
me for my reasons, and he no doubt for his. I was probably as drunk
that night as he was. Of course, I never called him, either, to tell him
what had happened; that would have been impossible for me, almost
unthinkable—in fact, it took me until this very instant to think of it.

But it didn’t matter, because, regardless, I was unable to take the

comfort offered me. Something metallic in me refused to yield, and
when one by one my sisters phoned and offered to come up to Sam
Dent, an old compulsion took over; the same thing happened when
various local people—Reverend Dreiser, Dorothy Coburn, even the
men from the garage—called or came by to see how I was or to ask if
there was anything they could do for me. It’s something I have done
since childhood, practically. When a person tries to comfort me, I
respond by reassuring him or her—it’s usually a her—and in that way I
shut her down, smothering all her good intentions by denying my need.

I can’t help it, and I’m not sorry for it; I’m even a little proud.

People think I’m cold and unfeeling, but that’s a price I’ve always
been willing to pay. The truth is that I’m beyond help; most people are;
and it only angers me to see my sisters or my friends here in town
wasting their time. To forestall or cover my anger, I jump in front of
them, and suddenly I myself have turned into the person come to
provide comfort, reassurance, help, whatever it is they originally
desired to provide me with. I take their occasion and make it my own.
I never know this at the time, of course; only afterwards, when I’m
alone again, sitting in my living room with a glass of whiskey in my
hand, brooding over my solitude, trying to generate a little feeling,
even if it’s only self-pity.

When my youngest sister, Sally, called on the night of the

accident, she was the first in the family to reach me, but it was maybe
the fifteenth telephone call I’d received since hiking through the snow
all the way home from the site. I had walked in whited out like a
snowman, shucked my soaked clothes and put on a bathrobe, sat down
at the kitchen table, opened a bottle of Scotch, and started to drink. I
knew what it looked like and was glad no one could see me, although I

was not ashamed. I knew why I was drinking, and it wasn’t to numb
the pain. Gary Dillinger, the school principal, called, and Wyatt Pitney,
and Eden Schraft; and I reassured them all that there was nothing they
could do for me. I’m okay, I’ll be fine. They believed me: not that I
was fine; they believed that there was nothing they could do for me. I
was like a wounded animal gone to ground: better leave him to heal
alone, or you might get bit trying to help. A couple of reporters called,
and I simply hung up on them.

Jimbo Gagne called from the garage, and as usual, it was like we

were both in Vietnam again—I was playing the lieutenant and he the
corporal. We were all logistics. What did I want him to do with my
truck? Leave it at the garage; I’d drive my car in tomorrow. Where
should he put the wrecked bus? Out of sight behind the garage, and
keep people away from it, because there was sure to be an
investigation. Was there anything I needed? No, but if people came
into the garage and asked, tell them I might be taking a few days off
from work, so there’ll probably be a delay for a couple of jobs.

“Are you okay, Billy?” He finally came right out and asked it.

“How’re you doing up there on the hill? You got somebody at the
house with you?”

“Are you okay, Jimbo?” I returned. “It must have been rough on

you out there.”

“Yeah, sure,” he said. “I’m all right, I guess. It was rough …,” he

began, but then realized where that would lead and swerved away.
“But, yeah, Billy, I’m okay.”

By eight that night, when my sister Sally called, I was thoroughly

drunk and was responding automatically, as if my mouth were a
telephone answering machine: You have reached the home of Billy
Ansel, he has suffered an irretrievable loss, has discovered that he is
inconsolable, and thus, to save you trouble and him embarrassment,
has removed himself from normal human contact. He will probably not
return, but if you wish to leave a message anyhow, do so at the sound
of the ice cubes tinkling in his glass, and if someday he does return, he
will try to respond to your message.

But don’t count on it.
Before you lose your children, you can talk about it—as a

possibility, I mean. You can imagine it, like I did that time in Jamaica,
years ago, and then later you can remember the moment when you first
imagined it, and you can describe that moment coherently to people
and with ease. But when the thing that you only imagined actually
happens, you quickly discover that you can barely speak of it. Your
story is jumbled and mumbled, out of sync and unfocused. At least
that’s how it has been for me.

People who have lost their children—and I’m talking here about

the people of Sam Dent and am including myself—twist themselves
into all kinds of weird shapes in order to deny what has happened. Not
just because of the pain of losing a person they have loved—we lose
parents and mates and friends, and no matter how painful, it’s not the
same—but because what has happened is so wickedly unnatural, so
profoundly against the necessary order of things, that we cannot accept
it. It’s almost beyond belief or comprehension that the children should
die before the adults. It flies in the face of biology, it contradicts
history, it denies cause and effect, it violates basic physics, even. It’s
the final contrary. A town that loses its children loses its meaning.

Desperately, we struggled to arrange the event in our minds so

that it made sense. Each of us in his own way went to the bottom and
top of his understanding in search of a believable explanation, trying to
escape this huge black nothingness that threatened to swallow our
world whole. I guess the Christians in town, and there are a lot of
them, got there first, at least the adults did, and I’m glad for them, but I
myself could not rest there, and I believe that secretly most of them
could not, either. To me, the religious explanation was just another sly
denial of the facts. Not as sly, maybe, as insisting that the accident was
actually not an accident, that someone—Dolores, the town, the state,
someone—had caused it; but a denial nevertheless. Biology doesn’t
matter, the Christians argued, because this body we live in is not
ultimately real; history doesn’t matter, they said, because God’s time is
different and superior to man’s anyhow; and forget cause and effect,
forget what you’ve been told about the physical world, because there is

heaven and there is hell and there is this green earth in between, and
you are always alive in one of the three places.

I was raised, like most folks in Sam Dent, with a Christian

perspective, and I remember it well: they made no bones about it.
Billy, they said, there is no such thing as death. Just everlasting life.
Isn’t that great? That was the bottom line, whether you were Protestant
like me and Lydia or Catholic like half the other folks in town. But
when I was nineteen and went to Vietnam, I was still young enough to
learn something new, and the new thing was all this dying that I saw
going on around me. Consequently, when I came home from Vietnam,
I couldn’t take the Christian line seriously enough even to bother
arguing with it. To please Lydia and the kids, I went to church a couple
of times a year, but the rest of the time I stayed home and read the
Sunday paper. Then Lydia died, and the Christian perspective came to
seem downright cruel to me, because I had learned that death touched
everyone. Even me. I stopped going to church altogether.

I still believed in life, however—that it goes on, in spite of death.

I had my children, after all. And Risa. But four years later, when my
son and daughter and so many other children of this town were killed
in the accident, I could no longer believe even in life. Which meant
that I had come to be the reverse, the opposite, of a Christian. For me,
now, the only reality was death.

I went to the funeral service, of course; there was no way to avoid

it without hurting and bewildering innocent people. And not to go, to
stay holed up in my house like I had been doing, would have drawn
too much attention to me, the last thing that I wanted. But the night
before the funeral, late, I ventured out of my house for the first time
and drove down the hill to town. I had been drinking pretty steadily for
four days, but at that particular hour was sober—or at least sober
enough to drive. It was a clear, starry night. A nearly full moon was
circled by a ring of pale blue haze. There were no other vehicles on the
road, and no lights on in the town. Sam Dent was a ghost town
surrounded by fields of glistening snow under moonlight, with the
hulking shades of the mountains blocking out half the sky.

bus had been hauled by the wrecker and dropped, and for a few
moments I sat in my truck with the motor running and looked at the
thing—a huge dead fish, one of those leviathans drawn up from the
deepest bottom of the sea, the ice-encrusted carcass of a creature from
another age. Most of the windows had been smashed by the force of
the accident and by the divers, the headlights and grille were gone, the
sides and roof were bent and dented, and the tires were flattened and
torn. It was dead, permanently stilled, silent, harmless.

I don’t know why I was there, staring with strange loathing and

awe at this wrecked yellow vehicle, as if it were a beast that had killed
our children and then in turn been slain by the villagers and dragged
here to a place where we could all come, one by one, and verify that it
was safely dead. But I did want to see it, to touch it with my hands,
maybe, in a primitive way to be sure finally that we had indeed killed
it.

I got out of my truck, leaving the motor running and the

headlights on, and walked slowly toward the bus. It was very cold; my
shoes squeaked against the hard-packed snow on the ground, and my
breath glided out in front of me in pale thin strips. There were several
other vehicles parked in the darkness in the back lot—customers’ cars
scheduled to be repaired but crowded out of the garage and a couple of
wrecks stashed there for parts or being rebuilt for the demolition derby.
The orange plastic tape that the state police had wrapped around the
bus to warn people away from it looked like tangled lines from the
harpoons we had stuck it with.

For a moment I stood at the side of the bus, looking up at the

windows; and then I heard the children inside. Their voices were faint,
but I could hear them clearly. They were alive and happy, going to
school, and Dolores was moving through the gears, driving the bus up
hill and down, cheerfully doing her duty; and I longed to join them,
felt a deep aching desire to be with them, the first clear emotion I had
felt since the accident; I wanted simply to pull the door open and walk
inside and smell the wet wool and rubber boots and the lunches carried
in paper sacks and tin boxes, hear their songs and gossip and teasing; I

wanted to be with them in death, with my own children, yes, but with
all of them, for they seemed at that moment so much more believable
than I myself was, so much more alive.

But it was not the voices of the children that I heard, of course; it

was the hiss of the wind in the pines at the edge of the lot, where the
forest begins, the cold wind that blows down along the valley from the
north. And it was not the sound of Dolores driving up hill and down; it
was the engine of my own vehicle idling a few yards behind me,
illuminating me and the bus with its headlights. For a long moment I
stood there, listening to the wind and the low thrum of the truck, and
slowly returned to reality.

And then, as I stepped away and turned back toward my truck, I

heard the unmistakable thump of a car door open and close, and the
crackle of leather footsteps on the hard dry snow of the lot. A tall man
emerged from the darkness next to the truck and entered the circle of
light between us. He wore a tan wool topcoat and was hatless, a
middle-aged man with a bulbous tangle of curly gray hair that made
his head appear much too large for his tall thin angular body. His hands
were jammed deep in his coat pockets, and he hunched over slightly
against the chilling wind that blew from behind him. Now, in the
shadows at the far end of the lot, I saw the car he had been sitting in, a
light-colored Mercedes sedan, silver or gray. The headlights were off,
but the engine was running; doubtless I had not heard it over the sound
of my own vehicle and the wind, the engine of the bus and the voices
of the children.

The man came up to within a few feet of me and made a strange

little smile, almost wistful. “You work for Ansel?” he said.

“I am Ansel.”
“Yes, I thought so.” He had bright blue wide-open eyes that were

impossible to read and sharp small features. He was clean-shaven, and
his skin was pink and taut. It was a likable face, but the face of a
smooth talker, self-confident and intelligent, and pleased, even eager,
to let you look directly at him. “I’m sorry about your children, Mr.
Ansel,” he said, lowering his voice.

“You are, eh?”
“Yes.”
For a few seconds neither of us spoke; we just looked straight into

each other’s eyes. He was good at it, he didn’t get nervous or scared or
even glance away; he held his ground and waited for me to break the
silence or the stare, whichever I preferred.

“I take you to be a lawyer,” I said, holding on to the stare.
“Yes, I am an attorney. My name is—”
“Mister, I don’t want to know your name.”
He hesitated a second. Then in a soft voice he said, “I

understand.”

“No. No, you don’t understand.”
“I can help you.” He went on looking right into my eyes, as if he

knew something I didn’t.

“No, you can’t help me. Not unless you can raise the dead.” I was

sorry at once for having said it, a cliché, a boy’s smart remark, not a
man’s sad one. I had revealed to him, and to myself, a desire that I did
not want to permit myself and that I was instantly ashamed of.

Pushing past him, I made quickly for my truck, but when I pulled

the door open and started to get in, he came up beside me and held out
a business card. “Here,” he said. “You may change your mind.”

I took the card and lifted it up and read it in the moonlight:

Mitchell Stephens, Esq., of a four-named firm, one of them Stephens,
in New York City. Then I passed it back to him. “Mr. Stephens,” I said
to him, “if right now I was to beat you with my hands and feet so bad
that you pissed blood and couldn’t walk right for a month, would you
sue me? Because that is what I’m about to do, you understand.”

“No, Mr. Ansel,” he said in a weary voice. “No, I wouldn’t sue

you. And I don’t think there’s anyone in this county who would even
arrest you for it. But you’re not about to beat me up, are you?”

I looked over at the bus. The children waved back at me, bright

knots of apparition. The lawyer was right; I was no danger to him. I

was a ghost.

“No, I’m not going to beat you up. Just don’t talk to me again,” I

said to him. “Don’t come around my garage, and don’t come to my
house or call me on the telephone.”

“You may change your mind. I can help you,” he said again.
“Leave me alone, Stephens. Leave the people of this town alone.

You can’t help any of us. No one can.”

“You can help each other,” he said. “Several people have agreed

to let me represent them in a negligence suit, and your case as an
individual will be stronger if I’m allowed to represent you together as
a group.”

“My ‘case’? I have no case. None of us has a case.”
“You’re wrong about that. Very wrong. Your friends the Walkers

have agreed, and Mr. and Mrs. Otto, and I’m talking with some other
folks. It’s important to initiate proceedings right away. Things get
covered up fast. People lie. You know that. People lie about these
things. We have to begin our own investigation quickly, before the
evidence disappears. That’s why I’m out here tonight,” he added, and
he drew a small black automatic camera from his coat pocket.

“Our children aren’t even buried yet,” I told him. “It’s you—

you’re the liar. Risa and Wendell Walker, I know them, you’re right,
but they wouldn’t hire a goddamned lawyer. And the Ottos, they
wouldn’t deal with you, for Christ’s sake. You’re lying to me about
them, and probably to them about me. We’re not fools, you know,
country bumpkins you can put the big-city hustle on. You’re just trying
to use us,” I told him. “You want us to pull each other in.”

He was not lying, though, and I knew it, and at bottom I didn’t

give a damn what the others were doing, even Risa. It was almost
funny to me at that moment, in a cruel and slightly superior way.
Ghosts don’t enter into class action lawsuits. I calmly smiled at the
lawyer, and I think I even wished him luck, and got into my truck and
closed the door on him. Slowly I backed the truck away from him and
drove out of the lot, turned left, and headed down the valley toward the
Rendez-Vous.

truck in the deserted parking lot outside the Rendez-Vous, which, like
everything else in town, was closed, and walked across the road to
Room 11 at the Bide-a-Wile. I don’t know if I expected Risa to be
there, but surely I hoped she would be—I had no other reason to go
there this late.

She was sitting by the window in the wicker chair, and when I let

myself into the darkened room, she said simply, without expression, “I
knew you’d come.”

“Well, I can’t say I did.” I sat down opposite her, on the edge of

the bed, and put my hands on my knees. “Habit, I guess.”

“Me, too,” she said. “Thank God for habits.”
We tried for a few moments to talk the way we used to, the way

people who love each other are supposed to talk—intimately, more or
less honestly, about their feelings for one another and for other people
as well. We tried to talk not as if nothing had happened, of course, but
with the accident and the loss of our children as a context. It was
useless. I couldn’t say anything true about how I felt, and neither could
she.

“This is the first time I’ve been able to leave the house,” I said.
“People keep calling on the phone and coming by to see if they

can help out.”

“No one can help.”
“No. Not really. But they try.”
“Yes, they try.”
“You’ll go to the funeral, though, won’t you?”
“Yes,” I said, “I’ll be there. But I’d rather stay at home alone.”
“There’ll be a lot of people there.”
“I expect so.”
“I wish it was just going to be the families, you know, like us.

They’re the only ones who really understand.”

“I guess so.”

“But people have been very thoughtful and sympathetic.”
“Yes. They have.”
We sounded like strangers sitting in a dentist’s waiting room.

Finally, though, we gave it up and were silent for a while. Then she
told me how she had known all along that something like this was
going to happen. She had felt it in her bones, she said. As if she
wanted me to be amazed and praise her for it.

I decided that she was stupid to think that and even stupider to say

it, although I did not tell her so. Instead, I told her about my
unexpected meeting with the lawyer, Stephens. Without saying why, I
said that I’d stopped by the garage and while I was there I’d caught the
lawyer taking pictures of the bus with a flash camera, which was more
or less the truth. “The sonofabitch tried to get me to hire him for some
kind of negligence suit,” I said. “He told me he’d already got you and
Wendell signed up, you and Wendell and the Ottos, and I told him to
shove it. We don’t need a lawyer,” I added.

“What do we need?”
“Good question.” I stood up and took a step toward the door; I

still had my coat and wool cap on. “But we don’t need a lawyer,” I
said. “Count me out.”

She looked up at me, and in the bands of moonlight falling

through the blinds I could see her face clearly, and it was no longer
lovely to me. It didn’t even look like a woman’s face anymore; it was
like the face of a male actor who had made himself up as a woman.
“Well,” she said, “goodbye.”

“Goodbye.” I pulled my gloves over my hands and opened the

door and stepped outside, where I turned and said to her, “I have to go
home now.”

“You go home, Billy.”
I closed the door on her and walked away. We spoke again, of

course, on numerous occasions, but always with other people
surrounding us; we managed not to meet again in a room alone,
however, or to speak face-to-face, and so it was as if we never saw

each other after that, never saw the people we had once been, Risa
Walker and Billy Ansel. From then on, we were simply different
people. Not new people; different.

OceanofPDF.com

Mitchell Stephens, Esquire

Angry? Yes, I’m angry; I’d be a lousy lawyer if I weren’t. I suppose
it’s as if I’ve got this permanent boil on my butt and can’t quite sit
down. Which is not the same, you understand, as being hounded by
greed; although I can see, of course, that it probably sometimes looked
like greed to certain individuals who were not lawyers, when they saw
a person like me driving all the way up there to the Canadian border,
practically, saw me camping out in the middle of winter in a windy
dingy little motel room for weeks at a time, bugging the hell out of
decent people who were in the depths of despair and just wanted to be
left alone. I can understand that.

But it wasn’t greed that put me there; it’s never been greed that

sends me whirling out of orbit like that. It’s anger. What the hell, I’m
not ashamed of it. It’s who I am. I’m not proud of it, either, but it
makes me useful, at least. Which is more than you can say for greed.

That’s what people don’t get about negligence lawyers—good

negligence lawyers, I mean, the kind who go after the sloppy fat cats
with their corner offices and end up nailing their pelts to the wall.
People immediately assume we’re greedy, that it’s money we’re after,
people call us ambulance-chasers and so on, like we’re the
proctologists of the profession, and, yes, there’s lots of those. But the
truth is, the good ones, we’d make the same moves for a single shekel
as for a ten-million-dollar settlement. Because it’s anger that drives us
and delivers us. It’s not any kind of love, either—love for the underdog
or the victim, or whatever you want to call them. Some litigators like
to claim that. The losers.

No, what it is, we’re permanently pissed off, the winners, and

practicing law is a way to be socially useful at the same time, that’s all.

It’s like a discipline; it organizes and controls us; probably keeps us
from being homicidal. A kind of Zen is what. Some people equally
pissed off are able to focus their rage by becoming cops or soldiers or
martial arts instructors; those who become lawyers, however,
especially litigators like me, are a little too intelligent, or maybe too
intellectual is all, to become cops. (I’ve known some pretty smart cops,
but not many intellectual ones.) So instead of learning how to break
bricks and two-by-fours with our hands or bust chain-snatchers in
subways, we sneak off to law school and put on three-piece suits and
come roaring out like banshees, all teeth and claws and fire and smoke.

Certainly we get paid well for it, which is a satisfaction, yes, but

not a motivation, because the real satisfaction, the true motivation, is
the carnage and the smoldering aftermath and the trophy heads that get
hung up on the den wall. I love it.

That’s why I spent most of six months up there in Sam Dent,

practically becoming a citizen. Not my idea of a winter vacation,
believe me. But anytime I hear about a case like that school bus
disaster up there, I turn into a heat-seeking missile, homing in on a
target that I know in my bones is going to turn out to be some bungling
corrupt state agency or some multinational corporation that’s cost-
accounted the difference between a ten-cent bolt and a million-dollar
out-of-court settlement and has decided to sacrifice a few lives for the
difference. They do that, work the bottom line; I’ve seen it play out
over and over again, until you start to wonder about the human
species. They’re like clever monkeys, that’s all. They calculate ahead
of time what it will cost them to assure safety versus what they’re
likely to be forced to settle for damages when the missing bolt sends
the bus over a cliff, and they simply choose the cheaper option. And
it’s up to people like me to make it cheaper to build the bus with that
extra bolt, or add the extra yard of guardrail, or drain the quarry. That’s
the only check you’ve got against them. That’s the only way you can
ensure moral responsibility in this society. Make it cheaper.

So that winter morning when I picked up the paper and read about

this terrible event in a small town upstate, with all those kids lost, I
knew instantly what the story was; I knew at once that it wasn’t an

“accident” at all. There are no accidents. I don’t even know what the
word means, and I never trust anyone who says he does. I knew that
somebody somewhere had made a decision to cut a corner in order to
save a few pennies, and now the state or the manufacturer of the bus or
the town, somebody, was busy lining up a troop of smoothies to
negotiate with a bunch of grief-stricken bumpkins a settlement that
wouldn’t displease the accountants. I packed a bag and headed north,
like I said, pissed off.

Sam Dent is a pretty town, actually. It’s not Aspen or Vail, maybe,

and it sure isn’t Saint Bart’s or Mustique, where frankly I’d much
rather have been at that time of year, but the landscape was attractive
and strangely stirring. I’m not a scenery freak like my ex-wife, Klara,
who has orgasms over sunsets and waterfalls and not much else, but
once in a great while I go someplace and look up and see where I am,
and it’s unexpectedly beautiful to me: my stomach tightens, and my
pulse races, and this powerful blend of fear and excitement comes over
me, like something dangerous is about to happen. It’s almost sexual.

Anyhow, the town of Sam Dent and the mountains and forests

that surrounded it, they gave me that feeling. I grew up in Oak Park,
Illinois, and have spent my entire adult life in New York City. I’m an
urban animal, basically; I care more about people than landscape. And
although I have sojourned in rural parts quite a bit (I’ve spent months
at a time in Wounded Knee, in eastern Washington, in Alabama, where
I won a big asbestosis case, in the coalmining region of West Virginia,
and so on), I can’t say the landscape of those places particularly moved
me. They were places, that’s all. Interchangeable chunks of the planet.
Yes, I needed to learn a whole lot about each of them in order to
pursue my case effectively, but in those other cases my interest in the
landscape was more pragmatic, you might say, than personal. Strictly
professional.

Here in Sam Dent, however, it somehow got personal. It’s dark up

there, closed in by mountains of shadow and a blanketing early
nightfall, but at the same time the space is huge, endless, almost like
being at sea—you feel like you’re reading one of those great long
novels by whatsername, Joyce Carol Oates, or Theodore Dreiser, that

make you feel simultaneously surrounded by the darkness and released
into a world much larger than any you’ve dealt with before. It’s a
landscape that controls you, sits you down and says, Shut up, pal, I’m
in charge here.

They have these huge trees everywhere, on the mountains, of

course, but down in the valleys and in town, too, and surrounding the
houses, even outside my motel room; they’ve got white pine and
spruce and hemlock and birches thick as a man, and the wind blows
through them constantly. And since there’s very little noise of any
other kind up there—almost no people, remember, and few cars, no
sirens howling, no jackhammers slamming, and so forth—the thing
you hear most is the wind blowing in the trees. From September to
June, the wind comes roaring out of Ontario all the way from
Saskatchewan or someplace weird like that, steady and hard and cold,
with nothing to stop or slow it until it hits these mountains and the
trees, which, like I say, are everywhere.

What they call the Adirondack Park, you understand, is no small

roadside park, no cutesy little campground with public toilets and
showers—I mean, we’re talking six million acres of woods,
mountains, and lakes, we’re talking a region the size of the state of
Vermont, the biggest damn park in the country—and most of the
people who live there year round are scattered in little villages in the
valleys, living on food stamps and collecting unemployment, huddling
close to their fires and waiting out the winter, until they can go back
outdoors and repair the damage the winter caused.

It’s a hard place, hard to live in, hard to romanticize. But,

surprisingly, not hard to love—because that’s what I have to call the
feeling it evokes, this strange combination of fear and awe I’m talking
about, even in someone like me.

That wasn’t what I expected, though. When I first drove up there,

the day after the school bus went over, I was astonished by what I saw.
Upstate New York, to me, had always been Albany, with maybe a little
Rip Van Winkle, Love Canal, and Woodstock tossed in; but this was
wilderness, practically. Like Alaska. Suddenly, I’m thinking Last of the

Mohicans. “Forest primeval,” I’m thinking. America before the arrival
of the white man.

I’m driving along the Northway above Lake George between

these high sheer cliffs with huge sheets of ice on them, and I look off
to the side into the woods, and the woods come banging right back at
me, a dense tangle of trees and undergrowth that completely resists
penetration, and I start hoping my car doesn’t break down. This is not
Bambi territory. It’s goddamn dark in there, with bears and bobcats and
moose. Ten thousand coyotes, I read in the Times. Sasquatches,
probably.

Of course, it was dead of winter then, that first time, and there

was five or six feet of snow over everything, and daytime temps that
got stuck below zero for weeks in a row, which only made the woods
and the mountains more ominous. Trees, rocks, snow, and ice—and,
until I turned off the Northway and started down those narrow winding
roads into the villages, no houses, no sign of people. It was scary, but it
was also very beautiful. No way around it.

Then I began to see the first signs of people—and I mean poor

people here. Not like in the city, of course, not like Harlem or Bedford-
Stuyvesant, where you feel that the poor are imprisoned, confined by
invisible wire fences, lifelong prisoners of the rich, who live and work
in the high-rises outside. No wonder they call them ghettos. They
ought to call them reservations.

Up here, though, the poor are kept out, and it’s the rich who stay

inside the fence and only in the summer months. It’s like Ultima Thüle
or someplace beyond the pale, and most of the people who live here
year round are castoffs, tossed out into the back forty and made to
forage in the woods for their sustenance and shelter, grubbing nuts and
berries, while the rest of us snooze warmly inside the palisade, feet up
on the old hassock, brandy by our side, Wall Street Journal unfolded
on our lap, good dog Tighe curled up by the fire.

I’m exaggerating, of course, but only slightly, because that is how

you feel when you cruise down these roads in your toasty Mercedes
and peer out at the patched-together houses with flapping plastic over

the windows and sagging porches and woodpiles and rusting pickup
trucks and junker cars parked in front, boarded-up roadside diners and
dilapidated motels that got bypassed by the turnpike that Rockefeller
built for the downstate Republican tourists and the ten-wheeler
truckers lugging goods between New York City and Montreal. It’s
amazing how poor people who live in distant beautiful places always
think that a six-lane highway or an international airport will bring
tourists who will solve all their problems, when inevitably the only
ones who get rich from it live elsewhere. The locals end up hating the
tourists, outsiders, foreigners—rich folks who employ the locals now
as part-time servants, yardmen, waitresses, gamekeepers, fix-it men.
Money that comes from out of town always returns to its source. With
interest. Ask an African.

Sam Dent. Weird name for a town. So naturally the first thing I

ask when I register at a sad little motel in town is “Who the hell was
Sam Dent?”

and baggy jeans was checking me in, Risa Walker, who I did not know
at the time was one of those parents who had lost a child in the so-
called accident. I might not have been so flippant otherwise. She said,
“He once owned most of the land in this town and ran a hotel or
something.” She had that flat expressionless voice that I should have
recognized as the voice of a parent who has lost a child. “Long time
ago,” she added. Like it was the good old days. (Good for Sam, I’ll
bet, who probably died peacefully in his sleep in his Fifth Avenue
mansion.)

She gave me the key to my room, number 3, and asked would I be

staying longer than one night.

“Hard to say.” I passed her my credit card, and she took the

imprint. I was hoping that tomorrow I’d find a better place in town or
nearby, maybe a Holiday Inn or a Marriott. This motel was definitely
on the downhill slide and had been for years—no restaurant or bar, a
small dark room with scarred furniture and sagging bedsprings, a
shower that looked as if it spat rusty lukewarm water for thirty seconds
before turning cold.

It turned out there was no other place in town to stay, and as I

needed to be close to the scene of the crime, so to speak, I ended up
staying at the Walkers’ motel throughout those winter and spring
months and into the summer, every time I was in Sam Dent, even
when things got a little ticklish between me and Risa and her husband,
Wendell. It never got that ticklish, but when the divorce started coming
on, I was giving her advice and not him. Throughout, I kept the room
on reserve, not that there was ever any danger of its being taken, and
paid for the entire period, whether I used it or not. It was the least I
could do.

The most I could do for the Walkers was represent them in a

negligence suit that compensated them financially for the loss of their
son, Sean. And that’s only part of it, the smaller part. I could also strip
and hang the hide of the sonofabitch responsible for the loss of their
son—which just might save the life of some other boy riding to school
in some other small American town.

That was my intention anyhow. My mission, you might say.
Every year, though, I swear I’m not going to take any more cases

involving children. No more dead kids. No more stunned grieving
parents who really only want to be left alone to mourn in the darkness
of their homes, for God’s sake, to sit on their kids’ beds with the blinds
drawn against the curious world outside and weep in silence as they
contemplate their permanent pain. I’m under no delusions—I know
that in the end a million-dollar settlement makes no real difference to
them, that it probably only serves to sharpen their pain by constricting
it with legal language and rewarding it with money, that it complicates
the guilt they feel and forces them to question the authenticity of their
own suffering. I know all that; I’ve seen it a hundred times.

It hardly seems worth it, right? Thanks but no thanks, right? And

I swear, if that were the whole story, if the settlement were not a fine as
well, if it were not a punishment that, though it can never fit the crime,
might at least make the crime seem prohibitively expensive to the
criminal, then, believe me, I would not pursue these cases. They
humiliate me. They make me burn inside with shame. Win or lose, I
always come out feeling diminished, like a cinder.

So I’m no Lone Ranger riding into town in my white Mercedes-

Benz to save the local sheepherders from the cattle barons in black
hats; I’m clear on that. And I don’t burn myself out with these awful
cases because it somehow makes me a better person. No, I admit it,
I’m on a personal vendetta; what the hell, it’s obvious. And I don’t
need a shrink to tell me what motivates me. A shrink would probably
tell me it’s because I myself have lost a child and now identify with
chumps like Risa and Wendell Walker and that poor sap Billy Ansel,
and Wanda and Hartley Otto. The victims. Listen, identify with the
victims and you become one yourself. Victims make lousy litigators.

Simply, I do it because I’m pissed off, and that’s what you get

when you mix conviction with rage. It’s a very special kind of anger,
let’s say. So I’m no victim. Victims get depressed and live in the there
and then. I live in the here and now.

Besides, the people of Sam Dent are not unique. We’ve all lost

our children. It’s like all the children of America are dead to us. Just
look at them, for God’s sake—violent on the streets, comatose in the
malls, narcotized in front of the TV. In my lifetime something terrible
happened that took our children away from us. I don’t know if it was
the Vietnam war, or the sexual colonization of kids by industry, or
drugs, or TV, or divorce, or what the hell it was; I don’t know which
are causes and which are effects; but the children are gone, that I
know. So that trying to protect them is little more than an elaborate
exercise in denial. Religious fanatics and superpatriots, they try to
protect their kids by turning them into schizophrenics; Episcopalians
and High Church Jews gratefully abandon their kids to boarding
schools and divorce one another so they can get laid with impunity; the
middle class grabs what it can buy and passes it on, like poisoned
candy on Halloween; and meanwhile the inner-city blacks and poor
whites in the boonies sell their souls with longing for what’s killing
everyone else’s kids and wonder why theirs are on crack.

It’s too late; they’re gone; we’re what’s left.
And the best we can do for them, and for ourselves, is rage

against what took them. Even if we can’t know what it’ll be like when
the smoke clears, we do know that rage, for better or worse, generates

a future. The victims are the ones who’ve given up on the future.
Instead, they’ve joined the dead. And the rest, look at them: unless
they’re enraged and acting on it, they’re useless, unconscious; they’re
dead themselves and don’t even know it.

If you want to know the truth, in my life, in my personal life, that

is, though my ex-wife, Klara, is the apparent victim (all you have to do
is ask her), the true victim is my daughter, Zoe. Not me, that’s for sure.
Because, though I may have lost her, Zoe’s not literally dead. At least
not that I know of. Not yet. The last time I heard from her she was out
in L.A., walking around like a tattooed zombie with one of her purple-
haired zombie boyfriends.

She’s my only child; I loved her more than I thought was

humanly possible. Certainly more than I’ve ever loved anyone else.
I’ve told my story—it’s a compulsion, I guess—to friends and
strangers and even to shrinks, all of whom feel sorry for me, if you can
believe that, which is a way of feeling sorry for themselves, I’ve
learned; I’ve attended Al-Anon meetings and ToughLove workshops
for parents and spouses of addicts, where they promote a kind of
spiritual triage (“Mitch, chill out, man, you’ve got to learn to separate
from your child,” they say, while you watch her drowning before your
eyes); and I’ve spent more time talking to Klara in the last five years
than in the entire fifteen years we were married—I’ve done everything
the loving father of a whacked-out drug-addicted child is supposed to
do. I’ve even done a Rambo and kicked a few doors off their jambs
and dragged Zoe out of filthy rat-infested apartments, garbage heaps
with satanic altars lit by candles in a goat’s skull on a TV in a corner;
I’ve locked her up in rehab hospitals, halfway houses, and the
Michigan farms of understanding relatives. Two weeks later, she’s
back on the streets. New York, Pittsburgh, Seattle, L.A. The next time
I hear from her, it’s a phone call scamming for money, money
supposedly for school or a new kind of therapist who specializes in
macrobiotic drug treatment or, sobbing with shame and need, a plane
ticket home (that’s usually the one that gets me). I send the money,
hundreds, thousands of dollars; and she’s gone again. A month or two
later, she’s calling from Santa Fe—same scam, same format, different

details: an acupuncturist specializing in treating drug addiction, a
registration fee for a culinary arts school in Tucson, and if those stories
don’t work, she breaks back to the old plea to let her come home to
New York and let’s solve this problem together, Daddy, dear Daddy,
once and for all, if I’ll just send the plane ticket and money to get her
stuff out of hock, etc. By now, of course, I realize that if I don’t send
money, she’ll raise it some other way, dealing drugs or pornography or
even hooking. It’s like I’m in the position of having to buy her clean
needles to protect her against AIDS. Forget protecting her against the
drugs. Forget healing her mind.

Five years of this, and what happens? You get pissed off—believe

me, enough rage and helplessness, your love turns to steamy piss. Of
course, long before Zoe dropped out of boarding school and hit the
streets, I was pissed off—it’s in my genes, practically—but she’s
succeeded in providing me with a nice sharp focus for it, so that,
except when I’m burning myself out on something like the Sam Dent
school bus case, I’m dizzy and incoherent, boiling over, obsessed,
useless—mad. I’d rather be a cinder than a madman. But there’s no
way I’ll let myself become a victim.

That guy Wendell Walker, who with his wife, Risa, owned the

motel I was staying at, the Bide-a-Wile—he surprised me. At first, I
pegged him as a permanent loser, one of those guys who love their
own tragedy, who feel ennobled and enlarged by it. But of all the
parents in Sam Dent who had lost a child when the bus went over, he
turned out to have the least interest in remaining a victim. Except for
Wanda Otto, maybe. We’re talking about the parents of some fourteen
kids here, some of whom, like Billy Ansel, lost more than one child, so
actually we’re talking about a list of only eight families in all. Of
which, in those first few weeks before the case took off, I was able to
interview five who had not already signed up with another attorney,
which put them off limits to me, or who were not talking to anyone at
all, like Billy Ansel, and even him I eventually got to. In a way.

And there was the girl Nichole Burnell, who survived the wreck;

she was going to be the linchpin of the case, an all-American teenaged
beauty queen whose life was ruined by her injuries and by the trauma

of having survived such an ordeal. A living victim is more effective
with a jury than a dead one; you can’t compensate the dead, they feel.
That’s how I planned to present her; luckily, it was how her parents
viewed the event too. She had been their destiny, their glory: for their
future, they had nothing but her future, and since it had been taken
from her, it had been taken, as they saw it, from them as well: so now
they were out for blood. One way or the other, they were going to
continue to use her to get what they thought was their due.

Fine by me. I had my agenda too. In spite of the injuries, Nichole

Burnell looked good, she talked good, and she had suffered
immeasurably and would for the rest of her life. A beautiful articulate
fourteen-year-old girl in a wheelchair. She was perfect. I could hardly
wait to see the other side depose her.

Wendell Walker, on the other hand, when I first met him, seemed

utterly defeated, gone, a dark hole in space. Useless, even to himself. I
had chucked my stuff in my room and wandered back out to the motel
office, to get directions to where the bus had gone over and to check
out some of the local response to the event—to start work, in other
words—but also to see if there was someplace in town where I could
get a decent meal. It seemed unlikely, but you never know about these
small towns. I once found a terrific barbecue shack in Daggle,
Alabama.

The office was gloomy and dark, cold as a meat locker; behind

the counter, a door leading to what I took to be the apartment where
the proprietors lived was open a crack, and a skinny band of light fell
across the linoleum floor of the room. I thought I was alone, but when
I walked up to the counter, looking for a bell or something to signal the
woman who had checked me in, I saw a figure there, a large, heavyset
man in a straight-backed chair, sitting behind the counter in the
darkness as if in bright light, looking at his lap as if reading a
magazine. It was a strange position, alert but frozen in place. He
looked catatonic to me.

“Sorry, buddy,” I said. “I didn’t see you there. How’s it going?”

No answer; no response whatsoever. He just went on staring

down at his lap, as if he didn’t hear or see me. One of those country
simples, I thought. Inbreeding. Great. First local I get to talk to, and he
turns out to be an alien. “The boss around?” I asked.

Nothing. Except that his tongue came out and licked dry lips.

Then I recognized it: I’ve seen it a hundred times, but it still surprises
and scares me. It’s the opaque black-glass look of a man who has
recently learned of the death of his child. It’s the face of a person
who’s gone to the other side of life and is no longer even looking back
at us. It always has the same history, that look: at the moment of the
child’s dying, the man follows his child into darkness, as if he’s
making a last attempt to save it; then, in panic, to be sure that he
himself has not died as well, the man turns momentarily back toward
us, maybe he even laughs then or says something weird, for he sees
only darkness there too; and now he has returned to where his child
first disappeared, fixing onto one of the bright apparitions that linger
there. It’s downright spooky.

“I’m sorry, bud,” I said to him. “I just arrived here.”
Still no response. Then he stirred slightly, turned his soft hands

over, and placed them on his knees. He was wearing a Montreal Expos
sweatshirt and loose khakis, a fat guy, slump-shouldered, not too
bright-looking.

Suddenly, he said, “Are you a lawyer?” His voice was low but

thin, flattened out, like a piece of tin. He still hadn’t turned to face me,
but I guess he’d taken my measure already. What the hell, I suppose I
looked like a lawyer, especially up here, especially now. Something
like this happens, people expect to see lawyers crawling around. Guys
in suits and topcoats.

“Yes, I’m a lawyer.”
“A good one?”
“Yes, sure. One of the best,” I said.
Slowly he turned toward me and in the dim light examined my

face. “Well, good. I need a lawyer,” he said, and when he stood up, his
large soft body tightened, and surprisingly the man looked very tough

to me, like a fist, and I said to myself, Well, well, I damned near
misread this guy entirely. “Come inside,” he said. “My wife and I want
to talk to you.”

I reached into my pocket, drew out a card, and handed it to him,

and he accepted it without a glance, like a bellhop taking a tip, and
placed it facedown on the counter. With the other hand, he swung open
the door to their quarters, washing the office in domestic light, and
walked straight into the living room beyond, where I saw the woman
in an easy chair, watching television with the sound off.

I followed him into the small room, and we three sat and talked

for several hours, and all the while they watched the soundless
television, never once looking at me or each other. Creepy, yes, but at
the time it seemed entirely appropriate, even necessary, to our
conversation.

This was a happy start for me, a lucky break. The Walkers were

classically pissed off. Both of them. They wanted revenge, which was
useless to them, of course—they weren’t going to get it, but they didn’t
know that yet. And as I later learned, they wanted money, not as
compensation but because they had been broke for so long and had
always wanted it.

I learned from them that first night in town a lot of what the

newspapers hadn’t yet told me—the names of the other parents whose
children had been killed, the usual route of the school bus, the
condition of the driver when she picked up their son, Sean, the
weather, the exact spot where the bus went off the road, the origin and
history of the sandpit it ended up in, and so forth.

It seemed clear that the bus driver, Dolores Driscoll, was a dead

end; she was probably only doing exactly what she had done for years,
and besides, she herself had no real property or earning power to attach
and was a popular woman in town to boot, a nondrinker with a
crippled husband she supported. Not the kind of person you want to
sue for negligence. The deep pockets, I knew, were going to be found
in the pants worn by the state, the town, and the school board, or, more
precisely, by their insurance companies. I explained that to them.

I asked them who else might be willing to join in a suit.
“I don’t know,” Risa said, her eyes still on the flickering screen of

the TV. The Cosby show, which I hate. Ozzie and Harriet in blackface.
“Nobody’s much talked about it yet. Although there’s been a lot of
lawyers in town, I heard. A couple of them checked in here today. But
they seemed—”

“Too young and too old,” Wendell said. “One or the other. Too

goddamn eager.”

I knew the types. I explained that the best people to enter the suit

were people who were unlikely to sign on with lawyers such as that.
No, I said, what we needed were folks who, like them, were intelligent
and articulate, who came across as sensitive, loving parents, people
with a solid family life, with no criminal background or history of
trouble in town. Good neighbors I wanted, decent hardworking people
like themselves, I said, laying it on a little.

“Well, okay, there’s Kyle and Doreen,” Risa said. “The Lamstons.

Up on Bartlett Hill. They lost all three of their kids. After everything
they’ve been through. Especially Doreen.” Risa was at that stage
where every now and then she didn’t believe that she had lost her
child; she thought that maybe it had only happened to other people in
town.

“Kyle’s a drunk, a belligerent drunk,” Wendell said. “Nobody

likes him. He’s trouble.”

“Belligerent, you say. Is he a known wife-beater?”
“Yeah, a wife-beater,” he said. “I’m afraid so. A ‘known’ one.

He’s that all right.”

“All right, there’s the Hamiltons. Joe and Shelley Hamilton.”
Wendell said, “Anybody knows that guy knows he’s been stealing

antiques from summer houses and reselling them to dealers in
Plattsburgh for years.”

I was starting to like this man, Wendell Walker. He looked like a

pushover, but he had an attitude. In the middle of a wrecked life,
drowning in sadness, he was still able to hold his grudges. He’d

probably kept them locked up inside himself for years, feeling guilty,
and now for the first time in his life he believed he was entitled to lay
about him. His wife, though, was more conventionally linked to other
people, a good-looking, once sexy woman who still courted her
neighbors’ good opinions and attention. She was trying to put the best
possible construction on things, even if it meant lying to herself.

Wendell, though, he didn’t give a damn. Not anymore.
They went on down the list of parents, most of them dismissed by

Wendell out of hand, as his resentments and grudges and old injuries,
one by one, surfaced and got expressed.

“Sonofabitch owes over fifty thousand bucks in unpaid bills to the

bank and half the businesses in town, and he’s about to lose his house
and cars….”

“She’s over to the Rendez-Vous or down to the Spread Eagle

every night and has slept with every drunk in town at least twice….”

“The Bilodeaus and the Atwaters are all inbred. They’re so dumb

they don’t know Saturday …”

And so on down the line, with Risa reluctantly concurring. Until

they got to the Ottos, Wanda and Hartley, who had lost their adopted
son, an Indian boy named Bear. Wanda was pregnant, they were smart
people apparently, college educated, even, had moved to Sam Dent a
dozen or so years ago from the city and had made a respected life here
as craftsmen.

“Yeah, well, I bet they’re pot-smokers,” Wendell grumped.
“You don’t know that.” Risa lit a cigarette, as if in defiance.
“They ever been busted?” I asked, and lit one myself.
“No,” Risa said.
“Not to your knowledge is what you mean,” Wendell shot back. I

wondered if he knew that his wife was probably having an affair with
somebody.

I made notes and let them continue. I especially liked the part

about the adopted Indian boy and Wanda’s pregnancy. It was possible
she’d lose the baby over this. That happens. The pot business I’d check

out later. (It turned out to be nothing, of course. At least no record.
Local suspicion was all.)

It was Wendell who mentioned Billy Ansel. Risa kept silent, and I

figured he was the guy she was having her affair with. That could be
trouble, so I put an asterisk next to his name; but otherwise he was
almost too good to be true. Ansel was a widower, much admired in
town, a Vietnam vet, a war hero, practically. And he had lost his two
children, who were twins. Also, he had actually witnessed the event;
he’d been following the bus in his truck on his way to work that
morning and had helped remove the victims. He’d know, by God, that
his kids were dead. No denial there.

The bus, Wendell said, had been hauled back to Ansel’s garage. “I

went to school with him,” Wendell added. “I guess he’s maybe the
most liked man in this town. And he knows it. And likes it. But what
the hell, that’s all right, I guess. He drinks,” he added. “But mostly at
home. Otherwise, no flaws.” I watched Risa, who watched her hands.
Double asterisk.

“What about the kids who survived the accident? Some of them

were injured pretty badly, I understand. Any of them whose parents
you think might be willing to join you in this?”

Risa, as if relieved not to be talking about Billy Ansel any longer,

rattled off the names of half a dozen families, including the Burnells,
Mary and Sam, whose daughter Nichole was in the eighth grade,
president of the class, queen of last fall’s Harvest Festival Ball. “A
potential Miss Essex County, or even a Miss New York,” Risa said
wistfully. “I’m serious.” Nichole was in the hospital in Lake Placid
with a broken back, still unconscious, as far as they knew. Her parents,
they agreed, were poor but honest, churchgoers. Pillars of the
community, Wendell noted sarcastically. Her father, Sam, was a
plumber; her mother sang in the choir. Nichole had been everybody’s
favorite babysitter.

It was a promising start. I retrieved a contingency fee agreement

form from my room, explained the terms and got the Walkers to sign
it, and went out in search of a burger and beer, which I found at the

Rendez-Vous, a tavern located practically across the road from the
motel. Very convenient. I didn’t even take the car; just strolled over.
Turned out the burger wasn’t bad.

There was no one in the place who looked local, other than the

bartender and the waitress. I guess everyone was at home watching TV
to see if they were on the news. But I wasn’t the only customer. A
couple of sharks in double-knit suits—Wendell was right: too old and
too young, too eager—sat at the bar watching the Knicks clobber the
Celtics, while a few guys whom I took to be reporters, in leather
jackets and stone-washed jeans, trolled back and forth among the
booths in back, talking shop and feeling superior to one another and to
the town, practicing for the assignment that would bring them the
Pulitzer. The reporters who cover these backcountry cases, even when
they’re stringers for the Plattsburgh Press-Republican or something,
always try to look as if they work for Rolling Stone or The Village
Voice.

spite of the Knicks game, so I took a booth in a far corner, just beyond
the reporters, and ate alone, working up my notes. I was off and
running. Happy. More or less.

The next morning (I was right about the shower, by the way, and

the bed was like a hammock made of wire, the room as cold as a
fishing camp in Labrador), I drove over to the town of Keene Valley,
ten miles to the southeast, where the bartender at the Rendez-Vous had
told me there was a diner, the Noonmark, that served a decent
breakfast and sold out-of-town newspapers. It was a pleasant drive.
The snow-covered mountains loomed above the village, dwarfing it,
making the buildings seem puny and temporary. Thin strands of wood
smoke curled from the chimneys of the houses and disappeared into
clean air. The sun was shining, the snow looked downy soft, the sky
was a huge blue bowl, and according to the Lake Placid radio station,
it was five degrees below zero. This place looks good in winter, but
believe me, you want to observe it through the windshield of a warm
car.

After a large country breakfast of pancakes and bacon among

citizens who shook their heads sadly while they pored over the news
accounts of the disaster in the village next door, I drove back to Sam
Dent, where I found the Ottos at home—if you want to call it that. I
couldn’t tell if it was a DEW-line radar station or a house. They lived
in a dome, definitely homemade, covered with wood shingles and half
set into the side of a hill, with odd-shaped windows, diamonds and
triangles, arranged in no pattern that I could discern from outside.

They didn’t exactly welcome me in. Hartley Otto answered the

door, and a huge black stupid-looking Newfoundland bounded past
both of us and started barking ferociously at my car as if I were still
inside it. The dog was enormous, but the car looked like it could
handle itself. There are certain domestic animals, oversized and
undersized dogs in particular, that ought to be granted extinction.
Horses too, now that we have tractors.

Hartley Otto was a tall, scrawny man in his early forties with a

patchy beard and long graying hair tied in a ponytail with a twisted
pipe cleaner. In his union suit, baggy dungarees held up with old-
fashioned galluses, and high-topped working shoes, he looked more
like an Appalachian hillbilly than an aging hippie, but that was the
desired effect, I suppose. It was political. His gaunt face was
prematurely lined, and he had dark circles under intelligent blue eyes
and clearly had not slept much, if at all, in the last two days. I
wondered if he’d be willing to get a haircut for the trial.

I stood silently in bright snow-reflected sunlight on the steps at

the doorway for a few seconds and let him look me over. I’ve learned
not to rush these things. Then I said, “Risa and Wendell Walker, they
told me you might be willing to talk to me.”

“Oh,” he said. Just that, as if I’d told him it might soon snow.

Though he was all sinew and bone, he looked fragile—as though a
friendly clap on the shoulder would send him falling to the floor in a
clattering heap.

“I apologize for coming over unannounced like this, Mr. Otto, but

the Walkers said you would understand. I know it’s a bad time, but it’s

important that we talk.”

“Yes, well, all right,” he said.
I took off my gloves, stuck my hand out, and said my name; he

accepted my hand limply into his and let me shake the thing, as if it
were an ear of corn. The guy’s gone, I thought, he’s off with his kid. I
hoped his wife would turn out to be the angry one.

Usually, that’s all you need. The angry partner carries the defeated

partner, who hasn’t the energy to argue against even the idea of a suit,
let alone the actuality, which of course, once it’s under way, provides
its own momentum. You do need one of them fueled by anger,
however, especially in the beginning; two defeated parties tend to
reinforce each other’s lassitude and make lousy litigants. The attorney
often ends up fighting his own clients, especially near the end, when it
gets down to dealing out the last cards, and the out-of-court settlement
offers get made and refused. I wanted a mean lean team, a troop of
vengeful parents willing to go the route with me and not come home
without some serious trophies on our spears. Hartley Otto was lean,
but he didn’t seem very mean.

He made a feeble gesture, inviting me inside, and I entered,

bumped aside by the dog, who had apparently given up trying to scare
my car. The place smelled like wood smoke and applesauce. There was
no pattern to the windows from the inside, either, although I couldn’t
imagine how you’d fit symmetrical windows into the building without
breaking up the structure altogether. It was that kind of design. The
light fell from above in a soft and diffuse wave that was actually
pleasant, if a little disorienting at first. Mostly what you saw out the
windows were treetops and blue sky, like looking up out of a cistern. I
guess they felt safe living in there. I would’ve felt trapped.

It took a few seconds to adjust to the hazy gloom of the interior,

which, when you looked away from the windows, turned out to be
more like the inside of an enormous tepee than a cistern. It was a large
two-story space divided into several smaller chambers with sheets of
brightly colored cloth—tie-dyes and Indian madras—that had been
hung from wires. On a low brick platform in the center of the main

chamber I made out a large steel wood stove; the dog had flopped next
to it like a shot buffalo.

A few feet from the stove, sitting cross-legged on a huge

overstuffed cushion like a Bedouin chieftain, was Wanda Otto, her face
darkly intelligent, eyes narrowed with suspicion and intolerance. She
was clearly ready to go to war. My kind of woman.

“What’d you say your name was?” Hartley asked me.
“Mitch Stephens.” I drew out a card and gave it to him. He read it

with deliberation and handed it to his wife, who swiftly passed her
eyes over it and set it on the floor next to her. I felt like Meriwether
Lewis sent out from Washington to treat with the Indians.

“The Walkers sent him by,” Hartley said in a voice that sounded

the way a sheet of blank paper looks. He moved around behind his
wife and sat on what appeared to be a stool but was in fact a cushioned
tree stump with a birch-stick back attached. Except for numerous large
pillows scattered around the room, all the furniture was made of wood
that still resembled trees, mostly birch, roughly cut and unfinished,
with the bark left on. Twig furniture, they call it, made to look as if it
grew in the woods in the approximate shape of a chair or table or set of
shelves, and all you had to do was drag it home, strip off the leaves
and lop off a few branches here and there, and voilà. Some people like
that stuff, and they pay a lot of money for it.

“You want a cup of tea or something?” he asked me.
I said tea would be fine and took the liberty of shucking my

topcoat. “All right if I sit down for a few moments, Mrs. Otto? I want
to talk with you. Same as I talked to the Walkers last night.” I was
wearing a suit, tieless, still dressed Manhattan style, which I regretted,
but it was all I had brought with me. I promised myself that when I
came up to Sam Dent a second time (and I was sure by now that I’d be
making a lot of trips up here), I’d stop at EMS first. Flannel shirts,
green wool pants, clodhoppers, down vest—the Adirondack look. By
then, of course, it wouldn’t much matter; everyone would already
know I was a New York lawyer. When in Rome, however.

chairs and stumps didn’t look very comfortable anyhow. Besides, I
wanted to get down near the floor, where she was, and look her straight
in the eye. Let Hartley hover overhead, out of it, making tea. We were
going to deal, this lady and I, the Indian chief and the white man.

“I’m a lawyer,” I said.
“I see that.” She was large-breasted, square-shouldered, with long

dark hair that hung in a thick braid down her back. She wore a floppy
print blouse that emphasized her pregnant belly rather than hid it, and a
long wool skirt and moccasins, and her volume seemed greater than
her weight—she looked as though she was terrific on the dance floor
and bossy in bed. A heavy turquoise and silver amulet hung on a thong
at her throat. She had big strong-looking hands, nearly as large as
mine, and thick wrists with half a dozen silver bracelets on each, and
there were several heavily embossed rings on her fingers.

The woman was deeply into the Indian trip, more so now, no

doubt, than usual, probably into chants and meditation, sweat lodges
and omens. I figured she was Jewish, Great Neck, Long Island, NYU,
class of ’72, psych major, with a couple of years of social work and art
classes at the New School, where she had met Hartley the Lutheran
woodcarver, a draft evader from Wisconsin or someplace. They
probably found this place on a camping trip. (Turned out I wasn’t far
off. I had Wanda pegged exactly, but Hartley had come from South
Dakota; they bought this land with money borrowed from Wanda’s
father when they were crafts counselors at a nearby socialist summer
camp and built the house the following year. I learned all this later, of
course.)

“You know the Walkers, Risa and Wendell,” I said.
“Yes.”
“They speak highly of you.”
“Good. Will they speak highly of you?”
“I think so. Especially when I have won their case for them.”
“So they have hired you.”

“Yes.”
“I see. Their child has died, and they have gone out and hired a

lawyer because of it.”

“Yes. Although my task is to represent them only in their anger,

not their grief.”

“That’s how you understand your job? To represent anger?”
“Yes. You are angry, are you not? Among so many other things.”
She pursed her lips thoughtfully and remained silent for a

moment. The dog had started to snore. Hartley had disappeared behind
a curtain, and I could hear water running into a kettle, which surprised
me—I’d imagined melting chunks of ice or maybe a hand pump, not a
faucet and sink. They probably had a microwave oven and a food
processor back there.

“Yes,” she said, expelling her breath. “Oh, yes, we are angry.

Among so many other things.”

“That’s why I’m here, Mrs. Otto. To give your anger a voice, to

be a weapon for you.”

“Against whom?”
“Against whoever caused that bus to go off the road into the

sandpit.”

“I see. You think someone, a person, caused the accident.”
“There is no such thing as an accident.”
“No. No, there isn’t. You are right about that. But how will you

know who caused this accident that took our son from us?”

“If everyone had done his job, your son would be alive this

morning and safely in school. I will simply find out who did not do his
job. Then, in your name and the Walkers’ and the name of whoever
else decides to join you, I will sue that person and the company or
agency he works for, I will sue them for negligence.”

“I want that person to go to prison for the rest of his life,” she

declared. “I want him to die there. I don’t want his money.”

“It’s unlikely anyone will go to prison. He or his company will

have to pay in other ways. But pay they will. And we must make them
pay, Mrs. Otto, not to benefit you in a material way or to compensate
you for the loss of your son, Bear, which can’t be done, but to protect
the child you’re carrying inside you now. Understand, I’m not here to
speak just for your anger. I’m here to speak for the future as well.
What we’re talking about here is our ongoing relation to time.”

“I see.” And I think she did. The Walkers had seemed more

muddled in their motives. The money promised by the lawsuit meant a
lot to them, of course, but in a greedy childish way, and certainly more
than they were willing to admit to themselves or reveal openly to me.
The Walkers were poor and in debt, and their poverty had bugged them
for years, and it seemed even more unfair to them now, with their child
gone, than before. But Wanda Otto, and her husband too, never struck
me as having any selfish interest in the money; they cared only about
its handy capacity to function as punishment and prohibition. They
were too lost in their Zen Little Indians fantasy to be wholly
believable, maybe, or as reliable as the Walkers were, but I admired
them nonetheless.

Hartley had returned bearing a mug with a tea bag in it. “Let it

steep a minute,” he said. “You want milk?”

“No. A little sugar, though.”
“We only have honey,” he said.
“I’ll take it straight.”
“Well, Mr. New York Lawyer, what you’ve been saying makes

sense,” Wanda said to me. “Not much else in this world does.” Then to
Hartley, “We should hire this man to represent us. That way we won’t
have to deal with any of the others. He can advise us on how to talk to
the reporters too. You’ll do that?” she asked me.

“Yes. Certainly. For now, though, you should refuse all

interviews. Say nothing to the press, nothing to any other lawyers.
Refer everybody to me.”

“Are you expensive?”

“No,” I said. “If you agree to have me represent you in this suit, I

will require no payment until after the suit is won, when I will require
one third of the awarded amount. If there is no award made, then my
services will have cost you nothing. It’s a standard agreement.”

“Do you have this agreement with you?”
“In my car,” I said, and, not without difficulty, stood up, almost

spilling my tea. I’m not used to sitting cross-legged on the floor. “I’ll
just be a minute. You should talk without me, anyhow, before you sign
it,” I added. Also, I needed a cigarette, and I hadn’t noticed any
ashtrays: the house was cluttered with small figurines and strange clay
baskets that looked as if they were made to hold the spirits of ancestors
rather than cigarette butts and ashes.

I stepped outside, coatless, still bearing my mug of tea, and the

dog followed me and promptly pissed on the front tire of my car and
took off down the road. I dumped the tea onto a snowbank, making my
own mark. Then I got inside the car, where it was still warm, and lit a
cigarette.

I felt terrific. My mind was off and running, switching options

and tracking consequences like a first-class computer. Everyone has a
specialty, and I guess this is mine. For twenty-five years now, and for
three different firms, even after making partner, I’ve been the guy who
handles these disaster negligence suits. I could pull away from tort
cases and just handle the white-shoe stuff if I wanted—I’ve got the
name and face for it—or I could quit the practice altogether, move
permanently out to the house in East Hampton and maybe teach a
course or two at Fordham; but I won’t. Nothing else provides me with
the rush that I get from cases like this. There is a brilliant hard-edged
clarity that comes over me when I take on a suit for the Ottos and the
Walkers of the world, an intensity and focus that makes me feel more
alive then than at any other time.

It’s almost like a drug. It’s probably close to what professional

soldiers feel, or bullfighters. The rest of the time, like most people, I
muddle lonely through my days and nights feeling unsure, vaguely
confused, conflicted, and aimless. Put me onto something like this

school bus case, though, and zap! all those feelings disappear. Nothing
else does it—not illicit sex, not cocaine, not driving fast late at night
on the wrong lane of the highway, all of which I’ve tried. Nothing.

When I think about it, the only other event in my life that I can

remember even coming close to giving me the same rush, the same
hard hit of formalized intelligence, happened nearly twenty years ago,
on the coast of North Carolina, when Zoe was two years old and we
were renting a summer place way out on the Outer Banks. Klara and I
were tight then, especially over Zoe; we still thought we had a future
together, the three of us. Later, it would be only two of us with a future
together, me and Zoe, or Klara and Zoe; then one of us, me alone,
Klara alone, and who knows now about Zoe’s future? Fission in the
nuclear family. It’s got a short half-life.

Klara had put Zoe down for her afternoon nap, and she and I were

sitting out on the deck reading and watching the tide come in. I heard
Zoe start to fuss and went in to check her; it was hot, North Carolina
hot, and the house wasn’t air-conditioned; I figured the heat had
wakened her early. But when I saw her I was horrified—she was
standing in the rented Portacrib, her red face sweating and swollen like
a melon, with a pathetic froglike smile sliced across it. I touched her
bare shoulder gingerly: she was feverish, her skin as hot as I’d ever felt
it. I grabbed her up, rushed her out to the kitchen, and splashed water
on her face, shouting for Klara to call the doctor, I think she’s been
bitten by an insect or something!

In that splendid isolation there was no doctor—or rather, there

was only one, and he was off fishing in the Gulf Stream for yellowfin
tuna. The nearest hospital was in Elizabeth City, forty miles inland,
across the Great Dismal Swamp on a narrow, badly paved road. Zoe’s
face, arms, and legs continued to swell, although she seemed not to be
in any pain or even discomfort. Klara took her in her arms and
continued washing her body down with cold water, searching in vain
for signs of a bite—snake or spider, I knew it mattered which—while I
frantically dialed the hospital.

I finally got a doctor on the line; he sounded young, Southern, but

cool. Instantly, he surmised that there was a nest of baby black widow

spiders in the crib mattress. “They have to be little babies, or else with
her body weight she’d be dead,” he said. “You’re way out there in
Duck, eh? If Dr. Hopkins has gone fishin’, then you’ll just have to rush
her here. I’m alone here and can’t leave. There is a good chance you
can get her to me before her throat closes, and then we can control the
swelling with insulin,” he said. But keep her calm, he told me, don’t
excite her. “Is she more relaxed with one of you than the other?”

“Yes,” I said. “With me.” Which was true enough, especially at

that moment. Klara was wild-eyed with fear, and her fear was
contagious. I was a better actor than she, that’s all. Zoe loved us
equally then. Just as she loathes us equally now.

“All right, then, you be the one to hold the child in your lap, Mr.

Stephens, and let your wife drive the vehicle. And you better bring a
small sharp knife along with you. Do you have one that’s clean? You
don’t have time to sterilize it properly.”

I said yes, my Swiss army knife. Clean and sharp. But what the

hell for?

“Use the small blade,” he said, and then he explained how to

perform an emergency tracheotomy, told me how to cut into my
daughter’s throat and windpipe without causing her to bleed to death.
“There will be a whole lot of blood, you understand. A whole lot.”

“I don’t think I can do that,” I said, but I heard my voice go flat

and toneless as I spoke, as if I were already doing it.

“If her throat closes up and stops her breathing, you’ll have to,

Mr. Stephens. You’ll have a minute and a half, two minutes maybe,
and she’ll probably be unconscious when you do it. But listen, if you
can keep her calm and relaxed, if you don’t let her little heart beat real
fast and spread that poison around, then you just might make it over
here first. You get going now,” he snapped, and hung up.

I relayed the bit about keeping her calm to Klara, but nothing

about the knife, and without explanation said that she should drive
while I held Zoe, which relieved her, I think. Then we took off down
the long sandy beach road to the bridge and over the causeway to the
mainland, speeding west through the swamp toward Elizabeth City. It

was an unforgettable forty-five minutes. Throughout, I was neatly
divided into two people—I was the sweetly easy daddy singing, “I’ve
got sixpence, jolly, jolly sixpence, I’ve got sixpence to last me all my
life,” and I was the icy surgeon, one hand in his pocket holding the
knife, blade open and ready, the decision to cut unquestioned now,
irreversible, while I waited merely for the second that Zoe’s breath
stopped to make the first slice into her throat.

I can’t tell you why I connect that terrifying drive to Elizabeth

City over two decades ago to this case in Sam Dent now, where
children actually died, fourteen of them, but there is a powerful
equivalence. With my knife in my hand and my child lying in my lap,
smiling up at me, trusting me utterly, with her face swelling like a
painted balloon, progressively distorting her features into grotesque
versions of themselves, I felt the same clearheaded power that I felt
during those first days in Sam Dent, when the suit was taking off. I felt
no ambivalence, did no second-guessing, had no mistrusted motives—
I knew what I did and what I would do next and why, and Lord, it felt
wonderful! It always feels that way. Which is why I go on doing it.

In the case of the drive to Elizabeth City, as in so many of the

suits I’ve since undertaken, it turned out that I did not have to go as far
as I was prepared to go. But this is only because I was indeed prepared
to go all the way. I was at peace with myself and the world, and
consequently Zoe, too, stayed calm and placid, her tiny heart beating
slowly, normally, even after I ran out of songs and had to go back to
the beginning of my repertoire, which usually irritated her; she almost
fell asleep at one point.

Klara raced into the hospital lot, drew up at the emergency room

entrance, and I stepped out of the car and calmly carried Zoe inside,
where the doctor and two nurses with a gurney and an IV hookup
awaited us. Five minutes later, her swelling had started to recede. By
evening, the three of us were back at the beach, watching from the
deck as the sun set behind the dunes and out near the eastern horizon
the red sky streaked the sea in plum and cobalt blue. We had removed
the mattress from the crib as soon as we got back from the hospital
and, unsure of what to do with it, had tossed it into a patch of

witchgrass beside the deck; but that night I built a driftwood fire on the
beach and burned the thing, and Zoe slept with us.

Now in my dreams of her, and I dream of her frequently, Zoe is

still that child in my lap, trusting me utterly—even though I am the
man who secretly held in his hand the knife that he had decided to use
to cut into her throat, and thus I am in no way the man she sees smiling
down at her, singing ditties and rondelets and telling stories of owls
and pussycats.

And sometimes when I wake, for a few moments I’m like Risa

Walker and Hartley Otto and Billy Ansel and all those other parents
whose children have died and who have been unable to react with rage
—the dreamed child is the real one, the dead child simply does not
exist. We waken and say, “I can’t believe she’s gone,” when what we
mean is “I don’t believe she exists.” It’s the other child, the dreamed
baby, the remembered one, that for a few lovely moments we think
exists. For those few moments, the first child, the real baby, the dead
one, is not gone; she simply never was.

After explaining to the Ottos the contingency fee agreement,

which, like the Walkers, they quickly signed (once they realized it
would cost them nothing up front), I returned to my car and drove
along Bartlett Hill Road from their house back into town, following
the route of the school bus, which took me past all the houses of the
families who had entrusted their children to it. A morbid drive, but it
gave me some insights and let me usefully imagine the event, despite
the different weather and time of day. So that when I passed the town
dump, pulled out onto the Marlowe road, and headed down from
Wilmot Flats, I saw that wide snow-covered bowl open up before me
and naturally picked up speed, as the driver of the bus must have, and
my attention momentarily left the roadway altogether, as hers must
have, and took in the marvelous view of valley and village, snowy
mountains and deep blue sky, and I almost missed the place where the
bus had gone over, where there remained all kinds of signs of the
disaster—the broken and trampled roadside snowbank and the state
police barriers still up, the tracks of trucks and ambulances, of
snowmobiles and crowds of rescue workers on the embankment and

the snow-covered ground around the water-filled sandpit below. The
pit, although it had frozen solid again, was now an ice crater of sorts,
with huge gray wedges and chunks sticking out of the new ice and
lying along the bank like the walls of a building destroyed by a bomb.

I parked my car a ways beyond the scene and slowly walked back

along the highway to it. No other vehicles in sight. The sun was bright,
and a steady breeze was blowing out of the valley below, hissing in the
trees and sending the powdery snow across the pavement in tiny
fantails. It was definitely ghostly out there, but I’ve visited hundreds of
scenes like this and can recreate the tragic event in my mind without
being distracted by the atmosphere of the aftermath.

I saw where the bus had gone through the low three-cable

guardrail and noted that it had been a relatively new rail, properly
installed. On the other side of the highway, the posts were rusted near
the base from the salty runoff; soon those rails, too, would have to be
replaced. But, regretfully, Dolores Driscoll hadn’t gone through over
there; she’d snapped off the new poles here on this side, half a dozen
of them, dragging the cables with her. From my point of view, the best
thing you could say about the new guardrail was that it was utterly
incapable of stopping or even diverting a fast-moving bus.

Beyond the broken guardrail, the embankment fell off

precipitously, and the angle between the road and the line that ran from
the road to the point where the bus had entered the sandpit below was
twenty or twenty-five degrees. No way the bus could have cut that
sharp an angle unless, when it left the road and broke through the
guardrail, it was speeding, or damned near speeding. A hundred yards
farther down the road, at a point directly opposite the sandpit, the drop
was gradual. If the vehicle had gone off there, no matter how fast it
had been going when it left the road, it wouldn’t have traveled the
several hundred feet down the slope to the sandpit: the impact of the
guardrail and then the snowbank and the field of deep snow beyond
would have stopped the vehicle first. Up above, though, all you had,
after the guardrail and the snowbank, was free-fall.

It was inescapable—when the bus left the road, it had been

moving pretty fast. And because of the drop-off, once through the

guardrail, the bus was gone. There was no way for the driver to have
kept it from going down the steep embankment and into the sandpit,
even at that oblique an angle, without having immediately,
deliberately, flipped it over on its side, which would have kept it out of
the sandpit, at least. But what kind of driver could have pulled that off?
Not the kind that’s terrified of losing the lives of children, that’s for
sure. Not Dolores Driscoll.

I stepped over the rail opposite the sandpit and made my way

down the trampled slope to examine the site up close. A chain-link
fence surrounded the pit, most of it flattened now, smashed first by the
plummeting bus and then by the rescuers. It had been a sturdy six-foot
fence with a wide gate that no doubt had been padlocked. I thought, if
one hot summer night some teenaged kids climbed over that fence to
skinny-dip and one of them drowned there, the town would be
negligent for not having drained it. That’s a case I could win, despite
the fence. But that, I had to note, was not the case I was chasing here.
What I had here was fourteen kids on their way to school one winter
morning dying in a sandpit a hundred yards off the road. They did not
get there on their own. Concentrate on how they got there, I decided.

Which presented certain problems. Unless I could establish that

the driver of the bus, this Dolores Driscoll, had been safely under the
speed limit when she came down the highway that morning, there was
no way I’d be able to blame the town or the school district or the state
or anyone else with deep pockets for negligence. To nail them, I’d
have to defend her. I’d have to defend her even if the brakes or some
part of the steering had failed. No matter what the immediate cause of
the crash, I’d still have to establish that at the time it left the road the
bus was being driven in a proper way and at a safe speed for the
conditions.

I damn sure did not want to go after Dolores Driscoll, and, for

somewhat different reasons, neither did my clients. Never mind that
her pockets weren’t an inch deep; she was well-liked, sober,
hardworking, from an old respected Sam Dent family, sole support of
her crippled husband, and she’d been driving local kids to school
safely for more than twenty years. Worse, the parents viewed her as

having been victimized just as much as they were themselves, and a
jury would agree with them. “Poor Dolores,” Risa had said. “She must
be destroyed by this.”

My case would have to be built on the assumption that Dolores

Driscoll was not at fault. The lawyers opposing me would simply hope
to prove the opposite and go home early and type up their bills.

Two ways to establish the speed of the bus at the time it left the

road, I figured: use the testimony of the driver and, more important,
use the testimony of the sole witness, Billy Ansel. Which meant, of
course, that he could not be one of my clients. Or anyone else’s, for
that matter. For him to testify that Dolores had been driving under the
speed limit (and I couldn’t even be sure of that yet), he could not be in
a position to profit from his testimony. But with his impartiality
established, I could then begin to hope that Ansel had in fact clocked
the bus from behind with his truck and that neither of them had been
traveling at more than fifty-five miles per hour. If he had not actually
monitored the speed of the bus from behind, then I would have him
testify as to his own safe driving habits—which, when challenged, I
could support, if not verify. It would still be self-serving testimony, of
course, but it would be enough for a jury that was inclined to believe
him and did not want to blame Dolores Driscoll anyhow.

My first task, though, was to keep him impartial. Keep him clean.

It would be easy to make him resist signing on with me, but I’d also
have to help him resist the impulse to sign on with any of the double-
knit sharks that were cruising these waters. I was sure he’d been
contacted already, but my best guess so far was that he’d rebuffed
them. Assuming that what I’d been told of him by the Walkers and the
Ottos—that he had holed up in his house alone and was staying drunk
—wasn’t just village gossip. Drunks don’t sue.

Originally, I’d decided that this guy, drunk or sober, was going to

require some careful seduction. I myself had not planned to approach
him until after the others had been turned down; let them seed the idea
of a negligence suit, was my strategy, and then let me come along with
my homework done and several of his more respected friends and

neighbors in tow and all ready to file notices of claim, and the guy
would sign on, I was sure.

Now, however, everything was different. Now I had to turn him

off me, and in such a way that no other lawyer could get to him
instead. This wasn’t quite ethical, of course; maybe not even moral.
Necessary, however—legal triage.

I’d planned to give Ansel another few days before making direct

contact, but that seemed too risky now. Better hit on the guy soon, or
better yet, talk to him this evening at his house, late, especially if he’s
into drinking. Give him a genteel nudge that pisses him off more
afterwards than at the time of delivery, and he’ll want to kill the next
lawyer he talks to, I figured.

There was no point in contacting any additional parents until I’d

first brought Ansel’s testimony under my control and had answered the
question of how fast the bus was moving when it went through the
guardrail. So I went to work on the other aspects of the case—checked
the state police in Marlowe, the county seat, to find out who had
arrived at the scene first; stopped by the county mapping office for a
look at the pitch and height of the highway and adjacent roads and
lands; that sort of thing—gathering data, mainly, for later.

That night, after the blue-plate special at the Noonmark over in

Keene Valley (ham and macaroni and cheese—kiddie food, but at least
there weren’t any lawyers or journalists eating there), I drove out to
Ansel’s house, which was up on Staples Mill Road. I passed the house
by and parked a short ways beyond it with my lights out, thinking I’d
reconnoiter a bit before approaching the man in person. It was a lovely
moonlit night, the snow a pale blue color under it, the trees black
against the snow. And cold—I didn’t even want to know the
temperature.

I got out of the car and walked slowly back toward the house, a

large well-maintained stone-faced colonial that looked recently
renovated, with sharply cleared paths and driveway, two-car garage,
breezeway—like a dentist’s house in the suburbs. The only lights on
were in the room adjacent to the breezeway, apparently the kitchen,

and from the road where I stood, next to the mailbox, I could see him
through the large picture window, seated at the table, alone.

Jesus, he looked sad. Tousled dark hair, shoulders slumped,

elbows planted on the table, a single glass and a half-empty bottle in
front of him—the picture of permanent depression. Gone to where he
thought his kids had gone. If I’d wanted the guy for a client, I’d have
been worried.

Suddenly, he stood up and turned and faced out the window,

looking across the snow-covered front yard right at me. I froze and
stared back at him. Nothing else to do. I remember that for several
seconds we seemed to be gazing at one another, me in moonlight at the
side of the road, him in the soft light of his kitchen a hundred feet
away, neither of us moving a muscle. We were like mirror images of
each other, but who knows if he saw me at all, or, if he saw me, what
he thought he was looking at? Maybe all he could see was himself
reflected off the window glass, a muscular bearded guy in his late
thirties in a plaid flannel shirt and khakis; and saw nothing of the tall
skinny fifty-five-year-old guy shivering outside in his camel-hair coat.
It was a weird moment, though. As if we were long-lost brothers,
separated early and passing by accident decades later, not quite
recognizing each other, but then, for a second or two, something—
something—clicks.

The moment passed. Ansel turned away from the window and

poured himself another drink: it looked like straight whiskey. He sat
heavily back down at the table, and I quickly walked back to my car.
He’s too drunk to talk to tonight, I thought; probably wouldn’t even
remember it in the morning. The aftereffect of what I had to say to him
was more important to me than the immediate effect. I think I was
rationalizing, though. Scared.

I decided to drive back to the motel by way of Ansel’s garage in

town, which was where they’d hauled the wrecked bus. I wanted some
pictures of the vehicle while I could still get them, even if I had to take
them at night with a flash. In a day or two, I knew, once I’d filed
notices of claim, the bus was likely to disappear.

I pulled into the garage lot and drove around to the rear, where

there were seven or eight different vehicles parked and stowed,
including the school bus, which was pretty smashed up, although not
as badly as I’d expected. Most of the windows toward the rear were
gone, kicked in by the divers, probably, but the vehicle was basically
intact, probably even salvageable—a repair job that I did not think
Billy Ansel would be taking on.

I took maybe twenty pictures, from all sides and even a few

through the windows, and had just got back into my car and started the
motor, when I saw a pickup truck enter the lot. It was Ansel’s. I kept
the motor running but the lights off and watched, as he drew up behind
the bus and after a few seconds stepped out of his truck. To my
surprise, he walked steadily and didn’t look especially drunk. A little
crazy, maybe, which was okay; but not drunk. In the glare of his
headlights I watched him walk over to the driver’s side of the bus,
where he stopped by the window and stood looking up at it for a long
time, as if talking to someone inside.

Finally, he turned away from the bus and moved back toward his

own vehicle. I decided to speak to him. I wasn’t scared of him
anymore. The timing and locale couldn’t be better. It was invasive but
not intrusive.

I got out of my car and crossed the lot toward him.
“You work for Ansel?” I asked him, as if I didn’t know who he

was.

“I am Ansel.”
I moved closer and in a low voice said, “I’m sorry about your

children, Mr. Ansel.”

“You are, eh?” He was already combative.
“Yes.”
We stared directly into each other’s eyes. The old staredown.
He broke first and said, “I take you to be a lawyer,” which let me

counterpunch, which is how you control these things.

“Yes, I am an attorney. My name is—”

“Mister, I don’t want to know your name.”
True enough, but he was damn well going to learn it anyhow. “I

understand,” I said.

“No. No, you don’t understand.”
“I can help you.”
“No, you can’t help me. Not unless you can raise the dead,” he

declared, moving away from me and getting into his truck.

I quickly handed him a card. “Here. You may change your mind.”
He read the card and then passed it back, looking me straight in

the face, but distracted somehow, as if memorizing the card.

Fine by me. I stared him back.
“Mr. Mitchell Stephens, Esquire, would you be likely to sue me if

right now I was to beat you with my hands and feet?” he growled.
“Beat you so bad that you pissed blood and couldn’t walk for a month?
Because that is what I’m about to do, you understand. Whether you
sue me or not.”

Lawyers sue; he’d made the connection. And suing is bad; he’d

taken his stand. In what I hoped was a slightly weary but kindly tone,
because I did not want to sound in the slightest defensive, the way I
knew those other lawyers would react when he started threatening
them, I said, “No, Mr. Ansel. No, I wouldn’t sue you. And I don’t
think there’s anyone in this county who would even arrest you for it.
But you’re not about to beat me up, are you?”

He paused, reconsidering. “No, I’m not going to beat you up. Just

don’t talk to me again. Don’t come around my garage, and don’t come
to my house or call me on the telephone.”

The rest was finish work. “You may change your mind. I can help

you,” I said.

“Leave me alone, Stephens. Leave the people of this town alone.

You can’t help any of us. No one can.”

“You can help each other. Several people have agreed to let me

represent them in a negligence suit, and your case as an individual will

be stronger if I’m allowed to represent you together as a group.” This
was no longer the hook I’d originally planned it to be; now it was
merely a way for him to feel morally superior to his neighbors, which,
of course, would keep him clean for me later on, when I put him in
front of a jury.

“My ‘case’? I have no case. None of us has a case.”
“You’re wrong about that. Very wrong. Your friends the Walkers

have agreed, and Mr. and Mrs. Otto, and I’m talking with some other
folks. It’s important to initiate proceedings right away. Things get
covered up fast. People lie. You know that. People lie about these
things. We have to begin our own investigation quickly, before the
evidence disappears. That’s why I’m out here tonight.” I showed him
my camera.

He looked at it with disgust. “Our children aren’t even buried

yet,” he said. “It’s you—you’re the liar. Risa and Wendell Walker, I
know them, you’re right, but they wouldn’t hire a goddamned lawyer.
And the Ottos, they wouldn’t deal with you, for Christ’s sake. You’re
lying to me about them, and probably to them about me. We’re not
fools, you know, country bumpkins you can put the big-city hustle on.
You’re just trying to use us. You want us to pull each other in,” he
announced, getting it nicely wrong.

Smiling at his minor triumph, he shut the door of his truck,

backed the vehicle up and turned, then drove quickly from the lot. The
truck fishtailed as it hit the road and turned left, heading toward the
west end of town. Where the Bide-a-Wile Motel was located; and Risa
Walker. I did not have too much trouble imagining the conversation
that would take place between them there. Husband Wendell I was
certain, would not be a party to it. Poor sap. I liked Wendell. I did not
like Billy Ansel.

Things moved pretty fast for a while then. A lot of it was strictly

procedural, the kind of search-and-destroy that precedes filing a notice
of claim, where you’re essentially boxing off the defendants so that
you can both narrow the terms and widen the areas of liability. I had
some files and a fax machine shipped up from New York by UPS and

set up a sort of office for myself in my room at the Bide-a-Wile. The
Walkers seemed pleased by the arrangement, especially Risa; from
their point of view, they now had a lawyer-in-residence. I wasn’t
exactly on retainer, but I did end up advising them, Risa in particular,
on a few matters other than their negligence suit, which I was now
attempting to aim at the State of New York, for not having installed
sufficiently strong guardrails along that especially dangerous stretch of
roadway, and at the town of Sam Dent, for not having drained the
sandpit. And I was contemplating a suit against the school board, for
having permitted Dolores Driscoll to service her school bus herself. I
figured, cast as wide a net as possible and catch whatever fish you can
in it.

As a defendant, the driver was out of bounds, of course, but I was

now considering making even her a plaintiff, since, if she was not
herself responsible for the accident, she might be shown to have a
cause for action for emotional distress. What the hell, it was worth a
try. It’d make an interesting precedent. Also, I might be able to run it
backward: it would be that much harder for the state, town, and school
lawyers to lay the responsibility for the accident on her if she was one
of the parties suing them for negligence. In an important way, the
whole case rose or fell on the question of Dolores Driscoll’s liability,
and it was a question I’d just as soon not get asked at all. At least not
without a few roadblocks.

The funerals started the next day, all over town, going on for

several days, for three or four children at a time, and naturally I
planned on staying away. Out of decency, but strategy as well. It
doesn’t hurt to be the only lawyer in town who doesn’t come off as a
buzzard.

The town was beginning to formalize its response to the tragedy.

There had appeared one morning fourteen tiny crosses out at the crash
site, which turned out to be the work of schoolchildren, at the
instigation of the school board. So much for separation of church and
state. A memorial service for the victims, announced in the local
weekly newspaper, was scheduled to be held the following week in the
school auditorium, where the state representative from the district, the

school principal, and half a dozen area clergymen would intone.
Money was being collected, ostensibly for the families of the victims
(although the exact purpose of the money was a little vague—funeral
expenses for some, medical expenses for others, I supposed), in glass
jars at all the local businesses, even at the Noonmark Diner over in
Keene Valley. TV viewers from around the country were sending
contributions—money, clothing, canned food, stuffed animals,
crucifixes, and potted plants—all of which was being logged in and
held at the school for eventual distribution. Even then I could see
problems down the road with that, but it was none of my affair, so I
just listened and nodded as Risa filled me in on the details. She was
evidently quite touched by the generosity of strangers, and I saw no
reason to disabuse her of it. Some people, when terrible things happen
to them, take strength from believing that other people are better than
in fact they are. Not me. I go in the opposite direction.

Actually, I knew that Risa’s increasing confidentiality with me,

her evident need to talk to me as frequently as possible, was her way of
leading up to a conversation about how to divorce Wendell. I doubt she
knew that herself then, but it was surely on the agenda. The death of
her son had eliminated the one reason she was married to the boy’s
father.

I still hadn’t taken the measure of Dolores Driscoll, however, so

when Risa told me that the woman was showing up at all the funerals,
sitting way in the back and then disappearing at the end of the service,
only to reappear down the road at the next one, I decided to break my
rule and take in a funeral myself, then head back to the city for a few
days. I had several other cases that I’d left hanging and needed
attention.

That morning at the motel, however, the phone in my room rang,

and it was Zoe, out of the blue, after three months of silence, and it
caught me completely by surprise, or I doubt I’d have handled it as
badly as I did.

“Daddy, it’s me!” she’d said. Her voice was full of the usual

phony enthusiasm, but it was dead, dead as the kids in their caskets.

razor and sat down on the bed. It was like getting a call from a ghost.
Every time I think my period of mourning is over, she calls to remind
me that I haven’t really started yet.

“Hi! How’re you doing? Where are you? Where’s five one eight?

I got this number off your phone machine.”

“Yeah, well, I’m … I’m surprised to hear from you. I’m on a case,

upstate, in the Adirondacks.”

She said that was very interesting, and for a minute I gabbled on

about the case, the motel, the town of Sam Dent, like we have these
conversations, any conversation, all the time. Finally, I was able to
stop myself, and I said, “Zoe, why are you calling me?”

“Why am I calling you? You’re my father, for Christ’s sake! I’m

not supposed to call you?”

“Oh, Jesus, Zoe. Please, for once, let’s talk straight.”
“Fine. That would be terrific. I called Mom, and all she wanted to

know was had I grown my hair back yet and what color was it, so I
hung up. What do you want to know?”

“Well, to be perfectly honest, right now I want to know if you’re

high.”

“You mean, Daddy, am I stoned? Do I have a needle dangling

from my arm? Am I nodding in a phone booth? Did I score this
morning, get whacked, Daddy, and call you for money”?

Trees, snow, mountains, ice. I could hear sirens, street traffic, a

radio or TV newscaster in the background. I imagined some boyfriend
behind her, sick and dying, smoking a cigarette, waiting for her to raise
some money from her rich father. Who was I talking to? The living or
the dead? How should I behave?

“God,” she said. “I don’t fucking believe it.”
“I’m sorry. I just need to know, if that’s possible. So I can know

how to talk to you. So I can know how to act.”

“Just act naturally, Daddy,” she snapped.

deposit another two dollars and twenty cents for an additional three
minutes.

“Where are you, Zoe? I’ll call back.”
“Shit!” she said. Then she hollered to someone, “What the fuck’s

the number of this phone? It’s not here!”

“Zoe, just tell me where you are.”
“It’s this hotel, this … place. Where’s the goddamned number? I

can’t find the fucking number.” The operator’s voice cut in again,
repeating her instructions.

“Where are you, Zoe? Give me the name of the hotel; I’ll get the

number from Information. What’s the address? You’re in New York?”

“Shit! It’s this pay phone. Yeah,” she said, and then the line went

dead.

What do you do when this sort of thing happens? I’ll tell you

what you do. You sit still and count slowly to ten, or a hundred, or a
thousand, however long it takes for your heart to stop pounding, and
then you resume doing whatever it was you were doing when the
telephone first rang. I had been standing in my socks and underwear at
the bathroom sink, shaving. I went back to shaving. I was in the tiny
village of Sam Dent, New York, in the middle of generating a terrific
negligence suit. I went back to that. I’d planned to return to the city
that day anyhow, and Zoe’s phone call hadn’t touched that. She was
probably in a ratty, crack-infested single-room-occupancy hotel in
back of Times Square, or had just been kicked out of one. And for all I
could do about it, she might as well be in L.A. as New York.

I switched my mind onto the business at hand, which I could do

something about. Breakfast at the Noonmark. Attending funerals.
Dolores Driscoll. The need to sound her out before I got myself locked
into this case.

There was only one funeral left, the service for the Catholic kids

at St. Hubert’s Church, a small white woodframe structure out by the
fairgrounds on the East Branch of the Ausable River, on Route 73, a

few miles from town. The funeral was for the Bilodeau and Atwater
kids, from Wilmot Flats, and there were five small open caskets up
front, surrounded by flowers and miscellaneous plant life. There were
maybe a hundred people attending, a sadly shabby crowd in their
Sunday best, mostly somber young men with big Adam’s apples and
weeping overweight young women with rotten complexions, and
bunches of kids and babies in hand-me-downs, with red runny noses
and slobbering mouths. The kind of crowd the Pope likes.

I recognized several lawyers, easy to spot in their suits and

topcoats, checking out the scene for potential clients, and a couple of
journalists with cameras dangling from their necks and notebooks in
their hands, waiting for visible signs of grief. Dolores I spotted
immediately, thanks to Risa’s description: late middle age, round face,
frizzy red hair, a little on the plump side, and wearing a man’s parka
and heavy trousers and boots. “You’d think she was a lesbian or
something, if you didn’t know about her husband, Abbott, and her
sons, who are all quite normal,” Risa had explained. I noted that Risa
herself seemed to prefer men’s clothing, but said nothing. What the
hell, it was probably just something between women, the way they
compete with one another without having to acknowledge it.

I was standing by the door in a pack of late arrivals, still thinking

about Zoe, I admit it, when I first saw Dolores. The tiny church was
crowded, but she had half a pew at the back to herself, so I slid in next
to her. Immediately four or five people followed and sat on my other
side, filling the rest of the pew. It wasn’t too hard to see what the
difficulty was—these people liked Dolores, she was one of them, and
they felt as profoundly sorry for her as for themselves; but they also
could not help blaming her and wanting to cast her out. They would
have preferred that she simply disappear from town for a while, go and
stay with her son in Plattsburgh or at least hide behind the door of her
house with her husband up there on Bartlett Hill. They wanted her to
stash her pain and guilt where they didn’t have to look at it.

But she wasn’t having any of that. Silently, with her head bowed,

Dolores was plunking herself down in the exact center of the town’s
grief and rage, compelling them by her presence at these funerals to

define her. Was she a victim of this tragedy, or was she the cause of it?
She had placed herself on the scales of their judgment, but they did not
want to judge her. To them, she was both, of course, victim and cause;
just as to herself she was both. Like every parent when something
terrible happens to his child, Dolores was innocent, and she was guilty.
We knew which, in the eyes of God and our fellowman, we were,
despite the fact that most of the time we felt like both; but she did not.
Denial was impossible for her, so she wanted us to come forward and
do the job for her.

Toward the end of the service, when the short red-faced priest

turned to the cross in the nave for a closing prayer and the pallbearers
stepped forward from their front-row seats and took their posts by the
caskets, Dolores suddenly stood and squeezed past me and the others
in the pew. I followed her, excusing my knees as I worked my way to
the aisle. From the foyer, I watched the woman hurry down the path to
the road, then move rapidly past the hearses and the long line of
parked cars. I broke into a run and caught up with her just as she
reached a large dark blue van.

“Mrs. Driscoll!” I called. “Please!”
She turned and faced me, scared. “What do you want!”
“I can tell you, I can tell you whether you’re guilty or not.” I was

out of breath; for her size, the woman moved pretty fast.

“Who are you? Who is it can do that? No one can do that.”
“Yes, I can. Answer me one simple question, and I’ll tell you if

you are to blame.”

“One question?”
“Yes. When the bus left the road, Mrs. Driscoll, how fast was it

moving?”

“I don’t know.”
“Approximately.”
“You said one question.”
“It’s the same question, Mrs. Driscoll. Approximately how fast?”

“The police already asked it.”
“What did you tell them?”
“You said one question.”
“Same question.”
“Fifty, fifty-five at the most, is what I told them.”
“Then you’re not guilty,” I said. “You’re not to blame. Believe

me.”

“Why? Why should I believe you?”
“Listen to me, you poor woman. You didn’t do anything wrong

that morning. It wasn’t your fault. I now know as much as anyone
about what happened out there on the highway that morning, and
believe me, it’s not you who are at fault.”

“Who, then?”
“Two or maybe three parties who were not there at the time,” I

said, and I listed them for her. I told her my name and explained that I
was representing the Ottos and the Walkers, people who liked and
admired her and who believed, with me, that she was in many ways as
much a victim of this tragedy as they were. I said that I would like to
represent her too.

“Me? Represent me? No,” she said. “You can’t. I only said I was

doing fifty, fifty-five. To the police; to Captain Wyatt Pitney, from the
state police. Because that’s how I remembered it. But the truth, mister,
is that I might have been doing sixty miles an hour when the bus went
over, or sixty-five. Not seventy, I’m sure. But sixty is possible. Sixty-
five, even. And I would say that to a judge, if some smart lawyer like
you, only working for the other side, took it into his head to ask it that
way. And, mister,” she said in a low voice, “let’s face it, if I was over
the limit, no matter how you tell it, I’m sure I’m to blame.”

Yep. “But what if Billy Ansel insists that at the time of the alleged

accident, you were going fifty-two miles an hour?”

“He knows that? Billy?”
“Yes. He does.”

“Billy said that?”
“If he does not volunteer to say so in court, I will subpoena him

and oblige him to testify to that effect—if you’ll let me bring a suit in
your name charging negligent infliction of emotional harm. It’s clear to
me and many other people that you have suffered significantly from
this event. And then, Dolores Driscoll, your name, your very good
name, will be cleared once and for all in this town. Everyone will
know then that you, too, have suffered enormously, we’ll have
established it legally, and then you will not have to bear any of the
blame.”

“Well, I’m not to blame!” she said. “I’m not to blame.” Her large

round face crinkled suddenly, and she began to weep. I placed both
hands on her shoulders and drew her toward me, and in a few seconds
she was blubbering against my chest. Peering over her head, I watched
the caskets come out of the church, one after the other. The pallbearers
—uncles and older brothers and cousins of the kids inside the boxes—
shoved the caskets into the hearses, and the somber black-suited guys
from the funeral homes slammed the doors shut on them.

It was probably just as well that Dolores had her back to the

scene. When the people coming out of the church saw us standing
there, they stopped, many of them, and glared at us. And when they
moved toward their cars and pickup trucks, they cut a wide swath
around us, until finally we were standing there in the parking lot next
to the church alone.

“Come out to the house,” she said to me, wiping her red swollen

face with her sleeve. “What I want, you can tell my husband, Abbott,
what you’ve told me. Abbott’s logical. Like you. But he’s more
interested than you in doing what’s right. You’ll see. If he says I should
do this, go to court and all, like you say, so my name can be cleared
and like that, then I will. But if he’s against it, then I’m against it.”

I hadn’t planned on this, but I said fine, that made perfect sense to

me, and agreed to follow her out to her house in my car. Yes, I suppose
I had a few minor misgivings about having lied to her—I was a little
worried that I wouldn’t be able to get Billy Ansel to confirm that she

had been driving under the speed limit. It was a gamble, a calculated
risk, but the odds were maybe ten to one that no matter how fast they
were going when the bus went over, Ansel, for several reasons, would
say to a jury, just as she had told the cops, “Fifty, fifty-five.” You have
to gamble like this now and then.

‘Would you say fifty-two miles per hour, Mr. Ansel?”
“Yeah. Fifty-two, I’d say.”
“Would you say fifty-three miles per hour, Mr. Ansel?”
“Yeah. It might have been fifty-three. No more, though.”
“At that time, Mr. Ansel, and under the weather conditions and

road conditions that prevailed at that time, the time of the accident, and
at that place on the road from Marlowe to the town of Sam Dent—a
stretch of road that you, like Mrs. Driscoll, are extremely familiar with,
are you not …?”

“Yeah.”
“Would fifty-three miles per hour have been a safe speed to be

operating a school bus?”

“Objection!”
“Sustained.”
“I withdraw the question. I have no further questions of the

gentleman, Your Honor.”

Piece of cake, on a plate.
Dolores and her husband, Abbott, lived near the top of Bartlett

Hill Road in a large foursquare white house with a wide porch in front
and a big unpainted barn in back, with nothing but dense woodlands
beyond. From the porch you had a great one-hundred-eighty-degree
view that included The Range, as they call it, from Mount Marcy to
Wolf Jaw. A million-dollar view. For the area, it was an old house, and
it had fallen on bad times. In the late 1800s, Dolores’s grandfather had
been a successful dairy farmer, she told me as we stood in the
driveway before going inside. He’d built it himself from trees cleared
off this land, and her father and then she herself had been raised in it.
Back then, Dolores said, even in her father’s day, these forested

mountains were alpine meadowlands. “It was like Switzerland,” she
said, “although I can’t say what Switzerland’s like.” Now, for miles,
straight to the horizon, you saw nothing but trees—hardwoods, mostly,
and hemlock and pine—and if it weren’t for the occasional old stone
wall sinking into the leafy ground, you’d think you were in the forest
primeval.

Abbott Driscoll was a shriveled guy in a wheelchair; he’d had a

stroke a few years before, and his whole right side had blinked out. He
had long thinning white hair, bright blue eyes, and soft pink skin, and
he drooled a little and sat canted to one side, like a baby in a high
chair.

Although he seemed bright enough, his speech was seriously

impaired, and I could make out only about half of what he said. Most
of the other half Dolores translated, whether I wanted her to or not. He
spoke in these odd cryptic sentences that didn’t really mean a whole lot
to me but to Dolores were like Delphic pronouncements. I guess she
loved the hell out of the guy and heard what she wanted to hear.

I sat at the kitchen table opposite him, while Dolores took what

appeared to be her customary position behind his wheelchair, where
she rubbed his shoulders affectionately and now and then stroked his
hair back.

It was a brief interview, mainly because I did a lot more talking

myself than I normally do. I was still distracted by the business with
Zoe. Essentially, I repeated what I had told Dolores outside the church,
but said it at least three times, with a slight variation each time, as if I
was cross-examining myself. I felt slightly out of control.

Abbott mostly gargled and sputtered, interrupting me occasionally

with stuff like “Blame … creates … gabble-gabble … ” and “Cluck-
cluck-cluck … lives … longer … than … spe-lunk.” Which Dolores,
with modest downcast eyes and a small knowing smile, translated as
“Blame creates comprehension” and “A person’s name lives longer
than her lifetime.”

Yeah, sure, Dolores. Whatever you say. I merely nodded and

continued talking, as if he’d said something I totally agreed with or

had asked me to repeat myself. Yackety-yak: out of sync, out of
character. Finally, I reached the end of my spiel one more time, and
because this time he said nothing, no mysterious oracular
pronouncements, just a drooling silence, I was able to stop, and for a
few seconds all three of us were silent and apparently thoughtful.

There was a crackling fire in the kitchen wood stove, but that was

the only sound. The house was warm and weathertight and smelled
good, like baked bread. Most of the furniture was either homemade or
yard sale stuff, twenty and thirty years old, repaired over and over with
string, wire, and glue, but still sturdy, still serviceable. I waited. I
wanted a cigarette, but it didn’t look as if either of them smoked,
especially him, so I just patted the pack in my shirt pocket for comfort.

Then Abbott spoke. He twisted his face around his mouth the best

he could and pursed his lips on the left side as though he were sucking
a straw and in a loud voice said something like “A down … gloobity-
gear … and day old’ll … find you … innocent … if a brudder … lands
… gloobity first….”

And so on and so forth. I was guessing, but it sounded like the old

guy was ready for action. All I could read was his face, however,
which was bright and open and smiling as he talked, not angry and
vengeful, the way I like it. It was the longest speech he’d made so far,
but to tell the truth, I hadn’t the foggiest idea of what words, or even
what language, he’d used for making it. Serbo-Croatian, maybe.

Dolores knew, though. She smiled and said to me, “You heard

what Abbott said?”

“Yes, I heard. Can you make it exact for me, though? I think I

missed some of it. You know, a word or two.”

“Certainly. Glad to. What Abbott said was: The true jury of a

person’s peers is the people of her town. Only they, the people who
have known her all her life, and not twelve strangers, can decide her
guilt or innocence. And if Dolores—meaning me, of course—if she
has committed a crime, then it’s a crime against them, not the state, so
they are the ones who must decide her punishment too. What Abbott is
saying, Mr. Stephens, is forget the lawsuit. That’s what he’s saying.”

“He is?”
“Yep.”
“You’re sure of that?”
“Yep. I told you he was logical,” she declared. “He understands

things better than most people. He understands me too.”

“That right?”
“Oh, yes. Abbott’s a genius.”
A genius, eh? A gibbering fool, is what I thought. From what I

could see and hear, Dolores was the ventriloquist and Abbott was the
dummy. And you can’t argue with the ventriloquist about what the
dummy really said.

I got up from my chair, lit a cigarette, said my goodbyes, and I

was gone. Not without a certain relief. It surprised me; I don’t usually
give up that easily. I guess I had my reasons: the Driscolls were too
weird to bring into a negligence suit, but they were also too weird to
sue, which did not displease me.

The guy Abbott Driscoll, though, he gave me the creeps.

Whatever his wife claimed he said or meant to say, I was sure he knew
things that neither of us knew and was just playing cat-and-mouse with
us, using his affliction to make us say and do things we might not
otherwise say or do, so that we would end up showing him who we
really were. Which might have been okay for her—presumably, she
wanted him to know who she really was, but I didn’t. The guy
would’ve made a hell of a lawyer if he could talk straight.

Well, you win some and you lose some, I said to myself. And this

one was probably better off lost early than late. Down the hill and over
to the west end of town I went, back to the Bide-a-Wile to pack.
Halfway down the hill, I passed by the little handmade house in the
pines where I’d been told Nichole Burnell lived with her mommy and
daddy and two younger brothers and baby sister, and I thought for a
second of stopping off there, just to put a scanner on the parents. But I
was in a hurry to get back to the city now, and it was getting late in the
day, so I let it go. I was sure I’d be back in a few days and could check

them out then. The kid was going to be in the hospital for a long time
anyhow. Apparently she was out of immediate danger, but they weren’t
allowing her any visitors yet, so I wasn’t worried about the
competition.

I pulled into the motel lot, and when I passed through the front

office on my way to my room, Wendell stopped me.

“Phone message, Mitch,” he said, and he handed me a pink slip of

paper. “Came in a few minutes ago.”

I remember it took me a few seconds to realize that I wasn’t

reading my secretary’s name and number. It was Zoe, which Wendell
had spelled Zooey, and there was a New York number, with the
instruction to call back right away. Okay. Will do. I was on automatic
pilot now. I knew she’d gone out and managed somehow to get high,
swapping services for goods, no doubt, and, thus fortified, was ready
to resume the enterprise she had begun earlier.

I went back to my room, sat down on the bed, and dialed. The

phone rang only once, and she answered, apparently waiting beside it.

“H’lo?”
“Zoe? That you?”
“Oh, Dad, hi. Hey, listen, I’m sorry about this morning, I was

really bumming, and this damn phone is all fucked up …,” blah blah
blah, in a soft, accommodating voice that was all surface, a lid of
sweetness and light over a caldron of rage and need.

I waited out the preliminaries, responding feebly but with caution,

and in a few minutes we got around to the main event, as I knew we
would, brought on by my asking a simple question, just as before. “Are
you calling me for money, Zoe?” I asked.

She inhaled deeply, held her breath for a few seconds, then

sighed. Real Sarah Bernhardt. “I’m calling,” she said, “because I have
some news for you. Daddy, I’ve got some big news for you.”

“News,” I said, suddenly fatigued beyond belief.
“You don’t want to hear it?” I heard the lid on the pot start to

wobble and jump.

“Yes, sure. Give me your news, Zoe.”
“You always think you know what I’m going to say, don’t you?

You always think you’re two steps ahead of me. The lawyer.”

“No, Zoe, I don’t always think that.”
“Well, this time I’m two steps ahead of you!”
“Tell me your news, Zoe.”
“Okay. Okay, then. You won’t want to hear this, but I’m gonna

say it anyhow. Dig it. I went to sell blood yesterday. That’s how it is.
I’m in fucking New York City, where my father is a hot shit lawyer,
and I’m selling my blood for thirty-five bucks.”

“This is not news, Zoe.”
“No, but this is. They wouldn’t take my blood.” Long pause. “I

tested HIV positive.”

I said nothing; the blood, hers, surged past my throat into my

face. I could hear the heavy slam of my heart. I was swimming in
blood.

“You know what that means, Daddy? Do you? Does it register?”
“Yes.”
“AIDS, Daddy.”
“Yes.”
“Welcome to hard times, Daddy.”
“Yes, that’s one way of saying it.”
“Isn’t that a kick, Daddy?”
“Oh, Lord,” I said. “What do you want me to do, Zoe?”
“What do I want you to do?” She practically shrieked it. Then she

laughed, a long high-pitched cackle, like an old madwoman, a witch
on the heath.

“I’ll do whatever you want, Zoe.”
“Good. That’s really good of you. I was hoping you’d say that. I

really was.” She laughed again, girlishly this time, a child who had
tricked her grumpy old dad. “Money,” she said. “I want money.”

“What for?”
She laughed again. “You can’t ask me that. Not anymore. You

asked me what I wanted. Not what I wanted it for. I want money.”

Suddenly, I was the man I had been twenty years earlier with the

knife hidden in my hand, my child in my lap. “All right,” I said. “Fine.
I’ll give you money. For whatever purpose.” I was the calm easy
daddy singing our favorite song. I’ve got sixpence, jolly jolly sixpence,
I’ve got sixpence, to last me all my life.

“I’ll come back down to the city this afternoon,” I assured her,

“and I’ll give you as much money as you need.”

“Want!”
“Yes, want.”
We were both silent then.
“I can hear you breathing, Daddy,” she said.
“Yes. I can hear you breathing too.” I’ve got sixpence to spend,

and sixpence to lend, and sixpence to take home to my wife, poor wife.

“I’ll come to your apartment,” she said. “Tonight. What time will

you be there?”

“Oh, seven or eight, maybe sooner. It’s about six hours’ drive

from here. I’ll leave here today, as soon as possible. How much …
how much money do you want, Zoe?”

“Oh, let’s see. Give me a thousand bucks. For now.”
“For now.”
“That’s all I’ve got, Daddy. All I’ve got is now. Remember?

AIDS, Daddy.”

“All right,” I said. I almost smiled agreeably into the phone. “I’ll

meet you at my place, and we’ll talk, won’t we?”

“Yes. We’ll talk. So long as you have the money. Otherwise, I’m

out of there, Pops.”

“Do you have the test? The blood test?”

“You don’t believe me!” she shrieked. “I get it—you don’t

believe me, do you?”

get you to take another test. With a regular doctor, in case the first one
was wrong.”

“You don’t believe me.” She laughed. “I like it even better that

way. It’s better you don’t believe me but have to act like you do.”

“I do believe you, Zoe. You say you have AIDS, goddammit! I

know what that means. Let me, for Christ’s sake, be your father!”

She began to cry then, which didn’t surprise me. And so did I. Or

at least I sounded, to her and to me as well, as if I was crying. I was
not, however; I was fingering the knife blade, testing its sharpness with
my thumb.

“I love you, Daddy. Oh, God, I’m scared,” she sobbed.
“I love you too. I’ll be there soon, and I’ll take care of you, Zoe.

No matter what happens, I’ll take care of you.”

I felt incredibly powerful at that moment, as if I had been waiting

for the moment for years.

We finally hung up, and I quickly packed my bag and put my

room in order. Zoe was right, of course. I did not believe her. I did not
disbelieve her, either. In that way, this call was like a thousand others.
There was one important difference, however. Until this moment, I had
for years been tied to the ground, helpless and enraged by my own
inability to choose between belief and disbelief. That first task, to
eliminate one or the other—to free one limb so as to untie the other—
had until now been denied me; because I loved her. Oh yes, I loved my
daughter. And because I loved her, I could not know the truth and then
act accordingly. Now, for the first time in all those years, I was in a
position to know the truth—and then to act. Out of desperation, Zoe
had freed me from love. Whether she had AIDS or was lying to me, I
would soon know. Either way, I was free. She’d played her final card
with me; she could no longer keep me from being who I am. Mitchell
Stephens, Esquire.

OceanofPDF.com

Nichole Burnell

“The mind is kind,” Dr. Robeson told me, touching my forehead
with his soft pink cool fingertips, which I couldn’t move away from, so
I just glared up at him.

I’m lucky, they all say, because I can’t remember the accident.

Lucky that it’s like a door between rooms, and there was one room on
the far side, and that room I remember fine, and another on the near
side, and I remember it too. I’m still in it. But I don’t have any
memory of passing through, I don’t remember the accident, and that’s
counted lucky by everyone.

“Don’t even try to remember,” Daddy said, and got up from his

chair by the window and looked out at the hospital parking lot. I think
it was snowing out. He was probably worried about the drive home.

Mom, seated in a chair next to the bed, kept patting the back of

my hand and not looking at me and said, “You just think about getting
well, Nichole, that’s all.”

By then I knew I was as well as I would ever be again, and Dr.

Robeson had told me that just to stay like this I would have to work
very hard. So shut up, Mom, go to hell. To live like a slug, I was going
to have to work like someone trying to become an Olympic ski jumper.
To feed myself, to go to the bathroom, to bathe, to get in and out of
bed, to put my clothes on and take them off, to change channels on the
TV or do schoolwork—for me to do these things as well as a three-
year-old, I’d have to work out for years, maybe the rest of my life, in a
room with pads on the floor and walls to keep my bones from breaking
when I fell off the parallel bars or one of the shiny new exercise
machines.

Anyhow, this was the room I woke up in after the accident, a

hospital room, a weepy Mom and embarrassed distracted Daddy room,
a doctor and nurse room, a room with a physical therapist who yells at
you for your own good and another guy who’s supposed to massage
you, but I wouldn’t let him, so they finally got a woman to do it. One
room led into the next, but they were all the same. Even when I finally
went home to my own room.

Daddy drove, with me in front next to him, and Mom and my new

wheelchair, folded up beside her, in the back. It was spring already,
late April, with only patches of snow left in the woods and on the
mountains, a few old dry dirt-covered mounds along the sides of the
road and at the edges of parking lots. No leaves on the trees yet, but
you could see a light green haze and in some places a reddish glow
over the branches where the buds were coming. At the edge of town,
the fairgrounds was mostly under water and mud, but here and there in
the field in front of the grandstand the snow melt had begun to recede,
and yellow wet chunks of old dead grass had appeared. What
happened to winter? I wondered. It was like I’d gone to Florida for the
worst of it. Wouldn’t that have been nice?

I was incredibly glad to be out of the hospital, though. I was sick

of Dr. Robeson and had started calling him Dr. Frankenstein, even to
his face, which of course he thought was cute. It wasn’t cute; I did it
because I felt like a monster and Dr. Robeson had created me out of all
these different body parts. I couldn’t walk as good as Frankenstein’s
monster, I couldn’t walk at all, though I could talk fine; but I felt ugly
like him and out of it, different from everyone else. I could really
understand why the monster had turned on all the dumb villagers.
Sometimes when one of the nurses came into the room and chirped
like a birdie at me, “And how are we this morning?” I’d go, “Argh-
guh-guh!” and cross my eyes and flop my head back and forth like a
spastic.

The first thing I noticed, when Daddy opened the car door and

pushed the wheelchair up next to it, was the ramp he’d built. It was
made of wood and way too wide and sloped from the ground up to the
front porch beside the regular people’s steps. My very own entrance,

like for a circus elephant. I pictured Daddy out there evenings after
work, whistling like he does when he’s got himself a new carpentry
project, hammering and sawing in porchlight, feeling proud of himself
—a good daddy.

“How do you like it, Babes?” he said.
“The ramp?” I swung myself out of the car seat and lurched into

the wheelchair. No way anybody was going to lift me up and set me
down. Especially him.

“Yeah. Pretty slick, eh?” He got behind the chair and pushed me

over to the bottom of the ramp and stopped so we could examine it
more closely. Mom came along behind, lugging my suitcase and stuff.
There was still a bunch more in the trunk, mostly presents from
strangers but some from people in town and Mom’s and Daddy’s
church friends and kids in school. The usual dumb things—handmade
get-well cards, stuffed animals, and pictures of Jesus and other
inspirational items.

“It’s okay,” I said. “Rudy and Skip can use it for skateboarding.”
“They better not,” Daddy said. “I made it for you.”
“Thanks. Thanks a lot.”
“I had to widen a few doors too. You’ll see,” he said proudly, and

he pushed me up his ramp and into the living room, like I was a new
piece of furniture. Then he didn’t know what to do with me, where to
park me. Put me by the window, I wanted to tell him, next to the
plants. But I said nothing. He was confused, and I guess I felt sorry for
him.

The phone rang, and Mom went off to the kitchen to answer it.

Rudy and Skip came down from their bedroom and said hi and all,
looking self-conscious and like they wished they weren’t there, as if I
was some old relative they had to be polite to. Jennie came along
behind them, sucking her thumb as always, and she stared at the
wheelchair for a minute and then decided it wouldn’t explode or
anything and came over and hugged me.

She’s the one, she’s the family to me, the whole family; the rest of

them, including Rudy and Skip, even though I love them the way
you’re supposed to, make me feel like I have to protect myself against
them.

“You want to see your new room, Babes?” Daddy asked.
“My new room? What’s wrong with the old one?” I knew what

was wrong with it—it was upstairs, with all the other bedrooms and
the big bathroom, and I couldn’t get to it anymore. But it was mine,
mine and Jennie’s since she was a baby, and we were safe there,
because there were two of us, and he never dared to come in there.
Nothing bad had ever happened in that dark little room with the bunk
beds and the clutter of all our clothes and her toys and my school stuff
and pictures and posters on the walls. From that room we could hear
the boys squabbling and playing late at night in their room next door,
and we could hear Daddy and Mom on the other side and know to
pretend we were asleep if they were arguing. There were places that
weren’t safe: the car at night with Daddy alone, the living room couch,
the bathroom unless the door was locked, the toolshed out back—and,
now, my new room?

Well, he said it was new, didn’t he? And I was a wheelchair girl

now, a cripple. Maybe everywhere was safe now. The whole house.
Everywhere. A fresh start.

“Come along, come along,” Daddy said. “I’ll show you.”
“You’re lucky,” Rudy said. “I still gotta sleep with him,” he said,

and he punched Skip on the shoulder, and Skip punched him back.

Mom came in from the kitchen, smiling like she’d just eaten

something sweet and light. “People are so kind,” she said. “The
phone’s been ringing off the hook with people wanting to welcome
you home. That was Edith Dillinger, the principal’s wife. She sent her
love.”

“Show me my room, Daddy,” I said, and he pushed me through

the door and across the kitchen to where the sun porch was. We’d
always used it in summers as a kind of playroom, setting up electric
trains and Barbie doll villages and stuff that no one wanted to pick up

and put away afterwards. But now it was a bedroom. My room. Daddy
had walled most of it in and installed baseboard heating units, had
even built a small closet in one corner, and had carpeted it nicely. One
whole wall was still windows, and I could see the yard and the woods
beyond. Mom had made white chintz curtains. There was a single bed
and a new dresser and a worktable Daddy’d made from a door. My
New Kids on the Block poster had been tacked on one wall, and a
whole bunch of my other favorite things were there—pictures of kids
from school, the cheerleaders’ team photograph, with me front and
center, looking grinny and dumb, my Albert Einstein picture, my
books, and on the bed Fergus the Bear. There was a new picture of
Jesus over the dresser that I knew Mom had put up; she’d no doubt left
the old one upstairs to keep track of Jennie.

“And you’ve got your own private bathroom,” Daddy said,

swinging open the door of what used to be a washroom. He had
enlarged it by cutting into the hallway and had installed a small tub
with a shower and a sink with a big mirror above it. Hung too high, I
noticed, but I didn’t say anything.

It was all very nice. Like my own little apartment.
“You are really lucky,” Rudy said again.
“Shut up, Rudy,” I heard myself say.
“Yeah,” Skip said, and he whacked Rudy on the back. That’s all

they do now, hit.

“You boys, get outside,” Daddy said, and they left, happy to be

relieved of duty.

“Can I come and visit you in your room?” Jennie asked.
“You better. And you can sleep in my new bed with me

sometimes too. I’ll get lonely way off here by myself,” I said, and I
grabbed her hand, and she moved in close to me. The phone rang
again, and Mom went to answer it.

“So whaddaya think, Babes?”
“It’s really very nice, Daddy,” I said, and I meant it. But it was

strange too. The room made me feel like I was suddenly a tenant, like I

had been eased out of the family somehow. I wanted that, though. In a
way, being a tenant was perfect. Except for Jennie, I didn’t want to be
a member of the same family as the rest of them, and I was glad that
we could never go back to being the family we had been before the
accident. Glad; not happy.

I wheeled my chair into the room and looked at the back of the

door. “It needs a lock on the door,” I said.

“It does. Sure it does. A girl needs her privacy and all, right? I’ll

fix that up now,” he said briskly, and he left the room to get his tools
and a lock from his shop in the basement.

“You got to keep the boys out,” Jennie said. “I need a lock too.

Mommy says I don’t need one because I’m only six. But the boys’re
always barging in when I’m undressing and stuff.”

“That’s right. A girl needs her privacy,” I said. “Don’t worry, I’ll

get Daddy to do it for you,” I said, and she grinned and pinched me on
the cheek like she was the grownup and I was the baby.

Then Daddy was back with an awl and a hook and eye. He made

a hole in the door with the awl and started screwing in the hook part,
and I said, “That’s too high. I’ll never reach it.”

“Oh, right, yes, of course,” he said, all flustered. He studied the

hole he’d made in his newly painted door. Now he’d have to fill it in
and sand it and paint it over. Daddy’s like that. “I better get some
spackle,” he said, and he left the room again. I saw him look at the
bathroom mirror as he passed it and knew what he was thinking.

I heard Mom say goodbye on the phone, and then she talked in a

low voice for a minute to Daddy. I couldn’t hear what she was saying,
but when they both came back I knew they had some kind of
pronouncement to make. Mom sat down on the bed and crossed her
legs at the ankles, like she does, and Daddy went to work filling the
tiny hole in the door with spackle.

“So you like your new room?” Mom said brightly.
“Yeah, it’s great.” I wheeled over to the worktable and discovered

that it was just the right height for my chair to slide under. That’s when

I saw the computer, a Mac. I guess I’d seen it before that, but the room
at first had looked like a picture to me, a magazine photograph, and the
new computer hadn’t really registered or something. Slowly the whole
thing was becoming real, though. “Wow. Is this mine? A Mac?” There
was a printer and everything.

Mom said, “Yes, it is. It’s yours. It’s a present.”
“Wow. Who from?” I turned to Daddy, but he was bent over at the

door, still working on the lock, this time screwing it in at shoulder
height for me, waist high for him. “You guys?”

“No,” Mom said. “It came from Mr. Stephens. You don’t really

know him yet. As a matter of fact, that was him just now on the phone.
He was calling to see how you were and all. Isn’t that a coincidence?”

“Who’s Mr. Stephens?”
“He’s a lawyer,” Daddy said. “He’s our lawyer.”
“You have a lawyer? You and Mom?”
“Well, yes, we all do. He’s your lawyer too,” Daddy said. He’d

finished with the lock and closed the door and tested it. It worked, but
the room seemed real small with the door closed and all these people
in it, like a closet, except for the big window, and I was relieved when
he unlocked and opened the door again.

“My lawyer? What do I need a lawyer for?”
Mom said, “Maybe we shouldn’t be talking about this just now,

with you barely home yet. Aren’t you hungry, honey? Want me to fix
you something?” She started to get up.

“No! What’s this lawyer business? How come this Mr. Stephens

gave me a computer?”

“He’s a very kind man,” Mom said. “And he knew you’d need

one for doing schoolwork, and he knew you wouldn’t be able to use
the computers at school until next fall, when you go back. And
naturally we couldn’t afford one….” She was picking invisible threads
from the bedspread, not looking at me, but her legs were still crossed
at the ankles, like she was on stage. I hate these kinds of conversations,

like everyone but me knows the lines and has been rehearsing the
scene without me.

people in town whose kids were on the bus have got lawyers, because
of the accident. Thank God we didn’t lose you, but a lot of people …
well, you know. People in town are very, very angry,” he said. “Us
included. There’s been a lot of grief here. People lost their children,
Babes.”

“Yeah, but you didn’t lose me!”
“No, honey,” Mom said. “And we will thank the Lord for that

every day and night for the rest of our lives. But you … you almost
died, and you were badly injured, and you won’t be … you can’t …”

“I can’t walk anymore.” I said it for her.
“Well, that’s … that’s a terrible loss,” Daddy said. “To you,

especially,” he said. “But to all of us.”

And because you’re going to need special care for a long time to come,
all that physical therapy and who knows what. For years, Babes.
Spinal cord injuries don’t just go away. It’s not going to be easy. Not
for you, not for any of us. And it’s going to cost more money than we
can imagine. For years.”

“What about insurance? Doesn’t insurance pay for these things?”
“Partly, yes, but it’s still expensive. There’s a lot the insurance

doesn’t cover. That’s one of the reasons we have a lawyer for you, to
make sure the insurance gets paid and to help us pay for the rest.”

“One of the reasons. What’re the other reasons?”
Daddy said, “Well, Mr. Stephens is representing several families:

the Ottos—you know them, of course—and Risa and Wendell Walker,
and us, and I think a couple more. Mr. Stephens is suing the state and
the town for negligence, because he is sure that the accident could
have been avoided if the state and the town had done their jobs right.”

“Suing! But it’s not the same for us! The Ottos … I mean, they

lost Bear in the accident, and maybe it’s like that with the Walkers and

poor little Sean, but …” I could feel myself starting to cry; I did not
want to cry.

So I shut up. I did not remember the accident, maybe, but I

definitely knew what had happened. I could read the newspapers, and
of course I had asked people, and eventually people had told me,
although they had not wanted to. Everyone had come to the hospital to
visit and tell me how lucky I was, to touch me on the hands and
shoulders and top of my head like I was some kind of rabbit’s foot, so
when I asked them about the other kids, what happened to the other
kids who were on the bus that morning, at first no one was willing to
tell me. Oh, now, Nichole, don’t you trouble yourself about that. You
just concentrate on getting better and coming back to school. That sort
of stuff.

But what about the other kids? I really needed to know. What

about Rudy and Skip, they were on the bus, were they okay? I had
asked about them first, naturally, as soon as I learned what had
happened to me. And what about the Lamstons, what about the
Prescott kids, what about the Bilodeaus? What happened to Sean
Walker, who had been sitting in my lap that morning because he didn’t
want to leave his mother? I could remember that much, Sean trying to
catch a glimpse of his mother by the road. And what about Bear Otto?
What about the Ansel twins? What happened to Dolores? Was she all
right? How come I’m lying here in the hospital with tubes stuck in me
and my body all numb. How come I’m not dead too? Someone,
anyone, tell me where all the other children are!

Slowly people let me know. One by one. That’s how I came to

understand what they meant by lucky. Rudy and Skip, they were
especially lucky; they had been up front in the bus and had been
almost the first to be removed from it, with barely a scratch on either
of them. Jennie had stayed home sick that day. There were a bunch like
that. Close calls. Because I was regarded as one myself, people liked
standing around in the hospital room talking to me and each other
about all the close calls.

But so many of the other kids were dead, and no one wanted to

talk about them. They told me with downcast eyes and sad slow shakes

of the head and as few words as possible. The Lamstons were dead, all
three of them. One of the Prescott kids was dead. Two of the
Bilodeaus, who had been at the rear of the bus, had been trapped
underwater. Sean Walker had been in front, like me, but when the bus
flipped over he’d fractured his skull and died from it before they got
him out of the bus, and I’d only broken my back. So I was lucky,
right? And Bear and the Ansel twins and several other kids who’d
been in the back, they were all dead. Dolores was okay, I learned.
She’d been in shock for a while, people said, but now she was okay. So
she was lucky too. I wondered if she had a lawyer, like me.

It just wasn’t right—to be alive, to have had what people assured

you was a close call, and then go out and hire a lawyer; it wasn’t right.
And even if you were the mother and father of one of the kids who had
died, like the Ottos or the Walkers, what good would it do to hire a
lawyer? To sue, because your child had died in an accident, and then
collect a bunch of money from the state—it was understandable, yet it
somehow didn’t seem right, either. But to be the mother and father of
one of the kids who had survived the accident, even a kid like me, who
would spend the rest of her life a cripple, and then to sue—I didn’t
understand that at all, and I really knew it wasn’t right. Not if I was,
like they said, truly lucky.

There was no stopping Mom and Daddy, though. They had their

minds made up. This Mr. Stephens had convinced them that they were
going to get a million dollars from the State of New York and maybe
another million from the town of Sam Dent. Daddy said they all have
insurance for this sort of thing; it won’t come out of anybody’s pocket,
he kept saying; but even so, it made me nervous. Since the accident, I
had become superstitious, I think. Mom and Daddy are Christians, at
least Mom is, and I sort of believe in God myself, so I did not want to
appear ungrateful and end up losing what little luck I had.

“This Mr. Stephens, who bought me the computer—what does he

want me to do? I don’t have to be the one to sue anybody, do I? Can’t
you guys do it?”

Daddy was in the bathroom now, unscrewing the mirror. “Well,

sure, but he’s got to arrange for the other side’s lawyers to take a

statement from you, a deposition, it’s called, and then we all go to
court, and you’ll be asked to testify and so forth—”

“About what?” I hollered. “I don’t even remember the accident!

It’s like I wasn’t even there!”

“Don’t get excited, honey,” Mom said, smooth as butter. God, I

hate her sometimes.

Jennie was sucking her thumb. “Cut that out,” I said to her.

“You’re too old for that,” I said, and she started to cry. I’m such a rat.
“I’m sorry, Babes,” I said to her. I pulled her to me and hugged her.
She stopped crying and didn’t put her thumb back in her mouth, but
now I was wishing she would.

Daddy said, “Mr. Stephens is really a very nice man, very gentle

and understanding. He just wants you to describe in your own words
what life was like before the accident, you know, with school and all,
cheerleading, your plans for the future and all, that sort of thing. In
your own words. He says it’s much more effective if you tell it, instead
of just us telling it.”

“Yeah. I’ll bet. Well, maybe I won’t. I don’t like even thinking

about that stuff, and I sure don’t want to talk about it to any lawyer or
some judge in a courtroom. So maybe I’ll just refuse to talk about it.
They can’t make me, can they?”

“C’mon, Babes, be reasonable,” Daddy said, coming back into the

bedroom.

“Let’s talk about this later, okay?” Mom said. “She just got home,

Sam. Are you hungry, honey? You want me to fix you something, a
sandwich or some soup? No more hospital food, honey, aren’t you
glad?” She had her cheery TV-mom voice working.

“Yeah,” I said, and I suppose I was glad. I hate hospital food. “I

am hungry. Maybe a sandwich and some soup would be good.”

Mom got up and hustled out to the kitchen, and Daddy slowly

gathered his tools and followed. I rolled over to the door and shut it
and put the new hook in place. “It works,” I said to Jennie.

“Cool,” she said, imitating me.

“I’m sorry I yelled at you.”
“That’s okay. Can you make the computer work?” she asked.

“Can you show me how to use it?”

I said sure and wheeled back to the table and switched on the

computer. “Cool,” I said, and winked at her and laughed. Quickly, she
came up next to my chair and put her arm around my shoulder, and we
started fooling around with Mr. Stephens’s computer, writing our
names and silly messages on the screen.

I was home again, and lots of things were the same as before. But

a few things, important things, were different. And not just my room,
either. Before the accident, I was ashamed all the time and afraid.
Because of Daddy. Sometimes I even wanted to kill myself. But now I
was mostly angry and never wanted to die.

Back then, though, with Jennie sound asleep in the bunk above

me, I used to lie awake at night thinking up ways to kill myself. Dying
was the only way I could imagine the end of what I was doing with
Daddy, although sometimes I imagined that he had suddenly decided
to leave me alone, because weeks would go by, whole months, when
he did leave me alone, when he just acted regular, and I thought then
that maybe he had decided that what he was making me do with him
was wrong, really wrong, and he was sorry and wouldn’t come to me
anymore when we were alone in the house or in the car and touch me
and make me touch him.

Those times when he left me alone, I thought maybe I had

dreamed the whole thing up, dreams are like that, or had imagined it,
because even when I was a little kid like Jennie, before Daddy started
touching me that way, I had imagined some things that had made me
ashamed, sexual things, sort of. Everybody does that. So maybe I had
imagined this too. A few weeks would pass, and I’d start to forget that
it had actually happened, and then I’d feel guilty for having been so
upset and confused.

But late one night he would pick me up from babysitting at the

Ansels’ or somebody else’s, and in the darkness of the car he’d slide
his hand across the seat to me and put it on my leg and pull me toward

him and keep sliding his hand up my leg, under my skirt, and I knew
his pants were undone and he wanted me to put my hand on him there
again, and so I would, and then we would do things to each other, like
he had taught me, things like I knew my girlfriends did with their
boyfriends after school dances and in cars with older boys but that I
would never do with a boy and pretended to be disgusted about when
they told me.

When we got home I would run into the house from the car and

go straight to my room upstairs with my heart pounding and a roaring
sound in my ears. It was awful. I lay in bed in the darkness with my
clothes still on and listened to him lock up below and walk slowly up
the stairs and go into his and Mom’s room and shut the door. I could
hear the bedsprings squeak as he got into bed next to Mom, and soon I
heard him snoring. For hours I stayed there, still as a log, until finally
the roaring in my ears stopped and I dared to get out of the bed and
take off my clothes in the darkened room and put on my nightgown
and go down the hall to the bathroom and come back to bed, where I
lay awake trying to think up ways to kill myself that wouldn’t upset
Jennie too much. Usually, I decided on sleeping pills and Daddy’s
vodka in the kitchen cupboard. Like Marilyn Monroe. But I didn’t
know how to get hold of any sleeping pills, so the next day I always
gave it up and instead tried to make what had happened in the car
coming home from the Ansels’ seem like I only dreamed it.

I didn’t have to try very hard, because Daddy, except when he

wanted to do those things with me, the rest of the time treated me
normally, like nothing wrong had happened. Always, the next morning
at breakfast he was just the same old Daddy, grumpy and distracted,
bossing the boys and me and Jennie around, ignoring Mom the way he
does, while she fussed in the kitchen, shoving food at the rest of us and
as usual worrying over her diet. She never eats anything in front of
anybody but keeps getting fatter and fatter all the time. She’s not a
blimp, but she is fat.

“Look at Nichole,” Daddy always said to Mom. “Look at me. We

never diet, we just eat three squares a day, and we’re not fat. What you
got to do, Mary, is stop all the in-between-meal snacking,” he’d say.

your family is skinny as a rail. And I don’t snack; it’s my metabolism.”
Then she’d pout and try to change the subject. “Rudy, you keep your
hat on today; you’re coming down with a cold,” she’d say, and start
hurrying us from the table so we wouldn’t miss the bus.

Normal life at the Burnell house.
What used to be normal life anyhow. Because after the accident,

things changed. For one thing, when the other kids went off to school
in the mornings, I stayed home. Mr. Dillinger, the principal, came over
one day and brought a bunch of assignments from my teachers so I
could catch up with the rest of my class and pass into the ninth grade
with them. He’s a huge gawk who wears a bow tie and always has
dandruff on his suits, and he sat in the living room with me and Mom,
all hearty and cheerful, talking real loud, like being in the wheelchair
had made me deaf, and together they tried to convince me to come
back to school and attend classes with everyone else. He said the
school board had authorized a special van to bring me back and forth.
“Isn’t that terrific!” he said, like I was supposed to jump up and give a
cheer for the school board.

“No way,” I said. “I’m never going back to that school,” I said,

and I noticed he didn’t argue very hard. Mom didn’t, either, but she
never argues hard when an official man is around. She just takes her
cues from him and agrees. Later on, Daddy tells her what she should
have said.

Anyhow, I don’t think Mr. Dillinger wanted me wheeling around

the school reminding everyone of the accident and the kids who had
died in it. They’d hired some woman from Plattsburgh, I heard, and
arranged all these special group therapy meetings and assemblies for
the kids after the accident, and things had more or less returned to
normal now. Besides, Mr. Dillinger knew I could do all the work at
home and still be ahead of most of the kids in my class, except for the
real brainy ones. And next year my class would all be going on to high
school in Lake Placid, and then I’d be somebody else’s problem.

I didn’t want to stay home alone with Mom all day, that’s for sure,

but I really did not need to see any of the kids from school. I didn’t
want to watch them strolling around in the hallways and the cafeteria,
sneaking into the lav between classes to put on lipstick and share a
cigarette, going off to cheerleading practice and hanging out after
school in the parking lot together. I didn’t want them to stop what they
were doing or saying when I rolled up in my wheelchair, “Hi, guys,
what’s up?” I knew what I’d look like to them, how they’d all go silent
for a minute when the dweeb arrived and then change the subject not
to embarrass her or make her feel bad because they were talking about
something she couldn’t do, like dancing or sports or just hanging out.
Poor Nichole, the cripple. That’s the best I’d get from them—pity. And
no matter how many of those group therapy sessions they’d been to,
everyone would see me and instantly think of the kids who weren’t
there anymore, the kids who had not been lucky like me, and maybe
they would hate me for it. And I wouldn’t blame them.

At the hospital, lots of kids from school, even the little kids from

the Sunday school class I taught, had come to visit me, like official
delegations at first, in groups of three and four at a time, but it was
always self-conscious and embarrassing, especially with the kids my
age, my friends, so called, and I knew they could hardly wait to leave,
and I was glad myself when they did. Then only my best friend, Jody
Plante, and one or two others, when they could get someone to drive
them over, came to visit, and that was okay. But by the time I left the
hospital to come home, I had pretty much run out of things to talk
about with them. We were living in different worlds now, and they
couldn’t know about mine, and I didn’t want to know about theirs
anymore.

For a while after I got home, Jody called me on the phone and

even came over once or twice, and she yacked brightly about school
and cheerleading gossip and boys, the usual stuff. But she was forcing
it, I knew, and I never seemed to have the desire to call her, and of
course I couldn’t visit, so pretty soon she didn’t call me anymore and
never came to visit, either.

I stayed in my new room, with the door closed and locked, except

when I came out to eat or use the bathroom. For supper, I had to sit at
the table with the rest of the family, but breakfast and lunch I usually
ate alone. One Saturday morning Mom and Daddy moved everything
in the cupboards—dishes, glasses, food, everything—down to the
lower cabinets, so I could reach them from my wheelchair. It was
Daddy’s idea. I think Mom would have preferred to have me go on
asking her for help every time I wanted a sandwich or a bowl of cereal.
But since Jennie was in school now, Mom was gone a lot of the time
herself, working part time over to the Grand Union in Marlowe, so she
had to go along with my taking care of myself in the kitchen.

During the days, I pretty much had the whole house to myself, but

I still stayed in my room. One night Daddy brought home a portable
black-and-white TV for me that he had bought used in Ausable Forks,
and he tied it into the regular cable, so I was able to watch TV then
without leaving my room. Soaps and game shows, mostly, which were
fine by me. And music videos. And Oprah and Donahue and Geraldo.
After a month of that stuff you feel like it’s all one show, ads and
everything, and you’ve been watching it for years. But I had Mr.
Stephens’s computer to play with, and plenty of schoolwork to do, and
books that Mrs. Twichell, the school librarian, brought over for me,
mostly sappy young-adult novels about race relations and divorce,
which I don’t like but will read anyhow because the writers seem so
intent on having you read them that you feel it’s impolite not to.

Things with Daddy were different now too. I had become a

wheelchair girl, and I think that scared him, like it does most people.
You see them on the street staring at you and then looking away, as if
you were a freak. To Daddy, it was like I was made of spun glass and
he was afraid he would break me if he touched me. Probably I wasn’t
pretty to him anymore, either, and he couldn’t pretend that I was like
some beautiful movie star, the way he used to. Miss America, he
always called me. “How’s my Miss America today?” But not anymore.
Which was fine by me. If he did touch me, by accident or because he
couldn’t avoid it, like the time he had to carry me up the stairs at the
courthouse in Marlowe when I had to make my deposition for Mr.

Stephens and the other lawyers, he backed away from me right away
and wouldn’t look at me.

I looked at him, though. I looked right into him. I had changed

since the accident, and not just in my body, and he knew it. His secret
was mine now; I owned it. It used to be like I shared it with him, but
no more. Before, everything had been fluid and changing and
confused, with me not knowing for sure what had happened or who
was to blame. But now I saw him as a thief, just a sneaky little thief in
the night who had robbed his own daughter of what was supposed to
be permanently hers—like he had robbed me of my soul or something,
whatever it was that Jennie still had and I didn’t. And then the accident
robbed me of my body.

So I didn’t own much anymore. My new room, maybe, and Mr.

Stephens’s computer, which weren’t really mine and weren’t worth
much anyhow. No, the only truly valuable thing that I owned now
happened to be Daddy’s worst secret, and I meant to hold on to it. It
was like I carried it in a locked box on my lap, with the key held
tightly in my hand, and it made him afraid of me. Every time he saw
me looking at him hard, he trembled.

I remember the first time Mr. Stephens came over to the house,

how strained and nervous Daddy was when he wheeled me out into the
living room and introduced me. It was like Mr. Stephens was a police
officer or something, probably because he’s such a big shot lawyer and
all, and Daddy was afraid I’d say something to make him suspicious.

Of course, he was also afraid that I would refuse to go along with

their lawsuit. I still hadn’t agreed to do it, not in so many words, but in
my mind I had decided to go ahead and say what they wanted me to
say, which they insisted was only to answer Mr. Stephens’s and the
other lawyers’ questions truthfully. That couldn’t hurt anything, I
figured, because the truth was, I didn’t really remember anything about
the actual accident, so nothing I said could be used to blame anybody
for it. It was an accident, that’s all. Accidents happen.

Mr. Stephens was this tall skinny guy with a big puffy head of

gray hair that made him look like a dandelion gone to seed and a gust

of wind would blow all his hair away and leave him bald. I liked him,
though. He had a small pointy face and red lips and a nice smile, and
he looked right into my eyes when he talked to me, which is something
that most people can’t do with me. Also, he reached down and shook
my hand when Daddy introduced us, which I liked. Adults almost
never do that, especially with girls. And with wheelchair girls, I’ve
noticed, they actually take a step backward and put their hands on their
hips or in their pockets, like you’ve got something they don’t want to
catch. Mr. Stephens, though, after he shook my hand and Daddy went
to stand edgily by the porch door, pulled a kitchen chair up next to my
wheelchair and sat right down and got his head the same level as mine,
and I felt like he could see that I was really a normal person.

He talked funny, fast and like he had already thought out ahead of

time what he wanted to say, the way city people or maybe just lawyers
do, but I liked it, because once you trust a person like that, you can
have a real good conversation with him. You can concentrate on what
the words mean and not have to worry all the time about what the
other person is thinking.

“Well, Nichole,” he began, “I’ve been wanting to meet you for a

long time now, and not just because I’ve heard so many good things
about you all over town, but because, as you know, I’m the guy
representing you and your mom and dad and some other folks here in
town,” he said, diving right in. “We’re trying to generate some
compensation, however meager, for what you all have suffered and at
the same time see that an accident like this one never happens again.
And you, Nichole Burnell, you’re pretty near central to the case I’m
trying to build,” he said. “But you would probably just as soon let the
whole thing lie, I’ll bet, so you can get on with your life as quickly and
smoothly as possible, right?”

I said yes, as a matter of fact I would. He waited for me to go on,

so I did. I said that I didn’t like thinking about the accident, which I
couldn’t remember anyhow, and I really hated talking with people
about it, because I didn’t even know what the accident meant, and
since it was obvious to me that anyone who wasn’t there couldn’t

possibly know what it meant, why bother at all? Besides, I said, it just
made people feel sorry for me, and I hated that.

From his perch by the door, Daddy said, “What she means, Mitch

—” and Mr. Stephens shushed him with a wave of his hand.

“Why do you hate it when people feel sorry for you?” he asked

me. “Do you mind if I smoke?”

Mom jumped up from the couch and said, “I’ll get an ashtray, Mr.

Stephens. I’m sorry, we don’t smoke, and I just didn’t think—”

“Actually, I mind,” I said. If I wasn’t allowed to smoke in this

Christian house, why should he? And it was me he had asked, not her.

“No problem,” Mr. Stephens said, and he smiled broadly at me,

like he was a teacher and I’d just aced a test, and said to Mom,
“Please, Mary, that’s fine. No ashtray. I can wait.” Then to me, “Go
ahead, Nichole, tell me why you hate it when people feel sorry for you.
Because they can’t help it, you know. They really can’t. When they see
you in this wheelchair, especially if they know what your life was like
just six months ago, people are going to feel sorry for you. No way
around it. I’ll be honest: we just met, and already I admire you—who
wouldn’t? You’re a brave tough smart kid, and that’s obvious right
away. And I didn’t know you or know how exciting and promising
your life was before the accident. But listen, even I feel sorry for you.
Do you hate that?”

Yes, I said, certainly I did, because all it did was remind me that I

wasn’t normal anymore. “You can feel lucky that you didn’t die for
only so long,” I said. “And then you start to feel unlucky.”

“That you didn’t die, you mean. Like the other children.”
“Yes!” I said. “Like Bear and the Ansel twins and Sean and all the

other kids on the bus who died out there that morning!”

“Nichole!” Mom said.
“It’s the truth!” I said.
“It is the truth,” Mr. Stephens said in a calm sure voice, like he

was correcting her on what time it was, and I knew that he understood

what I was feeling and Mom didn’t have the foggiest. I think Daddy
understood, but he couldn’t say it, not to me. I wouldn’t let him.

“It would be strange,” Mr. Stephens said to me, “if you didn’t feel

that way about the other kids.”

Then he got me talking about last year at school, how I had tried

out for cheerleading in the seventh grade and had made the team
easily, which is unusual for a seventh grader, and how last fall I was
captain, and that’s a big deal in Sam Dent, because the boys’ football
and basketball teams are so important to the town. I was Queen of the
Harvest Ball too, and I went with Bucky Waters, the captain of the
football team, even though he wasn’t my boyfriend.

I never actually had a boyfriend, no one steady, I told Mr.

Stephens, but Bucky was okay to go to the dance with, because he was
sort of famous at school as a playboy who wouldn’t go steady with
anybody, and I was famous for being churchy and stuck-up, or so some
kids thought. Bucky was chosen King of the Harvest Ball, naturally,
and for a while everybody thought we were a couple, but we knew we
weren’t. I didn’t say this to Mr. Stephens, but after the dance, Bucky
tried really hard to make out with me at Jody Plante’s party, and I
wouldn’t let him, so he got mad and went off with some of the other
football players to drink beer in Gilbert Jacques’s older brother’s car, I
heard later.

We stayed friends, though, Bucky and I, and let people think what

they wanted. It suited him that kids thought I was his girlfriend, at least
during football and basketball season, and it suited me too, because
then no one else bothered me, since he was such a big shot and all.
Boys are so immature, I said to Mr. Stephens. At least the boys in Sam
Dent are.

“Have you seen Bucky since the accident?” Mr. Stephens asked.

Mom was in the kitchen making tea, and Daddy had left the room to
go to the bathroom, I think.

“No.”
“Not once?”
“Nope.”

“What about the other kids, your girlfriends?”
“I saw them some at the hospital. But not lately,” I said.
“No one?”
I knew I was going to cry and sound stupid if we didn’t change

the subject, so I said, “Tell me what I have to do for the lawsuit.”

That got him talking about depositions and lawyers for the state

and the town, and by the time Daddy came back from the bathroom
and Mom came in with her tea and cookies, which I knew she’d
already eaten a bunch of in the kitchen, Mr. Stephens was going on
about how tough it would be for me to answer some of the questions
those other lawyers would ask. “They work for the people we’re trying
to sue, you understand, and their job is to try to minimize the damages.
Our job, Nichole, is to try to maximize the damages,” he explained. “If
you think of it that way, as people doing their jobs, no good guys and
no bad guys, just our side and the other side, then it’ll go easier for
you.”

No one was interested in the truth, was what he was saying.

Because the truth was that it was an accident, that’s all, and no one was
to blame. “I won’t lie,” I told him.

“Some of the questions will seem pretty personal to you, Nichole.

I just want to warn you up front.”

“No matter what they ask me,” I said, “I’ll tell the truth,” and I

looked straight at Daddy, who had taken a seat next to Mom on the
sofa. He studied his tea when I said that, as if he had seen a fly in it. I
knew what he was thinking, and he knew what I was thinking too.

“Fine, fine, I don’t want you to lie,” Mr. Stephens said. “I want

you to be absolutely truthful. Absolutely. No matter what I or the other
lawyers ask you. They’ll have a laundry list of questions, but I’ll be
right there to advise and help you. And there’ll be a court stenographer
there to make a record of it, and that’s what’ll go to the judge, before
the trial is set. It’ll be the same for everybody. They’ll be deposing the
Ottos and the Walkers, the bus driver, and even your mom and dad, but
I’ll make sure you go last, Nichole, so you can keep on getting well
before you have to go in and do this. It’ll all take place over the

summer,” he said to Mom and Daddy. “And the trial will be set for
sometime this fall, probably.”

“When do they award the damages?” Daddy asked, and he and

Mom leaned forward for the answer.

“Depends,” Mr. Stephens said. “If they appeal, and they probably

will, this could drag on for quite a while. But we’ll be there at the end,
Sam, don’t you worry,” he said. He put his cup on the coffee table and
stood up, thinking about a cigarette, I bet. He said his goodbyes, and
Daddy saw him out to his car, where they talked together for a while.

I went back to my room and closed the door and locked it. Let

them discuss their lawsuit without me, if they wanted; I had done my
part for now, and I didn’t want to speak about it again until I had to.

The whole thing, even though I liked Mr. Stephens and trusted

him, made me feel greedy and dishonest. I looked at my picture of
Einstein. What would he have done, if he’d been in an accident and
been lucky like me?

I hitched myself out of the wheelchair and when I swung onto the

bed, my skirt got hitched up, and I sat there for a minute, looking at
my dumb worthless legs reflected in the window glass. They looked
like they belonged to someone else. How much had they been worth a
year ago, I wondered, or last fall, at the Keene Valley game and the
Harvest Ball afterwards, when Bucky Waters and I, with crowns on
our heads, danced in the gym in front of the whole school? And to
whom? That was the real question. To me, my legs were worth
everything then and nothing now. But to Mom and Daddy, nothing
then and a couple of million dollars now.

After that night, I remember, a long time passed when it seemed

no one talked about the lawsuit, at least not to me, and I didn’t hear
anything more about Mr. Stephens, either. Which was fine. I sure
didn’t want to bring it up, and I guess Mom and Daddy, for different
reasons, didn’t want to, so it was as if it had never happened. Like I
had dreamed it, the way I used to about me and Daddy; and just as
before, I felt guilty for having so much emotion about the subject.
When you live with people like my mother, who thinks Jesus takes

care of everything except your weight, and my father, who goes around
whistling and hammering and sawing all the time, you tend to feel
guilty for your emotions. At least I did.

Then one night we were having supper together; it was in June, I

remember, because Mom and Daddy were trying to get me to attend
my graduation ceremonies with the other kids. I had come out second
in my class, and Mr. Dillinger had told Mom and Daddy that everyone
thought it would be great if I would give the salutatorian’s speech from
my wheelchair in front of the whole town.

I thought it was a terrible idea, and I said so. I had written a

research paper for English on Sam Dent, the man the town was named
after, and had received an A + for it, and Mr. Dillinger and Mrs.
Crosby, the English teacher, said that with a little revising it would
make a perfect salutatorian’s speech. The way they wanted me to
revise it, I knew without their even saying, was to turn Sam Dent into
an example for the kids who were graduating, which meant that I’d
have to cut out all the bad things he’d done, like cheating the Indians
out of their land and buying his way out of the Civil War, things— that
lots of people did in those days but that were just as bad then as they
would be now.

“C’mon, Babes,” Dad said. “You’ll be the star of the show.”
“Some star,” I said. “What you mean is, you and Mom’ll be the

stars of the show!” That was the main reason I didn’t want to do it. Of
course, they thought I was just ashamed of being in a wheelchair,
which was partly true, but I was slowly getting over that by then.
Twice a week, since I’d come home from the hospital, Mom had been
carting me over to Lake Placid for physical therapy at the Olympic
Center, where there were lots of kids and young people who were even
worse off than I was, and some of them had made friends with me, so I
was beginning to see myself in the world a little clearer by then. I
didn’t feel so abnormal anymore, and I didn’t worry so much about
whether I was lucky or unlucky. I was both, like most people.

No, the reason I was dead set on avoiding the graduation

ceremonies was because Mom and Daddy were so dead set on getting

me to do it and because they wanted it for themselves, not me. They
didn’t realize that, of course, but I did. Sometimes I almost felt sorry
for them, the way they desperately needed me to be a star, and that’s
why in the past, before the accident, I had always given in to them. But
no more. Now I only did what I wanted to do, for my reasons. For my
reasons, I didn’t go to church with them anymore, I didn’t teach
Sunday school, I didn’t baby-sit for anyone in town (although no one
had asked me to), I didn’t go to the movies or to restaurants with the
family. Instead, I stayed home, behind the door of my new room, and
that I did for my reasons too. No one else’s.

Anyhow, in the middle of our arguing about this, the phone rang,

and Mom got up to answer it. Daddy hates talking on the phone and
never answers it himself, even if he’s standing beside it when it rings.
He walks away and lets one of us do the job for him. I never minded,
and I used to rush to the phone when it rang, hoping it was for me; but
no more, of course.

A minute later, Mom came back to the table, looking worried.

“That was Billy Ansel,” she said to Daddy. “He wants to come over.
To talk to us, he said.”

“He say what about?” Daddy asked, sounding suspicious,

although as far as I knew then, he liked Billy Ansel well enough.
Everyone did. In fact, Billy Ansel was more of a local hero than Sam
Dent was. If they wanted a graduation speech about a role model, they
ought to get someone to make it about him.

“No,” Mom said.
“Was he drinking, could you tell?”
“I can’t tell about those things, Sam, you know that.”
I just listened. This was new, Billy Ansel drinking and Mom and

Daddy worried about his coming over to talk with them.

Rudy asked to be excused, and then Skip did, and Daddy said

sure, and they took off to watch TV in the living room, with Jennie
following along behind. Usually, that’s when I disappeared from the
table too, heading for my room, but this time I stayed.

“Is he coming over now? Right away?” Daddy asked.
Mom got up and started clearing the table. “That’s what he said.”
Daddy turned to me and said, “What’re you up to tonight,

Babes?” Trying to get rid of me.

“Nothing.”
“No homework?”
“Done. Besides, it’s Friday.”
“Nothing good on your TV?”
“Nope. Thought I’d wait around and see Billy Ansel,” I said, but

as soon as I said it, I realized that I didn’t want to see him at all.
Because of the accident. Maybe that’s why Mom and Daddy were so
nervous about his coming over.

In the last couple of years, after Billy’s wife died, I had become

his kids’ regular baby-sitter, and now they were gone too. Maybe I was
stuck in a wheelchair and all, but I sure wasn’t dead, like his twins, so
the idea of him seeing me made me cringe with shame. I didn’t want to
be seen by anyone whose kids had been killed in the accident, but
especially not Billy Ansel.

“Actually,” I said, “now that I think about it, I’d just as soon stay

in my room when he comes.”

“Fine,” Daddy said, obviously relieved, as I shoved my chair

away from the table and rolled across the kitchen toward my room.

“Daddy, when he comes …,” I said, trying to think of what I

wanted him to say for me to Billy Ansel, remembering all the times I
had tucked Jessica and Mason into bed, remembering how they loved
to have me read their Babar the Elephant books to them before they
went to sleep, remembering their faces, their bright trusting motherless
faces; and I had to give it up—there was nothing I could say to Billy,
except I’m sorry. I’m sorry that your children died when my parents’
children didn’t.

“Just tell him I’m sleeping,” I said, and wheeled into my room.

In a little while, I heard his pickup truck drive up and crunch

across the gravel of the driveway. He knocked on the door, and Daddy
greeted him in his fake-surprise way. “Hey, Billy! What brings you out
on a night like this? C’mon in, c’mon in, take a load off.”

I shut off the TV sound and with Fergus the Bear in my lap rolled

my chair over next to the door so I could hear them better. Mom was
washing dishes at the sink; I heard Billy and Daddy scrape their chairs
on the floor as they sat down at the kitchen table. Billy still hadn’t said
anything. I wondered what he was like when he was drinking. He used
to go out a lot at night, which is why I baby-sat so often for him, and
most times when he left the house he said he’d be having a few beers
with the boys down at the Rendez-Vous or the Spread Eagle, in case of
an emergency or something, but when he came home he never seemed
drunk or anything. Just sad, as usual. Because of his wife, I assumed.
That and Vietnam. He was a well-known Vietnam vet, and those guys
are always a little sad.

of cake left, if you want.”

“No. No, thanks, Mary,” he said in a flat voice.
“So,” Daddy said. “What brings you out tonight?”
“Well, Sam, I might’s well tell you the truth. It’s this lawsuit

you’ve gotten yourself all taken up with,” he said. “I want you to drop
the damned thing.”

“I don’t see how that concerns you, Billy,” Daddy said. I could

tell from his voice that he was smiling but was seriously mad. That’s
what he does when he’s mad, keeps on smiling but shifts his voice
down a notch. It’s scarier that way.

“It does concern me.”
Daddy said, “I don’t know why it should. There’s a whole lot of

people in town that’s involved with lawsuits. We’re hardly unique
here, Billy. I mean, I can understand how you feel, it’s depressing,
sure, but it’s reality. You can’t just turn this off because you happen to
think it’s a bad idea. Half the town is suing somebody or other, or
getting ready to.”

“Well, I’m one who’s not suing anybody. And I don’t want a

damned thing to do with it, either.”

“Okay, so fine. So stay out of it, then.”
“That’s exactly what I’ve tried to do. I’ve really tried to stay the

hell out of it. But it turns out that’s not so easy, Sam. You’ve gone and
got yourself some hotshot New York City lawyer, this Mitchell
Stephens—you and Risa and Wendell Walker and the Ottos.”

“Yeah, so? Lots of folks have got lawyers.”
“But yours is the one who’s gonna subpoena me, Sam. Force me

to testify in court. He came by the garage this afternoon, real smooth
and friendly.”

“Why would he do that?” Mom said. “You didn’t have anything

to do with the accident.” She’s so out of it. Even I knew that Billy had
been driving behind the bus that day, so he could wave at his kids, like
he always did. That made him the only person not on the bus who’d
actually witnessed the accident which meant that he’d be the one to tell
if Dolores had been driving safely. They naturally couldn’t sue
anybody if Dolores was driving recklessly, and only Billy knew the
truth about that.

“And if the bastard does subpoena me,” Billy said, ignoring

Mom, “then all these other lawyers are gonna line up behind him and
try to do the same thing.”

“No, that won’t happen, Billy. Mitch Stephens’s case is small,

compared to some of these guys, and very focused. The way he told
me, all he needs is for you to say what you saw that day, driving along
behind the bus. I know it’s a painful thing to have to do, testifying and
all, but it’ll only take a few minutes of your time, and that’ll be the end
of it.”

“Wrong,” Billy said. “That’s purely wrong. The other shysters’ll

copy him, or do a version of whatever he’s doing, and there’ll be all
kinds of appeals, and I’ll be tangled up in this mess for the next five
years. And believe me, you and Mary will too,” he said. “This thing is
never going to go away, Sam.”

“C’mon,” Daddy said. “You know that won’t—”
“Do you know,” Billy interrupted him, “that we got lawyers suing

lawyers, because some people were stupid enough to sign up with
more than one of the bastards? And we got people switching lawyers,
because these sons-of-bitches are bribing them, making deals and
dickering over percentages.” I hoped Mom and Daddy hadn’t done
that, switched lawyers, because of Mr. Stephens’s computer.

Billy said, “A couple of local folks I won’t bother to name—but

you know them, Sam, they’re friends of yours—they’ve even started a
suit against the school board, because they’re not happy with the way
they decided to use the money that got collected around town last
winter and the junk that people sent in from all over. There’s one group
in town that agrees with the school board and wants to spend the
money for a memorial playground and donate the junk to the Lake
Placid Hospital, and another that wants the money to go against this
year’s town tax bills and maybe have a tag sale or something to get rid
of the stuff.” He laughed, but he wasn’t amused. I knew Mom and
Daddy were in the second group, but I guess Billy didn’t.

“Yesterday,” he said, “I heard somebody wants to sue the rescue

squad, for Christ’s sake. The rescue squad. Because they supposedly
didn’t act fast enough.

“This whole town,” Billy said in a suddenly dead voice, “the town

has gone completely crazy. I used to like this town, I used to really
care about what happened here, but now … now I think I’ll sell my
house and the garage and move the fuck away.”

That got Mom upset—the word “fuck,” not the idea of Billy’s

moving. “Billy, please,” she said. “The children.” Like they could hear
him over the television. It was her own ears she was trying to protect,
not theirs. “I can’t have you talking that way in this house,” she said.
Right, this Christian house.

He said he was sorry, and the three of them were silent for a

minute. “I was thinking, if you two dropped the case,” Billy said in a
low voice, “then maybe the others would slowly come to their senses

and follow. You’re good sensible people, you and Mary. People respect
you.”

have to tell you, because I run a pretty good tab at your garage, but we
need the money, Billy. For hospital bills and suchlike. Just for living.”

“Christ, I’ll pay Nichole’s hospital bills, if that’s what you’re

talking about. The Walkers, they’d drop out if you did. And the Ottos,
I don’t think they want to be doing this, either. Then your lawyer
wouldn’t have any reason to pursue the case. I bet he’d pack it in, cut
his losses, and go home.”

“None of us wants to be doing this, Billy.”
“If you two could make a smart shyster like Stephens pull out,

then maybe the other people in town would start to see the light, and
people could get their mourning done properly and get on with their
lives. This has become a hateful place to live, Sam. Hateful.”

“Not for us,” Daddy said.
“No, not for us,” Mom chimed in.
What a dumb thing for them to say. It shocked even me. I heard

Billy’s chair bump against the floor as he stood up.

“Not for you. Right,” he said, “not for you.” He must have

thought they were the stupidest people he’d ever met. Then, naturally,
because of what they’d said, he thought of me. “How’s Nichole? She
around?”

Mom jumped in. “She’s resting, in her room.”
“Yeah. Well, that’s too bad. I haven’t seen her, you know. Since

the accident. I guess no one has. Tell her hello for me,” he said in a
low sad flat way that made my chest tighten, and I wanted to fly out
into the kitchen and hug him.

But I didn’t. I stayed there by the door, patting Fergus the Bear

and listening, and suddenly I was aware that I was shaking all over.

At that moment, I hated my parents more than I ever had. I hated

them for all that had gone before—Daddy for what he knew and had
done, and Mom for what she didn’t know and hadn’t done—but I also

hated them for this new thing, this awful lawsuit. The lawsuit was
wrong. Purely and in God’s eyes, as Mom especially should know, it
was wrong; but also it was making Billy Ansel sadder than life had
already done on its own, and that seemed stupid and cruel; and now it
looked like half the people in town were doing it too, making everyone
around them crazy with pain, the same as Mom and Daddy were doing
to Billy, so they didn’t have to face their own pain and get over it.

Why couldn’t they see that? Why couldn’t they just stand up like

good people and say to Mr. Stephens, “No, forget the lawsuit. We’ll
get by somehow on our own. It’s too harmful to too many people.
Goodbye, Mr. Stephens. Take your law practice back to New York
City, where people like to sue each other.”

I heard the door close behind Billy, and then Mom and Daddy

went up to their bedroom, probably to discuss things in private, which
they were doing more and more now, talking alone in their bedroom.
We were becoming a strange family, divided between parents and
children, and even among the children we were divided, with me and
Jennie on one side and the boys on the other. No one in the family
trusted anyone else in the family.

It had started back when Daddy began touching me and making

me keep his secret, but he and I were the only ones who knew about
that, so we had all gone on afterwards as if we were still a normal
family, with everyone needing and trusting one another, just like
you’re supposed to. But now it was like everyone, not just me and
Daddy, had secrets. Mom and Daddy had their secrets, and Jennie and
I had ours, and Rudy and Skip had theirs, and we each had our own
lonely secrets that we shared with no one.

I knew it was all directly connected to what had happened

between me and Daddy before the accident, and through that to the
accident itself, which had changed me and my view of everyone else,
and now from the accident to this lawsuit—which had set Mom and
Daddy against me, although they didn’t know that yet, and me against
everyone.

Maybe my realizing this, after Billy left the house, is what let me

start to evolve a plan in my mind that I couldn’t share with anyone,
certainly not Mom or Daddy, and not Jennie, who would never
understand, and not the boys, who would have ratted on me. If our
family was going to be all fragmented like this, I figured, then I might
as well take advantage of it and, for once, act completely on my own.

The first glimpse of it had come to me in a flash, as I sat there by

the door with my sweet old teddy bear, Fergus, in my lap. I suddenly
realized that I myself—and not Daddy and Mom or the Walkers or the
Ottos—could force Mr. Stephens to drop the lawsuit. I could force
their big shot lawyer to walk away from the case. And Daddy would
know that I did it. Which would give me a good laugh. And because of
what I knew about him, he wouldn’t be able to do a thing about it
afterwards. It wouldn’t really matter, but maybe then we could become
a regular family again. Husband and wife, parents and children,
brothers and sisters, all of us trusting one another, with no secrets.

Except the big one, of course. Which would always be there, no

matter what I did, like a huge purple birthmark on my face, something
that he alone could see whenever he looked at me, and I, whenever I
looked in the mirror.

Graduation came and went, and, yes, I did stay home, and the

school board mailed me my diploma, along with official notification
that I would be attending ninth grade next year at Lake Placid High
School and there would be a special van to transport me. At the last
minute, Mom and Daddy almost went to the graduation ceremonies
without me, just the two of them, all dressed up, but I talked them out
of it. It was a stupid idea, but typical of them. They couldn’t bear being
kept out of the limelight.

“It’s not the same as going to church every Sunday without me,” I

explained, “where people feel sorry for me and proud of you. People at
school will just think you’re dumb and will feel sorry for you instead
of me,” I said.

“Don’t talk to your mother that way,” Daddy said. They were all

sitting in the living room watching television together, like a good

American family—it was The Simpsons, probably, which was the one
show the whole bunch of them thought was funny. Even Jennie. Me, I
can’t stand that show; it’s insulting.

“Actually, Daddy,” I said, “I’m talking to you both,” and I backed

my wheelchair out of the room, turned, and went into my own room. I
wasn’t afraid of him anymore, and he knew it, but he couldn’t do
anything about it.

With summer here and school out, the kids were at home more,

and because Mom was working at the Grand Union full time now, I
had to baby-sit. That was all right by me, since I didn’t have anyplace
else to go, except physical therapy in Lake Placid two afternoons a
week, which Grand Union let Mom take off, so she could drive me to
the Olympic Center. Most days, Rudy and Skip ran wild, off in the
woods and fishing or swimming in the Ausable River or riding their
bikes all the way into town to goof around at the playground with their
friends. I just let them go, as long as they got home before Mom did,
and lied for them when Mom asked where they’d been all day, since
they were supposed to stay around the house.

Jennie stuck close to me and was easy enough to amuse,

especially if I let her play in my room with her Barbie dolls, which I
did most of the time. We talked a lot that summer, almost as if she
were a few years older than her real age and I were a few years
younger, and it was one of the nicest things I can remember about our
family. It was like I was ten years old again, and in the company of a
sister who was also ten, because Jennie met me halfway. Sometimes I
almost forgot about all the bad things that had happened to me, and I
felt safe again and whole, untouched and innocent.

We both played Barbie dolls and read the same books and talked

about things like witches and ghosts and whether we believed in them
or not, and we wrote funny poems about people we didn’t like or
thought were stupid and ridiculous, like Mr. Dillinger and Eden
Schraft, the postmistress. Silly nonsensical stuff.

There once was a man named Dillinger, 
Whose brain had only one cylinder. 

His wife’s had none, but she called him “Hon,” 
Now he’s convinced he’s thrilling her.

Eden Schraft was slightly daft 
And learned the alphabet late. 
She sorted the mail in a plastic pail,
And licked her stamps from a silver plate.

Those summer mornings and afternoons alone in the house with

Jennie were, in a way, the last days of my childhood; that’s how it felt,
even at the time it was happening to me.

Then one night Daddy knocked on the door of my room and said,

“Nichole, are you there? Can I come in a minute?”

“Yes, Daddy,” I said, “I’m here.” Where did he think I was? I

rolled over to the door and unlatched it, and he walked in. I reached
over to the television and shut off the sound; I knew he had an
announcement to make. He never came into my room alone now,
unless he had to. In fact, he almost never talked directly to me
anymore, probably because he couldn’t be sure of what I would say in
response. He knew I hated him.

He sat down on the bed and put his hands on his knees and

studied them. He has big hands. To me, they look like animals, thick
and hairy. To him, I suppose, they’re just hands.

“Nichole,” he said, and he cleared his throat. “Tomorrow,

Nichole, tomorrow Mr. Stephens wants you to make your deposition
over to the courthouse in Marlowe. I thought, even though it’s a
weekday, I’d stay home from work so I can take you over, and Mom
can stay with the kids, if that’s all right.”

“Sure,” I said. “Whatever.”
“Whatever. You sure are …”
“What? I’m what?”
“I don’t know. Well, distant, I guess. Distant. Hard to talk to.”

talk about. Do we?”

“What?”
“Do we?”
He inhaled and sighed heavily, as if he felt suddenly sorry for

himself. “Well, then, it’s okay? I’ll take you over about nine-thirty in
the morning? That’s okay with you?”

“Sure,” I said. “Whatever.”
“I wish you wouldn’t always say that.”
“Say what?”
“Whatever.”
“Why?”
“It’s just … it sounds like you’ll do whatever I want, like you

think you’re in my power or something. Only sarcastic. That’s the part
I don’t like, the sarcasm.”

I looked at him and didn’t say anything. Sometimes I don’t know

who’s more out of it, him or Mom. Slowly he got up and went out to
the living room, and I heard him and Mom go upstairs to their room.

The next morning, he drove me over to Marlowe. We rode the

whole way without saying anything, although once or twice Daddy
started whistling a little tune and then after a few seconds trailed off
into silence. It was a balmy clear day, with small white puffs of cloud
sailing over the mountains from Sam Dent. Daddy parked the car in
the lot and wheeled me around to the main entrance of the redbrick
building, which looks more like a mental hospital than a courthouse,
and it gave me the willies. Unexpectedly, I was very nervous and dry-
mouthed, scared of what I was about to do.

Daddy huffed and puffed carrying me up the long stairs, because I

kept my body stiff and wouldn’t hold on to him, and I must have felt
heavier to him than I really was. Like he was lugging a hundred and
ten pounds of cinder blocks. After he set me into a regular chair and
went back down for my wheelchair, I looked around me and saw that I

was in a nice large book-lined room with a huge table in the middle
and these big leather-covered chairs pulled up to it.

Mr. Stephens was there, wearing a dark pin-striped lawyer suit,

and he shook my hand with obvious pleasure. He was glad to see me, I
could tell, and this relaxed me some. When I first met him at our
house, he had worn his regular clothes, a plaid shirt and wool pants,
and had seemed even friendlier and gentler then. I had liked him, but
he wasn’t what you’d call impressive, probably because of his hairdo.
Now he looked important and smart, and I was glad my lawyer was
him and not one of the other guys he introduced me to there, a Mr.
Garay and a Mr. Schwartz. They were all suited up too, like him, but
their suits looked like K Mart compared to his, and they were both
short and baldish, and one of them, Mr. Garay, had real bad breath that
he was trying to kill with Feen-a-Mints. Good luck.

Mr. Schwartz stood at the far end of the table and shuffled a

messy pile of papers over and over, as if he was looking for a lost
document. Every few seconds, Mr. Garay walked down to Mr.
Schwartz’s end of the table and watched over his shoulder and waited,
then came back and stood nervously near me and Mr. Stephens.

“Well, Nichole, are you all ready for this?” Mr. Stephens asked

me, and he smiled and winked. We’re on the same side, and we’re
smarter than these other guys, was what he was communicating to me.

“I’m ready,” I said. And I was.
Daddy came back then with the wheelchair and opened it out for

me, and when I had hitched myself into it, Mr. Stephens rolled me up
to the table and took the seat beside me on the right. He asked Mr.
Schwartz where the stenographer was, and Mr. Schwartz looked up
from his papers, blinked, said to Mr. Garay, “Dave, you can tell Frank
we’re ready. We’re ready, right?”

“Yes, indeed,” Mr. Stephens said. Daddy dragged one of the

leather chairs from the table over by the wall next to the door, where
he sat down and crossed his legs and tried to look casual, like he does
this all the time.

by a short dark man I recognized from Mom and Daddy’s church—
which is how I thought of it by that time. It wasn’t my church
anymore, that’s for sure. The man carried a tape recorder and some
papers, and he nodded and smiled at Daddy as he passed him, and
Daddy nodded back. I realized then that this was probably the third or
fourth time Daddy had been in this room, so maybe he did have a
reason to look casual. He was getting used to this legal business.

“This is Frank Onishenko, he’s the stenographer, and he’ll be

taking down everything we say,” Mr. Stephens said to me. “This is
called an examination before trial, Nichole,” he explained, “and these
gentlemen will ask you some questions, and I may make a few
comments about the questions or your answers. Then Mr. Onishenko
will make a transcript of the whole thing, which we’ll sign, and we’ll
all have notarized copies, so there won’t be any surprises. Right,
gentlemen?”

Mr. Schwartz looked up from his papers. “What?”
“Just explaining to Nichole what’s going on here,” Mr. Stephens

said. “Are you ready?”

“Yeah, sure,” Mr. Schwartz said, as if he’d really rather be doing

something else. Mr. Garay didn’t seem too interested in what was
happening, either. I guess I was Mr. Stephens’s choice witness, Exhibit
A or something, and they figured there wasn’t much they could ask me
that would help their case. They knew the facts already, and I was
obviously exactly what I looked like, a poor teenaged kid in a
wheelchair, a victim—and that served only Mr. Stephens’s purpose,
and of course Mom’s and Daddy’s purpose, and the Walkers’ and the
Ottos’. But not Mr. Schwartz’s or Mr. Garay’s.

Mr. Stephens made some legal talk then. Stuff like “Pursuant to

the order of Judge Florio” and “all parties to appear today for the
court-ordered deposition, blah blah blah.” He talked like that for quite
a while. “Prior to this date … numerous discovery and inspection …
furnished to my office … the defendant, the State of New York … the
codefendant, the Town of Sam Dent, Essex County, State of New York

…” Et cetera, et cetera. It was pretty impressive, though, and if he
hadn’t been my lawyer, here to protect me, I would’ve been seriously
scared of him.

He went on growling and barking like that for a while, and the

other lawyers cut in and out a couple of times and made legal speeches
of their own. After each speech, they would all three fall into a
conversation among them that they said was off the record, so Mr.
Onishenko would stop the tape and look at me and smile a little, like
we were actors in a play rehearsal forced to stand by while the director
consulted with one of the other actors.

Finally, it looked like the lawyers had got all their technical

difficulties ironed out, and Mr. Onishenko asked me to swear to tell the
truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth so help me God.

I said I would, and then Mr. Schwartz looked straight at me,

smiled, and gazed into my eyes like the next words I heard were going
to make us lifelong friends. “Nichole,” he said, “good morning.”

“Good morning.”
“Nichole, I’m going to ask you a series of questions about this

case. If at any time you do not understand the question or would like
me to rephrase or repeat it, please just ask me and I will do so. Is that
agreed?”

“Yes.”
“Good. Could you tell me your full name?”
“Nichole Smythe Burnell.” I didn’t mention it, of course, since he

didn’t ask, but Smythe is Mom’s maiden name. At school in the fall I
was planning to start calling myself Smythe Burnell. No more Nichole.
No more Nickie, Nike, Nickie, Nicolodeon. From now on, Smythe.

“Where do you presently reside?”
“Box 54, Bartlett Hill Road, Sam Dent, New York 12950.”
“How long have you resided at that address?”
“All my life. Since December 4, 1975.” I figured I’d throw that

in, so he wouldn’t have to ask my age.

“Fine. And with whom do you presently reside at that address?”
“With my parents, Samuel and Mary Burnell, and my two

brothers, Rudolph and Richard, aged eleven and ten, and my sister,
Jennifer, aged six.”

For a long time, that’s how it went—Mr. Schwartz asking these

boring questions, like he was filling out a job application for me, and
me answering with the basic facts of my life so far. But I liked it. I
liked the way it was so factual and impersonal, almost as if we were
talking about someone else, a girl who wasn’t even in the room.

After a while, though, he started asking more personal things, like

about my health and my daily activities. I realized that he had done
some research already, because it was obvious from the questions that
he already knew the answers to most of them. It was like that TV game
show Jeopardy, where the MC gives the answers and the contestant
has to come up with the questions. Except that here the contestant, Mr.
Schwartz, seemed more in charge than the MC, me.

At one point, he asked me questions about how I spent my days

now. He wanted me to tell about my new room on the first floor and
how I stayed there almost all the time and hadn’t gone to school and so
forth. When he asked about graduation, I told him I hadn’t attended it,
and I thought he would ask why not, but he didn’t. He was trying to
make me look pampered and spoiled, I knew, but even so, I was glad
he didn’t go any further into my home life or school stuff than he did.
Instead, he wanted to know about the physical therapy I was getting,
and I told him; and then he asked me if I was in any pain now,
suddenly, just like that.

I said, “Well, no, not really.”
“You’re not in pain?”
“Actually, I don’t know.”
“What do you mean, Nichole, that you don’t know?”
“Well, I mean, it’s like I can’t feel it. I don’t have any feelings. In

my legs, I mean. From my waist down. That’s why I’m in a
wheelchair, Mr. Schwartz,” I said. “It’s not like I’m paralyzed or

anything. I just can’t feel anything down there, so I can’t move
anything down there. That’s what the physical therapy is for, to keep
the muscles from atrophying from disuse. Because even though they’re
basically okay, the muscles and bones and all, it’s actually like they’re
dead.”

I looked over at Mr. Stephens, and I saw him tighten his mouth

against a smile. He said, for Mr. Onishenko’s record, that he would be
introducing a set of medical reports along with depositions from Dr.
Robeson and the other doctors at Lake Placid Hospital who had taken
care of me, and I saw Mr. Garay make a few notes on a yellow lined
pad. “And unless the medical records are allowed to go into evidence,”
Mr. Stephens added, “I will of course object to this line of
questioning.”

After that, Mr. Schwartz wanted me to tell them about my social

life.

“Now or then?” I asked.
“Then.”
Mistake. He would not enjoy what I was about to tell him. I

started with cheerleading and talked about how big a deal that is to the
kids at school, and then I told him about the Harvest Ball and Bucky
Waters, even, and Mr. Schwartz started looking flustered. I was telling
him the truth, though. More or less. It was Q and A, not multiple
choice. On paper or like this, in a deposition, I probably came out
looking like Miss Teenaged America or something. I’m talking about
before the accident.

I knew, of course, that was where he would eventually have to

lead me, to the accident itself, and sure enough, pretty soon he was
asking me about what happened that morning.

“Now, on January 27, 1990, did there come a time, Nichole, when

you left your parents’ house on Bartlett Hill Road?”

“Yes.”
He asked a bunch of small questions for a while, nailing down

details, like what time of day was it, where did the bus pick us up, who

was at the stop with me, and so forth. “I was with my brothers,” I said.
“Rudy and Skip. Jennie was sick and stayed home that day.”

“Was there anything unusual about the driver, Dolores Driscoll, or

the bus this morning?”

“Like what? I mean, I don’t remember a lot.”
Mr. Stephens jumped in. “I object to the form of the question.

Note that.”

“Was the bus on time?” Mr. Schwartz asked.
“Yes.”
“And where did you sit that morning?”
“My usual place, on the right side, the first seat.”
“But according to your recollection, there was nothing unusual

about the drive that morning,” he said.

“Until the accident?”
“Yes.”
“No. Yes, there was. It was when Sean Walker got on, because he

was crying and didn’t want to leave his mother. So I sat him next to me
and quieted him down, and Dolores and Sean’s mother talked for a
second. Then, when Dolores started up again, a car came around the
corner there by the Rendez-Vous and almost hit Sean’s mother. She
was okay, but it really scared Sean, because he saw it out the window.”

After that, he didn’t want to ask about individual stops anymore,

which was fine by me, because except for when we picked up Sean,
the rest of the route was like every other day and I couldn’t be sure if I
was remembering something from the actual day of the accident or just
making it up from my usual experiences.

“Can you remember what the weather was like that morning?” he

asked me.

“I think it was snowing. Not hard, not at first. It wasn’t snowing

at all when we left the house, but it was snowing a little by the time we
stopped at Billy Ansel’s.”

Mr. Stephens interrupted again. “Unless the report from the

National Weather Bureau for the town of Sam Dent of January 27,
1990, goes into the record, I will object to that question.”

“I will offer that report,” Mr. Schwartz said. Then he asked me if I

saw Billy Ansel that morning.

I said yes, he was driving behind the bus in his pickup, like he did

every morning, following the bus in. I was exact and said I saw Billy’s
pickup truck, not Billy himself. “I sit in front; it’s the kids in the back
who always watch and wave at Billy.”

“Who were they?”
“In the back? I don’t know: Billy’s kids, of course, and Bear Otto,

and a couple of others.”

“Objection,” Mr. Stephens said. “Note my objection. She said, ‘I

don’t know.’ ”

Mr. Schwartz slipped a quick smile past me, his old friend. “Did

there come a time when all the children had been picked up?”

“Yes.”
“You remember that much,” he said. Like, How interesting.
“Yes. As I’m talking, I’m remembering more about it.” And I

really was, which surprised me probably as much as it was surprising
the lawyers.

Mr. Stephens looked worried. “Note my objection. She said, ‘As

I’m talking.’ ”

“Do you remember, did there come a time when the bus turned

off Staples Mill Road onto the Marlowe road at what’s called Wilmot
Flats?”

“Yes,” I said. “There was this big brown dog that ran across the

road up there, right by the dump, and Dolores slowed down so’s not to
hit him, and he ran into the woods. And then Dolores drove on and
turned onto the Marlowe road, as usual. I remember that. I’m
remembering it pretty clearly.”

“You are?” Mr. Schwartz said, eyebrows raised.

“Yes.”
“Note that she said pretty clearly.’ Not ‘clearly,’” Mr. Stephens

put in.

Then Mr. Schwartz asked me some more questions about Billy

Ansel, like, After we turned onto the Marlowe road, how far behind
the bus was his truck?

“I don’t know,” I said. “It was snowing pretty hard by then.

Dolores had the windshield wipers on.”

“She did?”
“Yes.”
Mr. Stephens said, “You remember that?”
“Yes.”
Mr. Schwartz went on, “Well, then, what else did you observe at

that time? Before the actual accident, I mean.”

“I was scared.”
“You were scared? Of what? This is before the accident, I’m

asking. Do you understand what I’m asking, Nichole?”

“Yes, I understand. Dolores was driving too fast, and it scared

me.”

“Mrs. Driscoll was driving too fast? What made you think that,

Nichole?”

“The speedometer. And it was downhill there.”
“You could see the speedometer?”
“Yes. I looked, because it was snowing so hard. And because it

seemed to me that we were going very fast coming down the hill there.
I was scared.” Mr. Stephens, I noticed, had gone silent.

“All right, then, Nichole, how fast would you say she was going?

To the best of your recollection.”

“Seventy-two miles an hour.”
“Really? Seventy-two miles an hour. You’re sure of this?”

but I imagined him slumped in his chair, looking at his fingernails.

“You believe that the bus driven by Mrs. Driscoll was going about

seventy miles an hour at that time?” Mr. Schwartz asked.

“No,” I said. “I know she was going seventy-two. The

speedometer is large and easy to see from where I was. I was in the
first seat, right beside it, practically.”

“I see. Did you say anything to her about this?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“Well, I guess I was scared. And there wasn’t time.”
“There wasn’t time?”
“No. Because then the bus went off the road. And crashed.”
“You remember this?”
“Yes,” I said. “I do now. Now that I’m telling about it.”
“She said, ‘Now that I’m telling about it.’ Note that,” Mr.

Stephens said in a weary voice.

“What do you recall of the accident itself? Exactly.”
“I remember the bus swerved, it just suddenly swerved to the

right, and it hit the guardrail and the snowbank on the side of the road,
and then it went over the embankment there, and everyone was
screaming and everything. And that’s all. I guess I was unconscious
after that. That’s all. Then I was in the hospital.”

Mr. Schwartz smiled and made some notes on his pad. Mr. Garay

was furiously doing the same. “Do you have any questions, Mr.
Stephens?” Mr. Schwartz said without looking up.

I made like I was straightening my skirt across my knees, but I

could see off to the side that Mr. Stephens was staring at me, and for a
long time he didn’t say a word. He just breathed hard through his nose.
Of course, he didn’t know if I had told the truth or not, but he was
leery of pressing me too hard to find out, or he might end up asking

questions that Mr. Schwartz and Mr. Garay would love to hear me
answer.

mouth half open, as if he wanted to say something but he didn’t dare.

“I have no questions,” Mr. Stephens said quietly.
Mr. Schwartz said, “I have no further questions. Mr. Garay?”
“No questions,” Mr. Garay said.
“Thank you, Nichole. You can go now,” Mr. Stephens said. He

didn’t get up from his seat; he sat there, sliding some papers into his
briefcase. Glancing along the table, I saw Mr. Schwartz and Mr. Garay
doing the same, only quicker. Mr. Onishenko had shut off the tape
recorder and was writing on a self-stick label. I pushed myself away
from the table and turned my wheelchair toward Daddy, who was
standing now but looking kind of wobbly.

As I passed by him, Mr. Stephens, in a voice so low only I could

hear, said to me, “You’d make a great poker player, kid.”

I said, “Thanks,” and quickly moved away from him. Daddy was

in shock, I could tell, white-faced and slouched, like someone had
punched him in the stomach. Probably, the meaning of what I had told
Mr. Schwartz was just now registering in his mind, over and over, and
he hadn’t begun to react yet.

I rolled my chair up beside him, and to further delay his reaction,

and maybe because I didn’t want him to embarrass himself in front of
the lawyers, for he was, after all, my father, I said, “Let’s go, Daddy.
We have to get home now.”

Like a kind of numb servant, he nodded okay and lifted me out of

the wheelchair and carried me down the stairs. This time I wrapped my
arms around his neck and shoulders and held on tight, making it easier
for him to lift my weight and carry me to the car.

While he was setting me into the front seat, I saw Mr. Schwartz

and Mr. Garay get into a fancy gray car parked on Court Street and
drive quickly away. They were loosening their neckties and smiling
and in general looking very pleased with themselves.

Daddy hurried back to retrieve my wheelchair from the

courthouse, but I knew he’d be longer than necessary, because he and
Mr. Stephens would want to have a few words up there in private. Mr.
Stephens would probably be incredibly mad at Daddy for not having
warned him that I had remembered so much about the accident, and
Daddy would be insisting that he hadn’t expected it, either.

Daddy would have concluded by now that I had lied, however,

and he would try to tell that to Mr. Stephens. She lied, Mitch, she
doesn’t remember anything about the accident, she has no idea how
fast Dolores was going. And Mr. Stephens would have to point out to
him that, Sam, it doesn’t matter whether she was lying or not, the
lawsuit is dead, everyone’s lawsuit is dead. Forget it. Tell the others to
forget it. It’s over. Right now, Sam, the thing you got to worry about is
why she lied. A kid who’d do that to her own father is not normal,
Sam.

But Daddy knew why I had lied. He knew who was normal and

who wasn’t. Mr. Stephens couldn’t ever know the truth, but Daddy
always would. He put my wheelchair into the trunk of the car and
came around to the driver’s side and got in and sat there for a minute
with the key in his hand, looking at it as if he didn’t quite understand
its purpose. He said nothing for a long time.

Finally, he reached forward and put the key into the ignition, and

speaking slowly, he said in a strange half-dead voice, “Well, Nichole,
what do you say we stop at Stewart’s for an ice cream? We haven’t
done that for a long time,” he added.

“That sounds fine, Daddy. I’d really like it.”
He started the car up then and drove across the road to Stewart’s

and bought each of us a huge pistachio cone, which is the kind we both
like best but that no one else in the family likes.

When we had left Marlowe and were coming along the East

Branch toward Sam Dent, with Daddy’s cone dripping and me handing
him napkins, we passed the fairgrounds at the edge of town, and I
noticed that they were setting up a midway. I hadn’t realized that it was

so late in the summer. Winter and spring and now summer had passed
by, and it was like I had been in some other land, traveling.

“Is it time for the fair already?” I asked. It looked beautiful, and

sad somehow. The white grandstand and the covered stage facing it
had been freshly painted, and the field of mown grass inside the oval
racetrack in front of the stand was bright green and shiny under the
huge blue sky. When I was Jennie’s age, the grandstand had seemed
enormous to me and frightening, especially when we went at night and
it was filled with a huge noisy crowd of strangers. Now the structure
seemed tiny and almost sweet, and it would no longer be filled with
strangers; I would know the faces and even the names of almost
everyone up there on those board seats, and they would wave at me
and say, Come on over, Nichole, and sit here with us. The track that
looped around the field and passed between the stage and the
grandstand had been raked smooth and watered until it looked like it
was made of chocolate frosting. Scattered among the pine trees behind
the grandstand were the low livestock barns and pens and the exhibit
halls, where over the years I had won ribbons for my 4-H projects—
my angora rabbits, Tweedle Dee and Tweedle Dum; and my plaster-of-
paris relief map of Sam Dent in 1886 with balsa wood houses and
lichen woods and painted fields; and my Just Say No to Drugs poster.
They had all won blue ribbons, which Daddy had framed and hung on
the living room wall and which were still hanging there, although I had
not looked at them in a long time. The skeleton of a Ferris wheel and
the long arms of the octopus ride were already in place, and the game
booths and tents were being assembled by a gang of tanned shirtless
young men and boys with tattoos on their arms and cigarettes in their
mouths, probably the same out-of-town men and boys who last year
had flirted and called to me and Jody and the other local girls as we
strolled along the midway and tried to ignore them but always found
an excuse to turn around at the end of the row of booths and walk
back, more slowly this time, looking at each other and rolling our eyes
as the boys asked us to come on over and try our luck.

“Would you like to go to the fair this year, Nichole?” Daddy

asked. He had slowed the car and had been looking at the fairgrounds

with me, probably thinking some of the same thoughts.

“When is it? When does it start?”
“Starts tomorrow, runs all week, right through the weekend.”
“I don’t know, Daddy. Maybe, though. Let me think about it,

okay?”

He said sure, and we drove on into town.
We had one more conversation before we got home, which I think

was responsible somehow for my deciding to go to the fair, although
it’s not really connected. As we pulled into the yard, I said to Daddy,
“Nothing will happen to Dolores, will it?”

He shut off the engine, and we sat there for a moment in silence,

listening to the dashboard clock tick. Finally, he said, “No. Nobody
wants to sue Dolores. She’s one of us.”

“Will the police do anything to her now?”
“It’s too late for that. Dolores can’t drive the school bus anymore,

anyhow; the school board saw to that right off. I doubt she even wants
to. Everyone knows she’s suffered plenty.”

“But everyone will blame her now, won’t they?”
“Most will, yes. Those that don’t know the truth will blame

Dolores. People have got to have somebody to blame, Nichole.”

“But we know the truth,” I said. “Don’t we?”
“Yes,” he said, and for the first time since before the accident, he

looked me straight in the face. “We know the truth, Nichole. You and
I.” His large blue eyes had filled with sorrowful tears, and his whole
face seemed to beg for forgiveness.

I made a small thin smile for him, but he couldn’t smile back.

Suddenly, I saw that he would never be able to smile again. Never.
And then I realized that I had finally gotten exactly what I had wanted.

“Well,” I said, “it’s over now.”
He turned away from me and got out of the car, and when he

came around to my side with the wheelchair and opened my door, I
said to him, “Daddy, I think I do want to go to the fair.”

He concentrated on unfolding the chair and said nothing.
“Let’s go Sunday afternoon and see everything,” I said. “The last

day is always the best. Everyone in town goes then, and we can sit in
the grandstand, and everyone will see us together. We can look at the
livestock too, and the rides, the midway, the games, everything. All of
us together, the whole family.”

He nodded somberly and lifted me out of the car and set me into

my wheelchair. Then he pushed me up the ramp and into the house.

OceanofPDF.com

Dolores Driscoll

Every August since we were married, and before that, separately,
since childhood, Abbott and I have attended the Sam Dent County
Fair, which by rights should be held over in Marlowe, since that’s the
county seat. Instead, it’s held here in Sam Dent, where there is a fine
old fairgrounds out along the East Branch of the Ausable River. Abbott
loves the fair, especially the demolition derby; weeks in advance, he
gets himself worked up to a fever pitch, practically, almost like a child.

Except for the pleasure I get from his excitement, I myself can

take the fair or leave it, it’s just one of the stops that a person makes in
the course of a year, but I do confess to enjoying the livestock
exhibitions. I like to wander through the dairy barns more than any of
the other exhibits, probably because of my childhood experiences,
what with my father having been a dairy farmer. The dim warm stalls
and the smell of wood chips and hay and fresh cow manure, the slow
and gentle movements of cattle and their large moist eyes—those
things cut straight through all my troubles to my heart and bring me
practically to tears as I pass along the long low barns and stop here and
there to admire and maybe even speak to an especially fine Jersey or a
pretty black and white Holstein, which is the type of cow my father
raised.

It’s not the same for Abbott. He’s more at ease in the flash and

bustle and noise of the midway and, as I said, the demolition derby,
which he prefers to watch from high in the grandstand. “You … need
… perspective … to … experience … it,” he explains. That’s a
problem, of course, with his being confined to a wheelchair in recent
years. Normally, what happens is that a couple of men from town spot
us before we even get to the grandstand and meet us at the bottom of

the steps and, one on each side, latch on and carry Abbott in his
wheelchair to the top level, where he can set his brake and watch the
whole thing to his heart’s delight, to the very end. Afterwards, usually
the same fellows from town show up and carry him back down to the
ground, where I take over and wheel him to the parking lot.

This year, though, things were different. I probably should have

expected it, but it caught me by surprise. Although I don’t think it
surprised Abbott one bit—there’s very little surprises that man. But
without having said anything to him, without our actually discussing it,
I figured that enough time had passed for people to have gone through
their first tangled reactions to the accident and come out on the other
side, just as I more or less had myself; I had pretty well stayed out of
sight and, I hoped, mind, all these lonesome months, which was only
proper; by now, I thought, people would have put their dark conflicted
feelings about me behind them and would once again be free to act
toward me and Abbott like the dear friends and neighbors they had
always been. Sam Dent was our permanent lifelong community. We
belonged to this town, we always had, and they to us; nothing could
change that, I thought. It was like a true family. Certainly, terrible
things happen in every family, death and disease, divorce and blood
feuds, just as they had in my own; but those things always have an end
to them and they pass away, and the family endures, just as ours had.
The same must hold for a town, I thought. But I’m a sanguine person,
as Abbott says. Too sanguine, I guess.

It was early Sunday evening when we got there, the last day of

the fair, and I had to park the van at the farthest end of the parking lot,
a long bumpy haul from the grandstand. There had been a
thunderstorm earlier, one of those late August storms that move
quickly and heavily through the mountains like a freight train from
Canada, and we had waited at home for it to pass over into Vermont,
which it did around six o’clock, leaving the sky cloudless and tinted a
stony shade of blue and the air moist and scrubbed and cool. For the
first time that summer, you could smell fall coming on.

Because of the storm, though, we were late and didn’t have time

to visit the livestock barns, which grieved me some, or linger along the

midway like Abbott enjoys. They start the demolition derby right at
sundown, for it is definitely more exciting to sit up high in the old
wooden stands and watch the cars down below smash against each
other under spotlights than to do it in broad daylight, when the whole
event might seem a foolish thing for a normal person to view. At least I
would find it somewhat embarrassing in daylight, although I doubt that
would matter much to Abbott. He’s not as self-conscious as most
people, due to his stroke, no doubt, and what he’s learned from it.

From the parking lot, we made our way through the gate and

along the far side of the field in front of the grandstand, which wasn’t
easy, as the lane was rutted and wet, the grass trampled by the crowds
of the last week. We were cheerful, though, Abbott and I; it was our
first time out in public together since last winter. After the accident, I
had attended the funerals, but alone, without even Abbott to
accompany me; it was a way of bearing witness, I guess you could call
it. I kept to myself, spoke to no one, and left immediately after the
services. It was just something I had to do, something crucial between
me and the children. I don’t think people, the adults, quite wanted me
there among them, which was understandable, but I had to do it—for
the children, who, if they could have spoken for themselves, would
surely have asked me to attend their funerals and say a prayer for each
of their dear departed souls. And I did. They would have thought me
cowardly if I had stayed home instead.

That done, though, I kept myself away from all town functions,

church affairs, meetings, bake sales, and so forth, and more or less
oriented myself west and south, faced our life toward Lake Placid,
where I had to take Abbott twice a week for his physical therapy
anyhow. Naturally, I no longer drove the school bus; two weeks after
the accident, the school board mailed me a certified letter saying my
services were no longer required, but I had already made that decision
for myself, thank you. And since Eden Schraft never called me, the
way she usually did, about carrying mail in the summer months, I gave
that up too; a bit more reluctantly, however, than I gave up the bus, for
I had no terrible associations with that particular job. Now, whenever I
saw one of those big yellow International school buses on the road, I

simply had to look away or else concentrate on a single detail, like the
sum of the numbers on the number plate or the poker hand the
numbers made, until the thing was gone from view.

I did all our grocery shopping at the Grand Union in Lake Placid,

and even started reading the Lake Placid newspaper, which is how I
got my job driving for the hotels. We needed money—since Abbott’s
stroke, I have been the sole breadwinner in the family. I started with
the Manor House, who’d advertised for a part-time driver with a van to
carry guests in from the Saranac airport. They did not connect my
name to the well-known accident in Sam Dent, and naturally I did not
give the school board as a reference. Then on my own initiative I
added a few more hotels and got me one of those belt beepers and a
CB, until soon I was on call twenty-four hours a day and in Lake
Placid five and six full days a week, lugging folks back and forth from
the airport, cruising in and out of the downtown shopping area with a
load of Canadian souvenir hunters and off to view the local sights—
Whiteface, the Olympic ski jumps, the John Brown house, and Kate
Smith’s grave. Lake Placid can be an interesting town when you see it
from a tourist’s perspective.

Sometimes, out of the goodness of his heart, because he’s easily

bored and would have preferred staying home with his radio and books
and magazines, Abbott came along, and that cheered me somewhat. I
was very lonely in those days, still in a kind of shock from the
accident, I think, and Abbott was the only person I could communicate
with. But soon winter passed over, and spring appeared and rolled on a
few weeks later, and then it was summer, and now in late summer I
had begun to feel more like my old self—although I knew, of course,
that I would never be the same person again. You can’t raise the dead.
I knew that.

Anyhow, it seemed like an appropriate time and way for me to

reenter the life of my town—coming out here to the fairgrounds with
my husband and joining the crowd and not making anything large of it,
just saying howdy to those folks who seemed willing to speak with me,
and enjoying ourselves for a few hours, like normal people, and then
going home. Tired but happy, as they say.

had warned me off it. “Ma, forget it, forget that damned town. C’mon
up here, you and Dad, sell the house, for God’s sake, and move up here
to Plattsburgh with me. I can build you an apartment upstairs or
renovate the basement or something, and I’ll look after you both.” As
if we were a helpless pair of elderlies. I think he had his own motives,
now that he and Tracy were separated and he was living alone in their
house. Reginald has always been something of a mama’s boy and
secretly ashamed of it; and while he’d never move back to Sam Dent
just to be near me and his father, he was not above trying to talk us
into moving near him.

The large oval field in front of the grandstand is ringed by a dirt

track that’s generally used for racing trotters. Tonight, though, the
racetrack, along with the field itself, was entirely covered by old
banged-up cars hand-painted in garish colors, slapped-on shades of
pink and aqua and yellow, with slogans, mottoes, girls’ names, and
huge numbers on the doors, hoods, and roofs. Parked around the cars
in no evident pattern or order I saw flatbed trailers and tow trucks,
pickups, and even some fancy new Z cars here and there, with what
looked like a couple hundred people lounging around the vehicles, all
drinking beer and having a fine time together. They were mostly young
men and women and teenaged boys and girls, all of whom love cars
and machinery. The boys and men, and many of the females too,
moved and mingled among the tow trucks and pickups and Z cars and
the old painted-up clunkers familiarly, as if the vehicles were beloved
and admired animals that they had raised themselves. It was a whole
pack of muscular good-looking youths in excellent health showing off
to one another, with the boys’ sleeves rolled practically over their
shoulders so as to expose their tanned arm muscles and new tattoos
and the girls in tight shorts or jeans and halters, their hair all moussed
and swirled and curled in the newest styles from the TV singers and
soaps. They had tape decks set out, blasting rock ’n’ roll and country
and western songs from the hoods of their vehicles, and coolers of iced
beer all around, and here and there a couple was dancing together.

It was almost dark now. Huge spotlights in front of the grandstand

had been turned on to illuminate a short section of rain-soaked track
that had been blocked off between the stands and the raised open stage
facing it. From the field, the pale glow of the spotlights and the
flashing lights from the midway and the rides—strips and circles of
red, yellow, purple, and green—passed like firelight from a huge
bonfire across the faces of the young people hanging out in the field. I
cut between a pair of beat-up sedans right onto the field among them
and pushed Abbott’s wheelchair over the grass between pickups and
flatbeds and knots of kids clutching beer cans. In the distance, I heard
the announcer start to call out the order of the upcoming heats.

Abbott swung his head around and said to me, “Can’t … be …

late.” I started to hurry, but while I wheeled him through the vast
conglomeration of cars, trailers, and trucks toward the stands, I kept
peering around in search of my old station wagon, Boomer, which I
had good reason to hope would be entered in the derby tonight,
resurrected and driven by Jimbo Gagne. It would have been difficult to
recognize it—they take out all the window glass and lights, and you
can barely tell what brand or model car it was originally, except by the
shape of its fenders and grille and so on. Forget telling who owned the
car originally.

All the way across the field to the stands, I kept an eye out, but I

never caught sight of anything that resembled Boomer more than
superficially. Boomer was, of course, the name my boys and I had
given to that old Dodge wagon, which had served back in the 1970s as
my very first bus and which, after 168,000 miles, had finally thrown a
rod and generally collapsed. I’d pushed it out behind the barn and
stashed it on blocks, in case Abbott or I or one of the boys ever needed
parts from it, which need never arose, as my boys were by then
obsessed with off-road vehicles and four-by-fours and I was driving
first the GMC and then the International. And then Abbott had his
stroke. The old Dodge got more or less forgotten over the years that it
sat back there, and in time meadow grass and tall weeds and berry
bushes grew around it. Until one day in June of this year, when Jimbo
Gagne came out to the house unannounced and asked to buy it. He said

he liked its power-to-weight ratio, it had plenty of both, and he would
like to get it running again and enter it in the demolition derby at the
fair.

I said, “What the heck, Jimbo, just take it. Haul it out of here and

keep it,” I said, and on the spot wrote him a bill of sale for one dollar.
He was the first person from town who had come out to the house in a
normal way and on his own since the accident, and I was so grateful to
him for that, I’d probably have given him my almost new Voyager van
for a dollar, if he’d asked me for it. Jimbo is one of Billy Ansel’s
Vietnam vets, the one who’s been working at the garage the longest,
nine or ten years now, and though he still lives over in Ausable Forks
in a trailer with his wife and a dozen sled dogs that he houses in oil
drums spread around the yard, he’s practically a local person now,
because of his association with Billy Ansel’s garage. People talk
against the way he uses oil drums for doghouses, but I can’t see how
they’re any worse for dogs than house trailers are for people. Jimbo is
a lanky brown-eyed man with stringy black hair who wears one of
those long Fu Manchu mustaches and a gold earring and looks
downright evil. But he’s actually a very shy and sensitive man, a
respectful soft-spoken gentleman, underneath that pirate’s costume,
and when he came with Billy’s wrecker to haul old Boomer away, he
treated me with courtesy and kindness. He knew that I would take one
look at that tow truck and remember the last time I’d seen it, when it
had slowly drawn the bus out of the water-filled sandpit that snowy
morning last January, and so he telephoned before coming out and in a
joking way said he was calling ahead in case I didn’t want to be there
when he took old Boomer away.

“I know how sentimental you are about that junker, Dolores. It’s

like I am about some of my dogs. But I ain’t going to put your car
down. In fact, I’m going to give the old boy a second life. Maybe you
should think of it that way,” he suggested.

I did, but I also made sure not to be home when he arrived with

the big blue wrecker. In fact, that night Abbott and I drove into Placid
for supper at the Ponderosa restaurant, where they serve good
beefsteaks cheap and have a long salad bar that Abbott particularly

likes to partake of, because he can reach everything from his
wheelchair. He always returns for seconds and even goes after salad
for me. “Sit … now … and … I’ll … serve,” he says. “Everyone …
must … serve … sometimes,” he says.

I’m not inclined to notice, but now and then poor Abbott must

feel a wave of guilt because of the way I’ve taken care of him in these
last years of our life together, and the few occasions when he can
perform some little physical task for me are no doubt of greater
importance to him than they are to me. I try to keep alert to such
opportunities and to make myself available to them, but they rarely
come along, due to his condition. To me, it never matters, because it’s
his mind that takes care of me, not his body. In the old days, before his
stroke, he took wonderful care of me with his body, which I will say
was always a creamy white and tender delight to me, providing me
with all the necessary and loving services a woman could imagine, and
consequently I did not pay sufficient attention to his mind, which from
the beginning was superior to mine, more logical and just. Now Abbott
and I live together like the perfect brother and sister, and I do not think
I would have been intelligent enough to do that back before he had his
stroke.

When we reached the edge of the field, we had to cross the track

behind one of the fire engines to get to the right-hand corner of the
grandstand, and I saw a few folks there that I recognized, volunteer
firemen from Sam Dent, and I know they saw and recognized me—
I’m pretty easy to recognize, even in twilight dark: I’m big and have
red hair, and here I am pushing this small man in a wheelchair. Not
wanting to put myself in a needy position, though, I merely nodded a
short hello, which I was glad of right after, as not a one of those boys
acknowledged me and Abbott when we passed by the fire engine and
crossed the track.

We came up on the gate, where I paid, and passed through to the

bottom of the grandstand. The thing was nearly filled already, with lots
of folks standing around at ground level by the rail. I knew many of
them, naturally—most of the town of Sam Dent comes out for the
demolition derby—and saw them glance at us and then look quickly

back toward the track and stage in front or nudge the person next to
them, who would then take his turn casting a quick expressionless
glance at us. No one said a word to me and Abbott or even
acknowledged our presence. I knew it was not Abbott they were
snubbing; it was me. But he was with me, so they ignored him too.
That made me mad.

Several times I started to say hello, to force the issue, but before I

could open my mouth, the person had turned his back to me.

I studied the stairs for a second; they looked steep and long.

Down here in front, I might be able to see some of the action over and
around the crowd of people at the rail; but not Abbott. “Hold on tight,
honey,” I said to him. “I believe I can get you up there a ways.”

He has the good use of his left hand and arm, although his right is

gone, of course; consequently, when he grabbed the left armrest
tightly, he had to flop his whole body against that side of the chair for
leverage, which put the chair all out of balance. Still, it was the only
way to do it. I backed him around and drew the chair up backward to
the first step, thinking I’d try to lug him up one step at a time, thinking
also that maybe someone kind would see me struggling and would
come to my aid. It’d probably have to be a stranger. A tourist, even. I
grunted and yanked, and the chair came along with a thump, and we
were up one step. Then another. Then a third, until soon we had made
the first landing.

Out of breath, with my back and legs hot and wobbly from the

effort, I had to stop for a breather, when, all of a sudden, of all the
people I did not want to see, there was Billy Ansel standing right next
to me, with a woman I didn’t know bouncing up the stairs behind him.

He grinned widely, which was not exactly a characteristic

expression, and said, “H’lo there, Dolores! Come out to see the
demolition derby, eh? Attagirl, Dolores!” he said in a loud voice, and
for a second I thought he was making cruel fun of me. His grin made
his teeth show through his beard, like he was clenching them. He was
dressed up, in his usual way, khakis and white shirt and loafers, but I

saw he was carrying a small paper bag with a bottle in it, and then I
realized he was drunk.

I took a look at the woman with him. She was maybe thirty-five

trying to look twenty—barefoot, in tight cutoff shorts and a tee shirt
with the words “Shit Happens” printed across the front. Taller than
Billy and skinny as a stick, she was dark-haired and had a small head
made to look even smaller by one of those pixie haircuts that used to
be so popular with teenagers. Her thin lips she had painted over and
around with bright red lipstick, trying to make her lips look full; it only
worked from a distance, though. Not the sort of woman you’d expect
to see in Billy Ansel’s company. She was drunk too.

“Goddamn, Dolores, you look like you an’ ol’ Abbott here could

use a hand,” Billy said, and he passed his brown bag to his friend. “Oh,
sorry, this here’s Stacey,” he said. “Stacey Gale Morrison, from
Ausable Forks. Stacey Gale, like you t’meet Dolores an’ Abbott
Driscoll, old friends from Sam Dent. Salt of the earth, both of ‘em,” he
declared.

“Pleased to meetcha,” Stacey Gale said. She didn’t put her hand

out to shake, and neither did I.

“Where you headed, Dolores? All the way to the top? Lemme

give a hand here.”

“No, that’s okay,” I said. “I can manage.”
“The hell you can. Here, you get on one side, an’ I’ll grab hold

the other, an’ we’ll scoot ol’ Abbott right to the top, just like that.
What’s a neighbor for, right? We got to lend each other a helping hand,
right, Abbott? Neighbors got to help each other out. Am I right?”

Abbott swung his head around and looked straight into Billy’s

bearded face, probably seeing grim things there that no one else could.
“You … help … Dolores … help … me …,” Abbott said to him. “Give
… thanks … then … all … around,” he added.

“How’s that, Abbott? I didn’t quite getcha. What’d he say,

Dolores?” Billy asked. “No offense, Abbott.”

I told him, although I doubt he really got it.

onto one side of the chair, and I grabbed the other, and we lifted
Abbott and his wheelchair together and crab-walked our way sideways
up the stairs. Stacey Gale came along a few stairs behind us, looking
slightly put out by the whole thing.

At the top, we put the wheelchair down, and I set the brake and

parked it there on the landing. The folks who were seated along the
last row silently moved in a bit on the long bench and made room for
Stacey Gale and then Billy Ansel and, finally, me. I noticed a few
familiar faces down along the row—a couple of the Hamiltons and
Prescotts, some Atwaters from up to Wilmot Flats, a bunch more from
town—but everybody kept themselves face-forward, like they hadn’t
noticed our arrival.

I sat down on the end seat, with Abbott on my left and Billy

Ansel on my right, and dropped my head and put my face in my hands.
Oh, this was hard on me. Much harder than I’d imagined. My heart
was pounding lickety-split, and my ears were hot. I was truly sorry that
we had come.

“Hey, Dolores,” Billy said, and he flopped a heavy arm over my

shoulder. “You just got to have a good time, Dolores, that’s all.
Whenever you can, you just go out there an’ you have yourself a good
goddamn time. The hell with the rest, that’s what I say. The hell with
’em.”

He extended his bottle toward me. For a second, I was tempted,

but I shook my head no, and he took a slug himself. “What about
Abbott?” he asked in a low voice and wiped his mouth with the back
of his hand. “He up for it?”

“No. Abbott doesn’t drink.”
Billy apologized, although I don’t know why, and passed the

bottle to Stacey Gale. She took a long pull that she tried to make look
like a sip, and Billy smiled approvingly and put his hand on her bare
knee.

I didn’t know what to think of how Billy had changed since the

accident. He scared me; but mostly he made me sad. He had been a

noble man; and now he was ruined. The accident had ruined a lot of
lives. Or, to be exact, it had busted apart the structures on which those
lives had depended—depended, I guess, to a greater degree than we
had originally believed. A town needs its children for a lot more than it
thinks.

I reflected on the Walkers, Wendell and Risa, and how they were

separated now, getting divorced, with their motel up for sale. A week
before, I’d run into poor fat Wendell sitting on a stool rewinding rental
videos at the Video Den in Ausable Forks, which is where I’d been
going for movies these days, and he told me Risa was selling chili
dogs at the Stewart’s in Keene. It was a short conversation; I think we
were both uncomfortable to see each other there.

And the Lamstons, gone up to Plattsburgh and living on welfare

in an old rooming house by the lake. Kyle Lamston had been
committed for a spell to the mental hospital to dry out, and afterwards,
as I later learned, he’d gone straight back to drinking, but with a
vengeance this time, and had done himself some permanent brain
damage and would never work again.

There had been trouble up on the Flats all spring and summer, bad

enough to get into the papers, with Bilodeaus and Atwaters dealing in
small quantities of drugs, cocaine and marijuana that they were
sneaking across from Canada. Three or four Bilodeaus and as many
Atwaters, the young ones, who a year ago had been parents, heads of
households, you might say, were now locked up in prison over to Ray
Brook.

All over town there were empty houses and trailers for sale that

last winter had been homes with families in them. A town needs its
children, just as much and in the same ways as a family does. It comes
undone without them, turns a community into a windblown scattering
of isolated individuals. Take the Ottos. With Bear gone, it was hard to
imagine the two of them together. Significant pain isolates you
anyhow, but under certain circumstances, it may be all you’ve got, and
after great loss, you must use whatever’s left, even if it isolates you
from everyone else. The Ottos were lucky, though—in addition to their

pain, they had that new baby. Otherwise, I’m sure, their lives, too,
would have come undone.

I wondered if my own children, Reginald and William, had

accomplished that for me and Abbott, if their presence in our lives had
held us peacefully together all those years. When Abbott and I were
young, we were so obsessed with each other, so enthralled by what we
thought were our striking similarities, that if I hadn’t twice gotten
accidentally pregnant, we might have lost touch with everything and
everyone else and maybe never would have grown up ourselves. Our
obsession with each other was like the isolation that comes with great
pain; it was like extreme sadness. Without our children, we might
never have discovered our differences, which is what has made our
abiding love for each other possible. We would have been like a pair of
infatuated teenagers, drowning in each other’s view of ourselves, so
self-absorbed that we’d never have been able to help each other over
the years the way we have.

and saddened me most about him was that he no longer loved anybody.
All the man had was himself. And you can’t love only yourself.

About that time I noticed a buzz going on down front, over at the

grandstand gate directly opposite to the one we had come in. People
were knotted up there, a whole bunch of folks who all looked to be
from Sam Dent, making a fuss over something or someone by the gate,
and the rest of the crowd was looking that way now, hooking and
craning their heads to see what was going on down there.

Then, in the center of the group by the gate, I saw the tall figure

of Sam Burnell, and behind him his wife, Mary, and three of their
children, the younger ones, Jennie, Skip, and Rudy. A second later,
several of the people in the crowd stepped back, and I saw that Sam
was pushing a wheelchair, and seated in it was his daughter Nichole. It
was an amazing sight. Everyone was smiling, and the folks nearest to
Nichole were reaching out as if to touch her. A few people had started
to clap their hands, and more and more of them were picking it up, as
Sam and his family, with Nichole in the lead, made their way from the
gate straight to the bottom of the stairs at the far side of the grandstand.

Nichole had a lovely sweet smile on her face—she’s a beautiful girl
anyhow, a fourteen-year-old blessed with movie star looks, practically
—and she waved one hand back and forth slowly, like a saint in a
religious procession or something, while the people applauded and
backed out of the way of her wheelchair.

Billy nudged me with an elbow and in a low voice said, “What

we got here, Dolores, is the local hero,” and he chuckled in a knowing
way that I couldn’t interpret.

I turned and said to Abbott, “Billy says Nichole is the town hero.”
“No … surprise … there.”
Several men, three or four of them, gathered around her

wheelchair and lifted it, like it was a throne, and with her father, Sam,
and the rest of her family falling in behind, they carried Nichole up the
stairs in a stately way, while the applause grew, a steady respectful
clapping, with even strangers, people who must have been tourists,
who couldn’t possibly have known who she was or what had happened
to her and to our town, joining in the applause.

“What’s the big deal with the kid?” Stacey Gale asked. Even she

had her hands out, ready to clap.

It was a hard question to answer. Part of it, I knew, was that

Nichole Burnell had survived the accident and had suffered terrible
loss, loss made visible by the wheelchair, and now for the first time,
after many months away from us, she was at last returning to us,
returning in a kind of triumph. Part of it was that she was a beautiful
young girl purified by her injury. I remembered how I used to regard
some of the Vietnam vets who worked for Billy Ansel. And part of it, I
also knew, was me, Dolores Driscoll, the fact of my presence here
tonight and the way people felt compelled to treat me. If they could not
forgive me, they could at least celebrate Nichole, and then maybe they
would not feel so bad that I, too, was one of them.

If she’d been capable of understanding it, that’s how I would have

answered Stacey Gale’s question. But then Billy Ansel said to her,
“That kid has saved this town from a hundred lawsuits. She’s kept us

all out of court, when it looked like half the damned town wanted
nothing else but to go to court.”

Abbott swung his head around and peered inquisitively at Billy,

who saw him and suddenly looked embarrassed.

“You heard about that, didn’t you?” Billy said.
“No,” Abbott said firmly.
“I figured you knew all about that legal crap.”
Abbott and I both shook our heads.
“Oh. Well, I guess it’s not really all that important,” he said, and

he took a quick swig from his bottle and kept looking at it while he
talked. “I mean, it’s not old news, actually. But any kind of news
travels fast in this town, so I thought you knew. But I guess you
folks’ve been out of touch.”

“Pretty much,” I said, still waiting.
“Yeah. Well, what it is, Nichole Burnell was s’posed to help this

big-time New York lawyer sue the town and the state for negligence.
She was like a witness.” He paused for a second. “I thought you knew
all about this.”

We shook our heads again.
“Yeah, well, when she refused to help him, when she wouldn’t

tell the judge or whoever what they expected, this lawyer, a guy that
Sam and Mary and the Ottos and who knows how many other people
in town had hired, he had to drop the case. And then everyone else
who was going to sue, they’ve been dropping out too. The Ottos went
first. I don’t think they were ever that serious and were probably happy
for the excuse. It just got too … it got too complicated, I guess. People
just said the hell with it, the Burnells are off the case, the Ottos are
gone, it’s a big mess, so the hell with it, let’s just get on with our lives.
You know.”

I told him that a lawyer had come out to the house and had tried

to get us to sue too, but I didn’t remember the man’s name. “Tall guy.
Drove a big Mercedes-Benz sedan. Abbott sent him packing, though.
Probably the same lawyer as you’re speaking of,” I said.

“Yeah. Probably was.”
The men who had carried Nichole up the stairs to the top of the

grandstand had set her down in the aisle there, in the same manner that
Billy and I had situated Abbott over here, and the Burnell family had
found seats for themselves at the farther end of the same topmost
bench. The derby was about to start, and people had turned their
attention back to the track now, where a batch of old cars were lining
up in single file, making a big racket as they positioned themselves to
enter the derby area for the first heat.

Abbott said, “What … did … Nichole … witness?”
“How’s that?”
“Abbott asked what did Nichole witness.”
“Oh.” Billy was watching the cars now. Out in the shadowy track

beyond the fire trucks, the half-wrecked cars shuddered and rocked on
their wheels, their engines hammering like kettledrums. That’s part of
the fun of it—the huge uncontrolled noise of it. All sixteen drivers in
the heat sit out there and race their motors as loudly as they can, and
clouds of exhaust and sparks fly out, and everyone cheers wildly with
excitement. The announcer, a short balding fellow in a green satin
jacket, stood on the stage facing the grandstand, and you could barely
hear him, despite the excellent loudspeaker system, as he singled out
individual drivers to comment on and make fun of, since most of the
drivers are local and there are inside jokes that everyone knows.

Then down on the track one of the green-jacketed referees waved

a small yellow flag, and one after the other, four of the gaudy battered
old junkers came roaring into the derby area, which is more like an
arena, a large rectangular muddy pit, than the finish-line section of a
racetrack. The four crossed in front of us, spinning wheels and cutting
reckless half circles, lurching forward and then suddenly stopping,
until all four of them were lined up at the right, side by side and facing
away from the direction they’d come. At a signal, a second line of four
cars sped into the arena, digging up the dirt with their tires as they
abruptly stopped, turned around, and backed up to the first set, rear
bumpers, or what was left of them, against rear bumpers. A third row

of cars charged out and slapped on their brakes, and as soon as their
front grilles faced the grilles of the second bunch, the last set roared in,
swiftly spun and whipped around, reversing direction, and backed their
rear bumpers up against the rear bumpers of the previous four. And
then they were ready—four rows with four cars in each row, all
squared off like sixteen gladiators, armored and breathing fire and
exhaling smoke, snarling and growling into each other’s faces. The
helmeted drivers were young men and boys, most of them grinning
fiercely and punching the air with fists or waving out the windshield
opening at the cheering crowd. It was a thrilling spectacle, even to me.

I glanced off to my left, to see how Abbott was enjoying his

favorite aspect of the fair, but to my surprise, he was ignoring the cars
altogether. Instead, he looked intently past me and straight at Billy
Ansel, and I realized that he was waiting for an answer to his question.
What did Nichole witness?

I didn’t know whether to say anything or not, which is unusual for

me, as I’m rarely undecided. I hate that state, so I made a decision not
to say a word. Leave it to the men to settle, was my decision. I was
aware that somehow I was at the center of this, my honor, perhaps, but
I was not sure how. I just trusted my husband to know.

Billy was hunched over, pretending to be engrossed in the scene

down below, but I could tell that he knew Abbott was watching him.
The girl, Stacey Gale, was off on her own planet.

Finally, Billy chanced a self-conscious glance at Abbott and got

caught at it. “Pretty good, eh, Abbott?” he said. “The ol’ demolition
derby.”

Abbott didn’t say anything. When he chooses, his gaze alone

makes a powerful statement. Without a word, just by sitting there and
putting on a hard look, he can set me or Reginald or William to
jabbering elaborate apologies and explanations, until finally he smiles
and we can stop. Sometimes I think that’s why Reginald moved to
Pittsburgh and William joined the army, just to get away from their
father’s gaze. For privacy. Me, of course, I never really thought I
needed that kind of privacy.

business, I suppose. Well, I don’t know what to tell you. There’s not
much more to it than what I already said.

Their lawyer, this guy Mitchell Stephens, he couldn’t get Nichole

to testify the way he wanted her to, that’s all. And then I guess he
didn’t feel he had a strong negligence case anymore, so he went home.
Since then, other folks have heard about it, and they’ve started having
second thoughts themselves, and their lawyers, too, have started
dropping out, one by one. So now it looks like we won’t be seeing any
lawsuits, after all. Which is fast bringing this town back together,” he
said. “The girl has done us all, every single person in town, a valuable
service. Even you, Abbott. Even you, Dolores, believe it or not.”

Abbott said, “Why … us?” Billy looked like he understood him

fine, so I didn’t translate.

What he did, though, was stammer a bit and then say something

to the effect that what was good for the town was good for everyone in
it, which, by my lights, seemed to evade the question somewhat. Also,
he still hadn’t answered Abbott’s earlier question, What did Nichole
witness? Down below, the first heat was well under way, and the cars
were slamming against one another, making an incredible noise as they
roared back and forth in the mud and struggled to smash each other
into submission. There were only about half the original sixteen still
moving, crawling like huge wounded beasts in the mud to get away or,
if they could, lining up to get one more good bash in before giving out
themselves. Stacey Gale was hollering along with everyone else in the
crowd, shrieking every time one of the remaining cars got in a good
loud hit and the car it hit got stopped and couldn’t move again,
eliminated.

Billy put his bottle down on the bench next to him and started

wringing his hands, and I felt a wave of sympathy for the man. I
already knew what he would say next, and Abbott surely did too. Billy
was the messenger bringing bad news, and no one wants that job. In a
low, uncertain voice, Billy said, “You ought to know, I guess.
Somebody’s got to tell you.”

I nodded my head yes, but Abbott didn’t even blink.
“What Nichole said she witnessed,” he said, “was the accident.

She was sitting in the bus up front next to you, Dolores. I guess I was
the only other witness, but I was driving a ways behind you, and not
paying much attention, either. So what Nichole had to say counted a
whole lot. Because they subpoenaed me, Mitchell Stephens did, and
when they did that, I told him and the other lawyers that I frankly
couldn’t say for sure how fast you were driving that bus that morning.
When it went over. Which is the gospel truth. All I knew was the speed
that I myself usually drive up there. Fifty-five to sixty, is what I told
them. Nichole, though, she was very certain. She said she remembered
it clearly—she knew how fast you were going when the bus went off
the road. That’s what she told them.”

He paused and looked back down at the track, where the winner

of the first heat had been determined: car number 43, a pink beetle-
shaped Hudson with “Death to the APA” painted across the roof,
“Tatum” on the hood, and “The Bone Rules” along the sides. That was
the driver’s name for himself, I guess—The Bone. In reality, it was
Richie Green, a good kid, not really a bone. Tatum is Tatum Atwater.
Wreckers and pickups with winches were rapidly hauling the smoking
carcasses of the losers off the track and onto the field, and a second
group of sixteen cars was lining up to enter the arena.

“How fast did the child say I was going?” I asked him. To save

Abbott the trouble, I suppose.

“Seventy-two miles an hour is what she told them.” He wouldn’t

look at me when he said it, but he said it. I have to hand Billy that.

“She told them I was driving seventy-two miles an hour?”
“Yes. Dolores, I thought you knew.”
“How would I know?”
“No way, I guess. I just figured you knew, like everybody else.

I’m sorry, Dolores,” he said.

“No, don’t be sorry to me, Billy. Not as long as you know the

truth.”

“Well, yeah, I know the truth.”
“That’s two of us, then,” I said. There were three of us, of course,

counting Nichole. Well, four, actually, counting Abbott. But Abbott
knew the truth because he happened to believe me, and I only assumed
that. Abbott hadn’t been there with me that January morning, out on
the Marlowe road with the snow coming down and the sight of the
mountains and the valley so lovely that when you see it your legs go
all watery and you have to hold your breath or you’ll say something
foolish, with the children all easy and at play in the school bus, and me
in charge of picking them up on time at their homes scattered across
the town and carrying them over those narrow winding roads for miles,
until we came to the big road and began our descent to the school in
the valley below. Abbott wasn’t with me then; I was alone.

Now, in addition to the truth, I knew what nearly everyone else in

town knew and believed, and if they didn’t, they were learning and
coming to believe it this very minute, probably, from the person
standing or sitting next to them here at the fair—they were learning
that Dolores Driscoll, the driver of the school bus, was to blame for the
terrible Sam Dent school bus accident last January. They were learning
that Dolores had been speeding, that she had been driving recklessly,
driving the bus in a snowstorm at nearly twenty miles an hour over the
limit, that Nichole Burnell, the beautiful teenaged girl who’d come out
to the fair in her wheelchair, a child who herself had almost died in the
accident, had sat next to the driver, that Nichole had seen how fast the
vehicle was moving, that she had told it to a court. Dolores Driscoll
was the reason why the bus had gone off the road and tumbled down
the embankment and into the icy water-filled sandpit. Dolores Driscoll
was the reason why the children of Sam Dent had died.

What did I feel then? I remember feeling relieved, but that’s a

weak word for it. Right away, without thinking once about it, I felt as
if a great weight that I had been lugging around for eight or nine
months, since the day of the accident, had been lifted from me. A huge
stone or an albatross or a yoke. One minute it was there, and because it
had been there for so long, I had grown used to it; and the next minute
it was gone, flown away, disappeared, and I was suddenly able to

recognize what a terrible weight I had been carrying all these months.
That’s strange, isn’t it? You’d expect me to feel angry, maybe, unjustly
accused and all that. But I didn’t. Not at all. I felt relieved. And,
therefore, grateful. Grateful to Billy Ansel, for revealing what Nichole
had done, and grateful to Nichole for having done it.

And for once, possibly for the first time in our life together, I did

not know what Abbott was thinking or feeling. Even more peculiar, I
didn’t care, either. He might be angry, he might be resentful, he might
even think I had lied to him. I didn’t care; it didn’t matter what Abbott
thought. I felt myself singled out in a way that had not happened to me
before, and although I have never experienced such a solitude as that, I
have also never felt quite so strong.

I looked over at Abbott; he had no idea what I was feeling, and it

actually pleased me that he didn’t.

As soon as Billy had ceased speaking, Abbott had swung his

attention back to the derby. The second heat was now almost over.
Billy was concentrating on his bottle, and when he wasn’t drinking, he
appeared to be studying his feet. Stacey Gale was like Abbott, all
caught up, apparently, in the smoke and the furious sound and sight of
the cars smashing one another to bits.

I said nothing. I just sat there and contemplated my strange new

feelings, letting them wash over me—relief, gratitude, aloneness—
naming them to myself as they came, one hard upon the other, in a
series, or a cycle would be a better word, for each wave of feeling
seemed to be the direct and sole cause of the next. Down below, the
single surviving car, a mangled old Impala with a front fender
crumpled and dangling off it, was pronounced the winner, and the tow
trucks rushed into the arena and hauled the losers off, and the cars in
the third heat came roaring in.

Suddenly, Abbott raised his left arm, his good one, and pointed. I

followed his finger down to the arena and saw what he saw, old
Boomer, my Dodge station wagon. Number 57, it was. Jimbo Gagne
had painted the car black and had written the number and his first
name and a peace symbol across the hood in big yellow letters. Along

the side was the name of the sponsor, not-quite-free advertising for
Billy Ansel’s Sunoco station. And on the top of the wagon, in huge
letters, he had painted the word boomer. I might not have recognized it
otherwise. All the window glass was gone, of course, and the trim and
hubcaps, and with no muffler it was blatting like the others, but I could
identify its beat, and it sounded pretty good to me: Jimbo had not just
got it running again, after it had sat dead on cinder blocks for years,
but got it running smoothly. It looked good too—glossy black all over,
with no chrome, no gaudy decorations; like a ghost car, it was dark and
unadorned and all business. The car was positioned in the middle of
the pack, not an advantageous spot in a demolition derby, but it was
bigger than most of the others in the heat, and like Jimbo had said, it
had a good power-to-weight ratio—plenty of both.

What happened then surprised me at the time but seems natural

now. The flag was dropped, and the cars commenced to smash into one
another, ramming each other from behind, the stronger cars quickly
driving the weaker against the heavy steel railing in front of the stage
and grandstand, shoving them sideways and backward through the
mud, with wheels spinning and tires smoking and clods of dirt flying
through the air. And every time Boomer got hit, no matter who hit it,
the crowd roared with sheer pleasure. A car with the words “Forever
Wild Development Corp.” painted over the hood slammed Boomer
from the side, driving it into another car, the Cherokee Trail
Condominium car, and everyone in the stands stood up and cheered. I
could see Jimbo wrestling with the wheel, frantically trying to regain
control, shoving the gearshift forward and back, rocking Boomer until
it was freed from the Cherokee Trail car, when another car hit it from
the front and sent it up against the rail, pinning it there, and everyone
cheered happily to see it. But somehow, before the referees were able
to slap it with one of their flags and pronounce it out, Jimbo got it
moving again, and Boomer charged back into the pack in the middle.
Seven or eight of the cars were dead by now, stalled, trapped against
the rail or boxed in between two other dead cars and unable to move.
But Boomer was still alive.

was standing, and if he hadn’t been positioned at the top of the stairs,
Abbott wouldn’t have been able to see. I hoped that Nichole, at the
other side of the grandstand, could see this. Everyone wanted to see
Boomer get hit, and again and again they got their wish, as Jimbo
seemed unable to get free of the pack long enough to do any of the
hitting himself. The other drivers were ganging up on Boomer, going
around one another, abandoning good clear shots at nearby cars for a
glancing shot at Boomer. Its front bumper had been torn off, and the
right front fender dangled like a broken limb. Jimbo kept working,
though, and the old engine wouldn’t let go, and every time one of the
other cars slapped Boomer from the side or rear and sent it into the
guardrail or against one of the stilled cars piled up in the middle,
Boomer would come to life and chug back for more.

Until finally there were only three cars left that could still move,

and they were moving slowly, like prizefighters with all the fight gone
out of them, coming forward on instinct now, bashing one another
blindly, stupidly, straight ahead, again and again. There was a torn-up
Ford Galaxie four-door from Chick Lawrence’s garage in Keene, with
Tom Smith driving, and I recognized JoAnn Bruce’s old brown Eagle,
sponsored by Ethel’s Dew Drop Inn in Willsboro and driven by
JoAnn’s cousin Marsden. All the other cars were smoldering in dented
and bent heaps, permanently stopped and eliminated. The Galaxie was
at the left of Boomer, and the Eagle was at the right, and at last it
looked like certain elimination for Boomer and Jimbo Gagne.

The crowd started to applaud then, clapping hands the way they

had when Nichole Burnell had first arrived. They didn’t cheer; they
just applauded. The drivers in the Galaxie and the Eagle revved their
motors and spun their wheels and lurched toward Boomer, stuck in the
middle, and suddenly it seemed like everyone in the stands stopped
clapping at once and the grandstand went silent, as the two cars
crossed the space between them, on a line toward the black station
wagon sitting at the center of that space. Boomer was held by the mud,
with its rear wheels blurred and tires sending up dark gray smoke and
chunks of dirt. Jimbo wrestled with the gearshift but couldn’t seem to

shift and rock the car free. It was a terrifying moment—in my memory,
it takes place in utter silence, and everyone is watching with great
seriousness, as if a matter of terrible importance is being settled before
them, instead of this dumb smalltown demolition derby.

And then it happened. Boomer backed slowly away, a few inches,

a foot, three feet—just enough to miss the charge first of the Galaxie
and then, a split second later, of the Eagle—and unable to swerve away
in time, the two cars hit each other instead of Boomer, and when Jimbo
saw that, he shifted into first gear and shot straight ahead, right against
the two of them, spinning them away and half around again. The
crowd erupted joyously, filling the night air with wild shouts and cries,
and when Jimbo had Boomer lined up on the Eagle, with the rear
bumper headed straight toward the right front end of the other car, the
people hollered for him to do it! Do it! Do it! and when he smashed
into the fender and wheel and tore the steering rods of the Eagle,
stopping it dead where it stood, and the official smacked it with the
flag, the crowd jumped up and down and yelled with delighted
approval and slapped each other on the shoulders and backs.

Then Jimbo went after the Galaxie, which was struggling in the

mud to turn and protect its front end. Boomer was moving smoothly
now; Jimbo had control of it. He spun the steering wheel, got Boomer
backed away from the wreckage of the Eagle, and turned and aimed its
rear end, which still had the bumper attached, toward the Galaxie. The
black station wagon came on slowly, chugging and slogging across the
open ground between them, while the Galaxie tried to turn, to take the
blow from behind. People were calling out Boomer’s name now,
almost chanting it: Boo-mer! Boo-mer! Boo-mer! At that instant Jimbo
squeezed a last burst of speed out of the old station wagon, and it
slammed into the Galaxie cleanly, catching it on the rear door, just
behind the driver, driving it sideways through the mud into the heap of
cars beyond it, where it ended jammed tightly against them, unable to
move. The official scrambled across the arena and whacked the
Galaxie on the hood, and Boomer had won.

Everyone in the place was happy. Even Abbott had a grin on his

face. I myself was neither happy nor disappointed. I remember having

decided beforehand that as soon as this heat was over, regardless of
how it ended, we must leave this place. Or I must, and Abbott would
have to leave with me. Naturally, I was glad when it turned out that my
old car had emerged victorious over the others. Glad for Jimbo Gagne,
glad for the town of Sam Dent, glad, I suppose, for Billy Ansel’s
Sunoco station too. But that’s a trivial kind of pleasure. Not what I’d
call happiness.

To tell the truth, up there in the stands, after Billy had revealed to

me what everyone in town now regarded as the truth, in the passage of
but a few moments’ time I had come to feel utterly and permanently
separated from the town of Sam Dent and all its people. There was no
reason for me to want to stand up there alongside them in the
grandstand, to help them cheer first to see a car once owned and driven
by Dolores Driscoll get destroyed by a bunch of other cars and then
join in when the very same people cheered to see it turn and destroy
the others. This demolition derby was a thing that held meaning for
other people, but not for me.

I do not believe that Nichole Burnell could have joined them,

either; nor would any of the other children who had been on the bus
with me that morning. All of us—Nichole, I, the children who
survived the accident, and the children who did not—it was as if we
were the citizens of a wholly different town now, as if we were a town
of solitaries living in a sweet hereafter, and no matter how the people
of Sam Dent treated us, whether they memorialized us or despised us,
whether they cheered for our destruction or applauded our victory over
adversity, they did it to meet their needs, not ours. Which, since it
could be no other way, was exactly as it should be.

Nichole Burnell, Bear Otto, the Lamston kids, Sean Walker,

Jessica and Mason Ansel, the Atwater and the Bilodeau kids, all the
children who had been on the bus and had died and had not died, and I,
Dolores Driscoll—we were absolutely alone, each of us, and even our
shared aloneness did not modify the simple fact of it. And even if we
weren’t dead, in an important way which no longer puzzled or
frightened me and which I therefore no longer resisted, we were as
good as dead.

“Abbott,” I said, “let’s go now. It’s time for us to leave.”
Without waiting for an answer, I stepped behind his wheelchair,

released the brake, and tipped it toward me on its rear wheels,
preparing to thump it down the stairs, one step at a time. It would be a
bumpy ride for him, but I knew he could take it. He’s not as fragile as
he looks.

But as I rolled him to the edge of the landing, a young fellow

seated in the row in front of me stood up and, to my surprise, turned to
help. I recognized him but did not know him personally. He was from
Sam Dent, one of Carl Bigelow’s sons, I think, a bearded potbellied
young man wearing a John Deere duck-billed cap, a squinty-eyed
fellow who looked like he did a lot of beer drinking down to the
Rendez-Vous, one of a hundred young men in town just like him. He
wanted to give me a hand. Another man suddenly appeared on my
other side, an older man who looked like a summer person, gray-
haired, trim, in sandals and Bermuda shorts and blue dress shirt. Then
a third and a fourth man moved into place, and before I could say a
word, they had lifted Abbott’s chair and were carrying him smoothly
down the stairs.

I followed along behind. The crowd had gone silent now, and it

seemed that everyone had decided to watch us descend the stairs. I
held my head up and tried to look like I didn’t notice. When I reached
the ground, I said thanks to the four men, and took over Abbott’s
wheelchair, and pushed him quickly through the gate. As I myself
exited the grandstand, I glanced back and saw that the fourth heat of
the derby had begun, and the crowd had gotten itself attentive and
noisy all over again. Even Billy Ansel. Life goes on, I might have said,
if there had been anyone to hear me. Nichole Burnell I could not see
from there.

The sky was a pale sheet of light sent up from the fairgrounds, but

the field was dark as we crossed it toward the parking lot, passing the
hulks of wrecked cars, idling pickups, and tow trucks. The grass was
wet with dew. Except for a couple of drivers seated or snoozing in
their vehicles, everyone was over by the stage and the railing,
watching the derby, and the sound of the cars as they roared back and

forth and collided with one another was dulled and dimmed, softened,
like background noises in a bad dream. Over by the midway, the Ferris
wheel spun slowly, rising and falling in the distance like a gigantic
clock. The faint music of the merry-go-round mingling with the
gravel-voiced calls and come-ons of the midway barkers was strangely
sad to me; it was like the sound of childhood—mine, Nichole’s,
everyone’s. Even Abbott’s. Our childhoods that were gone forever but
still calling mournfully back to us.

There’s not much more to tell. I got Abbott to the van, situated

him by the side door and lowered the lift for him, raised him up and
locked the wheelchair into place next to the driver’s seat. Then I came
around and got in myself and started driving. We departed quickly
from the parking lot, which was pretty much filled, with no more cars
arriving this late and no one but us leaving this early, and soon we
were on the road, headed home.

When the fairgrounds and all its illumination were sufficiently

behind us, the sky darkened nicely, and the stars seemed to come out
all at once, a wide swath of them spreading like sparkling seeds
overhead. It was a clear night, fresh and cool, and I knew that autumn
was going to come on fast now, the way it does up here.

Over to my left, the East Branch of the Ausable ran through the

darkness, and a dark spruce woods hove up on my right. At the edge of
the road, low and close to the ground, first on one side, and then on the
other, I began to see the eyes of animals suddenly flash and glitter as I
passed along the way, reflecting my headlights back at me and then as
quickly flaring out. For a brief second, though, their eyes were pure
white and flat, like dry, coldly glowing disks, and it was as if the
animals had all come to the edge of the forest, and there by the side of
the road they had waited and watched for me, until I had passed them
by and the safe familiar darkness had returned.

OceanofPDF.com

By homely gift and hindered Words  
The human heart is told 
Of Nothing—
“Nothing” is the force 
That renovates the World—
    Emily Dickinson (#1563)

OceanofPDF.com

Books by Russell Banks

Fiction

A Permanent Member of the Family

Outer Banks: Three Early Novels "Family Life, Hamilton Stark, and The Relation of My

Imprisonment"

Lost Memory of Skin

The Reserve

The Darling

The Angel on the Roof

Cloudsplitter

Rule of the Bone

The Sweet Hereafter

Affliction

Success Stories

Continental Drift

The Relation of My Imprisonment

Trailerpark

The Book of Jamaica

The New World

Hamilton Stark

Family Life

Searching for Survivors

Nonfiction

Dreaming Up America

The Invisible Stranger (with Arturo Patten)

OceanofPDF.com

Copyright

Portions of this novel have appeared in Adirondack Life, North American Review, and the Ontario

Review.

THE SWEET HEREAFTER. Copyright © 1991 by Russell Banks

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the

required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the

text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,

decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval

system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter

invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

EPub Edition © AUGUST 2011 ISBN: 9780062123152

FIRST EDITION

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Banks, Russell, 1940— 

     The sweet hereafter / Russell Banks.—1st ed. 

          p. cm.

ISBN 0-06-016703-3 (cloth)  

I. Title.

PS3552.A49S94      1991  

813’.54—dc20     90-56404

91 92 93 94 95 CC/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

OceanofPDF.com

About the Publisher

Australia 
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd. 
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street 
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia 
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada 
HarperCollins Canada 
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor 
Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada 
www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand 
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand 
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive 
Rosedale 0632 
Auckland, New Zealand 
www.harpercollins.ca
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London W6 8JB, UK 
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 
195 Broadway 
New York, NY 10007  
www.harpercollins.com

OceanofPDF.com

