  
BOOK ONE 
 
 ---------------- 
 
 PART ONE 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 WILSONsat on the balcony of the Bedford Hotel with his bald pink knees thrust against the ironwork. It was 
Sunday and the Cathedral bell clanged for matins. On the other side of Bond street, in the windows of the High 
School, sat the young negresses in dark-blue gym smocks engaged on, the interminable task of trying to wave their 
wirespring hair. Wilson stroked his very young moustache and dreamed, waiting for his gin-and-bitters. 
 
 Sitting there, facing Bond Street, he had his face turned to the sea. His pallor showed how recently he had emerged 
from it into the port: so did his lack of interest in the schoolgirls opposite. He was like the lagging finger of the 
barometer, still pointing to Fair long after its companion has moved to Stormy. Below him the black clerks moved 
churchward, but their wives in brilliant afternoon dresses of blue and cerise aroused no interest in Wilson. He was 
alone on the balcony except for one bearded Indian in a turban who had already tried to tell his fortune: this was not 
the hour or the day for white men - they would be at the beach five miles away, but Wilson had no car. He felt almost 
intolerably lonely. On either side of the school the tin roofs sloped towards the sea, and the corrugated iron above his 
head clanged and clattered as a vulture alighted. 
 
 Three merchant officers from the convoy in the harbour came into view, walking up from the quay. They were 
surrounded immediately by small boys wearing school caps. The boys refrain came faintly up to Wilson like a 
nursery rhyme: Captain want jig jig, my sister pretty girl school-teacher, captain want jig jig. The bearded Indian 
frowned over intricate calculations on the back of an envelope - a horoscope, the cost of living? When Wilson looked 
down into the street again the officers had fought their way free, and the schoolboys had swarmed again round a 
single able-seaman: they led him triumphantly away towards the brothel near the police station, as though to the 
nursery. 
 
 A black boy brought Wilsons gin and he sipped it very slowly because he had nothing else to do except to return to 
his hot and squalid room and read a novel - or a poem. Wilson liked poetry, but he absorbed it secretly, like a 
drug.The Golden Treasury accompanied him wherever he went, but it was taken at night in small doses - a finger of 
Longfellow, Macaulay, Mangan: Go on to tell how, with genius wasted, Betrayed in friendship, befooled in love ... 
His taste was romantic. For public exhibition he had his Wallace. He wanted passionately to be indistinguishable on 
the surface from other men: he wore his moustache like a club tie - it was his highest common factor, but his eyes 
betrayed him - brown dogs eyes, a setters eyes, pointing mournfully towards Bond Street. 
 
 Excuse me, a voice said, arent you Wilson? 
 
 He looked up at a middle-aged man in the inevitable khaki shorts with a drawn face the colour of hay. 
 
 Yes, thats me. 

 
 May I join you? My names Harris. 
 
 Delighted, Mr Harris. 
 
 Youre the new accountant at the U.A.C.? 
 
 Thats me. Have a drink? 
 
 Ill have a lemon squash if you dont mind. Cant drink in the middle of the day. 
 
 The Indian rose from his table and approached with deference, You remember me, Mr Harris. Perhaps you would 
tell your friend, Mr Harris, of my talents. Perhaps he would like to read my letters of recommendation ... The grubby 
sheaf of envelopes was always in his hand. The leaders of society. 
 
 Be off. Beat it, you old scoundrel, Harris said. 
 
 How did you know my name? Wilson asked. 
 
 Saw it on a cable. Im a cable censor, Harris said. What a job! What a place! 
 
 I can see from here, Mr Harris, that your fortune has changed considerably. If you would step with me for a moment 
into the bathroom... 
 
 Beat it, Gunga Din. 
 
 Why the bathroom? Wilson asked. 
 
 He always tells fortunes there. I suppose its the only private room available. I never thought of asking why. 
 
 Been here long? 
 
 Eighteen bloody months. 
 
 Going home soon? 
 
 Harris stared over the tin roofs towards the harbour. He said, The ships all go the wrong way. But when I do get 
home youll never see me here again. He lowered his voice and said with venom over his lemon squash, I hate the 
place. I hate the people. I hate the bloody niggers. Mustnt call em that you know. 
 
 My boy seems all right 
 
 A mans boys always all right. Hes a real nigger - but these, look at em, look at that one with a feather boa down 
there. They arent even real niggers. Just West Indians and they rule the coast Clerks in the stores, city council, 
magistrates, lawyers - my God. Its all right up in the Protectorate. I havent anything to say against a real nigger. God 
made our colours . But these - my God! The Governments afraid of them. The police are afraid of them. Look down 
there, Harris said, look at Scobie. 
 
 A vulture flapped and shifted on the iron roof and Wilson looked at Scobie. He looked without interest in obedience 
to a strangers direction, and it seemed to him that no particular interest attached to the squat grey-haired man walking 
alone up Bond Street. He couldnt tell that this was one of those occasions a man never forgets: a small cicatrice had 
been made on the memory, a wound that would ache whenever certain things combined - the taste of gin at mid-day, 
the smell of flowers under a balcony, the clang of corrugated iron, an ugly bird flopping from perch to perch. 

 
 He loves em so much, Harris said, he sleeps with em. 
 
 Is that the police uniform? 
 
 It is. Our great police force. A lost thing will they never find - you know the poem. 
 
 I dont read poetry, Wilson said. His eyes followed Scobie up the sun-drowned street. Scobie stopped and had a word 
with a black man in a white panama: a black policeman passed by, saluting smartly. Scobie went on. 
 
 Probably in the pay of the Syrians too if the truth were known. 
 
 The Syrians? 
 
 This is the original Tower of Babel, Harris said. West Indians, Africans, real Indians, Syrians, Englishmen, 
Scotsmen in the Office of Works, Irish priests, French priests, Alsatian priests. 
 
 What do the Syrians do? 
 
 Make money. They run an the stores up country and most of the stores here. Run diamonds too. 
 
 I suppose theres a lot of that 
 
 The Germans pay a high price. 
 
 Hasnt he got a wife here? 
 
 Who? Oh, Scobie. Rather. Hes got a wife. Perhaps if I had a wife like that, Id sleep with niggers too. Youll meet her 
soon. Shes the city intellectual. She likes art, poetry. Got up an exhibition of arts for the shipwrecked seamen. You 
know the kind of thing - poems on exile by aircraftsmen, water-colours by stokers, pokerwork from the mission 
schools. Poor old Scobie. Have another gin? 
 
 I think I will, said Wilson, 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Scobie turned up James Street past the Secretariat. With its long balconies it had always reminded him of a hospital. 
For fifteen years he had watched the arrival of a succession of patients; periodically at the end of eighteen months 
certain patients were sent home, yellow and nervy, and others took their place - Colonial Secretaries, Secretaries of 
Agriculture, Treasurers and Directors of Public Works. He watched their temperature charts every one - the first 
outbreak of unreasonable temper, the drink too many, the sudden stand for principle after a year of acquiescence. The 
black clerks carried their bedside manner like doctors down the corridors; cheerful and respectful they put up with 
any insult. The patient was always right. 
 
 Round the corner, in front of the old cotton tree, where the earliest settlers had garnered their first day on the 
unfriendly shore, stood the law courts and police station, a great stone building like the grandiloquent boast of weak 

men. Inside that massive frame the human being rattled in the corridors like a dry kernel. No one could have been 
adequate to so rhetorical a conception. But the idea in any case was only one room deep. In the dark narrow passage 
behind, in the charge-room and the cells, Scobie could always detect the odour of human meanness and injustice - it 
was the smell of a zoo, of sawdust, excrement, ammonia, and lack of liberty. The place was scrubbed daily, but you 
could never eliminate the smell. Prisoners and policemen carried it in their clothing like cigarette smoke. 
 
 Scobie climbed the great steps and turned to his right along the shaded outside corridor to his room: a table, two 
kitchen chairs, a cupboard, some rusty handcuffs hanging on a nail like an old hat, a filing cabinet: to a stranger it 
would have appeared a bare uncomfortable room but to Scobie it was home. Other men slowly build up the sense of 
home by accumulation - a new picture, more and more books, an odd-shaped paper-weight, the ash-tray bought for a 
forgotten reason on a forgotten holiday; Scobie built his home by a process of reduction. He had started out fifteen 
years ago with far more than this. There had been a photograph of his wife, bright leather cushions from the market 
an easy-chair, a large coloured map of the port on the wall. The map had been borrowed by younger men: it was of 
no more use to him; he carried the whole coastline of the colony in his minds eye: from Kufa Bay to Medley was his 
beat. As for the cushions and the easy-chair, he had soon discovered how comfort of that kind down in the airless 
town meant heat. Where the body was touched or enclosed it sweated. Last of all his wifes photograph had been 
made unnecessary by her presence. She had joined him the first year of the phoney war and now she couldnt get 
away: the danger of submarines had made her as much a fixture as the handcuffs on the nail. Besides, it had been a 
very early photograph, and he no longer cared to be reminded of the unformed face, the expression calm and gentle 
with lack of knowledge, the lips parted obediently in the smile the photographer had demanded. Fifteen years form a 
face, gentleness ebbs with experience, and he was always aware of his own responsibility. He had led the way: the 
experience that had come to her was the experience selected by himself. He had formed her face. 
 
 He sat down at his bare table and almost immediately his Mende sergeant clicked his heels in the doorway. Sah? 
 
 Anything to report? 
 
 The Commissioner want to see you, sah. 
 
 Anything on the charge sheet? 
 
 Two black men fight in the market, sah, 
 
 Mammy trouble? 
 
 Yes, sah, 
 
 Anything else? 
 
 Miss Wilberforce want to see you, sah, I tell her you was at church and she got to come back by-and-by, but she 
stick. She say she no budge. 
 
 Which Miss Wilberforce is that, sergeant? 
 
 I dont know, sah. She come from Sharp Town, sah. 
 
 Well, Ill see her after the Commissioner. But no one else, mind. 
 
 Very good, sah. 
 
 Scobie, passing down the passage to the Commissioners room, saw the girl sitting alone on a bench against the wall: 
he didnt look twice: he caught only the vague impression of a young black African face, a bright cotton frock, and 
then she was already out of his mind, and he was wondering what he should say to the Commissioner. It had been on 
his mind all that week. 

 
 Sit down, Scobie. The Commissioner was an old man of fifty-three - one counted age by the years a man had served 
in the colony. The Commissioner with twenty-two years service was the oldest man there, just as the Governor was a 
stripling of sixty compared with any district officer who had five years knowledge behind him. 
 
 Im retiring, Scobie, the Commissioner said, after this tour. 
 
 I know. 
 
 I suppose everyone knows. 
 
 Ive heard the men talking about it. 
 
 And yet you are the second man Ive told. Do they say whos taking my place? 
 
 Scobie said, They know who isnt. 
 
 Its damned unfair, the Commissioner said. I can do nothing more than I have done, Scobie. You are a wonderful 
man for picking up enemies. Like Aristides the Just 
 
 I dont think Im as just as all that 
 
 The question is what do you want to do? They are sending a man called Baker from Gambia. Hes younger than you 
are. Do you want to resign, retire, transfer, Scobie? 
 
 I want to stay, Scobie said, 
 
 Your wife wont like it 
 
 Ive been here too long to go. He thought to himself, poor Louise, if I had left it to her, where should we be now? and 
he admitted straight away that they wouldnt be here - somewhere far better, better climate, better pay, better position. 
She would have taken every opening for improvement: she would have steered agilely up the ladders and left the 
snakes alone. Ive landed her here, he thought, with the odd premonitory sense of guilt he always felt as though he 
were responsible for something in the future he couldnt even foresee. He said aloud, You know I like the place. 
 
 I believe you do. I wonder why. 
 
 Its pretty in the evening, Scobie said vaguely. 
 
 Do you know the latest story they are using against you at the Secretariat? 
 
 I suppose Im in the Syrians pay? 
 
 They havent got that far yet Thats the next stage. No, you steep with black girls. You know what it is, Scobie, you 
ought to have flirted with one of their wives. They feel insulted. 
 
 Perhaps I ought to sleep with a black girl Then they wont have to think up anything else. 
 
 The man before you slept with dozens, the Commissioner said, but it never bothered anyone. They thought up 
something different for him. They said he drank secretly. It made them feel better drinking publicly. What a lot of 
swine they are, Scobie. 
 
 The Chief Assistant Colonial Secretarys not a bad chap. 

 
 No, the Chief Assistant Colonial Secretarys all right The Commissioner laughed. Youre a terrible fellow, Scobie. 
Scobie the Just. 
 
 Scobie returned down the passage; the girl sat in the dusk. Her feet were bare: they stood side by side like casts in a 
museum: they didnt belong to the bright smart cotton frock. Are you Miss Wilberforce? Scobie asked. 
 
 Yes, sir. 
 
 You dont live here, do you? 
 
 No! I live in Sharp Town, sir. 
 
 Well, come in. He led the way into his office and sat down at his desk. There was no pencil laid out and he opened 
his drawer. Here and here only had objects accumulated: letters, india-rubbers, a broken rosary - no pencil. Whats the 
trouble, Miss Wilberforce? His eye caught a snapshot of a bathing party at Medley Beach: his wife, the Colonial 
Secretarys wife, the Director of Education holding up what looked like a dead fish, the Colonial Treasurers wife. The 
expanse of white flesh made them look like a gathering of albinos, and all the mouths gaped with laughter. 
 
 The girl said, My landlady - she broke up my home last night She come in when it was dark, and she pull down all 
the partition, an she thieve my chest with all my belongings. 
 
 You got plenty lodgers? 
 
 Only three, sir. 
 
 He knew exactly how it all was: a lodger would take a one-roomed shack for five shillings a week, stick up a few 
thin partitions and let the so-called rooms for half a crown a piece - a horizontal tenement. Each room would be 
furnished with a box containing a little china and glass dashed by an employer or stolen from an employer, a bed 
made out of old packing-cases, and a hurricane lamp. The glass of these lamps did not long survive, and the little 
open flames were always ready to catch some spilt paraffin; they licked at the plywood partitions and caused 
innumerable fires. Sometimes a landlady would thrust her way into her house and pull down the dangerous 
partitions, sometimes she would steal the lamps of her tenants, and the ripple of her theft would go out in widening 
rings of lamp thefts until they touched the European quarter and became a subject of gossip at the club. Cant keep a 
lamp for love or money. 
 
 Your landlady, Scobie told the girl sharply, she say you make plenty trouble: too many lodgers: too many lamps. 
 
 No, sir. No lamp palaver. 
 
 Mammy palaver, eh? You bad girl? 
 
 No, sir. 
 
 Why you come here? Why you not call Corporal Laminah In Sharp Town? 
 
 He my landladys brother, sir. 
 
 He is, is he? Same father same mother? 
 
 No, sir. Same father. 
 
 The interview was like a ritual between priest and server. He knew exactly what would happen when one of his men 

investigated the affair. The landlady would say that she had told her tenant to pull down the partitions and when that 
failed she had taken action herself. She would deny that there had ever been a chest of china. The corporal would 
confirm this. He would turn out not to be the landladys brother, but some other unspecified relation - probably 
disreputable. Bribes - which were known respectably as dashes - would pass to and fro, the storm of indignation and 
anger that had sounded so genuine would subside, the partitions would go up again, nobody would hear any more 
about the chest, and several policemen would be a shilling or two the richer. At the beginning of his service Scobie 
had flung himself into these investigations; he had found himself over and over again in the position of a partisan, 
supporting as he believed the poor and innocent tenant against the wealthy and guilty house-owner. But he soon 
discovered that the guilt and innocence were as relative as the wealth. The wronged tenant turned out to be also the 
wealthy capitalist, making a profit of five shillings a week on a single room, living rent free herself. After that he had 
tried to kill these cases at birth: he would reason with the complainant and point out that the investigation would do 
no good and undoubtedly cost her time and money; he would sometimes even refuse to investigate. The result of that 
inaction had been stones flung at his car window, slashed tyres, the nickname of the Bad Man that had stuck to him 
through all one long sad tour - it worried him unreasonably in the heat and damp; he couldnt take it lightly. Already 
he had begun to desire these peoples trust and affection. That year he had blackwater fever and was nearly invalided 
from the service altogether. 
 
 The girl waited patiently for his decision. They had an infinite capacity for patience when patience was required - 
just as their impatience knew no bounds of propriety when they had anything to gain by it. They would sit quietly all 
day in a white mans backyard in order to beg for something he hadnt the power to grant, or they would shriek and 
fight and abuse to get served in a store before their neighbour. He thought: how beautiful she is. It was strange to 
think that fifteen years ago he would not have noticed her beauty - the small high breasts, the tiny wrists, the thrust of 
the young buttocks, she would have been indistinguishable from her fellows - a black. In those days he had thought 
his wife beautiful. A white skin had not then reminded him of an albino. Poor Louise. He said, Give this chit to the 
sergeant at the desk. 
 
 Thank you, sir. 
 
 Thats all right. He smiled. Try to tell him the truth. 
 
 He watched her go out of the dark office like fifteen wasted years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Scobie had been out-manoeuvred in the interminable war over housing. During his last leave he had lost his 
bungalow in Cape Station, the main European quarter, to a senior sanitary inspector called Fellowes, and had found 
himself relegated to a square two-storeyed house built originally for a Syrian trader on the flats below - a piece of 
reclaimed swamp which would return to swamp as soon as the nuns set in. From the windows he looked directly out 
to sea over a line of Creole houses; on the other side of the road lorries backed and churned in a military transport 
camp and vultures strolled like domestic turkeys in the regimental refuse. On the low ridge of hills behind him the 
bungalows of the station lay among the low clouds; lamps burned all day in the cupboards, mould gathered on the 
boots - nevertheless these were the houses for men of his rank. Women depended so much on pride, pride in 
themselves, their husbands, their surroundings. They were seldom proud, it seemed to him, of the invisible. 
 
 Louise, he called, Louise. There was no reason to call: if she wasnt in the living-room there was nowhere else for 
her to be but the bedroom (the kitchen was simply a shed in the yard opposite the back door), yet it was his habit to 
cry her name, a habit he had formed in the days of anxiety and love. The less he needed Louise the more conscious 
he became of his responsibility for her happiness. When he called her name he was crying like Canute against a tide - 

the tide of her melancholy and disappointment. 
 
 In the old days she had replied, but she was not such a creature of habit as he was - nor so false, he sometimes told 
himself. Kindness and pity had no power with her; she would never have pretended an emotion she didnt feel, and 
like an animal she gave way completely to the momentary sickness and recovered as suddenly. When he found her in 
the bedroom under the mosquito-net she reminded him of a dog or a cat, she was so completely out. Her hair was 
matted, her eyes closed. He stood very still like a spy in foreign territory, and indeed he was in foreign territory now. 
If home for him meant the reduction of things to a friendly unchanging minimum, home to her was accumulation. 
The dressing-table was crammed with pots and photographs - himself as a young man in the curiously dated officers 
uniform of the last war: the Chief Justices wife whom for the moment she counted as her friend: their only child who 
had died at school in England three years ago - a little pious nine-year-old girls face in the white muslin of first 
communion: innumerable photographs of Louise herself, in groups with nursing sisters, with the Admirals party at 
Medley Beach, on a Yorkshire moor with Teddy Bromley and his wife. It was as if she were accumulating evidence 
that she had friends like other people. He watched her through the muslin net Her face had the ivory tinge of 
atabrine: her hair which had once been the colour of bottled honey was dark and stringy with sweat. These were the 
times of ugliness when he loved her, when pity and responsibility reached the intensity of a passion. It was pity that 
told him to go: he wouldnt have woken his worst enemy from sleep, leave alone Louise. He tiptoed out and down the 
stairs. (The inside stairs could be found nowhere else in this bungalow city except in Government House, and she 
had tried to make them an object of pride with stair-carpets and pictures on the wall.) In the living-room there was a 
bookcase full of her books, rugs on the floor, a native mask from Nigeria, more photographs. The books had to be 
wiped daily to remove the damp, and she had not succeeded very well in disguising with flowery curtains the food 
safe which stood with each foot in a little enamel basin of water to keep the ants out The boy was laying a single 
place for lunch. 
 
 The boy was short and squat with the broad ugly pleasant face of a Temne. His bare feet flapped like empty gloves 
across the floor. 
 
 Whats wrong with Missus? Scobie asked. 
 
 Belly humbug, Ali said. 
 
 Scobie took a Mende grammar from the bookcase: it was tucked away in the bottom shelf where its old untidy cover 
was least conspicuous. In the upper shelves were the flimsy rows of Louises authors - not so young modern poets and 
the novels of Virginia Woolf. He couldnt concentrate: it was too hot and his wifes absence was like a garrulous 
companion in the room reminding him of his responsibility. A fork fell on the floor and he watched Ali 
surreptitiously wipe it on his sleeve, watched him with affection. They had been together fifteen years - a year longer 
than his marriage - a long time to keep a servant He had been small boy first then assistant steward in the days when 
one kept four servants, now he was plain steward. After each leave Ali would be on the landing-stage waiting to 
organize his luggage with three or four ragged carriers. In the intervals of leave many people tried to steal Alis 
services, but he had never yet failed to be waiting - except once when he had been in prison. There was no disgrace 
about prison; it was an obstacle that no one could avoid for ever. 
 
 Ticki, a voice wailed, and Scobie rose at once. Ticki. He went upstairs. 
 
 His wife was sitting up under the mosquito-net and for a moment he had the impression of a joint under a meat-
cover. But pity trod on the heels of the cruel image and hustled it away. Are you feeling better, darling? 
 
 Louise said, Mrs Castles been in. 
 
 Enough to make anyone ill, Scobie said. 
 
 Shes been telling me about you, 
 
 What about me? He gave her a bright fake smile; so much of life was a putting off of unhappiness for another time. 
Nothing was ever lost by delay. He had a dim idea that perhaps if one delayed long enough, things were taken out of 

ones hands altogether by death, 
 
 She says the Commissioners retiring, and theyve passed you over. 
 
 Her husband talks too much in his sleep. 
 
 Is it true? 
 
 Yes, Ive known it for weeks. It doesnt matter, dear, really. 
 
 Louise said, Ill never be able to show my face at the club again. 
 
 It s not as bad as that. These things happen, you know. 
 
 Youll resign, wont you, Ticki? 
 
 I dont think I can do that, dear. 
 
 Mrs Castles on our side. Shes furious. She says everyones talking about it and saying things. Darling, you arent in 
the pay of the Syrians, are you? 
 
 No, dear. 
 
 I was so upset I came out of Mass before the end. Its so mean of them, Ticki. You cant take it lying down. Youve 
got to think of me. 
 
 Yes, I do. All the time. He sat down on the bed and put his hand under the net and touched hers. Little beads of 
sweat started where their skins touched. He said, I do think of you, dear. But Ive been fifteen years in this place. Id 
be lost anywhere else, even if they gave me another job. It isnt much of a recommendation, you know, being passed 
over, 
 
 We could retire. 
 
 The pension isnt much to live on. 
 
 Im sure I could make a little money writing. Mrs Castle says I ought to be a professional. With all this experience, 
Louise said, gazing through the white muslin tent as far as her dressing-table: there another face in white muslin 
stared back and she looked away. She said, If only we could go to South Africa. I cant bear the people here. 
 
 Perhaps I could arrange a passage for you. There havent been many sinkings that way lately. You ought to have a 
holiday. 
 
 There was a time when you wanted to retire too. You used to count the years. You made plans - for all of us. 
 
 Oh well, one changes, he said. 
 
 She said mercilessly, You didnt think youd be alone with me then. 
 
 He pressed his sweating hand against hers. What nonsense you talk, dear. You must get up and have some food... 
 
 Do you love anyone, Ticki, except yourself? 
 
 No, I just love myself, thats all. And Ali. I forgot Ali. Of course I love him too. But not you, he ran on with worn 

mechanical raillery, stroking her hand, smiling, soothing. . . 
 
 And Alis sister? 
 
 Has he got a sister? 
 
 Theyve an got sisters, havent they? Why didnt you go to Mass today? 
 
 It was my morning on duty, dear. You know that 
 
 You could have changed it. You havent got much faith, have you, Ticki? 
 
 Youve got enough for both of us, dear. Come and have some food. 
 
 Ticki, I sometimes think you just became a Catholic to marry me. It doesnt mean a thing to you, does it? 
 
 Listen, darling, you want to come down and eat a bit Then you want to take the car along to the beach and have 
some fresh air. 
 
 How different the whole day would have been, she said, staring out of her net, if youd come home and said, Darling, 
Im going to be the Commissioner. 
 
 Scobie said slowly, You know, dear, in a place like this in war-time - an important harbour - the Vichy French just 
across the border - all this diamond smuggling from the Protectorate, they need a younger man. He didnt believe a 
word he was saying. 
 
 I hadnt thought of that. 
 
 Thats the only reason. You cant blame anyone. Its the war. 
 
 The war does spoil everything, doesnt it? 
 
 It gives the younger men a chance. 
 
 Darling, perhaps Ill come down and just pick at a little cold meat 
 
 Thats right dear. He withdrew his hand: it was dripping with sweat. Ill tell Ali. 
 
 Downstairs he shouted Ali out of the back door. 
 
 Massa? 
 
 Lay two places. Missus better. 
 
 The first faint breeze of the day came off the sea, blowing up over the bushes and between the Creole huts. A vulture 
flapped heavily upwards from the iron roof and down again in me yard next door. Scobie drew a deep breath; he felt 
exhausted and victorious: he had persuaded Louise to pick a little meat. It had always been his responsibility to 
maintain happiness in those he loved. One was safe now, for ever, and the other was going to eat her lunch. 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 
 
 
 
 In the evening the port became beautiful for perhaps five minutes. The laterite roads that were so ugly and clay-
heavy by day became a delicate flower-like pink. It was the hour of content. Men who had left the port for ever 
would sometimes remember on a grey wet London evening the bloom and glow that faded as soon as it was seen: 
they would wonder why they had hated the coast and for a space of a drink they would long to return. 
 
 Scobie stopped his Morris at one of the great loops of the climbing road and looked back. He was just too late. The 
flower had withered upwards from the town; the white stones that marked the edge of the precipitous hill shone like 
candles in the new dusk. 
 
 I wonder if anybody will be there, Ticki. 
 
 Sure to be. Its library night. 
 
 Do hurry up, dear. Its so hot in the car. Ill be glad when the rains come. 
 
 Will you? 
 
 If only they just went on for a month or two and men stopped. 
 
 Scobie made the right reply. He never listened while his wife talked. He worked steadily to the even current of 
sound, but if a note of distress were struck he was aware of it at once. Like a wireless operator with a novel open in 
front of him, he could disregard every signal except the ships symbol and the SOS. He could even work better while 
she talked than when she was silent for so long as his ear-drum registered those tranquil sounds - the gossip of the 
club, comments on the sermons preached by Father Rank, the plot of a new novel, even complaints about the weather 
- he knew that all was well. It was silence that stopped him working - silence in which he might look up and see tears 
waiting in the eyes for his attention. 
 
 Theres a rumour going round that the refrigerators were all sunk last week. 
 
 He considered, while she talked, his line of action with the Portuguese ship that was due in as soon as the boom 
opened in the morning. The fortnightly arrival of a neutral ship provided an outing for the junior officers: a change of 
food, a few glasses of real wine, even the opportunity of buying some small decorative object in the ships store for a 
girl. In return they had only to help the Field Security Police in the examination of passports, the searching of the 
suspects cabins: all the hard and disagreeable work was done by the F.S.P., in the hold, sifting sacks of rice for 
commercial diamonds, or in the heat of the kitchen, plunging the hand into tins of lard, disembowelling the stuffed 
turkeys. To try to find a few diamonds in a liner of fifteen thousand tons was absurd: no malign tyrant in a fairy-story 
had ever set a goose girl a more impossible task, and yet as regularly as the ships called the cypher telegrams came in 
- So and so travelling first class suspected of carrying diamonds. The following members of the ships crew suspected 
... Nobody ever found anything. He thought: its Harriss turn to go on board, and Eraser can go with him. Im too old 
for these excursions. Let the boys have a little fun. 
 
 Last time half the books arrived damaged. 
 
 Did they? 
 
 Judging from the number of cars, he thought, there were not many people at the club yet. He switched off his lights, 
and waited for Louise to move, but she just sat there with a clenched fist showing in the switchboard light Well, dear, 
here we are, he said in the hearty voice that strangers took as a mark of stupidity. Louise said, Do you think they all 
know by this time? 

 
 Know what? 
 
 That youve been passed over. 
 
 My dear, I thought wed finished with all that. Look at all the generals whove been passed over since 1940. They 
wont bother about a deputy-commissioner. 
 
 She said, But they dont like me. 
 
 Poor Louise, he thought, it is terrible not to be liked, and his mind went back to his own experience in that early tour 
when the blacks had slashed his tyres and written insults on his car. Dear, how absurd you are. Ive never known 
anyone with so many friends. He ran unconvincingly on. Mrs Halifax, Mrs Castle ... and then decided it was better 
after all not to list them. 
 
 Theyll all be waiting there, she said, just waiting for me to walk in ... I never wanted to come to the club tonight. 
Lets go home. 
 
 We cant. Heres Mrs Castles car arriving. He tried to laugh. Were trapped, Louise. He saw the fist open and close, 
the damp inefficient powder lying like snow in the ridges of the knuckles. Oh, Ticki, Ticki, she said, you wont leave 
me ever, will you? I havent got any friends - not since the Tom Barlows went away. He lifted the moist hand and 
kissed the palm: he was bound by the pathos of her unattractiveness. 
 
 They walked side by side like a couple of policemen on duty into the lounge where Mrs Halifax was dealing out the 
library books. It is seldom that anything is quite so bad as one fears: there was no reason to believe that they had 
been the subject of conversation. Goody, goody, Mrs Halifax called to them, the new Clemence Danes arrived. She 
was the most inoffensive woman in the station; she had long untidy hair, and one found hairpins inside the library 
books where she had marked her place. Scobie felt it quite safe to leave his wife in her company, for Mrs Halifax had 
no malice and no capacity for gossip; her memory was too bad for anything to lodge there for long: she read the 
same novels over and over again without knowing it. 
 
 Scobie joined a group on the verandah. Fellowes, the sanitary inspector, was talking fiercely to Reith, the Chief 
Assistant Colonial Secretary, and a naval officer called Brigstock. After all this is a club, he was saying, not a 
railway refreshment-room. Ever since Fellowes had snatched his house, Scobie had done his best to like the man - it 
was one of the rules by which he set his life, to be a good loser. But sometimes he found it very hard to like 
Fellowes. The hot evening had not been good to him: the thin damp ginger hair, the small prickly moustache, the 
goosegog eyes, the scarlet cheeks, and the old Lancing tie. Quite, said Brigstock, swaying slightly. 
 
 Whats the trouble? Scobie asked. 
 
 Reith said, He thinks we are not exclusive enough. He spoke with the comfortable irony of a man who had in his 
time been completely exclusive, who had in fact excluded from his solitary table in the Protectorate everyone but 
himself. Fellowes said hotly, There are limits, fingering for confidence the Lancing tie. 
 
 Thas so, said Brigstock. 
 
 I knew it would happen, Fellowes said, as soon as we made every officer in the place an honorary member. Sooner 
or later they would begin to bring in undesirables. Im not a snob, but in a place like this youve got to draw lines - for 
the sake of the women. Its not like it is at home. 
 
 But whats the trouble? Scobie asked. 
 
 Honorary members, Fellowes said, should not be allowed to introduce guests. Only the other day we had a private 
brought in. The army can be democratic if it likes, but not at our expense. Thats another thing, theres not enough 

drink to go round as it is without these fellows. 
 
 Thas a point, Brigstock said, swaying more violently. 
 
 I wish I knew what it was all about, Scobie said. 
 
 The dentist from the 49th has brought in a civilian called Wilson, and this man Wilson wants to join the club. It puts 
everybody in a very embarrassing position. 
 
 Whats wrong with him? 
 
 Hes one of the U.A.C. clerks. He can join the club in Sharp Town. What does he want to come up here for? 
 
 That clubs not functioning, Reith said. 
 
 Well, thats their fault, isnt it? Over the sanitary inspectors shoulder Scobie could see the enormous range of the 
night. The fireflies signalled to and fro along the edge of the hill and the lamp of a patrol-boat moving on the bay 
could be distinguished only by its steadiness. Black-out time, Reith said. Wed better go in. 
 
 Which is Wilson? Scobie asked him. 
 
 Thats him over there. The poor devil looks lonely. Hes only been out a few days. 
 
 Wilson stood uncomfortably alone in a Wilderness of armchairs, pretending to look at a map on the wall. His pale 
face shone and trickled like plaster. He had obviously bought his tropical suit from a shipper who had worked off on 
him an unwanted line: it was oddly striped and liverish in colour. Youre Wilson, arent you? Reith said. I saw your 
name in Col. Sec.s book today. 
 
 Yes, thats me, Wilson said. 
 
 My names Reith. Im Chief Assistant Col. Sec. This is Scobie, the deputy-commissioner. 
 
 I saw you this morning outside the Bedford Hotel, sir, Wilson said. There was something defenceless, it seemed to 
Scobie, in his whole attitude: he stood there waiting for people to be friendly or unfriendly - he didnt seem to expect 
one reaction more than another. He was like a dog. Nobody had yet drawn on his face the lines that make a human 
being. 
 
 Have a drink, Wilson. 
 
 I dont mind if I do, sir. 
 
 Heres my wife, Scobie said. Louise, this is Mr Wilson. 
 
 Ive heard a lot about Mr Wilson already, Louise said stiffly. 
 
 You see, youre famous, Wilson, Scobie said. Youre a man from the town and youve gate-crashed Cape Station 
Club. 
 
 I didnt know I was doing anything wrong. Major Cooper invited me. 
 
 That reminds me, Reith said, I must make an appointment with Cooper. I think Ive got an abscess. He slid away. 
 
 Cooper was telling me about the library, Wilson said, and I thought perhaps ... 

 
 Do you like reading? Louise asked, and Scobie realized with relief that she was going to be kind to the poor devil. It 
was always a bit of a toss-up with Louise. Sometimes she could be the worst snob in the station, and it occurred to 
him with pity that perhaps now she believed she couldnt afford to be snobbish. Any new face that didnt know was 
welcome. 
 
 Well, Wilson said, and fingered desperately at his thin moustache, well... It was as if he were gathering strength for 
a great confession or a great evasion. 
 
 Detective stories? Louise asked. 
 
 I dont mind detective stories, Wilson said uneasily. Some detective stories. 
 
 Personally, Louise said, I like poetry. 
 
 Poetry, Wilson said, yes. He took his fingers reluctantly away from his moustache, and something in his dog-like 
look of gratitude and hope made Scobie think with happiness: have I really found her a friend? 
 
 I like poetry myself, Wilson said. 
 
 Scobie moved away towards the bar: once again a load was lifted from his mind. The evening was not spoilt: she 
would come home happy, go to bed happy. During one night a mood did not change, and happiness would survive 
until he left to go on duty. He could sleep... 
 
 He saw a gathering of his junior officers in the bar. Fraser was there and Tod and a new man from Palestine with the 
extraordinary name of Thimblerigg. Scobie hesitated to go in. They were enjoying themselves, and they would not 
want a senior officer with them. Infernal cheek, Tod was saying. They were probably talking about poor Wilson. 
Then before he could move away he heard Erasers voice. Hes punished for it. Literary Louise has got him. 
Thimblerigg gave a small gurgling laugh, a bubble of gin forming on a plump lip. 
 
 Scobie walked rapidly back into the lounge. He went full tilt into an arm-chair and came to a halt. His vision moved 
jerkily back into focus, but sweat dripped into his right eye. The fingers that wiped it free shook like a drunkards. He 
told himself: Be careful. This isnt a climate for emotion. Its a climate for meanness, malice, snobbery, but anything 
like hate or love drives a man off his head. He remembered Bowers sent home for punching the Governors A.D.C. at 
a party, Makin the missionary who ended in an asylum at Chislehurst. 
 
 Its damned hot, he said to someone who loomed vaguely beside him. 
 
 You look bad, Scobie. Have a drink. 
 
 No, thank you. Got to drive round on inspection. Beside the bookshelves Louise was talking happily to Wilson, but 
he could feel the malice and snobbery of the world padding up like wolves around her. They wouldnt even let her 
enjoy her books, he thought, and his hand began to shake again. Approaching, he heard her say in her kindly Lady 
Bountiful manner, You must come and have dinner with us one day. Ive got a lot of books that might interest you, 
 
 Id love to, Wilson said. Just ring us up and take pot luck. 
 
 Scobie thought: What are those others worth that they have the nerve to sneer at any human being? He knew every 
one of her faults. How often he had winced at her patronage of strangers. He knew each phrase, each intonation that 
alienated others. Sometimes he longed to warn her - dont wear that dress, dont say that again, as a mother might 
teach a daughter, but he had to remain silent, aching with the foreknowledge of her loss of friends. The worst was 
when he detected in his colleagues an extra warmth of friendliness towards himself, as though they pitied him. What 
right have you, he longed to exclaim, to criticize her? This is my doing. This is what Ive made of her. She wasnt 
always like this. 

 
 He came abruptly up to them and said, My dear, Ive got to go round the beats, 
 
 Already? 
 
 Im sorry. 
 
 Ill stay, dear. Mrs Halifax win run me home. 
 
 I wish youd come with me. 
 
 What? Round the beats? Its ages since Ive been. 
 
 Thats why Id like you to come. He lifted her hand and kissed it: it was a challenge. He proclaimed to the whole club 
that he was not to be pitied, that he loved his wife, that they were happy. But nobody that mattered saw - Mrs Halifax 
was busy with the books, Reith had gone long ago, Brigstock was in the bar, Fellowes talked too busily to Mrs Castle 
to notice any dung-nobody saw except Wilson. Louise said, Ill come another time, dear. But Mrs Halifax has just 
promised to run Mr Wilson home by our house. Theres a book I want to tend him. 
 
 Scobie felt an immense gratitude to Wilson. Thats fine, he said, fine. But stay and have a drink till I get back. Ill run 
you home to the Bedford. I shant be late. He put a hand on Wilsons shoulder and prayed silently: Dont let her 
patronize him too far: dont let her be absurd: let her keep this friend at least. I wont say good night, he said, Ill expect 
to see you when I get back. 
 
 Its very kind of you, sir. 
 
 You mustnt sir me. Youre not a policeman, Wilson. Thank your stars for that. 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Scobie was later than he expected. It was the encounter with Yusef that delayed him. Half-way down the hill he 
found Yusef s car stuck by the roadside, with Yusef sleeping quietly in the back: the light from Scobies car lit up the 
large pasty face, the lick of his white hair falling over the forehead, and just touched the beginning of the huge thighs 
in their tight white drill. Yusefs shirt was open at the neck and tendrils of black breast-hair coiled around the buttons. 
 
 Can I help you? Scobie unwillingly asked, and Yusef opened his eyes: the gold teeth fitted by his brother, the 
dentist, flashed instantaneously like a torch. If Fellowes drives by now, what a story, Scobie thought. The deputy-
commissioner meeting Yusef, the store-keeper, clandestinely at night. To give help to a Syrian was only a degree less 
dangerous than to receive help. 
 
 Ah, Major Scobie, Yusef said, a friend in need is a friend indeed. 
 
 Can I do anything for you? 
 
 We have been stranded a half hour, Yusef said. The cars have gone by, and I have thought - when will a Good 
Samaritan appear? 

 
 I havent any spare oil to pour into your wounds, Yusef. 
 
 Ha, ha, Major Scobie. That is very good. But if you would just give me a lift into town... 
 
 Yusef settled himself into the Morris, easing a large thigh against the brakes. 
 
 Your boy had better come in at the back. 
 
 Let him stay here, Yusef said. He will mend the car if he knows it is the only way he can get to bed. He folded his 
large fat hands over his knee and said, You have a very fine car, Major Scobie. You must have paid four hundred 
pounds for if 
 
 One hundred and fifty, Scobie said. 
 
 I would pay you four hundred. 
 
 It isnt for sale, Yusef. Where would I get another? 
 
 Not now, but maybe when you leave. 
 
 Im not leaving. 
 
 Oh, I had heard that you were resigning, Major Scobie. 
 
 No. 
 
 We shopkeepers hear so much - but all of it is unreliable gossip. 
 
 Hows business? 
 
 Oh, not bad. Not good. 
 
 What I hear is that youve made several fortunes since the war. Unreliable gossip of course. 
 
 Well, Major Scobie. you know how it is. My store in Sharp Town, that does fine because I am there to keep an eye 
on it. My store in Macaulay Street - that does not bad because my sister is there. But my store? in Durban Street and 
Bond Street they do badly. I am cheated all the time. Like all my countrymen, I cannot read or write, and everyone 
cheats me. 
 
 Gossip says you can keep all your stocks in all your stores in your head. 
 
 Yusef chuckled and beamed. My memory is not bad. But it keeps me awake at night, Major Scobie. Unless I take a 
lot of whisky I keep thinking about Durban Street and Bond Street and Macaulay Street 
 
 Which shall I drop you at now? 
 
 Oh, now I go home to bed, Major Scobie. My house in Sharp Town, if you please. Wont you come in and have a 
little whisky? 
 
 Sorry. Im on duty, Yusef. 
 
 It is very kind of you, Major Scobie, to give me this lift. Would you let me show my gratitude by sending Mrs 

Scobie a roll of silk? 
 
 Just what I wouldnt like, Yusef. 
 
 Yes, yes, I knew. Its very hard, all this gossip. Just because there are some Syrians like Tallit 
 
 You would like Tallit out of your way, wouldnt you, Yusef? 
 
 Yes, Major Scobie. It would be for my good, but it would also be for your good. 
 
 You sold him some of those fake diamonds last year, didnt you? 
 
 Oh, Major Scobie, you dont really believe Id get the better of anyone like that. Some of the poor Syrians suffered a 
great deal over those diamonds, Major Scobie. It would be a shame to deceive your own people like that. 
 
 They shouldnt have broken the law by buying diamonds. Some of them even had the nerve to complain to the 
police. 
 
 They are very ignorant, poor fellows. 
 
 You werent as ignorant as all that were you, Yusef? 
 
 If you ask me, Major Scobie, it was Tallit. Otherwise, why does he pretend I sold him the diamonds? 
 
 Scobie drove slowly. The rough street was crowded. Thin black bodies weaved like daddy-long-legs in the dimmed 
headlights. How long will the rice shortage go on, Yusef? 
 
 You know as much about that as I do, Major Scobie. 
 
 I know these poor devils cant get rice at the controlled price. 
 
 Ive heard. Major Scobie, that they cant get their share of the free distribution unless they tip the policeman at the 
gate. 
 
 It was quite true. There was a retort in this colony to every accusation. There was always a blacker corruption 
elsewhere to be pointed at. The scandalmongers of the secretariat fulfilled a useful purpose - they kept alive the idea 
that no one was to be trusted. That was better than complacence. Why, he wondered, swerving the car to avoid a 
dead pye-dog, do I love this place so much? Is it because here human nature hasnt had time to disguise itself? 
Nobody here could ever talk about a heaven on earth. Heaven remained rigidly in its proper place on the other side of 
death, and on this side flourished the injustices, the cruelties, the meanness that elsewhere people so cleverly hushed 
up. Here you could love human beings nearly as God loved them, knowing the worst: you didnt love a pose, a pretty 
dress, a sentiment artfully assumed. He felt a sudden affection for Yusef. He said, Two wrongs dont make a right. 
One day, Yusef, youll find my foot under your fat arse. 
 
 Maybe, Major Scobie, or maybe well be friends together. That is what I should like more than anything in the world. 
 
 They drew up outside the Sharp Town house and Yusef s steward ran out with a torch to light him in. Major Scobie, 
Yusef said, it would give me such pleasure to give you a glass of whisky. I think I could help you a lot. I am very 
patriotic, Major Scobie. 
 
 Thats why you are hoarding your cottons against a Vichy invasion, isnt it? They will be worth more than English 
pounds. 
 

 TheEsperanccedil; a is in tomorrow, isnt she? 
 
 Probably. 
 
 What a waste of time it is searching a big ship like that for diamonds. Unless you know beforehand exactly where 
they are. You know that when the ship returns to Angola a seaman reports where you looked. You will sift all the 
sugar in the hold. You will search the lard in the kitchens because someone once told Captain Druce that a diamond 
can be heated and dropped in the middle of a tin of lard. Of course the cabins and the ventilators and the lockers. 
Tubes of toothpaste. Do you think one day you will find one little diamond? 
 
 No. 
 
 I dont either. 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 A hurricane-lamp burned at each corner of the wooden pyramids of crates. Across the black slow water he could just 
make out the naval depot ship, a disused liner, where she lay, so it was believed, on a reef of empty whisky bottles. 
He stood quietly for a while breathing in the heavy smell of the sea. Within half a mile of him a whole convoy lay at 
anchor, but all he could detect were the long shadow of the depot ship and a scatter of small red lights as though a 
street were up: he could hear nothing from the water but the water itself, slapping against the jetties. The magic of 
this place never failed him: here he kept his foothold on the very edge of a strange continent. 
 
 Somewhere in the darkness two rats scuffled. These waterside rats were the size of rabbits. The natives called them 
pigs and ate them roasted; the name helped to distinguish them from the wharf rats, who were a human breed. 
Walking along a light railway Scobie made in the direction of the markets. At the corner of a warehouse he came on 
two policemen. 
 
 Anything to report? 
 
 No, sah. 
 
 Been along this way? 
 
 Oh yes, sah, we just come from there. 
 
 He knew that they were lying: they would never go alone to that end of the wharf, the playground of the human rats, 
unless they had a white officer to guard them. The rats were cowards but dangerous - boys of sixteen or so, armed 
with razors or bits of broken bottle, they swarmed in groups around the warehouses, pilfering if they found an easily-
opened case, settling like flies around any drunken sailor who stumbled their way, occasionally slashing a policeman 
who had made himself unpopular with one of their innumerable relatives. Gates couldnt keep them off the wharf: 
they swam round from Kru Town or the fishing beaches. 
 
 Come on, Scobie said, well have another look. 
 
 With weary patience the policemen trailed behind him, half a mile one way, half a mile the other. Only the pigs 
moved on the wharf, and the water slapped. One of the policemen said self-righteously, Quiet night, sah. They shone 

their torches with self-conscious assiduity from one side to another, lighting the abandoned chassis of a car, an empty 
truck, the corner of a tarpaulin, a bottle standing at the corner of a warehouse with palm leaves stuffed in for a cork. 
Scobie said, Whats that? One of his official nightmares was an incendiary bomb: it was so easy to prepare: every day 
men from Vichy territory came into town with smuggled cattle - they were encouraged to come in for the sake of the 
meat supply. On this side of the border native saboteurs were being trained in case of invasion : why not on the other 
side? 
 
 Let me see it, he said, but neither of the policemen moved to touch it. 
 
 Only native medicine, sah, one of them said with a skin-deep sneer. 
 
 Scobie picked the bottle up. It was a dimpled Haig, and when he drew out the palm leaves the stench of dogs pizzle 
and nameless decay blew out like a gas escape. A nerve in his head beat with sudden irritation. For no reason at all 
he remembered Frasers flushed face and Thimbleriggs giggle. The stench from the bottle moved him with nausea, 
and he felt his fingers polluted by the palm leaves. He threw the bottle over the wharf, and the hungry mouth of the 
water received it with a single belch, but the contents were scattered on the air, and the whole windless place smelt 
sour and ammoniac. The policemen were silent: Scobie was aware of their mute disapproval. He should have left the 
bottle where it stood: it had been placed there for one purpose, directed at one person, but now that its contents had 
been released, it was as if the evil thought were left to wander blindly through the air, to settle maybe on the 
innocent. 
 
 Good night, Scobie said and turned abruptly on his heel. He had not gone twenty yards before he heard their boots 
scuffling rapidly away from the dangerous area. 
 
 Scobie drove up to the police station by way of Pitt Street. Outside the brothel on the left-hand side the girls were 
sitting along the pavement taking a bit of air. Within the police station behind the black-out blinds the scent of a 
monkey house thickened for the night. The sergeant on duty took his legs off the table in the charge-room and stood 
to attention. 
 
 Anything to report? 
 
 Five drunk and disorderly, sah. I lock them in the big cell. 
 
 Anything else? 
 
 Two Frenchmen, sah, with no passes. 
 
 Black? 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 Where were they found? 
 
 In Pitt Street, sah. 
 
 Ill see them in the morning. What about the launch? Is it running all right? I shall want to go out to 
theEsperanccedil; a . 
 
 Its broken, sah. Mr Fraser he try to mend it, sah, but it humbug all the time. 
 
 What time does Mr Fraser come on duty? 
 
 Seven, sah. 
 

 Tell him I shant want him to go out to theEsperanccedil; a . Im going out myself. If the launch isnt ready, Ill go with 
the F.S.P. 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 Climbing again into his car, pushing at the sluggish starter, Scobie thought that a man was surely entitled to that 
much revenge. Revenge was good for the character: out of revenge grew forgiveness. He began to whistle, driving 
back through Km Town. He was almost happy: he only needed to be quite certain that nothing had happened at the 
club after he left, that at this moment, 10.55 p.m., Louise was at ease, content He could face the next hour when the 
next hour arrived. 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Before he went indoors he walked round to the seaward side of the house to check the black-out. He could hear the 
murmur of Louises voice inside: she was probably reading poetry. He thought: by God, what right has that young 
fool Fraser to despise her for that? and then his anger moved away again, like a shabby man, when he thought of 
Frasers disappointment in the morning - no Portuguese visit, no present for his best girl, only the hot humdrum office 
day. Feeling for the handle of the back door to avoid flashing his torch, he tore his right hand on a splinter. He came 
into the lighted room and saw that his hand was dripping with blood. Oh, darling, Louise said, what have you done? 
and covered her face. She couldnt bear the sight of blood. Can I help you, sir? Wilson asked. He tried to rise, but he 
was sitting in a low chair at Louises feet and his knees were piled with books. 
 
 Its all right, Scobie said. Its only a scratch. I can see to it myself. Just tell Ali to bring a bottle of water. Half-way 
upstairs he heard the voice resume. Louise said, A lovely poem about a pylon. Scobie walked into the bathroom, 
disturbing a rat that had been couched on the cool rim of the bath, like a cat on a gravestone. 
 
 Scobie sat down on the edge of the bath and let his hand drip into the lavatory pail among the wood shavings. Just as 
in his own office the sense of home surrounded him. Louises ingenuity had been able to do little with this room: the 
bath of scratched enamel with a single tap which always ceased to work before the end of the dry season: the tin 
bucket under the lavatory seat emptied once a day: the fixed basin with another useless tap: bare floorboards: drab 
green black-out curtains. The only improvements Louise had been able to impose were the cork that by the bath, the 
bright white medicine cabinet. 
 
 The rest of the room was all his own. It was like a relic of his youth carried from house to house. It had been like 
this years ago in his first house before he married. This was the room in which he had always been alone. 
 
 Ali came in, his pink soles flapping on the floorboards, carrying a bottle of water from the filter. The back door 
humbug me, Scobie explained. He held his hand out over the washbasin, while Ali poured the water over the wound. 
The boy made gentle clucking sounds of commiseration: his hands were as gentle as a girls. When Scobie said 
impatiently, Thats enough, Ali paid him no attention. Too much dirt, he said. 
 
 Now iodine. The smallest scratch in this country turned green if it were neglected for an hour. Again, he said, pour it 
over, wincing at the sting. Down below out of the swing of voices the word beauty detached itself and sank back into 
the trough. Now the Elastoplast 
 
 No, Ali said, no. Bandage better. 
 

 All right. Bandage then. Yean ago he had taught Ali to bandage: now he could tie one as expertly as a doctor. 
 
 Good night, Ali. Go to bed. I shant want you again. 
 
 Missus want drinks. 
 
 No. Ill attend to the drinks. You can go to bed. Alone he sat down again on the edge of the bath. The wound had 
jarred him a little and anyway he was unwilling to join the two downstairs, for his presence would embarrass Wilson. 
A man couldnt listen to a woman reading poetry in the presence of an outsider. I had rather be a kitten and cry mew 
... but that wasnt really his attitude. He did not despise: he just couldnt understand such bare relations of intimate 
feeling. And besides he was happy here, sitting where the rat had sat, in his own world. He began to think of 
theEsperanccedil; a and of the next days work. 
 
 Darling, Louise called up the stairs, are you all right? Can you drive Mr Wilson home? 
 
 I can walk, Mrs Scobie. 
 
 Nonsense. 
 
 Yes, really. 
 
 Coming, Scobie called. Of course Ill drive you back. When he joined them Louise took the bandaged hand tenderly 
in hers. Oh the poor hand, she said. Does it hurt? She was not afraid of the clean white bandage: it was like a patient 
in a hospital with the sheets drawn tidily up to the chin. One could bring grapes and never know the details of the 
scalpel wound out of sight. She put her lips to the bandage and left a little smear of orange lipstick. 
 
 Its quite all right, Scobie said. 
 
 Really, sir. I can walk. 
 
 Of course you wont walk. Come along, get in. 
 
 The light from the dashboard lit up a patch of Wilsons extraordinary suit. He leant out of the car and cried, Good 
night, Mrs Scobie. Its been lovely. I cant thank you enough. The words vibrated with sincerity: it gave them the 
sound of a foreign language - the sound of English spoken in England. Here intonations changed in the course of a 
few months, became high-pitched and insincere, or flat and guarded. You could tell that Wilson was fresh from 
home. 
 
 You must come again soon, Scobie said, as they drove down the Burnside road towards the Bedford Hotel, 
remembering Louises happy face. 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 The smart of his wounded hand woke Scobie at two in the morning. He lay coiled like a watch-spring on the outside 
of the bed, trying to keep his body away from Louises: wherever they touched - if it were only a finger lying against 
a finger -sweat started. Even when they were separated the heat trembled between them. The moonlight lay on the 
dressing-table like coolness and lit the bottles of lotion, the little pots of cream, the edge of a photograph frame. At 

once he began to listen for Louises breathing. 
 
 It came irregularly in jerks. She was awake. He put his hand up and touched the hot moist hair: she lay stiffly, as 
though she were guarding a secret. Sick at heart, knowing what he would find, he moved his fingers down until they 
touched her lids. She was crying. He felt an enormous tiredness, bracing himself to comfort her. Darling, he said, I 
love you. It was how he always began. Comfort, like the act of sex, developed a routine. 
 
 I know, she said, I know. It was how she always answered. He blamed himself for being heartless because the idea 
occurred to him that it was two oclock: this might go on for hours, and at six the days work began. He moved the 
hair away from her forehead and said, The rains will soon be here. Youll feel better then. 
 
 I feel all right, she said and began to sob. 
 
 What is it, darling? Tell me. He swallowed. Tell Ticki. He hated the name she had given him, but it always worked. 
She said, Oh Ticki, Ticki. I cant go on. 
 
 I thought you were happy tonight 
 
 I was - but think of being happy because a U.A.C. clerk was nice to me. Ticki, why wont they like me? 
 
 Dont be silly, darling. Its just the heat: it makes you fancy things. They all like you. 
 
 Only Wilson, she repeated with despair and shame and began to sob again. 
 
 Wilsons all right. 
 
 They wont have him at the club. He gate-crashed with the dentist Theyll be laughing about him and me. Oh Ticki, 
Ticki, please let me go away and begin again. 
 
 Of course, darling, he said, of course, staring out through the net and through the window to the quiet flat infested 
sea. Where to? 
 
 I could go to South Africa and wait until you have leave. Ticki, youll be retiring soon. Ill get a home ready for you, 
Ticki. 
 
 He flinched a little away from her, and then hurriedly in case she had noticed, lifted her damp hand and kissed the 
palm. It will cost a lot, darling. The thought of retirement set his nerves twitching and straining: he always prayed 
that death would come first He had prepared his life insurance in that hope: it was payable only on death. He thought 
of a home, a permanent home: the gay artistic curtains, the bookshelves full of Louises books, a pretty tiled 
bathroom, no office anywhere - a home for two until death, no change any more before eternity settled in. 
 
 Ticki, I cant bear it any longer here. 
 
 Ill have to figure it out, darling. 
 
 Ethel Mayburys in South Africa, and the Collinses. Weve got friends in South Africa. 
 
 Prices are high. 
 
 You could drop some of your silly old life insurances, Ticki. And, Ticki, you could economize here without me. 
You could have your meals at the mess and do without the cook. 
 
 He doesnt cost much. 

 
 Every little helps, Ticki. 
 
 Id miss you, he said. 
 
 No, Ticki, you wouldnt, she said, and surprised him by the range of her sad spasmodic understanding. After all, she 
said, theres nobody to save for. 
 
 He said gently, Ill try and work something out You know if its possible Id do anything for you - anything. 
 
 This isnt just two in the morning comfort, Ticki, is it? You will do something? 
 
 Yes, dear. Ill manage somehow. He was surprised how quickly she went to sleep: she was like a tired carrier who 
has slipped his load. She was asleep before he had finished his sentence, clutching one of his fingers like a child, 
breathing as easily. The load lay beside him now, and he prepared to lift it. 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 AT eight in the morning on his way to the jetty Scobie called at the bank. The managers office was shaded and cool: 
a glass of iced water stood on top of a safe. Good morning, Robinson. 
 
 Robinson was tall and hollow-chested and bitter because he hadnt been posted to Nigeria. He said, When will this 
filthy weather break? The rains are late. 
 
 Theyve started in the Protectorate. 
 
 In Nigeria, Robinson said, one always knew where one was. What can I do for you, Scobie? 
 
 Do you mind if I sit down? 
 
 Of course. I never sit down before ten myself. Standing up keeps the digestion in order. He rambled restlessly across 
his office on legs like stilts: he took a sip of the iced water with distaste as though it were medicine. On his desk 
Scobie saw a book calledDiseases of the Urinary Tract open at a coloured illustration. What can I do for you? 
Robinson repeated. 
 
 Give me two hundred and fifty pounds, Scobie said with a nervous attempt at jocularity. 
 
 You people always think a banks made of money, Robinson mechanically jested. How much do you really want? 
 
 Three fifty. 
 
 Whats your balance at the moment? 
 
 I think about thirty pounds. Its the end of the month. 
 
 Wed better check up on that. He called a clerk and while they waited Robinson paced the little room - six paces to 
the wall and round again. There and back a hundred and seventy-six times, he said, makes a mile. I try and put in 
three miles before lunch. It keeps one healthy. In Nigeria I used to walk a mile and a half to breakfast at the club, and 
then a mile and a half back to the office. Nowhere fit to walk here, he said, pivoting on the carpet A clerk, laid a slip 
of paper on the desk. Robinson held it close to his eyes, as though he wanted to smell it. Twenty-eight pounds fifteen 
and sevenpence, he said. 
 
 I want to send my wife to South Africa. 

 
 Oh yes. Yes. 
 
 I daresay, Scobie said, I might do it on a bit less. I shant be able to allow her very much on my salary though. 
 
 I really dont see how... 
 
 I thought perhaps I could get an overdraft, he said vaguely. Lots of people have them, dont they? Do you know I 
believe I only had one once - for a few weeks - for about fifteen pounds. I didnt like it. It scared me. I always felt I 
owed the bank manager the money. 
 
 The trouble is, Scobie, Robinson said, weve had orders to be very strict about overdrafts. Its the war, you know, 
Theres one valuable security nobody can offer now, his life. 
 
 Yes, I see that of course. But my lifes pretty good and Im not stirring from here. No submarines for me. And the 
jobs secure, Robinson, he went on with the same ineffectual at tempt at flippancy. 
 
 The Commissioners retiring, isnt he? Robinson said, reaching the safe at the end of the room and turning. 
 
 Yes, but Im not 
 
 Im glad to hear that Scobie. Thereve been rumours .. . 
 
 I suppose Ill have to retire one day, but thats a long way off. Id much rather die in my boots. Theres always my life 
insurance policy, Robinson. What about that for security? 
 
 You know you dropped one insurance three years ago. 
 
 That was the year Louise went home for an operation. 
 
 I dont think the paid-up value of the other two amounts to much, Scobie. 
 
 Still they protect you in case of death, dont they? 
 
 If you go on paying the premiums. We havent any guarantee, you know. 
 
 Of course not, Scobie said, I see that. 
 
 Im very sorry, Scobie. This isnt personal. Its the policy of the bank. If youd wanted fifty pounds, Id have lent it you 
myself. 
 
 Forget it, Robinson, Scobie said. Its not important. He gave his embarrassed laugh. The boys at the Secretariat 
would say I can always pick it up in bribes. Hows Molly? 
 
 Shes very well, thank you. Wish I were the same. 
 
 You read too many of those medical books, Robinson. 
 
 A mans got to know whats wrong with him. Going to be at the club tonight? 
 
 I dont think so. Louise is tired. You know how it is before the rains. Sorry to have kept you, Robinson. I must be 
getting along to the wharf. 
 

 He walked rapidly down-hill from the bank with his head bent He felt as though he had been detected in a mean 
action - he had asked for money and had been refused. Louise had deserved better of him. It seemed to him that he 
must have failed in some way in manhood. 
 
 Druce had come out himself to theEsperanccedil; a with his squad of F.S.P. men. At the gangway a steward awaited 
them with an invitation to join the captain for drinks in his cabin. The officer in charge of the naval guard was 
already there before them. This was a regular part of the fortnightly routine - the establishment of friendly relations. 
By accepting his hospitality they tried to ease down for the neutral the bitter pill of search; below the bridge the 
search party would proceed smoothly without them. While the first-class passengers had their passports examined, 
their cabins would be ransacked by a squad of the F.S.P. Already others were going through the hold - the dreary 
hopeless business of sifting rice. What had Yusef said, Have you ever found one little diamond? Do you think you 
ever will? In a few minutes when relations had become sufficiently smooth after the drinks Scobie would have the 
unpleasant task of searching the captains own cabin. The stiff disjointed conversation was carried on mainly by the 
naval lieutenant. 
 
 The captain wiped his fat yellow face and said, Of course for the English I feel in the heart an enormous admiration. 
 
 We dont like doing it, you know, the lieutenant said. Hard luck being a neutral. 
 
 My heart, the Portuguese captain said, is full of admiration for your great struggle. There is no room for resentment. 
Some of my people feel resentment. Me none. The face streamed with sweat, and the eyeballs were contused. The 
man kept on speaking of his heart, but it seemed to Scobie that a long deep surgical operation would have been 
required to find it. 
 
 Very good of you, the lieutenant said. Appreciate your attitude. 
 
 Another glass of port, gentlemen? 
 
 Dont mind if I do. Nothing like this on shore you know. You, Scobie? 
 
 No, thanks. 
 
 I hope you wont find it necessary to keep us here tonight, major? 
 
 Scobie said, I dont think theres any possibility of your getting away before midday tomorrow. 
 
 Will do our best, of course, the lieutenant said 
 
 On my honour, gentlemen, my hand upon my heart, you will find no bad hats among my passengers. And the crew - 
I know them all. 
 
 Druce said, Its a formality, captain, which we have to go through. 
 
 Have a cigar, the captain said. Throw away that cigarette. Here is a very special box. 
 
 Druce lit the cigar, which began to spark and crackle. The captain giggled. Only my joke, gentlemen. Quite 
harmless. I keep the box for my friends. The English have a wonderful sense of humour. I know you will not be 
angry. A German yes, an Englishman no. It is quite cricket, eh? 
 
 Very funny, Druce said sourly, laying the cigar down on the ash-tray the captain held out to him. The ash-tray, 
presumably set off by the captains finger, began to play a little tinkly tune. Druce jerked again: he was overdue for 
leave and his nerves were unsteady. The captain smiled and sweated. Swiss, he said. A wonderful people. Neutral 
too. 
 

 One of the Field Security men came in and gave Druce a note. He passed it to Scobie to read.Steward, who is under 
notice of dismissal, says the captain has letters concealed in his bathroom. 
 
 Druce said, I think Id better go and make them hustle down below. Coming, Evans? Many thanks for the port, 
captain. 
 
 Scobie was left alone with the captain. This was the part of the job he always hated. These men were not criminals: 
they were merely breaking regulations enforced on the shipping companies by the navicert system. You never knew 
in a search what you would find. A mans bedroom was his private life. Prying in drawers you came on humiliations; 
little petty vices were tucked out of sight like a soiled handkerchief. Under a pile of linen you might come on a grief 
he was trying to forget. Scobie said gently, Im afraid, captain, Ill have to look around. You know its a formality. 
 
 You must do your duty, major, the Portuguese said. 
 
 Scobie went quickly and neatly through the cabin: he never moved a thing without replacing it exactly: he was like a 
careful housewife. The captain stood with his back to Scobie looking out on to the bridge; it was as if he preferred 
not to embarrass his guest in the odious task. Scobie came to an end, closing the box of French letters and putting 
them carefully back in the top drawer of the locker with the handkerchiefs, the gaudy ties and the little bundle of 
dirty handkerchiefs. All finished? the captain asked politely, turning his head. 
 
 That door, Scobie said, what would be through there? 
 
 That is only the bathroom, the w.c. 
 
 I think Id better take a look. 
 
 Of course, major, but there is not much cover there to conceal anything. 
 
 If you dont mind... 
 
 Of course not. It is your duty. 
 
 The bathroom was bare and extraordinarily dirty. The bath was rimmed with dry grey soap, and the tiles slopped 
under his feet. The problem was to find the right place quickly. He couldnt linger here without disclosing the fact 
that he had special information. The search had got to have all the appearances of formality - neither too lax nor too 
thorough. This wont take long, he said cheerily and caught sight of the fat calm face in the shaving-mirror. The 
information, of course, might be false, given by the steward simply in order to cause trouble. 
 
 Scobie opened the medicine-cabinet and went rapidly through the contents: unscrewing the toothpaste, opening the 
razor box, dipping his finger into the shaving-cream. He did not expect to find anything there. But the search gave 
him time to think. He went next to the taps, turned the water on, felt up each funnel with his finger. The floor 
engaged his attention:, there were no possibilities of concealment there. The porthole: he examined the big screws 
and swung the inner mask to and fro. Every time he turned he caught sight of the captains face in the mirror, calm, 
patient, complacent. It said cold, cold to him all the while, as in a childrens game. 
 
 Finally, the lavatory: he lifted up the wooden seat: nothing had been laid between the porcelain and the wood. He 
put his hand on the lavatory chain, and in the mirror became aware for the first time of a tension: the brown eyes 
were no longer on his face, they were fixed on something else, and following that gaze home, he saw his own hand 
tighten on the chain. 
 
 Is the cistern empty of water? he wondered, and pulled. Gurgling and pounding in the pipes, the water flushed down. 
He turned away and the Portuguese said with a smugness he was unable to conceal, You see, major. And at that 
moment Scobie did see. Im becoming careless, he thought. He lifted the cap of the cistern. Fixed in the cap with 
adhesive tape and dear of the water lay a letter. 

 
 He looked at the address - a Frau Groener in Friedrichstrasse, Leipzig. He repeated, Im sorry, captain, and because 
the man didnt answer, he looked up and saw the tears beginning to pursue the sweat down the hot fat cheeks. Ill have 
to take it away, Scobie said, and report... 
 
 Oh, this war, the captain burst out, how I hate this war. 
 
 Weve got cause to hate it too, you know, Scobie said. 
 
 A man is ruined because he writes to his daughter, 
 
 Daughter? 
 
 Yes. She is Frau Groener. Open it and read. You will see. 
 
 I cant do that. I must leave it to the censorship. Why didnt you wait to write till you got to Lisbon, captain? 
 
 The man had lowered his bulk on to the edge of the bath as though it were a heavy sack his shoulders could no 
longer bear. He kept on wiping his eyes with the back of his hand like a child - an unattractive child, the fat boy of 
the school Against the beautiful and the clever and the successful, one can wage a pitiless war, but not against the 
unattractive: then the millstone weighs on the breast. Scobie knew he should have taken the letter and gone; he could 
do no good with his sympathy. 
 
 The captain moaned, If you had a daughter youd understand. You havent got one, he accused, as though there were a 
crime in sterility. 
 
 No. 
 
 She is anxious about me. She loves me, he said, raising his tear-drenched face as though he must drive the unlikely 
statement home. She loves me, he repeated mournfully. 
 
 But why not write from Lisbon? Scobie asked again. Why run this risk? 
 
 I am alone. I have no wife, the captain said. One cannot always wait to speak. And in Lisbon - you know how things 
go - friends, wine. I have a little woman there too who is jealous even of my daughter. There are rows, the time 
passes. In a week I must be off again. It was always so easy before this voyage. 
 
 Scobie believed him. The story was sufficiently irrational to be true. Even in war-time one must sometimes exercise 
the faculty of belief if it is not to atrophy. He said, Im sorry. Theres nothing I can do about it. Perhaps nothing will 
happen. 
 
 Your authorities, the captain said, will blacklist me. You know what that means. The consul will not give a navicert 
to any ship with me as captain. I shall starve on shore. 
 
 There are so many slips, Scobie said, in these matters. Files get mislaid. You may hear no more about it. 
 
 I shall pray, the man said without hope. 
 
 Why not? Scobie said. 
 
 You are an Englishman. You wouldnt believe in prayer. 
 
 Im a Catholic, too, Scobie said. 

 
 The fat face looked quickly up at him. A Catholic? he exclaimed with hope. For the first time he began to plead. He 
was like a man who meets a fellow countryman in a strange continent. He began to talk rapidly of his daughter in 
Leipzig; he produced a battered pocket-book and a yellowing snap-shot of a stout young Portuguese woman as 
graceless as himself. The little bathroom was stiflingly hot and the captain repeated again and again. You will 
understand. He had discovered suddenly how much they had in common: the plaster statues with the swords in the 
bleeding heart: the whisper behind the confessional curtains: the holy coats and the liquefaction of blood: the dark 
side chapels and the intricate movements, and somewhere behind it all the love of God. And in Lisbon, he said, she 
will be waiting, she will take me home, she will take away my trousers so that I cannot go out alone; every day it will 
be drink and quarrels until we go to bed. You will under-stand. I cannot write to my daughter from Lisbon. She loves 
me so much and she waits. He shifted his fat thigh and said, The pureness of that love, and wept. They had in 
common all the wide region of repentance and longing. 
 
 Their kinship gave the captain courage to try another angle. He said, I am a poor man, but I have enough money to 
spare ... He would never have attempted to bribe an Englishman: it was the most sincere compliment he could pay to 
their common religion. 
 
 Im sorry, Scobie said. 
 
 I have English pounds. I will give you twenty English pounds... fifty. He implored. A hundred... that is all I have 
saved. 
 
 It cant be done, Scobie said. He put the letter quickly in his pocket and turned away. The last time he saw the captain 
as he looked back from the door of the cabin, he was beating his head against the cistern, the tears catching in the 
folds of his cheeks. As he went down to join Druce in the saloon he could feel the millstone weighing on his breast. 
How I hate this war, he thought, in the very words the captain had used. 
 
 The letter to the daughter in Leipzig, and a small bundle of correspondence found in the kitchens, was the sole result 
of eight hours search by fifteen men. It could be counted an average day. When Scobie reached the police station he 
looked in to see the Commissioner, but his office was empty, so he sat down in his own room under the handcuffs 
and began to write his report A special search was made of the cabins and effects of the passengers named in your 
telegrams . -.. with no result The letter to the daughter in Leipzig lay on the desk beside him. Outside it was dark. 
The smell of the cells seeped in under the door, and in the next office Fraser was singing to him self the same tune he 
had sung every evening since his last leave: 
 
 
 
 What will we care for 
 
 The why and the wherefore, 
 
 When you and I 
 
 Are pushing up the daisies? 
 
 
 
 It seemed to Scobie that life was immeasurably long. Couldnt the test of man have been carried out in fewer years? 
Couldnt we have committed our first major sin at seven, have mined ourselves for love or hate at ten, have clutched 
at redemption on a fifteen-year-old death-bed? He wrote:A steward who had been dismissed for incompetence 
reported that the captain had correspondence concealed in his bathroom. I made a search and found the enclosed 
letter addressed to Frau Groener in Leipzig concealed in the lid of the lavatory cistern. An instruction on this hiding-
place might well be circulated, as it has not been encountered before at this station. The letter was fixed by tape 
above the water-line ... 

 
 He sat there staring at the paper, his brain confused with the conflict that had really been decided hours ago when 
Druce said to him in the saloon, Anything? and he had shrugged his shoulders in a gesture he left Druce to interpret. 
Had he ever intended it to mean: The usual private correspondence we are always finding. Druce had taken it for No. 
Scobie put his hand against his forehead and shivered: the sweat seeped between his fingers, and he thought, Am I in 
for a touch of fever? Perhaps it was because his temperature had risen that it seemed to him he was on the verge of a 
new life. One felt this way before a proposal of marriage or a first crime. 
 
 Scobie took the letter and opened it. The act was irrevocable, for no one in this city had the right to open clandestine 
mail. A microphotograph might be concealed in the gum of an envelope. Even a simple word code would be beyond 
him; his knowledge of Portuguese would take him no farther than the most surface meaning. Every letter found - 
however obviously innocent - must be sent to the London censors unopened. Scobie against the strictest orders was 
exercising his own imperfect judgement. He thought to himself: If the letter is suspicious, I will send my report. I can 
explain the torn envelope. The captain insisted on opening the letter to show me the contents. But if he wrote that, he 
would be unjustly blackening the case against the captain, for what better way could he have found for destroying a 
microphotograph? There must be some lie to be told, Scobie thought, but he was unaccustomed to lies. With the 
letter in his hand, held carefully over the white blotting-pad, so that he could detect anything that might fall from 
between the leaves, he decided that he would write a full report on all the circumstances, including his own act. 
 
 Dear little money spider,the letter began,your father who loves you more than anything upon earth will try to send 
you a little more money this time. I know how hard things are for you, and my heart bleeds. Little money spider, if 
only I could feel your fingers running across my cheek. How is it that a great fat father like I am should have so tiny 
and beautiful a daughter. Now little money spider, I will tell you everything that has happened to me. We left Lobito 
a week ago after only four days in port. I stayed one night with Sentilde;or Aranjuez and I drank more wine than was 
good for me, but all my talk was of you. I was good all the time I was in port because I had promised my little money 
spider, and I went to Confession and Communion, so that if anything should happen to me on the way to Lisbon - for 
who knows in these terrible days? - I should not have to live my eternity away from my little spider. Since we left 
Lobito we have had good weather. Even the passengers are not sea-sick. Tomorrow night, because Africa will be at 
last behind us, we shall have a ships concert, and I shall perform on my whistle. All the time I perform I shall 
remember the days when my little money spider sat on my knee and listened. My dear, I am growing old, and after 
every voyage I am fatter: I am not a good man, and sometimes I fear that my soul in all this hulk of flesh is no larger 
than a pea. You do not know how easy it is for a man like me to commit the unforgivable despair. Then I think of my 
daughter. There was just enough good in me once for you to be fashioned. A wife shares too much of a mans sin for 
perfect love. But a daughter may save him at the last. Pray for me, little spider. Your father who loves you more than 
life. 
 
 Mais que a vida.Scobie felt no doubt at all of the sincerity of this letter. This was not written to conceal a photograph 
of the Cape Town defences or a microphotograph report on troop movements at Durban. It should, he knew, be 
tested for secret ink, examined under a microscope, and the inner lining of the envelope exposed. Nothing should be 
left to chance with a clandestine letter. But he had committed himself to a belief. He tore the letter up, and his own 
report with it, and carried the scraps out to the incinerator in the yard - a petrol-tin standing upon two bricks with its 
sides punctured to make a draught. As he struck a match to light the papers, Fraser joined him in the yard.What will 
we care for the why and the wherefore? On the top of the scraps lay unmistakably half a foreign envelope: one could 
even read part of the address -Friedrichstrasse. He quickly held the match to the uppermost scrap as Fraser crossed 
the yard, striding with unbearable youth. The scrap went up in flame, and in the heat of the fire another scrap 
uncurled the name of Groener. Fraser said cheerfully, Burning the evidence? and looked down into the tin. The name 
had blackened: there was nothing there surely that Fraser could see - except a brown triangle of envelope that seemed 
to Scobie obviously foreign. He ground it out of existence with a stick and looked up at Fraser to see whether he 
could detect any surprise or suspicion. There was nothing to be read in the vacuous face, blank as a school notice-
board out of term. Only his own heart-beats told him he was guilty -that he had joined the ranks of the corrupt police 
officers -Bailey who had kept a safe deposit in another city, Crayshaw who had been found with diamonds, Boyston 
against whom nothing had been definitely proved and who had been invalided out. They had been corrupted by 
money, and he had been corrupted by sentiment. Sentiment was the more dangerous, because you couldnt name its 
price. A man open to bribes was to be relied upon below a certain figure, but sentiment might uncoil in the heart at a 
name, a photograph, even a smell remembered. 
 

 What sort of day, sir? Fraser asked, staring at the small pile of ash. Perhaps he was thinking that it should have been 
his day. 
 
 The usual kind of a day, Scobie said. 
 
 How about the captain? Fraser asked, looking down into the petrol-tin, beginning to hum again his languid tune. 
 
 The captain? Scobie said. 
 
 Oh, Druce told me some fellow informed on him. 
 
 Just the usual thing, Scobie said. A dismissed steward with a grudge. Didnt Druce tell you we found nothing? 
 
 No, Fraser said, he didnt seem to be sure. Good night, sir. I must be pushing off to the mess. 
 
 Thimblerigg on duty? 
 
 Yes, sir. 
 
 Scobie watched him go. The back was as vacuous as the face: one could read nothing there. Scobie thought, what a 
fool I have been. What a fool. He owed his duty to Louise, not to a fat sentimental Portuguese skipper who had 
broken the rules of his own company for the sake of a daughter equally unattractive. That had been the turning point, 
the daughter. And now, Scobie thought, I must return home: I shall put the car away in the garage, and Ali will come 
forward with his torch to light me to the door. She will be sitting there between two draughts for coolness, and I shall 
read on her face the story of what she has been thinking all day. She will have been hoping that everything is fixed, 
that I shall say, Ive put your name down at the agents for South Africa. but shell be afraid that nothing so good as 
that will ever happen to us. Shell wait for me to speak, and I shall try to talk about anything under the sun to 
postpone seeing her misery (it would be waiting at the corners of her mouth to take possession of her whole face). He 
knew exactly how things would go: it had happened so often before. He rehearsed every word, going back into his 
office, locking his desk, going down to his car. People talk about the courage of condemned men walking to the 
place of execution: sometimes it needs as much courage to walk with any kind of bearing towards another persons 
habitual misery. He forgot Fraser: he forgot everything but the scene ahead: I shall go in and say, Good evening, 
sweet heart, and shell say, Good evening, darling. What kind of a day? and Ill talk and talk, but all the time I shall 
know Im coming nearer to the moment when I shall say, What about you, darling? and let the misery in. 
 
 What about you, darling? He turned quickly away from her and began to fix two more pink gins. There was a tacit 
understanding between them that liquor helped; growing more miserable with every glass one hoped for the moment 
of relief. 
 
 You dont really want to know about me. 
 
 Of course I do, darling. What sort of a day have you had? 
 
 Ticki, why are you such a coward? Why dont you tell me its all off? 
 
 All off? 
 
 You know what I mean - the passage. Youve been talking and talking since you came in about theEsperanccedil; a . 
Theres a Portuguese ship in once a fortnight. You dont talk that way every time. Im not a child, Ticki. Why dont you 
say straight out - you cant go? 
 
 He grinned miserably at his glass, twisting it round and round to let the angostura cling along the curve. He said, 
That wouldnt be true. Ill find some way. Reluctantly he had recourse to the hated nickname. If that failed, the misery 
would deepen and go right on through the short night he needed for sleep. Trust Ticki, he said. It was as if a ligament 

tightened in his brain with the suspense. If only I could postpone the misery, he thought, until daylight. Misery is 
worse in the darkness: theres nothing to look at except the green black-out curtains, the Government furniture, the 
flying ants scattering their wings over the table: a hundred yards away the Creoles pye-dogs yapped and wailed. 
Look at that little beggar, he said, pointing at the house lizard that always came out upon the wall about this time to 
hunt for moths and cockroaches. He said, We only got the idea last night. These things take time to fix. Ways and 
means, ways and means, he said with strained humour. 
 
 Have you been to the bank? 
 
 Yes, he admitted. 
 
 And you couldnt get the money? 
 
 No. They couldnt manage it Have another gin and bitters, darling? 
 
 She held her glass out to him, crying dumbly; her face reddened when she cried - she looked ten years older, a 
middle-aged and abandoned woman - it was like the terrible breath of the future on his cheek. He went down on one 
knee beside her and held the pink gin to her lips as though it were medicine. My dear, he said, Ill find a way. Have a 
drink. 
 
 Ticki, I cant bear this place any longer. I know Ive said it before, but I mean it this time. I shall go mad. Ticki, Im so 
lonely. I havent a friend, Ticki. 
 
 Lets have Wilson up tomorrow. 
 
 Ticki, for Gods sake dont always mention Wilson. Please, please do something. 
 
 Of course I will Just be patient a while, dear. These things take time. 
 
 What will you do, Ticki? 
 
 Im full of ideas, darling, he said wearily. (What a day it had been.) Just let them simmer for a little while. 
 
 Tell me one idea. Just one. 
 
 His eyes followed the lizard as it pounced; then he picked an ant wing out of his gin and drank again. He thought to 
himself: what a fool I really was not to take the hundred pounds. I destroyed the letter for nothing. I took the risk. I 
might just as well... Louise said, Ive known it for years. You dont love me. She spoke with calm. He knew that calm 
- it meant they had reached the quiet centre of the storm: always in this region at about this time they began to speak 
the truth at each other. The truth, he thought, has never been of any real value to any human being - it is a symbol for 
mathematicians and philosophers to pursue. In human relations kindness and lies are worth a thousand truths. He 
involved himself in what he always knew was a vain struggle to retain the lies. Dont be absurd, darling. Who do you 
mink I love if I dont love you? 
 
 You dont love anybody. 
 
 Is that why I treat you so badly? He tried to hit a light note, and it sounded hollowly back at him. 
 
 Thats your conscience, she said, your sense of duty. Youve never loved anyone since Catherine died. 
 
 Except myself, of course. You always say I love myself. 
 
 No, I dont think you do. 

 
 He defended himself by evasions. In this cyclonic centre he was powerless to give the comforting lie. I try all the 
time to keep you happy. I work hard for that. 
 
 Ticki, you wont even say you love me. Go on. Say it once. 
 
 He eyed her bitterly over the pink gin, the visible sign of his failure: the skin a little yellow with atabrine, the eyes 
bloodshot with tears. No man could guarantee love for ever, but he had sworn fourteen years ago, at Ealing, silently, 
during the horrible little elegant ceremony among the lace and candles, that he would at least always see to it that she 
was happy. Ticki, Ive got nothing except you, and youve got - nearly everything. The lizard flicked across the wall 
and came to rest again, the wings of a moth in his small crocodile jaws. The ants struck tiny muffled blows at the 
electric globe. 
 
 And yet you want to go away from me, he said. 
 
 Yes, she said, I know you arent happy either. Without me youll have peace. 
 
 This was what he always left out of account - the accuracy of her observation. He had nearly everything, and all he 
needed was peace. Everything meant work, the daily regular routine in the little bare office, the change of seasons in 
a place he loved. How often he had been pitied for the austerity of the work, the bareness of the rewards. But Louise 
knew him better than that. If he had become young again this was the life he would have chosen to live; only this 
time he would not have expected any other person to share it with him, the rat upon the bath, the lizard on the wall, 
the tornado blowing open the windows at one in the morning, and the last pink light upon the laterite roads at 
sundown. 
 
 You are talking nonsense, dear, he said, and went through the doomed motions of mixing another gin and bitters. 
Again the nerve in his head tightened; unhappiness had uncoiled with its inevitable routine - first her misery and his 
strained attempts to leave everything unsaid: then her own calm statement of truths much better lied about, and 
finally the snapping of his own control - truths flung back at her as though she were his enemy. As he embarked on 
this last stage, crying suddenly and truthfully out at her while the angostura trembled in his hand, You cant give me 
peace, he already knew what would succeed it, the reconciliation and the easy lies again until the next scene. 
 
 Thats what I say, she said, if I go away, youll have your peace. 
 
 You havent any conception, he accused her, of what peace means. It was as if she had spoken slightingly of a 
woman he loved. For he dreamed of peace by day and night. Once in sleep it had appeared to him as the great 
glowing shoulder of the moon heaving across his window like an iceberg, Arctic and destructive in the moment 
before the world was struck: by day he tried to win a few moments of its company, crouched under the rusting 
handcuffs in the locked office, reading the reports from the sub-stations. Peace seemed to him the most beautiful 
word in the language: My peace I give you, my peace I leave with you: O Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of 
the world, grant us thy peace. In the Mass he pressed his fingers against his eyes to keep the tears of longing in. 
 
 Louise said with the old tenderness, Poor dear, you wish I were dead like Catherine. You want to be alone. 
 
 He replied obstinately, I want you to be happy. 
 
 She said wearily, Just tell me you love me. That helps a little. They were through again, on the other side of the 
scene: he thought coolly and collectedly, this one wasnt so bad: we shall be able to sleep tonight He said, Of course I 
love you, darling. And Ill fix that passage. Youll see. 
 
 He would still have made the promise even if he could have foreseen all that would come of it He had always been 
prepared to accept the responsibility for his actions, and he had always been half aware too, from the time he made 
his terrible private vow that she should be happy, how farthis action might carry him. Despair is the price one pays 
for setting oneself an impossible aim. It is, one is told, the unforgivable sin, but it is a sin the corrupt or evil man 
never practises. He always has hope. He never reaches the freezing-point of knowing absolute failure. Only the man 

of goodwill carries always in his heart this capacity for damnation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART TWO 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 WILSONstood gloomily by his bed in the Bedford Hotel and contemplated his cummerbund, which lay ruffled like 
an angry snake; the small room was hot with the conflict between them. Through the wall he could hear Harris 
cleaning his teeth for the fifth time that day. Harris believed in dental hygiene. Its cleaning my teeth before and after 
every meal thats kept me so well in this bloody climate, he would say, raising his pale exhausted face over an orange 
squash. Now he was gargling: it sounded like a noise in the pipes. 
 
 Wilson sat down on the edge of his bed and rested. He had left his door open for coolness, and across the passage he 
could see into the bathroom. The Indian with the turban was sitting on the side of the bath fully dressed. He stared 
inscrutably back at Wilson and bowed. Just a moment, sir, he called. If you would care to step in here ... Wilson 
angrily shut the door. Then he had another try with the cummerbund. 
 
 He had once seen a film - was itBengal Lancer ? - in which the cummerbund was superbly disciplined. A native held 
the coil and an immaculate officer spun like a top, so that the cummerbund encircled him smoothly, tightly. Another 
servant stood by with iced drinks, and a punkah swayed in the background. Apparently these things were better 
managed in India. However, with one more effort, Wilson did get the wretched thing wrapped around him. It was too 
tight and it was badly creased, and the tuck-in came too near the front, so that it was not hidden by the jacket. He 
contemplated his image with melancholy in what was left of the mirror. Somebody tapped on the door. 
 
 Who is it? Wilson shouted, imagining for a moment that the Indian had had the cool impertinence to pursue ... but 
when the door opened, it was only Harris: the Indian was still sitting on the bath across the passage shuffling his 
testimonials. 
 
 Going out, old man? Harris asked, with disappointment. 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Everybody seems to be going out this evening. I shall have the table all to myself. He added with gloom, Its the 
curry evening too. 
 
 So it is. Im sorry to miss it. 
 

 You havent been having it for two years, old man, every Thursday night He looked at the cummerbund. Thats not 
right, old man. 
 
 I know it isnt. Its the best I can do. 
 
 I never wear one. It stands to reason that its bad for the stomach. They tell you it absorbs sweat, but thats not where I 
sweat, old man. Id rather wear braces, only the elastic perishes, so a leather belts good enough for me. Im no snob. 
Where are you dining, old man? 
 
 At Tallits 
 
 How did you meet him? 
 
 He came into the office yesterday to pay his account and asked me to dinner. 
 
 You dont have to dress for a Syrian, old man. Take it all off again. 
 
 Are you sure? 
 
 Of course I am. It wouldnt do at all. Quite wrong. He added, Youll get a good dinner, but be careful of the sweets. 
The price of life is eternal vigilance. I wonder what he wants out of you. Wilson began to undress again while Harris 
talked. He was a good listener. His brain was like a sieve through which the rubbish fell all day long. Sitting on the 
bed in his pants he heard Harris - you have to be careful of the fish: I never touch it - but the words left no 
impression. Drawing up his white drill trousers over his hairless knees he said to himself: 
 
 
 
 the poor sprite is 
 
 Imprisoned for some fault of his 
 
 In a body like a grave. 
 
 
 
 His belly rumbled and tumbled as it always did a little before the hour of dinner. 
 
 
 
 From you he only dares to crave, 
 
 For his service and his sorrow, 
 
 A smile to-day, a song to-morrow, 
 
 
 
 Wilson stared into the mirror and passed his fingers over the smooth, too smooth skin. The face looked back at him, 
pink and healthy, plump and hopeless. Harris went happily on, I said once to Scobie, and immediately the clot of 
words lodged in Wilsons sieve. He pondered aloud, I wonder how he ever came to marry her. 
 
 Its what we all wonder, old man. Scobies not a bad sort 

 
 Shes too good for him. 
 
 Louise? Harris exclaimed. 
 
 Of course. Who else? 
 
 Theres no accounting for tastes. Go in and win, old man. 
 
 I must be off. 
 
 Be careful of the sweets. Harris went on with a small spurt of energy, God knows I wouldnt mind something to be 
careful of instead of Thursdays curry. It is Thursday, isnt it? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 They came out into the passage and into the focus of the Indian eyes. Youll have to be done sooner or later, old man, 
Harris said. He does everybody once. Youll never have peace till he does you. 
 
 I dont believe in fortune-telling, Wilson lied. 
 
 Nor do I, but hes pretty good. He did me the first week I was here. Told me Id stay here for more than two and a half 
years. I thought then I was going to have leave after eighteen months. I know better now. The Indian watched 
triumphantly from the bath. He said, I have a letter from the Director of Agriculture. And one from D. C. Parkes. 
 
 All right, Wilson said. Do me, but be quick about it. 
 
 Id better push off, old man, before the revelations begin. 
 
 Im not afraid, Wilson said. 
 
 Will you sit on the bath, sir? the Indian invited him courteously. He took Wilsons hand in his. It is a very interesting 
hand, sir, he said unconvincingly, weighing it up and down. 
 
 What are your charges? 
 
 According to rank, sir. One like yourself, sir, I should charge ten shillings. 
 
 Thats a bit steep. 
 
 Junior officers are five shillings. 
 
 Im in the five-shilling class, Wilson said. 
 
 Oh no, sir. The Director of Agriculture gave me a pound. 
 
 Im only an accountant. 
 
 Thats as you say, sir. A.D.C. and Major Scobie gave me ten shillings. 
 
 Oh well, Wilson said. Heres ten bob. Go ahead. 
 

 You have been here one, two weeks, the Indian said. You are sometimes at night an impatient man. You think you 
do not make enough progress. 
 
 Who with? Harris asked, lolling in the doorway. 
 
 You are very ambitious. You are a dreamer. You read much poetry. 
 
 Harris giggled and Wilson, raising his eyes from the finger which traced the lines upon his palm, watched the 
fortuneteller with apprehension. 
 
 The Indian went inflexibly on. His turban was bowed under Wilsons nose and bore the smell of stale food - he 
probably secreted stray pieces from the larder in its folds. He said, You are a secret man. You do not tell your friends 
about your poetry - except one. One, he repeated. You are very shy. You should take courage. You have a great line 
of success. 
 
 Go in and win, old man, Harris repeated. 
 
 Of course the whole thing was Coueacute;ism: if one believed in it enough, it would come true. Diffidence would be 
conquered. The mistake in a reading would be covered up. 
 
 You havent told me ten bobs worth, Wilson said. This is a five-bob fortune. Tell me something definite, something 
thats going to happen. He shifted his seat uncomfortably on the sharp edge of the bath and watched a cockroach like 
a large blood blister flattened on the wall. The Indian bent forward over the two hands. He said, I see great success. 
The Government will be very pleased with you. 
 
 Harris said,Il pense that you areun bureaucrat . 
 
 Why will the Government be pleased with me? Wilson asked. 
 
 You will capture your man. 
 
 Why, Harris said, I believe he thinks you are a new policeman. 
 
 It looks like it, Wilson said. Not much use wasting more time. 
 
 And your private life, that will be a great success too. You will win the lady of your heart. You will sail away. 
Everything is going to be fine. For you, he added. 
 
 A real ten-bob fortune. 
 
 Good night, Wilson said. I wont write you a recommendation on that. He got up from the bath, and the cockroach 
flashed into hiding. I cant bear those things, Wilson said, sidling through the door. He turned in the passage and 
repeated, Good night. 
 
 I couldnt when I first came, old man. But I evolved a system. Just step into my room and Ill show you. 
 
 I ought to be off. 
 
 Nobody will be punctual at Tallits. Harris opened his door and Wilson turned his eyes with a kind of shame from the 
first sight of its disorder. In his own room he would never have exposed himself quite like this - the dirty tooth-glass, 
the towel on the bed. 
 
 Look here, old man. 

 
 With relief he fixed his eyes on some symbols pencilled on the wall inside: the letter H, and under it a row of figures 
lined against dates as in a cash-book. Then the letters D.D., and under them more figures. Its my score in 
cockroaches, old man. Yesterday was an average day - four. My records nine. It makes you welcome the little brutes. 
 
 What does D.D. stand for? 
 
 Down the drain, old man. Thats when I knock them into the wash-basin and they go down the waste-pipe. It wouldnt 
be fair to count them as dead, would it? 
 
 No. 
 
 And it wouldnt do to cheat yourself either. Youd lose interest at once. The only thing is, it gets dull sometimes, 
playing against yourself. Why shouldnt we make a match of it, old man? It needs skill, you know. They positively 
hear you coming, and they move like greased lightning. I do a stalk every evening with a torch. 
 
 I wouldnt mind having a try, but Ive got to be off now. 
 
 I tell you what - I wont start hunting till you come back from Tallits. Well have five minutes before bed. Just five 
minutes. 
 
 If you like. 
 
 Ill come down with you, old man. I can smell the curry. You know I could have laughed when the old fool mixed 
you up with the new police officer. 
 
 He got most of it wrong, didnt he? Wilson said. I mean the poetry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Tallits living-room to Wilson, who saw it for the first time, had the appearance of a country dance-hall. The 
furniture all lined the walls: hard chairs with tall uncomfortable backs, and in the corners the chaperons sitting out: 
old women in black silk dresses, yards and yards of silk, and a very old man in a smoking-cap. They watched him 
intently in complete silence, and evading their gaze he saw only bare walls except that at each corner sentimental 
French postcards were nailed up in amontage of ribbons and bows: young men smelling mauve Sowers, a glossy 
cherry shoulder, an impassioned kiss. Wilson found there was only one other guest besides himself, Father Rank, a 
Catholic priest, wearing his long soutane. They sat in opposite corners of the room among the chaperons whom 
Father Rank explained were Tallits grandparents and parents, two uncles, what might have been a great-great-aunt, a 
cousin. Somewhere out of sight Tallits wife was preparing little dishes which were handed to the two guests by his 
younger brother and his sister. None of them spoke English except Tallit, and Wilson was embarrassed by the way 
Father Rank discussed his host and his hosts family resoundingly across the room. Thank you, no, Father Rank 
would say, declining a sweet by shaking his grey tousled head. Id advise you to be careful of those, Mr Wilson. 
Tallits a good fellow, but he wont team what a western stomach will take. These old people have stomachs like 
ostriches. 
 
 This is very interesting to me, Wilson said, catching the eye of a grandmother across the room and nodding and 
smiling at her. The grandmother obviously thought he wanted more sweets, and called angrily out for her 

granddaughter. No, no, Wilson said vainly, shaking his head and smiling at the centenarian. The centenarian lifted 
his lip from a toothless gum and signalled with ferocity to Tallits younger brother, who hurried forward with yet 
another dish. Thats quite safe, Father Rank shouted. Just sugar and glycerine and a little flour. All the time their 
glasses were charged and recharged with whisky, 
 
 Wish youd confess to me where you get this whisky from, Tallit, Father Rank called out with roguery, and Tallit 
beamed and slid agilely from end to end of the room, a word to Wilson, a word to Father Rank. He reminded Wilson 
of a young ballet dancer in his white trousers, his plaster of black hair and his grey polished alien face, and one glass 
eye like a puppets. 
 
 So theEsperanccedil; a s gone out, Father Rank shouted across the room. Did they find anything, do you think? 
 
 There was a rumour in the office, Wilson said, about some diamonds. 
 
 Diamonds, my eye, Father Rank said. Theyll never find any diamonds. They dont know where to look, do they, 
Tallit? He explained to Wilson, Diamonds are a sore subject with Tallit. He was taken in by the false ones last year. 
Yusef humbugged you, eh, Tallit, you young rogue? Not so smart, eh? You a Catholic humbugged by a Mahomedan. 
I could have wrung your neck. 
 
 It was a bad thing to do, Tallit said, standing midway between Wilson and the priest. 
 
 Ive only been here a few weeks, Wilson said, and everyone talks to me about Yusef. They say he passes false 
diamonds, smuggles real ones, sells bad liquor, hoards cottons against a French invasion, seduces the nursing sisters 
from the military hospital. 
 
 Hes a dirty dog, Father Rank said with a kind of relish. Not that you can believe a single thing you hear in this place. 
Otherwise everybody would be living with someone elses wife, every police officer who wasnt in Yusefs pay would 
be bribed by Tallit here. 
 
 Tallit said, Yusef is a very bad man. 
 
 Why dont the authorities run him in? 
 
 Ive been here for twenty-two years, Father Rank said, and Ive never known anything proved against a Syrian yet. 
Oh, often Ive seen the police as pleased as Punch carrying their happy morning faces around, just going to pounce - 
and I think to myself, why bother to ask them what its about? theyll just pounce on air. 
 
 You ought to have been a policeman, Father. 
 
 Ah, Father Rank said, who knows? There are more policemen in this town than meet the eye - or so they say. 
 
 Who say? 
 
 Careful of those sweets, Father Rank said, they are harmless in moderation, but youve taken four already. Look 
here, Tallit, Mr Wilson looks hungry. Cant you bring on the bakemeats? 
 
 Bakemeats? 
 
 The feast, Father Rank said. His joviality filled the room with hollow sound. For twenty-two years that voice had 
been laughing, joking, urging people humorously on through the rainy and the dry months. Could its cheeriness ever 
have comforted a single soul? Wilson wondered: had it even comforted itself? It was like the noise one heard 
rebounding from the tiles in a public baths: the laughs and the splashes of strangers in the steam-heating. 
 
 Of course, Father Rank. Immediately, Father Rank. Father Rank, without being invited, rose from his chair and sat 

himself down at a table which like the chairs hugged the wan. There were only a few places laid and Wilson 
hesitated. Come on. Sit down, Mr Wilson. Only the old folks will be eating with us - and Tallit of course. 
 
 You were saying something about a rumour? Wilson asked. 
 
 My head is a hive of rumours, Father Rank said, making a humorous hopeless gesture. If a man tells me anything I 
assume he wants me to pass it on. Its a useful function, you know, at a time like this, when everything is an official 
secret, to remind people that their tongues were made to talk with and that the truth is meant to be spoken about. 
Look at Tallit now, Father Rank went on. Tallit was raising the corner of his black-out curtain and gazing into the 
dark street. Hows Yusef, you young rogue? he asked. Yusefs got a big house across the street and Tallit wants it, 
dont you, Tallit? What about dinner, Tallit, were hungry? 
 
 It is here, Father, it is here, he said coming away from the window. He sat down silently beside the centenarian, and 
his sister served the dishes. You always get a good meal in Tallits house, Father Rank said. 
 
 Yusef too is entertaining tonight. 
 
 It doesnt do for a priest to be choosy, Father Rank said, but I find your dinner more digestible. His hollow laugh 
swung through the room. 
 
 Is it as bad as all that being seen at Yusef s? 
 
 It is, Mr Wilson. If I saw you there, Id say to myself, Yusef wants some information badly about cottons - what the 
imports are going to be next month, say - whats on the way by sea, and hell pay for his information. If I saw a girl go 
hi, Id think it was a pity, a great pity. He took a stab at his plate and laughed again. But if Tallit went in Id wait to 
hear the screams for help. 
 
 If you saw a police officer? Tallit asked. 
 
 I wouldnt believe my eyes, the priest said. None of them are such fools after what happened to Bailey. 
 
 The other night a police car brought Yusef home, Tallit said. I saw it from here plainly. 
 
 One of the drivers earning a bit on the side, Father Rank said. 
 
 I thought I saw Major Scobie. He was careful not to get out. Of course I am not perfectly sure. Itlooked like Major 
Scobie. 
 
 My tongue runs away with me, the priest said. What a garrulous fool I am. Why, if it was Scobie, I wouldnt think 
twice about it His eyes roamed the room. Not twice, he said. Id lay next Sundays collection that everything was all 
right, absolutely all right, and he swung his great empty-sounding bell to and fro, Ho, ho, ho, like a leper proclaiming 
his misery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 The light was still on in Harriss room when Wilson returned to the hotel. He was tired and worried and he tried to 
tiptoe by, but Harris heard him. Ive been listening for you, old man, he said, waving an electric torch. He wore his 

mosquito-boots outside his pyjamas and looked like a harassed air-raid warden. 
 
 Its late. I thought youd be asleep. 
 
 I couldnt sleep until wed had our hunt. The ideas grown on me, old man. We might have a monthly prize. I can see 
the time coming when other people will want to join in. 
 
 Wilson said with irony, There might be a silver cup. 
 
 Stranger things have happened, old man. The Cockroach Championship. 
 
 He led the way, walking softly on the boards to the middle of his room: the iron bed stood under its greying net, the 
armchair with collapsible back, the dressing-table littered with oldPicture Posts . It shocked Wilson once again to 
realize that a room could be a degree more cheerless man his own. 
 
 Well draw our rooms alternate nights, old man. 
 
 What weapon shall I use? 
 
 You can borrow one of my slippers. A board squeaked under Wilsons feet and Harris turned warningly. They have 
ears like rats, he said. 
 
 Im a bit tired. Dont you think that tonight...? 
 
 Just five minutes, old man. I couldnt sleep without a hunt. Look, theres one - over the dressing-table. You can have 
first shot, but as the shadow of the slipper fell upon the plaster wall, the insect shot away. 
 
 No use doing it like mat, old man. Watch me. Harris stalked his prey. The cockroach was half-way up the wall, and 
Harris, as he moved on tiptoe across the creaking floor, began to weave the light of his torch backwards and forwards 
over the cockroach. Then suddenly he struck and left a smear of blood. One up, he said. You have to mesmerize 
them. 
 
 To and fro across the room they padded, weaving their lights, smashing down their shoes, occasionally losing their 
heads and pursuing wildly into comers: the lust of the hunt touched Wilsons imagination. At first their manner to 
each other was sporting; they would call out, Good-shot or Hard Luck, but once they met together against the 
wainscot over the same cockroach when the score was even, and their tempers became frayed. 
 
 No point in going after the same bird, old man, Harris said. 
 
 I started him. 
 
 You lost your one, old man. This was mine. 
 
 It was the same. He did a double turn. 
 
 Oh no. 
 
 Anyway, theres no reason why I shouldnt go for the same one. You drove it towards me. Bad play on your part 
 
 Not allowed in the rules, Harris said shortly. 
 
 Perhaps not in your rules. 
 

 Damn it all, Harris said, I invented the game. 
 
 A cockroach sat upon the brown cake of soap in the washbasin. Wilson spied it and took a long shot with the shoe 
from six feet away. The shoe landed smartly on the soap and the cockroach span into the bam: Harris turned on the 
tap and washed it down. Good shot, old man, he said placatingly. One D.D. 
 
 D.D, be damned, Wilson said. It was dead when you turned on the tap. 
 
 You couldnt be sure of mat. It might have been just unconscious - concussion. Its D.D. according to the rules. 
 
 Your rules again. 
 
 My rules are the Queensberry rules in this town. 
 
 They wont be for long, Wilson threatened. He slammed the door hard behind him and the walls of his own room 
vibrated round him from the shock. His heart beat with rage and the hot night: the sweat drained from his armpits. 
But as he stood there beside his own bed, seeing the replica of Harriss room around him, the washbasin, the table, the 
grey mosquito-net, even the cockroach fastened on the wall, anger trickled out of nun and loneliness took its place. It 
was like quarrelling with ones own image in the glass. I was crazy, he thought. What made me fly out like that? Ive 
lost a friend. 
 
 That night it took him a long while to sleep, and when he slept at last he dreamed that he had committed a crime, so 
that he woke with the sense of guilt still heavy upon him. On his way down to breakfast he paused outside Harriss 
door. There was no sound. He knocked, but there was no answer. He opened the door a little way and saw obscurely 
through the grey net Harriss damp bed. He asked softly, Are you awake? 
 
 What is it? 
 
 Im sorry Harris, about last night. 
 
 My fault, old man. Ive got a touch of fever. I was sickening for it. Touchy. 
 
 No, its my fault. You are quite right. Itwas D.D. 
 
 Well toss up for it, old man. 
 
 Ill come in tonight. 
 
 Thats fine. 
 
 But after breakfast something took his mind right away from Harris. He had been in to the Commissioners office on 
his way down town and coming out he ran into Scobie. 
 
 Hallo, Scobie said, what are you doing here? 
 
 Been in to see the Commissioner about a pass. There are so many passes one has to have in this town, sir. I wanted 
one for the wharf. 
 
 When are you going to can on us again, Wilson? 
 
 You dont want to be bothered with strangers, sir. 
 
 Nonsense. Louise would like another chat about books. I dont read them myself, you know, Wilson. 

 
 I dont suppose you have much time. 
 
 Oh, theres an awful lot of time around, Scobie said, in a country like this. I just dont have a taste for reading, thats 
all. Come into my office a moment while I ring up Louise. Shell be glad to see you. Wish youd call in and take her 
for a walk. She doesnt get enough exercise. 
 
 Id love to, Wilson said, and blushed hurriedly in the shadows. He looked around him: this was Scobies office. He 
examined it as a general might examine a battleground, and yet it was difficult to regard Scobie as an enemy. The 
rusty handcuffs jangled on the wall as Scobie leant back from his desk and dialled. 
 
 Free this evening? 
 
 He brought his mind sharply back, aware that Scobie was watching him: the slightly protruding, slightly reddened 
eyes dwelt on him with a kind of speculation. I wonder why you came out here, Scobie said. You arent the type. 
 
 One drifts into things, Wilson lied. 
 
 I dont, Scobie said, Ive always been a planner. You see, I even plan for other people. He began to talk into the 
telephone. His intonation changed: it was as if he were reading a part - a part which called for tenderness and 
patience, a part which had been read so often that the eyes were blank above the mouth. Putting down the receiver, 
he said, Thats fine. Thats settled then. 
 
 It seems a very good plan to me, Wilson said. 
 
 My plans always start out well, Scobie said. You two go for a walk, and when you get back Ill have a drink ready 
for you. Stay to dinner, he went on with a hint of anxiety. Well be glad of your company. 
 
 When Wilson had gone, Scobie went in to the Commissioner. He said, I was just coming along to see you, sir, when 
I ran into Wilson. 
 
 Oh yes, Wilson, the Commissioner said. He came in to have a word with me about one of their lightermen. 
 
 I see. The shutters were down in the office to cut out the morning sun. A sergeant passed through carrying with him, 
as well as his file, a breath of the Zoo behind. The day was heavy with unshed rain: already at 8.30 in the morning 
the body ran with sweat. Scobie said, He told me hed come about a pass. 
 
 Oh yes, the Commissioner said, that too. He put a piece of blotting-paper under his wrist to absorb the sweat as he 
wrote. Yes, there was something about a pass too, Scobie. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 

 MRSSCOBIEled the way, scrambling down towards the bridge over the river that still carried the sleepers of an 
abandoned railway. 
 
 Id never have found this path by myself, Wilson said, panting a little with the burden of his plumpness. 
 
 Louise Scobie said, Its my favourite walk. 
 
 On the dry dusty slope above the path an old man sat in the doorway of a hut doing nothing. A girl with small 
crescent breasts climbed down towards them balancing a pail of water on her head; a child naked except for a red 
bead necklace round the waist played in a little dust-paved yard among the chickens; labourers carrying hatchets 
came across the bridge at the end of their day. It was the hour of comparative coolness, the hour of peace. 
 
 You wouldnt guess, would you, that the citys just behind us? Mrs Scobie said. And a few hundred yards up there 
over the hill the boys are bringing in the drinks. 
 
 The path wound along the slope of the hill. Down below him Wilson could see the huge harbour spread out. A 
convoy was gathering inside the boom; tiny boats moved like flies between the ships; above them the ashy trees and 
the burnt scrubs hid the summit of the ridge. Wilson stumbled once or twice as his toes caught in the ledges left by 
the sleepers. 
 
 Louise Scobie said, This is what I thought it was all going to be like. 
 
 Your husband loves the place, doesnt he? 
 
 Oh, I think sometimes hes got a kind of selective eyesight. He sees what he likes to see. He doesnt seem to see the 
snobbery, and he doesnt hear the gossip. 
 
 He sees you, Wilson said. 
 
 Thank God he doesnt, because Ive caught the disease. 
 
 You arent a snob. 
 
 Oh yes, I am. 
 
 You tookme up, Wilson said, blushing and contorting his face into a careful careless whistle. But he couldnt whistle. 
The plump lips blew empty air, like a fish. 
 
 For Gods sake, Louise said, dont be humble. 
 
 Im not really humble, Wilson said. He stood aside to let a labourer go by. He explained, Ive got inordinate 
ambitions. 
 
 In two minutes, Louise said, we get to the best point of all - where you cant see a single house. 
 
 Its good of you to show me ... Wilson muttered, stumbling on again along the ridge track. He had no small talk: with 
a woman he could be romantic, but nothing else. 
 
 There, Louise said, but he had hardly time to take the view in - the harsh green slopes falling down towards the great 
flat glaring bay - when she wanted to be off again, back the way they had come. Henry will be in soon, she said. 
 
 Whos Henry? 
 

 My husband. 
 
 I didnt know his name. Id heard you call him something else - something like Ticki. 
 
 Poor Henry, she said. How he hates it. I try not to when other people are there, but I forget. Lets go. 
 
 Cant we go just a little further - to the railway station? 
 
 Id like to change, Louise said, before dark. The rats begin to come in after dark. 
 
 Going back will be downhill all the way. 
 
 Lets hurry then, Louise said. He followed her. Thin and ungainly, she seemed to him to possess a sort of Undine 
beauty. She had been kind to him, she bore his company, and automatically at any first kindness from a woman love 
stirred. He had no capacity for friendship or for equality. In his romantic, humble, ambitious mind he could conceive 
only a relationship with a waitress, a cinema usherette, a landladys daughter in Battersea or with a queen - this was a 
queen. He began to mutter again at her heels - so good - between pants, his plump knees knocking together on the 
stony path. Quite suddenly the light changed: the laterite soil turned a translucent pink sloping down the hill to the 
wide flat water of the bay. There was something happily accidental in the evening light as though it hadnt been 
planned. 
 
 This is it, Louise said, and they leant and got their breath again against the wooden wall of the small abandoned 
station, watching the light fade out as quickly as it came. 
 
 Through an open door - had it been the waiting room or the station masters office? - the hens passed in and out. The 
dust on the windows was like the steam left only a moment ago by a passing train. On the forever-closed guichet 
somebody had chalked a crude phallic figure. Wilson could see it over her left shoulder as she leant back to get her 
breath. I used to come here every day, Louise said, until they spoilt it for me. 
 
 They? 
 
 She said, Thank God, I shall be out of here soon. 
 
 Why? You are not going away? 
 
 Henrys sending me to South Africa. 
 
 Oh God, Wilson exclaimed. The news was so unexpected that it was like a twinge of pain. His face twisted with it. 
 
 He tried to cover up the absurd exposure. No one knew better than he did that his face was not made to express 
agony or passion. He said, What will he do without you? 
 
 Hell manage. 
 
 Hell be terribly lonely, Wilson said - he, he, he chiming back in his inner ear like a misleading echo I, I, I. 
 
 Hell be happier without me. 
 
 He couldnt be. 
 
 Henry doesnt love me, she said gently, as though she were teaching a child, using the simplest words to explain a 
difficult subject, simplifying ... She leant her head back against the guichet and smiled at him as much as to say, its 
quite easy really when you get the hang of it. Hell be happier without me, she repeated. An ant moved from the 

woodwork on to her neck and he leant close to flick it away. He had no other motive. When he took his mouth away 
from hers the ant was still there. He let it run on to his finger. The taste of the lipstick was like something hed never 
tasted before and that he would always remember. It seemed to him that an act had been committed which altered the 
whole world. 
 
 I hate him, she said, carrying on the conversation exactly where it had been left. 
 
 You mustnt go, he implored her. A bead of sweat ran down into his right eye and he brushed it away; on the guichet 
by her shoulder his eyes took in again the phallic scrawl. 
 
 Id have gone before this if it hadnt been for the money, poor dear. He has to find it. 
 
 Where? 
 
 Thats mans business, she said like a provocation, and he kissed her again; their mouths clung like bivalves, and then 
she pulled away and he heard the sad - to and fro - of Father Ranks laugh coming up along the path. Good evening, 
good evening, Father Rank called. His stride lengthened and he caught a foot in his soutane and stumbled as he went 
by. A storms coming up, he said. Got to hurry, and his ho, ho, ho diminished mournfully along the railway track, 
bringing no comfort to anyone. 
 
 He didnt see who we were, Wilson said. 
 
 Of course he did. What does it matter? 
 
 Hes the biggest gossip in the town. 
 
 Only about things that matter, she said. 
 
 This doesnt matter? 
 
 Of course it doesnt, she said. Why should it? 
 
 Im in love with you, Louise, Wilson said sadly. 
 
 This is the second time weve met. 
 
 I dont see that that makes any difference. Do you like me, Louise? 
 
 Of course I like you, Wilson. 
 
 I wish you wouldnt call me Wilson. 
 
 Have you got another name? 
 
 Edward. 
 
 Do you want me to call you Teddy? Or Bear? These things creep on you before you know where you are. Suddenly 
you are calling someone Bear or Ticki, and the real names seems bald and formal, and the next you know they hate 
you for it. Ill stick to Wilson. 
 
 Why dont you leave him? 
 
 I am leaving him. I told you. Im going to South Africa. 

 
 I love you, Louise, he said again. 
 
 How old are you, Wilson? 
 
 Thirty-two. 
 
 A very young thirty-two, and I am an old thirty-eight. 
 
 It doesnt matter. 
 
 The poetry you read, Wilson, is too romantic. It does matter. It matters much more than love. Love isnt a fact like 
age and religion ... 
 
 Across the bay the clouds came up: they massed blackly over Bullom and then tore up the sky, climbing vertically: 
the wind pressed the two of them back against the station. Too late, Louise said, were caught. 
 
 How long will this last? 
 
 Half an hour. 
 
 A handful of rain was flung in their faces, and then the water came down. They stood inside the station and heard 
the water hurled upon the roof. They were in darkness, and the chickens moved at their feet 
 
 This is grim, Louise said. 
 
 He made a motion towards her hand and touched her shoulder. Oh, for Gods sake, Wilson, she said, dont lets have a 
petting party. She had to speak loud for her voice to carry above the thunder on the iron roof. 
 
 Im sorry ... I didnt mean... 
 
 He could hear her shifting further away, and he was glad of the darkness which hid his humiliation. I like you, 
Wilson, she said, but Im not a nursing sister who expects to be taken whenever she finds herself in the dark with a 
man. You have no responsibilities towards me, Wilson. I dont want you. 
 
 I love you, Louise. 
 
 Yes, yes, Wilson. Youve told me. Do you think there are snakes in here - or rats? 
 
 Ive no idea. When are you going to South Africa, Louise? 
 
 When Ticki can raise the money. 
 
 It will cost a lot. Perhaps you wont be able to go. 
 
 Hell manage somehow. He said he would. 
 
 Life insurance? 
 
 No, hes tried that 
 
 I wish I could tend it to you myself. But Im poor as a church-mouse. 

 
 Dont talk about mice in here, Ticki will manage somehow. 
 
 He began to see her face through the darkness, thin, grey, attenuated - it was like trying to remember the features of 
someone he had once known who had gone away. One would build them up in just this way - the nose and then if 
one concentrated enough the brow; the eyes would escape him. 
 
 Hell do anything for me. 
 
 He said bitterly, A moment ago you said he didnt love you. 
 
 Oh, she said, but he has a terrible sense of responsibility. 
 
 He made a movement and she cried furiously out, Keep still. I dont love you. I love Ticki. 
 
 I was only shifting my weight he said. She began to laugh. How funny this is, she said. Its a long time since 
anything funny happened to me. Ill remember this for months, for months. But it seemed to Wilson that he would 
remember her laughter all his life. His shorts flapped in the draught of the storm and he thought, In a body like a 
grave. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 When Louise and Wilson crossed the river and came into Burnside it was quite dark. The headlamps of a police van 
lit an open door, the figures moved to and fro carrying packages. Whats up now? Louise exclaimed, and began to run 
down the road. Wilson panted after her. Ali came from the house carrying on his head a tin bath, a folding chair, and 
a bundle tied up in an old towel. What on earths happened, Ali? 
 
 Massa go on trek, he said, and grinned happily in the headlamps. 
 
 In the sitting-room Scobie sat with a drink in his hand. Im glad you are back, he said. I thought Id have to write a 
note, and Wilson saw that in fact he had already begun one. He had torn a leaf out of his notebook, and his large 
awkward writing covered a couple of lines. 
 
 What on earths happening, Henry? 
 
 Ive got to get off to Bamba. 
 
 Cant you wait for the train on Thursday? 
 
 No. 
 
 Can I come with you? 
 
 Not this time. Im sorry, dear. Ill have to take Ali and leave you the small boy. 
 
 Whats happened? 

 
 Theres trouble over young Pemberton. 
 
 Serious? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Hes such a fool. It was madness to leave him there as D.C. 
 
 Scobie drank his whisky and said, Im sorry, Wilson. Help yourself. Get a bottle of soda out of the ice-box. The boys 
are busy packing. 
 
 How long will you be, darling? 
 
 Oh, Ill be back the day after tomorrow, with any luck. Why dont you go and stay with Mrs Halifax? 
 
 I shall be all right here, darling. 
 
 Id take the small boy and leave you Ali, but the small boy cant cook. 
 
 Youll be happier with Ali, dear. It will be like the old days before I came out 
 
 I think Ill be off, sir, Wilson said. Im sorry I kept Mrs Scobie out so late. 
 
 Oh, I didnt worry, Wilson. Father Rank came by and told me you were sheltering in the old station. Very sensible of 
you. He got a drenching. He should have stayed too - he doesnt want a dose of fever at his age. 
 
 Can I fill your glass, sir? Then Ill be off. 
 
 Henry never takes more than one. 
 
 All the same, I think I will. But dont go, Wilson. Stay and keep Louise company for a bit. Ive got to be off after this 
glass. I shant get any sleep tonight. 
 
 Why cant one of the young men go? Youre too old, Ticki, for this. Driving all night. Why dont you send Fraser? 
 
 The Commissioner asked me to go. Its just one of those cases - carefulness, tact, you cant let a young man handle it. 
He took another drink of whisky and his eyes moved gloomily away as Wilson watched him. I must be off. 
 
 Ill never forgive Pemberton for this. 
 
 Scobie said sharply, Dont talk nonsense, dear. Wed forgive most things if we knew the facts. He smiled unwillingly 
at Wilson. A policeman should be the most forgiving person in the world if he gets the facts right. 
 
 I wish I could be of help, sir. 
 
 You can. Stay and have a few more drinks with Louise and cheer her up. She doesnt often get a chance to talk about 
books. At the word books Wilson saw her mouth tighten just as a moment ago he had seen Scobie flinch at the name 
of Ticki, and for the first time he realized the pain inevitable in any human relationship - pain suffered and pain 
inflicted. How foolish one was to be afraid of loneliness. 
 
 Good-bye, darling. 
 

 Good-bye, Ticki. 
 
 Look after Wilson. See he has enough to drink. Dont mope. 
 
 When she kissed Scobie, Wilson stood near the door with a glass in his hand and remembered the disused station on 
the hill above and the taste of lipstick. For exactly an hour and a half the mark of his mouth had been the last on hers. 
He felt no jealousy, only the dreariness of a man who tries to write an important letter on a damp sheet and finds the 
characters blur. 
 
 Side by side they watched Scobie cross the road to the police van. He had taken more whisky than he was 
accustomed to, and perhaps that was what made him stumble. They should have sent a younger man, Wilson said. 
 
 They never do. Hes the only one the Commissioner trusts. They watched him climb laboriously in, and she went 
sadly on, Isnt he the typical second man? The man who always does the work. 
 
 The black policeman at the wheel started his engine and began to grind into gear before releasing the clutch. They 
dont even give him a good driver, she said. The good driver will have taken Fraser and the rest to the dance at the 
Club. The van bumped and heaved out of the yard. Louise said, Well, thats that, Wilson. 
 
 She picked up the note Scobie had intended to leave for her and read it aloud.My dear, I have had to leave for 
Bamba. Keep this to yourself. A terrible thing has happened. Poor Pemberton ... 
 
 Poor Pemberton, she repeated furiously. 
 
 Whos Pemberton? 
 
 A little puppy of twenty-five. All spots and bounce. He was assistant D.C. at Bamba, but when Butterworth went 
sick, they left him in charge. Anybody could have told them thered be trouble. And when trouble comes its Henry, of 
course, who has to drive all night... 
 
 Id better leave now, hadnt I? Wilson said. Youll want to change. 
 
 Oh yes, youd better go - before everybody knows hes gone and that weve been alone five minutes in a house with a 
bed in it. Alone, of course, except for the small boy and the cook and their relations and friends. 
 
 I wish I could be of some use. 
 
 You could be, she said. Would you go upstairs and see whether theres a rat in the bedroom? I dont want the small 
boy to know Im nervous. And shut the window. They come in that way. 
 
 It will be very hot for you, 
 
 I dont mind. 
 
 He stood just inside the door and clapped his hands softly, but no rat moved. Then quickly, surreptitiously, as 
though he had no right to be there, he crossed to the window and closed it. There was a faint smell of face-powder in 
the room - it seemed to him the most memorable scent he had ever known. He stood again by the door taking the 
whole room in - the childs photograph, the pots of cream, the dress laid out by Ali for the evening. He had been 
instructed at home how to memorize, pick out the important detail, collect the right evidence, but his employers had 
never taught him that he would find himself in a country so strange to him as this. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 PART THREE 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THEpolice van took its place in the long line of army lorries waiting for the ferry. Their headlamps were like a little 
village in the night. The trees came down on either side smelling of heat and rain, and somewhere at the end of the 
column a driver sang - the wailing, toneless voice rose and fell like a wind through a keyhole. Scobie slept and woke, 
slept and woke. When he woke he thought of Pemberton and wondered how he would feel if he were his father - that 
elderly, retired bank manager whose wife had died in giving birth to Pemberton - but when he slept he went 
smoothly back into a dream of perfect happiness and freedom. He was walking through a wide cool meadow with 
Ali at his heels: there was nobody else anywhere in his dream, and Ali never spoke. Birds went by far overhead, and 
once when he sat down the grass was parted by a small green snake which passed on to his hand and up his arm 
without fear, and before it slid down into the grass again touched his cheek with a cold, friendly, remote tongue. 
 
 Once when he opened his eyes Ali was standing beside him waiting for him to awake. Massa like bed, he stated 
gently, firmly, pointing to the camp-bed he had made up at the edge of the path with the mosquito-net tied from the 
branches overhead. Two three hours, Ali said. Plenty lorries. Scobie obeyed and lay down and was immediately back 
in that peaceful meadow where nothing ever happened. The next time he woke Ali was still there, this time with a 
cup of tea and a plate of biscuits. One hour, Ali said. 
 
 Then at last it was the turn of the police van. They moved down the red laterite slope on to the raft, and then edged 
foot by foot across the dark styx-like stream towards the woods on the other side. The two ferrymen pulling on the 
rope wore nothing but girdles, as though they had left their clothes behind on the bank where life ended, and a third 
man beat time to them, making do for instrument in this between-world with an empty sardine-tin. The wailing 
tireless voice of the living singer shifted backwards. 
 
 This was only the first of three ferries that had to be crossed, with the same queue forming each time. Scobie never 
succeeded in sleeping properly again; his head began to ache from the heave of the van: he ate some aspirin and 
hoped for the best He didnt want a dose of fever when he was away from home. It was not Pemberton that worried 
him now - let the dead bury their dead - it was the promise he had made to Louise. Two hundred pounds was so 
small a sum: the figures rang their changes in his aching head like a peal of bells: 200 002 020: it worried him that he 
could not find a fourth combination: 002 200 020. 
 
 They had come beyond the range of the tin-roofed shacks and the decayed wooden settlers huts; the villages they 
passed through were bush villages of mud and thatch: no light showed anywhere: doors were closed and shutters 
were up, and only a few goats eyes watched the headlamps of the convoy. 020 002 200 200 002 020. Ali squatting in 
the body of the van put an arm around his shoulder holding a mug of hot tea - somehow he had boiled another kettle 
in the lurching chassis. Louise was right - it was like the old days. If he had felt younger, if mere had been no 
problem of 200 020 002, he would have been happy. Poor Pembertons death would not have disturbed him - that was 
merely in the way of duty, and he had never liked Pemberton. 

 
 My head humbug me, Ali. 
 
 Massa take plenty aspirin. 
 
 Do you remember, Ali, that two hundred 002 trek we did twelve years ago in ten days, along the border; two of the 
carriers went sick... 
 
 He could see in the drivers mirror Ali nodding and beaming. It seemed to him that this was all he needed of love or 
friendship. He could be happy with no more in the world than this - the grinding van, the hot tea against his lips, the 
heavy damp weight of the forest, even the aching head, the loneliness. If I could just arrange for her happiness first, 
he thought, and in the confusing night he forgot for the while what experience had taught him - that no human being 
can really understand another, and no one can arrange anothers happiness. One hour more, Ali said, and he noticed 
that the darkness was thinning. Another mug of tea, Ali, and put some whisky in it. The convoy had separated from 
them a quarter of an hour ago, when the police van had turned away from the main road and bumped along a by-road 
farther into the bush. He shut his eyes and tried to draw his mind away from the broken peal of figures to the 
distasteful job. There was only a native police sergeant at Bamba, and he would like to be clear in his own mind as to 
what had happened before he received the sergeants illiterate report. It would be better, he considered reluctantly, to 
go first to the Mission and see Father Clay. 
 
 Father Clay was up and waiting for him in the dismal little European house which had been built among the mud 
huts in laterite bricks to look like a Victorian presbytery. A hurricane-lamp shone on the priests short red hair and his 
young freckled Liverpool face. He couldnt sit still for more than a few minutes at a time, and then he would be up, 
pacing his tiny room from hideous oleograph to plaster statue and back to oleograph again. I saw so little of him, he 
wailed, motioning with his hands as though he were at the altar. He cared for nothing but cards and drinking. I dont 
drink and Ive never played cards - except demon, you know, except demon, and thats a patience. Its terrible, terrible. 
 
 He hanged himself? 
 
 Yes. His boy came over to me yesterday. He hadnt seen him since the night before, but that was quite usual after a 
bout, you know, a bout. I told him to go to the police. That was right, wasnt it? There was nothing I could do. 
Nothing. He was quite dead. 
 
 Quite right. Would you mind giving me a glass of water and some aspirin? 
 
 Let me mix the aspirin for you. You know, Major Scobie, for weeks and months nothing happens here at all. I just 
walk up and down here, up and down, and then suddenly out of the blue ... its terrible. His eyes were red and 
sleepless: he seemed to Scobie one of those who are quite unsuited to loneliness. There were no books to be seen 
except a little shelf with his breviary and a few religious tracts. He was a man without resources. He began to pace 
up and down again and suddenly, turning on Scobie, he shot out an excited question. Mightnt there be a hope that its 
murder? 
 
 Hope? 
 
 Suicide, Father Clay said. Its too terrible. It puts a man outside mercy. Ive been thinking about it all night. 
 
 He wasnt a Catholic. Perhaps that makes a difference. Invincible ignorance, eh? 
 
 Thats what I try to think. Half-way between oleograph and statuette he suddenly started and stepped aside as though 
he had encountered another on his tiny parade. Then he looked quickly and slyly at Scobie to see whether his act had 
been noticed. 
 
 How often do you get down to the port? Scobie asked. 
 

 I was there for a night nine months ago. Why? 
 
 Everybody needs a change. Have you many converts here? 
 
 Fifteen. I try to persuade myself that young Pemberton had time - time, you know, while he died, to realize ... 
 
 Difficult to think clearly when you are strangling, Father. He took a swig at the aspirin and the sour grains stuck in 
his throat If it was murder youd simply change your mortal sinner, Father, he said with an attempt at humour which 
wilted between the holy picture and the holy statue. 
 
 A murderer has time ... Father Clay said. He added wistfully, with nostalgia, I used to do duty sometimes at 
Liverpool Gaol. 
 
 Have you any idea why he did it? 
 
 I didnt know him well enough. We didnt get on together. 
 
 The only white men here. It seems a pity. 
 
 He offered to lend me some books, but they werent at all the kind of books I care to read - love stories, novels ... 
 
 What do you read, Father? 
 
 Anything on the saints, Major Scobie. My great devotion is to the Little Flower. 
 
 He drank a lot, didnt he? Where did he get it from? 
 
 Yusefs store, I suppose. 
 
 Yes. He may have been in debt? 
 
 I dont know. Its terrible, terrible. 
 
 Scobie finished his aspirin. I suppose Id better go along. It was day now outside, and there was a peculiar innocence 
about the light, gentle and clear and fresh before the sun climbed. 
 
 Ill come with you. Major Scobie. 
 
 The police sergeant sat in a deck-chair outside the D.C.s bungalow. He rose and raggedly saluted, then immediately 
in his hollow unformed voice began to read his report. At 3.30 p.m. yesterday, sah, I was woken by D.C.s boy, who 
reported that D.C. Pemberton, sah ... 
 
 Thats all right, sergeant, Ill go inside and have a look round. The chief clerk waited for him just inside the door. 
 
 The living-room of the bungalow had obviously once been the D.C.s pride - that must have been in Butterworths 
day. There was an air of elegance and personal pride in the furniture; it hadnt been supplied by the Government. 
There were eighteenth-century engravings of the old colony on the wall and in one bookcase were the volumes that 
Butterworth had left behind him - Scobie noted some titles and authors, MaitlandsConstitutional History , Sir Henry 
Maine, BrycesHoly Roman Empire , Hardys poems, and theDoomsday Records of Little Withington , privately 
printed. But imposed on all this were the traces of Pemberton - a gaudy leather pouf of so-called native work, the 
marks of cigarette-ends on the chairs, a stack of the books Father Clay had disliked - Somerset Maugham, an Edgar 
Wallace, two Horlers, and spread-eagled on the settee,Death Laughs at Locksmiths , The room was not properly 
dusted and Butterworths books were stained with damp. 

 
 The body is in the bedroom, sah, the sergeant said. Scobie opened the door and went in - Father Clay followed him. 
The body had been laid on the bed with a sheet over the face. When Scobie turned the sheet down to the shoulder he 
had the impression that he was looking at a child in a nightshirt quietly asleep: the pimples were the pimples of 
puberty and the dead face seemed to bear the trace of no experience beyond the class-room or the football field. Poor 
child, he said aloud. The pious ejaculations of Father Clay irritated him. It seemed to him that unquestionably there 
must be mercy for someone so unformed. He asked abruptly, How did he do it? 
 
 The police sergeant pointed to the picture rail that Butter-worth had meticulously fitted - no Government contractor 
would have thought of it. A picture - an early native king receiving missionaries under a State umbrella - leant 
against the wall and a cord remained twisted over the brass picture hanger. Who would have expected the flimsy 
contrivance not to collapse? He can weigh very little, he thought, and he remembered a childs bones, light and brittle 
as a birds. His feet when he hung must have been only fifteen inches from the ground. 
 
 Did he leave any papers? Scobie asked the clerk. They usually do. Men who are going to die are apt to become 
garrulous with self-revelations. 
 
 Yes, sah, in the office. 
 
 It needed only a casual inspection to realize how badly the office had been kept. The filing cabinet was unlocked: 
the trays on the desk were filled by papers dusty with inattention. The native clerk had obviously followed the same 
ways as his chief. There, sah, on the pad. 
 
 Scobie read, in a hand-writing unformed as the face, a script-writing which hundreds of his school contemporaries 
must have been turning out all over the world:Dear Dad, - Forgive all this trouble. There doesnt seem anything else 
to do. Its a pity Im not in the army because then I might be killed. Dont go and pay the money I owe - the fellow 
doesnt deserve it. They may try and get it out of you. Otherwise I wouldnt mention it. Its a rotten business for you, 
but it cant be helped. Your loving son. The signature was Dicky. It was like a letter from school excusing a bad 
report. 
 
 He handed the letter to Father Clay. You are not going to tell me theres anything unforgivable there, Father. If you 
or I did it, it would be despair - I grant you anything with us. Wed be damned because we know, but he doesnt know 
a thing. 
 
 The Churchs teaching ... 
 
 Even the Church cant teach me that God doesnt pity the young ... Scobie broke abruptly off. Sergeant, see that a 
graves dug quickly before the sun gets too hot. And look out for any bills he owed. I want to have a word with 
someone about this. When he turned towards the window the light dazzled him. He put his hand over his eyes and 
said, I wish to God my head ... and shivered. Im in for a dose if I cant stop it. If you dont mind Ali putting up my bed 
at your place, Father, Ill try and sweat it out 
 
 He took a heavy dose of quinine and lay naked between the blankets. As the sun climbed it sometimes seemed to 
bun that the stone walk of the small cell-like room sweated with cold and sometimes were baked with heat. The door 
was open and Ali squatted on the step just outside whittling a piece of wood. Occasionally he chased away villagers 
who raised their voices within the area of sick-room silence. Thepeine forte et dure weighed on Scobies forehead: 
occasionally it pressed him into sleep. 
 
 But in this sleep there were no pleasant dreams. Pemberton and Louise were obscurely linked. Over and over again 
he was reading a letter which consisted only of variations on the figure 200 and the signature at the bottom was 
sometimes Dicky and sometimes Ticki; he had the sense of time passing and his own immobility between the 
blankets - mere was something he had to do, someone he had to save, Louise or Dicky or Ticki, but he was tied to the 
bed and they laid weights on his forehead as you lay weights on loose papers. Once the sergeant came to the door 
and Ali chased him away, once Father Clay tiptoed in and took a tract off a shelf, and once, but that might have been 
a dream, Yusef came to the door. 

 
 About five in the evening he woke feeling dry and cool and weak and called Ali in. I dreamed I saw Yusef. 
 
 Yusef come for to see you, sah. 
 
 Tell him Ill see him now. He felt tired and beaten about the body: he turned to face the stone wall and was 
immediately asleep. In his sleep Louise wept silently beside him; he put out his hand and touched the stone wall 
again - Everything shall be arranged. Everything. Ticki promises. When he awoke Yusef was beside him. 
 
 A touch of fever, Major Scobie. I am very sorry to see you poorly. 
 
 Im sorry to see you at all, Yusef. 
 
 Ah, you always make fun of me. 
 
 Sit down, Yusef. What did you have to do with Pemberton? 
 
 Yusef eased his great haunches on the hard chair and noticing that his flies were open put down a large and hairy 
hand to deal with them. Nothing, Major Scobie. 
 
 Its an odd coincidence that you are here just at the moment when he commits suicide. 
 
 I think myself it is providence. 
 
 He owed you money, I suppose? 
 
 He owed my store-manager money. 
 
 What sort of pressure were you putting on nun, Yusef? 
 
 Major, you give an evil name to a dog and the dog is finished. If the D.C. wants to buy at my store, how can my 
manager stop selling to him? If he does that, what will happen? Sooner or later there will be a first-class row. The 
Provincial Commissioner will find out. The D.C. will be sent home. If he does not stop selling, what happens then? 
The D.C. runs up more and more bills. My manager becomes afraid of me, he asks the D.C. to pay - there is a row 
that way. When you have a D.C. like poor young Pemberton, there will be a row one day whatever you do. And the 
Syrian is always wrong. 
 
 Theres quite a lot in what you say, Yusef. The pain was beginning again. Give me that whisky and quinine, Yusef. 
 
 You are not taking too much quinine, Major Scobie? Remember blackwater. 
 
 I dont want to be stuck up here for days. I want to kill this at birth. Ive too many things to do. 
 
 Sit up a moment, Major, and let me beat your pillows. 
 
 You arent a bad chap, Yusef. 
 
 Yusef said, Your sergeant has been looking for bills, but he could not find any. Here are IOUs though. From my 
managers safe. He flapped his thigh with a little sheaf of papers. 
 
 I see. What are you going to do with them? 
 
 Burn them, Yusef said. He took out a cigarette-lighter and lit the corners. There, Yusef said. He has paid, poor boy. 

There is no reason to trouble his father. 
 
 Why did you come up here? 
 
 My manager was worried. I was going to propose an arrangement. 
 
 One needs a long spoon to sup with you, Yusef. 
 
 My enemies do. Not my friends. I would do a lot for you, Major Scobie. 
 
 Why do you always call me a friend, Yusef? 
 
 Major Scobie, Yusef said, leaning his great white head forward, reeking of hair oil, friendship is something in the 
soul. It is a thing one feels. It is not a return for something. You remember when you put me into court ten years ago? 
 
 Yes, yes. Scobie turned his head away from the light of the door. 
 
 You nearly caught me, Major Scobie, that time. It was a matter of import duties, you remember. You could have 
caught me if you had told your policeman to say something a little different. I was quite overcome with 
astonishment, Major Scobie, to sit in a police court and hear true facts from the mouths of policemen. You must have 
taken a lot of trouble to find out what was true, and to make them say it. I said to myself, Yusef, a Daniel has come 
to the Colonial Police. 
 
 I wish you wouldnt talk so much, Yusef. Im not interested in your friendship. 
 
 Your words are harder than your heart, Major Scobie. I want to explain why in my soul I have always felt your 
friend. You have made me feel secure. You will not frame me. You need facts, and I am sure the facts will always be 
in my favour. He dusted the ashes from his white trousers, leaving one more grey smear. These are facts. I have 
burned all the IOUs. 
 
 I may yet find traces, Yusef, of what kind of agreement you were intending to make with Pemberton. This station 
controls one of the main routes across the border from - damnation, I cant think of names with this head. 
 
 Cattle smugglers. Im not interested in cattle. 
 
 Other things are apt to go back the other way. 
 
 You are still dreaming of diamonds, Major Scobie. Everybody has gone crazy about diamonds since the war. 
 
 Dont feel too certain, Yusef, that I wont find something when I go through Pembertons office. 
 
 I feel quite certain, Major Scobie. You know I cannot read or write. Nothing is ever on paper. Everything is always 
in my head. Even while Yusef talked, Scobie dropped asleep - into one of those shallow sleeps that last a few 
seconds and have only time to reflect a preoccupation. Louise was coming towards him with both hands held out and 
a smile that he hadnt seen upon her face for years. She said, I am so happy, so happy, and he woke again to Yusefs 
voice going soothingly on. It is only your friends who do not trust you, Major Scobie. I trust you. Even that 
scoundrel Tallit trusts you. 
 
 It took him a moment to get this other face into focus. His brain adjusted itself achingly from the phrase so happy to 
the phrase do not trust. He said, What are you talking about, Yusef? He could feel the mechanism of his brain 
creaking, grinding, scraping, cogs failing to connect, all with pain. 
 
 First, there is the Commissionership. 

 
 They need a young man, he said mechanically, and thought, if I hadnt fever I would never discuss a matter like this 
with Yusef. 
 
 Then the special man they have sent from London ... 
 
 You must come back when Im clearer, Yusef. I dont know what the hell you are talking about. 
 
 They have sent a special man from London to investigate the diamonds - they are crazy about diamonds - only the 
Commissioner must know about him - none of the other officers, not even you. 
 
 What rubbish you talk, Yusef. Theres no such man. 
 
 Everybody guesses but you. 
 
 Too absurd. You shouldnt listen to rumour, Yusef. 
 
 And a third thing. Tallit says everywhere you visit me. 
 
 Tallit! Who believes what Tallit says? 
 
 Everybody everywhere believes what is bad. 
 
 Go away, Yusef. Why do you want to worry me now? 
 
 I just want you to understand, Major Scobie, that you can depend on me. I have friendship for you in my soul. That 
is true, Major Scobie, it is true. The reek of hair-oil come closer as he bent towards the bed: the deep brown eyes 
were damp with what seemed to be emotion. Let me pat your pillow. Major Scobie. 
 
 Oh, for goodness sake, keep away, Scobie said. 
 
 I know how things are. Major Scobie, and if I can help .. I am a well-off man. 
 
 Im not looking for bribes, Yusef, he said wearily and turned his head away to escape the scent. 
 
 I am not offering you a bribe, Major Scobie. A loan at any time on a reasonable rate of interest - four per cent per 
annum. No conditions. You can arrest me next day if you have facts. I want to be your friend. Major Scobie. You 
need not be my friend. There is a Syrian poet who wrote, "Of two hearts one is always warm and one is always cold: 
the cold heart is more precious than diamonds: the warm heart has no value and is thrown away." 
 
 It sounds a very bad poem to me. But Im no judge. 
 
 It is a happy chance for me that we should be here together. In the town there are so many people watching. But 
here, Major Scobie, I can be of real help to you. May I fetch you more blankets? 
 
 No, no, just leave me alone. 
 
 I hate to see a man of your characteristics, Major Scobie, treated badly. 
 
 I dont mink the times ever likely to come, Yusef, when I shall needyour pity. If you want to do something for me, 
though, go away and let me sleep. 
 
 But when he slept the unhappy dreams returned. Upstairs Louise was crying, and he sat at a table writing his last 

letter. Its a rotten business for you, but it cant be helped. Your loving husband, Dicky, and then as he turned to look 
for a weapon or a rope, it suddenly occurred to him that this was an act he could never do. Suicide was for ever out 
of his power - he couldnt condemn himself for eternity - no cause was important enough. He tore up his letter and ran 
upstairs to tell Louise that after all everything was all right, but she had stopped crying and the silence welling out 
from inside the bedroom terrified him. He tried the door and the door was locked. He called out, Louise, everythings 
all right. Ive booked your passage, but there was no answer. He cried again, Louise, and then a key turned and the 
door slowly opened with a sense of irrecoverable disaster, and he saw standing just inside Father Clay, who said to 
him, The teaching of the Church ... Then he woke again to the small stone room like a tomb. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 He was away for a week, for it took three days for the fever to run its course and another two days before he was fit 
to travel. He did not see Yusef again. 
 
 It was past midnight when he drove into town. The houses were white as bones in the moonlight; the quiet streets 
stretched out on either side like the arms of a skeleton, and the faint sweet smell of flowers lay on the air. If he had 
been returning to an empty house he knew that he would have been contented. He was tired and he didnt want to 
break the silence - it was too much to hope that Louise would be asleep, too much to hope that things would 
somehow have become easier in his absence and that he would see her free and happy as she had been in one of his 
dreams. 
 
 The small boy waved his torch from the door: the frogs croaked from the bushes, and the pye dogs wailed at the 
moon. He was home. Louise put her arms round him: the table was laid for a late supper, the boys ran to and fro with 
his boxes: he smiled and talked and kept the bustle going. He talked of Pemberton and Father Clay and mentioned 
Yusef, but he knew that sooner or later he would have to ask how things had been with her. He tried to eat, but he 
was too tired to taste the food. 
 
 Yesterday I cleared up his office and wrote my report - and that was that. He hesitated, Thats all my news, and went 
reluctantly on, How have things been here? He looked quickly up at her face and away again. There had been one 
chance in a thousand that she would have smiled and said vaguely, Not so bad and then passed on to other things, but 
he knew from her mouth that he wasnt so lucky as that Something fresh had happened. 
 
 But the outbreak - whatever it was to be - was delayed. She said, Oh, Wilsons been attentive. 
 
 Hes a nice boy. 
 
 Hes too intelligent for his job. I cant think why hes out here as just a clerk. 
 
 He told me he drifted. 
 
 I dont mink Ive spoken to anybody else since youve been away, except the small boy and the cook. Oh, and Mrs 
Halifax. Something in her voice told him that the danger point was reached. Always, hopelessly, he tried to evade it. 
He stretched and said, My God, Im tired. The fevers left me limp as a rag. I think Ill go to bed. Its nearly half-past 
one, and Ive got to be at the station at eight. 
 
 She said, Ticki, have you done anything at all? 
 

 How do you mean, dear? 
 
 About the passage. 
 
 Dont worry. Ill find a way, dear. 
 
 You havent found one yet? 
 
 No. Ive got several ideas Im working on. Its just a question of borrowing. 200,020,002 rang in his brain. 
 
 Poor dear, she said, dont worry, and put her hand against his cheek. Youre tired. Youve bad fever. Im not going to 
bait you now. Her hand, her words broke through every defence: he had expected tears, but he found them now in his 
own eyes. Go up to bed, Henry, she said, 
 
 Arent you coming up? 
 
 There are just one or two things I want to do. 
 
 He lay on his back under the net and waited for her. It occurred to him, as it hadnt occurred to him for years, that she 
loved him. Poor dear, she loved him: she was someone of human stature with her own sense of responsibility, not 
simply the object of his care and kindness. The sense of failure deepened round him. All the way back from Bamba 
he had faced one fact - that there was only one man in the city capable of lending him, and willing to lend him, the 
two hundred pounds, and that was a man he must not borrow from. It would have been safer to accept the Portuguese 
captains bribe. Slowly and drearily he had reached the decision to tell her that the money simply could not be found, 
that for the next six months at any rate, until his leave, she must stay. If he had not felt so tired he would have told 
her when she asked him and it would have been over now, but he had flinched away and she had been kind, and it 
would be harder now than it had ever been to disappoint her. There was silence all through the little house, but 
outside the half-starved pye dogs yapped and whined. He listened, leaning on his elbow; he felt oddly unmanned, 
lying in bed alone waiting for Louise to join him. She had always been the one to go first to bed. He felt uneasy, 
apprehensive, and suddenly his dream came to mind, how he had listened outside the door and knocked, and there 
was no reply. He struggled out from under the net and ran downstairs barefooted. 
 
 Louise was sitting at the table with a pad of notepaper in front of her, but she had written nothing but a name. The 
winged ants beat against the light and dropped then- wings over the table. Where the light touched her head he saw 
the grey hairs. 
 
 What is it, dear? 
 
 Everything was so quiet, he said, I wondered whether something had happened. I had a bad dream about you the 
other night. Pembertons suicide upset me. 
 
 How silly, dear. Nothing like that could ever happen with us. 
 
 Yes, of course. I just wanted to see you, he said, putting his hand on her hair. Over her shoulder he read the only 
words she had written, Dear Mrs Halifax... 
 
 You havent got your shoes on, she said. Youll be catching jiggers. 
 
 I just wanted to see you, he repeated and wondered whether the stains on the paper were sweat or tears. 
 
 Listen, dear, she said. You are not to worry any more. Ive baited you and baited you. Its like fever, you know. It 
comes and goes. Well, now its gone - for a while. I know you cant raise the money. Its not your fault. If it hadnt been 
for that stupid operation ... Its just the way things are, Henry. 
 

 Whats it all got to do with Mrs Halifax? 
 
 She and another woman have a two-berth cabin in the next ship and the other womans fallen out. She thought 
perhaps I could slip in - if her husband spoke to the agent. 
 
 Thats in about a fortnight, he said. 
 
 Darling, give up trying. Its better just to give up. Anyway, I had to let Mrs Halifax know tomorrow. And Im letting 
her know that I shant be going. 
 
 He spoke rapidly - he wanted the words out beyond recall. Write and tell her that you can go. 
 
 Ticki, she said, what do you mean? Her face hardened. Ticki, please dont promise something which cant happen. I 
know youre tired and afraid of a scene. But there isnt going to be a scene. I mustnt let Mrs Halifax down. 
 
 You wont. I know where I can borrow the money. 
 
 Why didnt you tell me when you came back? 
 
 I wanted to give you your ticket. A surprise. 
 
 She was not so happy as he would have expected: she always saw a little farther than he hoped. And you are not 
worrying any more? she asked. 
 
 Im not worrying any more. Are you happy? 
 
 Oh yes, she said in a puzzled voice. Im happy, dear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 The liner came in on a Saturday evening; from the bedroom window they could see its long grey form steal past the 
boom, beyond the palms. They watched it with a sinking of the heart - happiness is never really so welcome as 
changelessness - hand in hand they watched their separation anchor in the bay. Well, Scobie said, that means 
tomorrow afternoon. 
 
 Darling, she said, when this time is over, Ill be good to you again. I just couldnt stand this life any more. 
 
 They could hear a clatter below stain as Ali, who had also been watching the sea, brought out the trunks and boxes. 
It was as if the house were tumbling down around them, and the vultures took off from the roof, rattling the 
corrugated-iron as though they felt the tremor in the walls. Scobie said, While you are sorting your things upstairs, Ill 
pack your books. It was as if they had been playing these last two weeks at infidelity, and now the process of divorce 
had them in its grasp: the division of one life into two: the sharing out of the sad spoils. 
 
 Shall I leave you this photograph, Ticki? He took a quick sideways glance at the first communion face and said, No. 
You have it. 
 

 Ill leave you this one of us with the Ted Bromleys. 
 
 Yes, leave that He watched her for a moment laying out her clothes and then he went downstairs. One by one he 
took out the books and wiped them with a cloth: the Oxford Verse, the Woolfs, the younger poets. Afterwards the 
shelves were almost empty: his own books took up so little room. 
 
 Next day they went to Mass together early. Kneeling together at the Communion rail they seemed to claim that this 
was not separation. He thought: Ive prayed for peace and now Im getting it. Its terrible the way that prayer is 
answered. It had better be good, Ive paid a high enough price for it As they walked back he said anxiously, You are 
happy? 
 
 Yes, Ticki, and you? 
 
 Im happy as long as you are happy. 
 
 It will be all right when Ive got on board and settled down. I expect I shall drink a bit tonight Why dont you have 
someone in, Ticki? 
 
 Oh, I prefer being alone. 
 
 Write to me every week. 
 
 Of course. 
 
 And Ticki, you wont be lazy about Mass? Youll go when Im not there? 
 
 Of course. 
 
 Wilson came up the road. His face shone with sweat and anxiety. He said, Are you really off? Ali told me at the 
house that you are going on board this afternoon. 
 
 Shes off, Scobie said. You never told me it was close like this. 
 
 I forgot, Louise said, there was so much to do. 
 
 I never thought youd really go. I wouldnt have known if I hadnt run into Halifax at the agents. 
 
 Oh well, Louise said, you and Henry will have to keep an eye on each other. 
 
 Its incredible, Wilson said, kicking the dusty road. He hung there, between them and the house, not stirring to let 
them by. He said, I dont know a soul but you - and Harris of course. 
 
 Youll have to start making acquaintances, Louise said. Youll have to excuse us now. Theres so much to do. 
 
 They walked round him because he didnt move, and Scobie, looking back, gave him a kindly wave - he looked so 
lost and unprotected and out of place on the blistered road. Poor Wilson, he said, I think hes in love with you. 
 
 He thinks he is. 
 
 Its a good thing for him you are going. People like that become a nuisance in this climate. Ill be kind to him while 
you are away. 
 
 Ticki, she said, I shouldnt see too much of him. I wouldnt trust him. Theres something phoney about him. 

 
 Hes young and romantic. 
 
 Hes too romantic. He tells lies. Why does he say he doesnt know a soul? 
 
 I dont think he does. 
 
 He knows the Commissioner. I saw him going up there the other night at dinner-time. 
 
 Its just a way of talking. 
 
 Neither of them had any appetite for lunch, but the cook, who wanted to rise to the occasion, produced an enormous 
curry which filled a washing-basin in the middle of the table: round it were ranged (he many small dishes that went 
with it -the fried bananas, red peppers, ground nuts, paw paw, orange-slices, chutney. They seemed to be sitting 
miles apart separated by a waste of dishes. The food chilled on their plates and there seemed nothing to talk about 
except, Im not hungry, Try and eat a little, I cant touch a thing, You ought to start off with a good meal, an endless 
friendly bicker about food. Ali came in and out to watch them: he was like a figure on a clock that records the 
striking of the hours. It seemed horrible to both of them that now they would be glad when the separation was 
complete; they could settle down when once this ragged leave-taking was over, to a different life which again would 
exclude change. 
 
 Are you sure youve got everything? This was another variant which enabled them to sit there not eating but 
occasionally picking at something easily swallowed, going through all the things that might have been forgotten. 
 
 Its lucky theres only one bedroom. Theyll have to let you keep the house to yourself. 
 
 They may turn me out for a married couple. 
 
 Youll write every week? 
 
 Of course. 
 
 Sufficient time had elapsed: they could persuade themselves that they had lunched. If you cant eat any more I may 
as well drive you down. The sergeants organized carriers at the wharf. They could say nothing now which wasnt 
formal; unreality cloaked their movements. Although they could touch each other it was as if the whole coastline of a 
continent was already between them; their words were like the stilted sentences of a bad letter-writer. 
 
 It was a relief to be on board and no longer alone together. Halifax, of the Public Works Department, bubbled over 
with false bonhomie. He cracked risky jokes: and told the two women to drink plenty of gin. Its good for the bow-
wows, he said. First thing to go wrong on board ship are the bowwows. Plenty of gin at night and what will cover a 
sixpence in the morning. The two women took stock of their cabin. They stood there in the shadow like cave-
dwellers; they spoke in undertones that the men couldnt catch: they were no longer wives - they were sisters 
belonging to a different race. You and I are not wanted, old man, Halifax said. Theyll be all right now. Me for the 
shore. 
 
 Ill come with you. Everything had been unreal, but this suddenly was real pain, the moment of death. Like a prisoner 
he had not believed in the trial: it had been a dream: the condemnation had been a dream and the truck ride, and then 
suddenly here he was with his back to the blank wall and everything was true. One steeled oneself to end 
courageously. They went to the end of the passage, leaving the Halifaxes the cabin. 
 
 Good-bye, dear. 
 
 Good-bye. Ticki, youll write every ... 
 

 Yes, dear. 
 
 Im an awful deserter. 
 
 No, no. This isnt the place for you. 
 
 It would have been different if theyd made you Commissioner. 
 
 Ill come down for my leave. Let me know if you run short of money before then. I can fix things. 
 
 Youve always fixed things for me. Ticki, youll be glad to have no more scenes. 
 
 Nonsense. 
 
 Do you love me, Ticki? 
 
 What do you think? 
 
 Say it. One likes to hear it - even if it isnt true. 
 
 I love you, Louise. Of course its true. 
 
 If I cant bear it down there alone, Ticki, Ill come back. 
 
 They kissed and went up on deck. From here the port was always beautiful; the thin layer of houses sparkled in the 
sun like quartz or lay in the shadow of the great green swollen hills. You are well escorted, Scobie said. The 
destroyers and the corvettes sat around like dogs: signal flags rippled and a helio flashed. The fishing boats rested on 
the broad bay under their brown butterfly sails. Look after yourself, Ticki. 
 
 Halifax came booming up behind them. Whos for shore? Got the police launch, Scobie? Marys down in the cabin, 
Mrs Scobie, wiping off the tears and putting on the powder for the passengers. 
 
 Good-bye, dear. 
 
 Good-bye. That was the real good-bye, the handshake with Halifax watching and the passengers from England 
looking curiously on. As the launch moved away she was almost at once indistinguishable; perhaps she had gone 
down to the cabin to join Mrs Halifax. The dream had finished: change was over: life had begun again. 
 
 I hate these good-byes, Halifax said. Glad when its all over. Think Ill go up to the Bedford and have a glass of beer. 
Join me? 
 
 Sorry. I have to go on duty. 
 
 I wouldnt mind a nice little black girl to look after me now Im alone, Halifax said. However, faithful and true, old 
fidelity, thats me, and as Scobie knew, it was. 
 
 In the shade of a tarpaulined dump Wilson stood, looking out across the bay. Scobie paused. He was touched by the 
plump sad boyish face. Sorry we didnt see you, he said and lied harmlessly. Louise sent her love. 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 
 
 
 
 It was nearly one in the morning before he returned. The light was out in the kitchen quarters and Ali was dozing on 
the steps of the house until the headlamps woke him, passing across his sleeping face. He jumped up and lit the way 
from the garage with his torch. 
 
 All right, Ali. Go to bed. 
 
 He let himself into the empty house - he had forgotten the deep tones of silence. Many a time he had come in late, 
after Louise was asleep, but there had never then been quite this quality of security and impregnability in the silence: 
his ears had listened for, even though they could not catch, the faint rustle of another persons breath, the tiny 
movement. Now there was nothing to listen for. He went upstairs and looked into the bedroom. Everything had been 
tidied away; there was no sign of Louises departure or presence: Ali had even removed the photograph and put it in a 
drawer. He was indeed alone. In the bathroom a rat moved, and once the iron roof crumpled as a late vulture settled 
for the night. 
 
 Scobie sat down in the living-room and put his feet upon another chair. He felt unwilling yet to go to bed, but he 
was sleepy - it had been a long day. Now that he was alone he could indulge in the most irrational act and sleep in a 
chair instead of a bed. The sadness was peeling off his mind, leaving contentment. He had done his duty: Louise was 
happy. He closed his eyes. 
 
 The sound of a car driving in off the road, headlamps moving across the window, woke him. He imagined it was a 
police car - that night he was the responsible officer and he thought that some urgent and probably unnecessary 
telegram had come in. He opened the door and found Yusef on the step. Forgive me, Major Scobie, I saw your light 
as I was passing, and I thought... 
 
 Come in, he said, I have whisky or would you prefer a little beer ...? 
 
 Yusef said with surprise, This is very hospitable of you, Major Scobie. 
 
 If I know a man well enough to borrow money from him, surely I ought to be hospitable. 
 
 A little beer then, Major Scobie. 
 
 The Prophet doesnt forbid it? 
 
 The Prophet had no experience of bottled beer or whisky. Major Scobie. We have to interpret his words in the 
modern light. He watched Scobie take the bottles from the ice chest Have you no refrigerator, Major Scobie? 
 
 No. Mines waiting for a spare part - it will go on waiting till the end of the war, I imagine. 
 
 I must not allow that. I have several spare refrigerators. Let me send one up to you. 
 
 Oh, I can manage all right, Yusef. Ive managed for two years. So you were passing by. 
 
 Well, not exactly. Major Scobie. That was a way of speaking. As a matter of fact I waited until I knew your boys 
were asleep, and I borrowed a car from a garage. My own car is so well known. And I did not bring a chauffeur. I 
didnt want to embarrass you, Major Scobie. 
 
 I repeat, Yusef, that I shall never deny knowing a man from whom I have borrowed money. 

 
 You do keep harping on that so, Major Scobie. That was just a business transaction. Four per cent is a fair interest. I 
ask for more only when I have doubt of the security. I wish you would let me send you a refrigerator. 
 
 What did you want to see me about? 
 
 First, Major Scobie, I wanted to ask after Mrs Scobie. Has she got a comfortable cabin? Is there anything she 
requires? The ship calls at Lagos, and I could- have anything she needs sent on board there. I would telegraph my 
agent. 
 
 I think shes quite comfortable. 
 
 Next, Major Scobie, I wanted to have a few words with you about diamonds. 
 
 Scobie put two more bottles of beer on the ice. He said slowly and gently, Yusef, I dont want you to think I am the 
kind of man who borrows money one day and insults his creditor the next to reassure his ego. 
 
 Ego? 
 
 Never mind. Self-esteem. What you like. Im not going to pretend that we havent in a way become colleagues in a 
business, but my duties are strictly confined to paying you four per cent. 
 
 I agree, Major Scobie. You have said all this before and I agree. I say again that I am never dreaming to ask you to 
do one thing for me. I would rather do things for you. 
 
 What a queer chap you are, Yusef. I believe you do like me. 
 
 Yes, I do like you, Major Scobie. Yusef sat on the edge of his chair which cut a sharp edge in his great expanding 
thighs: he was Ill at ease in any house but his own. And now may I talk to you about diamonds, Major Scobie? 
 
 Fire away then. 
 
 You know I think the Government is crazy about diamonds. They waste your time, the time of the Security Police: 
they send special agents down the coast: we even have one here - you know who, though nobody is supposed to 
know but the Commissioner: he spends money on every black or poor Syrian who tells him stories. Then he 
telegraphs it to England and all down the coast. And after all this, do they catch a single diamond? 
 
 This has got nothing to do with us, Yusef. 
 
 I want to talk to you as a friend, Major Scobie. There are diamonds and diamonds and Syrians and Syrians. You 
people hunt the wrong men. You want to stop industrial diamonds going to Portugal and then to Germany, or across 
the border to the Vichy French. But all the time you are chasing people who are not interested in industrial diamonds, 
people who just want to get a few gem stones in a safe place for when peace comes again. 
 
 In other words you? 
 
 Six times this month police have been into my stores making everything untidy. They will never find any industrial 
diamonds that way. Only small men are interested in industrial diamonds. Why, for a whole matchbox full of them, 
you would only get two hundred pounds. I call them gravel collectors, he said with contempt 
 
 Scobie said slowly, Sooner or later, Yusef, I felt sure that youd want something out of me. But you are going to get 
nothing but four per cent. Tomorrow Im giving a full confidential report of our business arrangement to the 
Commissioner. Of course he may ask for my resignation, but I dont think so. He trusts me. A memory pricked him. I 
think he trusts me. 

 
 Is that a wise thing to do, Major Scobie? 
 
 I think its very wise. Any kind of secret between us two would go bad in time. 
 
 Just as you like, Major Scobie. But I dont want anything from you, I promise. I would like to give you things 
always. You will not take a refrigerator, but I thought you would perhaps take advice, information. 
 
 Im listening, Yusef. 
 
 Tallits a small man. He is a Christian. Father Rank and other people go to his house. They say, If theres such a thing 
as an honest Syrian, then Tallits the man. Tallits not very successful, and that looks just the same as honesty. 
 
 Go on. 
 
 Tallits cousin is sailing in the next Portuguese boat. His luggage will be searched, of course, and nothing will be 
found. He will have a parrot with him in a cage. My advice, Major Scobie, is to let Tallits cousin go and keep his 
parrot. 
 
 Why let the cousin go? 
 
 You do not want to show your hand to Tallit. You can easily say the parrot is suffering from a disease and must stay. 
He will not dare to make a fuss. 
 
 You mean the diamonds are in its crop? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Has that trick been used before on the Portuguese boats? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 It looks to me as if well have to buy an aviary. 
 
 Will you act on that information, Major Scobie? 
 
 You give me information, Yusef. I dont give you information. 
 
 Yusef nodded and smiled. Raising his bulk with some care he touched Scobies sleeve quickly and shyly. You are 
quite right, Major Scobie. Believe me, I never want to do you any harm at all. I shall be careful and you be careful 
too, and everything will be all right. It was as if they were in a conspiracy together to do no harm: even innocence in 
Yusefs hands took on a dubious colour. He said, If you were to say a good word to Tallit sometimes it would be 
safer. The agent visits him. 
 
 I dont know of any agent. 
 
 You are quite right, Major Scobie. Yusef hovered like a fat moth on the edge of the light. He said, Perhaps if you 
were writing one day to Mrs Scobie you would give her my best wishes. Oh no, letters are censored. You cannot do 
that You could say, perhaps - no, better not. As long as you know, Major Scobie, that you have my best wishes - 
Stumbling on the narrow path, he made for his car. When he had turned on his lights he pressed his face against the 
glass: it showed up in the illumination of the dashboard, wide, pasty, untrustworthy, sincere. He made a tentative shy 
sketch of a wave towards Scobie, where he stood alone in the doorway of the quiet and empty house. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BOOK TWO 
 
 ----------------- 
 
 PART ONE 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THEYstood on the verandah of the D.C.s bungalow at Pende and watched the torches move on the other side of the 
wide passive river. So thats France, Druce said, using the native term for it. 
 
 Mrs Perrot said, Before the war we used to picnic in France. 
 
 Perrot joined them from the bungalow, a drink in either hand: bandy-legged, he wore his mosquito-boots outside his 
trousers like riding-boots, and gave the impression of having only just got off a horse. Heres yours, Scobie. He said, 
Of course ye know I find it hard to think of the French as enemies. My family came over with the Huguenots. It 
makes a difference, ye know. His lean long yellow face cut in two by a nose like a wound was all the time arrogantly 
on the defensive: the importance of Perrot was an article of faith with Perrot -doubters would be repelled, persecuted 
if he had the chance ... the faith would never cease to be proclaimed. 
 
 Scobie said, If they ever joined the Germans, I suppose this is one of the points where theyd attack. 
 
 Dont I know it, Perrot said, I was moved here in 1939. The Government had a shrewd idea of what was coming. 
Everythings prepared, ye know. Wheres the doctor? 
 
 I think hes taking a last look at the beds, Mrs Perrot said. You must be thankful your wifes arrived safely, Major 
Scobie. Those poor people over there. Forty days in the boats. It shakes one up to think of it. 
 
 Its the damned narrow channel between Dakar and Brazil that does it every time, Perrot said. 
 
 The doctor came gloomily out on to the verandah. 
 
 Everything over the river was still and blank again: the torches were all out. The light burning on the small jetty 
below the bungalow showed a few feet of dark water sliding by. A piece of wood came out of the dark and floated so 

slowly through the patch of light that Scobie counted twenty before it went into darkness again. 
 
 The Froggies havent behaved too badly this time, Druce said gloomily, picking a mosquito out of his glass. 
 
 Theyve only brought the women, the old men and the dying, the doctor said, pulling at his beard. They could hardly 
have done less. 
 
 Suddenly like an invasion of insects the voices whined and burred upon the farther bank, Groups of torches moved 
like fireflies here and there: Scobie, lifting his binoculars, caught a black face momentarily illuminated: a hammock 
pole: a white arm: an officers back. I think theyve arrived, he said. A long line of lights was dancing along the waters 
edge. Well, Mrs Perrot said, we may as well go in now. The mosquitoes whirred steadily around them like sewing 
machines. Druce exclaimed and struck his hand. 
 
 Come in, Mrs Perrot said. The mosquitoes here are all malarial. The windows of the living-room were netted to keep 
them out; the state air was heavy with the coming rains. 
 
 The stretchers will be across at six a.m., the doctor said. I think we are all set, Perrot. Theres one case of blackwater 
and a few cases of fever, but most are just exhaustion - the worst disease of all. Its what most of us die of in the end. 
 
 Scobie and I will see the walking cases, Druce said. Youll have to tell us how much interrogation they can stand, 
doctor. Your police will look after the carriers, Perrot, I suppose - see that they all go back the way they came. 
 
 Of course, Perrot said. Were stripped for action here. Have another drink? Mrs Perrot turned the knob of the radio 
and the organ of the Orpheum Cinema, Clapham, sailed to them over three thousand miles. From across the river the 
excited voices of the carriers rose and fell. Somebody knocked on the verandah door. Scobie shifted uncomfortably 
in his chair: the music of the Wrlitzer organ moaned and boomed. It seemed to him outrageously immodest. The 
verandah door opened and Wilson came in. 
 
 Hello, Wilson, Druce said. I didnt know you were here. 
 
 Mr Wilsons up to inspect the U.A.C. store, Mrs Perrot explained. I hope the rest-house at the store is all right. Its not 
often used. 
 
 Oh yes, its very comfortable, Wilson said. Why, Major Scobie, I didnt expect to see you. 
 
 I dont know why you didnt, Perrot said. I told you hed be here. Sit down and have a drink. Scobie remembered what 
Louise had once said to him about Wilson - phoney, she had called him. He looked across at Wilson and saw the 
blush at Perrots betrayal fading from the boyish face, and the little wrinkles that gathered round the eyes and gave the 
lie to his youth. 
 
 Have you heard from Mrs Scobie, sir? 
 
 She arrived safely last week. 
 
 Im glad. Im so glad. 
 
 Well, Perrot said, what are the scandals from the big city? The words big city came out with a sneer - Perrot couldnt 
bear the thought that there was a place where people considered themselves important and where he was not 
regarded. Like a Huguenot imagining Rome, he built up a picture of frivolity, viciousness and corruption. We 
bushfolk, Perrot went heavily on, live very quietly. Scobie felt sorry for Mrs Perrot; she had heard these phrases so 
often: she must have forgotten long ago the time of courtship when she had believed in them. Now she sat close up 
against the radio with the music turned low listening or pretending to listen to the old Viennese melodies, while her 
mouth stiffened in the effort to ignore her husband in his familiar part. Well, Scobie, what are our superiors doing in 
the city? 

 
 Oh, said Scobie vaguely, watching Mrs Perrot, nothing very much has been happening. People are too busy with the 
war ... 
 
 Oh, yes, Perrot said, so many files to turn over in the Secretariat. Id like to see them growing rice down here. Theyd 
know what work was. 
 
 I suppose the greatest excitement recently, Wilson said, would be the parrot, sir, wouldnt it? 
 
 Tallits parrot? Scobie asked. 
 
 Or Yusefs according to Tallit, Wilson said. Isnt that right, sir, or have I got the story wrong? 
 
 I dont think well ever know whats right, Scobie said. 
 
 But whatis the story? Were out of touch with the great world of affairs here. We have only the French to think about 
 
 Well, about three weeks ago Tallits cousin was leaving for Lisbon on one of the Portuguese ships. We searched his 
baggage and found nothing, but Id heard rumours that sometimes diamonds had been smuggled in a birds crop, so I 
kept the parrot back, and sure enough there were about a hundred pounds worth of industrial diamonds inside. The 
ship hadnt sailed, so we fetched Tallits cousin back on shore. It seemed a perfect case. 
 
 But it wasnt? 
 
 You cant beat a Syrian, the doctor said. 
 
 Tallits cousins boy swore that it wasnt Tallits cousins parrot - and so of course did Tallits cousin. Their story was 
that the small boy had substituted another bird to frame Tallit. 
 
 On behalf of Yusef, I suppose, the doctor said. 
 
 Of course. The trouble was the small boy disappeared. Of course there are two explanations of that - perhaps Yusef 
had given him his money and hed cleared off, or just as possibly Tallit had given him money to throw the blame on 
Yusef. 
 
 Down here, Perrot said, Id have had em both in jail. 
 
 Up in town, Scobie said, we have to think about the law. 
 
 Mrs Perrot turned the knob of the radio and a voice shouted with unexpected vigour, Kick him in the pants. 
 
 Im for bed, the doctor said. Tomorrows going to be a hard day. 
 
 Sitting up in bed under his mosquito-net Scobie opened his diary. Night after night for more years than he could 
remember he had kept a record - the barest possible record - of his days. If anyone argued a date with him he could 
check up; if he wanted to know which day the rains had begun in any particular year, when the last but one Director 
of Public Works had been transferred to East Africa, the facts were all there, in one of the volumes stored in the tin 
box under his bed at home. Otherwise he never opened a volume - particularly that volume where the barest fact of 
all was contained -C. died . He couldnt have told himself why he stored up this record - it was certainly not for 
posterity. Even if posterity were to be interested in the life of an obscure policeman in an unfashionable colony, it 
would have learned nothing from these cryptic entries. Perhaps the reason was that forty years ago at a preparatory 
school he had been given a prize - a copy ofAllan Quatermain - for keeping a diary throughout one summer holiday, 
and the habit had simply stayed. Even the form the diary took had altered very little.Had sausages for breakfast. Fine 
day. Walk in morning. Riding lesson in afternoon. Chicken for lunch. Treacle roll . Almost imperceptibly this record 

had changed intoLouise left. Y. called in the evening. First typhoon 2 a.m . His pen was powerless to convey the 
importance of any entry: only he himself, if he had cared to read back, could have seen in the last phrase but one the 
enormous breach pity had blasted through his integrity. Y. not Yusef. 
 
 Scobie wrote:May 5. Arrived Pende to meet survivors of s.s. 43 (he used the code number for security).Druce with 
me . He hesitated for a moment and then added,Wilson here . He closed the diary, and lying flat on his back under 
the net he began to pray. This also was a habit. He said the Our Father, the Hail Mary, and then, as sleep began to 
clog his lids, he added an act of contrition. It was a formality, not because he felt himself free from serious sin but 
because it had never occurred to him that his life was important enough one way or another. He didnt drink, he didnt 
fornicate, he didnt even lie, but he never regarded this absence of sin as virtue. When he thought about it at all, he 
regarded himself as a man in the ranks, the member of an awkward squad, who had no opportunity to break the more 
serious military rules. I missed Mass yesterday for insufficient reason. I neglected my evening prayers. This was no 
more than admitting what every soldier did - that he had avoided a fatigue when the occasion offered. O God, bless - 
but before he could mention names he was asleep. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 They stood on the jetty next morning: the first light lay in cold strips along the eastern sky. The huts in the village 
were still shuttered with silver. At two that morning there had been a typhoon - a wheeling pillar of black cloud 
driving up from the coast, and the air was cold yet with the rain. They stood with coat-collars turned up watching the 
French shore, and the carriers squatted on the ground behind them. Mrs Perrot came down the path from the 
bungalow wiping the white sleep from her eyes, and from across the water very faintly came the bleating of a goat. 
Are they late? Mrs Perrot asked. 
 
 No, we are early. Scobie kept his glasses focused on the opposite shore. He said, They are stirring. 
 
 Those poor souls, Mrs Perrot said, and shivered with the morning chill. 
 
 They are alive, the doctor said. 
 
 Yes. 
 
 In my profession we have to consider that important. 
 
 Does one ever get over a shock like that? Forty days in open boats. 
 
 If you survive at all, the doctor said, you get over it. Its failure people dont get over, and this you see is a kind of 
success. 
 
 They are fetching them out of the huts, Scobie said. I think I can count six stretchers. The boats are being brought in. 
 
 We were told to prepare for nine stretcher cases and four walking ones, the doctor said. I suppose thereve been some 
more deaths. 
 
 I may have counted wrong. They are carrying them down now. I think there are seven stretchers. I cant distinguish 
the walking cases. 
 

 The flat cold light, too feeble to clear the morning haze, made the distance across the river longer than it would seem 
at noon. A native dugout canoe bearing, one supposed, the walking cases came blackly out of the haze: it was 
suddenly very close to them. On the other shore they were having trouble with the motor of a launch; they could hear 
the irregular putter, like an animal out of breath. 
 
 First of the walking cases to come on shore was an elderly man with an arm in a sling. He wore a dirty white topee 
and a native cloth was draped over his shoulders; his free hand tugged and scratched at the white stubble on his face. 
He said in an unmistakably Scottish accent, Ahm Loder, chief engineer. 
 
 Welcome home, Mr Loder, Scobie said. Will you step up to the bungalow and the doctor will be with you in a few 
minutes? 
 
 Ah have no need of doctors. 
 
 Sit down and rest. Ill be with you soon. 
 
 Ah want to make ma report to a proper official. 
 
 Would you take him up to the house, Perrot? 
 
 Im the District Commissioner, Perrot said. You can make your report to me. 
 
 What are we waitin for then? the engineer said. Its nearly two months since the sinkin. Theres an awful lot of 
responsibility on me, for the captains dead. As they moved up the hill to the bungalow, the persistent Scottish voice, 
as regular as the pulse of a dynamo, came back to them. Ahm responsible to the owners. 
 
 The other three had come on shore, and across the river the tinkering in the launch went on: the sharp crack of a 
chisel, the clank of metal, and then again the spasmodic putter. Two of the new arrivals were the cannon fodder of all 
such occasions: elderly men with the appearance of plumbers who might have been brothers if they had not been 
called Forbes and Newall, uncomplaining men without authority, to whom things simply happened. One had a 
crushed foot and walked with a crutch; the other had his hand bound up with shabby strips of tropical shirt. They 
stood on the jetty with as natural a lack of interest as they would have stood at a Liverpool street corner waiting for 
the local to open. A stalwart grey-headed woman in mosquito-boots followed them out of the canoe. 
 
 Your name, madam? Druce asked, consulting a list. Are you Mrs Rolt? 
 
 I am not Mrs Rolt. I am Miss Malcott. 
 
 Will you go up to the house? The doctor... 
 
 The doctor has far more serious cases than me to attend to. 
 
 Mrs Perrot said, Youd like to lie down. 
 
 Its the last thing I want to do, Miss Malcott said. I am not in the least tired. She shut her mouth between every 
sentence. I am not hungry. I am not nervous. I want to get on. 
 
 Where to? 
 
 To Lagos. To the Educational Department. 
 
 Im afraid there will be a good many delays. 
 

 Ive been delayed two months. I cant stand delay. Work wont wait. Suddenly she lifted her face towards the sky and 
howled like a dog. 
 
 The doctor took her gently by the arm and said, Well do what we can to get you there right away. Come up to the 
house and do some telephoning. 
 
 Certainly, Miss Malcott said, theres nothing that cant be straightened on a telephone. 
 
 The doctor said to Scobie, Send those other two chaps up after us. They are all right. If you want to do some 
questioning, question them. 
 
 Druce said, Ill take them along. You stay here, Scobie, in case the launch arrives. French isnt my language. 
 
 Scobie sat down on the rail of the jetty and looked across the water. Now that the haze was lifting the other bank 
came closer; he could make out now with the naked eye the details of the scene: the white warehouse, the mud huts, 
the brass-work of the launch glittering in the sun: he could see the red fezzes of the native troops. He thought: Just 
such a scene as this and I might have been waiting for Louise to appear on a stretcher - or perhaps not waiting. 
Somebody settled himself on the rail beside him, but Scobie didnt turn his head. 
 
 A penny for your thoughts, sir. 
 
 I was just thinking that Louise is safe, Wilson. 
 
 I was thinking that too, sir. 
 
 Why do you always call me sir, Wilson? You are not in the police force. It makes me feel very old. 
 
 Im sorry, Major Scobie. 
 
 What did Louise call you? 
 
 Wilson. I dont think she liked my Christian name. 
 
 I believe theyve got that launch to start at last, Wilson. Be a good chap and warn the doctor. 
 
 A French officer in a stained white uniform stood in the bow: a soldier flung a rope and Scobie caught and fixed 
itBon jour , he said, and saluted. 
 
 The French officer returned his salute - a drained-out figure with a twitch in the left eyelid. He said in English, Good 
morning. I have seven stretcher cases for you here. 
 
 My signal says nine. 
 
 One died on the way and one last night. One from black-water and one from - from, my English is bad, do you say 
fatigue? 
 
 Exhaustion. 
 
 That is it. 
 
 If you will let my labourers come on board they will get the stretchers off. Scobie said to the carriers, Very softly. 
Go very softly. It was an unnecessary command: no white hospital attendants could lift and carry more gently. Wont 
you stretch your legs on shore? Scobie asked, or come up to the house and have some coffee? 

 
 No. No coffee, thank you. I will just see that all is right here. He was courteous and unapproachable, but all the time 
his left eyelid flickered a message of doubt and distress. 
 
 I have some English papers if you would like to see them. 
 
 No, no, thank you. I read English with difficulty. 
 
 You speak it very well. 
 
 That is a different thing. 
 
 Have a cigarette? 
 
 Thank you, no. I do not like American tobacco. 
 
 The first stretcher came on shore - the sheets were drawn up to the mans chin and it was impossible to tell from the 
stiff vacant face what his age might be. The doctor came down the hill to meet the stretcher and led the carriers away 
to the Government rest-house where the beds had been prepared. 
 
 I used to come over to your side, Scobie said, to shoot with your police chief. A nice fellow called Durand - a 
Norman. 
 
 He is not here any longer, the officer said 
 
 Gone home? 
 
 Hes in prison at Dakar, the French officer replied, standing like a figure-head in the bows, but the eye twitching and 
twitching. The stretchers slowly passed Scobie and turned up the hill: a boy who couldnt have been more than ten 
with a feverish face and a twig-like arm thrown out from his blanket: an old lady with grey hair falling every way 
who twisted and turned and whispered: a man with a bottle nose - a knob of scarlet and blue on a yellow face. One 
by one they turned up the hill - the carriers feet moving with the certainty of mules. And Pegrave;re Brle? Scobie 
asked. He was a good man. 
 
 He died last year of blackwater. 
 
 He was out here twenty years without leave, wasnt he? Hell be hard to replace. 
 
 He has not been replaced, the officer said. He turned and gave a short savage order to one of his men. Scobie looked 
at the next stretcher load and looked away again. A small girl -she couldnt have been more than six-lay on it. She 
was deeply and unhealthily asleep; her fair hair was tangled and wet with sweat; her open mouth was dry and 
cracked, and she shuddered regularly and spasmodically. Its terrible, Scobie said. 
 
 What is terrible? 
 
 A child like that. 
 
 Yes. Both parents were lost. But it is all right. She will die. 
 
 Scobie watched the bearers go slowly up the hill, their bare feet very gently flapping the ground. He thought: It 
would need all Father Brles ingenuity to explain that Not that the child would die - that needed no explanation. Even 
the pagans realized that the love of God might mean an early death, though the reason they ascribed was different; 
but that the child should have been allowed to survive the forty days and nights in the open boat - that was the 

mystery, to reconcile that with the love of God. 
 
 And yet he could believe in no God who was not human enough to love what he had created. How on earth did she 
survive till now? he wondered aloud. 
 
 The officer said gloomily, Of course they looked after her on the boat. They gave up their own share of the water 
often. It was foolish, of course, but one cannot always be logical. And it gave them something to think about. It was 
like the hint of an explanation - too faint to be grasped. He said, Here is another who makes one angry. 
 
 The face was ugly with exhaustion: the skin looked as though it were about to crack over the cheek-bones: only the 
absence of lines showed that it was a young face. The French officer said, She was just married - before she sailed. 
Her husband was lost. Her passport says she is nineteen. She may live. You see, she still has some strength. Her arms 
as thin as a childs lay outside the blanket, and her fingers clasped a book firmly. Scobie could see the wedding-ring 
loose on her dried-up finger. 
 
 What is it? 
 
 Timbres, the French officer said. He added bitterly, When this damned war started, she must have been still at 
school. 
 
 Scobie always remembered how she was carried into his life on a stretcher grasping a stamp-album with her eyes 
fast shut. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 In the evening they gathered together again for drinks, but they were subdued. Even Perrot was no longer trying to 
impress them. Druce said, Well, tomorrow Im off. You coming, Scobie? 
 
 I suppose so. 
 
 Mrs Perrot said, You got all you wanted? 
 
 All I needed. That chief engineer was a good fellow. He had it ready in his head. I could hardly write fast enough. 
When he stopped he went flat out. That was what was keeping him together - ma responsibility. You know theyd 
walked - the ones that could walk - five days to get here. 
 
 Wilson said, Were they sailing without an escort? 
 
 They started out in convoy, but they had some engine trouble - and you know the rule of the road nowadays: no 
waiting for lame ducks. They were twelve hours behind the convoy and were trying to pick up when they were 
sniped. The submarine commander surfaced and gave them direction. He said he would have given them a tow, but 
there was a naval patrol out looking for him. You see, you can really blame nobody for this sort of thing, and this 
sort of thing came at once to Scobies minds eye - the child with the open mouth, the thin hands holding the stamp-
album. He said, I suppose the doctor will look in when he gets a chance? 
 
 He went restlessly out on to the verandah, closing the netted door carefully behind him, and a mosquito immediately 
droned towards his ear. The skirring went on all the time, but when they drove to the attack they had the deeper tone 

of dive-bombers. The lights were showing in the temporary hospital, and the weight of that misery lay on his 
shoulders. It was as if he had shed one responsibility only to take on another. This was a responsibility he shared 
with all human beings, but that was no comfort, for it sometimes seemed to him that he was the only one who 
recognized his responsibility. In the Cities of the Plain a single soul might have changed the mind of God. 
 
 The doctor came up the steps on to the verandah. Hallo, Scobie, he said in a voice as bowed as his shoulders, taking 
the night air? Its not healthy in this place. 
 
 How are they? Scobie asked. 
 
 Therell be only two more deaths, I think. Perhaps only one. 
 
 The child? 
 
 Shell be dead by morning, the doctor said abruptly. 
 
 Is she conscious? 
 
 Never completely. She asks for her father sometimes: she probably thinks shes in the boat still. Theyd kept it from 
her there - said her parents were in one of the other boats. But of course theyd signalled to check up. 
 
 Wont she take you for her father? 
 
 No, she wont accept the beard. 
 
 Scobie said, Hows the school teacher? 
 
 Miss Malcott? Shell be all right. Ive given her enough bromide to put her out of action till morning. Thats all she 
needs - and the sense of getting somewhere. You havent got room for her in your police van, have you? Shed be 
better out of here. 
 
 Theres only just room for Druce and me with our boys and kit. Well be sending proper transport as soon as we get 
back. The walking cases all right? 
 
 Yes, theyll manage. 
 
 The boy and the old lady? 
 
 Theyll pull through. 
 
 Who is the boy? 
 
 He was at a prep. school in England. His parents in South Africa thought hed be safer with them. 
 
 Scobie said reluctantly, That young woman - with the stamp-album? It was the stamp-album and not the face that 
haunted his memory for no reason that he could understand, and the wedding-ring loose on the finger, as though a 
child had dressed up. 
 
 I dont know, the doctor said. If she gets through tonight - perhaps - 
 
 Youre dead tired, arent you? Go in and have a drink. 
 
 Yes. I dont want to be eaten by mosquitoes. The doctor opened the verandah door, and a mosquito struck at Scobies 

neck. He didnt bother to guard himself. Slowly, hesitatingly, he retraced the route the doctor had taken, down the 
steps on to the tough rocky ground. The loose stones turned under his boots. He thought of Pemberton. What an 
absurd thing it was to expect happiness in a world so full of misery. He had cut down his own needs to a minimum, 
photographs were put away in drawers, the dead were put out of mind: a razor-strop, a pair of rusty handcuffs for 
decoration. But one still has ones eyes, he thought, ones ears. Point me out the happy man and I will point you out 
either extreme egotism, evil - or else an absolute ignorance. 
 
 Outside the rest-house he stopped again. The lights inside would have given an extraordinary impression of peace if 
one hadnt known, just as the stars on this clear night gave also an impression of remoteness, security, freedom. If one 
knew, he wondered, the facts, would one have to feel pity even for the planets? if one reached what they called the 
heart of the matter? 
 
 Well, Major Scobie? It was the wife of the local missionary speaking to him. She was dressed in white like a nurse, 
and her flint-grey hair lay back from her forehead in ridges like wind erosion. Have you come to look on? she asked 
forbiddingly. 
 
 Yes, he said. He had no other idea of what to say: he couldnt describe to Mrs Bowles the restlessness, the haunting 
images, the terrible impotent feeling of responsibility and pity. 
 
 Come inside, Mrs Bowles said, and he followed her obediently like a boy. There were three rooms in the rest-house. 
In the first the walking cases had been put: heavily dosed they slept peacefully, as though they had been taking 
healthy exercise. In the second room were the stretcher cases for whom there was reasonable hope. The third room 
was a small one and contained only two beds divided by a screen: the six-year-old girl with the dry mouth, the young 
woman lying unconscious on her back, still grasping the stamp-album. A night-light burned in a saucer and cast thin 
shadows between the beds. If you want to be useful, Mrs Bowles said, stay here a moment. I want to go to the 
dispensary. 
 
 The dispensary? 
 
 The cook-house. One has to make the best of things. 
 
 Scobie felt cold and strange. A shiver moved his shoulders. He said, Cant I go for you? 
 
 Mrs Bowles said, Dont be absurd. Are you qualified to dispense? Ill only be away a few minutes. If the child shows 
signs of going call me. If she had given him time, he would have thought of some excuse, but she was already out of 
the room and he sat heavily down in the only chair. When he looked at the child, he saw a white communion veil 
over her head: it was a trick of the light on the mosquito net and a trick of his own mind. He put his head in his hands 
and wouldnt look. He had been in Africa when his own child died. He had always thanked God that he had missed 
that. It seemed after all that one never really missed a thing. To be a human being one had to drink the cup. If one 
were lucky on one day, or cowardly on another, it was presented on a third occasion. He prayed silently into his 
hands, O God, dont let anything happen before Mrs Bowles comes back. He could hear the heavy uneven breathing 
of the child. It was as if she were carrying a weight with great effort up a long hill: it was an inhuman situation not to 
be able to carry it for her. He thought: this is what parents feel year in and year out, and I am shrinking from a few 
minutes of it. They see their children dying slowly every hour they live. He prayed again, Father, look after her. Give 
her peace. The breathing broke, choked, began again with terrible effort. Looking between his fingers he could see 
the six-year-old face convulsed like a navvys with labour. Father, he prayed, give her peace. Take away my peace for 
ever, but give her peace. The sweat broke out on his hands. Father ... 
 
 He heard a small scraping voice repeat, Father, and looking up he saw the blue and bloodshot eyes watching him. 
He thought with horror: this is what I thought Id missed. He would have called Mrs Bowles, only he hadnt the voice 
to call with. He could see the breast of the child struggling for breath to repeat the heavy word; he came over to the 
bed and said, Yes, dear. Dont speak, Im here. The night-light cast the shadow of his clenched fist on the sheet and it 
caught the childs eye. An effort to laugh convulsed her, and he moved his hand away. Sleep, dear, he said, you are 
sleepy. Sleep. A memory that he had carefully buried returned and taking out his handkerchief he made the shadow 
of a rabbits head fall on the pillow beside her. Theres your rabbit, he said, to go to sleep with. It will stay until you 

sleep. Sleep. This sweat poured down his face and tasted in his mouth as salt as tears. Sleep. He moved the rabbits 
ears up and down, up and down. Then he heard Mrs Bowless voice, speaking low just behind him. Stop that, she said 
harshly, the childs dead. 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 In the morning he told the doctor that he would stay till proper transport arrived: Miss Malcott could have his place 
in the police van. It was better to get her moving, for the childs death had upset her again, and it was by no means 
certain that there would not be other deaths. They buried the child next day, using the only coffin they could get: it 
had been designed for a tall man. In this climate delay was unwise. Scobie did not attend the funeral service which 
was read by Mr Bowles, but the Perrots were present, Wilson and some of the court messengers: the doctor was busy 
in the rest-house. Instead, Scobie walked rapidly through the rice-fields, talked to the agricultural officer about 
irrigation, kept away. Later, when he had exhausted the possibilities of irrigation, he went into the store and sat in the 
dark among all the tins, the tinned jams and the tinned soups, the tinned butter, the tinned biscuits, the tinned milk, 
the tinned potatoes, the tinned chocolates, and waited for Wilson. But Wilson didnt come: perhaps the funeral had 
been too much for all of them, and they had returned to the D.C.s bungalow for drinks. Scobie went down to the jetty 
and watched the sailing boats move down towards the sea. Once he found himself saying aloud as though to a man at 
his elbow, Why didnt you let her drown? A court messenger looked at him askance and he moved on, up the hill. 
 
 Mrs Bowles was taking the air outside the rest-house: taking it literally, in doses like medicine. She stood there with 
her mouth opening and closing, inhaling and expelling. She said, Good afternoon, stiffly, and took another dose. You 
werent at the funeral, major? 
 
 No. 
 
 Mr Bowles and I can seldom attend a funeral together. Except when were on leave. 
 
 Are there going to be any more funerals? 
 
 One more, I think. The rest will be all right in time. 
 
 Which of them is dying? 
 
 The old lady. She took a turn for the worse last night. She had been getting on well. 
 
 He felt a merciless relief. He said, The boys all right? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 And Mrs Rolt? 
 
 Shes not out of danger, but I think shell do. Shes conscious now. 
 
 Does she know her husbands dead? 
 
 Yes. Mrs Bowles began to swing her arms, up and down, from the shoulder. Then she stood on tip-toe six times. He 
said, I wish there was something I could do to help. 

 
 Can you read aloud? Mrs Bowles asked, rising on her toes. 
 
 I suppose so. Yes. 
 
 You can read to the boy. Hes getting bored and boredoms bad for him. 
 
 Where shall I find a book? 
 
 There are plenty at the Mission. Shelves of them. 
 
 Anything was better than doing nothing. He walked up to the Mission and found, as Mrs Bowles said, plenty of 
books. He wasnt much used to books, but even to his eye these hardly seemed a bright collection for reading to a sick 
boy. Damp-stained and late Victorian, the bindings bore titles likeTwenty Years in the Mission Field ,Lost and 
Found ,The Narrow Way ,The Missionarys Warning . Obviously at some time there had been an appeal for books for 
the Mission library, and here were the scrapings of many pious shelves at home. ThePoems of John Oxenham 
,Fishers of Men . He took a book at random out of the shelf and returned to the rest-house. Mrs Bowles was in her 
dispensary mixing medicines. 
 
 Found something? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 You are safe with any of those books, Mrs Bowles said. They are censored by the committee before they come out. 
Sometimes people try to send the most unsuitable books. We are not teaching the children here to read in order that 
they shall read - well, novels. 
 
 No, I suppose not. 
 
 Let me see what youve chosen. 
 
 He looked at the title himself for the first time:A Bishop among the Bantus . 
 
 That should be interesting, Mrs Bowles said. He agreed doubtfully. 
 
 You blow where to find him. You can read to him for a quarter of an hour - not more. 
 
 The old lady had been moved into the innermost room where the child had died, the man with the bottle-nose had 
been shifted into what Mrs Bowles now called the convalescence ward, so that the middle room could be given up to 
the boy and Mrs Rolt. Mrs Rolt lay facing the wall with her eyes closed. They had apparently succeeded in removing 
the album from her clutch and it lay on a chair beside the bed. The boy watched Scobie with the bright intelligent 
gaze of fever. 
 
 My names Scobie. Whats yours? 
 
 Fisher. 
 
 Scobie said nervously, Mrs Bowles asked me to read to you. 
 
 What are you? A soldier? 
 
 No, a policeman. 
 

 Is it a murder story? 
 
 No. I dont think it is. He opened the book at random and came on a photograph of the bishop sitting in his robes on a 
hard drawing-room chair outside a little tin-roofed church: he was surrounded by Bantus, who grinned at the camera. 
 
 Id like a murder story. Have you ever been in a murder? 
 
 Not what youd call a real murder with clues and a chase. 
 
 What sort of a murder then? 
 
 Well, people get stabbed sometimes fighting. He spoke in a low voice so as not to disturb Mrs Rolt. She lay with her 
fist clenched on the sheet - a fist not much bigger than a tennis ball. 
 
 Whats the name of the book youve brought? Perhaps Ive read it. I readTreasure Island on the boat. I wouldnt mind a 
pirate story. Whats it called? 
 
 Scobie said dubiously,A Bishop among the Bantus , What does that mean? 
 
 Scobie drew a long breath. Well, you see, Bishop is the name of the hero. 
 
 But you saida Bishop. 
 
 Yes. His name was Arthur. 
 
 Its a soppy name. 
 
 Yes, but hes a soppy hero. Suddenly, avoiding the boys eyes, he noticed that Mrs Rolt was not asleep: she was 
staring at the wall, listening. He went wildly on, The real heroes are the Bantus. 
 
 What are Bantus? 
 
 They were a peculiarly ferocious lot of pirates who haunted the West Indies and preyed on all the shipping in that 
part of the Atlantic. 
 
 Does Arthur Bishop pursue them? 
 
 Yes. Its a kind of detective story too because hes a secret agent of the British Government. He dresses up as an 
ordinary seaman and sails on a merchantman so that he can be captured by the Bantus. You know they always give 
the ordinary seamen a chance to join them. If hed been an officer they would have made him walk the plank. Then he 
discovers all their secret passwords and hiding-places and their plans of raids, of course, so that he can betray them 
when the time is ripe. 
 
 He sounds a bit of a swine, the boy said. 
 
 Yes, and he falls in love with the daughter of the captain of the Bantus and thats when he turns soppy. But that 
comes near the end and we wont get as far as that. There are a lot of fights and murders before then. 
 
 It sounds all right. Lets begin. 
 
 Well, you see, Mrs Bowles told me I was only to stay a short time today, so Ive just told youabout the book, and we 
can start it tomorrow. 
 

 You may not be here tomorrow. There may be a murder or something. 
 
 But the book will be here. Ill leave it with Mrs Bowles. Its her book. Of course it may sound a bit different when she 
reads it 
 
 Just begin it, the boy pleaded. 
 
 Yes, begin it, said a low voice from the other bed, so low that he would have discounted it as an illusion if he hadnt 
looked up and seen her watching him, the eyes large as a childs in the starved face. Scobie said, Im a very bad reader. 
 
 Go on, the boy said impatiently. Anyone can read aloud. 
 
 Scobie found his eyes fixed on an opening paragraph which stated,I shall never forget my first glimpse of the 
continent where I was to labour for thirty of the best years of my life . He said slowly, From the moment that they 
left Bermuda the low lean rakehelly craft had followed in their wake. The captain was evidently worried, for he 
watched the strange ship continually through his spyglass. When night fell it was still on their trail, and at dawn it 
was the first sight that met their eyes. Can it be, Arthur Bishop wondered, that I am about to meet the object of my 
quest, Blackboard, the leader of the Bantus himself, or his blood-thirsty lieutenant ... He turned a page and was 
temporarily put out by a portrait of the bishop in whites with a clerical collar and a topee, standing before a wicket 
and blocking a ball a Bantu had just bowled him. 
 
 Go on, the boy said. 
 
 ... Batty Davis, so called because of his insane rages when he would send a whole ships crew to the plank? It was 
evident that Captain Duller feared the worst, for he crowded on all canvas and it seemed for a time that he would 
show the strange ship a clean pair of heels. Suddenly over the water came the boom of a gun, and a cannon-ball 
struck the water twenty yards ahead of them. Captain Buller had his glass to his eye and called down from the bridge 
to Arthur Bishop, The jolly Roger, by God. He was the only one of the ships company who knew the secret of 
Arthurs strange quest. 
 
 Mrs Bowles came briskly in. There, that will do. Quite enough for the day. And whats he been reading you, Jimmy? 
 
 Bishop among the Bantus. 
 
 I hope you enjoyed it 
 
 Its wizard. 
 
 Youre a very sensible boy, Mrs Bowles said approvingly. 
 
 Thank you, a voice said from the other bed and Scobie turned again reluctantly to take in the young devastated face. 
Will you read again tomorrow? 
 
 Dont worry Major Scobie, Helen, Mrs Bowles rebuked her. Hes got to get back to the port. Theyll all be murdering 
each other without him. 
 
 You a policeman? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 I knew a policeman once - in our town - the voice trailed off into sleep. He stood a minute looking down at her face. 
Like a fortune-tellers cards it showed unmistakably the past - a voyage, a loss, a sickness. In the next deal perhaps it 
would be possible to see the future. He took up the stamp-album and opened it at the fly-leaf: it was inscribed, Helen, 
from her loving father on her fourteenth birthday. Then it fell open at Paraguay, full of the decorative images of 

parakeets - the kind of picture stamps a child collects. Well have to find her some new stamps, he said sadly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Wilson was waiting for him outside. He said, Ive been looking for you, Major Scobie, ever since the funeral. 
 
 Ive been doing good works, Scobie said. 
 
 Hows Mrs Rolt? 
 
 They think shell pull through - and the boy too. 
 
 Oh yes, the boy. Wilson kicked a loose stone in the path and said, I want your advice, Major Scobie. Im a bit 
worried. 
 
 Yes? 
 
 You know Ive been down here checking up on our store. Well, I find that our manager has been buying military 
stuff. Theres a lot of tinned food that never came from our exporters. 
 
 Isnt the answer fairly simple - sack him? 
 
 It seems a pity to sack the small thief if he could lead one to the big thief, but of course thats your job. Thats why I 
wanted to talk to you. Wilson paused and that extraordinary tell-tale blush spread over his face. He said, You see, he 
got the stuff from Yusef s man. 
 
 I could have guessed that. 
 
 You could? 
 
 Yes, but you see, Yusef s man is not the same as Yusef. Its easy for him to disown a country storekeeper. In fact, for 
all we know, Yusef may be innocent Its unlikely, but not impossible. Your own evidence would point to it. After all 
youve only just learned yourself what your storekeeper was doing. 
 
 If there were clear evidence, Wilson said, would the police prosecute? 
 
 Scobie came to a standstill. Whats that? 
 
 Wilson blushed and mumbled. Then, with a venom that took Scobie completely by surprise, he said, There are 
rumours going about that Yusef is protected. 
 
 Youve been here long enough to know what rumours are worth. 
 
 They are all round the town. 
 
 Spread by Tallit - or Yusef himself. 

 
 Dont misunderstand me, Wilson said. Youve been very kind to me - and Mrs Scobie has too. I thought you ought to 
know whats been said. 
 
 Ive been here fifteen years, Wilson. 
 
 Oh, I know, Wilson said, this is impertinent. But people are worried about Tallits parrot. They say he was framed 
because Yusef wants him run out of town. 
 
 Yes, Ive heard that. 
 
 They say that you and Yusef are on visiting terms. Its a lie, of course, but... 
 
 Its perfectly true. Im also on visiting terms with the sanitary inspector, but it wouldnt prevent my prosecuting him ... 
He stopped abruptly. He said, I have no intention of defending myself to you, Wilson. 
 
 Wilson repeated, I just thought you ought to know. 
 
 You are too young for your job, Wilson. 
 
 My job? 
 
 Whatever it is. 
 
 For the second time Wilson took him by surprise, breaking out with a crack in his voice, Oh, you are unbearable. 
You are too damned honest to live. His face was aflame, even his knees seemed to blush with rage, shame, self-
depreciation. 
 
 You ought to wear a hat, Wilson, was all Scobie said. 
 
 They stood facing each other on the stony path between the D.C.s bungalow and the rest-house; the light lay flat 
across the rice-fields below them, and Scobie was conscious of how prominently they were silhouetted to the eyes of 
any watcher. You sent Louise away, Wilson said, because you were afraid of me. 
 
 Scobie laughed gently. This is sun, Wilson, just sun. Well forget about it in the morning. 
 
 She couldnt stand your stupid, unintelligent ... you dont know what a woman like Louise thinks. 
 
 I dont suppose I do. Nobody wants another person to know that, Wilson. 
 
 Wilson said, I kissed her that evening... 
 
 Its the colonial sport, Wilson. He hadnt meant to madden the young man: he was only anxious to let the occasion 
pass lightly, so that in the morning they could behave naturally to each other. It was just a touch of sun. he told 
himself; he had seen this happen times out of mind during fifteen years. 
 
 Wilson said, Shes too good for you. 
 
 For both of us. 
 
 How did you get the money to send her away? Thats what Id like to know. You dont earn all that. I know. Its printed 
in the Colonial Office List. If the young man had been less absurd, Scobie might have been angered and they might 
have ended friends. It was his serenity that stoked the flames. He said now, Lets talk about it tomorrow. Weve all 

been upset by that childs death. Come up to the bungalow and have a drink. He made to pass Wilson, but Wilson 
barred the way: a Wilson scarlet in the face with tears in the eyes. It was as if he had gone so far that he realized the 
only thing to do was to go farther - there was no return the way he had come. He said, Dont think I havent got my 
eye on you. 
 
 The absurdity of the phrase took Scobie off his guard. 
 
 You watch your step, Wilson said, and Mrs Rolt... 
 
 What on earth has Mrs Rolt got to do with it? 
 
 Dont think I dont know why youve stayed behind, haunted the hospital... While we were all at the funeral, you slunk 
down here ... 
 
 You really are crazy, Wilson, Scobie said. 
 
 Suddenly Wilson sat down; it was if he had been folded up by some large invisible hand He put his head in his 
hands and wept. 
 
 Its the sun, Scobie said. Just the sun. Go and lie down, and taking off his hat he put it on Wilsons head. Wilson 
looked up at him between his fingers - at the man who had seen his tears - with hatred. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THEsirens were wailing for a total black-out, wailing through the rain which fell interminably; the boys scrambled 
into the kitchen quarters, and bolted the door as though to protect themselves from some devil of the bush. Without 
pause the hundred and forty-four inches of water continued their steady and ponderous descent upon the roofs of the 
port. It was incredible to imagine that any human beings, let alone the dispirited fever-soaked defeated of Vichy 
territory, would open an assault at this time of the year, and yet of course one remembered the Heights of Abraham 
... A single feat of daring can alter the whole conception of what is possible. 
 
 Scobie went out into the dripping darkness holding his big striped umbrella: a mackintosh was too hot to wear. He 
walked all round his quarters; not a light showed, the shutters of the kitchen were closed, and the Creole houses were 
invisible behind the rain. A torch gleamed momentarily in the transport park across the road, but, when he shouted, it 
went out: a coincidence: no one there could have heard his voice above the hammering of the water on the roof. Up 
in Cape Station the officers mess was shining wetly towards the sea, but that was not his responsibility. The 
headlamps of the military lorries ran like a chain of beads along the edge of the hills, but that too was someone elses 
affair. 
 
 Up the road behind the transport park a light went suddenly on in one of the Nissen huts where the minor officials 

lived; it was a hut that had been unoccupied the day before and presumably some visitor had just moved in. Scobie 
considered getting his car from the garage, but the hut was only a couple of hundred yards away, and he walked. 
Except for the sound of the rain, on the road, on the roofs, on the umbrella, there was absolute silence: only the dying 
moan of the sirens continued for a moment or two to vibrate within the ear. It seemed to Scobie later that this was the 
ultimate border he had reached in happiness: being in darkness, alone, with the rain falling, without love or pity. 
 
 He knocked on the door of the Nissen hut, loudly because of the blows of the rain on the black roof like a tunnel. He 
had to knock twice before the door opened. The light for a moment blinded him. He said, Im sorry to bother you. 
One of your lights is showing. 
 
 A womans voice said, Oh, Im sorry. It was careless ... His eyes cleared, but for a moment he couldnt put a name to 
the intensely remembered features. He knew everyone in the colony. This was something that had come from outside 
... a river ... early morning ... a dying child. Why, he said, its Mrs Rolt, isnt it? I thought you were in hospital? 
 
 Yes. Who are you? Do I know you? 
 
 Im Major Scobie of the police. I saw you at Pende. 
 
 Im sorry, she said. I dont remember a thing that happened there. 
 
 Can I fix your light? 
 
 Of course. Please. He came in and drew the curtains close and shifted a table lamp. The hut was divided in two by a 
curtain: on one side a bed, a makeshift dressing-table: on the other a table, a couple of chairs - the few sticks of 
furniture of the pattern allowed to junior officials with salaries under 500 a year. He said, They havent done you very 
proud, have they? I wish Id known. I could have helped. He took her in closely now: the young worn-out face, with 
the hair gone dead ... The pyjamas she was wearing were too large for her: the body was lost in them: they fell in 
ugly folds. He looked to see whether the ring was still loose upon her finger, but it had gone altogether. 
 
 Everybodys been very kind, she said. Mrs Carter gave me a lovely pouf. 
 
 His eyes wandered: there was nothing personal anywhere: no photographs, no books, no trinkets of any kind, but 
then he remembered that she had brought nothing out of the sea except herself and a stamp-album. 
 
 Is there any danger? she asked anxiously, 
 
 Danger? 
 
 The sirens. 
 
 Oh, none at all. These are just alarms. We get about one a month. Nothing ever happens. He took another long look 
at her. They oughtnt to have let you out of hospital so soon. Its not six weeks ... 
 
 I wanted to go. I wanted to be alone. People kept on coming to see me. 
 
 Well, Ill be going now myself. Remember if you ever want anything Im just down the road. The two-storeyed white 
house beyond the transport park sitting in a swamp. 
 
 Wont you stay till the rain stops? she asked. 
 
 I dont think Id better, he said. You see, it goes on until September, and won out of her a stiff unused smile. 
 
 The noise is awful. 

 
 You get used to it in a few weeks. Like living beside a railway. But you wont have to. Theyll be sending you home 
very soon. Theres a boat in a fortnight. 
 
 Would you like a drink? Mrs Carter gave me a bottle of gin as well as the pouf. 
 
 Id better help you to drink it then. He noticed when she produced the bottle that nearly half had gone. Have you any 
limes? 
 
 No. 
 
 Theyve given you a boy, I suppose? 
 
 Yes, but I dont know what to ask him for. And he never seems to be around. 
 
 Youve been drinking it neat? 
 
 Oh no, I havent touched it. The boy upset it - that was his story. 
 
 Ill talk to your boy in the morning, Scobie said. Got an ice-box? 
 
 Yes, but the boy cant get me any ice. She sat weakly down in a chair. Dont think me a fool. I just dont know where I 
am. Ive never been anywhere like this. 
 
 Where do you come from? 
 
 Bury St Edmunds. In Suffolk. I was there eight weeks ago. 
 
 Oh no, you werent. You were in that boat. 
 
 Yes. I forgot the boat. 
 
 They oughtnt to have pushed you out of the hospital all alone like this. 
 
 Im all right. They had to have my bed. Mrs Carter said shed find room for me, but I wanted to be alone. The doctor 
told them to do what I wanted. 
 
 Scobie said, I can understand you wouldnt want to be with Mrs Carter, and youve only got to say the word and Ill be 
off too. 
 
 Id rather you waited till the All Clear. Im a bit rattled, you know. The stamina of women had always amazed Scobie. 
This one had survived forty days in an open boat and she talked about being rattled. He remembered the casualties in 
the report the chief engineer had made: the third officer and two seamen who had died, and the stoker who had gone 
off his head as a result of drinking sea water and drowned himself. When it came to strain it was always a man who 
broke. Now she lay back on her weakness as on a pillow. 
 
 He said, Have you thought out things? Shall you go back to Bury? 
 
 I dont know. Perhaps Ill get a job. 
 
 Have you had any experience? 
 
 No, she confessed, looking away from him. You see, I only left school a year ago. 

 
 Did they teach you anything? It seemed to him that what she needed more than anything else was just talk, silly 
aimless talk. She thought that she wanted to be alone, but what she was afraid of was the awful responsibility of 
receiving sympathy. How could a child like that act the part of a woman whose husband had been drowned more or 
less before her eyes? As well expect her to act Lady Macbeth. Mrs Carter would have had no sympathy with her 
inadequacy. Mrs Carter, of course, would have known how to behave, having buried one husband and three children. 
 
 She said, I was best at netball, breaking in on his thoughts. 
 
 Well, he said, you havent quite the figure for a gym instructor. Or have you, when you are well? 
 
 Suddenly and without warning she began to talk. It was as if by the inadvertent use of a password he had induced a 
door to open: he couldnt tell now which word he had used. Perhaps it was gym instructor, for she began rapidly to 
tell him about the netball (Mrs Carter, he thought, had probably talked about forty days in an open boat and a three-
weeks-old husband). She said, I was in the school team for two years, leaning forward excitedly with her chin on her 
hand and one bony elbow upon a bony knee. With her white skin -unyellowed yet by atabrine or sunlight - he was 
reminded of a bone the sea has washed and cast up. A year before that I was in the second team. I would have been 
captain if Id stayed another year. In 1940 we beat Roedean and tied with Cheltenham. 
 
 He listened with the intense interest one feels in a strangers life, the interest the young mistake for love. He felt the 
security of his age sitting there listening with a glass of gin in his hand and the rain coming down. She told him her 
school was on the downs just behind Seaport: they had a French mistress called Mile Dupont who had a vile temper. 
The headmistress could read Greek just like English - Virgil... 
 
 I always thought Virgil was Latin. 
 
 Oh yes. I meant Homer. I wasnt any good at Classics. 
 
 Were you good at anything besides netball? 
 
 I think I was next best at maths, but I was never any good at trigonometry. In summer they went into Seaport and 
bathed, and every Saturday they had a picnic on the downs -sometimes a paper-chase on ponies, and once a 
disastrous affair on bicycles which spread out over the whole country, and two girls didnt return till one in the 
morning. He listened fascinated, revolving the heavy gin in his glass without drinking. The sirens squealed the All 
Clear through the rain, but neither of them paid any attention. He said, And then in the holidays you went back to 
Bury? 
 
 Apparently her mother had died ten years ago, and her father was a clergyman attached in some way to the 
Cathedral. They had a very small house on Angel Hill. Perhaps she had not been as happy at Bury as at school, for 
she tacked back at the first opportunity to discuss the games mistress whose name was the same as her own - Helen, 
and for whom the whole of her year had an enormous schwarmerei. She laughed now at this passion in a superior 
way: it was the only indication she gave him that she was grown-up, that she was - or rather had been - a married 
woman. 
 
 She broke suddenly off and said. What nonsense it is telling you all this. 
 
 I like it. 
 
 You havent once asked me about - you know - 
 
 He did know, for he had read the report. He knew exactly the water ration for each person in the boat - a cupful 
twice a day, which had been reduced after twenty-one days to half a cupful. That had been maintained until within 
twenty-four hours of the rescue mainly because the deaths had left a small surplus. Behind the school buildings of 
Seaport, the totem-pole of the netball game, he was aware of the intolerable surge, lifting the boat and dropping it 

again, lifting it and dropping it. I was miserable when I left - it was the end of July. I cried in the taxi all the way to 
the station. Scobie counted the months - July to April: nine months: the period of gestation, and what had been born 
was a husbands death and the Atlantic pushing them like wreckage towards the long flat African beach and the sailor 
throwing himself over the side. He said, This is more interesting. I can guess the other. 
 
 What a lot Ive talked. Do you know, I think I shall sleep tonight. 
 
 Havent you been sleeping? 
 
 It was the breathing all round me at the hospital. People turning and breathing and muttering. When the light was 
out, it was just like - you know. 
 
 Youll sleep quietly here. No need to be afraid of anything. Theres a watchman always on duty. Ill have a word with 
him. 
 
 Youve been so kind, she said. Mrs Carter and the others - theyve all been kind. She lifted her worn, frank, childish 
face and said, I like you so much. 
 
 I like you too, he said gravely. They both had an immense sense of security: they were friends who could never be 
anything else than friends - they were safely divided by a dead husband, a living wife, a father who was a clergyman, 
a games mistress called Helen, and years and years of experience. They hadnt got to worry about what they should 
say to each other. 
 
 He said, Good night. Tomorrow Im going to bring you some stamps for your album. 
 
 How did you know about my album? 
 
 Thats my job. Im a policeman. 
 
 Good night. 
 
 He walked away, feeling an extraordinary happiness, but this he would not remember as happiness, as he would 
remember setting out in the darkness, in the rain, alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 From eight-thirty in the morning until eleven he dealt with a case of petty larceny; there were six witnesses to 
examine, and he didnt believe a word that any of them said. In European cases there are words one believes and 
words one distrusts: it is possible to draw a speculative line between the truth and the lies; at least the cui bono 
principle to some extent operates, and it is usually safe to assume, if the accusation is theft and there is no question of 
insurance, that something has at least been stolen. But here one could make no such assumption: one could draw no 
lines. He had known police officers whose nerves broke down in the effort to separate a single grain of incontestable 
truth; they ended, some of them, by striking a witness, they were pilloried in the local Creole papers and were 
invalided home or transferred. It woke in some men a virulent hatred of a black skin, but Scobie had long ago, during 
his fifteen years, passed through the dangerous stages; now lost in the tangle of lies he felt an extraordinary affection 
for these people who paralysed an alien form of justice by so simple a method. 
 

 At last the office was clear again. There was nothing further on the charge-sheet, and taking out a pad and placing 
some blotting-paper under his wrist to catch the sweat, he prepared to write to Louise. Letter-writing never came 
easily to him. Perhaps because of his police training, he could never put even a comforting lie upon paper over his 
signature. He had to be accurate: he could comfort only by omission. So now, writing the two wordsMy dear upon 
the paper, he prepared to omit He wouldnt write that he missed her, but he would leave out any phrase that told 
unmistakably that he was content.My dear, you must forgive a short letter again. You know Im not much of a hand at 
letter writing. I got your third letter yesterday, the one telling me that you were staying -with Mrs Halifaxs friend for 
a week outside Durban. Here everything is quiet. We had an alarm last night, but it turned out that an American pilot 
had mistaken a school of porpoises for submarines. The rains have started, of course. The Mrs Rolt I told you about 
in my last letter is out of hospital and theyve put her to wait for a boat in one of the Nissen huts behind the transport 
park, Ill do what I can to make her comfortable. The boy is still in hospital, but all right. I natty think thats about all 
the news. The Tallit affair drags on - I dont think anything will come of it in the end. Ali had to go and have a couple 
of teeth out the other day. What a fuss he made! I had to drive him to the hospital or hed never have gone. He 
paused: he hated the idea of the censors - who happened to be Mrs Carter and Galloway - reading these last phrases 
of affection.Look after yourself, my dear, and dont worry about me. As long as you are happy, Im happy. In another 
nine months I can take my leave and well be together. He was going to write, You are in my mind always, but that 
was not a statement he could sign. He wrote instead,you are in mymind so often during the day , and then pondered 
the signature. Reluctantly, because he believed it would please her, he wroteYour Ticki . For a moment he was 
reminded of that other letter signed Dicky which had come back to him two or three times in dreams. 
 
 The sergeant entered, marched to the middle of the floor, turned smartly to face him, saluted. He had time to address 
the envelope while all this was going on. Yes, sergeant? 
 
 The Commissioner, sah, he ask you to see him. 
 
 Right. 
 
 The Commissioner was not alone. The Colonial Secretarys face shone gently with sweat in the dusky room, and 
beside him sat a tall bony man Scobie had not seen before - he must have arrived by air, for there had been no ship in 
during the last ten days. He wore a colonels badges as though they didnt belong to him on his loose untidy uniform. 
 
 This is Major Scobie, Colonel Wright. He could tell the Commissioner was worried and irritated. He said, Sit down, 
Scobie. Its about this Tallit business. The rain darkened the room and kept out the air. Colonel Wright has come up 
from Cape Town to hear about it. 
 
 From Cape Town, sir? 
 
 The Commissioner moved his legs, playing with a pen-knife. He said, Colonel Wright is the M.I.5 representative. 
 
 The Colonial Secretary said softly, so that everybody had to bend their heads to hear him, The whole things been 
unfortunate. The Commissioner began to whittle the corner of his desk, ostentatiously not listening. I dont think the 
police should have acted - quite in the way they did - not without consultation. 
 
 Scobie said, Ive always understood it was our duty to stop diamond smuggling. 
 
 In his soft obscure voice the Colonial Secretary said, There werent a hundred pounds worth of diamonds found. 
 
 They are the only diamonds that have ever been found. 
 
 The evidence against Tallit, Scobie, was too slender for an arrest. 
 
 He wasnt arrested. He was interrogated. 
 
 His lawyers say he was brought forcibly to the police station. 

 
 His lawyers are lying. You surely realize that much. 
 
 The Colonial Secretary said to Colonel Wright, You see the kind of difficulty we are up against. The Roman 
Catholic Syrians are claiming they are a persecuted minority and that the police are in the pay of the Moslem 
Syrians. 
 
 Scobie said, The same thing would have happened the other way round - only it would have been worse. Parliament 
has more affection for Moslems than Catholics. He had a sense that no one had mentioned the real purpose of this 
meeting. The Commissioner flaked chip after chip off his desk, disowning everything, and Colonel Wright sat back 
on his shoulder-blades saying nothing at all. 
 
 Personally, the Colonial Secretary said, I would always ... and the soft voice faded off into inscrutable murmurs 
which Wright, stuffing his fingers into one ear, leaning his head sideways as though he were trying to hear something 
through a defective telephone, might possibly have caught. 
 
 Scobie said, I couldnt hear what you said. 
 
 I said personally Id always take Tallits word against Yusefs. 
 
 That, Scobie said, is because you have only been in this colony five years. 
 
 Colonel Wright suddenly interjected, How many years have you been here, Major Scobie? 
 
 Fifteen. 
 
 Colonel Wright grunted non-committally. 
 
 The Commissioner stopped whittling the corner of his desk and drove his knife viciously into the top. He said, 
Colonel Wright wants to know the source of your information, Scobie. 
 
 You know that, sir. Yusef. Wright and the Colonial Secretary sat side by side watching him. He stood back with 
lowered head, waiting for the next move, but no move came. He knew they were waiting for him to amplify his bald 
reply, and he knew too that they would take it for a confession of weakness if he did. The silence became more and 
more intolerable: it was like an accusation. Weeks ago he had told Yusef that he intended to let the Commissioner 
know the details of his loan; perhaps he had really had that intention, perhaps he had been bluffing; he couldnt 
remember now. He only knew that now it was too late. That information should have been given before taking action 
against Tallit: it could not be an afterthought. In the corridor behind the office Fraser passed whistling his favourite 
tune; he opened the door of the office, said, Sorry, sir, and retreated again, leaving a whiff of warm Zoo smell behind 
him. The murmur of the rain went on and on. The Commissioner took the knife out of the table and began to whittle 
again; it was as if, for a second time, he were deliberately disowning the whole business. The Colonial Secretary 
cleared his throat Yusef, he repeated. 
 
 Scobie nodded. 
 
 Colonel Wright said, Do you consider Yusef trustworthy? 
 
 Of course not, sir. But one has to act on what information is available - and this information proved correct up to a 
point. 
 
 Up to what point? 
 
 The diamonds were there. 
 

 The Colonial Secretary said, Do you get much information from Yusef? 
 
 This is the first time Ive had any at all. 
 
 He couldnt catch what the Colonial Secretary said beyond the word Yusef. 
 
 I cant hear what you say, sir. 
 
 I said are you in touch with Yusef? 
 
 I dont know what you mean by that 
 
 Do you see him often? 
 
 I think in the last three months I have seen him three - no, four times. 
 
 On business? 
 
 Not necessarily. Once I gave him a lift home when his car had broken down. Once he came to see me when I had 
fever at Bamba. Once ... 
 
 We are not cross-examining you, Scobie, the Commissioner said. 
 
 I had an idea, sir, that these gentlemen were. 
 
 Colonel Wright uncrossed his long legs and said, Lets boil it down to one question. Tallit, Major Scobie, has made 
counter-accusations - against the police, against you. He says in effect that Yusef has given you money. Has he? 
 
 No, sir. Yusef has given me nothing. He felt an odd relief that he had not yet been called upon to lie. 
 
 The Colonial Secretary said, Naturally sending your wife to South Africa was well within your private means. 
Scobie sat back in his chair, saying nothing. Again he was aware of the hungry silence waiting for his words. 
 
 You dont answer? the Colonial Secretary said impatiently. 
 
 I didnt know you had asked a question. I repeat - Yusef has given me nothing. 
 
 Hes a man to beware of, Scobie. 
 
 Perhaps when you have been here as long as I have youll realize the police are meant to deal with people who are 
not received at the Secretariat. 
 
 We dont want our tempers to get warm, do we? 
 
 Scobie stood up. Can I go, sir? If these gentlemen have finished with me ... I have an appointment. The sweat stood 
on his forehead; his heart jumped with fury. This should be the moment of caution, when the blood runs down the 
flanks and the red cloth waves. 
 
 Thats all right, Scobie, the Commissioner said. 
 
 Colonel Wright said, You must forgive me for bothering you. I received a report. I had to take the matter up 
officially. Im quite satisfied. 
 

 Thank you, sir. But the soothing words came too late: the damp face of the Colonial Secretary filled his field of 
vision. The Colonial Secretary said softly, Its just a matter of discretion, thats all. 
 
 If Im wanted for the next half an hour, sir, Scobie said to the Commissioner, I shall be at Yusefs 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 After all they had forced him to tell a kind of lie: he had no appointment with Yusef. All the same he wanted a few 
words with Yusef; it was just possible that he might yet clear up, for his own satisfaction, if not legally, the Tallit 
affair. Driving slowly through the rain - his windscreen wiper had long ceased to function - he saw Harris struggling 
with his umbrella outside the Bedford Hotel. 
 
 Can I give you a lift? Im going your way. 
 
 The most exciting things have been happening, Harris said. His hollow face shone with rain and enthusiasm. Ive got 
a house at last. 
 
 Congratulations. 
 
 At least its not a house: its one of the huts up your way. But its a home. Harris said. Ill have to share it, but its a 
home. 
 
 Whos sharing it with you? 
 
 Im asking Wilson, but hes gone away - to Lagos for a week or two. The damned elusive Pimpernel. Just when I 
wanted him. And that brings me to the second exciting thing. Do you know Ive discovered we were both at 
Downham? 
 
 Downham? 
 
 The school, of course. I went into his room to borrow his ink while he was away, and there on his table I saw a copy 
of the oldDownhamian . 
 
 What a coincidence, Scobie said. 
 
 And do you know - its really been a day of extraordinary happenings - I was looking through the magazine and there 
at the end was a page which said, The Secretary of the old Downhamian Association would like to get in touch with 
the following old boys with whom we have lost touch - and mere half-way down was my own name, in print, large 
as life. What do you think of that? 
 
 What did you do? 
 
 Directly I got to the office I sat down and wrote - before I touched a cable, except of course the most immediates, 
but then I found Id forgotten to put down the secretarys address, so back I had to go for the paper. You wouldnt care 
to come in, would you, and see what Ive written? 
 

 I cant stay long. Harris had been given an office in a small unwanted room in the Elder Dempster Companys 
premises. It was the size of an old-fashioned servants bedroom and this appearance was enhanced by a primitive 
washbasin with one cold tap and a gas-ring. A table littered with cable forms was squashed between the washbasin 
and a window no larger than a port-hole which looked straight out on to the water-front and the grey creased bay. An 
abridged version ofIvanhoe for the use of schools, and half a loaf of bread stood in an out-tray. Excuse the muddle, 
Harris said. Take a chair, but there was no spare chair. 
 
 Whereve I put it? Harris wondered aloud, turning over the cables on his desk. Ah, I remember. He opened Ivanhoe 
and fished out a folded sheet. Its only a rough draft, he said with anxiety. Of course Ive got to pull it together. I think 
Id better keep it back till Wilson comes. You see Ive mentioned him. 
 
 Scobie read,Dear Secretary, - It was just by chance I came on a copy of the Old Downhamian which another old 
Downhamian, E. Wilson (1923-1928), had in his room. Im afraid Ive been out of touch with the old place for a great 
many years and I was very pleased and a bit guilty to see that you have been trying to get into touch with me. 
Perhaps youd like to know a bit about what Im doing in the white mans grave, but as Im a cable censor you will 
understand that I cant tell you much about my work. That will have to wait till weve won the war. We are in the 
middle of the rains now - and how it does rain. Theres a lot of fever about, but Ive only had one dose and E. Wilson 
has so far escaped altogether. We are sharing a little house together, so that you can feel that old Downhamians even 
in this wild and distant part stick together. Weve got an old Downhamian team of two and go out hunting together 
but only cockroaches {Ha! Ha!). Well, I must stop now and get on with winning the war. Cheerio to all old 
Downhamians from quite an old Coaster. 
 
 Scobie looking up met Harriss anxious and embarrassed gaze. Do you think its on the right lines? he asked. I was a 
bit doubtful about Dear Secretary. 
 
 I think youve caught the tone admirably. 
 
 Of course you know it wasnt a very good school, and I wasnt very happy there. In fact I ran away once. 
 
 And now theyve caught up with you. 
 
 It makes you think, doesnt it? said Harris. He stared out over the grey water with tears in his bloodshot eyes. Ive 
always envied people who were happy there, he said. 
 
 Scobie said consolingly, I didnt much care for school myself. 
 
 To start off happy, Harris said. It must make an awful difference afterwards. Why, it might become a habit, mightnt 
it? He took the piece of bread out of the out-tray and dropped it into the wastepaper-basket. I always mean to get this 
place tidied up, he said. 
 
 Well, I must be going, Harris. Im glad about the house -and the old Downhamian. 
 
 I wonder if Wilson was happy there, Harris brooded. He tookIvanhoe out of the out-tray and looked around for 
somewhere to put it, but there wasnt any place. He put it back again. I dont suppose he was, he said, or why should 
he have turned up here? 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 

 
 Scobie left his car immediately outside Yusefs door: it was like a gesture of contempt in the face of the Colonial 
Secretary. He said to the steward, I want to see your master. I know the way. 
 
 Massa out. 
 
 Then Ill wait for him. He pushed the steward to one side and walked in. The bungalow was divided into a succession 
of small rooms identically furnished with sofas and cushions and low tables for drinks like the rooms in a brothel. He 
passed from one to another, pulling the curtains aside, till he reached the little room where nearly two months ago 
now he had lost his integrity. On the sofa Yusef lay asleep. 
 
 He lay on his back in his white duck trousers with his mouth open, breathing heavily. A glass was on a table at his 
side, and Scobie noticed the small white grains at the bottom. Yusef had taken a bromide. Scobie sat down at his side 
and waited. The window was open, but the rain shut out the air as effectively as a curtain. Perhaps it was merely the 
want of air that caused the depression which now fell on his spirits, perhaps it was because he had returned to the 
scene of a crime. Useless to tell himself that he had committed no offence. Like a woman who has made a loveless 
marriage he recognized in the room as anonymous as an hotel bedroom the memory of an adultery. 
 
 Just over the window there was a defective gutter which emptied itself like a tap, so that all the time you could hear 
the two sounds of the rain - the murmur and the gush. Scobie lit a cigarette, watching Yusef. He couldnt feel any 
hatred of the man. He had trapped Yusef as consciously and as effectively as Yusef had trapped him. The marriage 
had been made by both of them. Perhaps the intensity of the watch he kept broke through the fog of bromide: the fat 
thighs shifted on the sofa. Yusef grunted, murmured, dear chap in his deep sleep, and turned on his side, facing 
Scobie. Scobie stared again round the room, but he had examined it already thoroughly enough when he came here to 
arrange his loan: there was no change - the same hideous mauve silk cushions, the threads showing where the damp 
was rotting the covers, the tangerine curtains. Even the blue syphon of soda was in the same place: they had an 
eternal air like the furnishings of hell. There were no bookshelves, for Yusef couldnt read: no desk because he 
couldnt write. It would have been useless to search for papers - papers were useless to Yusef. Everything was inside 
that large Roman head. 
 
 Why ... Major Scobie ... The eyes were open and sought his; blurred with bromide they found it difficult to focus. 
 
 Good morning, Yusef. For once Scobie had him at a disadvantage. For a moment Yusef seemed about to sink again 
into drugged sleep; then with an effort he got on an elbow. 
 
 I wanted to have a word about Tallit, Yusef. 
 
 Tallit... forgive me, Major Scobie .. . 
 
 And the diamonds. 
 
 Crazy about diamonds, Yusef brought out with difficulty in a voice half-way to sleep. He shook his head, so that the 
white lick of hair flapped; then putting out a vague hand he stretched for the syphon. 
 
 Did you frame Tallit, Yusef? 
 
 Yusef dragged the syphon towards him across the table knocking over the bromide glass; he turned the nozzle 
towards his face and pulled the trigger. The soda water broke on his face and splashed all round him on the mauve 
silk. He gave a sigh of relief and satisfaction, like a man under a shower on a hot day. What is it, Major Scobie, is 
anything wrong? 
 
 Tallit is not going to be prosecuted. 
 
 He was like a tired man dragging himself out of the sea: the tide followed him. He said, You must forgive me, Major 

Scobie. I have not been sleeping well. He shook his head up and down thoughtfully, as a man might shake a box to 
see whether anything rattles. You were saying something about Tallit, Major Scobie, and he explained again, It is the 
stocktaking. All the figures. Three four stores. They try to cheat me because its all in my head. 
 
 Tallit, Scobie repeated, wont be prosecuted. 
 
 Never mind. One day he will go too far. 
 
 Were they your diamonds, Yusef? 
 
 My diamonds? They have made you suspicious of me, Major Scobie. 
 
 Was the small boy in your pay? 
 
 Yusef mopped the soda water off his face with the back of his hand. Of course he was, Major Scobie. That was 
where I got my information. 
 
 The moment of inferiority had passed; the great head had shaken itself free of the bromide, even though the limbs 
still lay sluggishly spread over the sofa. Yusef, Im not your enemy. I have a liking for you. 
 
 When you say that, Major Scobie, how my heart beats. He pulled his shirt wider, as though to show the actual 
movement of the heart and little streams of soda water irrigated the black bush on his chest. I am too fat, he said. 
 
 I would like to trust you, Yusef. Tell me the truth. Were the diamonds yours or Tallits? 
 
 I always want to speak the truth to you, Major Scobie. I never told you the diamonds were Tallits. 
 
 They were yours? 
 
 Yes, Major Scobie. 
 
 What a fool you have made of me, Yusef. If only I had a witness here, Id run you in. 
 
 I didnt mean to make a fool of you, Major Scobie. I wanted Tallit sent away. It would be for the good of everybody 
if he was sent away. It is no good the Syrians being in two parties. If they were in one party you would be able to 
come to me and say, Yusef, the Government wants the Syrians to do this or that, and I should be able to answer, It 
shall be so. 
 
 And the diamond smuggling would be in one pair of hands. 
 
 Oh, the diamonds, diamonds, diamonds, Yusef wearily complained. I tell you, Major Scobie, that I make more 
money in one year from my smallest store than I would make in three years from diamonds. You cannot understand 
how many bribes are necessary. 
 
 Well, Yusef, Im taking no more information from you. This ends our relationship. Every month, of course, I shall 
send you the interest. He felt a strange unreality in his own words: the tangerine curtains hung there immovably. 
There are certain places one never leaves behind; the curtains and cushions of this room joined an attic bedroom, an 
ink-stained desk, a lacy altar in Haling - they would be there so long as consciousness lasted. 
 
 Yusef put his feet on the floor and sat bolt upright. He said, Major Scobie, you have taken my little joke too much to 
heart. 
 
 Good-bye, Yusef, you arent a bad chap, but good-bye. 

 
 You are wrong, Major Scobie. I am a bad chap. He said earnestly, My friendship for you is the only good thing in 
this black heart. I cannot give it up. We must stay friends always. 
 
 Im afraid not, Yusef. 
 
 Listen, Major Scobie. I am not asking you to do anything for me except sometimes - after dark perhaps when 
nobody can see - to visit me and talk to me. Nothing else. Just that. I will tell you no more tales about Tallit. I will 
tell you nothing. We will sit here with the syphon and the whisky bottle ... 
 
 Im not a fool, Yusef. I know it would be of great use to you if people believed we were friends. Im not giving you 
that help. 
 
 Yusef put a finger in his ear and cleared it of soda water. He looked bleakly and brazenly across at Scobie. This 
must be how he looks, Scobie thought, at the store manager who has tried to deceive him about the figures he carries 
in his head. Major Scobie, did you ever tell the Commissioner about our little business arrangement or was that an 
bluff? 
 
 Ask him yourself. 
 
 I think I will My heart feels rejected and bitter. It urges me to go to the Commissioner and tell him everything. 
 
 Always obey your heart, Yusef. 
 
 I will tell him you took my money and together we planned the arrest of Tallit. But you did not fulfil your bargain, 
so I have come to him in revenge. In revenge, Yusef repeated gloomily, his Roman head sunk on his fat chest. 
 
 Go. ahead. Do what you like, Yusef. But he couldnt believe in any of this scene however hard he played it. It was 
like a lovers quarrel. He couldnt believe in Yusef s threats and he had no belief in his own calmness: he did not even 
believe in this good-bye. What had happened in the mauve and orange room had been too important to become part 
of the enormous equal past. He was not surprised when Yusef, lifting his head, said, Of course I shall not go. One 
day you will come back and want my friendship. And I shall welcome you. 
 
 Shall I really be so desperate? Scobie wondered, as though in the Syrians voice he had heard the genuine accent of 
prophecy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 On his way home Scobie stopped his car outside the Catholic church and went in. It was the first Saturday of the 
month and he always went to confession on that day. Half a dozen old women, their hair bound like char-womens in 
dusters, waited their turn: a nursing sister: a private soldier with a Royal Ordnance insignia. Father Ranks voice 
whispered monotonously from the box. Scobie, with his eyes fixed on the cross, prayed - the Our Father, the Hail 
Mary, the Act of Contrition. The awful languor of routine fell on his spirits. He felt like a spectator -one of those 
many people round the cross over whom the gaze of Christ must have passed, seeking the face of a friend or an 
enemy. It sometimes seemed to him that his profession and his uniform classed him inexorably with all those 
anonymous Romans keeping order in the streets a long way off. One by one the old Kru women passed into the box 
and out again, and Scobie prayed - vaguely and ramblingly - for Louise, that she might be happy now at this moment 

and so remain, that no evil should ever come to her through him. The soldier came out of .the box and he rose. 
 
 In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. He said, Since my last confession a month ago I have missed 
one Sunday Mass and one holiday of obligation. 
 
 Were you prevented from going? 
 
 Yes, but with a little effort I could have arranged my duties better. 
 
 Yes? 
 
 All through this month I have done the minimum. Ive been unnecessarily harsh to one of my men ... He paused a 
long time. 
 
 Is that everything? 
 
 I dont know how to put it, Father, but I feel - tired of my religion. It seems to mean nothing to me. Ive tried to love 
God, but - he made a gesture which the priest could not see, turned sideways through the grille. Im not sure that I 
even believe. 
 
 Its easy, the priest said, to worry too much about that. Especially here. The penance I would give to a lot of people if 
I could is six months leave. The climate gets you down. Its easy to mistake tiredness for - well, disbelief. 
 
 I dont want to keep you, Father. There are other people waiting. I know these are just fancies. But I feel - empty. 
Empty. 
 
 Thats sometimes the moment God chooses, the priest said. Now go along with you and say a decade of your rosary. 
 
 I havent a rosary. At least... 
 
 Well, five Our Fathers and five Hail Marys then. He began to speak the words of absolution, but the trouble is, 
Scobie thought, theres nothing to absolve. The words brought no sense of relief because there was nothing to relieve. 
They were a formula: the Latin words hustled together - a hocus pocus. He went out of the box and knelt down 
again, and this too was part of a routine. It seemed to him for a moment that God was too accessible. There was no 
difficulty in approaching Him. Like a popular demagogue He was open to the least of His followers at any hour. 
Looking up at the cross he thought. He even suffers in public. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Three 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 

 IVEbrought you some stamps, Scobie said. Ive been collecting them for a week - from everybody. Even Mrs Carter 
has contributed a magnificent parrakeet - look at it - from somewhere in South America. And heres a complete set of 
Liberians surcharged for the American occupation. I got those from the Naval Observer. 
 
 They were completely at ease: it seemed to both of them for that very reason they were safe. 
 
 Why do you collect stamps? he asked. Its an odd thing to do - after sixteen. 
 
 I dont know, Helen Rolt said. I dont really collect. I carry them round. I suppose its habit. She opened the album and 
said, No, its not just habit. I do love the things. Do you see this green George V halfpenny stamp? Its the first I ever 
collected. I was eight. I steamed it off an envelope and stuck it in a notebook. Thats why my father gave me an 
album. My mother had died, so he gave me a stamp-album. 
 
 She tried to explain more exactly. They are like snapshots. They are so portable. People who collect china - they 
cant carry it around with them. Or books. But you dont have to tear the pages out like you do with snapshots. 
 
 Youve never told me about your husband, Scobie said. 
 
 No. 
 
 Its not really much good tearing out a page because you can see the place where its been torn? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Its easier to get over a thing, Scobie said, if you talk about it. 
 
 Thats not the trouble, she said. The trouble is - its so terribly easy to get over. She took him by surprise; he hadnt 
believed she was old enough to have reached that stage in her lessons, that particular turn of the screw. She said, Hes 
been dead - how long - is it eight weeks yet? and hes so dead, so completely dead. What a little bitch I must be. 
 
 Scobie said, You neednt feel that. Its the same with everybody, I think. When we say to someone, I cant live without 
you, what we really mean is, I cant live feeling you may be in pain, unhappy, in want. Thats all it is. When they are 
dead our responsibility ends. Theres nothing more we can do about it. We can rest in peace. 
 
 I didnt know I was so tough, Helen said. Horribly tough. 
 
 I had a child, Scobie said, who died. I was out here. My wife sent me two cables from Bexhill, one at five in the 
evening and one at six, but they mixed up the order. You see she meant to break the thing gently. I got one cable just 
after breakfast. It was eight oclock in the morning - a dead time of day for any news. He had never mentioned this 
before to anyone, not even to Louise. Now he brought out the exact words of each cable, carefully. The cable 
said,Catherine died this afternoon no pain God bless you . The second cable came at lunch-time. It said,Catherine 
seriously ill. Doctor has hope my diving . That was the one sent off at five. Diving was a mutilation - I suppose for 
darling. You see there was nothing more hopeless she could have put to break the news than doctor has hope. 
 
 How terrible for you, Helen said. 
 
 No, the terrible thing was that when I got the second telegram, I was so muddled in my head, I thought, theres been 
a mistake. She must be still alive. For a moment until I realized what had happened, I was - disappointed. That was 
the terrible thing. I thought now the anxiety begins, and the pain, but when I realized what had happened, then it was 
all right, she was dead, I could begin to forget her. 
 
 Have you forgotten her? 
 
 I dont remember her often. You see, I escaped seeing her die. My wife had that. 

 
 It was astonishing to him how easily and quickly they had become friends. They came together over two deaths 
without reserve. She said, I dont know what Id have done without you. 
 
 Everybody would have looked after you. 
 
 I think they are scared of me, she said. 
 
 He laughed. 
 
 They are. Flight-Lieutenant Bagster took me to the beach this afternoon but he was scared. Because Im not happy 
and because of my husband. Everybody on the beach was pretending to be happy about something and I sat there 
grinning and it didnt work. Do you remember when you went to your first party and coming up the stairs you heard 
all the voices and you didnt know how to talk to people? Thats how I felt so I sat and grinned in Mrs Carters bathing-
dress and Bagster stroked my leg and I wanted to go home. 
 
 Youll be going home soon. 
 
 I dont meanthat home. I mean here where I can shut the door and not answer when they knock. I dont want to go 
away yet. 
 
 But surely you arent happy here? 
 
 Im so afraid of the sea, she said. 
 
 Do you dream about it? 
 
 No. I dream of John sometimes - thats worse. Because Ive always had bad dreams of him and I still have bad dreams 
of him. I mean we were always quarrelling in the dreams and we still go on quarrelling. 
 
 Did you quarrel? 
 
 No. He was sweet to me. We were only married a month you know. It would be easy being sweet as long as that 
wouldnt it? When this happened I hadnt really had time to know my way around. It seemed to Scobie that she had 
never known her way around - at least not since she had left her net-ball team; was it a year ago? Sometimes he saw 
her lying back in the boat on that oily featureless sea day after day with the other child near death and the sailor 
going mad and Miss Malcott, and the chief engineer who felt his responsibility to the owners, and sometimes he saw 
her carried past him on a stretcher grasping her stamp-album, and now he saw her in the borrowed unbecoming 
bathing-dress grinning at Bagster as he stroked her legs, listening to the laughter and the splashes, not knowing the 
adult etiquette ... Sadly like an evening tide he felt responsibility bearing him up the shore. Youve written to your 
father? 
 
 Oh yes, of course. He cabled that hes pulling strings about the passage. I dont know what strings he can pull from 
Bury, poor dear. He doesnt know anybody at all. He cabled too about John, of course. She lifted a cushion off the 
chair and pulled the cable out. Read it. Hes very sweet, but of course he doesnt know a thing about me. 
 
 Scobie read.Terribly grieved for you, dear child, but remember his happiness, Your loving father . The date stamp 
with the Bury mark made him aware of the enormous distance between father and child. He said, How do you mean, 
he doesnt know a thing? 
 
 You see, he believes in God and heaven, all that sort of thing. 
 
 You dont? 
 

 I gave up all that when I left school. John used to pull his leg about it, quite gently you know. Father didnt mind. But 
he never knew I felt the way John did. If you are a clergymans daughter there are a lot of things you have to pretend 
about. He would have hated knowing that John and I went together, oh, a fortnight before we married. 
 
 Again he had that vision of someone who didnt know her way around: no wonder Bagster was scared of her. Bagster 
was not a man to accept responsibility, and how could anyone lay the responsibility for any action, he thought, on 
this stupid bewildered child? He turned over the little pile of stamps he had accumulated for her and said, I wonder 
what youll do when you get home? 
 
 I suppose, she said, theyll conscript me. 
 
 He thought: If my child had lived, she too would have been conscriptable, flung into some grim dormitory, to find 
her own way. After the Atlantic, the A.T.S. or the W.A.A.F., the blustering sergeant with the big bust, the cook-
house and the potato peelings, the Lesbian officer with the thin lips and the tidy gold hair, and the men waiting on 
the Common outside the camp, among the gorse bushes ... compared to that surely even the Atlantic was more a 
home. He said, Havent you got any shorthand? any languages? Only the clever and the astute and the influential 
escaped in war. 
 
 No, she said, Im not really any good at anything. 
 
 It was impossible to think of her being saved from the sea and then Sung back like a fish that wasnt worth catching. 
 
 He said, Can you type? 
 
 I can get along quite fast with one finger. 
 
 You could get a job here, I think. We are very short of secretaries. All the wives, you know, are working in the 
secretariat, and we still havent enough. But its a bad climate for a woman. 
 
 Id like to stay. Lets have a drink on it. She called, Boy, boy. 
 
 You are learning, Scobie said. A week ago you were so frightened of him... The boy came in with a tray set out with 
glasses, limes, water, a new gin bottle. 
 
 This isnt the boy I talked to, Scobie said. 
 
 No, that one went. You talked to him too fiercely. 
 
 And this one came? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Whats your name, boy? 
 
 Vande, sah. 
 
 Ive seen you before, havent I? 
 
 No, sah. 
 
 Who am I? 
 
 You big policeman, sah. 

 
 Dont frighten this one away, Helen said. 
 
 Who were you with? 
 
 I was with D.C. Pemberton up bush, sah. I was small boy. 
 
 Is that where I saw you? Scobie said. I suppose I did. You look after this missus well now, and when she goes home, 
I get you big job. Remember that. 
 
 You havent looked at the stamps, Scobie said. 
 
 No, I havent, have I? A spot of gin fell upon one of the stamps and stained it. He watched her pick it out of the pile, 
taking in the straight hair falling in rats tails over the nape as though the Atlantic had taken the strength out of it for 
ever, the hollowed face. It seemed to him that he had not felt so much at ease with another human being for years - 
not since Louise was young. But this case was different, he told himself: they were safe with each other. He was 
more than thirty years the older; his body in this climate had lost the sense of lust; he watched her with sadness and 
affection and enormous pity because a time would come when he couldnt show her around in a world where she was 
at sea. When she turned and the light fell on her face she looked ugly, with the temporary ugliness of a child. The 
ugliness was like handcuffs on his wrists. 
 
 He said, That stamps spoilt. Ill get you another. 
 
 Oh no, she said, it goes in as it is. Im not a real collector. 
 
 He had no sense of responsibility towards the beautiful and the graceful and the intelligent. They could find their 
own way. It was the face for which nobody would go out of his way, the face that would never catch the covert look, 
the face which would soon be used to rebuffs and indifference that demanded his allegiance. The word pity is used as 
loosely as the word love: the terrible promiscuous passion which so few experience. 
 
 She said, You see, whenever I see that stain Ill see this room... 
 
 Then its like a snapshot. 
 
 You can pull a stamp out, she said with a terrible youthful clarity, and you dont know that its ever been there. She 
turned suddenly to him and said, Its so good to talk to you. I can say anything I like. Im not afraid of hurting you. 
You dont want anything out of me. Im safe. 
 
 Were both safe. The rain surrounded them, falling regularly on the iron roof. 
 
 She said, I have a feeling that youd never let me down. The words came to him like a command he would have to 
obey however difficult. Her hands were full of the absurd scraps of paper he had brought her. She said, Ill keep these 
always. Ill never have to pull these out. 
 
 Somebody knocked on the door and a voice said, Freddie Bagster. Its only me. Freddie Bagster, cheerily. 
 
 Dont answer, she whispered, dont answer. She put her arm in his and watched the door with her mouth a little open 
as though she were out of breath. He had the sense of an animal which had been chased to its hole. 
 
 Let Freddie in, the voice wheedled. Be a sport, Helen. Only Freddie Bagster. The man was a little drunk. 
 
 She stood pressed against him with her hand on his side. 
 

 When the sound of Bagsters feet receded, she raised her mouth and they kissed. What they had both thought was 
safety proved to have been the camouflage of an enemy who works in terms of friendship, trust and pity. 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 The rain poured steadily down, turning the little patch of reclaimed ground on which his house stood back into 
swamp again. The window of the room blew to and fro. At some time during the night the catch had been broken by 
a squall of wind. Now the rain had blown in, his dressing-table was soaking wet, and there was a pool of water on the 
floor. His alarm clock pointed to 4.25. He felt as though he had returned to a house that had been abandoned years 
ago. It would not have surprised him to find cobwebs over the mirror, the mosquito-net hanging in shreds and the dirt 
of mice upon the floor. 
 
 He sat down on a chair and the water drained off his trousers and made a second pool around his mosquito-boots. He 
had left his umbrella behind, setting out on his walk home with an odd jubilation, as though he had rediscovered 
something he had lost, something which belonged to his youth. In the wet and noisy darkness he had even lifted his 
voice and tried out a line from Frasers song, but his voice was tuneless. Now somewhere between the Nissen hut and 
home he had mislaid his joy. 
 
 At four in the morning he had woken. Her head lay in his side and he could feel her hair against his breast. Putting 
his hand outside the net he found the light She lay in the odd cramped attitude of someone who has been shot in 
escaping. It seemed to him for a moment even then, before his tenderness and pleasure awoke, that he was looking at 
a bundle of cannon fodder. The first words she said when the light had roused her were, Bagster can go to hell. 
 
 Were you dreaming? 
 
 She said, I dreamed I was lost in a marsh and Bagster found me. 
 
 He said, Ive got to go. If we sleep now, we shant wake again till its light. He began to think for both of them, 
carefully. Like a criminal he began to fashion in his own mind the undetectable crime: he planned the moves ahead: 
he embarked for the first time in his life on the long legalistic arguments of deceit. If so-and-so ... then that follows. 
He said, What time does your boy turn up? 
 
 About six I think. I dont know. He calls me at seven. 
 
 Ali starts boiling my water about a quarter to six. Id better go. He looked carefully everywhere for signs of his 
presence: he straightened a that and hesitated over an ash-tray. Then at the end of it all he had left his umbrella 
standing against the wall. It seemed to him the typical action of a criminal. When the rain reminded him of it, it was 
too late to go back. He would have to hammer on her door, and already in one hut a light had gone on. Standing in 
his own room with a mosquito-boot in his hand, he thought wearily and drearily, In future I must do better than that. 
 
 In the future - that was where the sadness lay. Was it the butterfly that died in the act of love? But human beings 
were condemned to consequences. The responsibility as well as the guilt was his - he was not a Bagster: he knew 
what he was about. He had sworn to preserve Louises happiness, and now he had accepted another and contradictory 
responsibility. He felt tired by all the lies he would some time have to tell; he felt the wounds of those victims who 
had not yet bled. Lying back on the pillow he stared sleeplessly out towards the grey early morning tide. Somewhere 
on the face of those obscure waters moved the sense of yet another wrong and another victim, not Louise, nor Helen. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 PART TWO 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THERE. What do you think of it? Harris asked with Ill-concealed pride. He stood in the doorway of the hut while 
Wilson moved cautiously forward between the brown sticks of Government furniture like a setter through stubble. 
 
 Better than the hotel, Wilson said cautiously, pointing his muzzle towards a Government easy-chair. 
 
 I thought Id give you a surprise when you got back from Lagos. Harris had curtained the Nissen hut into three: a 
bedroom for each of them and a common sitting-room. Theres only one point that worries me. Im not sure whether 
there are any cockroaches. 
 
 Well, we only played the game to get rid of them. 
 
 I know, but it seems almost a pity, doesnt it? 
 
 Who are our neighbours? 
 
 Theres Mrs Rolt who was submarined, and there are two chaps in the Department of Works, and somebody called 
Clive from the Agricultural Department, Boling, whos in charge of Sewage - they all seem a nice friendly lot. And 
Scobie, of course, is just down the road. 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Wilson moved restlessly around the hut and came to a stop in front of a photograph which Harris had propped 
against a Government inkstand. It showed three long rows of boys on a lawn: the first row sitting cross-legged on the 
grass: the second on chairs, wearing high stiff collars, with an elderly man and two women (one had a squint) in the 
centre: the third row standing. Wilson said, That woman with a squint - I could swear Id seen her somewhere before. 
 
 Does the name Snakey convey anything to you? 
 
 Why, yes, of course. He looked closer. So you were at that hole too? 
 
 I sawThe Downhamian in your room and I fished this out to surprise you. I was in Jaggers house. Where were you? 
 
 I was a Prog, Wilson said. 
 

 Oh well, Harris admitted in a tone of disappointment, there were some good chaps among the Progs. He laid the 
photograph flat down again as though it were something that hadnt quite come off. I was thinking we might have an 
old Downhamian dinner. 
 
 Whatever for? Wilson asked. There are only two of us. 
 
 We could invite a guest each. 
 
 I dont see the point. 
 
 Harris said bitterly, Well, you are the real Downhamian, not me. I never joined the association. You get the 
magazine. I thought perhaps you had an interest in the place. 
 
 My father made me a life member and he always forwards the bloody paper, Wilson said abruptly. 
 
 It was lying beside your bed. I thought youd been reading it. 
 
 I may have glanced at it 
 
 There was a bit about me in it. They wanted my address. 
 
 Oh, but you know why that is? Wilson said. They are sending out appeals to any old Downhamian they can rake up. 
The panelling in the Founders Hall is in need of repair. Id keep your address quiet if I were you. He was one of those, 
it seemed to Harris, who always knew what was on, who gave advance information on extra halves, who knew why 
old So-and-So had not turned up to school, and what the row brewing at the Heads special meeting was about. A few 
weeks ago he had been a new boy whom Harris had been delighted to befriend, to show around. He remembered the 
evening when Wilson would have put on evening dress for a Syrians dinner-party if he hadnt been warned. But 
Harris from his first year at school had been fated to see how quickly new boys grew up: one term he was their 
kindly mentor - the next he was discarded. He could never progress as quickly as the newest unlicked boy. He 
remembered how even in the cockroach game - thathe had invented - his rules had been challenged on the first 
evening. He said sadly, I expect you are right. Perhaps I wont send a letter after all. He added humbly, I took the bed 
on this side, but I dont mind a bit which I have... 
 
 Oh, thats all right, Wilson said. 
 
 Ive only engaged one steward. I thought we could save a bit by sharing. 
 
 The less boys we have knocking about here the better, Wilson said. 
 
 That night was the first night of their new comradeship. They sat reading on their twin Government chairs behind 
the black-out curtains. On the table was a bottle of whisky for Wilson and a bottle of barley-water flavoured with 
lime for Harris. A sense of extraordinary peace came to Harris while the rain tingled steadily on the roof and Wilson 
read a Wallace. Occasionally a few drunks from the R.A.F. mess passed by, shouting or revving their cars, but this 
only enhanced the sense of peace inside the hut. Sometimes his eyes strayed to the walls seeking a cockroach, but 
you couldnt have everything. 
 
 Have you gotThe Downhamian handy, old man? I wouldnt mind another glance at it. This books so dull. 
 
 Theres a new one unopened on the dressing-table. 
 
 You dont mind my opening it? 
 
 Why the hell should I? 
 

 Harris turned first to the old Downhamian notes and read again how the whereabouts of H R. Harris (1917-1921) 
was still wanted. He wondered whether it was possible that Wilson was wrong: there was no word here about the 
panelling in Hall. Perhaps after all he would send that letter and he pictured the reply he might receive from the 
Secretary.My dear Harris , it would go something like that,we were all delighted to receive your letter from those 
romantic parts. Why not send us a full length contribution to the mag. and while Im writing to you, what about 
membership of the Old Downhamian Association? I notice youve never joined. Im speaking for all Old 
Downhamians when I say that well be glad towelcome you. He tried out proud to welcome you on his tongue, but 
rejected that. He was a realist. 
 
 The Downhamians had had a fairly successful Christmas term. They had beaten Harpenden by one goal, Merchant 
Taylors by two, and had drawn with Lancing. Ducker and Tierney were coming on well as forwards, but the scrum 
was still slow in getting the ball out. He turned a page and read how the Opera Society had given an excellent 
rendering ofPatience in the Founders Hall. F.J.K., who was obviously the English master, wrote:Lane as Bunthorne 
displayed a degree of aestheticism which surprised all his companions of Vb. We would not hitherto have described 
his hand as mediaeval or associated him with lilies, but he persuaded us that we had misjudged him. A great 
performance, Lane. 
 
 Harris skimmed through the account of five matches, a fantasy called The Tick of the Clock beginningThere was 
once a little old lady whose most beloved possession ... The walls of Downham - the red brick laced with yellow, the 
extraordinary crockets, the mid-Victorian gargoyles - rose around him: boots beat on stone stairs and a cracked 
dinner-bell rang to rouse him to another miserable day. He felt the loyalty we feel to unhappiness - the sense that that 
is where we really belong. His eyes filled with tears, he took a sip of his barley-water and thought, Ill post that letter 
whatever Wilson says. Somebody outside shouted, Bagster. Where are you, Bagster, you sod? and stumbled in a 
ditch. He might have been back at Downham, except of course that they wouldnt have usedthat word. 
 
 Harris turned a page or two and the title of a poem caught his eye. It was called West Coast and it was dedicated to 
L.S.. He wasnt very keen on poetry, but it struck him as interesting that somewhere on this enormous coastline of 
sand and smells there existed a third old Downhamian. 
 
 
 
 Another Tristram on this distant coast, he read 
 
 Raises the poisoned chalice to his lips, 
 
 Another Mark upon the palm-fringed shore 
 
 Watches his loves eclipse. 
 
 
 
 It seemed to Harris obscure: his eye passed rapidly over the intervening verses to the initials at the foot: E.W. He 
nearly exclaimed aloud, but he restrained himself in time. In such close quarters as they now shared it was necessary 
to be circumspect. There wasnt space to quarrel in. Who is L.S., he wondered, and thought, surely it cant be ... the 
very idea crinkled his lips in a cruel smile. He said, Theres not much in the mag. We beat Harpenden. Theres a poem 
called West Coast. Another poor devil out here, I suppose. 
 
 Oh. 
 
 Lovelorn, Harris said. But I dont read poetry. 
 
 Nor do I, Wilson lied behind the barrier of the Wallace. 
 
 

 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 It had been a very narrow squeak. Wilson lay on his back in bed and listened to the rain on the roof and (he heavy 
breathing of the old Downhamian beyond the curtain. It was as if the hideous years had extended through the 
intervening mist to surround him again. What madness had induced him to send that poem to the Downhamian? But 
it wasnt madness: he had long since become incapable of anything so honest as madness: he was one of those 
condemned in childhood to complexity. He knew what he had intended to do: to cut the poem out with no indication 
of its source and to send it to Louise. It wasnt quite her sort of poem, he knew, but surely, he had argued, she would 
be impressed to some extent by the mere fact that the poem was in print. If she asked him where it had appeared, it 
would be easy to invent some convincing coterie name. TheDownhamian luckily was well printed and on good 
paper. It was true, of course, that he would have to paste the cutting on opaque paper to disguise what was printed on 
the other side, but it would be easy to think up an explanation of that. It was as if his profession were slowly 
absorbing his whole life, just as school had done. His profession was to lie, to have the quick story ready, never to 
give himself away, and his private life was taking the same pattern. He lay on his back in a nausea of self-disgust. 
 
 The rain had momentarily stopped. It was one of those cool intervals that were the consolation of the sleepless. In 
Harriss heavy dreams the rain went on. Wilson got softly out and mixed himself a bromide; the grains fizzed in the 
bottom of the glass and Harris spoke hoarsely and turned over behind the curtain. Wilson flashed his torch on his 
watch and read 2.25. Tiptoeing to the door so as not to waken Harris, he felt the little sting of a jigger under his toe-
nail. In the morning he must get his boy to scoop it out. He stood on the small cement pavement above the marshy 
ground and let the cool air play on him with his pyjama jacket flapping open. All the huts were in darkness, and the 
moon was patched with the rain-clouds coming up. He was going to turn away when he heard someone stumble a 
few yards away and he flashed his torch. It lit on a mans bowed back moving between the huts towards the road. 
Scobie, Wilson exclaimed and the man turned. 
 
 Hullo, Wilson, Scobie said, I didnt know you lived up here. 
 
 Im sharing with Harris, Wilson said, watching the man who had watched his tears. 
 
 Ive been taking a walk, Scobie said unconvincingly, I couldnt sleep. It seemed to Wilson that Scobie was still a 
novice in the world of deceit: he hadnt lived in it since childhood, and he felt an odd elderly envy for Scobie, much 
as an old lag might envy the young crook serving his first sentence, to whom all this was new. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Wilson sat in his little stuffy room in the U.A.C. office. Several of the firms journals and day books bound in quarter 
pigskin formed a barrier between him and the door. Surreptitiously, like a schoolboy using a crib, Wilson behind the 
barrier worked at his code books, translating a cable. A commercial calendar showed a week old date - June 20, and 
a motto:The best investments are honesty and enterprise. William P. Cornforth . A clerk knocked and said, Theres a 
nigger for you, Wilson, with a note. 
 
 Who from? 

 
 He says Brown. 
 
 Keep him a couple of minutes, theres a good chap, and then boot him in. However diligently Wilson practised, the 
slang phrase sounded unnaturally on his lips. He folded up the cable and stuck it in the code book to keep his place: 
then he put the cable and the code book in the safe and pulled the door to. Pouring himself out a glass of water he 
looked out on the street; the mammies, their heads tied up in bright cotton cloths, passed under their coloured 
umbrellas. Their shapeless cotton gowns fell to the ankle: one with a design of matchboxes: another with kerosene 
lamps: the third - the latest from Manchester - covered with mauve cigarette-lighters on a yellow ground. Naked to 
the waist a young girl passed gleaming through the rain and Wilson watched her out of sight with melancholy lust. 
He swallowed and turned as the door opened. 
 
 Shut the door. 
 
 The boy obeyed. He had apparently put on his best clothes for this morning call: a white cotton shirt fell outside his 
white shorts. His gym shoes were immaculate in spite of the rain, except that his toes protruded. 
 
 You small boy at Yusefs? 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 You got a message, Wilson said, from my boy. He tell you what I want, eh? Hes your young brother, isnt he? 
 
 Yes, sah, 
 
 Same father? 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 He says you good boy, honest. You want to be a steward, eh? 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 Can you read? 
 
 No, sah. 
 
 Write? 
 
 No, sah. 
 
 You got eyes in your head? Good ears? You see everything? You hear everything? The boy grinned - a gash of 
white in the smooth grey elephant hide of his face: he had a look of sleek intelligence. Intelligence, to Wilson, was 
more valuable than honesty. Honesty was a double-edged weapon, but intelligence looked after number one. 
Intelligence realized that a Syrian might one day go home to his own land, but the English stayed. Intelligence knew 
that it was a good thing to work for Government, whatever the Government. How much you get as small boy? 
 
 Ten shillings. 
 
 I pay you five shillings more. If Yusef sack you I pay you ten shillings. If you stay with Yusef one year and give me 
good information - true information - no lies, I give you job as steward with white man. Understand? Yes, sah. 
 
 If you give me lies, then you go to prison. Maybe they shoot you. I dont know. I dont care. Understand? 

 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 Every day you see your brother at meat market. You tell him who comes to Yusef s house. Tell him where Yusef 
goes. You tell him any strange boys who come to Yusefs house. You no tell lies, you tell truth. No humbug. If no 
one comes to Yusefs house you say no one. You no make big lie. If you tell lie, I know it and you go to prison 
straight away. The wearisome recital went on. He was never quite sure how much was understood. The sweat ran off 
Wilsons forehead and the cool contained grey face of the boy aggravated him like an accusation he couldnt answer. 
You go to prison and you stay in prison plenty long time. He could hear his own voice cracking with the desire to 
impress; he could hear himself, like the parody of a white man on the halls. He said, Scobie? Do you know Major 
Scobie? 
 
 Yes, sah. He very good man, sah. They were the first words apart from yes and no the boy had uttered. 
 
 You see him at your masters? 
 
 Yes, sah. 
 
 How often? 
 
 Once, twice, sah. 
 
 He and your master - they are friends? 
 
 My master he think Major Scobie very good man, sah. The reiteration of the phrase angered Wilson. He broke 
furiously out, I dont want to hear whether hes good or not. I want to know where he meets Yusef, see? What do they 
talk about? You bring them in drinks some time when stewards busy? What do you hear? 
 
 Last time they have big palaver, the boy brought ingratiatingly out, as if he were showing a corner of his wares. 
 
 I bet they did. I want to know all about their palaver. 
 
 When Major Scobie go away one time, my master he put pillow right on his face. 
 
 What on earth do you mean by that? 
 
 The boy folded his arms over his eyes in a gesture of great dignity and said, His eyes make pillow wet. 
 
 Good God, Wilson said, what an extraordinary thing. 
 
 Then he drink plenty whisky and go to sleep - ten, twelve hours. Then he go to his store in Bond Street and make 
plenty hell. 
 
 Why? 
 
 He say they humbug him. 
 
 Whats that got to do with Major Scobie? 
 
 The boy shrugged. As so many times before Wilson had the sense of a door closed in his face; he was always on the 
outside of the door. 
 
 When the boy had gone he opened his safe again, moving the knob of the combination first left to 32 - his age, 

secondly right to 10, the year of his birth, left again to 65, the number of his home in Western Avenue, Pinner, and 
took out the code books. 32946 78523 97042. Row after row of groups swam before his eyes. The telegram was 
headed Important, or he would have postponed the decoding till the evening. He knew how little important it really 
was - the usual ship had left Lobito carrying the usual suspects - diamonds, diamonds, diamonds. When he had 
decoded the telegram he would hand it to the long-suffering Commissioner, who had already probably received the 
same information or contradictory information from S.O.E. or one of the other secret organizations which took root 
on the coast like mangroves.Leave alone but do not repeat not pinpoint P. Ferreira passenger 1st class repeat P. 
Ferreira passenger 1st class . Ferreira was presumably an agent his organization had recruited on board. It was quite 
possible that the Commissioner would receive simultaneously a message from Colonel Wright that P. Ferreira was 
suspected of carrying diamonds and should be rigorously searched. 72391 87052 63847 92034. How did one 
simultaneously leave alone, not repeat not pinpoint, and rigorously search Mr Ferreira? That luckily was not his 
worry. Perhaps it was Scobie who would suffer any headache there was. 
 
 Again he went to the window for a glass of water and again he saw the same girl pass. Or maybe it was not the same 
girl. He watched the water trickling down between the two thin wing-like shoulder-blades. He remembered there was 
a time when he had not noticed a black skin. He felt as though he had passed years and not months on this coast, all 
the years between puberty and manhood. 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Going out? Harris asked with surprise. Where to? 
 
 Just into town, Wilson said, loosening the knot round his mosquito-boots. 
 
 What on earth can you find to do in town at this hour? 
 
 Business, Wilson said. 
 
 Well, he thought, it was business of a kind, the kind of joyless business one did alone, without friends. He had 
bought a second-hand car a few weeks ago, the first he had ever owned, and he was not yet a very reliable driver. No 
gadget survived the climate long and every few hundred yards he had to wipe the windscreen with his handkerchief. 
In Kru town the hut doors were open and families sat around the kerosene lamps waiting till it was cool enough to 
sleep. A dead pye-dog lay in the gutter with the rain running over its white swollen belly. He drove in second gear at 
little more than a walking pace, for civilian head-lamps had to be blacked out to the size of a visiting-card and he 
couldnt see more than fifteen paces ahead. It took him ten minutes to reach the great cotton tree near the police 
station. There were no lights on in any of the officers rooms and he left his car outside the main entrance. If anyone 
saw it there they would assume he was inside. For a moment he sat with the door open hesitating. The image of the 
girl passing in the rain conflicting with the sight of Harris on his shoulder-blades reading a book with a glass of 
squash at his elbow. He thought sadly, as lust won the day, what a lot of trouble it was; the sadness of the after-taste 
fell upon his spirits beforehand. 
 
 He had forgotten to bring his umbrella and he was wet through before he had walked a dozen yards down the hill. It 
was the passion of curiosity more than of lust that impelled him now. Some time or another if one lived in a place 
one must try the local product. It was like having a box of chocolates shut in a bedroom drawer. Until the box was 
empty it occupied the mind too much. He thought: when this is over I shall be able to write another poem to Louise. 
 
 The brothel was a tin-roofed bungalow half-way down the hill on the right-hand side. In the dry season the girls sat 
outside in the gutter like sparrows; they chatted with the policeman on duty at the top of the hill. The road was never 

made up, so that nobody drove by the brothel on the way to the wharf or the Cathedral: it could be ignored. Now it 
turned a shuttered silent front to the muddy street, except where a door, propped open with a rock out of the 
roadway, opened on a passage. Wilson looked quickly this way and that and stepped inside. 
 
 Years ago the passage had been white-washed and plastered, but rats had torn holes in the plaster and human beings 
had mutilated the whitewash with scrawls and pencilled names. The walls were tattooed like a sailors arm, with 
initials, dates, there was even a pair of hearts interlocked. At first it seemed to Wilson that the place was entirely 
deserted; on either side of the passage there were little cells nine feet by four with curtains instead of doorways and 
beds made out of old packing-cases spread with a native cloth. He walked rapidly to the end of the passage; then, he 
told himself, he would turn and go back to the quiet and somnolent security of the room where the old Downhamian 
dozed over his book. 
 
 He felt an awful disappointment, as though he had not found what he was looking for, when he readied the end and 
discovered that the left-hand cell was occupied; in the light of an oil lamp burning on the floor he saw a girl in a dirty 
shift spread out on the packing-cases like a fish on a counter; her bare pink soles dangled over the words Tates 
Sugar. She lay there on duty, waiting for a customer. She grinned at Wilson, not bothering to sit up and said, Want 
jig jig, darling. Ten bob. He had a vision of a girl with a rain-wet back moving forever out of his sight. 
 
 No, he said, no, shaking his head and thinking, What a fool I was, what a fool, to drive all the way for only this. The 
girl giggled as if she understood his stupidity and he heard the slop slop of bare feet coming up the passage from the 
road; the way was blocked by an old mammy carrying a striped umbrella. She said something to the girl in her native 
tongue and received a grinning explanation. He had the sense that all this was only strange tohim , that it was one of 
the stock situations the old woman was accustomed to meet in the dark regions which she ruled. He said weakly, Ill 
just go and get a drink first. 
 
 She get drink, the mammy said. She commanded the girl sharply in the language he couldnt understand and the girl 
swung her legs off the sugar cases. You stay here, the mammy said to Wilson, and mechanically like a hostess whose 
mind is elsewhere but who must make conversation with however uninteresting a guest, she said, Pretty girl, jig jig, 
one pound. Market values here were reversed: the price rose steadily with his reluctance. 
 
 Im sorry. I cant wait, Wilson said. Heres ten bob, and he made the preliminary motions of departure, but the old 
woman paid him no attention at all, blocking the way, smiling steadily like a dentist who knows whats good for you. 
Here a mans colour had no value: he couldnt bluster as a white man could elsewhere: by entering this narrow plaster 
passage, he had shed every racial, social and individual trait, he had reduced himself to human nature. If he had 
wanted to hide, here was the perfect hiding-place; if he had wanted to be anonymous, here he was simply a man. 
Even his reluctance, disgust and fear were not personal characteristics; they were so common to those who came here 
for the first time that the old woman knew exactly what each move would be. First the suggestion of a drink, then the 
offer of money, after that... 
 
 Wilson said weakly, Let me by, but he knew that she wouldnt move; she stood watching him, as though he were a 
tethered animal on whom she was keeping an eye for its owner. She wasnt interested in him, but occasionally she 
repeated calmly, Pretty girl jig jig by-and-by. He held out a pound to her and she pocketed it and went on blocking 
the way. When he tried to push by, she thrust him backwards with a casual pink palm, saying, By-an-by. Jig jig. It 
had all happened so many hundreds of times before. 
 
 Down the passage the girl came carrying a vinegar bottle filled with palm wine, and with a sigh of reluctance 
Wilson surrendered. The heat between the walls of rain, the musty smell of his companion, the dim and wayward 
light of the kerosene lamp reminded him of a vault newly opened for another body to be let down upon its floor. A 
grievance stirred in him, a hatred of those who had brought him here. In their presence he felt as though his dead 
veins would bleed again. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 PART THREE 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 HELENsaid, I saw you on the beach this afternoon. Scobie looked up from the glass of whisky he was measuring. 
Something in her voice reminded him oddly of Louise. He said, I had to find Rees - the Naval Intelligence man. 
 
 You didnt even speak to me. 
 
 I was in a hurry. 
 
 You are so careful, always, she said, and now he realized what was happening and why he had thought of Louise. 
He wondered sadly whether love always inevitably took the same road. It was not only the act of love itself that was 
the same. ... How often in the last two years he had tried to turn away at the critical moment from just such a scene - 
to save himself but also to save the other victim. He laughed with half a heart and said, For once I wasnt thinking of 
you. I had other things in mind. 
 
 What other things? 
 
 Oh, diamonds ... 
 
 Your work is much more important to you than I am, Helen said, and the banality of the phrase, read in how many 
bad novels, wrung his heart. 
 
 Yes, he said gravely, but Id sacrifice it for you. 
 
 Why? 
 
 I suppose because you are a human being. Somebody may love a dog more than any other possession, but he 
wouldnt run down even a strange child to save it 
 
 Oh, she said, why do you always tell me the truth? I dont want the truth all the time. 
 
 He put the whisky glass in her hand and said, Dear, you are unlucky. You are tied up with a middle-aged man. We 
cant be bothered to lie all the time like the young. 
 
 If you knew, she said, how tired I get of all your caution. You come here after dark and you go after dark. Its so-so 
ignoble. 
 
 Yes. 
 

 We always make love - here. Among the junior officials furniture. I dont believe wed know how to do it anywhere 
else. 
 
 Poor you, he said. 
 
 She said furiously, I dont want your pity. But it was not a question of whether she wanted it - she had it. Pity 
smouldered like decay at his heart. He would never rid himself of it. He knew from experience how passion died 
away and how love went, but pity always stayed. Nothing ever diminished pity. The conditions of life nurtured it. 
There was only a single person in the world who was unpitiable, oneself. 
 
 Cant you ever risk anything? she asked. You never even write a line to me. You go away on trek for days, but you 
wont leave anything behind. I cant even have a photograph to make this place human. 
 
 But I havent got a photograph. 
 
 I suppose you think Id use your letters against you. He thought, if I shut my eyes it might almost be Louise speaking 
- the voice was younger, that was all, and perhaps less capable of giving pain. Standing with the whisky glass in his 
hand he remembered another night - a hundred yards away - the glass had then contained gin. He said gently, You 
talk such nonsense. 
 
 You think Im a child. You tiptoe in - bringing me stamps. 
 
 Im trying to protect you. 
 
 I dont care a bloody damn if people talk. He recognized the hard swearing of the netball team. 
 
 He said, If they talked enough, this would come to an end. 
 
 You are not protectingme . You are protecting your wife. 
 
 It comes to the same thing. 
 
 Oh, she said, to couple me with - that woman. He couldnt prevent the wince. He had underrated her power of giving 
pain. He could see how she had spotted her success: he had delivered himself into her hands. Now she would always 
know how to inflict the sharpest stab. She was like a child with a pair of dividers who knows her power to injure. 
You could never trust a child not to use her advantage. 
 
 Dear, he said, its too soon to quarrel. 
 
 That woman, she repeated, watching his eyes. Youd never leave her, would you? 
 
 We are married, he said. 
 
 If she knew of this, youd go back like a whipped dog. He thought with tenderness, she hasnt read the best books, 
like Louise. 
 
 I dont know. 
 
 Youll never marry me. 
 
 I cant. You know that 
 
 Its a wonderful excuse being a Catholic, she said. It doesnt stop you sleeping with me - it only stops you marrying 

me. 
 
 Yes, he said. He thought: how much older she is than she was a month ago. She hadnt been capable of a scene then, 
but she had been educated by love and secrecy: he was beginning to form her. He wondered whether if this went on 
long enough, she would be indistinguishable from Louise. In my school, he thought, they learn bitterness and 
frustration and how to grow old. 
 
 Go on, Helen said, justify yourself. 
 
 It would take too long, he said. One would have to begin with the arguments for a God. 
 
 What a twister you are. 
 
 He felt disappointed. He had looked forward to the evening. All day in the office dealing with a rent case and a case 
of juvenile delinquency he had looked forward to the Nissen hut, the bare room, the junior officials furniture like his 
own youth, everything that she had abused. He said, I meant well. 
 
 What do you mean? 
 
 I meant to be your friend. To look after you. To make you happier than you were. 
 
 Wasnt I happy? she asked as though she were speaking of years ago. 
 
 He said, You were shocked, lonely... 
 
 I couldnt have been as lonely as I am now, she said. I go out to the beach with Mrs Carter when the rain stops. 
Bagster makes a pass, they think Im frigid. I come back here before the rain starts and wait for you ... we drink a 
glass of whisky ... you give me some stamps as though I were your small girl... 
 
 Im sorry, Scobie said. He put out his hand and covered hers: the knuckles lay under his palm like a small backbone 
that had been broken. He went slowly and cautiously on, choosing his words carefully, as though he were pursuing a 
path through an evacuated country sown with booby-traps: every step he took he expected the explosion. Id do 
anything - almost anything - to make you happy. Id stop coming here. Id go right away - retire... 
 
 Youd be so glad to get rid of me, she said. 
 
 It would be like the end of life. 
 
 Go away if you want to. 
 
 I dont want to go. I want to do what you want. 
 
 You can go if you want to - or you can stay, she said with contempt. I cant move, can I? 
 
 If you want it, Ill get you on the next boat somehow. 
 
 Oh, how pleased youd be if this were over, she said and began to weep. When he put out a hand to touch her she 
screamed at him, Go to hell. Go to hell. Clear out. 
 
 Ill go, he said. 
 
 Yes, go and dont come back. 
 

 Outside the door, with the rain cooling his face, running down his hands, it occurred to him how much easier life 
might be if he took her at her word. He would go into his house and close the door and be alone again; he would 
write a letter to Louise without a sense of deceit and sleep as he hadnt slept for weeks, dreamlessly. Next day the 
office, the quiet going home, the evening meal, the locked door ... But down the hill, past the transport park, where 
the lorries crouched under the dripping tarpaulins, the rain fell like tears. He thought of her alone in the but, 
wondering whether the irrevocable words had been spoken, if all the tomorrows would consist of Mrs Carter and 
Bagster until the boat came, and she went home with nothing to remember but misery. Inexorably anothers point of 
view rose on the path like a murdered innocent. 
 
 As he opened his door a rat that had been nosing at the food-safe retreated without haste up the stairs. This was what 
Louise had hated and feared; he had at least made her happy, and now ponderously, with planned and careful 
recklessness, he set about trying to make things right for Helen. He sat down at his table and taking a sheet of 
typewriting paper -official paper stamped with the Government watermark - he began to compose a letter. 
 
 He wrote:My darling - he wanted to put himself entirely in her hands, but to leave her anonymous. He looked at his 
watch and added in the right-hand corner, as though he were making a police report,12.35 a.m. Burnside, September 
5. He went carefully on, I love you more than myself, more than my wife, more than God I think. I am trying very 
hard to tell the truth. I want more than anything in the world to make you happy ... The banality of the phrases 
saddened him; they seemed to have no truth personal to herself: they had been used too often. If I were young, he 
thought, I would be able to find the right words, the new words, but all this has happened to me before. He wrote 
again,I love you. Forgive me , signed and folded the paper. 
 
 He put on his mackintosh and went out again in the rain. Wounds festered in the damp, they never healed. Scratch 
your finger and in a few hours there would be a little coating of green skin. He carried a sense of corruption up the 
hill. A soldier shouted something in his sleep in the transport park -a single word like a hieroglyphic on a wall which 
Scobie could not interpret - the men were Nigerians. The rain hammered on the Nissen roofs, and he thought, Why 
did I write that? Why did I write more than God? she would have been satisfied with more than Louise. Even if its 
true, why did I write it? The sky wept endlessly around him; he had the sense of wounds that never healed. He 
whispered, O God, I have deserted you. Do not you desert me. When he came to her door he thrust the letter under it; 
he heard the rustle of the paper on the cement floor but nothing else. Remembering the childish figure carried past 
him on the stretcher, he was saddened to think how much had happened, how uselessly, to make him now say to 
himself with resentment: she will never again be able to accuse me of caution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 I was just passing by, Father Rank said, so I thought Id look in. The evening rain fell in grey ecclesiastical folds, and 
a lorry howled its way towards the hills. 
 
 Come in, Scobie said. Im out of whisky. But theres beer - or gin. 
 
 I saw you up at the Nissens, so I thought Id follow you down. You are not busy? 
 
 Im having dinner with the Commissioner, but not for another hour. 
 
 Father Rank moved restlessly around the room, while Scobie took the beer out of the ice-box. Would you have 
heard from Louise lately? he asked. 
 
 Not for a fortnight, Scobie said, but thereve been more sinkings in the south. 

 
 Father Rank let himself down in the Government armchair with his glass between his knees. There was no sound but 
the rain scraping on the roof. Scobie cleared his throat and then the silence came back. He had the odd sense that 
Father Rank, like one of his own junior officers, was waiting there for orders. 
 
 The rains will soon be over, Scobie said. 
 
 It must be six months now since your wife went. 
 
 Seven. 
 
 Will you be taking your leave in South Africa? Father Rank asked, looking away and taking a draught of his beer, 
 
 Ive postponed my leave. The young men need it more. 
 
 Everybody needs leave. 
 
 Youvebeen here twelve years without it, Father. 
 
 Ah, but thats different, Father Rank said. He got up again and moved restlessly down one wall and along another. 
He turned an expression of undefined appeal toward Scobie. Sometimes, he said, I feel as though I werent a working 
man at all. He stopped and stared and half raised his hands, and Scobie remembered Father Clay dodging an unseen 
figure in his restless walk. He felt as though an appeal were being made to which he couldnt find an answer. He said 
weakly, Theres no one works harder than you, Father. 
 
 Father Rank returned draggingly to his chair. He said, Itll be good when the rains are over. 
 
 Hows the mammy out by Congo Creek? I heard she was dying. 
 
 Shell be gone this week. Shes a good woman. He took another draught of beer and doubled up in the chair with his 
band on his stomach. The wind, he said. I get the wind badly. 
 
 You shouldnt drink bottled beer, Father. 
 
 The dying, Father Rank said, thats what Im here for. They send for me when they are dying. He raised eyes bleary 
with too much quinine and said harshly and hopelessly, Ive never been any good to the living, Scobie. 
 
 You are talking nonsense, Father. 
 
 When I was a novice, I thought that people talked to their priests, and I thought God somehow gave the right words. 
Dont mind me, Scobie, dont listen to me. Its the rains -they always get me down about this time. God doesnt give the 
right words, Scobie. I had a parish once in Northampton. They make boots there. They used to ask me out to tea, and 
Id sit and watch their hands pouring out, and wed talk of the Children of Mary and repairs to the church roof. They 
were very generous in Northampton. I only had to ask and theyd give. I wasnt of any use to a single living soul, 
Scobie. I thought, in Africa things will be different. You see Im not a reading man, Scobie. I never had much talent 
for loving God as some people do. I wanted to be of use, thats all. Dont listen to me. Its the rains. I havent talked like 
this for five years. Except to the mirror. If people are in trouble theyd go to you, Scobie, not to me. They ask me to 
dinner to hear the gossip. And if you were in trouble where would you go? And Scobie was again aware of those 
bleary and appealing eyes, waiting through the dry seasons and the rains, for something that never happened. Could I 
shift my burden mere, he wondered: could I tell him that I love two women: that I dont know what to do? What 
would be the use? I know the answers as well as he does. One should look after ones own soul at whatever cost to 
another, and thats what I cant do, what I shall never be able to do. It wasnt he who required the magic word, it was 
the priest, and he couldnt give it. 
 

 Im not the kind of man to get into trouble, Father. Im dull and middle aged, and looking away, unwilling to see 
distress, he heard Father Ranks clapper miserably sounding, Ho! ho ho! 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 On his way to the Commissioners bungalow, Scobie looked in at his office. A message was written in pencil on his 
pad.I looked in to see you. Nothing important. Wilson. It struck him as odd: he had not seen Wilson for some weeks, 
and if his visit had no importance why had he so carefully recorded it? He opened the drawer of his desk to find a 
packet of cigarettes and noticed at once that something was out of order: he considered the contents carefully: his 
indelible pencil was missing. Obviously Wilson had looked for a pencil with which to write his message and had 
forgotten to put it back. But why the message? 
 
 In the charge-room the sergeant said, Mr Wilson come to see you, sah. 
 
 Yes, he left a message. 
 
 So that was it, he thought: I would have known anyway, so he considered it best to let me know himself. He 
returned to his office and looked again at his desk. It seemed to him that a file had been shifted, but he couldnt be 
sure. He opened his drawer, but there was nothing there which would interest a soul. Only the broken rosary caught 
his eye - something which should have been mended a long while ago. He took it out and put it in his pocket. 
 
 Whisky? the Commissioner asked. 
 
 Thank you, Scobie said, holding the glass up between himself and the Commissioner. Doyou trust me? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Am I the only one who doesnt know about Wilson? 
 
 The Commissioner smiled, lying back at ease, unembarrassed. Nobody knows officially - except myself and the 
manager of the U.A.C. - that was essential of course. The Governor too and whoever deals with the cables marked 
Most Secret. Im glad youve tumbled to it. 
 
 I wanted you to know that - up to date of course - Ive been trustworthy. 
 
 You dont need to tell me, Scobie. 
 
 In the case of Tallits cousin we couldnt have done anything different. 
 
 Of course not. 
 
 Scobie said, There is one thing you dont know though. I borrowed two hundred pounds from Yusef so that I could 
send Louise to South Africa. I pay him four per cent interest. The arrangement is purely commercial, but if you want 
my head for it... 
 
 Im glad you told me, the Commissioner said. You see Wilson got the idea that you were being blackmailed. He must 

have dug up those payments somehow. 
 
 Yusef wouldnt blackmail for money. 
 
 I told him that. 
 
 Do you want my head? 
 
 I need your head, Scobie. Youre the only officer I really trust, 
 
 Scobie stretched out a hand with an empty glass in it: it was like a handclasp. 
 
 Say when. 
 
 When. 
 
 Men can become twins with age. The past was their common womb; the six months of rain and the six months of 
sun was the period of their common gestation. They needed only a few words and a few gestures to convey their 
meaning. They had graduated through the same fevers, they were moved by the same love and contempt. 
 
 Derry reports thereve been some big thefts from the mines. 
 
 Commercial? 
 
 Gem stones. Is it Yusef - or Tallit? 
 
 It might be Yusef, Scobie said. I dont think he deals in industrial diamonds. He calls them gravel. But of course one 
cant be sure. 
 
 TheEsperanccedil; a will be in in a few days. Weve got to be careful, 
 
 What does Wilson say? 
 
 He swears by Tallit. Yusef is the villain of his piece - and you, Scobie. 
 
 I havent seen Yusef for a long while. I know. 
 
 I begin to know what these Syrians feel - watched and reported on. 
 
 Wilson reports on all of us, Scobie. Fraser, Tod, Thimblerigg, myself. He thinks Im too easy-going. It doesnt matter 
though. Wright tears up his reports, and of course Wilson reports on him. 
 
 I suppose so. 
 
 He walked up, at midnight, to the Nissen huts. In the blackout he felt momentarily safe, unwatched, unreported on; 
in the soggy ground his footsteps made the smallest sounds, but as he passed Wilsons hut he was aware again of the 
deep necessity for caution. An awful weariness touched him, and he thought: I will go home: I wont creep by to her 
tonight: her last words had been dont come back. Couldnt one, for once, take somebody at their word? He stood 
twenty yards from Wilsons hut, watching the crack of light between the curtains. A drunken voice shouted 
somewhere up the hill and the first spatter of the returning rain licked his face. He thought: Ill go back and go to bed, 
in the morning Ill write to Louise and in the evening go to Confession: the day after that God will return to me in a 
priests hands: life will be simple again. Virtue, the good life, tempted him in the dark like a sin. The rain blurred his 
eyes, the ground sucked at his feet as they trod reluctantly towards the Nissen hut. 

 
 He knocked twice and the door immediately opened. He had prayed between the two knocks that anger might still 
be there behind the door, that he wouldnt be wanted. He couldnt shut his eyes or his ears to any human need of him; 
he was not the centurion, but a man in the ranks who had to do the bidding of a hundred centurions, and when the 
door opened, he could tell the command was going to be given again - the command to stay, to love, to accept 
responsibility, to lie. 
 
 Oh darling, she said, I thought you were never coming. I bitched you so. 
 
 Ill always come if you want me. 
 
 Will you? 
 
 Always. If Im alive. God can wait, he thought: how can one love God at the expense of one of his creatures? Would 
a woman accept the love for which a child had to be sacrificed? 
 
 Carefully they drew the curtains close before turning up the lamps. 
 
 She said, Ive been afraid all day that you wouldnt come. 
 
 Of course I came. 
 
 I told you to go away. Never pay any attention to me when I tell you to go away. Promise. 
 
 I promise, he said. 
 
 If you hadnt come back -... she said, and became lost in thought between the lamps. He could see her searching for 
herself, frowning in the effort to see where she would have been ... I dont know. Perhaps Id have slutted with 
Bagster, or killed myself, or both. I think both. 
 
 He said anxiously, You mustnt think like that. Ill always be here if you need me, as long as Im alive. 
 
 Why do you keep on saying as long as Im alive? 
 
 There are thirty years between us. 
 
 For the first time that night they kissed. She said, I cant feel the years. 
 
 Why did you think I wouldnt come? Scobie said. You got my letter. 
 
 Your letter? 
 
 The one I pushed under your door last night. 
 
 She said with fear, I never saw a letter. What did you say? 
 
 He touched her face and smiled. Everything. I didnt want to be cautious any longer. I put down everything. 
 
 Even your name? 
 
 I think so. Anyway, its signed with my handwriting. 
 
 Theres a that by the door. It must be under the mat But they both knew it wouldnt be there. It was as if all along they 

had foreseen how disaster would come in by that particular door. 
 
 Who would have taken it? 
 
 He tried to soothe her nerves. Probably your boy threw it away, thought it was waste paper. It wasnt in an envelope. 
Nobody could know whom I was writing to. 
 
 As if that mattered. Darling, she said, I feel sick. Really sick. Somebodys getting something on you. I wish Id died 
in that boat. 
 
 Youre imagining things. Probably I didnt push the note far enough. When your boy opened the door in the morning 
it blew away or got trampled in the mud. He spoke with all the conviction he could summon: it was just possible. 
 
 Dont let me ever do you any harm, she implored, and every phrase she used fastened the fetters more firmly round 
his wrists. He put out his hands to her and lied firmly, Youll never do me harm. Dont worry about a lost letter. I 
exaggerated. It said nothing really - nothing that a stranger would understand. Dont worry. 
 
 Listen, darling. Dont stay tonight Im nervous. I feel -watched. Say good night now and go away. But come back. Oh 
my dear, come back. 
 
 The light was still on in Wilsons hut as he passed. Opening the door of his own dark house he saw a piece of paper 
on the floor. It gave him an odd shock as though the missing letter had returned, like a cat, to its old home. But when 
he picked it up, it wasnt his letter, though this too was a message of love. It was a telegram addressed to him at police 
headquarters and the signature written in full for the sake of censorship, Louise Scobie, was like a blow struck by a 
boxer with a longer reach than he possessed.Have written am on my way home have been a fool stop love - and then 
that name as formal as a seal. 
 
 H e sat down. His head swam with nausea. He thought: if I had never written that other letter, if I had taken Helen at 
her word and gone away, how easily then life could have been arranged again. But he remembered his words in the 
last ten minutes, Ill always be here if you need me as long as Im alive - that constituted an oath as ineffaceable as the 
vow by the Ealing altar. The wind was coming up from the sea - the nuns ended as they began with typhoons. The 
curtains blew in and he ran to the windows and pulled them shut. Upstairs the bedroom windows clattered to and fro, 
tearing at hinges. Turning from closing them he looked at the bare dressing-table where soon the photographs and the 
pots would be back again - one photograph in particular. The happy Scobie, he thought, my one success. A child in 
hospital said Father as the shadow of a rabbit shifted on the pillow: a girl went by on a stretcher clutching a stamp-
album - why me, he thought, why do they need me, a dull middle-aged police officer who had failed for promotion? 
Ive got nothing to give them that they cant get elsewhere: why cant they leave me in peace? Elsewhere there was a 
younger and better love, more security. It sometimes seemed to him that all he could share with them was his 
despair. 
 
 Leaning back against the dressing-table, he tried to pray. The Lords Prayer lay as dead on his tongue as a legal 
document: it wasnt his daily bread that he wanted but so much more. He wanted happiness for others and solitude 
and peace for himself. I dont want to plan any more, he said suddenly aloud. They wouldnt need me if I were dead. 
No one need the dead. The dead can be forgotten. O God, give me death before I give them unhappiness. But the 
words sounded melodramatically in his own ears. He told himself that he mustnt get hysterical: there was far too 
much planning to do for an hysterical man, and going downstairs again he thought three aspirins or perhaps four 
were what he required in this situation - this banal situation. He took a bottle of filtered water out of the ice-box and 
dissolved the aspirin. He wondered how it would feel to drain death as simply as these aspirin which now stuck 
sourly in his throat The priests told one it was the unforgivable sin, the final expression of an unrepentent despair, 
and of course one accepted the Churchs teaching. But they taught also that God had sometimes broken his own laws, 
and was it less possible for him to put out a hand of forgiveness into the suicidal darkness than to have woken 
himself in the tomb, behind the stone? Christ had not been murdered - you couldnt murder God. Christ had killed 
himself: he had hung himself on the Cross as surely as Pemberton from the picture-rail. 
 
 He put his glass down and thought again, I must not get hysterical. Two peoples happiness was in his hands and he 

must learn to juggle with strong nerves. Calmness was everything. He took out his diary and began to write against 
the date,Wednesday, September 6. Dinner with the Commissioner. Satisfactory talk about W. Ceiled on Helen for a 
few minutes. Telegram from Louise that she is on the way home. 
 
 He hesitated for a moment and then wrote:Father Rank called in for drink before dinner. A little overwrought. He 
needs leave. He read this over and scored out the last two sentences. It was seldom in this record that he allowed 
himself an expression of opinion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THEtelegram lay on his mind all day: ordinary life - the two hours in court on a perjury case - had the unreality of a 
country one is leaving for ever. One thinks, At this hour, in that village, these people I once knew are sitting down at 
table just as they did a year ago when I was there, but one is not convinced that any life goes on the same as ever 
outside the consciousness. All Scobies consciousness was on the telegram, on that nameless boat edging its way now 
up the African coastline from the south. God forgive me, he thought, when his mind lit for a moment on the 
possibility that it might never arrive. In our hearts men is a ruthless dictator, ready to contemplate the misery of a 
thousand strangers if it will ensure the happiness of the few we love. 
 
 At the end of the perjury case Fellowes, the notary Inspector, caught him at the door. Come to chop tonight, Scobie. 
Weve got a bit of real Argentine beef. It was too much of an effort in this dream world to refuse an invitation. 
Wilsons coming, Fellowes said. To tell you the truth, be helped us with the beef. You like him, dont you? 
 
 Yes. I thought it was you who didnt 
 
 Oh, the clubs got to move with the times, and all sorts of people go into trade nowadays. I admit I was hasty. Bit 
bound up, I wouldnt be surprised. He was at Downham: we used to play them when I was at Lancing. 
 
 Driving out to the familiar house he had once occupied himself on the hills, Scobie thought listlessly, I must speak 
to Helen soon. She mustnt learn this from someone else. Life always repeated the same pattern; there was always, 
sooner or later, bad news that had to be broken, comforting lies to be uttered, pink gins to be consumed to keep 
misery away. 
 
 He came to the long bungalow living-room and there at the end of it was Helen. With a sense of shock he realized 
that never before had he seen her like a stranger in another mans house, never before dressed for an evenings party. 
You know Mrs Rolt, dont you? Fellowes asked. There was no irony in his voice. Scobie thought with a tremor of 
self-disgust, how clever weve been: how successfully weve deceived the gossipers of a small colony. It oughtnt to be 
possible for lovers to deceive so well. Wasnt love supposed to be spontaneous, reckless ...? 
 
 Yes, he said, Im an old friend of Mrs Rolt. I was at Pende when she was brought across. He stood by the table a 
dozen feet away while Fellowes mixed the drinks and watched her while she talked to Mrs Fellowes, talked easily, 

naturally. Would I, he wondered, if I had come in tonight and seen her for the first time ever have felt any love at all? 
 
 Now which was yours, Mrs Rolt? 
 
 A pink gin. 
 
 I wish I could get my wife to drink them. I cant bear her gin and orange. 
 
 Scobie said, If Id known you were going to be here, Id have called for you. 
 
 I wish you had, Helen said. You never come and see me. She turned to Fellowes and said with an ease that horrified 
him, He was so kind to me in hospital at Pende, but I think he only likes the sick. 
 
 Fellowes stroked his little ginger moustache, poured himself out some more gin and said, Hes scared of you, Mrs 
Rolt. All we married men are. 
 
 She said with false blandness, Do you think I could have one more without getting tight? 
 
 Ah, heres Wilson, Fellowes said, and there he was with his pink, innocent, self-distrustful face and his badly tied 
cummerbund. You know everybody, dont you? You and Mrs Rolt are neighbours. 
 
 We havent met though, Wilson said, and began automatically to blush. 
 
 I dont know whats come over the men in this place, said Fellowes. You and Scobie both neighbours and neither of 
you see anything of Mrs Rolt, and Scobie was immediately aware of Wilsons gaze speculatively turned upon him. I 
wouldnt be so bashful, Fellowes said, pouring out the pink gins. 
 
 Dr Sykes late as usual, Mrs Fellowes commented from the end of the room but at that moment treading heavily up 
the outside stairs, sensible in a dark dress and mosquito-boots, came Dr Sykes. Just in time for a drink, Jessie, 
Fellowes said. Whats it to be? 
 
 Double Scotch, Dr Sykes said. She glared around through her thick glasses and added, Evening all. 
 
 As they went in to dinner, Scobie said, Ive got to see you, but catching Wilsons eye he added, about your furniture. 
 
 My furniture? 
 
 I think I could get you some extra chairs. As conspirators they were much too young; they had not yet absorbed a 
whole code book into their memory and he was uncertain whether she had understood the mutilated phrase. All 
through dinner he sat silent, dreading the time when he would be alone with her, afraid to lose the least opportunity; 
when he put his hand in his pocket for a handkerchief the telegram crumpled in his fingers...have been a fool stop 
love . 
 
 Of course you know more about it than we do, Major Scobie, Dr Sykes said. 
 
 Im sorry. I missed ... 
 
 We were talking about the Pemberton case. So already in a few months it had become a case. When something 
became a case it no longer seemed to concern a human being: there was no shame or suffering in a case. The boy on 
the bed was cleaned and tidied, laid out for the test-book of psychology. 
 
 I was saying, Wilson said, that Pemberton chose an odd way to kill himself. I would have chosen a sleeping-draught. 
 

 It wouldnt be easy to get a sleeping-draught in Bamba, Dr Sykes said. It was probably a sudden decision. 
 
 I wouldnt have caused all that fuss, said Fellowes. A chaps got the right to take his own life, of course, but theres no 
need for fuss. An overdose of sleeping-draught - I agree with Wilson - thats the way. 
 
 You still have to get your prescription, Dr Sykes said. 
 
 Scobie with his fingers on the telegram remembered the letter signed Dicky, the immature handwriting, the marks of 
cigarettes on the chairs, the novels of Wallace, the stigmata of loneliness. Through two thousand years, he thought, 
we have discussed Christs agony in just this disinterested way. 
 
 Pemberton was always a bit of a fool, Fellowes said. 
 
 A sleeping-draught is invariably tricky, Dr Sykes said. Her big lenses reflected the electric globe as she turned them 
like a lighthouse in Scobies direction.Your experience will tell you how tricky. Insurance companies never like 
sleeping-draughts, and no coroner could tend himself to a deliberate fraud. 
 
 How can they tell ? Wilson asked. 
 
 Take luminal, for instance. Nobody could really take enough luminal by accident ... Scobie looked across the table 
at Helen. She ate slowly, without appetite, her eyes on her plate. Their silences seemed to isolate them: this was a 
subject the unhappy could never discuss impersonally. Again he was aware of Wilson looking from one to another of 
them, and Scobie drew desperately at his mind for any phrase that would end their dangerous solitude. They could 
not even be silent together with safety. 
 
 He said, Whats the way out youd recommend, Dr Sykes? 
 
 Well, there are bathing accidents - but even they need a good deal of explanation. If a mans brave enough to step in 
front of a car, but its too uncertain ... 
 
 And involves somebody else, Scobie said. Personally, Dr Sykes said, grinning under her glasses, I should have no 
difficulties. In my position, I should classify myself as an angina case and then get one of my colleagues to 
prescribe.. . 
 
 Helen said with sudden violence, What a beastly talk this is. Youve got no business to tell... 
 
 My dear, Dr Sykes said, revolving her malevolent beams, when youve been a doctor as long as I have been you 
know your company. I dont think any of us are likely... 
 
 Mrs Fellowes said, Have another helping of fruit salad, Mrs Rolt. 
 
 Are you a Catholic, Mrs Rolt? Fellowes asked. Of course they take very strong views. 
 
 No, Im not a Catholic. 
 
 But they do, dont they, Scobie? 
 
 We are taught, Scobie said, that its the unforgivable sin. 
 
 But do you really, seriously, Major Scobie, Dr Sykes asked, believe in Hell? 
 
 Oh yes, I do. 
 

 In flames and torment? 
 
 Perhaps not quite that. They tell us it may be a permanent sense of loss. 
 
 That sort of Hell wouldnt worryme ! Fellowes said. 
 
 Perhaps youve never lost anything of any importance, Scobie said. 
 
 The real object of the dinner-party had been the Argentine beef. With that consumed there was nothing to keep them 
together (Mrs Fellowes didnt play cards). Fellowes busied himself about the beer, and Wilson was wedged between 
the sour silence of Mrs Fellowes and Dr Sykes garrulity. 
 
 Lets get a breath of air, Scobie suggested. 
 
 Wise? 
 
 It would look odd if we didnt, Scobie said. 
 
 Going to look at the stars? Fellowes called, pouring out the beer. Making up for lost time, Scobie? Take your glasses 
 
 with you. 
 
 They balanced their glasses on the rail of the verandah. Helen said, I havent found your letter. 
 
 Forget it 
 
 Wasnt that what you wanted to see me about? 
 
 No. 
 
 He could see the outline of her face against the sky doomed to go out as the rain clouds advanced. He said, Ive got 
bad news. 
 
 Somebody knows? 
 
 Oh no, nobody knows. He said, Last night I had a telegram from my wife. Shes on the way home. One of the glasses 
fell from the rail and smashed in the yard. 
 
 The lips repeated bitterly the word home as if that were the only word she had grasped. He said quickly, moving his 
hand along the rail and failing to reach her,Her home. It will never by my home again. 
 
 Oh yes, it will. Now it will be. 
 
 He swore carefully, I shall never again want any home without you. The rain clouds had reached the moon and her 
face went out like a candle in a sudden draught of wind. He had the sense that he was embarking now on a longer 
journey than he had ever intended. A light suddenly shone on both of them as a door opened. He said sharply, Mind 
the blackout, and thought: at least we were not standing together, but how, how did our faces look? Wilsons voice 
said, We thought a fight was going on. We heard a glass break. 
 
 Mrs Rolt lost all her beer. 
 
 For Gods sake call me Helen, she said drearily, everybody else does, Major Scobie. 
 

 Am I interrupting something? 
 
 A scene of unbridled passion, Helen said. Its left me shaken. I want to go home. 
 
 Ill drive you down, Scobie said. Its getting late. 
 
 I wouldnt trust you, and anyway Dr Sykes is dying to talk to you about suicide. I wont break up the party. Havent 
you got a car, Mr Wilson? 
 
 Of course. Id be delighted. 
 
 You could always drive down and come straight back. 
 
 Im an early bird myself, Wilson said. 
 
 Ill just go in then and say good night. 
 
 When he saw her face again in the light, he thought: do I worry too much? Couldnt this for her be just the end of an 
episode? He heard her saying to Mrs Fellowes, The Argentine beef certainly was lovely. 
 
 Weve got Mr Wilson to thank for it 
 
 The phrases went to and fro like shuttlecocks. Somebody laughed (it was Fellowes or Wilson) and said, Youre right 
there, and Dr Sykes spectacles made a dot dash dot on the ceiling. He couldnt watch the car move off without 
disturbing the black-out; he listened to the starter retching and retching, the racing of the engine, and then the slow 
decline to silence. 
 
 Dr Sykes said, They should have kept Mrs Rolt in hospital a while longer. 
 
 Why? 
 
 Nerves. I could feel it when she shook hands. 
 
 He waited another half an hour and then he drove home. As usual Ali was waiting for him, dozing uneasily on the 
kitchen step. He lit Scobie to the door with his torch. Missus leave letter, he said, and took an envelope out of his 
shirt, 
 
 Why didnt you leave it on my table? 
 
 Massa in there. 
 
 What massa? but by that time the door was open, and he saw Yusef stretched in a chair, asleep, breathing so gently 
that the hair lay motionless on his chest 
 
 I tell him go away, Ali said with contempt, but he stay. 
 
 Thats all right. Go to bed. 
 
 He had a sense that life was closing in on him. Yusef had never been here since the night he came to inquire after 
Louise and to lay his trap for Tallit. Quietly, so as not to disturb the sleeping man and bring that problem on his 
heels, he opened the note from Helen. She must have written it immediately she got home. He read,My darling, this 
is serius. I cant say this to you, so Im putting it on paper. Only Ill give it to Ali. You trust Ali. When I heard your 
wife was coming back... 

 
 Yusef opened his eyes and said, Excuse me, Major Scobie, for intruding. 
 
 Do you want a drink? Beer. Gin. My whiskys finished. 
 
 May I send you a case? Yusef began automatically and then laughed. I always forget. I must not send you things. 
 
 Scobie sat down at the table and laid the note open in front of him. Nothing could be so important as those next 
sentences. He said, What do you want, Yusef? and read on.When I heard your wife was coming back, I was angry 
and bitter. It was stupid of me. Nothing is your fault. 
 
 Finish your reading, Major Scobie, I can wait. 
 
 It isnt really important, Scobie said, dragging his eyes from the large immature letters, the mistake in spelling. Tell 
me what you want, Yusef, and back his eyes went to the letter.Thats why Im writing. Because last night you made 
promises about not leaving me and I dont want you ever to be bound to me with promises. My dear, all your 
promises... 
 
 Major Scobie, when I lent you money, I swear, it was for friendship, just friendship. I never wanted to ask anything 
of you, anything at all, not even the four per cent. I wouldnt even have asked foryour friendship ... I wasyour friend .. 
this is very confusing, words are very complicated, Major Scobie. 
 
 Youve kept the bargain, Yusef. I dont complain about Tallits cousin. He read on:belong to your wife. Nothing you 
say to me is a promise. Please, please remember that. If you never want to see me again, dont write, dont speak. And, 
dear, if you just want to see me sometimes, see me sometimes. Ill tell any lies you like. 
 
 Do finish what you are reading, Major Scobie. Because what I have to speak about is very, very important. 
 
 My dear, my dear, leave me If you want to or have me as your hore if you want to. He thought: shes only heard the 
word, never seen it spelt: they cut it out of the school Shakesspeare [sic!].Good night. Dont worry, my darling. He 
said savagely, All right, Yusef. What is it thats so important? 
 
 Major Scobie, I have got after all to ask you a favour. It has nothing to do with the money I lent you. If you can do 
this for me it will be friendship, just friendship. 
 
 Its late, Yusef, tell me what it is. 
 
 TheEsperanccedil; a will be in the day after tomorrow. I want a small packet taken on board for me and left with the 
captain. 
 
 Whats in the packet? 
 
 Major Scobie, dont ask. I am your friend. I would rather have this be a secret. It will harm no one at all. 
 
 Of course, Yusef, I cant do it. You know that. 
 
 I assure you, Major Scobie, on my word - he leant forward in the chair and laid his hand on the black fur of his chest 
- on my word as a friend the package contains nothing, nothing for the Germans. No industrial diamonds, Major 
Scobie. 
 
 Gem stones? 
 
 Nothing for the Germans. Nothing that will hurt your country. 

 
 Yusef, you cant really believe that Id agree? 
 
 The light drill trousers squeezed to the edge of the chair: for one moment Scobie thought that Yusef was going on 
his knees to him. He said, Major Scobie, I implore you ... It is important for you as well as for me. His voice broke 
with genuine emotion, I want to be a friend. 
 
 Scobie said, Td better warn you before you say any more, Yusef, that the Commissionerdoes know about our 
arrangement. 
 
 I daresay, I daresay, but this is so much worse, Major Scobie, on my word of honour, this will do no harm to 
anyone. Just do this one act of friendship, and Ill never ask another. Do it of your own free will. Major Scobie. There 
is no bribe. I offer no bribe. 
 
 His eye went back to the letter:My darling, this is serius . Serius - his eye this time read it asservus - a slave: a 
servant of the servants of God. It was like an unwise command which he had none the less to obey. He felt as though 
he were turning his back on peace for ever. With his eyes open, knowing the consequences, he entered the territory 
of lies without a passport for return. 
 
 What were you saying, Yusef? I didnt catch... 
 
 Just once more I ask you... 
 
 No, Yusef. 
 
 Major Scobie, Yusef said, sitting bolt upright in his chair, speaking with a sudden odd formality, as though a 
stranger had joined them and they were no longer alone, you remember Pemberton? 
 
 Of course. 
 
 His boy came into my employ. 
 
 Pembertons boy?Nothing you say to me is a promise. 
 
 Pembertons boy is Mrs Rolts boy. 
 
 Scobies eyes remained on the letter, but he no longer read what he saw. 
 
 Her boy brought me a letter. You see I asked him to keep his eyes - bare - is that the right word? 
 
 You have a very good knowledge of English, Yusef. Who read it to you? 
 
 That does not matter. 
 
 The formal voice suddenly stopped and the old Yusef implored again, Oh, Major Scobie, what made you write such 
a letter? It was asking for trouble. 
 
 One cant be wise all the time, Yusef. One would die of disgust. 
 
 You see it has put you in my hands. 
 
 I wouldnt mind that so much. But to put three people in your hands... 
 

 If only you would have done an act of friendship... 
 
 Go on, Yusef. You must complete your blackmail. You cant get away with half a threat. 
 
 I wish I could dig a hole and put the package in it. But the wars going badly, Major Scobie. I am doing this not for 
myself, but for my father and mother, my half brother, my three sisters - and there are cousins too/ 
 
 Quite a family. 
 
 You see if the English are beaten all my stores have no value at all. 
 
 What do you propose to do with the letter, Yusef? 
 
 I hear from a clerk in the cable company that your wife is on her way back. I will have the letter handed to her as 
soon as she lands. 
 
 He remembered the telegram signed Louise Scobie:have been a fool stop love . It would be a cold welcome, he 
thought. 
 
 And if I give your package to the captain of theEsperanccedil; a ? 
 
 My boy will be waiting on the wharf. In return for the captains receipt he will give you an envelope with your letter 
inside. 
 
 You trust your boy? 
 
 Just as you trust Ali. 
 
 Suppose I demand the letter first and gave you my word... 
 
 It is the penalty of the blackmailer, Major Scobie, that he has no debts of honour. You would be quite right to cheat 
me. 
 
 Suppose you cheat me? 
 
 That wouldnt be right. And formerly I was your friend. 
 
 You very nearly were, Scobie reluctantly admitted. 
 
 I am the base Indian. 
 
 The base Indian? 
 
 Who threw away a pearl, Yusef sadly said. That was in the play by Shakespeare the Ordnance Corps gave in the 
Memorial Hall. I have always remembered it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 

 
 
 Well, Druce said, Im afraid well have to get to work now. 
 
 One more glass, the captain of theEsperanccedil; a said. Not if we are going to release you before the boom closes. 
 
 See you later, Scobie. When the door of the cabin closed the captain said breathlessly, I am still here. 
 
 So I see. I told you there are often mistakes - minutes go to the wrong place, files are lost. 
 
 I believe none of that, the captain said. I believe you helped me. He dripped gently with sweat in the stuffy cabin. He 
added, I pray for you at Mass, and I have brought you this. It was all that I could find for you in Lobito. She is a very 
obscure saint, and he slid across the table between them a holy medal the size of a nickel piece. Santa - I dont 
remember her name. She had something to do with Angola I think, the captain explained. 
 
 Thank you, Scobie said. The package in his pocket seemed to him to weigh as heavily as a gun against his thigh. He 
let the last drops of port settle in the well of his glass and then drained them. He said, This time I have something for 
you. A terrible reluctance cramped his fingers. 
 
 For me? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 How light the little package actually was now that it was on the table between them. What had weighed like a gun in 
the pocket might now have contained little more than fifty cigarettes. He said, Someone who comes on board with 
the pilot at Lisbon will ask you if you have any American cigarettes. You will give him this package. 
 
 Is this Government business? 
 
 No. The Government would never pay as well as this. He laid a packet of notes upon the table. 
 
 This surprises me, the captain said with an odd note of disappointment. You have put yourself in my hands. 
 
 You were in mine, Scobie said. 
 
 I dont forget. Nor will my daughter. She is married outside the Church, but she has faith. She prays for you too. 
 
 The prayers we pray then dont count, surely? 
 
 No, but when the moment of Grace returns they rise, the captain raised his fat arms in an absurd and touching 
gesture, all at once together like a flock of birds. 
 
 I shall be glad of them, Scobie said. 
 
 You can trust me, of course. 
 
 Of course. Now I must search your cabin. 
 
 You do not trust me very far. 
 
 That package, Scobie said, has nothing to do with the war. 
 
 Are you sure? 

 
 I am nearly sure. 
 
 He began his search. Once, pausing by a mirror, he saw poised over his own shoulder a strangers face, a fat, 
sweating, unreliable face. Momentarily he wondered: who can that be? before he realized that it was only this new 
unfamiliar look of pity which made it strange to him. He thought: am I really one of those whom people pity? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BOOK THREE 
 
 -------------------- 
 
 PART ONE 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THErains were over and the earth steamed. Flies everywhere settled in clouds, and the hospital was full of malaria 
patients. Farther up the coast they were dying of blackwater, and yet for a while there was a sense of relief. It was as 
if the world had become quiet again, now that the drumming on the iron roofs was over. In the town the deep scent of 
flowers modified the Zoo smell in the corridors of the police station. An hour after the boom was opened the liner 
moved in from the south unescorted. 
 
 Scobie went out in the police boat as soon as the liner anchored. His mouth felt stiff with welcome; he practised on 
his tongue phrases which would seem warm and unaffected, and he thought: what a long way I have travelled to 
make me rehearse a welcome. He hoped he would find Louise in one of the public rooms; it would be easier to greet 
her in front of strangers, but there was no sign of her anywhere. He had to ask at the pursers office for her cabin 
number. 
 
 Even then, of course, there was the hope that it would be shared. No cabin nowadays held less than six passengers. 
 
 But when he knocked and the door was opened, nobody was there but Louise. He felt like a caller at a strange house 
with something to sell. There was a question-mark at the end of his voice when he said, Louise? 
 
 Henry. She added, Come inside. When once he was with in the cabin there was nothing to do but kiss. He avoided 
her mouth - the mouth reveals so much, but she wouldnt be content until she had pulled his face round and left the 
seal of her return on his lips. Oh my dear, here I am. 
 

 Here you are, he said, seeking desperately for the phrases he had rehearsed. 
 
 Theyve all been so sweet, she explained. They are keeping away, so that I can see you alone. 
 
 Youve had a good trip? 
 
 I think we were chased once. 
 
 I was very anxious, he said and thought: that is the first lie. I may as well take the plunge now. He said, Ive missed 
you so much. 
 
 I was a fool to go away, darling. Through the port-hole the houses sparkled like mica in the haze of heat. The cabin 
smelt closely of women, of powder, nail-varnish, and nightdresses. He said, Lets get ashore. 
 
 But she detained him a little while yet Darling, she said, Ive made a lot of resolutions while Ive been away. 
Everything now is going to be different. Im not going to rattle you any more. She repeated, Everything will be 
different and he thought sadly that that at any rate was the truth, the bleak truth. 
 
 Standing at the window of his house while Ali and the small boy carried in the trunks he looked up the hill towards 
the Nissen huts. It was as if a landslide had suddenly put an immeasurable distance between him and them. They 
were so distant that at first there was no pain, any more than for an episode of youth remembered with the faintest 
melancholy. Did my lies really start, he wondered, when I wrote that letter? Can I really love her more than Louise? 
Do I, in my heart of hearts, love either of them, or is it only that this automatic pity goes out to any human need - and 
makes it worse? Any victim demands allegiance. Upstairs silence and solitude were being hammered away, tin-tacks 
were being driven in, weights fell on the floor and shook the ceiling. Louises voice was raised in cheerful peremptory 
commands. There was a rattle of objects on the dressing-table. He went upstairs and from the doorway saw the face 
in the white communion veil staring back at him again: the dead too had returned. Life was not the same without the 
dead. The mosquito-net hung, a grey ectoplasm, over the double bed. 
 
 Well, Ali, he said, with the phantom of a smite which was all he could raise at this seance, Missus back. Were all 
together again. Her rosary lay on the dressing-table, and he thought of the broken one in his pocket. He had always 
meant to get it mended: now it hardly seemed worth the trouble. 
 
 Darling, Louise said, Ive finished up here. Ali can do the rest There are so many things I want to speak to you about. 
... She followed him downstairs and said at once, I must get the curtains washed. 
 
 They dont show the dirt 
 
 Poor dear, you wouldnt notice, but Ive been away. She said, I really want a bigger bookcase now. Ive brought a lot 
of books back with me. 
 
 You havent told me yet what made you... 
 
 Darling, youd laugh at me. It was so silly. But suddenly I saw what a fool Id been to worry like that about the 
Commissionership. Ill tell you one day when I dont mind your laughing. She put her hand out and tentatively 
touched his arm. Youre really glad...? 
 
 So glad, he said. 
 
 Do you know one of the things that worried me? I was afraid you wouldnt be much of a Catholic without me 
around, keeping you up to things, poor dear. 
 
 I dont suppose I have been. 
 

 Have you missed Mass often? 
 
 He said with forced jocularity, Ive hardly been at all. 
 
 Oh, Ticki. She pulled herself quickly up and said, Henry, darling, youll think Im very sentimental, but tomorrows 
Sunday and I want us to go to communion together. A sign that weve started again - in the right way. It was 
extraordinary the points in a situation one missed - this he had not considered. He said, Of course, but his brain 
momentarily refused to work. 
 
 Youll have to go to confession this afternoon. 
 
 I havent done anything very terrible. 
 
 Missing Mass on Sundays a mortal sin, just as much as adultery. 
 
 Adulterys more fun, he said with attempted lightness. 
 
 Its time I came back. 
 
 Ill go along this afternoon - after lunch. I cant confess on an empty stomach. he said. 
 
 Darling, youhave changed, you know. 
 
 I was only joking. 
 
 I dont mind you joking. I like it You didnt do it much though before. 
 
 You dont come back every day, darling. The strained good humour, the jest with dry lips, went on and on: at lunch 
he kid down his fork for yet another crack. Dear Henry, she said, Ive never known you so cheerful The ground had 
given way beneath his feet, and all through the meal he had the sensation of falling, the relaxed stomach, the 
breathless-ness, the despair - because you couldnt fall so far as this and survive. His hilarity was like a scream from a 
crevasse. 
 
 When lunch was over (he couldnt have told what it was hed eaten) he said, I must be off. 
 
 Father Rank? 
 
 First Ive got to look in on Wilson. Hes living in one of the Nissens now. A neighbour. 
 
 Wont he be in town? 
 
 I think he comes back for lunch. 
 
 He thought as he went up the hill, what a lot of times in future I shall have to call on Wilson. But no - that wasnt a 
safe alibi. It would only do this once, because he knew that Wilson lunched in town. None the less, to make sure, he 
knocked and was taken aback momentarily when Harris opened to him. I didnt expect to see you. 
 
 I bad a touch of fever, Harris said. I wondered whether Wilson was in. 
 
 He always lunches in town, Harris said. I just wanted to tell him hed be welcome to look in. My wifes back, you 
know. 
 
 I thought I saw the activity through the window. 

 
 You must call on us too. 
 
 Im not much of a calling man, Harris said, drooping in the doorway. To tell you the truth women scare me. 
 
 You dont see enough of them, Harris. 
 
 Im not a squire of dames, Harris said with a poor attempt at pride, and Scobie was aware of how Harris watched him 
as he picked his way reluctantly towards a womans hut, watched with the ugly asceticism of the unwanted man. He 
knocked and felt that disapproving gaze boring into his back. He thought: there goes my alibi: he will tell Wilson and 
Wilson ... He thought: I will say that as I was up here, I called ... and he felt his whole personality crumble with the 
slow disintegration of lies. 
 
 Why did you knock? Helen asked. She lay on her bed in the dusk of drawn curtains. 
 
 Harris was watching me. 
 
 I didnt think youd come today. 
 
 How did you know? 
 
 Everybody here knows everything - except one thing. How clever you are about that. I suppose its because you are a 
police officer. 
 
 Yes. He sat down on the bed and put his hand on her arm; immediately the sweat began to run between them. He 
said, What are you doing here? You are not ill? 
 
 Just a headache. 
 
 He said mechanically, without even hearing his own words, Take care of yourself. 
 
 Somethings worrying you, she said. Have things gone - wrong? 
 
 Nothing of that kind. 
 
 Do you remember the first night you stayed here? We didnt worry about anything. You even left your umbrella 
behind. We were happy. Doesnt it seem odd? - we were happy, 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Why do we go on like this - being unhappy? 
 
 Its a mistake to mix up the ideas of happiness and love, Scobie said with desperate pedantry, as though, if he could 
turn the whole situation into a textbook case, as they had turned Pemberton, peace might return to both of them, a 
kind of resignation. 
 
 Sometimes you are so damnably old, Helen said, but immediately she expressed with a motion of her hand towards 
him that she wasnt serious. Today, he thought, she cant afford to quarrel - or so she believes. Darling, she added, a 
penny for your thoughts. 
 
 One ought not to lie to two people if it could be avoided -that way lay complete chaos, but he was tempted terribly 
to lie as he watched her face on the pillow. She seemed to him like one of those plants in nature films which you 
watch age under your eye. Already she had the look of the coast about her. She shared it with Louise. He said, Its just 

a worry I have to think out for myself. Something I hadnt considered. 
 
 Tell me, darling. Two brains... She closed her eyes and he could see her mouth steady for a blow. 
 
 He said, Louise wants me to go to Mass with her, to communion. Im supposed to be on the way to confession now. 
 
 Oh, is that all? she asked with immense relief, and irritation at her ignorance moved like hatred unfairly in his brain. 
 
 All? he said. All? Then justice reclaimed him. He said gently, If I dont go to communion, you see, shell know theres 
something wrong - seriously wrong. 
 
 But cant you simply go? 
 
 He said, To me that means - well, its the worst thing I can do. 
 
 You dont really believe in hell? 
 
 That was what Fellowes asked me. 
 
 But I simply dont understand. If you believe in hell, why are you with me now? 
 
 How often, he thought, lack of faith helps one to see more clearly than faith. He said, You are right, of course: it 
ought to prevent all this. But the villagers on the slopes of Vesuvius go on ... And then, against all the teaching of the 
Church, one has the conviction that love - any kind of love - does deserve a bit of mercy. One will pay, of course, 
pay terribly, but I dont believe one will pay for ever. Perhaps one will be given time before one dies ... 
 
 A deathbed repentance, she said with contempt. 
 
 It wouldnt be easy, he said, to repent of this. He kissed the sweat off her hand. I can regret the lies, the mess, the 
unhappiness, but if I were dying now I wouldnt know how to repent the love. 
 
 Well, she said with the same undertone of contempt that seemed to pull her apart from him, into the safety of the 
shore, cant you go and confess everything now? After all it doesnt mean you wont do it again. 
 
 Its not much good confessing if I dont intend to try... 
 
 Well then, she said triumphantly, be hung for a sheep. You are in - what do you call it - mortal sin? now. What 
difference does it make? 
 
 He thought: pious people, I suppose, would call this the devil speaking, but he knew that evil never spoke in these 
crude answerable terms: this was innocence. He said, Thereis a difference - a big difference. Its not easy to 
explain.Now Im just putting our love above - well, my safety. But the other - the others really evil. Its like the Black 
Mass, the man who steals the sacrament to desecrate it. Its striking God when hes down - in my power. 
 
 She turned her head wearily away and said, I dont understand a thing you are saying. Its all hooey to me. 
 
 I wish it were to me. But I believe it 
 
 She said sharply, Isuppose you do. Or is it just a trick? I didnt hear so much about God when we began, did I? You 
arent turning pious on me to give you an excuse...? 
 
 My dear, Scobie said, Im not leaving you ever. Ive got to think, thats all. 
 

 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 At a quarter-past six next morning Ali called them. Scobie woke at once, but Louise remained sleeping - she had had 
a long day. Scobie watched her - this was the face he had loved: this was the face he loved. She was terrified of death 
by sea and yet she had come back, to make him comfortable. She had borne a child by him in one agony, and in 
another agony had watched the child die. It seemed to him that he had escaped everything. If only, he thought, I 
could so manage that she never suffers again, but he knew that he had set himself an impossible task. He could delay 
the suffering, that was all, but he carried it about with him, an infection which sooner or later she must contract 
Perhaps she was contracting it now, for she turned and whimpered in her sleep. He put his hand against her cheek to 
soothe her. He thought: if only she will go on sleeping, then I win steep on too, I will oversleep, we shall miss Mass, 
another problem will be postponed. But as if his thoughts had been an alarm dock she awoke 
 
 What time is it, darling? 
 
 Nearly half-past six. 
 
 Well have to hurry. He felt as though he were being urged by a kindly and remorseless gaoler to dress for execution. 
Yet he soil put off the saving lie: there was always the possibility of a miracle. Louise gave a final dab of powder 
(but the powder caked as it touched the skin) and said, Well be off now. Was there the faintest note of triumph in her 
voice? Years and years ago, in the other life of childhood, someone with his name Henry Scobie had acted in the 
school play, had acted Hotspur. He had been chosen for his seniority and his physique, but everyone said that it had 
been a good performance. Now he had to act again - surely it was as easy as the simple verbal lie? 
 
 Scobie suddenly leant back against the wall and put his hand on his chest. He couldnt make his muscles imitate pain, 
so he simply closed his eyes. Louise looking in her mirror said, Remind me to tell you about Father Davis in Durban. 
He was a very good type of priest, much more intellectual than Father Rank. It seemed to Scobie that she was never 
going to look round and notice him. She said, Well, we really must be off, and dallied by the mirror. Some sweat-
lank hairs were out of place. Through the curtain of his lashes at last he saw her turn and look at him. Come along, 
dear, she said, you look sleepy. 
 
 He kept his eyes shut and stayed where he was. She said sharply, Ticki, whats the matter? 
 
 A little brandy. 
 
 Are you ill? 
 
 A little brandy, he repeated sharply, and when she had fetched it for him and he felt the taste on his tongue he had an 
immeasurable sense of reprieve. He sighed and relaxed, Thats better. 
 
 What was it, Tick!? 
 
 Just a pain in my chest. Its gone now. 
 
 Have you had it before? 
 
 Once or twice while youve been away. 
 

 You must see a doctor. 
 
 Oh, its not worth a fuss. Theyll just say overwork. 
 
 I oughtnt to have dragged you up, but I wanted us to have Communion together. 
 
 Im afraid Ive ruined that - with the brandy. 
 
 Never mind, Ticki. Carelessly she sentenced him to eternal death. We can go any day. 
 
 He knelt in his seat and watched Louise kneel with the other communicants at the altar rail: he had insisted on 
coming to the service with her. Father Rank turning from the altar came to them with God in His bands. Scobie 
thought: God has just escaped me, but will He always escape?Domine non sum dignus ... domine non sum dignus ... 
domine non sum dignus ... His hand formally, as though he were at drill, beat on a particular button of his uniform. It 
seemed to him for a moment cruelly unfair of God to have exposed himself in this way, a man, a wafer of bread, first 
in the Palestinian villages and now here in the hot port, there, everywhere, allowing man to have his will of Him. 
Christ had told the rich young man to sell all and follow Him, but that was an easy rational step compared with this 
that God had taken, to put Himself at the mercy of men who hardly knew the meaning of the word. How desperately 
God must love, he thought with shame. The priest had reached Louise in his slow interrupted patrol, and suddenly 
Scobie was aware of the sense of exile. Over there, where all these people knelt, was a country to which he would 
never return. The sense of love stirred in him, the love one always feels for what one has lost, whether a child, a 
woman, or even pain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 WILSONtore the page carefully out ofThe Downhamian and pasted a thick sheet of Colonial Office notepaper on. 
the back of the poem. He held it up to the light: it was impossible to read the sports results on the other side of his 
verses. Then he folded the page carefully and put it in his pocket; there it would probably stay, but one never knew. 
 
 He had seen Scobie drive away towards the town and with beating heart and a sense of breathlessness, much the 
same as he had felt when stepping into the brothel, even with the same reluctance - for who wanted at any given 
moment to change the routine of his life? - he made his way downhill towards Scobies house. 
 
 He began to rehearse what he considered another man in his place would do: pick up the threads at once: kiss her 
quite naturally, upon the mouth if possible, say Ive missed you, no uncertainty. But his beating heart sent out its 
message of fear which drowned thought. 
 
 Its Wilson at last, Louise said. I thought youd forgotten me, and held out her hand. He took it like a defeat. 
 
 Have a drink. 

 
 I was wondering whether youd like a walk. 
 
 Its too hot, Wilson. 
 
 I havent been up there, you know, since... 
 
 Up where? He realized that for those who do not love time never stands still. 
 
 Up at the old station. 
 
 She said vaguely with a remorseless lack of interest, Oh yes ... yes, I havent been up there myself yet. 
 
 That night when I got back, he could feel the awful immature flush expanding, I tried to write some verse. 
 
 What, you, Wilson? 
 
 He said furiously, Yes, me, Wilson. Why not? And its been published. 
 
 I wasnt laughing. I was just surprised. Who published it? 
 
 A new paper calledThe Circle . Of course they dont pay much. 
 
 Can I see it? 
 
 Wilson said breathlessly, Ive got it here. He explained, There was something on the other side I couldnt stand. It was 
just too modern for me. He watched her with hungry embarrassment. 
 
 Its quite pretty, she said weakly. 
 
 You see the initials? 
 
 Ive never had a poem dedicated to me before. 
 
 Wilson felt sick; he wanted to sit down. Why, he wondered, does one ever begin this humiliating process: why does 
one imagine that one is in love? He had read somewhere that love had been invented in the eleventh century by the 
troubadours. Why had they not left us with lust? He said with hopeless venom, I love you. He thought: its a lie, the 
word means nothing off the printed page. He waited for her laughter. 
 
 Oh, no, Wilson, she said, no. You dont. Its just Coast fever. 
 
 He plunged blindly, More than anything in the world. 
 
 She said gently, No one loves like that, Wilson. 
 
 He walked restlessly up and down, his shorts flapping, waving the bit of paper fromThe Downhamian . You ought to 
believe in love. Youre a Catholic. Didnt God love the world? 
 
 Oh yes, she said, Hes capable of it But not many of us are. 
 
 You love your husband. You told me so. And its brought you back. 
 

 Louise said sadly, I suppose I do. All I can. But its not the kind of love you want to imagine you feel. No poisoned 
chalices, eternal doom, black sails. We dont die for love, Wilson - except, of course, in books. And sometimes a boy 
play-acting. Dont lets play-act, Wilson - its no fun at our age. 
 
 Im not play-acting, he said with a fury in which he could hear too easily the histrionic accent. He confronted her 
bookcase as though it were a witness she had forgotten. Do they play-act? 
 
 Not much, she said. Thats why I like them better thanyour poets. 
 
 All the same you came back. His face lit up with wicked inspiration. Or was that just jealousy? 
 
 She said, Jealousy? What on earth have I got to be jealous about? 
 
 Theyve been careful, Wilson said, but not as careful as all that. 
 
 I dont know what you are talking about. 
 
 Your Ticki and Helen Rolt. 
 
 Louise struck at his cheek and missing got his nose, which began to bleed copiously. She said, Thats for calling him 
Ticki. Nobodys going to do that except me. You know he hates it. Here, take my handkerchief if you havent got one 
of your own. 
 
 Wilson said, I bleed awfully easily. Do you mind if I lie on my back? He stretched himself on the floor between the 
table and the meat safe, among the ants. First there had been Scobie watching his tears at Pende, and now - this. 
 
 You wouldnt like me to put a key down your back? Louise asked. 
 
 No. No thank you. The blood had stained theDownhamian page. 
 
 I reallyam sorry. Ive got a vile temper. This will cure you, Wilson. But if romance is what one lives by, one must 
never be cured of it. The world has too many spoilt priests of this faith or that: better surely to pretend a belief than 
wander in that vicious vacuum of cruelty and despair. He said obstinately, Nothing will cure me, Louise. I love you. 
Nothing, bleeding into her handkerchief. 
 
 How strange, she said, it would be if it were true. 
 
 He grunted a query from the ground. 
 
 I mean, she explained, if youwere one of those people who really love. I thought Henry was. It would be strange if 
really it was you all the time. He felt an odd fear that after all he was going to be accepted at his own valuation, 
rather as a minor staff officer might feel during a rout when he finds that his claim to know the handling of the tanks 
will be accepted. It is too late to admit that he knows nothing but what he has read in the technical journals - O lyric 
love, half angel and half bird. Bleeding into the handkerchief, he formed his lips carefully round a generous phrase, I 
expect he loves - in his way. 
 
 Who? Louise said. Me? This Helen Rolt you are talking about? Or just himself? 
 
 I shouldnt have said that. 
 
 Isnt it true? Lets have a bit of truth, Wilson. You dont know how tired I am of comforting lies. Is she beautiful? 
 
 Oh no, no. Nothing of that sort. 

 
 Shes young, of course, and Im middle-aged. But surely shes a bit worn after what shes been through. 
 
 Shes very worn. 
 
 But shes not a Catholic. Shes lucky. Shes free, Wilson. 
 
 Wilson sat up against the leg of the table. He said with genuine passion, I wish to God you wouldnt call me Wilson. 
 
 Edward. Eddie. Ted. Teddy. 
 
 Im bleeding again, he said dismally and lay back on the floor. 
 
 What do you know about it all, Teddie? 
 
 I think Id rather be Edward. Louise, Ive seen him come away from her hut at two in the morning. He was up there 
yesterday afternoon. 
 
 He was at confession. 
 
 Harris saw him. 
 
 Youre certainly watching him. 
 
 Its my belief Yusef is using him. 
 
 Thats fantastic. Youre going too far. 
 
 She stood over him as though he were a corpse: the bloodstained handkerchief lay in his palm. They neither of them 
heard the car stop or the footsteps up to the threshold. It was strange to both of them, hearing a third voice from an 
outside world speaking into this room which had become as close and intimate and airless as a vault. Is anything 
wrong? Scobies voice asked. 
 
 Its just... Louise said and made a gesture of bewilderment - as though she were saying: where does one start 
explaining? Wilson scrambled to his feet and at once his nose began to bleed. 
 
 Here, Scobie said and taking out his bundle of keys dropped them inside Wilsons shirt collar. Youll see, he said, the 
old-fashioned remedies are always best, and sure enough the bleeding did stop within a few seconds. You should 
never lie on your back, Scobie went reasonably on. Seconds use a sponge of cold water, and you certainly look as 
though youd been in a fight, Wilson. 
 
 I always lie on my back, Wilson said. Blood makes me Ill. 
 
 Have a drink? 
 
 No, Wilson said, no. I must be off. He retrieved the keys with some difficulty and left the tail of his shirt dangling. 
He only discovered it when Harris pointed it out to him on his return to the Nissen, and he thought: that is how I 
looked while I walked away and they watched side by side. 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 
 
 
 
 What did he want? Scobie said. 
 
 He wanted to make love to me. 
 
 Does he love you? 
 
 He thinks he does. You cant ask much more than that, can you? 
 
 You seem to have hit him rather hard, Scobie said, on the nose? 
 
 He made me angry. He called you Ticki. Darling, hes spying on you. 
 
 I know that. 
 
 Is he dangerous? 
 
 He might be - under some circumstances. But then it would be my fault. 
 
 Henry, do you never get furious at anyone? Dont you mind him making love to me? 
 
 He said, Id be a hypocrite if I were angry at that. Its the kind of thing that happens to people. You know, quite 
pleasant normal people do fall in love. 
 
 Have you ever fallen in love? 
 
 Oh yes, yes. He watched her closely while he excavated his smile.You know I have. 
 
 Henry, did you really feel ill this morning? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 It wasnt just an excuse? 
 
 No. 
 
 Then, darling, lets go to communion together tomorrow morning. 
 
 If you want to, he said. It was the moment he had known would come. With bravado, to show that his hand was not 
shaking, he took down a glass. Drink? 
 
 Its too early, dear, Louise said; he knew she was watching him closely like all the others. He put the glass down and 
said, Ive just got to run back to the station for some papers. When I get back it will be time for drinks. 
 
 He drove unsteadily down the road, his eyes blurred with nausea. O God, he thought, the decisions you force on 
people, suddenly, with no time to consider. I am too tired to think: this ought to be worked out on paper like a 
problem in mathematics, and the answer arrived at without pain. But the pain made him physically sick, so that he 
retched over the wheel. The trouble is, he thought, we know the answers - we Catholics are damned by our 

knowledge. Theres no need for me to work anything out - there is only one answer: to kneel down in the confessional 
and say, Since my last confession I have committed adultery so many times etcetera etcetera; to hear Father Rank 
telling me to avoid the occasion: never see the woman alone (speaking in those terrible abstract terms: Helen - the 
woman, the occasion, no longer the bewildered child clutching the stamp-album, listening to Bagster howling outside 
the door: that moment of peace and darkness and tenderness and pity adultery). And I to make my act of contrition, 
the promise never more to offend thee, and then tomorrow the communion: taking God in my mouth in what they 
call the state of grace. Thats the right answer - thereis no other answer: to save my own soul and abandon her to 
Bagster and despair. One must be reasonable, he told himself, and recognize that despair doesnt last (is that true?), 
that love doesnt last (but isnt that the very reason that despair does?), that in a few weeks or months shell be all right 
again. She has survived forty days in an open boat and the death of her husband and cant she survive the mere death 
of love? As I can, as I know I can. 
 
 He drew up outside the church and sat hopelessly at the wheel. Death never comes when one desires it most. He 
thought: of course theres the ordinary honestwrong answer, to leave Louise, forget that private vow, resign my job. 
To abandon Helen to Bagster or Louise to what? I am trapped, he told himself, catching sight of an expressionless 
strangers face in the driving mirror, trapped. Nevertheless he left the car and went into the church. While he was 
waiting for Father Rank to go into the confessional he knelt and prayed: the only prayer he could rake up. Even the 
words of the Our Father and the Hail Mary deserted him. He prayed for a miracle, O God convince me, help me, 
convince me. Make me feel that I am more important than that girl, It was not Helens face he saw as he prayed but 
the dying child who called him father: a face in a photograph staring from the dressing-table: the face of a black girl 
of twelve a sailor had raped and killed glaring blindly up at him in a yellow paraffin light. Make me put my own soul 
first Give me trust in your mercy to the one I abandon. He could hear Father Rank close the door of his box and 
nausea twisted him again on his knees. O God, he said, if instead I should abandon you, punish me but let the others 
get some happiness. He went into the box. He thought, a miracle may still happen. Even Father Rank may for once 
find the word, the right word ... Kneeling in the space of an upturned coffin he said, Since my last confession I have 
committed adultery. 
 
 How many times? 
 
 I dont know, Father, many times. 
 
 Are you married? 
 
 Yes. He remembered that evening when Father Rank had nearly broken down before him, admitting his failure to 
help ... Was he, even while he was struggling to retain the complete anonymity of the confessional, remembering it 
too? He wanted to say, Help me, Father. Convince me that I would do right to abandon her to Bagster. Make me 
believe in the mercy of God, but he knelt silently waiting: he was unaware of the slightest tremor of hope. Father 
Rank said, Is it one woman? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 You must avoid seeing her. Is that possible? 
 
 He shook his head. 
 
 If you must see her, you must never be alone with her. Do you promise to do that, promise God not me? He thought: 
how foolish it was of me to expect the magic word. This is the formula used so many times on so many people. 
Presumably people promised and went away and came back and confessed again. Did they really believe they were 
going to try? He thought: I am cheating human beings every day I live, I am not going to try to cheat myself or God. 
He replied, It would be no good my promising that, Father. 
 
 You must promise. You cant desire the end without desiring the means. 
 
 Ah, but one can, he thought, one can: one can desire the peace of victory without desiring the ravaged towns. 
 

 Father Rank said, I dont need to tell you surely that theres nothing automatic in the confessional or in absolution. It 
depends on your state of mind whether you are forgiven. Its no good coming and kneeling hers unprepared. Before 
you come here you must know the wrong youve done. 
 
 I do know that 
 
 And you must have a real purpose of amendment. We are told to forgive our brother seventy times seven and we 
neednt fear God will be any less forgiving than we are, but nobody can begin to forgive the uncontrite. Its better to 
sin seventy times and repent each time than sin once and never repent. He could see Father Ranks hand go up to wipe 
the sweat out of his eyes: it was like a gesture of weariness. He thought: what is the good of keeping him in this 
discomfort? Hes right, of course, hes right. I was a fool to imagine that somehow in this airless box I would find a 
conviction ... He said, I think I was wrong to come, Father. 
 
 I dont want to refuse you absolution, but I think if you would just go away and turn things over in your mind, youd 
come back in a better frame of mind. 
 
 Yes, Father. 
 
 I will pray for you. 
 
 When he came out of the box it seemed to Scobie that for the first time his footsteps had taken him out of sight of 
hope. There was no hope anywhere he turned his eyes: the dead figure of the God upon the cross, the plaster Virgin, 
the hideous stations representing a series of events that had happened a long time ago. It seemed to him that he had 
only left for his exploration the territory of despair. 
 
 He drove down to the station, collected a file and returned home. Youve been a long time, Louise said. He didnt 
even know the lie he was going to tell before it was on his lips. That pain came back, he said, so I waited for a while. 
 
 Do you think you ought to have a drink? 
 
 Yes. until anybody tells me not to. 
 
 And youll see a doctor? 
 
 Of course. 
 
 That night he dreamed that he was in a boat drifting down just such an underground river as his boyhood hero Allan 
Quatermain had taken towards the lost city of Milosis. But Quatermain had companions while he was alone, for you 
couldnt count the dead body on the stretcher as a companion. He felt a sense of urgency, for he told himself that 
bodies in this climate kept for a very short time and the smell of decay was already in his nostrils. Then, sitting there 
guiding the boat down the mid-stream, he realized that it was not the dead body that smelt but his own living one. He 
felt as though his blood had ceased to run: when he tried to lift his arm it dangled uselessly from his shoulder. He 
woke and it was Louise who had lifted his arm. She said, Darling, its time to be off. 
 
 Off? he asked. 
 
 Were going to Mass, and again he was aware of how closely she was watching him. What was the good of yet 
another delaying lie? He wondered what Wilson had said to her. Could he go on lying week after week, finding some 
reason of work, of health, of forgetfulness for avoiding the issue at the altar rail? He thought hopelessly: I am 
damned already -I may as well go the whole length of my chain. Yes, he said, of course. Ill get up, and was suddenly 
surprised by her putting the excuse into his mouth, giving him his chance. Darling, she said, if you arent well, stay 
where you are. I dont want to drag you to Mass. 
 
 But the excuse it seemed to him was also a trap. He could see where the turf had been replaced over the hidden 

stakes. If he took the excuse she offered he would have all but confessed his guilt. Once and for all now at whatever 
eternal cost, he was determined that he would clear himself in her eyes and give her the reassurance she needed. He 
said, No, no. I will come with you. When he walked beside her into the church it was as if he had entered this 
building for the first time - a stranger. An immeasurable distance already separated him from these people who knelt 
and prayed and would presently receive God in peace. He knelt and pretended to pray. 
 
 The words of the Mass were like an indictment. I will go in unto the altar of God: to God who giveth joy to my 
youth. But there was no joy anywhere. He looked up from between his hands and the plaster images of the Virgin 
and the saints seemed to be holding out hands to everyone, on either side, beyond him. He was the unknown guest at 
a party who is introduced to no one. The gentle painted smiles were unbearably directed elsewhere. When the Kyrie 
Eleison was reached he again tried to pray. Lord have mercy ... Christ have mercy ... Lord have mercy, but the fear 
and the shame of the act he was going to commit chilled his brain. Those ruined priests who presided at a Black 
Mass, consecrating the Host over the naked body of a woman, consuming God in an absurd and horrifying ritual, 
were at least performing the act of damnation with an emotion larger than human love: they were doing it from hate 
of God or some odd perverse devotion to Gods enemy. But he had no love of evil or hate of God. How was he to hate 
this God who of His own accord was surrendering Himself into his power? He was desecrating God because he 
loved a woman - was it even love, or was it just a feeling of pity and responsibility? He tried again to excuse himself: 
You can look after yourself. You survive the cross every day. You can only suffer. You can never be lost. Admit that 
you must come second to these others. And myself, he thought, watching the priest pour the wine and water into the 
chalice, his own damnation being prepared like a meal at the altar, I must come last: I am the Deputy Commissioner 
of Police: a hundred men serve under me: I am the responsible man. It is my job to look after the others. I am 
conditioned to serve. 
 
 Sanctus. Sanctus. Sanctus.The Canon of the Mass had started: Father Ranks whisper at the altar hurried 
remorselessly towards the consecration. To order our days in thy peace ... that we be preserved from eternal 
damnation ...Pax, pacis, pacem : all the declinations of the word peace drummed on his ears through the Mass. He 
thought: I have left even the hope of peace for ever. I am the responsible man. I shall soon have gone too far in my 
design of deception ever to go back.Hoc est enim Corpus : the bell rang, and Father Rank raised God in his fingers - 
this God as light now as a wafer whose coming lay or Scobies heart as heavily as lead.Hic est enim calix sanguinis 
and the second bell. 
 
 Louise touched his hand. Dear, are you well? He thought: here is the second chance. The return of my pain. I can go 
out. But if he went out of church now, he knew that there would be only one thing left to do - to follow Father Ranks 
advice, to settle his affairs, to desert, to come back in a few days time and take God with a clear conscience and a 
knowledge that he had pushed innocence back where it properly belonged - under the Atlantic surge. Innocence must 
die young if it isnt to kill the souls of men. 
 
 Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. 
 
 Im all right, he said, the old longing pricking at the eyeballs, and looking up towards the cross on the altar he 
thought savagely: Take your sponge of gall. You made me what I am. Take the spear thrust. He didnt need to open 
his Missal to know how this prayer ended. May the receiving of Thy Body, O Lord Jesus Christ, which I unworthy 
presume to take, turn not to my judgment and condemnation. He shut his eyes and let the darkness in. Mass rushed 
towards its end:Domine, non sum dignus ... Domine, non sum dignus... Domine, non sum dignus.... At the foot of the 
scaffold he opened his eyes and saw the old black women shuffling up towards the altar rail, a few soldiers, an 
aircraft mechanic, one of his own policemen, a clerk from the bank: they moved sedately towards peace, and Scobie 
felt an envy of their simplicity, their goodness. Yes, now at this moment of time they were good. 
 
 Arent you coming, dear? Louise asked, and again the hand touched him: the kindly firm detective hand. He rose and 
followed her and knelt by her side like a spy in a foreign land who has been taught the customs and to speak the 
language like a native. Only a miracle can save me now, Scobie told himself, watching Father Rank at the altar 
opening the tabernacle, but God would never work a miracle to save Himself, I am the cross, he thought. He will 
never speak the word to save Himself from the cross, but if only wood were made so that it didnt feel, if only the 
nails were senseless as people believed. 
 
 Father Rank came down the steps from the altar bearing the Host. The saliva had dried in Scobies mouth: it was as 

though his veins had dried. He couldnt look up; he saw only the priests skirt like the skirt of the mediaeval war-horse 
bearing down upon him: the flapping of feet: the charge of God. If only the archers would let fly from ambush, and 
for a moment he dreamed that the priests steps had indeed faltered : perhaps after all something may yet happen 
before he reaches me: some incredible interposition ... But with open mouth (the time had come) he made one last 
attempt at prayer, O God, I offer up my damnation to you. Take it. Use it for them, and was aware of the pale papery 
taste of an eternal sentence on the tongue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Three 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 THEbank manager took a sip of feed water and exclaimed with more than professional warmth, How glad you must 
be to have Mrs Scobie back well in time for Christmas. 
 
 Christmas is a long way off still, Scobie said. 
 
 Time flies when the rains are over, the bank manager went on with his novel cheerfulness. Scobie had never before 
heard in his voice this note of optimism. He remembered the stork-like figure pacing to and fro, pausing at the 
medical books, so many hundred times a day. 
 
 I came along... Scobie began. 
 
 About your life insurance - or an overdraft, would it be? 
 
 Well, it wasnt either this time. 
 
 You know Ill always be glad to help you, Scobie, whatever it is. How quietly Robinson sat at his desk. Scobie said 
with wonder, Have you given up your daily exercise? 
 
 Ah, that was all stuff and nonsense, the manager said. I had read too many books. 
 
 I wanted to look in your medical encyclopaedia, Scobie explained. 
 
 Youd do much better to see a doctor, Robinson surprisingly advised him. Its a doctor whos put me right, not the 
books. The tune I would have wasted ... I tell you, Scobie, the new young fellow theyve got at the Argyll Hospitals 
the best man theyve sent to this colony since they discovered it. 
 
 And hes put you right? 
 
 Go and see him. His names Travis. Tell him I sent you 
 

 All the same, if I could just have a look... 
 
 Youll find it on the shelf. I keep em there still because they look important. A bank manager has to be a reading 
man. People expect him to have solid books around. 
 
 Im glad your stomachs cured. 
 
 The manager took another sip of water. He said, Im not bothering about it any more. The truth of the matter is, 
Scobie, Im... 
 
 Scobie looked through the encyclopaedia for the word Angina and now he read on:CHARACTER OF THE 
PAIN.This is usually described as being gripping, as though the chest were in a vice. The pain is situated in the 
middle of the chest and under the sternum. It may run down either arm perhaps more commonly the left, or up into 
the neck or down into the abdomen. It lasts a few seconds, or at the most a minute or so.THE BEHAVIOUR OF 
THE PATIENT.This is characteristic. He holds himself absolutely still in whatever circumstances he may find 
himself .... Scobies eye passed rapidly down the cross-headings :CAUSE OF THE PAIN. TREATMENT. 
TERMINATIONOF THE DISEASE. Then he put the book back on the shelf. Well, he said, perhaps Ill drop in on 
your Dr Travis. Id rather see him than Dr Sykes. I hope he cheers me up as hes done you. 
 
 Well, my case, the manager said evasively, had peculiar features. 
 
 Mine looks straightforward enough. 
 
 You seem pretty well. 
 
 Oh, Im all right - bar a bit of pain now and then and sleeping badly. 
 
 Your responsibilities do that for you. 
 
 Perhaps. 
 
 It seemed to Scobie that he had sowed enough - against what harvest? He couldnt himself have told. He said 
goodbye and went out into the dazzling street. He carried his helmet and let the sun strike vertically down upon his 
thin greying hair. He offered himself for punishment all the way to the police station and was rejected. It had seemed 
to him these last three weeks that the damned must be in a special category; like the young men destined for some 
unhealthy foreign post in a trading company, they were reserved from their humdrum fellows, protected from the 
daily task, preserved carefully at special desks, so that the worst might happen later. Nothing now ever seemed to go 
wrong. The sun would not strike, the Colonial Secretary asked him to dinner ... He felt rejected by misfortune. 
 
 The Commissioner said, Come in, Scobie. Ive got good news for you, and Scobie prepared himself for yet another 
rejection. 
 
 Baker is not coining here. They need him in Palestine. Theyve decided after all to let the right man succeed me. 
Scobie sat down on the window-ledge and watched his hand tremble on his knee. He thought: so all this need not 
have happened. If Louise had stayed I should never have loved Helen, I would never have been blackmailed by 
Yusef, never have committed that act of despair. I would have been myself still - the same self that lay stacked in 
fifteen years of diaries, not this broken cast. But, of course, he told himself, its only because I have done these things 
that success comes. I am of the devils party. He looks after his own in this world. I shall go now from damned 
success to damned success, he thought with disgust. 
 
 I think Colonel Wrights word was the deciding factor. You impressed him, Scobie. 
 
 Its come too late, sir. 
 

 Why too late? 
 
 Im too old for the job. It needs a younger man. 
 
 Nonsense. Youre only just fifty. 
 
 My healths not good. 
 
 Its the first Ive heard of it. 
 
 I was telling Robinson at the bank today. Ive been getting pains, and Im sleeping badly. He talked rapidly, beating 
time on his knee. Robinson swears by Travis. He seems to have worked wonders with him. 
 
 Poor Robinson. 
 
 Why? 
 
 Hes been given two years to live. Thats in confidence, Scobie. 
 
 Human beings never cease to surprise: so it was the death sentence that had cured Robinson of his imaginary 
ailments, his medical books, his daily walk from wall to wall. I suppose, Scobie thought, that is what comes of 
knowing the worst - one is left alone with the worst and its like peace. He imagined Robinson talking across the desk 
to his solitary companion. I hope we all die as calmly, he said. Is he going home? 
 
 I dont think so. I suppose presently hell have to go to the Argyll. 
 
 Scobie thought: I wish I had known what I had been looking at. Robinson was exhibiting the -most enviable 
possession a man can own - a happy death. This tour would bear a high proportion of deaths - or perhaps not so high 
when you counted them and remembered Europe. First Pemberton, then the child at Pende, now Robinson ... no, it 
wasnt many, but of course he hadnt counted the blackwater cases in the military hospital. 
 
 So thats how matters stand, the Commissioner said. Next tour you will be Commissioner. Your wife will be pleased. 
 
 I must endure her pleasure, Scobie thought, without anger. I am the guilty man, and I have no right to criticize, to 
show vexation ever again. He said, Ill be getting home. 
 
 Ali stood by his car, talking to another boy who slipped quietly away when he saw Scobie approach. Who was that, 
Ali? 
 
 My small brother, sah, Ali said. 
 
 I dont know him, do I? Same mother? 
 
 No, sah, same father. 
 
 What does he do? Ali worked at the starting handle, his face dripping with sweat, saying nothing. 
 
 Who does he work for, Ali? 
 
 Sah? 
 
 I said who does he work for? 
 

 For Mr Wilson, sah. 
 
 The engine started and Ali climbed into the back seat. Has he ever made you a proposition, Ali? I mean has he asked 
you to report on me - for money? He could see Alis face in the driving mirror, set, obstinate, closed and rocky like a 
cave mouth. No, sah. 
 
 Lots of people are interested in me and pay good money for reports. They think me bad man, Ali. 
 
 Ali said, Im your boy, staring back through the medium of the mirror. It seemed to Scobie one of the qualities of 
deceit that you lost the sense of trust. If I can lie and betray, so can others. Wouldnt many people gamble on my 
honesty and lose their stake? Why should I lose my stake on Ali? I have not been caught and he has not been caught, 
thats all An awful depression weighed his head towards the wheel He thought: I know that Ali is honest: I have 
known that for fifteen years; I am just trying to find a companion in this region of lies. Is the next stage the stage of 
corrupting others? 
 
 Louise was not in when they arrived. Presumably someone had called and taken her out - perhaps to the beach. She 
hadnt expected him back before sundown. He wrote a note for her,Taking some furniture up to Helen. Will be back 
early with good news for you , and then he drove up alone to the Nissen huts through the bleak empty middle day. 
Only the vultures were about gathering round a dead chicken at the edge of the road, stooping their old mens necks 
over the carrion, their wings like broken umbrellas sticking out this way and that 
 
 Ive brought you another table and a couple of chairs. Is your boy about? 
 
 No, hes at market. 
 
 They kissed as formally now when they met as a brother and sister. When the damage was done adultery became as 
unimportant as friendship. The flame had licked them and gone on across the clearing: it had left nothing standing 
except a sense of responsibility and a sense of loneliness. Only if you trod barefooted did you notice the heat in the 
grass. Scobie said, Im interrupting your lunch. 
 
 Oh no. Ive about finished. Have some fruit salad. 
 
 Its time you had a new table. This one wobbles. He said, They are making me Commissioner after all. 
 
 It will please your wife, Helen said. 
 
 It doesnt mean a thing to me. 
 
 Oh, of course it does, she said briskly. This was another convention of hers - that only she suffered. He would for a 
long tune resist, like Coriolanus, the exhibition ofhis wounds, but sooner or later he would give way: he would 
dramatize his pain in words until even to himself it seemed unreal. Perhaps, he would think, she is right after all: 
perhaps I dont suffer. She said, Of course the Commissioner must be above suspicion, mustnt he, like Caesar. (Her 
sayings, as well as her spelling, lacked accuracy.) This is the end of us, I suppose. 
 
 You know there is no end to us. 
 
 Oh, but the Commissioner cant have a mistress hidden away in a Nissen hut. The sting, of course, was in the hidden 
away, but how could he allow himself to feel the least irritation, remembering the letter she had written to him, 
offering herself as a sacrifice any way he liked, to keep or to throw away? Human beings couldnt be heroic all the 
time: those who surrendered everything - for God or love - must be allowed sometimes in thought to take back their 
surrender. So many had never committed the heroic act, however rashly. It was the act that counted. He said, If the 
Commissioner cant keep you, then I shant be the Commissioner. 
 
 Dont be silly. After all, she said with fake reasonableness, and he recognized this as one of her bad days, what do we 

get out of it? 
 
 I get a lot, he said, and wondered: is that a lie for the sake of comfort? There were so many lies nowadays he couldnt 
keep track of the small, the unimportant ones. 
 
 An hour or two every other day perhaps when you can slip away. Never so much as a night. 
 
 He said hopelessly, Oh, I have plans, 
 
 What plans? 
 
 He said, They are too vague still. 
 
 She said with all the acid she could squeeze out, Well, let me know in time. To fall in with your wishes, I mean. 
 
 My dear, I havent come here to quarrel. 
 
 I sometimes wonder what you do come here for. 
 
 Well, today I brought some furniture. 
 
 Oh yes, the furniture. 
 
 Ive got the car here. Let me take you to the beach. 
 
 Oh, we cant be seen there together. 
 
 Thats nonsense. Louise is there now, I think. 
 
 For Gods sake, Helen said, keep that smug woman out of my sight 
 
 All right then. Ill take you for a run in the car. 
 
 That would be safer, wouldnt it? 
 
 Scobie took her by the shoulders and said, Im not always thinking of safety. 
 
 I thought you were. 
 
 Suddenly he felt his resistance give way and he shouted at her, The sacrifice isnt all on your side. With despair he 
could see from a distance the scene coming up on both of them: like the tornado before the rains, that wheeling 
column of blackness which would soon cover the whole sky. 
 
 Of course work must suffer, she said with childish sarcasm. All these snatched half-hours. 
 
 Ive given up hope, he said. 
 
 What do you mean? 
 
 Ive given up the future. Ive damned myself. 
 
 Dont be so melodramatic, she said. I dont know what you are talking about. Anyway, youve just told me about the 

future - the Commissionership. 
 
 I mean the real future - the future that goes on. 
 
 She said, If theres one thing I hate its your Catholicism. I suppose it comes of having a pious wife. Its so bogus. If 
you really believed you wouldnt be here. 
 
 But I do believe and I am here. He said with bewilderment, I cant explain it, but there it is. My eyes are open. I 
know what Im doing. When Father Rank came down to the rail carrying the sacrament... 
 
 Helen exclaimed with scorn and impatience, Youve told me all that before. You are trying to impress me. You dont 
believe in Hell any more than I do. 
 
 He took her wrists and held them furiously. He said, You cant get out of it that way. I believe, I tell you. I believe 
that Im damned for all eternity - unless a miracle happens. Im a policeman. I know what Im saying. What Ive done is 
far worse than murder - thats an act, a blow, a stab, a shot: its over and done, but Im carrying my corruption around 
with me. Its the coating of my stomach. He threw her wrists aside like seeds towards the stony floor. Never pretend I 
havent shown my love. 
 
 Love for your wife, you mean. You were afraid shed find out. 
 
 Anger drained out of him. He said, Love for both of you. If it were just for her thered be an easy straight way. He 
put his hands over his eyes, feeling hysteria beginning to mount again. He said, I cant bear to see suffering, and I 
cause it all the time. I want to get out, get out. 
 
 Where to? 
 
 Hysteria and honesty receded: cunning came back across the threshold like a mongrel dog. He said, Oh, I just mean 
take a holiday. He added, Im not sleeping well. And Ive been getting an odd pain. 
 
 Darling, are you Ill? The pillar had wheeled on its course: the storm was involving others now: it had passed beyond 
them. Helen said, Darling, Im a bitch. I get tired and fed up with things - but it doesnt mean anything. Have you seen 
a doctor? 
 
 Ill see Travis at the Argyll some time soon. 
 
 Everybody says Dr Sykes is better. 
 
 No, I dont want to see Dr Sykes. Now that the anger and hysteria had passed he could see her exactly as she was that 
first evening when the sirens blew. He thought, O God, I cant leave her. Or Louise. You dont need me as they need 
me. You have your good people, your saints, all the company of the blessed. You can do without me. He said, Ill 
take you for a spin now in the car. It will do us both good. 
 
 In the dusk of the garage he took her hands again and kissed her. He said, There are no eyes here ... Wilson cant see 
us. Harris isnt watching. Yusefs boys ... 
 
 Dear, Id leave you tomorrow if it would help. 
 
 It wouldnt help. He said, You remember when I wrote you a letter - which got lost. I tried to put down everything 
there, plainly, in black and white. So as not to be cautious any more. I wrote that I loved you more than my wife ... 
As he spoke he heard anothers breath behind his shoulder, beside the car. He said, sharply, Whos that? 
 
 What, dear? 
 

 Somebodys here. He came round to the other side of the car and said sharply, Whos there? Come out 
 
 Its Ali, Helen said. 
 
 What are you doing here. Ali? 
 
 Missus sent me, Ali said. I wait here for Massa ten him Missus back. He was hardly visible in the shadow. 
 
 Why were you waiting here? 
 
 My head humbug me, Ali said. I go for sleep, small, small sleep. 
 
 Dont frighten him, Helen said. Hes telling the truth. 
 
 Go along home, Ali, Scobie told him, and tell Missus I come straight down. He watched him pad out into the hard 
sunlight between the Nissen huts. He never looked back. 
 
 Dont worry about him, Helen said. He didnt understand a thing. 
 
 Ive had Ali for fifteen years, Scobie said. It was the first time he had been ashamed before him in all those years. He 
remembered Ali the night after Pembertons death, cup of tea in hand, holding him up against the shaking lorry, and 
then he remembered Wilsons boy slinking off along the wall by the police station. 
 
 You can trust him, anyway. 
 
 I dont know how, Scobie said. Ive lost the trick of trust. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Louise was asleep upstairs, and Scobie sat at the table with his diary open. He had written down against the date 
October 31:Commissioner told me this morning I am to succeed him. Took some furniture to H.R. Told Louise 
news, which pleased her . The other life - bare and undisturbed and built of facts - lay like Roman foundations under 
his hand. This was the life he was supposed to lead; no one reading this record would visualize the obscure shameful 
scene in the garage, the interview with the Portuguese captain, Louise striking out blindly with the painful truth, 
Helen accusing him of hypocrisy ... He thought: this is how it ought to be. I am too old for emotion. I am too old to 
be a cheat. Lies are for the young. They have a lifetime of truth to recover in. He looked at his watch, 11.45, and 
wrote: Temperature at 2 p.m. 92. The lizard pounced upon the wall, the tiny jaws clamping on a moth. Something 
scratched outside the door - a pye-dog? He laid his pen down again and loneliness sat across the table opposite him. 
No man surely was less alone with his wife upstairs and his mistress little more than five hundred yards away up the 
hill, and yet it was loneliness that seated itself like a companion who doesnt need to speak. It seemed to him that he 
had never been so alone before. 
 
 There was nobody now to whom he could speak the truth. There were things the Commissioner must not know, 
Louise must not know, there were even limits to what he could tell Helen, for what was the use, when he had 
sacrificed so much in order to avoid pain, of inflicting it needlessly? As for God he could speak to Him only as one 
speaks to an enemy - there was bitterness between them. He moved his hand on the table, and it was as though his 
loneliness moved too and touched the tips of his fingers. You and I, his loneliness said, you and I. It occurred to him 

that the outside world if they knew the facts might envy him: Bagster would envy him Helen, and Wilson Louise. 
What a hell of a quiet dog, Fraser would exclaim with a lick of the lips. They would imagine, he thought with 
amazement, that I get something out of it, but it seemed to him that no man had ever got less. Even self-pity was 
denied him because he knew so exactly the extent of his guilt. He felt as though he had exiled himself so deeply in 
the desert that his skin had taken on the colour of the sand. 
 
 The door creaked gently open behind him. Scobie did not move. The spies, he thought, are creeping in. Is this 
Wilson, Harris, Pembertons boy, Ali...? Massa, a voice whispered, and a bare foot slapped the concrete floor. 
 
 Who are you? Scobie asked not turning round. A pink palm dropped a small ball of paper on the table and went out 
of sight again. The voice said, Yusef say come very quiet nobody see. 
 
 What does Yusef want now? 
 
 He send you dash - small small dash. Then the door closed again and silence was back. Loneliness said, Let us open 
this together, you and I. 
 
 Scobie picked up the ball of paper: it was light, but it had a small hard centre. At first he didnt realize what it was: 
he thought it was a pebble put in to keep the paper steady and he looked for writing which, of course, was not there, 
for whom would Yusef trust to write for him? Then he realized what it was - a diamond, a gem stone. He knew 
nothing about diamonds, but it seemed to him that it was probably worth at least as much as his debt to Yusef. 
Presumably Yusef had information that the stones he had sent by theEsperanccedil; a had reached their destination 
safely. This was a mark of gratitude - not a bribe, Yusef would explain, the fat hand upon his sincere and shallow 
heart. 
 
 The door burst open and there was Ali. He had a boy by the arm who whimpered. Ali said, This stinking Mende boy 
he go all round the house. He try doors. 
 
 Who are you? Scobie said. 
 
 The boy broke out in a mixture of fear and rage, I Yusef s boy. I bring Massa letter, and he pointed at the table 
where the pebble lay in the screw of paper. Alis eyes followed the gesture. Scobie said to his loneliness, You and I 
have to think quickly. He turned on the boy and said, Why you not come here properly and knock on the door? Why 
you come like a thief? 
 
 He had the thin body and the melancholy soft eyes of all Mendes. He said, I not a thief, with so slight an emphasis 
on the first word that it was just possible he was not impertinent. He went on, Massa tell me to come very quiet. 
 
 Scobie said, Take this back to Yusef and tell him I want to know where he gets a stone like that. I think he steals 
stones and I find out by-and-by. Go on. Take it. Now, Ali, throw him out. Ali pushed the boy ahead of him through 
the door, and Scobie could hear the rustle of their feet on the path. Were they whispering together? He went to the 
door and called out after them, Tell Yusef I call on him one night soon and make hell of a palaver. He slammed the 
door again and thought, what a lot Ali knows, and he felt distrust of his boy moving again like fever with the 
bloodstream. He could ruin me, he thought: he could ruinthem . 
 
 He poured himself out a glass of whisky and took a bottle of soda out of his ice-box. Louise called from upstairs, 
Henry. 
 
 Yes, dear? 
 
 Is it twelve yet? 
 
 Close on, I think. 
 

 You wont drink anything after twelve, will you? You remember tomorrow? and of course he did remember, draining 
his glass: it was November the First - All Saints Day, and this All Souls Night. What ghost would pass over the 
whiskys surface? You are coming to communion, arent you, dear? and he thought wearily: there is no end to this: 
why should I draw the line now? One may as well go on damning oneself until the end. His loneliness was the only 
ghost his whisky could invoke, nodding across the table at him, taking a drink out of his glass. The next occasion, 
loneliness told him, will be Christmas - the Midnight Mass - you wont be able to avoid that you know, and no excuse 
will serve you on that night, and after that - the long chain of feast days, of early Masses in spring and summer, 
unrolled themselves like a perpetual calendar. He had a sudden picture before his eyes of a bleeding face, of eyes 
closed by the continuous shower of blows: the punch-drunk head of God reeling sideways. 
 
 You are coming, Ticki? Louise called with what seemed to him a sudden anxiety, as though perhaps suspicion had 
momentarily breathed on her again - and he thought again, can Ali really be trusted? and all the stale coast wisdom 
of the traders and the remittance men told him, Never trust a black. Theyll let you down in the end. Had my boy 
fifteen years ... The ghosts of distrust came out on All Souls Night and gathered around his glass. Oh yes, my dear, 
Im coming. 
 
 You have only to say the word, he addressed God, and legions of angels ... and he struck with his ringed hand under 
the eye and saw the bruised skin break. He thought, And again at Christmas, thrusting the Childs face into the filth of 
the stable. He cried up the stairs, Whats that you said, dear? 
 
 Oh, only that weve got so much to celebrate tomorrow. Being together and the Commissionership. Life is so happy, 
Ticki. And that, he told his loneliness with defiance, is my reward, splashing the whisky across the table, defying the 
ghosts to do their worst, watching God bleed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Four 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 He could tell that Yusef was working late in his office on the quay. The little white two-storeyed building stood 
beside the wooden jetty on the edge of Africa, just beyond the army dumps of petrol, and a line of light showed 
under the curtains of the landward window. A policeman saluted Scobie as he picked his way between the crates. All 
quiet, corporal? 
 
 All quiet, sah. 
 
 Have you patrolled at the Kru Town end? 
 
 Oh yes, sah. All quiet, sah. He could tell from the promptitude of the reply how untrue it was. 
 
 The wharf rats out? 
 
 Oh no, sah. All very quiet like the grave. The stale literary phrase showed that the man had been educated at a 

mission school. 
 
 Well, good night. 
 
 Good night, sah. 
 
 Scobie went on. It was many weeks now since he had seen Yusef - not since the night of the blackmail, and now he 
felt an odd yearning towards his tormentor. The little white building magnetized him, as though concealed there was 
his only companionship, the only man he could trust At least his blackmailer knew him as no one else did: he could 
sit opposite that fat absurd figure and tell the whole truth. In this new world of lies his blackmailer was at home: he 
knew the paths: he could advise: even help ... Round the comer of a crate came Wilson. Scobies torch lit his face like 
a map. 
 
 Why, Wilson, Scobie said, you are out late. 
 
 Yes, Wilson said, and Scobie thought uneasily, how he hates me. 
 
 Youve got a pass for the quay? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 Keep away from the Kru Town end. Its not safe there alone. No more nose bleeding? 
 
 No, Wilson said. He made no attempt to move; it seemed always his way - to stand blocking a path: a man one had 
to walk round. 
 
 Well, Ill be saying good night, Wilson. Look in any time. Louise ... 
 
 Wilson said, I love her, Scobie. 
 
 I thought you did, Scobie said. She likes you, Wilson. 
 
 I love her, Wilson repeated. He plucked at the tarpaulin over the crate and said, You wouldnt know what that means. 
 
 What means? 
 
 Love. You dont love anybody except yourself, your dirty self. 
 
 You are overwrought, Wilson. Its the climate. Go and lie down. 
 
 You wouldnt act as you do if you loved her. Over the black tide, from an invisible ship, came the sound of a 
gramophone playing some popular heart-rending tune. A sentry by the Field Security post challenged and somebody 
replied with a password. Scobie lowered his torch till it lit only Wilsons mosquito-boots. He said, Love isnt as simple 
as you think it is, Wilson. You read too much poetry. 
 
 What would you do if I told her everything - about Mrs Rolt? 
 
 But you have told her, Wilson. What you believe. But she prefers my story. 
 
 One day Ill ruin you, Scobie. 
 
 Would that help Louise? 
 

 I could make her happy, Wilson claimed ingenuously, with a breaking voice that took Scobie back over fifteen years 
- to a much younger man than this soiled specimen who listened to Wilson at the seas edge, hearing under the words 
the low sucking of water against wood. He said gently, Youd try. I know youd try. Perhaps... but he had no idea 
himself how that sentence was supposed to finish, what vague comfort for Wilson had brushed his mind and gone 
again. Instead an irritation took him against the gangling romantic figure by the crate who was so ignorant and yet 
knew so much. He said, I wish meanwhile youd stop spying on me. 
 
 Its my job. Wilson admitted, and his boots moved in the torchlight. 
 
 The things you find out are so unimportant. He left Wilson beside the petrol dump and walked on. As he climbed the 
steps to Yusef s office he could see, looking back, an obscure thickening of the darkness where Wilson stood and 
watched and hated. He would go home and draft a report. At 11.25 I observed Major Scobie going obviously by 
appointment... 
 
 Scobie knocked and walked right in where Yusef half lay behind his desk, his legs upon it, dictating to a black clerk. 
Without breaking his sentence - five hundred rolls matchbox design, seven hundred and fifty bucket and sand, six 
hundred poker dot artificial silk - he looked up at Scobie with hope and apprehension. Then he said sharply to the 
clerk, Get out. But come back. Tell my boy that I see no one. He took his legs from the desk, rose and held out a 
flabby hand, Welcome, Major Scobie, then let it fall like an unwanted piece of material. This is the first time you 
have ever honoured my office, Major Scobie. 
 
 I dont know why Ive come here now, Yusef. 
 
 It is a long time since we have seen each other. Yusef sat down and rested his great head wearily on a palm like a 
dish. Time goes so differently for two people - fast or slow. According to their friendship. 
 
 Theres probably a Syrian poem about that. 
 
 There is, Major Scobie, he said eagerly. 
 
 You should be friends with Wilson, not me, Yusef. He reads poetry. I have a prose mind. 
 
 A whisky, Major Scobie? 
 
 I wouldnt say no. He sat down on the other side of the desk and the inevitable blue syphon stood between them. 
 
 And how is Mrs Scobie? 
 
 Why did you send me that diamond, Yusef? 
 
 I was in your debt, Major Scobie. 
 
 Oh no, you werent You paid me off in full with a bit of paper. 
 
 I try so hard to forget that that was the way. I tell myself it was really friendship - at bottom it was friendship. 
 
 Its never any good lying to oneself, Yusef. One sees through the lie too easily. 
 
 Major Scobie, if I saw more of you, I should become a better man. The soda hissed in the glasses and Yusef drank 
greedily. He said, I can feel in my heart, Major Scobie, that you are anxious, depressed ... I have always wished that 
you would come to me in trouble. 
 
 Scobie said, I used to laugh at the idea - that I should ever come to you. 

 
 In Syria we have a story of a lion and a mouse... 
 
 We have the same story, Yusef. But Ive never thought of you as a mouse, and Im no lion. No lion. 
 
 It is about Mrs Rolt you are troubled. And your wife, Major Scobie? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 You do not need to be ashamed with me, Major Scobie. I have had much woman trouble in my life. Now it is better 
because I have learned the way. The way is not to care a damn. Major Scobie. You say to each of them, I do not care 
a damn. I sleep with whom I please. You take me or leave me. I do not care a damn. They always take you, Major 
Scobie. He sighed into his whisky. Sometimes I have wished they would not take me. 
 
 Ive gone to great lengths, Yusef, to keep things from my wife. 
 
 I know the lengths you have gone, Major Scobie. 
 
 Not the whole length. The business with the diamonds was very small compared... 
 
 Yes? 
 
 You wouldnt understand. Anyway somebody else knows now - Ali. 
 
 But you trust Ali? 
 
 I think I trust him. But he knows about you too. He came in last night and saw the diamond there. Your boy was 
very indiscreet. 
 
 The big broad hand shifted on the table. I will deal with my boy presently. 
 
 Alis half-brother is Wilsons boy. They see each other. 
 
 That is certainly bad, Yusef said. 
 
 He had told all his worries now - all except the worst. He had the odd sense of having for the first time in his life 
shifted a burden elsewhere. And Yusef carried it - he obviously carried it He raised himself from his chair and now 
moved his great haunches to the window, staring at the green black-out curtain as though it were a landscape. A hand 
went up to his mouth and he began to bite his nails - snip, snip, snip, his teeth closed on each nail in turn. Then he 
began on the other hand. I dont suppose its anything to worry about really, Scobie said. He was touched by 
uneasiness, as though he had accidentally set in motion a powerful machine he couldnt control. 
 
 It is a bad thing not to trust, Yusef said. One must always have boys one trusts. You must always know more about 
them than they do about you. That, apparently, was his conception of trust. Scobie said, I used to trust him. 
 
 Yusef looked at his trimmed nails and took another bite. He said, Do not worry. I will not have you worry. Leave 
everything to me, Major Scobie. I will find out for you whether you can trust him. He made the startling claim, I will 
look after you. 
 
 How can you do that? I feel no resentment, he thought with weary surprise. I am being looked after, and a kind of 
nursery peace descended. 
 
 You mustnt ask me questions, Major Scobie. You must leave everything to me just this once. I understand the way. 

Moving from the window Yusef turned on Scobie eyes like closed telescopes, blank and brassy. He said with a 
soothing nurses gesture of the broad wet palm, You will just write a little note to your boy, Major Scobie, asking him 
to come here. I will talk to him. My boy will take it to him. 
 
 But Ali cant read. 
 
 Better still then. You win send some token with my boy to show that he comes from you. Your signet ring. 
 
 What are you going to do, Yusef? 
 
 I am going to help you, Major Scobie. That is all. Slowly, reluctantly, Scobie drew at his ring. He said, Hes been 
with me fifteen years. I always have trusted him until now. 
 
 You will see, Yusef said. Everything will be all right He spread out his palm to receive the ring and their hands 
touched: it was like a pledge between conspirators. Just a few words. 
 
 The ring wont come off, Scobie said. He felt an odd unwillingness. Its not necessary, anyway. Hell come if your boy 
tells him that I want him. 
 
 I do not think so. They do not like to come to the wharf at night. 
 
 He will be all right He wont be alone. Your boy will be with him. 
 
 Oh yes, yes, of course. But I still think - if you would just send something to show - well, that it is not a trap. Yusef s 
boy is no more trusted, you see, than Yusef. 
 
 Let him come tomorrow, then. 
 
 Tonight is better, Yusef said. 
 
 Scobie felt in his pockets: the broken rosary grated on his nails. He said, Let him take this, but its not necessary... 
and fell silent, staring back at those blank eyes. 
 
 Thank you, Yusef said. This is most suitable. At the door he said, Make yourself at home, Major Scobie. Pour 
yourself another drink. I must give my boy instructions... 
 
 He was away a very long time. Scobie poured himself a third whisky and then, because the little office was so 
airless, he drew the seaward curtains after turning out the light and let what wind there was trickle in from the bay. 
The moon was rising and the naval depot ship glittered like grey ice. Restlessly he made his way to the other window 
that looked up the quay towards the sheds and lumber of the native town. He saw Yusef s clerk coming back from 
there, and he thought how Yusef must have the wharf rats well under control if his clerk could pass alone 
throughtheir quarters. I came for help, he told himself, and I am being looked after - how, and at whose cost? This 
was the day of All Saints and he remembered how mechanically, almost without fear or shame, he had knelt at the 
rail this second time and watched the priest come. Even that act of damnation could become as unimportant as a 
habit. He thought: my heart has hardened, and he pictured the fossilized shells one picks up On a beach: the stony 
convolutions like arteries. One can strike God once too often. After that does one care what happens? It seemed to 
him that he had rotted so far that it was useless to make any effort. God was lodged in his body and his body was 
corrupting outwards from that seed. 
 
 It was too hot? Yusefs voice said. Let us leave the room dark. With a friend the darkness is kind. 
 
 You have been a very long time. 
 
 Yusef said with what must have been deliberate vagueness, There was much to see to. It seemed to Scobie that now 

or never he must ask what was Yusef s plan, but the weariness of his corruption halted his tongue. Yes, its hot, he 
said, lets try and get a cross-draught, and he opened the side window on to the quay. I wonder if Wilson has gone 
home. 
 
 Wilson? 
 
 He watched me come here. 
 
 You must not worry, Major Scobie. I think your boy can be made quite trustworthy. 
 
 He said with relief and hope, Yon mean you have a hold on him? 
 
 Dont ask questions. You will see. The hope and the relief both wilted. He said, Yusef, Imust know... but Yusef said, 
I have always dreamed of an evening just like this with two glasses by our side and darkness and time to talk about 
important things, Major Scobie. God. The family. Poetry. I have great appreciation of Shakespeare. The Royal 
Ordnance Corps have very fine actors and they have made me appreciate the gems of English literature. I am crazy 
about Shakespeare. Sometimes because of Shakespeare I would like to be able to read, but I am too old to learn. And 
I think perhaps I would lose my memory. That would be bad for business, and though I do not live for business I 
must do business to live. There are so many subjects I would like to talk to you about. I should like to hear the 
philosophy of your life. 
 
 I have none. 
 
 The piece of cotton you hold in your hand in the forest 
 
 Ive lost my way. 
 
 Not a man like you, Major Scobie. I have such an admiration for your character. You are a just man. 
 
 I never was, Yusef. I didnt know myself thats all. Theres a proverb, you know, about in the end is the beginning. 
When I was born I was sitting here with you drinking whisky, knowing... 
 
 Knowing what, Major Scobie? 
 
 Scobie emptied his glass. He said, Surely your boy must have got to my house now. 
 
 He has a bicycle. 
 
 Then they should be on their way back. 
 
 We must not be impatient. We may have to sit a long time, Major Scobie. You know what boys are. 
 
 I thought I did. He found his left hand was trembling on the desk and he put it between his knees to hold it still. He 
remembered the long trek beside the border: innumerable lunches in the forest shade, with Ali cooking in an old 
sardine-tin, and again that last drive to Bamba came to mind - the long wait at the ferry, the fever coming down on 
him, and Ali always at hand. He wiped the sweat off his forehead and he thought for a moment: This is just a 
sickness, a fever, I shall wake soon. The record of the last six months - the first night in the Nissen hut, the letter 
which said too much, the smuggled diamonds, the lies, the sacrament taken to put a womans mind at ease - seemed 
as insubstantial as shadows over a bed cast by a hurricane-lamp. He said to himself: I am waking up, and heard the 
sirens blowing the alert just as on that night, that night ... He shook his head and came awake to Yusef sitting in the 
dark on the other side of the desk, to the taste of the whisky, and the knowledge that everything was the same. He 
said wearily, They ought to be here by now. 
 
 Yusef said, You know what boys are. They get scared by the siren and they take shelter. We must sit here and talk to 

each other, Major Scobie. It is a great opportunity for me. I do not want the morning ever to come. 
 
 The morning? I am not going to wait till morning for AIL 
 
 Perhaps he will be frightened. He will know you have found him out and he will run away. Sometimes boys go back 
to bush ... 
 
 You are talking nonsense, Yusef. 
 
 Another whisky, Major Scobie? 
 
 All right. All right. He thought: am I taking to drink too? It seemed to him that he had no shape left, nothing you 
could touch and say: this is Scobie. 
 
 Major Scobie, there are rumours that after all justice is to be done and that you are to be Commissioner. 
 
 He said with care, I dont think it will ever come to that 
 
 I just wanted to say, Major Scobie, that you need not worry about me. I want your good, nothing so much as that. I 
will slip out of your life, Major Scobie. I will not be a millstone. It is enough for me to have had tonight - this long 
talk in the dark on all sorts of subjects. I will remember tonight always. You will not have to worry. I will see to that 
Through the window behind Yusefs head, from somewhere among the jumble of huts and warehouses, a cry came: 
pain and fear: it swam up like a drowning animal for air, and fell again into the darkness of the room, into the 
whisky, under the desk, into the basket of wastepaper, a discarded finished cry. 
 
 Yusef said too quickly, A drunk man. He yelped apprehensively, Where are you going, Major Scobie? Its not safe - 
alone. That was the last Scobie ever saw of Yusef, a silhouette stuck stiffly and crookedly on the wall, with the 
moonlight shining on the syphon and the two drained glasses. At the bottom of the stairs the clerk stood, staring 
down the wharf. The moonlight caught his eyes: like road studs they showed the way to turn. 
 
 There was no movement in the empty warehouses on either side or among the sacks and crates as he moved his 
torch: if the wharf rats had been out, that cry had driven them back to their holes. His footsteps echoed between the 
sheds, and somewhere a pye-dog wailed. It would have been quite possible to have searched in vain in this 
wilderness of litter until morning: what was it that brought him so quickly and unhesitatingly to the body, as though 
he had himself chosen the scene of the crime? Turning this way and that down the avenues of tarpaulin and wood, he 
was aware of a nerve in his forehead that beat out the whereabouts of Ali. 
 
 The body lay coiled and unimportant like a broken watch-spring under a pile of empty petrol drums: it looked as 
though it had been shovelled there to wait for morning and the scavenger birds. Scobie had a moment of hope before 
he turned the shoulder over, for after all two boys had been together on the road. The seal grey neck had been slashed 
and slashed again. Yes, he thought, I can trust him now. The yellow eyeballs stared up at him like a strangers, 
flecked with red. It was as if this body had cast him off, disowned him - I know you not. He swore aloud, 
hysterically. By God, Ill get the man who did this, but under that anonymous stare insincerity withered. He thought: I 
am the man. Didnt I know all the time in Yusef s room that something was planned? Couldnt I have pressed for an 
answer? A voice said, Sah? 
 
 Whos that? 
 
 Corporal Laminah, sah.. 
 
 Can you see a broken rosary anywhere around? Look care fully. 
 
 I can see nothing, sah.. 
 

 Scobie thought: if only I could weep, if only I could feel pain; have I really become so evil? Unwillingly he looked 
down at the body. The fumes of petrol lay all around in the heavy night and for a moment he saw the body as 
something very small and dark and a long way away - like a broken piece of the rosary he looked for: a couple of 
black beads and the image of God coiled at the end of it Oh God, he thought, Ive killed you: youve served me all 
these years and Ive killed you at the end of them. God lay there under the petrol drums and Scobie felt the tears in his 
mouth, salt in the cracks of his lips. You served me and I did this to you. You were faithful to me, and I wouldnt trust 
you. 
 
 What is it, sah? the corporal whispered, kneeling by the body. 
 
 I loved him, Scobie said, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART TWO 
 
 
 
 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 ASsoon as he had handed over his work to Frazer and closed his office for the day, Scobie started out for the Nissen. 
He drove with his eyes half-closed, looking straight ahead: he told himself, now, today, I am going to clean up, 
whatever the cost. Life is going to start again: this nightmare of love is finished. It seemed to him that it had died for 
ever the previous night under the petrol drums. The sun blazed down on his hands, which were stuck to the wheel by 
sweat 
 
 His mind was so concentrated on what had to come - the opening of a door, a few words, and closing a door again 
for ever - that he nearly passed Helen on the road. She was walking down the hill towards him, hatless. She didnt 
even see the car. He had to run after her and catch her up. When she turned it was the face he had seen at Pende 
carried past him - defeated, broken, as ageless as a smashed glass. 
 
 What are you doing here? In the sun, without a hat. 
 
 She said vaguely, I was looking for you, standing there, dithering on the laterite. 
 
 Come back to the car. Youll get sunstroke. A look of cunning came into her eyes. Is it as easy as all that? she asked, 
but she obeyed him. 
 
 They sat side by side in the car. There seemed to be no object in driving farther: one could say good-bye here as 
easily as there. She said, I heard this morning about Ali. Did you do it? 
 

 I didnt cut his throat myself, he said. But he died because I existed. 
 
 Do you know who did? 
 
 I dont know who held the knife. A wharf rat, I suppose, 
 
 Yusef s boy who was with him has disappeared. Perhaps he did it or perhaps hes dead too. We will never prove 
anything, I doubt if Yusef intended it 
 
 You know, she said, this is the end for us. I cant go on ruining you any more. Dont speak. Let me speak. I never 
thought it would be like this. Other people seem to have love affairs which start and end and are happy, but with us it 
doesnt work. It seems to be all or nothing. So its got to be nothing. Please dont speak. Ive been thinking about this 
for weeks. Im going to go away - right right away. 
 
 Where to? 
 
 I told you not to speak. Dont ask questions. He could see in the windscreen a pale reflection of her desperation. It 
seemed to him as though he were being torn apart. Darling, she said, dont think its easy. Ive never done anything so 
hard. It would be so much easier to die. You come into every thing. I can never again see a Nissen hut - or a Morris 
car. Or taste a pink gin. See a black face. Even a bed ... one has to steep in a bed. I dont know where Ill get away 
from you. Its no use saying in a year it will be all right Its a year Ive got to get through. All the time knowing you are 
somewhere. I could send a telegram or a letter and youd have to read it, even if you didnt reply. He thought: how 
much easier it would be for her if I were dead. But I mustnt write, she said. She wasnt crying: her eyes when he took 
a quick glance were dry and red, as he remembered them in hospital, exhausted. Waking up will be the worst. Theres 
always a moment when one forgets that everythings different. 
 
 He said, I came up here to say good-bye too. But there are things I cant do. 
 
 Dont talk, darling. Dm being good. Cant you see Im being good? You dont have to go away from me - Im going 
away from you. You wont ever know where to. I hope I wont be too much of a slut 
 
 No, he said, no. 
 
 Be quiet darling. You are going to be all right youll see. Youll be able to clean up. Youll be a Catholic again - thats 
what you really want, isnt it, not a pack of women? 
 
 I want to stop giving pain, he said. 
 
 You want peace, dear. Youll have peace. Youll see. Everything will be all right. She put her hand on his knee and 
began at last to weep in this effort to comfort him. He thought: where did she pick up this heartbreaking tenderness? 
Where do they learn to be so old so quickly? 
 
 Look, dear. Dont come up to the hut. Open the car door for me. Its stiff. Well say good-bye here, and youll just drive 
home - or to the office if youd rather. Thats so much easier. Dont worry about me. Ill be all right He thought I missed 
that one death and now Im having them all. He leant over her and wrenched at the car door: her tears touched his 
cheek. He could feel the mark like a burn. Theres no objection to a farewell kiss. We havent quarrelled. There hasnt 
been a scene. Theres no bitterness. As they kissed he was aware of pain under his mouth like the beating of a birds 
heart. They sat still, silent and the door of the car lay open. A few black labourers passing down the hill looked 
curiously hi. 
 
 She said, I cant believe that this is the last time: that Ill get out and youll drive away, and we wont see each other 
again ever. I wont go outside more than I can help till I get right away. Ill be up here and youll be down there. Oh, 
God, I wish I hadnt got the furniture you brought me. 
 

 Its just official furniture. 
 
 The cane is broken in one of the chairs where you sat down too quickly. 
 
 Dear, dear, this isnt the way. 
 
 Dont speak, darling. Im really being quite good, but I cant say these things to another living soul. In books theres 
always a confidant. But I havent got a confidant. I must say them all once. He thought again: if I were dead, she 
would be free of me. One forgets the dead quite quickly; one doesnt wonder about the dead - what is he doing now, 
who is he with? This for her is the hard way. 
 
 Now, darling, Im going to do it. Shut your eyes. Count three hundred slowly, and I wont be in sight Turn the car 
quickly and drive like hell. I dont want to see you go. And Ill stop my ears. I dont want to hear you change gear at 
the bottom of the hill. Cars do that a hundred times a day. I dont want to hear you change gear. 
 
 O God, he prayed, his hands dripping over the wheel, kill me now, now. My God, youll never have more complete 
contrition. What a mess I am. I carry suffering with me like a body smell. Kill me. Put an end to me. Vermin dont 
have to exterminate themselves. Kill me. Now. Now. Now. 
 
 Shut your eyes, darling. This is the end. Really the end. She said hopelessly, It seems so silly though. 
 
 He said, I wont shut my eyes. I wont leave you. I promised that. 
 
 You arent leaving me. Im leaving you. 
 
 It wont work. We love each other. It wont work. Id be up this evening to see how you were. I couldnt steep... 
 
 You can always sleep. Ive never known such a sleeper. Oh, my dear, look. Im beginning to laugh at you again just 
as though we werent saying good-bye. 
 
 We arent. Not yet. 
 
 But Im only ruining you. I cant give you any happiness, 
 
 Happiness isnt the point. 
 
 Id made up my mind. 
 
 So had I. 
 
 But, darling, what do wedo ? She surrendered completely. I dont mind going on as we are. I dont mind the lies. 
Anything. 
 
 Just leave it to me. Ive got to think. He leant over her and closed the door of the car. Before the lock had clicked he 
had made his decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 

 
 
 Scobie watched the small boy as he cleared away the evening meal, watched him come in and go out, watched the 
bare feet flap the floor. Louise said, I know its a terrible thing, dear, but youve got to put it behind you. You cant 
help Ali now. A new parcel of books had come from England and he watched her cutting the leaves of a volume of 
verse. There was more grey in her hair than when she had left for South Africa, but she looked, it seemed to him, 
yean younger because she was paying more attention to make-up: her dressing-table was Uttered with the pots and 
bottles and tubes she had brought back from the south. Alis death meant little to her: why should it? It was the sense 
of guilt that made it so important. Otherwise one didnt grieve for a death. When he was young, he had thought love 
had something to do with understanding, but with age he knew that no human being understood another. Love was 
the wish to understand, and presently with constant failure the wish died, and love died too perhaps or changed into 
this painful affection, loyalty, pity ... She sat there, reading poetry, and she was a thousand miles away from the 
torment that shook his hand and dried his mouth. She would understand, he thought, if I were in a book, but would I 
understand her if she were just a character? I dont read that sort of book. 
 
 Havent you anything to read, dear? 
 
 Im sorry. I dont feel much like reading. 
 
 She closed her book, and it occurred to him that after all she had her own effort to make: she tried to help. 
Sometimes he wondered with horror whether perhaps she knew everything, whether that complacent face which she 
had worn since her return masked misery. She said, Lets talk about Christmas. 
 
 Its still a long way off, he said quickly. 
 
 Before you know it will be on us. I was wondering whether we could give a party. Weve always been out to dinner: 
it would be fun to have people here. Perhaps on Christmas Eve. 
 
 Just what you like. 
 
 We could all go on then to Midnight Mass. Of course you and I would have to remember to drink nothing after ten - 
but the others could do as they pleased. 
 
 He looked up at her with momentary hatred as she sat so cheerfully there, so smugly, it seemed to him, arranging his 
further damnation. He was going to be Commissioner. She had what she wanted - her sort of success, everything was 
all right with her now. He thought: it was the hysterical woman who felt the world laughing behind her back that I 
loved. I love failure: I cant love success. And how successful she looks, sitting there, one of the saved, and he saw 
laid across that wide face like a news-screen the body of Ali under the black drums, the exhausted eyes of Helen, and 
an the faces of the lost, his companions in exile, the unrepentant thief, the soldier with the sponge. Thinking of what 
he had done and was going to do, he thought, even God is a failure. What is it, Ticki? Are you still worrying...? But 
he couldnt tell her the entreaty that was on his lips: let me pity you again, be disappointed, unattractive, be a failure 
so that I can love you once more without this bitter gap between us. Time is short. I want to love you too at the end. 
He said slowly, Its the pain. Its over now. When it comes - he remembered the phrase of the textbook - its like a vice. 
 
 You must see the doctor, Ticki. 
 
 Ill see him tomorrow. I was going to anyway because of my sleeplessness. 
 
 Your sleeplessness? But, Ticki, you sleep like a log. 
 
 Not the last week. 
 
 Youre imagining it. 
 

 No. I wake up about two and cant sleep again - till just before we are called. Dont worry. Ill get some tablets. 
 
 I hate drugs. 
 
 I wont go on long enough to form a habit 
 
 We must get you right for Christmas, Ticki. 
 
 Ill be all right by Christmas. He came stiffly across the room to her, imitating the bearing of a man who fears that 
pain may return again, and put his hand against her breast. Dont worry. Hatred went out of him at the touch - she 
wasnt as successful as all that: she would never be married to the Commissioner of Police. 
 
 After she had gone to bed he took out his diary. In this record at least he had never lied. At the worst he had omitted. 
He had checked his temperatures as carefully as a sea captain making up his log. He had never exaggerated or 
minimized, and he had never indulged in speculation. All he had written here was fact.November 1, Early Mass with 
Louise. Spent morning on larceny case at Mrs Onokos. Temperature 91at 2. Saw Y. at his office. Ali found murdered 
. The statement was as plain and simple as that other time when he had written:C. died. 
 
 November 2. He sat a long while with that date in front of him, so long that presently Louise called down to him. He 
replied carefully, Go to sleep, dear. If I sit up late, I may be able to steep properly. But already, exhausted by the day 
and by all the plans that had to be laid, he was near to nodding at the table. He went to his ice-box and wrapping a 
piece of ice in his handkerchief rested it against his forehead until sleep receded.November 2 . Again he picked up 
his pen: this was his death-warrant he was signing. He wrote:Saw Helen for a few minutes . (It was always safer to 
leave no facts for anyone else to unearth.)Temperature at 2, 92. In the evening return of pain. Fear angina . He 
looked up the pages of the entries for a week back and added an occasional note.Slept very badly. Bad night. 
Sleeplessness continues . He read the entries over carefully: they would be read later by the coroner, by the insurance 
inspectors. They seemed to him to be in his usual manner. Then he put the ice back on his forehead to drive sleep 
away. It was still only half after midnight: it would be better not to go to bed before two. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Two 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 ITgrips me, Scobie said, like a vice. 
 
 And what do you do then? 
 
 Why nothing. I stay as still as I can until the pain goes. 
 
 How long does it last? 
 
 Its difficult to tell, but I dont think more than a minute. 

 
 The stethoscope followed like a ritual. Indeed there was something clerical in all that Dr Travis did: an earnestness, 
almost a reverence. Perhaps because he was young he treated the body with great respect; when he rapped the chest 
he did it slowly, carefully, with his ear bowed close as though he really expected somebody or something to rap 
back. Latin words came softly on to his tongue as though in the Mass -sternum instead ofpacem . 
 
 And then, Scobie said, theres the sleeplessness. 
 
 The young man sat back behind his desk and tapped with an indelible pencil; there was a mauve smear at the corner 
of his mouth which seemed to indicate that sometimes - off guard - he sucked it. Thats probably nerves, Dr Travis 
said, apprehension of pain. Unimportant. 
 
 Its important to me. Cant you give me something to take? Im all right when once I get to sleep, but I lie awake for 
hours, waiting ... Sometimes Im hardly fit for work. And a policeman, you know, needs his wits. 
 
 Of course, Dr Travis said. Ill soon settle you. Evipans the stuff for you. It was as easy as all that. Now for the pain - 
he began his tap, tap, tap, with the pencil. He said, Its impossible to be certain, of course .... I want you to note 
carefully the circumstances of every attack... what seems to bring it on. Then it will be quite possible to regulate it, 
avoid it almost entirely. 
 
 But whats wrong? 
 
 Dr Travis said, There are some words that always shock the layman. I wish we could call cancer by a symbol like H 
2 O. People wouldnt be nearly so disturbed. Its the same with the world angina. 
 
 You think its angina? 
 
 It has all the characteristics. But men live for years with angina - even work in reason. We have to see exactly how 
much you can do. 
 
 Should I tell my wife? 
 
 Theres no point in not telling her. Im afraid this might mean - retirement. 
 
 Is that all? 
 
 You may die of a lot of things before angina gets you -given care. 
 
 On the other hand I suppose it could happen any day? 
 
 I cant guarantee anything, Major Scobie. Im not even absolutely satisfied that this is angina. 
 
 Ill speak to the Commissioner then on the quiet. I dont want to alarm my wife until we are certain. 
 
 If I were you, Id tell her what Ive said. It will prepare her. But tell her you may live for years with care. 
 
 And the sleeplessness? 
 
 This will make you sleep. 
 
 Sitting in the car with the little package on the seat beside him, he thought, I have only now to choose the date. He 
didnt start his car for quite a while; he was touched by a feeling of awe as if he had in fact been given his death 
sentence by the doctor. His eyes dwelt on the neat blob of sealing-wax like a dried wound. He thought, I have still 

got to be careful, so careful. If possible no one must even suspect. It was not only the question of his life insurance: 
the happiness of others had to be protected. It was not so easy to forget a suicide as a middle-aged mans death from 
angina. 
 
 He unsealed the package and studied the directions. He had no knowledge of what a fatal dose might be, but surely 
if he took ten times the correct amount he would be safe. That meant every night for nine nights removing a dose and 
keeping it secretly for use on the tenth night. More evidence must be invented in his diary which had to be written 
right up to the end - November 12. He must make engagements for the following week. In his behaviour there must 
be no hint of farewells. This was the worst crime a Catholic could commit -it must be a perfect one. 
 
 First the Commissioner... He drove down towards the police station and stopped his car outside the church. The 
solemnity of the crime lay over his mind almost like happiness: it was action at last - he had fumbled and muddled 
too long. He put the package for safekeeping into his pocket and went in, carrying his death. An old mammy was 
lighting a candle before the Virgins statue; another sat with her market basket beside her and her hands folded staring 
up at the altar. Otherwise the church was empty. Scobie sat down at the back: he had no inclination to pray - what 
was the good? If one was a Catholic, one had all the answers: no prayer was effective in a state of mortal sin, but he 
watched the other two with sad envy. They were still inhabitants of the country he had left. This was what human 
love had done to him - it had robbed him of love for eternity. It was no use pretending as a young man might that the 
price was worth white. 
 
 If he couldnt pray he could at least talk, sitting there at the back, as far as he could get from Golgotha. He said, O 
God, I am the only guilty one because Ive known the answers all the time. Ive preferred to give you pain rather than 
give pain to Helen or my wife because I cant observe your suffering. I can only imagine it But there are limits to 
what I can do to you - or them. I cant desert either of them while Im alive, but I can die and remove myself from 
their blood stream. They are ill with me and I can cure them. And you too, God - you are ill with me. I cant go on, 
month after month, insulting you. I cant face coming up to the altar at Christmas - your birthday feast - and taking 
your body and blood for the sake of a lie. I cant do that. Youll be better off if you lose me once and for all. I know 
what Im doing. Im not pleading for mercy. I am going to damn myself, whatever that means. Ive longed for peace 
and Im never going to know peace again. But youll be at peace when I am out of your reach. It will be no use then 
sweeping the floor to find me or searching for me over the mountains. Youll be able to forget me, God, for eternity. 
One hand clasped the package in his pocket like a promise. 
 
 No one can speak a monologue for long alone - another voice will always make itself heard; every monologue 
sooner or later becomes a discussion. So now he couldnt keep the other voice silent; it spoke from the cave of his 
body: it was as if the sacrament which had lodged there for his damnation gave tongue. You say you love me, and 
yet youll do this to me - rob me of you for ever. I made you with love. Ive wept your tears. Ive saved you from more 
man you will ever know; I planted in you this longing for peace only so that one day I could satisfy your longing and 
watch your happiness. And now you push me away, you put me out of your reach. There are no capital letters to 
separate us when we talk together. I am not Thou but simply you, when you speak to me; I am humble as any other 
beggar. Cant you trust me as youd trust a faithful dog? I have been faithful to you for two thousand years. All you 
have to do now is ring a bell, go into a box, confess ... the repentance is already there, straining at your heart. Its not 
repentance you lack, just a few simple actions: to go up to the Nissen hut and say good-bye. Or if you must, continue 
rejecting me but without lies any more. Go to your house and say good-bye to your wife and live with your mistress. 
If you live you will come back to me sooner or later. One of them will suffer, but cant you trust me to see that the 
suffering isnt too great? 
 
 The voice was silent in the cave and his own voice replied hopelessly: No. I dont trust you. Ive never trusted you. If 
you made me, you made this feeling of responsibility that Ive always carried about like a sack of bricks. Im not a 
policeman for nothing - responsible for order, for seeing justice is done. There was no other profession for a man of 
my kind. I cant shift my responsibility to you. If I could, I would be someone else. I cant make one of them suffer so 
as to save myself. Im responsible and Ill see it through the only way I can. A sick mans death means to them only a 
short suffering - everybody has to die. We are all of us resigned to death: its life we arent resigned to. 
 
 So long as you live, the voice said, I have hope. Theres no human hopelessness like the hopelessness of God. Cant 
you just go on, as you are doing now? the voice pleaded, lowering the terms every time it spoke like a dealer in a 
market. It explained: mere are worse acts. But no, he said, no. Thats impossible. I wont go on insulting you at your 

own altar. You see its animpasse , God, animpasse , he said, clutching the package in his pocket. He got up and 
turned his back on the altar and went out. Only when he saw his face in the driving mirror did he realize that his eyes 
were bruised with suppressed tears. He drove on towards the police station and the Commissioner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Three 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 November 3. Yesterday I told the Commissioner that angina had been diagnosed and that I should have to retire as 
soon as a successor could be found. Temperature at 2 p.m. 91. Much better night as the result of Evipan. 
 
 November 4. Went with Louise to 7.30 Mass but as pain threatened to return did not wait for Communion. In the 
evening told Louise that I should have to retire before end of tour. Did not mention angina but spoke of strained 
heart. Another good night as a result of Evipan. Temperature at 2 p.m. 89. 
 
 November 5. Lamp thefts in Wellington Street. Spent long morning at Azikawes store checking story of fire in 
storeroom. Temperature at 2 p.m. 90. Drove Louise to Club for library night. 
 
 November 6 - 10. First time Ive failed to keep up daily entries. Pain has become more frequent and unwilling to take 
on any extra exertion. Like a vice. Lasts about a minute. Liable to come on if I walk more than half a mile. Last night 
or two have slept badly in spite of Evipan, I think from the apprehension of pain. 
 
 November 11. Saw Travis again. There seems to be no doubt now that it is angina. Told Louise tonight, but also that 
with care I may live for years. Discussed with Commissioner an early passage home. In any case cant go for another 
month as too many cases I want to see through the courts in the next week or two. Agreed to dine with Fellowes on 
13th, Commissioner on 14th. Temperature at 2 p.m. 88. 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Scobie laid down his pen and wiped his wrist on the blotting paper. It was just six oclock on November 12 and 
Louise was out at the beach. His brain was clear, but the nerves tingled from his shoulder to his wrist He thought: I 
have come to the end. What years had passed since he walked up through the rain to the Nissen hut, while the sirens 
wailed: the moment of happiness. It was time to die after so many years. 
 
 But there were still deceptions to be practised, just as though he were going to live through the night, good-byes to 

be said with only himself knowing that they were good-byes. He walked very slowly up the bin in case he was 
observed - wasnt he a sick man? - and turned off by the Nissens. He couldnt just die without some word - what 
word? O God, he prayed, let it be the right word, but when he knocked there was no reply, no words at all. Perhaps 
she was at the beach with Bagster. 
 
 The door was not locked and he went in. Years had passed in his brain, but here time had stood still. It might have 
been the same bottle of gin from which the boy had stolen - how long ago? The junior officials chairs stood stiffly 
around, as though on a film set: he couldnt believe they had ever moved, any more than the pouf presented by - was 
it Mrs Carter? On the bed the pillow had not been shaken after the siesta, and he laid his hand on the warm mould of 
a skull. O God, he prayed, Im going away from all of you for ever: let her come back in time: let me see her once 
more, but the hot day cooled around him and nobody came. At 6.30 Louise would be back from the beach. He 
couldnt wait any longer. 
 
 I must leave some kind of a message, he thought, and perhaps before I have written it she will have come. He felt a 
constriction in his breast worse than any pain he had ever invented to Travis. I shall never touch her again. I shall 
leave her mouth to others for the next twenty years. Most lovers deceived themselves with the idea of an eternal 
union beyond the grave, but he knew all the answers: he went to an eternity of deprivation. He looked for paper and 
couldnt find so much as a torn envelope; he thought he saw a writing-case, but it was the stamp-album that he 
unearthed, and opening it at random for no reason, he felt fate throw another shaft, for he remembered that particular 
stamp and how it came to be stained with gin. She will have to tear it out, he thought, but that wont matter: she had 
told him that you cant see where a stamp has been torn out. There was no scrap of paper even in his pockets, and in a 
sudden rush of jealousy he lifted up the little green image of George V and wrote in ink beneath it: I love you. She 
cant take that out, he thought with cruelty and disappointment, thats indelible. For a moment he felt as though he had 
laid a mine for an enemy, but this was no enemy. Wasnt he clearing himself out of her path like a piece of dangerous 
wreckage? He shut the door behind him and walked slowly down the hill - she might yet come. Everything he did 
now was for the last time - an odd sensation. He would never come this way again, and five minutes later taking a 
new bottle of gin from his cupboard, he thought: I shall never open another bottle. The actions which could be 
repeated became fewer and fewer. Presently there would be only one unrepeatable action left, the act of swallowing. 
He stood with the gin bottle poised and thought: then Hell will begin, and theyll be safe from me, Helen, Louise, and 
You. 
 
 At dinner he talked deliberately of the week to come; he blamed himself for accepting Fellowess invitation and 
explained that dinner with the Commissioner the next day was unavoidable - there was much to discuss. 
 
 Is there no hope, Ticki, that after a rest, a long rest...? 
 
 It wouldnt be fair to carry on - to them or you. I might break down at any moment. 
 
 Its really retirement? 
 
 Yes. 
 
 She began to discuss where they were to live. He felt tired to death, and it needed all his will to show interest in this 
fictitious village or that, in the kind of house he knew they would never inhabit. I dont want a suburb, Louise said. 
What Id really like would be a weather-board house in Kent, so that one can get up to town quite easily. 
 
 He said, Of course it will depend on what we can afford. My pension wont be very large. 
 
 I shall work, Louise said. It will be easy in wartime. 
 
 I hope we shall be able to manage without that. 
 
 I wouldnt mind. 
 
 Bed-time came, and he felt a terrible unwillingness to let her go. There was nothing to do when she had once gone 

but die. He didnt know how to keep her - they had talked about all the subjects they had in common. He said, I shall 
sit here a while. Perhaps I shall feel sleepy if I stay up half an hour longer. I dont want to take the Evipan if I can 
help it. 
 
 Im very tired after the beach. Ill be off. 
 
 When shes gone, be thought, I shall be alone for ever. His heart beat and he was held in the nausea of an awful 
unreality. I cant believe that Im going to do this. Presently I shall get up and go to bed, and life will begin again. 
Nothing, nobody, can force me to die. Though the voice was no longer speaking from the cave of his belly, it was as 
though fingers touched him, signalled their mute messages of distress, tried to hold him... 
 
 What is it, Ticki? You look Ill. Come to bed too. 
 
 I wouldnt sleep, he said obstinately. 
 
 Is there nothing I can do? Louise asked. Dear, Id do anything... Her love was like a death sentence. 
 
 Theres nothing, dear, he said. I mustnt keep you up. But so soon as she turned towards the stairs he spoke again. 
Read me something, he said, you got a new book today. Read me something. 
 
 You wouldnt like it, Ticki. Its poetry. 
 
 Never mind. It may send me to sleep. He hardly listened while she read. People said you couldnt love two women, 
but what was this emotion if it were not love? This hungry absorption of what he was never going to see again? The 
greying hair, the line of nerves upon the face, the thickening body held him as her beauty never had. She hadnt put 
on her mosquito-boots, and her slippers were badly in need of mending. It isnt beauty that we love, he thought, its 
failure - the failure to stay young for ever, the failure of nerves, the failure of the body. Beauty is like success: we 
cant love it for long. He felt a terrible desire to protect - but thats what Im going to do, I am going to protect her from 
myself for ever. Some words she was reading momentarily caught his attention: 
 
 
 
 We are all falling. This hands falling too - 
 
 all have this falling sickness none withstands. 
 
 
 
 And yet theres always One whose gentle hands 
 
 this universal falling cant fall through. 
 
 
 
 They sounded like truth, but he rejected them - comfort can come too easily. He thought, those hands will never 
hold my fall: I slip between the fingers, Im greased with falsehood, treachery. Trust was a dead language of which he 
had forgotten the grammar. 
 
 Dear, you are half asleep. 
 
 For a moment. 
 
 Ill go up now. Dont stay long. Perhaps you wont need your Evipan tonight 

 
 He watched her go. The lizard lay still upon the wall. Before she had reached the stairs he called her back. Say good 
night, Louise, before you go. You may be asleep. 
 
 She kissed him perfunctorily on the forehead and he gave her hand a casual caress. There must be nothing strange 
on this last night, and nothing she would remember with regret. Good night, Louise. You know I love you, he said 
with careful lightness. 
 
 Of course and I love you. 
 
 Yes. Good night. Louise. 
 
 Good night, Tick!. It was the best he could do with safety. 
 
 As soon as he heard the door close, he took out the cigarette carton in which he kept the ten doses of Evipan. He 
added two more doses for greater certainty - to have exceeded by two doses in ten days could not, surely, be regarded 
as suspicious. After that he took a long drink of whisky and sat still and waited for courage with the tablets in the 
palm of his hand. Now, he thought, I am absolutely alone: this was freezing-point. 
 
 But he was wrong. Solitude itself has a voice. It said to him. Throw away those tablets. Youll never be able to 
collect enough again. Youll be saved. Give up play-acting. Mount the stairs to bed and have a good nights sleep. In 
the morning youll be woken by your boy, and youll drive down to the police station for a days ordinary work. The 
voice dwelt on the word ordinary as it might have dwelt on the word happy or peaceful. 
 
 No, Scobie said aloud, no. He pushed the tablets in his mouth six at a time, and drank them down in two draughts. 
Then he opened his diary and wrote against November 12,Called on H.R., out; temperature at 2 p.m. and broke 
abruptly off as though at that moment he had been gripped by the final pain. Afterwards he sat bolt upright and 
waited what seemed a long while for any indication at all of approaching death; he had no idea how it would come to 
him. He tried to pray, but the Hail Mary evaded his memory, and he was aware of his heartbeats like a clock striking 
the hour. He tried out an act of contrition, but when he reached, I am sorry and beg pardon, a cloud formed over the 
door and drifted down over the whole room and he couldnt remember what it was that he had to be sorry for. He had 
to hold himself upright with both hands, but he had forgotten the reason why he so held himself. Somewhere far 
away he thought he heard the sounds of pain. A storm, he said aloud, theres going to be a storm, as the clouds grew, 
and he tried to get up to close the windows. Ali, he called, Ali. It seemed to him as though someone outside the room 
were seeking him, calling him, and he made a last effort to indicate that he was here. He got to his feet and heard the 
hammer of his heart beating out a reply. He had a message to convey, but the darkness and the storm drove it back 
within the case of his breast, and all the time outside the house, outside the world that drummed like hammer blows 
within his ear, someone wandered, seeking to get in, someone appealing for help, someone in need of nun. And 
automatically at the call of need, at the cry of a victim, Scobie strung himself to act He dredged his consciousness up 
from an infinite distance in order to make some reply. He said aloud, Dear God, I love... but the effort was too great 
and he did not feel his body when it struck the floor or hear the small tinkle of the medal as it span like a coin under 
the ice-box - the saint whose name nobody could remember. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART THREE 
 
 
 

 Chapter One 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wilson said, I have kept away as long as I could, but I thought perhaps I could be of some help. 
 
 Everybody, Louise said, has been very kind, 
 
 I had no idea that he was so ill. 
 
 Your spying didnt help you there, did it? 
 
 That was my job, Wilson said, and I love you. 
 
 How glibly you use that word, Wilson. 
 
 You dont believe me? 
 
 I dont believe in anybody who says love, love, love. It means self, self, self. 
 
 You wont marry me then? 
 
 It doesnt seem likely, does it, but I might, in time. I dont know what loneliness may do. But dont lets talk about love 
any more. It was his favourite lie. 
 
 To both of you. 
 
 How has she taken it, Wilson? 
 
 I saw her on the beach this afternoon with Bagster. And I hear she was a bit pickled last night at the club. 
 
 She hasnt any dignity. 
 
 I never knew what he saw in her. Id never betray you, Louise. 
 
 You know he even went up to see her the day he died. 
 
 How do you know? 
 
 Its all written there. In his diary. He never lied in his diary. He never said things he didnt mean - like love. 
 
 Three days had passed since Scobie had been hastily buried. Dr Travis had signed the death certificate -angina 
pectoris . In that climate a post-mortem was difficult, and in any case unnecessary, though Dr Travis had taken the 
precaution of checking up on the Evipan. 
 
 Do you know, Wilson said, when my boy told me he had died suddenly in the night, I thought it was suicide? 
 

 Its odd how easily I can talk about him, Louise said, now that hes gone. Yet I did love him, Wilson. I did love him, 
but he seems so very very gone. 
 
 It was as if he had left nothing behind him in the house but a few suits of clothes and a Mende grammar: at the 
police station a drawer full of odds and ends and a pair of rusting handcuffs. And yet the house was no different: the 
shelves were as full of books; it seemed to Wilson that it must always have beenher house, not his. Was it just 
imagination then that made their voices ring a little hollowly, as though the house were empty? 
 
 Did you know all the time - about her? Wilson asked. 
 
 Its why I came home. Mrs Carter wrote to me. She said everybody was talking. Of course he never realized that. He 
thought hed been so clever. And he nearly convinced me - that it was finished. Going to communion the way he did. 
 
 How did he square that with his conscience? 
 
 Some Catholics do, I suppose. Go to confession and start over again. I thought he was more honest though. When a 
mans dead one begins to find out. 
 
 He took money from Yusef. 
 
 I can believe it now. 
 
 Wilson put his hand on Louises shoulder and said, You can trust me, Louise. I love you. 
 
 I really believe you do. They didnt kiss; it was too soon for that, but they sat in the hollow room, holding hands, 
listening to the vultures clambering on the iron roof. 
 
 So thats his diary, Wilson said. 
 
 He was writing in it when he died - oh nothing interesting, just the temperatures He always kept the temperatures. 
He wasnt romantic. God knows what she saw in him to make it worth while. 
 
 Would you mind if I looked at it? 
 
 If you want to, she said, poor Ticki, he hasnt any secrets left. 
 
 His secrets were never very secret. He turned a page and read and turned a page. He said, Had he suffered from 
sleeplessness very long? 
 
 I always thought that he slept like a log whatever happened. 
 
 Wilson said, Have you noticed that hes written in pieces about sleeplessness - afterwards? 
 
 How do you know? 
 
 Youve only to compare the colour of the ink. And all these records of taking his Evipan - its very studied, very 
careful. But above all the colour of the ink. He said, It makes one think. 
 
 She interrupted him with horror, Oh no, he couldnt have done that. After all, in spite of everything, he was a 
Catholic. 
 
 
 

 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Just let me come in for one little drink, Bagster pleaded. 
 
 We had four at the beach. 
 
 Just one little one more. 
 
 All right, Helen said. There seemed to be no reason so far as she could see to deny anyone anything any more for 
ever. 
 
 Bagster said, You know its the first time youve let me come in. Charming little place youve made of it. Whod have 
thought a Nissen hut could be so homey? Flushed and smelling of pink gin, both of us, we are a pair, she thought. 
Bagster kissed her wetly on her upper lip and looked around again. Ha ha, he said, the good old bottle. When they 
had drunk one more gin he took off his uniform jacket and hung it carefully on a chair. He said, Lets take our back 
hair down and talk of love. 
 
 Need we? Helen said. Yet? 
 
 Lighting up time, Bagster said. The dusk. So well let George take over the controls ... 
 
 Whos George? 
 
 The automatic pilot, of course. Youve got a lot to learn. 
 
 For Gods sake teach me some other time. 
 
 Theres no time like the present for a prang, Bagster said, moving her firmly towards the bed. Why not? she thought, 
why not ... if he wants it? Bagster is as good as anyone else. Theres nobody in the world I love, and out of it doesnt 
count, so why not let them have their prangs (it was Bagsters phrase) if they want them enough. She lay back mutely 
on the bed and shut her eyes and was aware in the darkness of nothing at all. Im alone, she thought without self-pity, 
stating it as a fact, as an explorer might after his companions have died from exposure. 
 
 By God, you arent enthusiastic, Bagster said. Dont you love me a bit, Helen? and his ginny breath fanned through 
her darkness. 
 
 No. she said, I dont love anyone. 
 
 He said furiously, You loved Scobie, and added quickly, Sorry. Rotten thing to say. 
 
 I dont love anyone, she repeated. You cant love the dead, can you? They dont exist, do they? It would be like loving 
the dodo, wouldnt it? questioning him as if she expected an answer, even from Bagster. She kept her eyes shut 
because in the dark she felt nearer to death, the death which had absorbed him. The bed trembled a little as Bagster 
shuffled his weight from off it, and the chair creaked as he took away his jacket He said, Im not all that of a bastard, 
Helen. You arent in the mood. See you tomorrow? 
 
 I expect so. There was no reason to deny anyone anything, but she felt an immense relief because nothing after all 
had been required. 
 

 Good night, old girl, Bagster said, Ill be seeing you. 
 
 She opened her eyes and saw a stranger in dusty blue pottering round the door. One can say anything to a stranger -
they pass on and forget like beings from another world. She asked, Do you believe in a God? 
 
 Oh well, I suppose so, Bagster said, feeling at his moustache. 
 
 I wish I did, she said, I wish I did. 
 
 Oh well, you know, Bagster said a lot of people do. Must be off now. Good night. 
 
 She was alone again in the darkness behind her lids, and the wish struggled in her body like a child: her lips moved, 
but all she could think of to say was, For ever and ever, Amen... The rest she had forgotten. She put her hand out 
beside her and touched the other pillow, as though perhaps after all there was one chance in a thousand that she was 
not alone, and if she were not alone now she would never be alone again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Ishould never have noticed it, Mrs Scobie, Father Rank said. 
 
 Wilson did. 
 
 Somehow I cant like a man whos quite so observant. 
 
 Its his job. 
 
 Father Rank took a quick look at her. As an accountant? 
 
 She said drearily, Father, havent you any comfort to give me? Oh, the conversations, he thought, that go on in a 
house after a death, the turnings over, the discussions, the questions, the demands - so much noise round the edge of 
silence. 
 
 Youve been given an awful lot of comfort in your life, Mrs Scobie. If what Wilson thinks is true, its he who needs 
our comfort. 
 
 Do you know all that I know about him? 
 
 Of course I dont, Mrs Scobie. Youve been his wife, havent you, for fifteen years. A priest only knows the 
unimportant things. 
 
 Unimportant? 
 
 Oh, I mean the sins, he said impatiently. A man doesnt come to us and confess his virtues. 
 
 I expect you know about Mrs Rolt Most people did. 
 

 Poor woman. 
 
 I dont see why. 
 
 Im sorry for anyone happy and ignorant who gets mixed up in that way with one of us. 
 
 He was a bad Catholic. 
 
 Thats the silliest phrase in common use, Father Rank said. 
 
 And at the end this - horror. He must have known that he was damning himself. 
 
 Yes, he knew that all right. He never had any trust in mercy - except for other people. 
 
 Its no good even praying... 
 
 Father Rank clapped the cover of the diary to and said furiously, For goodness sake, Mrs Scobie, dont imagine you - 
or I - know a thing about Gods mercy. 
 
 The Church says ... 
 
 I know the Church says. The Church knows all the rules. But it doesnt know what goes on in a single human heart. 
 
 You think theres some hope then? she wearily asked. 
 
 Are you so bitter against him? 
 
 I havent any bitterness left. 
 
 And do you think Gods likely to be more bitter than a woman? he said with harsh insistence, but she winced away 
from the arguments of hope. 
 
 Oh, why, why, did he have to make such a mess of things? 
 
 Father Rank said, It may seem an odd thing to say - when a mans as wrong as he was - but I think, from what I saw 
of him, that he really loved God. 
 
 She had denied just now that she felt any bitterness, but a little more of it drained out now like tears from exhausted 
ducts. He certainly loved no one else, she said. 
 
 And you may be in the right of it there too, Father Rank replied. 
 
 
 
 
 

