T h e  R e d  B a d g e
o f  C o u r a g e

T

p

Chapter 1

he cold passed slowly from the earth, 

and the lifting dawn revealed an army stretched across the hills, rest­

ing. As the hillsides changed from brown to green, the army awakened 

and began to tremble with eagerness at the talk of battle. A river, yel­

low­colored, curled at the army’s feet. At night, when the stream had 

become a sorrowful blackness, one could see across it the red, eye­like 

glow of enemy campfires in the distant hills.

Once a certain tall soldier went to wash a shirt. He came rushing 

back from a brook waving his shirt like a flag. He was breathless with a 

tale he had heard from a good friend.

“We’re going to move tomorrow—sure,” he said importantly. 

“We’re going up along the river, across, and come around behind them.”

To his listeners he told a loud and careful story of a very smooth 

battle plan. When he had finished, the blue­clothed men scattered 
into small arguing groups.

“It’s a lie! That’s all it is—a thundering lie!” said another soldier 

loudly. His smooth face was red and his hands were pushed angrily into 
his pockets. He considered the matter as a wrong against him. “I don’t 
believe the old army’s ever going to move. I’ve been ready to go eight 
times in the last two weeks, and we haven’t moved yet.”

The tall soldier felt required to defend the truth of the story he 

himself had introduced. He and the loud one almost started fighting 
about it.

There was a youthful soldier who listened with eager ears to the 

words of the tall one and to the varied remarks of his friends. After lis­
tening to discussions concerning marches and attacks, he went to his 
tent. He wished to be alone with some new thoughts that had lately 
come to him.

The youth was in a condition of shock. So they were at last going 

to fight! Tomorrow, perhaps, there would be a battle, and he would be 
in it. For a time he had to labor to make himself believe. He could not 
accept with certainty a sign that he was about to take part in one of 
those great affairs of the world.

He had, of course, dreamed of battles all his life—of uncertain and  

bloody fights that had excited him with their vastness and fire. In  
dreams, he had seen himself in many struggles. He had imagined peo­
ple secure in the protection of his fierce bravery. But, awake, he had 
regarded battles as bloody marks on the pages of the past. He had put 
them as things of the past with his imaginings of heavy crowns and high 
castles. There was a portion of the world’s history which he regarded as 
“the time of the wars.” But it, he thought, had disappeared forever.

He had wanted several times to join the army. Tales of great move­

ments shook the land. There seemed to be much glory in them. He had 
read of marches, advances, battles, and he had wanted to see it all. His  
busy mind had drawn for him large pictures filled with breathless  
deeds.

But his mother had prevented him from going. She looked with 

little favor upon the quality of his war spirit. She could calmly seat her­
self and give him many hundreds of reasons why he was more impor­
tant on the farm than on the field of battle. She had had certain ways 
of expression that told him that her statements on the subject came 
from a deep belief.

At last, however, he had taken a firm position. The newspapers, 

the talk of the village, his own imaginings, had excited him to an uncon­
trollable degree. They were in truth, fighting finely down there. Almost 
every day the newspapers talked of victory.

One night, as he lay in bed, the winds had carried to him the ring­

ing of the church bell. Someone was pulling the bell rope wildly to tell 
the news of a great battle. This voice of the people, joyful in the night, 
had made him tremble in excitement. Later, he had gone down to his 
mother’s room and had told her, “Ma, I’m going to join the army.”

“Henry, don’t you be a fool,” his mother had replied. She had then 

covered her face with the blanket. There was an end to the matter for 
that night.

Nevertheless, the next morning he had gone to a town that was 

near his mother’s farm and had joined a regiment that was forming 
there. When he had returned home, his mother was milking a cow. Four  
others stood waiting. “Ma, I’ve joined,” he said to her hesitatingly. There  
was a short silence. “The Lord’s will be done, Henry,” she had finally 
replied, and had then continued to milk the cow.

When he had stood in the doorway with his blue soldier’s clothes 

on his back, and with the light of excitement and expectancy in his eyes,  
he had seen two tears leaving their trails on his mother’s tired face.

Still, she had surprised him by saying nothing about his return­

ing. He had privately been ready for a beautiful scene. He had prepared 
certain sentences which he thought could be used to produce great 
emotion. But her words destroyed his plans. She had steadily cut pota­
toes and spoken as follows: “You be careful, Henry, and take good care 
of yourself. Don’t think you can beat the whole rebel army at the start, 
because you can’t. You’re just one little fellow among a lot of others, 

and you have to keep quiet and do what they tell you. I know how you 
are, Henry.

“And always be careful when you choose your friends. There are 

lots of bad men in the army, Henry. The army makes them wild. They 
like nothing better than taking a young fellow like you, who has never 
been away from home much and has always had a mother, and teach­
ing him to drink liquor and curse. Stay away from them, Henry. I don’t 
want you ever to do anything, Henry, that you would be ashamed to tell 
me about. Just act as if I were watching you. If you keep that in your 
mind always, I guess you’ll come out all right.

“You must always remember your father, too, child. And remem­

ber he never drank a drop of liquor in his life, and seldom cursed, either.

“I don’t know what else to tell you, Henry, except that you must 

never avoid your duty, child. If a time comes when you have to be killed 
or do a bad thing, Henry, don’t think of anything except what’s right. 
Many women have to endure such things in these times, and the Lord 
will take care of us all.

“Don’t forget your shirts, child, and try and keep warm and dry. 

Good­bye, Henry. Be careful, and be a good boy.”

been quite what he expected. He departed, feeling a kind of relief.

Still, when he had looked back from the gate, he had seen his 

mother kneeling among the potatoes. Her brown face, upraised, was 
marked with tears, and her body was shaking. He had lowered his head 
and gone ahead, feeling suddenly ashamed of his purpose.

From his home he had gone to the school to say good­bye to many 

friends. They had gathered about him with wonder and admiration. He 
had felt the difference now between himself and them, and had been 
filled with calm pride.

There was a dark­haired girl at whom he had gazed steadily, and he 

thought she grew sad at the sight of his blue uniform. As he had walked 
down the path between the rows of oaks, he had turned his head and 
seen her at a window watching his departure. He often thought of it.

On the way to Washington, his spirits had risen. The regiment 

was fed and praised at station after station, until the youth had believed 
that he must be a hero. As he enjoyed the smiles of the girls and was 
given attention by the old men, he had felt growing within him the 
strength to do splendid deeds.

After long journeyings with many pauses, there had come months 

of boring life in a camp. He had had the belief that real war was a series 
of death struggles with little time for sleep and meals. But since his reg­
iment had come to the field, the army had done little but sit still and 
try to keep warm.

He was brought then gradually back to his old ideas. Struggles as 

in ancient times were ended. Men were either better or more fearful.

He had grown to regard himself merely as part of a vast blue display. 

His main job was to take care of his personal comfort as well as he could.

Now there was a more serious problem. He lay in his tent think­

ing about it. He tried to prove to himself that he would not run from 
a battle.

Before now, he had never felt obliged to consider too seriously this 

question. In his life he had accepted certain things, never doubting his 
belief in final success, and thinking little about methods. But here he 
was faced with an immediate situation. He had suddenly wondered if, 
perhaps, in a battle he might run. He was forced to admit that—in the 
matter of war—he knew nothing about himself.

He jumped from his bed and began to pace nervously back and 

forth. “Good Lord, what’s the matter with me?” he said aloud.

After a time the tall soldier came into the tent. He began to put 

some articles in his bag.

The youth, pausing in his nervous walk, looked at the busy fig­

ure. “Going to be a battle, sure, is there, Jim?” he asked.

“Of course there is,” replied the tall soldier, whose name was Jim 

Conklin. “Of course there is. You just wait until tomorrow, and you’ll 
see one of the biggest battles that ever was. You just wait.”

“Do you really think so?” asked the youth.
“Oh, you’ll see fighting this time, my boy—real fighting,” added 

the tall soldier, with the manner of a man who is about to enact a bat­

tle for the benefit of his friends.

“Well,” remarked the youth, “this story will probably have the 

same result the others did.”

“No, it won’t,” replied the tall soldier. “No, it won’t.”
The youth remained silent for a time. At last he spoke to the tall 

soldier. “Jim!”

“What?”
“How do you think the regiment will do?”
“Oh, they’ll fight all right, I guess, after they once get into it,” 

said the other with cold judgment. “They’re new, of course, but they’ll 
fight all right, I guess.”

“Do you think any of the boys will run?” continued the youth.
“Oh, maybe a few of them will run, but there’s that kind in every 

regiment, especially when they first go under fire,” said the other in a 
kindly way.

“Of course it might happen that the whole regiment might start 

to run, if they met some big fighting at the beginning. Or they might 
stay and fight. But you can’t depend on anything. Of course they haven’t 
ever been under fire yet, and it’s not likely they’ll beat the whole rebel 
army in one battle. But I think they’ll fight better than some, and may­
be worse than others. That’s the way I see it. Most of the boys will fight 
all right after they start shooting.” He placed great weight on the last 
four words.

“Did you ever think you might run yourself, Jim?” the youth asked. 

On completing the sentence he laughed as if he had meant it as a joke.

The tall soldier waved his hand. “Well,” he said seriously, “I’ve 

thought it might get too uncomfortable for Jim Conklin sometimes. If  
a lot of boys started to run, I suppose I’d start to run, too. And if I once 
started, I’d run like the devil. But if everybody were standing and fight­
ing, well, I’d stand and fight, I would. I know I would!”

The youth felt grateful for these words of his companion. He had 

feared that all of the other men possessed a great confidence. He was 
now a little reassured.

Chapter 2

the next morning the youth discovered that his tall friend 
had been the fast­flying messenger of a mistake. There was much laugh­
ter at the latter by those who had yesterday been firm believers of his 
views. And there were even some remarks about his foolishness by men 
who had never believed his story. The tall one fought with a man from 
Chatfield Comers and beat him badly.

The youth felt, however, that his problem was in no way lifted  

from him. There was, in fact, a continuing worry. The story of coming 
battle had created in him a great concern for himself. Now, with the 
question in his mind, he became again a part of the blue display.

For days he worried. He finally decided that there was only one  

way to prove himself: go into battle, and then watch his legs to dis­
cover their virtues and faults. To gain an answer he must have gunfire, 
blood and danger. So he waited eagerly for an opportunity.

Meanwhile he continually tried to measure himself by his com­

panions. The tall soldier, for one, gave him some assurance. This man’s 
calm unconcern gave him a measure of confidence, for he had known 
Jim Conklin since he, Henry Fleming, had been a child. Still, he  
thought that his friend might be mistaken about himself. Or, perhaps, 
Jim Conklin might be a man who had always lived in peace and pri­
vacy but was, in reality, made to shine in war.

The youth would have liked to have discovered another who  

doubted himself. A sharing of mental notes would have been a joy to 
him.

Then one morning the men were whispering and starting again  

the old reports. In the darkness before the break of day their uniforms 
glowed a deep purple color. From across the river the red eyes were still 

watching. In the eastern sky there was a yellow spot, like a rug put down 
for the feet of the coming sun.

From somewhere in the darkness came the sound of feet. The 

youth could occasionally see dark shadows that moved like huge devils.  
The regiment waited for what seemed a long time. The youth lost his 
patience. It was unbearable the way these affairs were managed. He  
wondered how long they were to be kept waiting.

At last he heard from along the road at the bottom of the hill the 

sound of a horse. It must be the coming of orders. He bent forward, 
scarcely breathing. Then a horseman stopped before the colonel of the 
regiment. The two held a short, sharp­worded conversation. The men  
in the front stretched their necks to see and hear.

As the horseman turned his animal and started away he shouted 

over his shoulder, “Don’t forget that box of tobacco.” The colonel mur­
mured a reply. The youth wondered what a box of tobacco had to do 
with war.

A moment later the regiment went marching off into the dark­

ness. The air was heavy and cold. The wet grass, marched upon, sound­
ed like moving silk.

Soon they passed into a roadway and moved forward easily. A  

dark regiment moved in front of them, and from behind also came the 
sounds of marching men.

The rushing yellow of the developing day continued behind their 

backs. When the sun rays at last struck full upon the earth, the youth 
saw that the land was marked with two long, thin, black columns  
which disappeared over the top of a hill in front, and in the rear dis­
appeared in a forest.

There was much discussion among the soldiers. The youth took  

no part. As he walked along in the careless line he was busy with his 
own personal problem. He could not stop himself from thinking about  
it. He was in low spirits and threw searching glances about him. He 
looked ahead, often expecting to hear the sound of shooting.

But the long lines moved slowly from hill to hill without a bit of 

smoke. The sky overhead was a lovely blue.

The youth studied the faces of his companions, ever watching to 

see emotions similar to his. He found none.

Considering himself as separated from the others, he was saddened 

by the light and merry speeches among the men. The regiment marched 
to the music of laughter.

At nightfall the column broke apart and went into the fields to 

camp. Tents grew up like strange plants. Campfires, like red flowers, lit 
the night.

The youth talked with his companions as little as possible. In the 

evening he wandered a few paces into the dark. From this little dis­
tance the many fires, with the black forms of men passing back and forth 
before the red rays, made strange and devilish effects.

He lay down in the grass and it pressed tenderly against his face. 

The moon seemed to be hung in a treetop. The liquid stillness of the 
night closing upon him made him feel vast pity for himself. There was 
a gentleness in the soft winds; and the whole feeling of darkness, he 
thought, was one of sympathy for himself in his sorrow.

He wished that he were home again, going from the house to the 

farmyard, from the farmyard to the fields, from the fields to the farm­
yard, from the farmyard to the house. He remembered he had often 
cursed the cows. But from his present point of view, there was a crown 
of happiness about each of their heads. He would have sacrificed all  
the uniforms on the continent to be able to return to them. He told 
himself that he was not made to be a soldier. And he thought serious­
ly about the many differences between himself and those men who  
were moving around the fires.

He went slowly to his tent and stretched himself on a blanket by 

the side of the sleeping tall soldier. He stared at a fire’s red, shaking 
shadow on the white wall of his tent until, tired and ill from his con­
tinued suffering, he fell asleep.

Chapter 3

in the morning they were called out early, and hurried along 
a narrow road that led deep into the forest. It was during this rapid 
march that the regiment lost many of the marks of being new.

The men had begun to count the miles upon their fingers, and 

they grew tired. “Sore feet and not enough food, that’s all,” said a loud 
soldier. There were hot faces and angry words. After a time they began 
to throw away the bags they carried on their backs. Some dropped them 
unconcernedly down; others hid them carefully, planning to return for 
them at some convenient time. Men took off their thick shirts. Soon 
few carried anything but their necessary clothing, blankets, canteens, 
and guns. “You can now eat and shoot,” said the tall soldier to the youth.  
“That’s all you want to do.”

There was sudden change now among the men. The regiment was 

no longer the heavy, slow army of theory, but the light, speedy army of 
reality. The regiment, relieved of a burden, received a new strength.

But the regiment did not yet have the appearance of experienced 

soldiers. Regiments who had been in battle were likely to be very small 
groups of men. And the letters on the flags were still new and beautiful.  
The youth returned to his theory that he was part of a blue display.

One gray dawn, however, the youth was kicked in the leg by the 

tall soldier. And then, before he was entirely awake, he found himself 
running down a forest road among men who were already breathing 
heavily from the first effects of speed. His canteen repeatedly struck his  
leg. His gun fell off his shoulder at each step, and his cap felt uncertain 
upon his head.

He could hear the men whisper broken sentences: “Say, what’s all 

this—about?” “What are we hurrying—this way for?” “Billie—stay off 
my feet—you run—like a cow.” And a soldier’s loud voice could be 
heard: “What the devil are they in such a hurry for?”

From a distance came a sudden sound of gunfire. He was surprised. 

As he ran with his friends he tried hard to think; but all he knew was 
that if he fell down those coming behind would step upon him. All his 
power seemed to be needed to guide him over and past objects. He felt 
carried along by a mob.

The sun spread revealing rays. And one by one, regiments burst 

into view like men just born of the earth. The youth realized that the 
time had come. He was about to be measured. For a moment—facing 
his great test—he felt like a baby, and the flesh over his heart seemed 
very thin. He seized time to look about him carefully.

He instantly saw that it would be impossible for him to escape 

from the regiment. It enclosed him. And there were iron laws of custom  
and law on four sides. He was in a moving box.

As he realized this fact, he thought that he had never wished to 

come to the war. He had not joined the army by his own choice. He 
had been dragged by a merciless government. And now they were tak­
ing him out to be killed.

The regiment slipped down a hill and crossed a little stream. As 

they climbed a hill on the other side, guns began to roar. Here the youth  
forgot many things as he felt a sudden curiosity. He hurried up to the 
top with a great speed.

He expected a battle scene.
There were some little fields surrounded by a forest. Spread over 

the grass and among the trees he could see moving lines of men run­
ning here and there and firing. A dark battle line lay upon a sunstruck 
clearing. A flag blew in the light wind.

Other regiments climbed up the hill. The brigade was formed in 

line of battle. After a pause the brigade started slowly through the for­
est, behind small groups of soldiers who melted into the scene to appear  
again farther forward. These were always busy as bees, deeply concerned 
in their little battles.

The youth tried to observe everything. He did not use care to 

avoid trees and branches, and his forgotten feet were always striking 
against stones or getting caught in the low bushes. He saw that the fig­
ures ahead and their noises were red and shocking against the gentle 
land of softened greens and browns. It looked like the wrong place for 
a battlefield.

The fighters in front interested him. Their shots into bushes and 

at distant trees spoke to him of sorrows—hidden, secret.

Once the line of men came upon the body of a dead soldier. He 

lay upon his back staring at the sky. He was dressed in an ugly suit of  
yellowish brown. The line opened to avoid the body. The dead man 
forced a way for himself. The youth looked sharply at the ashen face. 
He wanted to walk around and around the body and stare; it was the  
desire of the living to try to read in dead eyes the answer to the 
Question—the Question of Death.

During the march the eagerness which the youth had developed 

when out of view of the field rapidly reduced to nothing. His curiosity 
was quite easily satisfied. If an exciting scene had caught him with its 
wild action as he came to the top of the hill, he might have gone run­
ning forward. This advance upon Nature was too calm. He had oppor­
tunity to think. He had time in which to wonder about himself and to 
attempt to question his feelings.

The quick thought came to him that the generals did not know 

what they were doing. Suddenly those close forests would reveal count­
less guns pointing at him. Iron­like enemy brigades would appear in the  
rear. He and his friends were all going to be killed. The generals were 
fools. The enemy would soon eat the whole army. His angry eyes  
searched about him, expecting to see the sure approach of his death.

The line, broken into moving parts by the ground, went calmly 

forward through fields and forests. The youth looked at the men near­
est him. And he saw, mainly, expressions of deep interest, as if they  
were looking for something. Most of the men appeared quiet and 
thoughtful. They were going to look at war, the red animal—war, the 
blood­drinking god. And they were deeply occupied in this march.

was surprised by a young officer of his regiment—a lieutenant—who 
began to beat him with a sword, calling out in a loud and unfriendly 
voice: “Come, young man, get on there. No falling behind here.” He 
changed his pace with proper speed. And he hated the lieutenant, who 
had no respect for fine minds. He was a mere animal.

After a time the brigade was stopped in the shady light of a forest. 

The busy fighters ahead were still shooting.

Many men in the regiment began piling tiny hills in front of them.  

They used stones, sticks, earth and anything they thought might protect  
them from a bullet. Some built quite large ones, while others seemed 
satisfied with little ones. In a short time there was quite a wall along the  
fronts of the regiments. Soon, however, they were ordered to leave that  
place.

This shocked the youth. He forgot his worries about the advance 

movement. “Well, then, why did they march us out here?” he demand­
ed of the tall soldier. The latter, with calm faith, began a heavy expla­
nation, although he had been compelled to leave a little protection of 
stones and earth to which he had devoted much care and skill.

When the regiment was moved to another position, each man’s 

regard for his safety caused another line of small hills. The men ate their 
noon meal behind a third line of hills. They were moved from this one also.  
They were marched from place to place with apparent lack of purpose.

The youth had been taught that a man became another thing in  

a battle. He saw his preservation in such a change. Therefore, this wait­
ing was painful to him. He had no patience. He considered that the 
generals lacked purpose. He began to complain to the tall soldier. “I  
can’t wait like this much longer,” he cried. “I don’t see what good it does 
to make us tire our legs for nothing.”

He wished to return to camp, knowing that this affair was only a 

blue display. Or he wanted to go into battle and discover that he had 
been a fool in his doubts, and was, in truth, a man of customary courage. 
The strain of present circumstances he felt to be unbearable.

The tall soldier ate his bread in a carefree manner. “Oh, I suppose  

we must go around the country just to keep them from getting too close,  
or to develop them, or something.”

“Well,” cried the youth, still nervous, “I’d rather do almost any­

thing than march around all day doing no good to anyone and just 
tir ing ourselves.”

In the afternoon the regiment went back over the same ground 

it had traveled in the morning. The land then ceased to threaten the 
youth. He had been close to it and become familiar with it. When, how­
ever, they began to pass into a new region, his old fears came back.

Once he thought that it would be better to get killed immedi­

ately and end his troubles. Regarding death thus out of the corner of  
his eye, he knew it was nothing but rest. He was filled with a momen­
tary surprise that he should have made a great problem over the mere 
matter of getting killed. He would die; he would go to some place where  
he would be understood. It was useless to expect respect from such men 
as the lieutenant. He must look to the grave for understanding.

The gunfire increased. With it was faraway cheering. Then the 

youth saw soldiers running. They were followed by more gunfire. After 
a time the hot, dangerous flashes of the rifles were seen. Smoke clouds 
went slowly across the fields. The noise grew into a roar.

A brigade ahead of them and on the right went into action. It  

was as if it had burst apart. And thereafter it lay stretched in the dis­
tance, behind a long gray wall, at which one had to look twice to make 
sure that it was smoke.

The youth forgot his plan of getting killed. He stared speechlessly.  

His eyes grew wide with the action of the scene. His mouth was open 
a little.

Chapter 4

the noise in front grew to a mighty roar. the youth and his 
companions were frozen to silence. They could see a flag that whipped 
in the smoke angrily. Near it were moving forms of troops. There came 
a rushing stream of men across the fields. Another group, changing posi­
tion at a fast pace, scattered them right and left.

Bullets began to whistle among the branches of the trees. Showers 

of pine needles and pieces of wood came falling down. It was as if a 
thousand axes were being used.

The lieutenant of the youth’s regiment was shot in the hand. He 

began to curse so magnificently that a nervous laugh went through the 
regiment. It relieved the tightened senses of the men.

The officer held his hand carefully away from his side so that the 

blood would not drop upon his trousers.

The captain of the regiment, putting his sword under his arm, 

produced a handkerchief and began to bind the lieutenant’s wound. 
And they argued about how the binding should be done.

The battle flag in the distance danced about madly. It seemed to 

be struggling to free itself from a frightful pain. The clouds of smoke 
were filled with flashes.

Fast running men came through the smoke. They grew in num­

bers until it was seen that many brigades were running away. The flag 
suddenly sank down as if dying. Its motion as it fell was a movement of  
despair.

Wild shouts came from behind the walls of smoke. A mob of men 

rushed past like wild horses. The experienced regiments on the right 
and left of the youth’s regiment—the 304th—immediately began to 

call out bitter jokes. With the passionate song of the bullets and the 
bursts of gunfire were mixed loud remarks and bits of advice concern­
ing places of safety.

But the new regiment was breathless with terror. The youth looked  

along the blue line of his regiment. The men were motionless, stone; 
and afterward he remembered that the flag bearer was standing with 
his legs apart, as if he expected to be pushed to the ground.

The commander of the brigade was rushing around screaming.  

His horse often threatened the running men, but they escaped with  
un usual luck. In this rush they apparently could not hear or see. They paid  
no attention even to the largest and longest of the curses that were 
thrown at them from all directions.

Frequently, over this wild scene could be heard the jokes of the 

experienced soldiers. But the running men apparently were not even 
aware of this attention.

The battle look that shone for an instant on the faces in the mad 

current of men made the youth feel that forceful hands from heaven 
could not hold him in place if he could get simple control of his legs.

The sight of this mad river had a floodlike force that seemed able 

to drag sticks and stones and men from the ground. But the youth and 
his regiment had to keep their place. They grew pale and firm, and red 
and shaking.

The youth accomplished one little thought in the middle of this 

madness. The frightful thing which had caused the other troops to run 
had not then appeared. He determined to get a view of it. And then, 
he thought he might very likely run better than the best of them.

Chapter 5

then someone cried, “here they come!”

There was movement and murmuring among the men. They dis­

played a feverish desire to have every possible bullet ready. Boxes were 
pulled around into different positions, and arranged with great care. It 
was as if seven hundred new hats were being tried on.

The tall soldier, having prepared his rifle, produced a red hand­

kerchief of some kind. He was putting it about his throat with careful 
attention when the shout was repeated up and down the line, “Here 
they come! Here they come!” Guns were made ready.

Across the smoky fields came a brown mass of running men who 

were giving loud screams. They came straight on, bent near the ground 
and swinging their rifles in all positions. A flag rushed along near the 
front.

As he caught sight of them, the youth was momentarily fright­

ened by a thought that perhaps his gun was not loaded. He stood try­
ing to remember the moment when he had loaded, but he could not.

A hatless general pulled his horse to a stop near the colonel of 

the 304th. He waved his hand in the colonel’s face. “You have to hold 
them back!”

The colonel answered nervously. “A­all r­right, General. All right, 

by God! W­we’ll do our—we’ll d­d­do—do our best, General.”

The general rode away. The colonel, perhaps to relieve his feel­

ings, began to shout angrily at the men. The youth, turning quickly to 
make sure that it was safe behind, saw the colonel looking at his men 
with a bitter expression. He seemed to be sorry that he was associated 
with them.

The man at the youth’s elbow was murmuring, as if to himself:
“Oh, we’re in trouble now! Oh, we’re in trouble now!”
The captain of the regiment had been pacing excitedly back and 

forth in the rear. His talk was endlessly repeated. “Save your fire, boys— 
don’t shoot till I tell you—save your fire—wait till they get close— 
don’t be crazy fools—!”

The youth frequently, with a nervous movement, wiped his eyes 

with his arm. His mouth was still open a little.

He got the one glance at the enemy­filled field in front of him, 

and instantly stopped wondering if he had loaded his gun. Before he 
was ready to begin—before he had announced to himself that he was 
about to fight—he threw the rifle into position and fired a first wild 
shot. Suddenly he was working at his gun like an old soldier.

He suddenly lost concern for himself, and forgot to look at a threat­

ening fate. He became not a man but a member. He felt that something 
of which he was a part—a regiment, an army, a cause, or a country— 
was in danger. He was melted into a united personality which was moved 
by a single desire. For some moments, he could not run away, no more 
than a little finger can revolt from a hand.

he could have cut himself away from it. But its noise gave him assur­
ance. It roared and shot with a vast power.

There was an awareness always of the presence of his companions 

about him. He felt the battle fellowship, more powerful even than the 
cause for which they were fighting. It was a strange fellowship born of 
the smoke and danger of death.

Soon he began to feel the effects of the war—a burning­up feeling; 

even his eyeballs felt like hot stones. And a burning roar filled his ears.

Following this came a red anger—like a worried animal, a well­

meaning cow troubled by dogs. He had a mad feeling against his rifle, 
which could only be used against one life at a time. He wished to rush 
forward and kill with his fingers. He wanted a power that would enable 
him to make a world­sweeping motion and brush everything back. His 
lack of power became clear to him, and made his anger like that of a 

fenced beast.

Buried in the smoke of many rifles, his anger was directed not so 

much against the men who were rushing toward him, but against the 
waves of battle smoke that were pouring down his dry throat. He fought 
fiercely for relief for his senses, for air.

There was a fire of anger, mixed with a certain expression of pur­

pose, on all faces. The tall soldier was cursing in a loud voice. Suddenly 
another shouted, “Well, why don’t they help us? Why don’t they send 
supports? Do they think—”

The youth in his battle sleep heard this as one who is half­awake.
There was an absence of apparent heroes. The men bending and 

rising in their hurry and anger were in every impossible position. The 
steel rang out as the men ceaselessly employed the hot rifles. The rifles, 
when loaded, were pulled to the shoulders and fired without apparent 
aim into the smoke.

The officers neglected to stand in brave positions. They were leap­

ing back and forth, roaring directions and encouragements. Often they 
nearly stood upon their heads in their eagerness to observe the enemy 
on the other side of the smoke clouds.

The lieutenant of the youth’s regiment had found a soldier who 

had run screaming at the first of the shooting. Behind the lines, these 
two were acting a little private scene. The man was crying and staring 
with sheepish eyes at the lieutenant, who had seized him by the shirt 
and was hitting him. The lieutenant pushed him back among the rest 
with many blows. The soldier went dully, with his animal­like eyes upon  
the officer. Perhaps there was to him a strength expressed in the voice 
of the other—hard, with no sign of fear in it. He tried to reload his gun, 
but his shaking hands prevented him. The lieutenant had to assist him.

The men dropped here and there. The captain of the regiment 

had been killed in an early part of the action. His body lay stretched 
out in the position of a tired man resting, but upon his face there was  
a surprised and sorrowful look, as if a friend had done something unkind 
to him.

The crying man was hit by a shot that made the blood stream 

widely down his face. He put both hands to his head. “Oh!” he said, and 
ran. Another screamed suddenly, as if he had been struck by a club in 
the stomach. Farther up the line, a man standing behind a tree had his 
knee broken by a bullet. Immediately he dropped his rifle and grasped 
the tree with both arms. And there he remained, hanging despairingly 
and crying for help so that he might let go of the tree.

At last a joyful shout went along the trembling line. The firing fell 

from a roar to a single shot. As the smoke slowly cleared away, the youth 
saw that the enemy had been stopped. They were scattered into small 
groups. He saw a man climb to the top of the fence and fire a last shot.

Some in the regiment began to shout madly. Many were silent. 

Apparently they were trying to think of themselves.

And then, the youth thought that at last he was going to faint. 

He became aware of the bad air in which he had been struggling. He 
was dirty and wet from the labor and heat. He grasped his canteen and 
took a long drink of the warmed water.

A sentence was spoken up and down the line. “Well, we’ve held 

them back. We’ve held them back; so we have!” The men said it joy­
fully, looking at each other with dirty smiles.

The youth turned to look behind him and off to the right and off 

to the left. He experienced the joy of a man who at last finds time in 
which to look about.

Under foot there were a few awful forms motionless. Arms were 

bent and heads were turned in unbelievable ways. It seemed that the 
dead men must have fallen from some great height to get into such 
positions. They looked as if they had been thrown out upon the ground 
from the sky.

A small line of wounded men was going slowly toward the rear.  

It was like a flow of blood from the torn body of the brigade.

To the right and to the left were the dark lines of other troops. 

Far in front he thought he could see lighter masses extending in points 
from the forest. They suggested unnumbered thousands.

From a hill came the sound of cheering. Smoke rose slowly through 

the trees.

The guns were sounding with thundering effort. Here and there 

were flags, the red putting bits of warm color upon the dark lines of 
troops.

The youth felt the old excitement at the sight of the flags. They 

were like beautiful birds strangely untouched by a storm.

He listened to the noise from the hillside, to a deep steady thun­

der that came from afar to the left, and to the lesser shots which came 
from many directions. And he realized that they were fighting, too— 
over there, and over there, and over there. Before, he had supposed 
that all the battle was directly under his nose.

As he gazed around him, the youth felt a flash of surprise at the 

blue, pure sky and the sun shining on the trees and fields. It was won­
derful that Nature had gone quietly ahead with her golden process in 
the middle of so much devilment.

Chapter 6

the youth awakened slowly. he came gradually to a position 
from which he could regard himself. For moments he had been exam­
ining himself as if he had never before seen himself. Then he picked 
up his cap from the ground. He moved in his jacket to make it feel 
more comfortable, and kneeling, tied his shoe. He thoughtfully wiped 
his face.

So it was all over at last! The great test had been passed. The red 

frightful difficulties of war had been mastered.

He went into a passion of self­satisfaction. He had the most 

de lightful emotions of his life. Standing as if apart from himself, he viewed  
that last scene. He thought that the man who had fought thus was mag­
nificent.

He felt that he was a fine fellow. He saw himself with those virtues 

which he had considered as far beyond him. He smiled in deep pride.

Upon his companions he smiled with tenderness and good will. 

“It’s hot, isn’t it?” he said cheerfully to a man who was wiping his face 
with his arm.

“You’re right!” said the other, smiling sociably, “I’ve never seen 

such foolish hotness.” He lay down comfortably on the ground. “Oh, 
yes, and I hope we don’t have any more fighting till a week from 
Monday.”

There were some handshakings and deep speeches with men whose 

faces were familiar, but with whom the youth now felt the bonds of tied 
hearts. He helped a cursing companion to bind a wound of the foot.

But, suddenly, cries of surprise broke out among the men of the 

new regiment. “Here they come again! Here they come again!” The 

man who had lain upon the ground started to get up and said, “Oh!”

The youth turned quick eyes upon the field. He saw forms begin 

to come in masses out of a distant forest. He again saw the flag speed­
ing forward.

The bullets, which had ceased to trouble the regiment for a time, 

came flying again, and struck the grass and the branches of the trees. 
The gunfire looked like strange war flowers bursting into fierce growth.

The men murmured. The glow left their eyes. Their dirty faces 

now expressed a deep sorrow. They moved their stiffened bodies slow­
ly, and watched in quiet anger the fast approach of the enemy.

They complained each to the other. “Oh, this is too much! Why 

can’t somebody send us help?”

“We’re never going to live through a second battle. I didn’t come 

here to fight the whole rebel army.”

The youth stared. Surely, he thought, this impossible thing was 

not about to happen. He waited as if he expected the enemy to sud­
denly stop, ask his pardon, and leave. It was all a mistake.

But the firing began somewhere in the line and ran along in both 

directions. The sheets of flame developed into great clouds of smoke that 
rose and dropped in the gentle wind near the ground, and then rolled 
through the line as through a gate. The clouds were colored an earth­
like yellow in the sunlight, and in the shadows were a sorry blue. The 
flag was sometimes lost in this mass of smoke, but more often it stood 
out, sun­touched, splendid.

Into the youth’s eyes there came a strange look. His neck was 

trembling with nervous weakness and the muscles of his arms felt stiff 
and bloodless. His hands, too, seemed large and useless. And there was 
a great uncertainty in his knees.

The words that companions had spoken before the firing began  

to come back to him. “Oh, this is too much!” “What do they think we 
are?” “Why don’t they send help?” “I didn’t come here to fight the whole 
rebel army.”

He slowly lifted his rifle and, seeing the field through the smoke, 

he fired. He stopped then and began to look as best he could through 

the smoke. He caught changing views of the ground covered with men 
who were all running like devils and shouting.

A man near him, who had been working feverishly at his rifle, sud­

denly stopped and ran, screaming. A lad whose face had worn an expres­
sion of high courage threw down his gun and ran. There was no shame 
in his face. He ran like a rabbit.

Others began to run away through the smoke. The youth turned 

his head, shaken by this movement as if the regiment were leaving him 
behind. He saw the quickly moving forms.

He shouted with fright and turned around. For a moment he was 

like a chicken. He lost the direction of safety. He was threatened from 
all points.

He began to speed toward the rear in great leaps. His rifle and cap 

were gone. His open coat flew in the wind. The canteen was swinging 
out behind him. On his face was the terror of those things which he 
imagined.

He ran like a blind man. Two or three times he fell down. Once he 

struck his shoulder so heavily against a tree that he went down head first.

Since he had turned his back upon the fight his fears had been 

greatly increased. Death about to strike him between the shoulders was 
much more awful than death about to hit him between the eyes. When 
he thought of it later, he got the impression that it is better to view the 
terror than merely to hear it. The noises of the battle were like stones; 
he believed himself about to be crushed.

As he ran on he mixed with others. He saw men on his right and 

on his left, and he heard footsteps behind him. He thought that the 
whole regiment was running away.

The sound of these following footsteps gave him his one small 

relief. He felt that death must first choose the men who were nearest 
it; they would be those who were following him. So he displayed the 
eagerness of a mad runner in his purpose to keep them in the rear. 
There was a race.

He experienced a shock when he came within view of a group of 

gunners in action. The men there seemed to be completely unaware of 

the coming danger. They were fighting with a distant enemy and were 
wrapped in admiration of their own shooting.

He saw a brigade going to the relief of tired soldiers. He climbed 

up a small hill and watched it moving, keeping formation in difficult 
places. The blue of the line was edged with steel color, and the bright 
flags shone. Officers were shouting.

This sight also filled him with wonder. The brigade was hurrying 

quickly, to be eaten by the mouths of the war god. What kind of men 
were they? Oh, they were some strange and wonderful sort! Or else they 
didn’t understand—the fools!

The youth went on, slowing his pace since he had left the place 

of noises.

Later he came upon a general seated upon a horse that lifted its 

ears in an interested way at the battle. The quiet man looked dull upon 
such a splendid animal.

A moment later the youth saw the general jump excitedly in his 

saddle.

“Yes, by heavens, they have!” The officer leaned forward. His face 

was aflame with excitement. “Yes, by heavens, they’ve held them! 
They’ve held them.”

He began to roar at the officers near him. “We’ll beat them now! 

We’ll beat them now! We’ve got them!”

The general’s face shone upon the earth like a sun. In his eyes 

was a desire to sing a song. He kept repeating, “They’ve stopped them, 
by heavens!”

His excitement made his horse jump forward, and the general mer­

rily kicked and cursed at it. He did a little dance of joy on horseback.

Chapter 7

the youth lowered his head as if he had been discovered in a 
crime. They had won after all! The crazy line had remained firm and 
come to victory. He could hear cheering.

He stretched his neck and looked in the direction of the fight. A 

yellow cloud lay on the treetops. From beneath it came the sound of 
gunfire. Deep cries told of an advance.

He turned away, shocked and angry. He felt that he had been 

wronged.

He had run, he told himself, because certain death approached.  

He had done well in saving himself, because he was a little piece of the 
army. He had decided it was the duty of every piece to save itself if pos­
sible. Later the officers could fit the little pieces together again and  
make a battle line. If none of the little pieces were wise enough to save 
themselves from death at such a time, where would the army be?

It was all clear that he had proceeded according to very correct 

and admirable rules. His actions had been sensible—full of wisdom.

Thoughts of his companions came to him. The thin blue line had 

taken the blows and won. He grew bitter about it. He had been over­
turned and crushed by their lack of wisdom. They had held the position 
when clever thinking would have shown them that it was impossible. 
He, the wise man who looks far into the darkness, had run away because 
of his superior mind. He felt a great anger against his companions. He 
knew it could be proved that they had been fools.

He wondered what they would remark when later he appeared in  

camp. His mind heard wild laughing. Their dull minds would not  
enable them to understand his sharper point of view.

crushed beneath the feet of an iron injustice. He had proceeded with 
wisdom and sense, only to be defeated by hateful circumstances.

A dull, animal­like revolt against his companions, against war, 

against fate, grew within him. He walked along with his head down, 
his brain suffering and full of despair. When he looked up, trembling 
at each sound, his eyes had the expression of a criminal who thinks his 
guilt and punishment are great, and who can find no words.

He went from the fields into a thick forest, as if determined to 

bury himself. He wished to stop hearing the shots which were to him 
like voices.

After a time the sound of rifles grew faint, and the large guns 

roared in the distance. The sun, suddenly apparent, shone among the 
trees.

The sound of death was far away. It seemed now that Nature had 

no ears. The scene gave him assurance. This was a place holding life.  
It was the religion of peace. It would die if its calm eyes were compelled 
to see the blood. He believed Nature to be a woman with a deep unwill­
ingness to see suffering.

Chapter 8

THE TREES BEGAN SOFTLY TO SING A SONG OF EVENING. THE SUN SANK 
until dark orange rays struck the forest. There was silence except for 
the singing of the trees.

Then, upon this stillness, there suddenly broke a vast burst of 

sounds. A roar came from the distance.

The youth stopped. He was turned to stone by this mixture of all 

noises. It was as if worlds were being torn apart. There was the tearing 
sound of rifles and the breaking thunder of great guns.

His mind flew in all directions. He pictured the two armies meet­

ing each other. He listened for a while. Then he began to run in the 
direction of the battle. How strange to be running toward that which 
he had been so careful to avoid!

As he ran, he became aware that the forest had stopped its music, 

as if at last becoming able to hear the foreign sounds. The trees stood 
quiet and motionless. Everything seemed to be listening to the earth­
shaking thunder.

At last he was where he could see long gray walls of smoke. The 

voices of the guns shook him. The rifles sounded in long uneven bursts. 
He stood watching for a moment. His eyes had an expression of surprise. 
He stared in the direction of the fight.

Again he proceeded on his forward way. The battle was like the 

sound of a huge and awful machine to him. Its powers and processes 
interested him. He must go near and see it produce death.

He came to a fence and climbed over it. On the far side, the 

ground was covered with clothes and guns. A newspaper, folded, lay in 
the dirt. A dead soldier was stretched with his face hidden in his arm.

Farther away there was a group of four or five other bodies. A hot sun  
had burned upon the spot.

In this place the youth felt that he was an outsider. This forgot­

ten part of the battleground was owned by the dead men, and he hur­
ried with the crazy fear that one of the bloody forms would rise and tell 
him to go.

He came finally to a road from which he could see troops moving 

in the distance. Below him was a blood­spotted crowd dragging itself 
forward. The wounded men were cursing, shouting, and weeping. In 
the air, always, was a mighty roar that seemed to move the earth. With 
the brave words of the big guns and the cruel sentences of the small 
guns, cheers were mixed. And out of this region of noises came the 
steady flow of the wounded.

One of the wounded men had a shoeful of blood. He jumped 

along like a schoolboy in a game. He was laughing crazily.

One was insisting that he had been shot in the arm because of the 

commanding general’s bad management of the army. One was march­
ing grandly, and upon his face was a mixture of merriment and suffer­
ing. He was singing a bit of a song in a high and trembling voice.

Another had the gray look of death already upon his face. His 

lips were curled in hard lines and his teeth were pressed together tight­
ly. His hands were bloody from where he had pressed them upon his 
wound. He seemed to be awaiting the moment when he would fall for­
ward. He walked along, his eyes staring into the unknown.

There were some who proceeded full of anger at their wounds, 

ready to attack anything as a cause.

An officer was carried along by two soldiers. He was hurt. “Don’t 

be so rough, Johnson, you fool,” he cried. “Do you think my leg is made 
of iron? If you can’t carry me properly, put me down and let someone 
else do it.”

He shouted at the men in his path, “Make way there, can’t you? 

Make way!”

They slowly parted and went to the sides of the road. As he was 

carried past they made bitter remarks to him. When he shouted angrily 

in reply and threatened them, they cursed him.

The youth joined this crowd and marched along with it. The torn 

bodies expressed the awful machinery in which the men had been 
caught.

The march was continually broken into by messengers, and some­

times by hurrying brigades that came quickly upon them, with officers 
shouting orders to clear the way.

There was a tattered man, covered with dust and blood from hair 

to shoes, who walked quietly at the youth’s side. He was listening humbly 
and with eagerness to the stories of another soldier. The tattered man’s 
face wore an expression of admiration. He looked with unspeakable 
wonder. His mouth was open like a small boy’s.

The other soldier, seeing this, remarked, “Be careful, fellow, or 

you’ll be catching bees.”

The tattered man moved back.
After a while he began to approach the youth, and in a different 

way try to make him a friend. His voice was gentle, and his eyes appeal­
ing. The youth saw with surprise that the soldier had two wounds, one  
in the head, bound with a bloody cloth, and the other in the arm, mak­
ing it hang like a broken branch.

After they had walked together for some time the tattered man 

gathered sufficient courage to speak. “It was a good fight, wasn’t it?” he 
asked quietly. The youth, deep in thought, glanced at the bloody and 
sad figure with its lamblike eyes. “What?”

“It was a good fight, wasn’t it?”
“Yes,” said the youth shortly. He quickened his pace.
But the other came speedily after him. He apparently thought that 

he needed only to talk for a time, and the youth would realize that he 
was a good fellow.

“It was a good fight, wasn’t it?” he began in a small voice, and then 

he gained the strength to continue. “I never saw fellows fight like that. 
How they did fight! I knew the boys would like it when they once start­
ed. The boys haven’t had a fair chance up to now, but this time they 
showed what they could do. I knew it would happen this way. You can’t  

beat those boys. No, sir! They’re fighters, they are.”

He breathed a deep breath of humble admiration. He had looked 

at the youth for encouragement several times. He received none, but 
gradually he seemed to get interested in his subject.

“I was talking once with a rebel boy from Georgia. We were doing 

night guard duty on opposite sides of a stream. Well, that boy, he said, 
‘Your fellows will all start running when they first hear a gun.’ ‘Maybe 
they will,’ I said, ‘but I don’t think so.’ And I said, ‘Maybe your fellows 
will all start running when they first hear a gun.’” And the dusty man 
laughed. “Well, our boys didn’t run today, did they? No, sir! They fought 
and fought and fought.”

His tired face was filled with a light of love for the army which 

was to him all things beautiful and powerful.

After a time he turned to the youth. “Where were you hit, old 

boy?” he asked in a brotherly tone.

The youth felt instant terror at this question, although at first its 

full importance did not enter his mind.

“What?” he asked.
“Where were you hit?” repeated the tattered man.
“Oh,” began the youth, “I—I—that is—oh—”
He turned away suddenly and slipped through the crowd. His face 

was red and his fingers were moving nervously at one of his buttons. 
He bent his head and studied the button as if it were a little problem.

The tattered man looked after him in surprise.

Chapter 9

THE YOUTH FELL BACK IN THE LINE UNTIL THE TATTERED SOLDIER WAS 
not in sight. Then he started to walk along with the others.

But he was among wounds. Blood was flowing from the mob of 

men. Because of the tattered soldier’s question he now felt that his 
shame could be viewed. He was continually glancing around to see if 
the men were looking at his guilt.

At times he wished he were wounded. He believed persons with 

torn bodies were unusually happy. He wished that he, too, had a 
wound—a red badge of courage.

The dying soldier he had passed earlier was now at his side. The 

man’s eyes were still staring into the unknown. His gray, frightening face  
had drawn attention in the crowd. The men, slowing to his pace, were 
walking with him. They were discussing his wound, questioning him 
and giving him advice. He refused their help, telling them to go and  
leave him alone. The shadows of his face were deepening and his tight 
lips seemed to hold inside the cry of great despair. There was a stiffness  
in the movements of his body. As he went along, he seemed always  
looking for a certain place, like one who goes to choose a grave.

Something in the manner of the man as he waved away the bloody 

and pitying soldiers made the youth scream in terror. Hurrying forward, 
he laid a trembling hand upon the man’s arm. As the latter slowly turned 
his pale face toward him, the youth cried:

“God! Jim Conklin!”
The tall soldier made a little smile. “Hello, Henry,” he said.
The youth stopped and stared strangely. He finally spoke: “Oh, 

Jim—oh, Jim—oh, Jim—”

The tall soldier held out his bloody hand. There was a strange 

black and red combination of old and new blood upon it. “Where have 
you been, Henry?” he asked. He continued in a dull voice, “I thought 
maybe you got killed. Today has been a bad one. I was worrying about it.

The youth still cried sadly, “Oh, Jim—oh, Jim—oh, Jim—”
“You know,” said the tall soldier, “I was out there.” He made a 

careful movement. “And Lord, what a show. And I got shot—I got 
shot. Yes, I got shot.” He repeated this fact in a surprised way, as if he 
did not know how it happened.

The youth put forth anxious arms to help him, but the tall sol­

dier went firmly on as if moved by another force. Since the youth’s 
arrival as a support for his friend, the other wounded men had ceased 
to display much interest. They occupied themselves again in dragging 
their own sorrows along.

Suddenly, as the two friends walked, the tall soldier seemed to be 

overcome by a terror. His face turned ashen. He grasped the youth’s 
arm and looked all about him, as if fearing he would be heard by the 
others. Then he began to speak in a shaking whisper:

“I’ll tell you what I’m afraid of, Henry—I’ll tell you what I’m 

afraid of. I’m afraid I’ll fall down—and then you know—those heavy 
wagons—they will run over me. That’s what I’m afraid of—”

The youth cried out to him excitedly, “I’ll take care of you, Jim! 

I’ll take care of you! I promise to God I will!”

“Will you, Henry?” the tall soldier begged.
“Yes—yes—I tell you—I’ll take care of you, Jim!” spoke the youth. 

He could not speak correctly because his heart seemed to be filling his 
throat.

But the tall soldier continued to beg in a lowly way. He now hung 

to the youth’s arm like a child. His eyes rolled in the wildness of his 
terror. “I was always a good friend to you, wasn’t I, Henry? I’ve always 
been a good fellow, haven’t I? And it isn’t much to ask, is it? Just to 
pull me out of the road? I’d do it for you, wouldn’t I, Henry?”

He paused in pitiful fear to await his friend’s reply.
The youth had reached a state of sorrow where his tears burned 

him. He tried to express the depth of his feeling, but he could only make 
strange motions.

However, the tall soldier seemed suddenly to forget all those fears. 

He became again the determined and awful sight he had been. He  
went forward. The youth wanted his friend to lean upon him, but the 
other always shook his head and strangely protested. “No—no—no—
leave me alone—leave me alone—”

His look stared again upon the unknown. He moved with 

un knowable purpose, and all of the youth’s offers he brushed aside. 
“No—no—leave me alone—leave me alone—”

The youth had to follow.
After a while he heard a voice talking softly near his shoulder. 

Turning, he saw that it belonged to the tattered soldier. “You ought to  
take him out of the road, son. There’s a regiment coming down the  
road fast, and he’ll get run over. He’s not going to live more than about 
five minutes—you can see that. You ought to take him out of the road. 
Where does he get his strength from?”

“Lord knows,” cried the youth. He was shaking his hands  

helplessly.

He ran forward then and grasped the tall soldier by the arm. “Jim. 

Jim!” he begged, “come with me.”

The tall soldier weakly tried to pull himself free. “Huh,” he said, 

emptily. He stared at the youth for a moment. At last he spoke as if with 
a shadow of understanding. “Oh! Into the fields? Oh!”

He stared blindly through the grass.
The youth turned once to look at the riders and guns of the regi­

ment. He was pulled from this view by a sharp cry from the tattered 
man.

“God! He’s running.”
Turning his head quickly, the youth saw his friend running and 

falling toward some little bushes. The boy’s heart seemed to tear itself 
free from his body at this sight. He made a noise of pain. He and the 
tattered man began to follow.

When he came to the tall soldier he began to beg with all the 

words he could find. “Jim—Jim—what are you doing—what makes  
you do this—you’ll hurt yourself.”

The same purpose was in the tall soldier’s face. He protested in 

a dulled way, keeping his eyes on the unknown place of his determi­
nation. “No—no—don’t touch me—leave me alone—leave me 
alone—”

The youth, shocked and filled with wonder at the tall soldier, 

began fearfully to question him. “Where are you going, Jim? What are 
you thinking about? Where are you going? Tell me, won’t you, Jim?”

The tall soldier turned around. In his eyes there was a great 

appeal. “Leave me, can’t you? Leave me alone for a minute.”

The youth drew back. “Why, Jim,” he said, in a blind way, “what’s 

the matter with you?”

The tall soldier turned and struggling dangerously, went forward. 

The youth and the tattered soldier followed, as fearful as if they had 
been whipped, feeling unable to face the wounded man if he should 
again turn on them. They began to have thoughts of a holy affair. There  
was something in these movements of the dying soldier like a mad reli­
gion. They were afraid. They held back as if he might use, if he wished 
it, an awful power.

At last, they saw him stop and stand motionless. Hurrying to him, 

they saw that his face wore an expression telling that he had at last  
found the place for which he had struggled. His thin figure was straight; 
his bloody hands were quietly at his side. He was waiting with patience 
for something that he had come to meet. He was at the place. They 
paused and stood, expectant.

There was a silence.
Finally, the chest of the dying soldier began to lift with a strained 

motion. It increased in force until it was as if an animal were within and  
kicking fiercely to be free.

This sight of gradual death made the youth breathless. And once, 

as his friend rolled his eyes, the boy saw something in them that made 
him sink crying to the ground. He raised his voice in a last call.

“Jim—Jim—Jim— “

The tall soldier opened his lips and spoke. He made a motion. 

“Leave me—don’t touch me—leave me—”

There was another silence while he waited.
Suddenly his form stiffened and straightened. Then it shook 

strangely. He stared into space. To the two watchers there was a strange  
and vast dignity in the firm lines of his awful face.

He was attacked by a gradual strangeness that slowly filled him.  

For a moment the shaking of his legs caused him to dance a sort of awful 
dance. His arms beat wildly about his head in an expression of devilish 
delight.

His tall figure stretched itself to its full height. There was a slight 

tearing sound. Then he began to fall forward, slow and straight, in the 
manner of a falling tree. The left shoulder struck the ground first.

“God!” said the tattered soldier.
The youth had watched, unable to move. His face had expressed 

every suffering he had imagined for his friend.

He now jumped to his feet and, going closer, gazed upon the gray 

face. The mouth was open and the teeth showed in a laugh.

As the blue jacket fell away from the body, he could see that the 

man’s side looked as if it had been eaten away by a wolf.

The youth turned, with sudden burning anger toward the battle­

field. He seemed about to deliver a speech.

“Hell—”
The red sun shone in the sky.

Chapter 10

THE TATTERED MAN STOOD THINKING.

“Well, he had a lot of spirit, didn’t he?” he said finally in a small, 

surprised voice. “A lot of spirit.” He thoughtfully moved one of the life­
less hands with his foot. “I wonder where he got his strength from. I  
never saw a man do anything like that before. It was a strange thing.  
Well, he had a lot of spirit.”

The youth wanted to scream out his grief, but his tongue lay dead 

in his mouth. He threw himself again upon the ground in sorrow.

The tattered man stood thinking.
“Look here,” he said, after a time. He gazed at the body as he spoke. 

“He’s gone, isn’t he, and we might as well begin to think about our­
selves. This is all over. He’s gone, isn’t he? And he’s safe here. Nobody 
will touch him. And I must say I’m not enjoying any great health myself 
these days.”

The youth, awakened by the tattered soldier’s tone of voice, looked 

up quickly. He saw that the man was standing unsteadily on his legs and 
that his face had become a kind of blue.

“Good Lord!” the youth cried, “you’re not going to—not you, 

too?”

The tattered man waved his hand. “Not die,” he said. “All I want 

is some soup and a good bed. Some soup,” he repeated dreamily.

The youth arose from the ground. “I wonder where he came from. 

I left him over there.” He pointed. “And now I find him here. And he 
was coming from over there, too.” He indicated a new direction. They 
both turned toward the body as if to ask it a question.

“Well,” the tattered man spoke at last, “there isn’t any use in our 

staying here and trying to ask him anything.”

The youth nodded an agreement. They both turned to gaze for a 

moment at the body.

The youth murmured something.
“Well, he was quite a fellow, wasn’t he?” said the tattered man as 

if in answer.

They turned their backs and started to walk away.
“I’m beginning to feel very bad,” said the tattered man, suddenly 

breaking one of his little silences. “I’m beginning to feel very bad.”

The youth said, “Oh Lord!” He wondered if he were to be the suf­

fering witness of another death.

But his companion waved his hand reassuringly. “Oh, I’m not  

going to die yet! There’s too much depending on me for me to die yet. 
No, sir! Not die! I can’t! You ought to see the children I’ve got at home.”

The youth glanced at his companion and could see by the shad ow 

of a smile that he was making some kind of fun.

As they walked heavily along, the man continued to talk. “Besides, 

if I died, I wouldn’t die the way that fellow did. That was the strangest 
thing. I’d just lie down, I would. I never saw a fellow die the way that 
fellow did.”

The tattered soldier continued. “Tom Jamison lives next to my 

house at home. He’s a nice fellow, he is, and we were always good friends. 
He’s clever, too. Well, when we were fighting this afternoon, all of a 
sudden he began to curse and scream at me. ‘You’re shot!’ he screamed.

“I put my hand to my head and when I looked at my fingers, I saw, 

sure enough, I was shot. I gave a shout and began to run, but before I 
could get away another one hit me in the arm and turned me all the 
way around. They were all shooting behind me and I ran. I think I’d 
be fighting still, if Tom Jamison hadn’t told me I was shot.”

Then he made a calm announcement. “I don’t believe I can walk 

much farther.”

They went slowly along in silence. “You look quite bad yourself,” 

said the tattered man at last. “I think you’ve got a worse wound than 
you think. You ought to take care of your hurt. Where is it located?” 

But he continued talking without waiting for a reply.

“I saw a fellow get hit in the head once,” the tattered soldier said. 

“And everybody shouted out to him, ‘Hurt, John? Are you hurt much?’ 
‘No,’ he said. He looked surprised, and he kept telling them how he 
felt. He said he didn’t feel anything. But, by God, the next thing that 
fellow knew, he was dead. Yes, he was dead—stone dead. So, you want 
to be careful. You might have some queer kind of hurt yourself. You 
can’t ever tell. Where is yours located?”

The youth had been uncomfortable since the beginning of the  

subject. He now gave a cry of impatience and made an angry motion  
with his hand. “Oh, don’t talk to me!” he said. He was angered at the 
tattered man, and could have killed him. His companions seemed always 
to play unbearable parts. They were ever upraising the shadow of shame 
on the stick of their curiosity. He turned toward the tattered man.  
“Now, don’t talk to me,” he repeated with a despairing threat.

“Well, Lord knows I don’t want to worry anybody,” said the other. 

There was a little tone of despair in his voice, too, as he replied, “Lord 
knows I’ve got enough problems of my own to think of.”

The youth, who had been having a bitter argument with himself, 

here spoke in a hard voice. “Goodbye,” he said.

The tattered man looked at him with complete surprise. “Why, 

friend, where are you going?” he asked unsteadily. The youth, looking at 
him, could see that he, too, like the other one, was beginning to act dull 
and animal­like. His thoughts seemed to be jumping about in his head.

The other was speaking in a trembling voice. “Now—now—look 

here, you Tom Jamison—now—I won’t allow this—this isn’t right. 
Where—where are you going?”

The youth pointed distantly. “Over there,” he replied.
“Well, now, look here,” said the tattered man, talking in a crazy 

way. His head was hanging forward and his words were pushed togeth­
er. “This isn’t right, now, Tom Jamison. This isn’t right. It’s not right— 
for you—to go away with a bad hurt. It’s not—not—right—it’s not.”

In reply, the youth climbed a fence and started away. He could 

hear the man begging.

Once he turned angrily, “What?”
“Look—here, now, Jamison—now—it’s not—”
The youth kept going. Turning at a distance, he saw the tattered 

man wandering about helplessly in the field.

He now thought that he wished he were dead. He believed that he  

wished to be one of those men whose bodies lay spread over the grass 
of the fields and among the trees of the forest.

The simple questions of the tattered man had been like knives 

cutting into him. They showed a society that digs pitilessly at secrets 
until all is apparent. His companion’s steady questions made him feel 
that he could not keep his crime hidden in his heart. It was sure to be 
uncovered by one of those who are always finding those things which 
are meant to be forever hidden. He admitted that he could not defend 
himself against this. It was not within his power.

Chapter 11

HE CLIMBED A LITTLE HILL, HE SAW THAT THE ROAD WAS NOW A 
crying mass of wagons, horses and men. Fear was pushing it all along. 
The youth felt a bit comforted by this sight. They were all moving 
back. Perhaps, then, he was not so bad after all. He seated himself and 
watched the terror­filled wagons. They were running away like soft, 
heavy animals.

Soon a forward­going column of marching soldiers appeared in  

the road. It came quickly. The commands to get out its way had the 
sound of great importance in them. The men were going forward to the 
heart of the noise. They were to meet the eager rush of the enemy. They 
felt the pride of their onward movement when the rest of the army was 
trying to escape down this road. They pushed aside wagons with an atti­
tude that nothing mattered as long as their column got to the battle in 
time. This importance made their faces serious. And the backs of the 
officers were very straight.

As the youth looked at them, the black weight of his worry 

re turned to him. He felt that he was regarding a line of finer beings. The  
separation between himself and them was as great to him as if they had 
marched with guns of flame and flags of sunlight. He could never be  
like them. He wanted to cry because he wanted so much to become  
better than he was.

Also, varied ills had begun to cry out. In their presence he could 

not continue his desire to fly high on the wings of war. They made it 
almost impossible for him to imagine himself as a hero. He fell.

He discovered that he had an awful need for water. His face was 

so dry and dirty that he thought he could feel his skin break open. Each 

bone of his body hurt, and seemed to threaten to break with every move­
ment. His feet were like two sores. Also, his body was calling for food. 
It was more powerful than direct hunger. There was a dull, weight­like 
feeling in his stomach, and, when he tried to walk, his head seemed to 
swim. He could not see well. Small spots of green floated before his eyes.

While he had been experiencing many emotions, he had not been 

aware of his hurts. Now he was at last compelled to give attention to 
them, and his self­hate was increased. In despair, he declared that he 
was not like those others. He now admitted that it was impossible for 
him ever to become a hero. He was a fool. Those pictures of glory were 
pitiful things. He murmured from his heart and moved away.

A certain desire within him kept him in the area of the battle. He 

wanted to see, and to get news. He wished to know who was winning.

Again he thought that he wished he were dead. Thinking of the 

dead, he made himself feel very angry at some of the dead men, as if 
they were guilty for thus becoming lifeless. They might have been killed  
by lucky chances, he said, before they had had opportunities to run 
away, or before they had been really tested. But they would be praised 
for bravery. He cried out bitterly that they had stolen their crowns, and 
their robes of glory were false. However, he still said that it was a great 
pity that he was not as they were.

When he thought again that it was not possible for the army to be 

defeated, he tried to think of a fine tale which he could take back to his 
regiment. With it he could avoid the anger he expected to receive.

But it became impossible for him to invent a tale he felt he could 

trust. He thought of many, but put them out of his mind, one by one, 
as no good. He was quick to see the weak places in them all.

Also, he was much afraid that some unkind remark might strike 

him mentally low before he could tell his protecting tale.

He imagined the whole regiment saying: “Where’s Henry Fleming? 

He ran, didn’t he? That’s awful!” He thought of several persons who 
would be quite sure to give him no peace about it. They would doubt­
less question him and laugh at his slow hesitation. In the next battle 
they would watch him to see when he would run.

Wherever he would go, angry and cruel stares would follow him. 

As he imagined himself passing near a crowd of companions, someone 
would say, “There he goes!”

Then, as if the heads were moved by one muscle, all the faces 

would turn toward him with wide, knowing smiles. He seemed to hear 
someone make a joke in a low voice. At it, all the others would laugh 
and laugh.

THE COLUMN OF SOLDIERS THAT HAD RACED ALONG THE ROAD WERE 
hardly out of the youth’s sight before he saw dark groups of men come 
rushing out of the forest and down through the fields. They were burst­
ing from their coats, throwing away their things. They came upon him 
like frightened cattle.

The youth was filled with terror. He stared in pain and wonder. 

The fight was lost. The army was going to be eaten. War, the red  
animal—war, the blood­drinking god—would have what it wanted.

Within him something wanted to cry out. He had the desire to 

make a speech, to shout, but he could only get his tongue to call into 
the air: “Why—why—what—what’s the matter?”

Soon he was in the middle of the mob. They were leaping and  

running all about him. Their pale faces shone in the weakening sun­
light. They seemed, most of them, to be very big men. The youth turned 
from one to another of them as they came along. His senseless questions 
were not heard. The men gave no attention to his appeals. They did not 
seem to see him.

The youth, after rushing about and asking questions, finally caught  

a man by the arm. They swung around face to face.

“Why—why—” started the youth, struggling with his tongue.
The man screamed, “Let me go! Let me go!” His face was ashy 

pale and his eyes were rolling uncontrolled. He was breathing with dif­
ficulty. He still grasped his rifle, perhaps having forgotten to let go of 
it. He pulled away, and the youth was dragged several paces.

“Let me go! Let me go!”
“Why—why—” repeated the youth.

“No!” shouted the man. In his mad anger he fiercely swung his 

rifle. It crushed upon the youth’s head; The man ran away.

The youth’s fingers had turned to water upon the other’s arm. The 

energy was struck from his muscles. He saw flaming wings of lightning 
flash before his eyes; There was a vast roar of thunder within his head.

Suddenly his legs seemed to die. He sank to the ground. He tried 

to get up. In his efforts against the pain he was like a man fighting with 
a creature made of air. There was a cruel struggle. 

At last, with a forceful movement, he got upon his hands and  

knees, and from there, like  a baby trying to walk, to his feet. Pressing his 
hands to his head, he went, struggling to stay straight, over the grass. He 
went like the tall soldier.

Once he put his hand to the top of his head and carefully touched 

the wound. The sudden pain made him draw a long breath through his 
teeth. His fingers were covered with blood. He regarded them with a 
glassy stare.

He hurried on. The day had turned to darkness and he could 

hardly see where to put his feet.

His wound now pained him very little. He was afraid to move 

rapidly, however, for fear of hurting it. He held his head very still and 
took great care not to fall. He was filled with worry and fear that any 
sudden mistake of his feet in the dark would bring more pain.

His thoughts, as he walked, were completely upon his hurt. There 

was a cool, liquid feeling about it and he imagined blood moving slowly 
down under his hair. His head seemed to be swelling to a size that  
made him think his neck would be too small.

He began to think about things of the past. He thought of cer­

tain meals his mother had cooked at home, in which foods he partic­
ularly liked had been served. He saw the loaded table. The pine walls 
of the kitchen glowed in the warm light from the stove. Also, he remem­
bered how he and his friends would go from the schoolhouse to a shad­
ed pool. He saw his clothes thrown upon the grass. He felt the waves 
of the water upon his body. The branches of the overhanging trees 
softly sang in the wind of youthful summer.

Then he was overcome by a dragging weakness. His head hung 

forward and his shoulders were bent as if he were carrying a great bur­
den. His feet slowly dragged along the ground.

He argued with himself about whether he should lie down and 

sleep or force himself to keep going.

At last he heard a cheerful voice near his shoulder: “You seem to 

be in a bad way, boy!”

The youth did not look up, but he agreed with thick tongue. “Uh!”
The owner of the cheerful voice took him firmly by the arm.  

“Well,” he said, with a gay laugh, “I’m going your way. The whole crowd 
is going your way. And I guess I can help you a bit.” They began to walk 
along like a drunken man and his friend.

As they went along, the man questioned the youth and helped 

him with replies, like one managing the mind of a child. Sometimes he 
told stories.

“What regiment do you belong to? What’s that? The 304th? I 

thought they weren’t fighting today— Oh, they were? Well, almost 
everybody got their share of fighting today. I thought I was dead any 
number of times. There was shooting here and shooting there and 
shouting here and shouting there, in the darkness, until I couldn’t tell 
which army I was with. It was the most mixed­up thing I ever saw, in 
these forests. It will be a wonder if we find our regiments. There they 
go with an officer, I guess. Look at his head dragging. He’s had all the 
war he wants, I imagine. I hope we can find our regiments tonight. It’s 
not going to be easy. But I guess we can do it.”

In the search that followed, the man with the cheerful voice 

seemed to possess a magic way of doing things. He came through the 
forest with strange luck.

The forest seemed filled with men running about in circles, but 

the cheerful man led the youth without mistake until at last he began to  
laugh with joy and self­satisfaction. “Oh, there you are! See that fire?”

The youth nodded.
“Well, that’s where your regiment is. And now, goodbye. Good 

luck to you.”

and then the boy heard a cheerful whistling as the man walked away. 
As he who had been so kind to him was thus passing out of his life, the 
youth suddenly realized that he had not once seen his face.

THE YOUTH WENT SLOWLY TOWARD THE FIRE INDICATED BY HIS 
departed friend. As he went, he thought of the welcome his former com­
panions would give him. He was sure they would laugh at him. He had 
no strength to invent a tale; it would be an easy victory for them.

He wanted to go into the darkness and hide, but his ills forced him 

to seek the place of food and rest, at whatever cost.

He swung unsteadily toward the fire. He could see the forms of 

men making black shadows in the red light. As he went nearer he saw 
that the ground was covered with sleeping men.

Suddenly he met a black figure, aiming a rifle. “Stop there!” He  

was surprised for a moment, but he thought that he recognized the 
voice—nervous now—of the loud soldier. As he stood trembling before 
the rifle, he called out: “Hello, Wilson, you—you here?”

The rifle was lowered to a careful position, and the soldier came 

slowly forward. He looked into the youth’s face. “Is that you, Henry?”

“Yes, it’s—it’s me.”
“Well, well, old boy,” said the other, “well, I’m glad to see you! I 

thought you were dead.” There was real emotion in his voice.

The youth found that now he could hardly stand upon his feet. 

There was a sudden sinking of his strength. He felt he must hurry with 
his tale to protect himself. So, before the soldier said anything more, 
he began:

“Yes, yes. I’ve—I’ve had an awful time. I’ve been all over. Far over  

on the right. Awful fighting over there. I had a frightful time. I got sep­
arated from the regiment. Over on the right, I got shot. In the head. I  
never saw such fighting. Awful time. I don’t see how I got separated  

from the regiment. I got shot, too.”

His friend had stepped forward quickly. “What? Got shot? Why 

didn’t you say so first? Poor fellow, we must—wait a minute—I’ll call 
Simpson.”

At that moment another soldier appeared. “Who are you talking 

to, Wilson?” he demanded. His voice was angry. “Who are you talking 
to?—Oh, hello, Henry, are you here? Well, I thought you were dead 
four hours ago! Great heavens, they keep coming in every ten minutes! 
We thought we’d lost forty­two men, but if they keep coming this way, 
we’ll have the whole regiment back by morning. Where were you?”

“Over on the right. I got separated—” began the youth.
But his friend had interrupted. “Yes, and he got shot in the head, 

and we must help him right away.”

He rested his rifle on his left arm and put his right around the 

youth’s shoulder.

“It must hurt bad!” he said.
The youth leaned heavily upon his friend. “Yes, it hurts—hurts a 

lot,” he replied. There was a shaking in his voice.

“Oh,” said the second soldier. He put his arm around the youth 

and led him forward. “Come on, Henry. I’ll take care of you.”

As they went together, Wilson called out after them: “Put him to 

sleep in my blanket, Simpson. And—wait—here’s my canteen. It’s full 
of coffee. Look at his head by the fire and see how it is. Maybe it’s a 
bad wound. When someone else comes to take guard duty, I’ll be over 
to see him.”

The youth’s senses were so deadened that his friend’s voice sound­

ed from afar and he could hardly feel the support of Simpson’s arm. His  
head was hanging forward upon his breast. His knees shook.

Simpson led him to the light of the fire. “Now, Henry,” he said, 

“let’s have a look at your head.”

The youth obeyed and sat down, and the other, laying aside his 

rifle, began to look into the bushy hair of his companion. He had to 
turn the youth’s head so that the full glow of the fire light, would shine 
on it. He whistled through his teeth when his fingers found the blood 

and the unusual wound.

“Ah, here we are!” he said. He anxiously searched further. “Just as 

I thought,” he added after a while. “You’ve been brushed by a bullet. 
It’s raised a queer swelling, as if some fellow had hit you on the head 
with a club. The blood stopped flowing a long time ago. The worst 
about it is that in the morning you’ll feel as if the world’s biggest hat 
wouldn’t fit you. And you may get a lot of other sicknesses, too, by 
morning. Still, I don’t think so. It’s just a bad hit on the head and 
nothing more. Now, you just sit here and don’t move. I’ll send Wilson 
to take care of you.”

Simpson went away. The youth remained on the ground. He 

stared with an empty look into the fire.

Within the glow of red and orange light from the burning sticks 

were other soldiers, breathing heavily, or lying deathlike in sleep. A 
few pairs of legs were spread out, stiff and straight. The shoes displayed 
the mud or dust of marches.

The youth sat in a sorrowful position until his friend, Wilson, 

came, carrying two canteens. “Well, now, Henry, we’ll have you fixed 
in just about a minute.”

He had the busy manner of a new nurse. He moved around the 

fire and stirred the sticks. He made his patient drink from the canteen 
that contained the coffee. It was to the youth a delightful drink. He 
put his head far back and held the canteen long to his lips. The cool 
liquid went smoothly down his hot throat. Having finished, he sighed 
with comfortable delight.

Wilson watched his companion with a look of satisfaction. He 

later produced a huge handkerchief from his pocket. He folded it and 
poured water from the other canteen onto it. This he bound over the 
youth’s head, tying the ends in a queer arrangement at the back of the 
neck.

“There,” he said, moving off and studying his deed, “you look like 

the devil, but I guess you feel better. “

The youth looked at his friend with grateful eyes. Upon his pain­

ing and swelling head the cold cloth was like a tender woman’s hand.

“You don’t scream or say anything,” remarked his friend admir­

ingly. “You’re a good one, Henry. Most men would have been in the 
hospital long ago. A shot in the head is no joking matter.”

The youth made no reply, but began to play with the buttons of 

his jacket.

“Well, come now,” continued his friend, “come now. I must put 

you to bed and see that you get a good night’s rest.”

The other stood up carefully, and the young soldier led him among 

the sleeping forms lying in groups and rows. Finally Wilson bent and 
picked up his blankets. He spread the rubber one upon the ground and 
placed the woolen one about the youth’s shoulders.

“There now,” he said, “lie down and get some sleep.”
The youth, obeying quietly, got carefully down. He stretched out 

with a murmur of relief and comfort. The ground felt like the softest 
bed.

But suddenly he said, “Wait a minute. Where are you going to 

sleep?”

His friend waved his hand impatiently. “Right down there next 

to you.”

“Well, but wait—” continued the youth. “What are you going to 

sleep on? I’ve got your—”

The young soldier answered: “Be quiet and go to sleep. Don’t be 

making a fool of yourself,” he said firmly.

After this the youth said no more. A wonderful sleepiness had 

spread through him. The warm comfort of the blanket surrounded him. 
His head fell forward and his arm and his eyes slowly closed. Hearing 
guns from the distance, he wondered—not really caring—if those men 
sometimes slept. He gave a long sigh, curled into his blanket, and in a 
moment was like his companions.

WHEN THE YOUTH AWOKE IT SEEMED TO HIM THAT HE HAD BEEN 
asleep for a thousand years. He felt sure that he opened his eyes upon 
an unexpected world. A splendid dawn could be seen in the eastern 
sky. The night air had made his face cold, and immediately upon awak­
ening he moved further down into his blankets. He stared for a while 
at the branches overhead, moving in the wind of the day.

The distance was filled with the noise of fighting. There was in 

the sound an expression of a deadly continuance, as if it had not begun 
and was not to cease.

About him were the groups of men that he had seen in the shad­

ows the night before. They were getting a last bit of sleep before the 
awakening.

He heard then the noise of wood burning in the cold air, and 

turning his head, he saw his friend busy about a small fire. A few other 
figures were moving, and he heard the hard sound of ax blows.

Suddenly there was a hollow noise of drums. A distant horn sang 

faintly. Similar sounds, varying in strength, came from near and far 
over the front. The horns called to each other.

The groups of men in the forest moved. There was a general 

up lifting of heads. A murmuring of voices filled the air.

The youth sat up. He rubbed his eyes, and then putting up his 

hand felt carefully of the cloth over his wound. His friend, seeing him 
awake, came from the fire. “Well, Henry, old man, how do you feel this 
morning?” he demanded.

The youth sighed again. In truth, his head felt like a big ball, and 

there was an unpleasant feeling in his stomach.

“I feel pretty bad,” he said.
“Sorry!” exclaimed the other. “I hoped you’d feel all right this 

morning. Let’s see the handkerchief—I guess it’s slipped.” He began to 
look at the wound in rather a rough way until the youth spoke sharply.

“Why can’t you be more easy?” he said angrily. “I’d rather have 

you stand back and throw guns at it. Now go slow, and don’t act as if 
you were nailing down rugs.”

His friend answered softly, “Well, well, come now, and get some 

food. Then, maybe, you’ll feel better.”

At the fireside, the young soldier took care of his friend’s needs 

with tenderness and care. He sat down and watched, with pleasure, the 
youth’s eager mouthfuls.

The youth noticed a remarkable change in his friend since those 

earlier days of camp life. Wilson no longer seemed to be continually 
regarding the greatness of his virtues. He was not angry at small words 
that cut into his self­satisfaction and pride. He was no more a loud 
young soldier. There was about him now a fine inner strength. He 
showed a quiet belief in his purposes and his qualities. And this inner 
sureness apparently enabled him to give no attention to little words of 
other men aimed at him.

The youth thought. He had always regarded his companion as a  

loud child, with a careless daring grown from his inexperience; thought­
less, demanding, and filled with a false courage. The youth wondered 
where those new eyes had been born; when his companion had made 
the great discovery that there were many men who would refuse to be 
commanded by him. Apparently, the other had now climbed a moun­
tain of wisdom, from which he could see himself as a very tiny thing. 
And the youth saw that ever after it would be easier to live with his 
friend as a neighbor.

His companion balanced his coffee­cup on his knee. “Well, 

Henry,” he said, “what do you think our chances are? Do you think 
we’ll beat them?”

The youth considered for a moment. “Day before yesterday,” he 

finally replied, with daring, “you would have said you could beat the 

whole rebel army by yourself.”

His friend looked surprised. “Would I?” he asked. He thought. 

“Well, perhaps I would,” he decided at last. He stared humbly at the 
fire.

The youth was quite shocked at this unusual reply to his remarks. 

“Oh, no, you wouldn’t really,” he said quickly trying to undo what he 
had done.

But the other made a small motion. “Oh, never mind Henry,” he 

said. “I believe I was quite a fool in those days.” He spoke as though 
many years had passed.

There was a little pause.
“All the officers say we’re going to win,” said Wilson. “They seem 

to think we’ve got the rebels just where we want them.”

“I don’t know about that,” the youth replied. “What I saw over 

on the right makes me think it was the opposite. From where I was, it 
looked as if we were getting a good beating yesterday.”

“Do you think so?” inquired the friend. “I thought we were beat­

ing them yesterday.”

“Not a bit!” said the youth. “Man, you didn’t see any thing of the 

fight!” Then a sudden thought came to him. “Jim Conklin is dead.”

His friend was shocked. “What? Is he? Jim Conklin!”
The youth spoke slowly. “Yes. He’s dead. Shot in the side.”
“Really! Jim Conklin—poor fellow!”
There was another little pause.
“The regiment lost over half its men yesterday,” remarked the 

friend finally. “I thought they were all dead but they kept coming back 
last night until it seems that we lost only a few. They were scattered all 
over, wandering around in the forest, fighting in other regiments—just 
like you did.”

“Oh,” said the youth.

Chapter 15

guns were always to be heard, filling the air with a thun­
dering sound. This part of the world was strange and never without 
battle.

The youth’s regiment marched again. The men took positions 

behind a curving line of rifles along the edge of the forest. Before them 
was a flat place, filled with broken tree trunks. From the forest beyond 
came the dull noise of soldiers firing. From the right came the noise of  
a fast battle.

The men sat quietly, awaiting their turn. Many had their backs 

to the firing. The youth’s friend lay down, buried his face in his arms 
and, almost instantly, it seemed, he was in a deep sleep.

The youth leaned his breast against the brown earth and gazed 

over at the forest and up and down the line. Trees cut off his view. He 
could see only a short distance. A few idle flags were placed on the 
earthen hills. Behind them were rows of dark figures with a few heads 
looking curiously over the tops.

Always the noise of fighting came from the forest in front and to 

the left, and the battle on the right had grown to frightful size. The 
guns were roaring without an instant’s pause for breath.

Before the sun was bright, the regiment was moving carefully 

through the forest. The hurrying lines of the enemy could sometimes 
be seen through the trees and little fields. The enemy soldiers were 
shouting and happy.

At this sight the youth forgot personal matters and became great­

ly angered. He shouted in loud sentences. “We’re being led by a lot of 
fools, by God!”

“More than one fellow has said that today,” declared a man.
Wilson, recently awakened, was still very sleepy. He looked 

be hind him until his mind took in the meaning of the movement. Then  
he sighed. “Oh, well, I suppose we were beaten,” he remarked sadly.

“Well, don’t we fight like the devil? Don’t we do all that men 

can?” demanded the youth loudly.

In his reply, the friend’s voice was firm. “No man dares say we don’t  

fight like the devil. No man will ever dare say it. The boys fight like 
hell. But still—still, we don’t have any luck.”

“Well, then, if we fight like the devil and don’t ever win, it must 

be the general’s fault,” the youth said grandly and decidedly. “And I  
don’t see any sense in fighting and fighting and fighting, and yet 
always losing because of some old fool of a general.”

A man who was walking at the youth’s side then spoke slowly. 

“Maybe you think you fought the whole battle yesterday, Fleming,” he 
remarked.

The words cut the youth. Within he was reduced to nothing by 

this speech. His legs shook. He gave a frightened glance at the man.

“Well, no,” he hurried to say. “I don’t think I fought the whole 

battle yesterday.”

But the man seemed to have no deeper meaning. Apparently, he 

had no information. It was merely his habit to speak this way. “Oh,” he  
replied in the same tone.

The youth, nevertheless, felt a threat. His mind refused to go 

nearer to the danger, and thereafter he was silent. The man’s words 
took from him all thought of saying anything that would make him 
noticeable. He became suddenly a quiet person.

There was low­toned talk among the troops. The officers were 

impatient and angry, their faces clouded with the tales of bad luck. The  
troops, coming through the forest, were sad. In the youth’s regiment, 
once, a man’s laugh rang out. A dozen soldiers turned their faces quick ly 
toward him in blame.

In a clear space the troops were at last stopped. Regiments and 

brigades, broken by battle, grew together again and lines were faced 

toward the enemy.

“Good God,” the youth complained, “we’re always being led 

around like dogs! It makes me sick. Nobody seems to know where we 
go or why we go.”

At this time there was a flood of speech from the young lieu­

tenant, who felt obliged to place some of his own unhappiness upon his  
men. “You boys keep quiet! There is no need to waste your breath in 
long­winded arguments about this and that and the other. You’ve been 
screaming like a lot of old chickens—all you have to do is fight, and 
you’ll get plenty of that to do in about ten minutes. I never heard such 
foolish talking,” he said to them, turning his head for a final remark.

There was a wait. The strained moments that go before the battle 

passed slowly. In the regiment a strange kind of hesitation could be seen  
in the attitude of the men. They were tired and weak, having slept 
lit tle and labored much. They rolled their eyes toward the advancing 
battle as they stood waiting for the shock—waiting to be hit.

THIS ADVANCE OF THE ENEMY SEEMED TO THE YOUTH LIKE A CRUEL 
hunting. He began to express his anger. He beat his foot upon the 
ground, and looked with hate at the rising smoke that was approach­
ing like a flood. There was a maddening quality in this apparent deter­
mination of the enemy to give him no rest, to give him no time to sit 
down and think. Yesterday he had fought and run away. There had 
been many adventures. Today he felt that he had earned opportunity 
for rest and thought. He was sore and stiff from his experiences. He had  
had enough, and he wished to rest.

But the rebels seemed never to grow tired; they were fighting with 

their old speed. He had a wild hate for the enemy. Yesterday, when he  
had imagined the world to be against him, he had hated the world. 
Today he hated the army of the enemy with the same great hatred. He 
was not going to run all his life, like a cat hunted by dogs, he thought. 
It was not good to push men so hard.

He leaned and spoke into his friend’s ear. He threatened the for­

est with a movement of the hand. “If they keep coming after us, by 
God, they’d better be careful. We can’t sit here and let them do much 
more.”

The friend turned his head and made a calm reply. “If they keep 

coming after us, they’ll force us all into the river.”

The winds of battle had swept all around the regiment until 

one enemy rifle, instantly followed by others, flashed in the front. A 
moment later the regiment roared forth its sudden and brave answer.  
A thick wall of smoke settled slowly down. It was often cut by the 
knife­like fire from the rifles.

struggle into a dark hole. There was a feeling that he and his compan­
ions were always pushing back the attacks of fierce creatures who were 
slippery. Their gunfire seemed to have no effect upon the bodies of the 
enemy; the latter seemed to avoid them with ease, and come through, 
between, around and about them with unopposed skill.

He had taken a position behind a small tree, with a determina­

tion to hold it against the world. He had not thought it possible that 
his army could succeed that day, and thus he felt the strength to fight 
harder. But the group had moved in all ways, until he lost directions 
and locations, except that he knew where the enemy was.

The flames burned him, and the hot smoke baked his skin. His 

rifle grew so hot that ordinarily he could not have held it in his hand; 
but he kept firing it. When he shot at some changing form through the 
smoke, he made a fierce sound, as if he were delivering a blow with all 
his strength.

When the enemy seemed to move back, he went instantly for­

ward, like a dog who, seeing his enemy slowing, turns and insists upon 
being followed. And when he was compelled to move back again, he 
did it slowly, angrily, taking steps of despair.

Once, in his fierce hate, he was almost alone and kept firing when 

all those near him had ceased. He was so completely busy that he was 
not aware of a silence.

He was surprised by a rough laugh and a sentence that came to 

his ears. “You fool, don’t you know enough to stop when there isn’t any­
thing to shoot at?”

He turned then and looked at his companions. During this 

mo ment of silence they all seemed to be staring at him with surprise. 
Turning to the front again, he saw, under the lifted smoke, a deserted 
ground.

He was uncertain for a moment; then he understood.
He turned to his companions and fell upon the ground. His flesh 

seemed strangely on fire, and the sounds of the battle continued in his 
ears. He reached blindly for his canteen.

The lieutenant was shouting. He seemed drunk with fighting. He 

called out to the youth: “By heavens, if I had ten thousand wildcats like 
you, I could finish this war in less than a week!”

Some of the men murmured and looked at the youth in wonder. 

It was clear that as he had loaded and fired and cursed without stop­
ping; they had found time to watch him. And now they looked upon 
him as a war devil.

His friend came over to him. There was some fright in his voice. 

“Are you all right, Fleming? Do you feel all right? There isn’t anything 
the matter with you, Henry, is there?”

“No,” said the youth with difficulty. His throat seemed full and it  

was hard to talk.

These happenings made the youth think. He realized that he had 

been a beast. He saw that fighting like this had been fine, wild, and in 
some ways easy. He had been a magnificent sight, no doubt. By this  
struggle he had mastered fears which seemed to him like mountains. 
They had fallen like paper, and he was now what he called a hero. He 
had not been aware of the process. It was as if he had slept and, awak­
ening, found he was a nobleman.

were black from the burned gunpowder. Their breathing was loud and 
hard. And from these dirty faces, they looked at him.

“Good work! Good work!” said the lieutenant. He walked back 

and forth, restless and eager. Sometimes his voice could be heard in a 
wild, strange laugh.

When he had a particularly serious thought about the science of 

war, he always spoke to the youth.

There was a strange joy in the talk of the men. “I guess this army 

will never see another new regiment like us!”

“Lost a lot of men, the enemy did!”
“Yes, and in about an hour they’ll lose a lot more!”
The forest still carried its burden of noise. From under the trees 

came the rolling sound of the guns. A cloud of dark smoke went up 
toward the sun, now bright and gay in the blue sky.

Chapter 17

THE TIRED MEN RESTED FOR SOME MINUTES, BUT DURING THEIR PAUSE 
the struggle in the forest grew greater and greater until the ground 
seemed to shake from the rushing of other men. It seemed difficult to 
live in such a place. The chests of the men strained for fresh air, and 
their throats needed water.

The youth’s friend thought he remembered a stream nearby, and 

he was permitted to go for some water. Immediately canteens were given 
to him. “Fill mine, will you?” “Bring me some too.” “And me too.” He 
departed, heavily loaded. The youth went with his friend, feeling a 
desire to throw his heated body into the stream and drink and drink.

They made a hurried search for the water, but did not find it.  

“None here,” said the youth. They turned without delay and began to  
go back.

A moment later a general on horseback was directly in front of 

the two soldiers. Another officer, riding with the skill of a cowboy, 
moved his horse to a position directly in front of the general. The two 
unnoticed soldiers moved nearer to hear the conversation. Perhaps, 
they thought, some great things would be said.

The general, whom the boys recognized as their commander, 

looked at the officer and spoke coolly, without emotion. “The enemy  
is getting ready for another attack,” he said. “I fear they’ll break 
through there unless we manage to stop them.”

The other officer cursed his nervous horse and then spoke. “It will  

mean heavy losses,” he said shortly.

“I suppose so,” remarked the general. Then he began to talk rapid­

ly. The two young soldiers could hear nothing until finally he asked,  

“What troops can you use?”

The officer thought for an instant. “Well,” he said, “I had to order 

the 12th regiment to help the 76th and I haven’t really got any extra 
troops. But there’s the 304th. I don’t need them very much.”

The youth and his friend exchanged glances of surprise.
The general spoke sharply, “Get them ready then. I’ll watch devel­

opments from here, and send you word when to start. It’ll happen in 
five minutes.”

As the other officer started away, the general called after him in 

a serious voice. “I don’t believe many of them will get back.”

With frightened faces, the youth and his companion hurried back 

to the line.

These happenings had occupied an unbelievably short time, yet 

the youth felt they had made him old. New eyes were given to him. And  
the most surprising thing was to learn suddenly that he was very unim­
portant. The officer spoke of the regiment as if he spoke of a brush. 
Some part of the forest needed sweeping, perhaps, and he merely indi­
cated the brush in a tone properly uncaring about its fate. It was war, 
no doubt, but it appeared strange.

became angry. “Fleming—Wilson—how long does it take you to get  
water? Where have you been?” But he stopped when he saw their eyes.

“We’re going to attack—we’re going to attack!” cried the youth’s 

friend, hurrying with his news.

“Attack?” said the lieutenant. “Well! Now, this is real fighting!” 

Over his dirty face there went a proud smile. “Attack? Well, by God!”

A little group of soldiers surrounded the two youths. “Are we, real­

ly?” “Well!” “Attack?” “What for?” “What at?” “Wilson, you’re lying.”

His friend spoke. “No, he’s not—he’s not lying. We heard them 

talking.”

A moment later the officers began to hurry among the men, push­

ing them into a closer mass and into a better line. They were like men 
struggling with sheep.

They were surrounded by the noises of war. The world was inter­

ested in other matters. The regiment had this small affair to itself.

The youth, turning, gave a quick, inquiring glance at his friend. 

The latter returned to him the same kind of look. They were the 
only ones who possessed the information. “—heavy losses.” “—don’t 
believe many will get back.” An awful secret! But they saw no hesita­
tion in each other’s faces, and they nodded a silent agreement when a 
man near them said in a small voice, “We’ll get eaten.”

tHE YOUTH STARED AT THE LAND IN FRONT OF HIM. EVERY BUSH 
seemed to hide terror and power. He was not aware of the series of 
orders that started the attack, although from the comers of his eyes he  
saw an officer waving his hat. Suddenly he felt a straining among the 
men. The line went slowly forward like a falling wall, and with a sigh 
that was meant to be a cheer, the regiment began its journey. The 
youth was pushed for a moment before he understood the movement 
at all, but then he jumped ahead and began to run.

He looked at a distant group of trees where he had decided the 

enemy were to be met, and he ran toward it. He had believed the whole  
time that it was only a matter of finishing something unpleasant as 
quickly as possible, and he ran hard. His face clearly showed the strain. 
His eyes were held in an awful stare. And with his dirty clothes, the 
torn cloth with its spot of blood on his head, his wildly swinging rifle, 
he appeared to be a mad soldier.

As the regiment went from its position into a clear space, the for­

est in front awakened. Yellow flames leaped from many directions. The 
forest made a fierce sound.

The line moved straight for a moment. Then the right side start­

ed forward; it in turn was passed by the left. After this, the center came 
to the front until the regiment was like a moving wave of water. An 
instant later the opposition from bushes and trees burst upon the men 
and scattered them.

The youth, light­footed, was in front without realizing it. His 

eyes still watched the group of trees. From all places near it the shouts 
of the enemy could be heard. Little flames from rifles leaped out. The 

song of the bullets sounded in the air.

All around, men fell in pain. The regiment left an awful trail of 

bodies.

They had passed into a clearer place. The straining pace ate the 

energies of the men. As if by agreement, the leaders slowed their speed. 
Among some larger trees now, the men watched and waited for some 
of the distant smoke to move and show them the scene. Since much of 
their strength and their breath was gone, they returned to fear.

The youth thought that he had run miles, and that he was in some  

new and unknown land.

The men now had opportunity to see some of their friends drop­

ping with screams and shouts. A few lay near, silent or crying. And now,  
for an instant, the men stood, their rifles in their hands, and watched 
the regiment get smaller. They were in a state of shock. They stared 
blankly at the sight, and lowering their eyes, looked from face to face. 
It was a strange pause, and a strange silence.

Then, above the sounds of guns, arose the shouts of the lieutenant. 

He came suddenly forward, his young face filled with anger.

“Come on, you fools!” he screamed. “Come on! You can’t stay here. 

You must come on!” He said more, but much of it could not be under­
stood.

He started rapidly ahead, with his head turned toward the men.
“Come on!” he was shouting. The men stared at him with dull 

eyes. He was obliged to stop and come back. He stood then with his 
back to the enemy and shouted curses into the faces of the men. His 
body shook from the force of his voice.

The friend of the youth moved suddenly forward. Dropping to his 

knees, he fired an angry shot at the forest. This action awakened the 
men. They acted no more like sheep. They seemed to think suddenly 
of their rifles, and at once began firing. At the shouts of the officers 
they began to move forward. The men stopped every few steps to fire 
and load, and in this manner moved slowly from trees to trees.

They went painfully forward until they reached an open space. 

Here, behind trees, the men stopped, as if threatened by a giant wave.

youth by the arm. “Come on,” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all get killed 
if we stay here. We only have to go across that field. And then—” the 
remainder of his idea disappeared in curses.

The youth stretched forth his arm.
“Cross there?”
“Certainly. Just across the field! We can’t stay here,” screamed the 

lieutenant. He put his face close to the youth. “Come on!” It was as if  
he planned to drag the youth by the ear into the attack.

The youth felt a sudden unspeakable anger against his officer. He 

pulled away fiercely and shook him off.

“Come on yourself, then,” he shouted.
There was a bitter demand in his voice.
They ran together down the line of the regiment. The friend hur­

ried after them. In front of the flag the three men began to shout, 
“Come on! Come on!” They danced and leaped like madmen.

The others waited in doubt for a moment. And then, with a long 

cry, the reduced regiment moved forward and began its new journey.

Over the fields went the rushing mass. It was a handful of men 

thrown into the faces of the enemy. Toward it instantly would leap the 
yellow flames. Blue smoke hung before them.

The youth ran like a madman to reach the trees before a bullet 

could find him. He put his head low. Within him was born a love, a 
despairing love, for the flag which was near him. It was a creation of 
beauty, secure from harm. It was like a woman, red and white, hating 
and loving, that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no 
harm could come to it, he gave it power. He stayed near, as if it could 
be a saver of lives.

Then he was aware that the soldier carrying the flag jumped sud­

denly, as if struck by a bullet. He slowed, and then became motionless.

The youth leaped at the flag pole. At the same instant his friend 

came from the other side. They pulled at it. For a moment there was a 
fierce struggle—the dead man seemed to be fighting in awful ways for 
the possession of the flag.

as they turned again, the lifeless body fell forward with bowed head. 
One arm swung high, and the curved hand fell with heavy protest on 
the friend’s shoulder.

WHEN THE TWO YOUTHS TURNED WITH THE FLAG, THEY SAW THAT 
much of the regiment had moved back. It moved back slowly, with 
faces still toward the forest and rifles still replying to the fire. Several 
officers were giving orders with screaming voices.

“Where in hell are you going?” the lieutenant was shouting. And 

a red­haired officer was commanding, “Shoot into them! Shoot into 
them!” The men were trying to do opposite and hopeless things.

The youth and his friend had a small argument over the flag. 

“Give it to me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with the other’s  
possession of it, but each felt the need to declare, by an offer to carry the  
flag, his willingness to further risk himself. The youth roughly pushed 
his friend away.

The regiment fell back to the trees. There it stopped for a moment  

to fire at some dark forms that had begun to follow it. Then it marched 
again, curving among the trees. By the time it again reached the first  
open space, the men were receiving fast and merciless fire. There seemed  
to be enemy mobs all around them.

The youth went along with slipping, uncertain feet. With pride 

he kept the flag straight. He called to the others. To those he knew 
well he made special appeals, begging them by name. Between himself 
and the lieutenant there was felt fellowship and equality.

But the regiment was a broken machine. The two men shouted at  

a forceless thing. The soldiers who had heart to go slowly forward were  
continually shaken by a certainty that others were going back. Wounded 
men were left crying on this sorrowful journey.

There was smoke and flame always. The youth, looking once 

through a sudden clearing of smoke, saw a brown mass of troops. The 
youth walked straight ahead and, with his flag in his hands, took a  
stand, as if he expected an attempt to push him to the ground. He passed 
over his forehead a hand that trembled. His breath did not come freely.

The officers labored hard to bring the men into a proper circle to  

face the enemy. The ground was uneven and torn. The men curled 
into hollows and fitted themselves behind whatever would turn away 
a bullet.

The youth noticed with surprise that the lieutenant was standing  

with his legs far apart and his sword touching the ground. The youth 
wondered what had happened to his voice, because he no longer 
cursed.

There was something strange in this little pause of the lieutenant. 

He was like a child who, having cried, raises its eyes and looks upon a  
distant toy.

The silent men were suddenly strengthened by the eager voice of 

the lieutenant screaming, “Here they come! Right on to us, by God!” 
His other words were lost in a wild roar of thunder from the men’s  
rifles.

The youth’s eyes had turned instantly in the direction indicated 

by the lieutenant, and he saw the soldiers of the enemy. They were so  
near that he could see their faces. Their uniforms were rather gay, being 
light gray with touches of bright color. And, their clothes seemed new.

These troops had apparently been going forward, their rifles held 

in readiness, when the lieutenant had discovered them. Their move­
ment had been interrupted by the shooting from the blue regiment. It 
seemed that they had been unaware of the closeness of their blue ene­
mies, or had mistaken the direction.

Almost instantly they were hidden from the youth’s sight by the 

smoke from the busy rifles of his companions. He strained his eyes to  
learn the results of the shooting, but the smoke hung before him. 
There appeared to be many of them, and they were replying quickly. 
They moved toward the blue regiment, step by step. He seated himself 
sadly on the ground, with his flag between his knees.

But soon the blows of the enemy began to grow weaker. Fewer 

bullets tore the air, and finally, when the men paused they could see 
only dark, floating smoke. The regiment lay still and watched. The 
smoke rolled away enough to show a lonely ground. It would have been 
an empty space except for a few bodies that lay in odd positions.

At the sight of this scene, many of the men in blue began to 

dance with joy. Their eyes burned, and a cheer of gladness broke from 
their dry lips.

It had seemed to them that events were trying to prove that they 

must lose. The other battles had tried to prove that the men could not 
fight well. Then this small battle showed them that their chances were 
not hopeless, and thus they had proven themselves.

Eagerness was theirs again. They looked about with pride, feeling 

new trust in the rifles in their hands. And they were men.

Chapter 20

sOON THEY KNEW THAT NO FIGHTING THREATENED THEM. ALL WAYS 
seemed once more opened to them. The dusty blue lines of their friends 
were seen a short distance away. Far away there were great noises, but 
in all this part of the field there was a sudden stillness.

They felt that they were free. The small group took a long breath 

of relief and gathered itself to complete its trip.

In this last length of journey, the men began to show strange emo­

tions. They hurried with nervous fear. Some who had been brave in  
fiercest moments now could not hide their anxious feelings. It was per­
haps that they did not wish to be killed in unimportant ways after the 
time for proper military deaths had passed. And so they hurried.

As they approached their own forces there were some rough 

re marks by another regiment that lay resting in the shade of trees.

“Where do you think you have been?”
“What are you coming back for?”
“Why didn’t you stay there?”
“Was it warm out there, sir?”
“Going home now, boys?”
“Oh, look at the soldiers!”
There was no reply from the hurt and shaken regiment. The 

youth’s tender emotions were deeply burned by these remarks. They 
turned when they arrived at their old position, to regard the ground 
over which they had rushed.

The youth was shocked. He discovered that the distances, com­

pared with the large measurings in his mind, were small indeed. The 
trees, where much had happened, seemed unbelievably near. The time, 

too, he realized, had been short. He wondered about the emotions and 
events that had been crowded into such little spaces. Tricks played by 
the thoughts of the moment must have enlarged everything, he felt.

It seemed then that there was some bitter justice in the speeches 

of the other regiment. He looked down upon his friends lying upon the 
ground, breathless with dust and heat. They were drinking from their 
canteens, fierce to get every drop of water.

However, to the youth there was considerable joy in thinking of 

his own performances during the attack. There had been very little time  
before in which to admire himself, so now there was much satisfaction 
in quietly thinking of his actions. He remembered things that in the 
battle had sunk unnoticed into his mind.

As the regiment lay catching its breath, the officer who had named 

them to make the attack came up on his horse. He stopped the animal 
with an angry pull near the colonel of the regiment. He immediately 
began blaming the colonel in strong words, which came clearly to the 
ears of the men.

“What an awful job you made of this thing, MacChesnay! Good 

Lord, man, you stopped about a hundred feet before a very fine success! 
If your men had gone another hundred feet you would have made a 
great attack, but as it is—what a lot of mud diggers you’ve got!”

The men, listening quietly, now turned their curious eyes upon 

the colonel. They had a real interest in this matter.

The colonel straightened himself, and put one hand forth in 

speech­making fashion. He wore a hurt look; it was as if a minister had 
been blamed for stealing. The men were excited.

But suddenly the colonel’s manner changed. He shook his head. 

“Oh, well, general, we went as far as we could,” he said calmly.

“As far as you could? Did you, by God?” said the general. “Well, 

that wasn’t very far, was it?” He looked with cold anger into the other’s 
eyes. “Not very far, I think.” He turned his horse and rode stiffly away.

The news that the regiment had been blamed went along the 

line. For a time the men were surprised by it. They stared at the disap­
pearing form of the general. They thought it must be a huge mistake.

In a short time, however, they began to believe that in truth their 

efforts had been unmeaningful. The youth could see this weigh heavi ly 
upon the entire regiment, until the men were like chained animals.

The youth developed a calm philosophy for these moments. “Oh, 

well,” he declared to his friends, “he probably didn’t see any of it, and 
got angry. He probably decided we were wrong just because we didn’t 
do what he wanted.”

Several men came hurrying to them. Their faces showed that they 

brought great news.

“Henry, you just should have heard!” cried one eagerly.
“You should have heard!” repeated another, and arranged himself 

to tell his story. The others formed an excited circle.

“Well, sir,” the storyteller proceeded, “the colonel met the lieu­

tenant, who was standing near us—it was the best thing I ever heard! 
The colonel said to the lieutenant, ‘Mr. Hasbrouck, who was that lad 
that carried the flag?’ There, Fleming, what do you think of that? The 
lieutenant said right away, ‘That’s Fleming, and he’s a good soldier!’ 
The colonel said, ‘He is, indeed, a very good man to have! He kept the  
flag right in front. I saw him. He’s a good one,’ said the colonel. ‘Yes, sir!’  
said the lieutenant, ‘he and a fellow named Wilson were at the front of  
the attack.’ ‘Well,’ said the colonel, ‘they deserve to be major­generals!’”

The youth and his friend endured the joking that followed with 

the greatest pleasure—they knew that their faces became a deep red 
from the emotions they felt. They exchanged a secret glance of joy and  
pride.

They quickly forgot many things. The past held no pictures of error  

and defeat. They were very happy, and their hearts filled with grateful 
warmth toward the colonel and the youthful lieutenant.

wHEN THE MASSES OF THE ENEMY AGAIN BEGAN TO COME FROM THE 
forest, the youth felt great self­confidence. He stood, tall and calm, 
watching the attack begin against a part of the line that made a blue 
curve along the side of a nearby hill. His view was not hidden by smoke, 
so he had opportunity to see parts of the hard fight.

A short distance away, he saw two regiments fighting a separate 

little battle with two other regiments. The battle had a set­apart look. 
The firing was unbelievably fierce and rapid. Apparently these busy 
regiments were occupied completely in this battle.

In another direction he saw a magnificent brigade marching with 

the intention of driving the enemy from a part of the forest. They passed  
from sight and soon there was a mighty noise in the forest. The brigade,  
after a little time, came marching out again, in no way divided.

The battle between the four regiments lasted for some time. Then 

the gray­colored regiments moved back, leaving the blue lines shout­
ing. The youth could see two flags shaking with laughter in the middle 
of the remaining smoke.

Finally there was a stillness, deep with meaning. The blue lines 

stared expectantly at the silent forests and fields before them.

The youth’s regiment came forth with a new fierceness when it 

was time again to fight. The men burst out in angry pain at the first 
scatter of bullets. They bent their heads in hatred behind their guns. 
Their eager arms unceasingly loaded the rifles. The front of the regi­
ment was a wall of smoke, broken by flashing points of yellow and red.

A strong section of the enemy line came within dangerous dis­

tance. They could be seen plainly—tall men with excited faces, run­

ning toward a fence.

At sight of this danger, the men suddenly ceased their talking. 

There was an instant of silence before they raised their rifles and fired.

But the enemy was quick to gain the protection of the fence. 

They slipped down behind it with remarkable ease, and from this posi­
tion they began carefully to shoot the blue men.

The youth was determined not to move, no matter what might 

happen.

Blue figures began to drop. Some fell down at the feet of their 

companions. Others, wounded, moved away; but many lay still, their 
bodies turned into impossible shapes.

The youth looked around for his friend. He saw him. The lieu­

tenant, also, was in his position in the rear. He had continued to curse, 
but with a voice rapidly growing weak.

The colonel came running along behind the line. There were 

other officers following him. “We must attack!” they shouted. “We must 
attack!” They had strained voices, as if expecting a refusal by the men.

The youth, upon hearing the shouts, began to study the distance 

between him and the enemy. He made a guess. He saw that to be firm 
soldiers they must go forward. It would be death to stay in the present 
place. Their hope was to push the enemy away from the fence.

He expected that his companions would have to be forced to make 

this attack. But as he turned toward them, he saw that they were giv­
ing quick and unquestioning expressions of approval. At the words of 
command, the soldiers began to push forward in eager leaps. There was 
new and unexpected force in the movement of the regiment. It was a 
blind and despairing rush by the men in dusty blue, over grass and under 
a bright sky, toward a fence. From behind it spoke the fierce guns of the 
enemy.

tHE YOUTH KEPT THE BRIGHT FLAG IN THE FRONT. HE WAS WAVING HIS 
free arm in fast circles, screaming appeals, urging forward those who 
did not need to be urged. It seemed that the mob of blue men throw­
ing themselves on this dangerous group of rifles was again suddenly 
wild with a spirit of selflessness. It looked as if the mob would merely 
succeed in becoming a great spread of dead men on the grass in front 
of the fence. But they were in a state of madness.

The youth thought of the bullets only as things that could prevent 

him from reaching the fence. There were quiet flashings of joy within 
him that he had such thoughts.

He put forth all his strength. His eyesight was shaken by the effort 

of thought and muscle. He did not see anything except the smoke and 
the fire, but he knew that in it lay the old fence of an absent farmer—
the fence protecting the hidden figures of the gray men.

As the smoke rolled away, it revealed men who ran, their bodies 

turned to send back bullets at the blue line.

But behind one part of the fence there was a determined group 

that made no movement. They were settled down firmly. A flag waved 
over them and their rifles continued to fire.

The youth centered his eyes upon that other flag. Its possession 

would give great pride. He jumped crazily at it. He was determined that 
it should not escape if wild grasps could seize it. His own flag was point­
ing toward the other.

The blue men came to a sudden stop and fired their guns rapidly. 

The group in gray was broken by this fire, but it still fought. The men 
in blue rushed upon it.

Among the gray was the flag bearer, who had been badly hurt by 

the last rain of bullets. Over his face was the look of death, but upon 
it were the hard lines of determined purpose. He held his precious flag 
close to him and was struggling to go the way that led to safety for it.

The youth’s friend went over the fence in a single leap and made 

a jump at the flag. Pulling it free, he lifted up its red colors with a mad 
cry of victory, just as the flag bearer turned his dead face to the ground.

There was some long grass. The youth rested in it, making the 

fence support his flag. His friend, full of joy and glory, holding his trea­
sure with pride, came to him there. They sat, side by side, and praised 
each other.

Finally the youth arose. “Well, what now, I wonder?” he said.
His friend also rose and stared. “I think we’re going to go back 

across the river,” he said.

They waited, watching. Within a little while, the regiment 

re ceived orders to go back the way it had come. The men got up from 
the soft grass.

They traveled slowly across the field through which they had run 

in their mad attack.

through a forest to the road. Soon they were in a mass of dust­covered 
troops. At this point, they all curved away from the field and went off 
in the direction of the river.

The youth breathed a breath of new satisfaction. He finally 

touched his friend. “Well, it’s all over,” he said to him.

“By God, it is!”
They thought about it.
Gradually the youth was able to more closely understand himself 

and what had happened.

He understood that the shooting was in the past. He had been in  

a land of strange battle and had come through. He had been where 
there was red blood and black passion, and he had escaped. His first 
thoughts were thoughts of joy at this fact.

Later he began to study his deeds, his failures, and his accom­

plishments. At last his acts passed before him clearly.

The youth felt happy and without guilt as he remembered, for his 

public deeds were things of great and shining beauty.

It was a pleasure to think of these things. He realized that he was 

good.

Nevertheless, the memory of his running from the first battle 

appeared to him.

He thought with shame of the tattered soldier who, broken by 

bullets and losing blood, had worried about an imagined wound in the 
youth. The tattered soldier had given his last strength to Jim Conklin. 
And, tired and hurt, he had been left alone in the field.

For an instant, the youth’s heart seemed frozen at the thought 

that his actions might be discovered. And for a time this steady 
remem bering of the tattered man took all joy from the youth. He saw 
his error always before him, and he was afraid it would stand before 
him all his life.

But gradually he gathered strength to put the sin at a distance. 

Then he regarded it with what he thought was great calmness. It would 
become a part of him. He would have to live with the realization of a  
great mistake. And from it he would learn to be gentle with others. He 
would be a man.

His eyes were now open to new ways. He found that he could look 

back upon his earlier ideas of the glory of war and see them differently. 
He was glad when he discovered that he now hated them. He had come 
from his struggles with a better understanding of the world.

With this recognition came a new assurance. He felt a quiet man­

liness, calm but strong and healthy. He had faced the great death, and 
found that, after all, it was only the great death. He was a man.

It rained. The tired soldiers marched with effort through the brown 

mud under a low, dark sky. Yet the youth smiled, for he saw that the 
world was a world for him. He had freed himself of the red sickness 
of battle. The awful dream was in the past. He had been an animal 
burned and wounded in the heat and pain of war. He turned now with 
a lover’s desire to thoughts of calm skies, fresh meadows, cool brooks— 

an existence of soft and everlasting peace.

Over the river a golden ray of sun came through the masses of gray  

rain clouds.

